A Practical Commentary, OR AN EXPOSITION WITH NOTES On the Epistle of JUDE.

Delivered (for the most part) In sundry weekly Lectures at Stoke-Newington in
Middlesex.

By THOMAS MANTON, B. D. and Minister of Covent. Garden.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Luke Fawn, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
sign of the Parrot in Paul's Churchyard. 1658.

TO THE Religious and Honorable LADY, LETITIA POPHAM; Wife to Colonel
ALEXANDER POPHAM.
MADAM,
`TIS a lovely Conjunction when Goodness and Greatness meet together: Persons
of Estate and Respect in the world, have more temptations and hindrances than
others, but greater obligations to own God; the great Landlord of the world
expects a Rent from every Country-Cottage, but a large Revenue from great
Houses: Now usually it falls out so, that Qui majores terras possident,
minores census solv^nt, Parisiensis.
they that hold the greatest Farms pay the least Rent; never is the Lord more
neglected and dishonored then in great men's Houses, in the very face of all
his bounty; if Religion chance to get in there, it is soon worn out again;
though vices live long in a family, and run in a blood from father to son, yet
it is a rare case to see strictness of Religion carried on for three or four
descents; 'twas the honor of Abraham's house, that from Father to Son for a
long while, they were Heirs of the same Promise, Heb. 11. 9, but where is there
such a succession to be found in the houses of our Gentry? The Father perchance
professes godliness (for (...), says the Apostle, b 1 Cor. 1. 26.
not many noble, etc. there are a few, he does not say there are none) and a
carnal son comes and turns all out of doors, as if he were ashamed of his
Fathers God: The Causes of this mischief may be supposed to be these. 1. Plenty
ill-governed disposes to vice and sin, as a rank soil is apt to breed weeds.
2. Brave Spirits (as the world counts them) think Coguntur esse mali ne viles
habeantur. Salvian.
strictness inglorious, and the power of Religion a base thing, that takes off
from their Grandeur and Esteem: a loose owning of Christianity is honorable,
since the Kings of the earth have counted it one of the fairest flowers of
their Crowns to be styled the Catholic King, the most Christian King, the
Defender of the Faith, etc. But a true submission to the power of it is made a
scorn, as being contrary to that liberty of fashions, vanity of complement, and
some Gentile customs, which in a fond compliance with the humor of the age
they are loath to part with; 'twere a rude zeal to deny them honest civilities,
but certain Customs and Modes there are inconsistent with the severity of
Religion, which rather then men will part with, they will even break with God
himself. 3. The Marriage of children into carnal families, wherein they consult
rather with the greatness of their House then the continuing of Christ's
interest in their line and Posterity; how careful are they that they should
match in their own rank for blood and Estate! should they not be as careful for
Religion also? but even good people give a suspicion sometimes that they do not
believe what they do profess; That this is the ready way to undo all that has
been set on foot for God, is evident by See Genesis 6. 1, 2, 3. Psalm. 106. 38.
Neh. 13. 25. 26.
Scripture and Experience* in Scripture we read of Jehoram, who is said to walk
in the way of the Kings of Israel, for the Daughter of Ahab was his wife, 2
King 8. 18. and in Ecclesiastical History of Valens the Emperor, who by
marrying with an Arian Lady, was himself ensnared in that wicked opinion.

All this is spoken ( Madam) to quicken you to the greater care in your
Relations, that you may settle a standing interest for Jesus Christ so
hopefully already begun in your House and Family; it will not be pleasing to
you that I should publish upon the house top what God has done for you, or
enabled you to do for him; Go on still and be faithful, there are few (that I
know in the world) who have more cause to honor God then you have.

That I have inscribed this Commentary to your name will not seem strange to
those that know my great obligations to your Self and your worthy Husband, and
your interest in that Stoke Newington.
beloved place and people, among whom I have had so many sweet opportunities of
enjoying, and (I hope) of glorifying God, and from whom I should never have
removed, but upon those weighty causes and considerations which did even rend
me from them: and though I am now transplanted and owe very much service and
respect elsewhere, yet that The Right Honorable William Earl of Bed lord.
Noble Lord that gave me the Call will allow me full time and leave to pay my
old debts that afterward I may be the more in a capacity publicly to express
my gratitude to himself.

If any should be so foolish as to object the unsuiteableness of Dedicating a
Comment on the Scripture to one of your Sex (as it seems some did to Hieron.
Epist. 140.
Jerome) I shall not plead, that two of the Books of Scripture are named from
Women, Ruth and Esther, that an Epistle which makes up a part of the Canon in
inscribed to an Elect Lady, that if this be a fault Hieron, to Celantia Asella,
etc.
others have faulted in like kind before me, but only that this is a
practical Commentary, and surely in matters of practice (which is every
Christians Common interest) your Sex has a full share: though your course of
life be more private and confined, yet you have your service; the Scriptures
speak of the woman's gaining upon the husband, 1 Pet. 3. 1. seasoning the
children, Pro. 31. 1. 2 Timothy 1. 5. incourraging the servants in a way of
Godliness, especially of their own Sex, it is said Esther 4. 16. I also and my
maidens will fast likewise: these maidens were either Jews, and then it shows
what servants should be taken into a nearer attendance, such as savor of
Religion, see, Psalm. 101. 6. or else which is more probable, such as she had
instructed in the true Religion, for these maidens were appointed her by the
Eunuch, and were before instructed in Court-fashions, Esther 2. 9. but that did
not satisfy, she takes time to instruct them in the knowledge of the true
God, and it seems in her apartment had many oppertunities of religious
commerce with them in the Worship of God. Madam, how far you practice these
duties, it is not necessary that I should tell the world, persevere with
cheerfulness, and in due time you shall reap if you faint not: the good Lord
shed abroad the Comforts and Graces of his Spirit more abundantly into your
heart, which is the unfeigned desire of him, who is

Madam, Your most Obliged, and respectively Observant Tho: Manton.

The Epistle to the READER.
Good Reader,
THe people of God have ever been exercised with two sorts of Enemies,
Persecutors and Sectaries: it is hard to say which is worst; when the Christian
Church began first to look forth in the world, there were adverse powers
without ready to crush it, and Libertines who (like worms bred within the body)
sought to devour the entrails and eat out the very bowels of it: the first
Ringleader was Simon Magus, and there followed Menander Saturninus, Basilides,
Carpocrates, Cerinthus, Ebion, Cerdo, Marcion, Tatianus, Valentinus, and many
others, who being once turned aside from the truth and the fellowship of the
faithful, lost all awe of God, and were given up to a sottish judgment to
believe all kind of fables and fancies. The monsters of Africa came from the
unnatural commixtures of the beasts running wild in the deserts; so when men
had once broken through the hedge, mingling their own fancies with the Word of
God by an unnatural production, they brought forth such monstrous and absurd
Opinions.

In succeeding ages the devil has often played over the old game; sometimes
oppressing the Church by the tyranny of pseudo-christians, as many Martyrs
being made by Antichristian, as Pagan, persecutions, Revel. 14. 13. at other
times corrupting the truth by error, or rendering it suspicious by the
divisions about it: heresies revolve as fashions, and in the course of a few
years, antiquated errors revive again, and that by their means who did not so
much as know them by name.

When God first called his people out of Babylon by Luthers reformation, and
the Christian religion began to be restored to its pristine purity, there was
not only a Roman party to persecute, but a fanatical party to perplex the
estate of reformation, and retard the course of the Gospel, as histories do
abundantly declare, especially Sleidan in his Commentaries.

What has been our late experience, we all know, and have cause to bewail,
as soon as we were freed from our hard taskmasters, and a door of hope began
to be opened to us, ^ swarm of libertines have arisen among us, and do every
day increase in number, power and malice, and under various forms oppugn the
unquestionable interests of Jesus Christ, to the great scandal of reformation
and the sadning of the hearts of the godly. We seem to be ripe for a judgment,
but from what corner the storm shall blow we cannot tell; some fear a return of
Popery, and that a second deluge of Antichristianisme shall overwhelm the
Western Churches; the Papists (I confess* are dangerous, but the great and next
fear I think to be from libertines and a yokeless generation of men who are
most reproachful to religion and most troublesome.

The spirit and drift of this Epistle is carried out mainly against this
fanatical and libertine party; and therefore I suppose it to be a mistake in Dr
Willet, Mr Perkins and others, when they would turn the edg of it against the
Papists, I confess they had a temptation that way, these being the only
Heretical party with whom the Church of God was then in suit, and symbolizing
in many things with those of the other extreme, as usually darkness and
darkness does better agree than light and darkness: but certainly the party
described here are not a domineering faction, that carry things by power and
greatness and height of natural abilities, as the Papists do; but a creeping
party, such as by sordid and clancular ways seek to undermine the truth, a
kind of mean and loose sort of people, that vented monstrous and gross
conceits, chiefly out of envy against those that excelled in gifts and place;
and if our modern Ranters, Familists, Quakers be not here described in their
lively colors (as if the Apostle had lived to hear their blasphemous
expressions and that contempt which they cast upon the Officers of the Church)
I confess then I understand nothing of the whole Epistle. If the Judicious
Reader let alone the larger discussion of the observations, and go but over the
explications of each verse, he will soon find my observation true.

What I have done, through grace, to the clearer understanding of the Apostles
scope, and the larger explanation of the common places here offered, I shall
not mention, but leave to the Readers judgment: some will blame me for being
too large, and others in many places for being too short; I shall only let the
first sort know, that in the larger explications of points of doctrine, I have
rather satisfied the desires of others, than followed my own judgment; who,
when these things were first delivered (which was long since) in the way of
short notes, were willing to hear the points more largely debated, and so I
went over them again in a Sermon-fashion: if any blame me for being too short,
let them know, that therein I have more satisfied my self, as keeping to the
Laws of an expository exercise. I confess I am so conscious to the many
imperfections of this work, that the Reader had never been troubled with it,
had it not been extorted from me by such importunity as I could not withstand:
especially did I judge the publication needless, the Elaborate commentary of my
Reverend Brother Mr William Jenkyns being already printed; but when I saw that
we went different ways in prosecuting the same truth, that objection ceased:
seasonable things must be often urged, and the variety of method makes the
repetition grateful. I observe Gods providence in it, when diverse men fall
upon the same work, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every truth
might be established. Beza (I remember) persuades Olevian to print his
Meditations on the Galatians, though many excellent Writers had but lately and
diligently explained that Epistle: Dr King, Dr Abbot and Dr Benefield all wrote
upon Jonah and with approbation near about the same time. As much as my
occasions would permit me, I consulted with my Reverend Brothers Book, and when
I found any point at large discussed by him, I either omitted it, or mentioned
it very briefly; so that his Labors will be necessary to supply the weaknesses
of mine. This work has been long in the Press; and no wonder, the Author
lying under such an oppression of Business, it being carried on by snatches and
spare hours; many faults have been occasioned, whether by the obscurity of the
Copy, or the negligence of the Printer, I will not now determine: surely I have
had to do with those that learned how to make a pitcher in a tubb, or else they
would never have so pitifully mangled the Greek and Latin sentences, that in
some places they are scarce intelligible. I have added the Errata in the end,
which must be consulted with, or else the Reader will hardly find sense, and
in some places not true doctrine: the Tables I have collected with some
diligence; the one of Scriptures, which are either vindicated or largely
illustrated in this Commentary; the other of the principal matters, especially
the common places here discussed: if by all thou find any help in the way of
thy heavenly Calling, bless God, and forget not to put up one prayer for

The meanest of the Lords Servants, THO. MANTON.

AN EXPOSITION WITH NOTES On the EPISTLE of JUDE.
VERSE 1. Jude the Servant of Jesus Christ, and Brother of James, to them that
are sanctified by God the Father, preserved in Jesus Christ, and called.
THis Epistle, as others, begins with usual Christian salutations; these are
continued through the two first Verses, in which you have,

1. The person saluting, Jude, the Author of the Epistle.

2. The persons saluted, the Believers of that age.

3. The form of sal(...)tion, Verse. 2. Mercy, and peace, and love be multiplied.

This first Verse presents us with the two first Circumstances, the Saluter,
and the saluted. 1. The Saluter is described by his name, Judas; his office and
condition of life, the servant of Jesus Christ; by his kindred and relation,
and Brother of James. 2. The Saluted they are described, 1. By their condition,
(...) called, that is to be read first, as Beza. 2. By the effects and
manifestations of it, which are two: 1. Sanctified by God the Father. 2.
Preserved in Jesus Christ. These are the parts, I shall explain them branch by
branch in the order propounded, with practical hints from each, which I shall
handle in no fuller latitude then the present Text will allow.

1. The Saluter, and there his name Judas, called also Thaddeus, Mat. 10. 3.
and Lebbaeus; these several names implying the same thing, and were given him
either by the people or the Disciples, partly to distinguish him from Judas the
Apostate, partly to note his constancy in confessing and praising God; for so
it signifies, as you may see Genesis 29. 35. Now Leah said, I will praise the
Lord* therefore she called his name Judah. Diverse note hence, 1. That Christian
names should be significant, such as may remember us of duty. Again,
Observations.
2. That it is lawsul to divulge or conceal our names in our writings,
according as it may make for the glory of God, to do either the one or the
other. Jude mentions his name, but Paul does not, or whosoever was the Author
of the Epistle to the Hebrews. 3. That godly men and wicked may both be called
by the same name: So Judas the Apostle, and* Judas the Apostate: There was
Enoch Cains son, Genesis 4. 17. and Enoch Seths son of the Church line, that
walked with God, Gen* 5. 22. But to mention these things is more then enough;
the next circumstance will afford us more.

2. His office and condition, the Servant of Jesus Christ. It is a thing usual
with the Apostles to prefix this among other their honorary titles; as Romans 1.
1. Paul a Servant of Jesus Christ: so Phil. 1. 1. The greatest honor that he
would put upon himself and Timothy, was this, Paul and Timotheus the Servants
of Jesus Christ. This term, a servant of God or Christ, in the use of
Scripture, is several ways applied* 1. It may be understood of any kind of
subserviency to Gods Will and secret Counsels, or instrumentality in the
execution of his Decrees: so wicked men may be said to be Gods servants, so far
forth as he serves his designs of their endeavors: as Cyrus was Gods servant,
because he should perform all his pleasure: so Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. 27. 6.
These things have I given into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar my servant. 2. It
notes a pious care to perform Gods revealed Will; they that out of a sense of
his love resign up themselves to do his Will, are called his servants* so he
that is called in the Lord, whether he be bond or free, is said to be Christ's
servant, 1 Cor. 7. 22. So godly Masters are said to have the Lord for their
Master, Ephesians. 6. 9. Knowing that your Master is also in Heaven: In the former
place he says, a servant is Gods freeman; and here, that a Master is Gods
servant. 3. It notes designation to any public office for Gods glory; those
that do more eminently or more nearly serve God in some peculiar office, are
called his servants; as Magistrates. Romans 12. 4. He is the Minister of God for
thy God: And verse. 6. Gods Ministers attending continually for this thing. But
yet more especially they are called Ministers and servants, who sustain the
public Offices of the Church; as 2 Timothy 2. 14. The servant of the Lord must
not strive, but be gentle to all m^n, apt to teach; patient; meaning one
employed in the public Ministry. So the Priests of the Old Testament were
called the Lords servants, as Psalm. 134. 1. Behold, bless ye the Lord all ye
servants of the Lord, which by night stand in the house of the Lord; He
speaks to the Priests that were to watch in the Temple: and in this sense it
is said, Amos 3. 7. I have sent my servants the Prophets. But now among these
Ministers and Officers of the Church, the Prophets and Apostles are styled so
by way of eminency: Yea yet further* Christ, because of his Office of Mediator,
which is the highest Office, and proper to the Head of the Church, is called
Gods Servant; as Isai. 49. 3. Thou art my Servant: and Isai. 53. 11. By his
knowledge shall my righteous Servant justify many. To apply all now to the case
in hand; Jude is called a servant of Jesus Christ, not only as one that had
given up himself to do his Will as a Christian, but as an Apostle See my
Exposition on Ja^* 1. 1.
Let us now observe something hence.

Observe first, That Jude places his service among his Titles: Observat. 1.
He might have urged other things to render himself honorable to the world, but
he does not stand upon those things, it is enough for him to say, Jude a
servant: As Jude the Lords Cousin calls himself his servant; so does Mary the
Lords Mother style her self his handmaid, Luke 1. 38. Behold the handmaid of
the Lord: And the Apostles generally urge it as one of the fairest flowers in
their garland, the honor of being Christ's servants; yea Christ himself
counts it no dishonor to be styled Gods servant: The meanest offices about
Princes are accounted honorable; to be a Groom there, is better then to be a
Lord elsewhere: Servire Deo regnare est, it is royal and kingly to be Gods
servant; indeed every servant there is a 1 Pet. 2. 9. Rev. 1. 6.
King; as Zeba and Zalmunna said of Gideons Brethren, They each one resembled
the children of a King: so all these are spiritual Kings, that live the noblest
and freest life in the world. And as we have a glorious Master, so consider
your fellow servants; the glorified Saints and we make but one family, Ephesians.
3. 15. And the Angels themselves are called his Ministers, Psalm. 103. 21. Ye
Ministers of his that do his pleasure; they are a part of Gods attendance, and
wait upon their Masters person: When we have such fellow servants, we should
not count our work a slavery and baseness; it can be no disparagement to us to
be in the same rank and order with the Angels and Saints departed. Well then,
Learn to value the honor that you have by Christ's service; as that Emperor
counted it a greater privilege to be a Member of the Church, then Head of the
Empire: Look upon duty as an honor, and service as a privilege; Honorabilia
legis, Hos. 8. 12. so the Vulgar: And if ever you be put to your choice, either
to enjoy the greatest outward honors, or to serve Christ with disgrace, choose
the latter. Moses refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter when he
came to age, Heb. 11. 24, 25. Galeacius Carraciolus left the honor of his
Marquisate for an obscure life and the Gospel at Geneva: Indignities and
dishonours done you in the way of duty, are honors; reproaches for Christ's
sake are treasure, Heb. 11. 26. One of Paul's honorary titles is, Paul a
Prisoner of Jesus Christ, Philem. 1. and elsewhere he holds up his chain in a
kind of triumph, For the hope of Israel am I bound with this chain, Acts 28.
20. What ever befalls us in and for our service to Christ, be it never so
disgraceful, it is rather a mark of honor, then a brand of shame.

Observe again, His relation to Christ is expressed by service; Observat. 2.
as he describes himself to be James's Brother, so Christ's Servant; by that
means he was entitled to Christ: if we would be Christ's, we must do his Will;
our John 12. 26.
relation arises from service: Therefore I shall here take occasion to show
you what it is to be Christ's servants. 1. Who ever is Christ's servant must
resign and give up himself wholly to the Will of Christ; for he that is Christ's
servant, he is so by Covenant and Consecration: We are indeed Christ's by all
kind of rights and titles; he made us, and not we our selves; no creature is of
its self, and therefore it is not its own, but another: It is Gods Prerogative
alone to love himself, and seek himself, because he alone is without obligation
and dependence; but we owe our selves to him, and therefore cannot without
robbery call our selves our own. Your Psalm. 12. 4.
tongues are not your own to speak what you please, nor your hearts your own to
think what you please, nor your hands your own to do what you please; by virtue
of your Creation you are another, and are bound to live and act for another,
according to his Will, for his Glory. But this is not all; By Redemption you
are Christ's; Ye are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6. 20. as the redeemed are
bound to serve him that ransomed them: If a man had bought another out of
captivity, or he had sold himself, all his strength or service belonged to the
Buyer: Christ has bought us from the worst slavery, and with the greatest
Price; no thraldom so bad as bondage to Sin and Satan, no Prison so black as
Hell, and certainly Christ's Blood is better then a little money: So that to
live as if we were at our own dispose, is to defraud Christ of his purchase.
Thus we are Christ's by Creation and Redemption; but now if we would be his
servants, we must be his by voluntary contract, and spiritual resignation:
Yield up your selves, etc. Romans 6. 13. Christ loves to have his right and
title established by our own consent. We take Christ for Lord and Master, and
give up our selves to him, that we may be no longer at our own dispose, and
therefore it is not only robbery, but treachery and breach of Covenant to seek
our selves in any thing. This resignation must be made out of a sense of
Christ's love to us in his death and sufferings: 2 Cor. 5. 15. Christ dyed, that
they which live should not henceforth live to themselves, but unto him that
dyed for them: We enter upon other services out of hopes, but we enter upon
Christ's service out of thankefulness. Again, This resignation must be
universal, without reservation of any part: You must have no other Master but
God; Mat. 6. 24. Ye cannot serve two Masters, ye cannot serve God and Mammon.
Usually men divide themselves between God and the world; they would give their
Consciences to Christ, and their hearts to Mammon: The Devil pleads for a
part, for by that means he knows that the whole will fall to his share;
therefore all, the whole man, in vow, purpose and resolution, must be given up
to God. 2. Having given up your selves to Gods service, you must walk as his
servants, that is, not as you list, but as the Master pleases: The Angels are
Gods Ministers, doing his pleasure, Psalm. 103. 21. A servant has no will of
his own, but has given up his liberty to the directions and commands of
another; therefore if you be Gods servants, you must earnestly desire the
knowledge of his Will, and readily comply with it; you must not do things as
they please self and flesh, but as they please God: David beggeth for knowledge
as Gods servant, Psalm. 119. 125. I am thy servant, grant me understanding, that
I may know thy Testimonies. A faithful servant would not willingly offend his
Master, and therefore would fain know what is his will: They plead with God,
and search themselves, Romans 12. 2. and all to know his pleasure; and not only
to know it, but to do it, otherwise they are worthy of many stripes by Christ's
own sentence: The Masters will should be motive enough, 1 These. 4. 3. and 5.
13. 1 Pet. 2. 15. If God will have it so, if Jesus Christ will have it so, it
is enough to a faithful servant: The very signification of Gods Will carries
with it reason enough to enforce the practice of it. Yea you must equally
comply with every Will of God, not only with the easy and pleasant ways of
obedience, but such as cross lusts and interests. When two men go together, a
man cannot tell whom the servant follows till they part: When God and our
lusts or our interests command contrary things, then you are put to the trial
whether you are Gods servants.

Again, Observe from the proper acception of the phrase, Observat. 3.
as it is applied to those that stand before the Lord in some special Office
and Ministration; as to the Apostles, and by consequence to the Ministers of
the Gospel. The Note is, That Ministers are servants of Jesus Christ; Paul a
servant, and Jude a servant. We are to deal between God and the Soul, Factors
for Heaven; there is many a good inference may be collected from this Notion, I
shall refer all to two heads, the Ministers Duty and the Peoples. 1. It hinteth
Duty to Ministers, it teaches us diligence in our Lords work, for we are
Servants, and must give an account, Heb. 13. 17. what good we have done in our
places, how we have employed our parts, improved our Interests, for his glory.
Math. 25. 19. After a long time the Lord of those servants comes and reckons
with them. We are entrusted with the talent of gifts, with the talent of office
and authority in the Church; now God will see what we have done for his Glory,
whether we have beaten our fellow servants, or helped them in the way of
Salvation; whether our pound has been hidden in a napkin, or laid out for the
gain of Souls. Again, it hinteth faithfulness: We are not to trade for our
selves, and to drive on our own designs of credit and advantage; we are
servants, employed for the Masters uses: Gal. 1. 10. Do I yet please men? If I
pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ. A man that sets up for
himself, is to trade for himself; but all that a servant does, should be for
his Masters honor and profit. 2. It hinteth duty to the people; Regard
Ministers as servants of Christ, that you may give their persons all due
honor; consider, God has retained them as for a nearer service to himself: 1
Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the Mysteries of the Gospel. The world counts the Calling
probrosum artificium, a sordid artifice and way of living, whereby men set
their tongues and parts to sale, and think that of all Callings this can best
be spared; therefore it is high time to assert the dignity of the Office: Men
should not think so basely of those who are Christ's servants, not only to do
his business, but to wait upon his person, his special Attendants; nay 2 Cor. 5
20.
Ambassadors, that impersonate and represent their Master. Again, Bear our
doctrine with meekness and patience; we are but servants: if the message which
we bring be displeasing, remember it is the will of our Master; it is not in
our power to comply with your lusts and humors, if the Scripture does not: As
God said to Jeremy, Jer. 15. 19. Let them return unto thee, but return not thou
to them: so you should comply with the Word; we cannot comply with you; The
false Prophets returned to the people complied with their humors: We must
deliver our Message, pardon to whom pardon, terror to whom terror is due;
servants must be faithful: Thus must you look upon them as servants; yet but as
servants, that you may not fondly idolize their persons: What is Paul and
Apollos, but Ministers by whom ye believe? 1 Cor. 3. 5. It is the old way of
flesh and blood to sacrifice to the next hand: And that you may know to whom to
go for the fruit of the Ordinance, when we have done our work, there is Man. 3.
11.
one that comes after us who is mightier then we, 1 Cor. 3. 6.
who gives the increase to what we have planted and watered.

3. The Author of the Epistle is described by his kindred and relation, [ and
Brother of James.] There were two in the College of the Apostles of that name,
James of Zebodee, and James the son of Alpheus, who was also called the Brother
of the Lord, that is, his Cousin German, who is the person intended; for Jude
was his Brother, as Mat. 13. 55. Is not his Mother called Mary? and his
Brethren James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas? Now this clause is added,
partly to distinguish him from the other Judas called Iscariot, who bebetrayed
our Lord. It is good to prevent all visible scandals Observat.
and exceptions against our persons. I observe this, because the Scripture does
elsewhere, Joh. 14. 22. Judas says unto him, not Iscariot, How is it that thou will manifest thy self to us, and not unto the world? The Scripture would not
have you mistake him that said so: Men drink less freely of a suspected
fountain. Partly because this would make the Epistle the more welcome: James
was of great credit and repute, reckoned by Paul among the Pillars, Gal. 2. 9.
From whence observe, 1. That it is lawful to use the credit of others for the
Observat.
advantage of the Truth. In the 15 of the Acts the Apostles might have
determined the case by their own infallible spirit; but for the greater credit
sake they take in the consent of others, verse. 23. The Apostles, and Elders,
and Brethren, etc. Paul dealing with Heathens, quoteth the sayings of their own
Writers in diverse places; which may justify the unaffected use of sentences
and passages out of the ancient Writers of the Church: It is good to bait the
naked hook of Truth sometimes with the advantage of carnal credit. Again
observe, That we should walk so, that we may be an Observat.
honor to our relations. This is one of Judes titles, the Brother of James; He
took it for an honor to be related to so eminent an Apostle: Worthy men
reflect a credit upon their families: To be brother, father, son, to such as
have deserved well of the Church, is no mean honor and engagement to virtue.
Well then, live so that you may not disgrace your lineage; and you that come of
worthy Ancestors, walk answerably to the dignity of your extraction: The images
of your Progenitors are not more fullied with dust, and smoke, and age, then
they are with your vices: The Spirit of God brands a degenerate Issue for
walking unworthy their birth, and the privileges of their blood, 1 Chronicles. 4.
22, 23. Vide Junium and alios in locum. So much for the Saluter.

Let us now come to the Saluted, they are described by their Condition, [
called,] by the effects and manifestations of it, which are two, Sanctification
and Preservation.

1. Their Condition, [ called,] for that both in the construction of the words,
and the order of nature, is to be read first. There is an outward calling, and
in that sense Christ speaks, Mat. 20. 16. Many are called, but few are
chosen; that is, outwardly called in the invitations of the Word; so all wicked
men that live within the hearing of the Gospel; but it seems they are only
called obiter, by the by, as they live among the Elect; those are called (...),
according to purpose, Romans 8. 28. But there is an inward and effectual calling,
by the persuasion of the Spirit, or the voice of the Son of God, which causes
life, Joh. 5. 25. The Apostle speaks here of the called according to Purpose,
and that by an inward and effectual calling: Whence note, That it is the
condition of the people of God to be a called people; this is Observat.
first in their description: see Romans 1. 6. Among whom are ye also the called
of Jesus Christ: So the Corinthians are said to be Saints by calling, 1 Cor. 1.
2. and Heb. 3. 1. Holy Brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling. Now the
Saints are a called people, first, Because all they have and enjoy is from Gods
1 Reason.
calling; a Christian is nothing and has nothing but what God is pleased to
work in him by his creating Word: Calling the things that are not as though
they were, Romans 4. 18. Now God is pleased to work this way, partly to give us a
Warrant, that we may possess our privileges in Christ without intrusion and
usurpation: Heb. 5.
No man takes this honor upon him till he be called of God; This is that we
have to show to Conscience, that we do not presume and usurp; we have a calling
so to do: Why do thou vile wretch go to God in the Name of Christ? How durst
thou that art a sinner look him in the face? lay hold of Christ? hope for
glory? Still the Call is our Warrant and Title. If it should be asked of the
guests that came in a wedding garment, Friends, how durst ye come hither, and
approach the presence chamber of the Kings son? they might answer, We were
bidden to the wedding, Mat. 22. So in Mat. 20. Why do not you go into the
Vineyard? their answer was, No man has hired us; they had no calling. Partly
to give us encouragement; We need not only leave to come to God by Christ, but
also quickening and encouragement, for we are backward* In other preferments
there needs nothing but leave, for there men are forward enough; but here
guilt makes us shy of God, and God is forced to call and hollow after us. By
nature we are not only exiles, but fugitives: Before God banished Adam, he
first ran away from him, he ran to the bushes, and then God called him, Adam,
where art thou? Genesis 3. 9. How often does God hollow after us in the Word
before we return, and come out of the bushes? He makes proclamation, Isa. 55.
1. Ho every one that thirsts, etc. We are under spiritual bondage, as the
Israelites were in Egypt under corporal bondage, and God sends again and
again, and out of very anguish of heart we will not believe him; therefore he
calls and cries, Sinners, where are you? why will you not return unto me?
Gods outward Call is managed by men, and therefore it is very hard to persuade
them to discern the voice of God; as Samuel would not be persuaded but that it
was Eli called him when it was the Lord: We think it to be the charity of the
Minister, and will not easily acknowledge a call from God, and therefore do not
only need leave, but encouragement. Partly because God will work in a way
suitable to his own nature and ours; fortiter and suaviter, strongly like
himself, and sweetly with respect to us; and therefore he does not only draw,
but call; not only put forth the power of his Spirit, but exhort and invite by
the Word; the efficacy of divine grace is conveyed this way more suitably to
the nature of man; There is grace offered in the Gospel, and the Spirit
compels to come in. In all the Works of God, there is some word by which his
Power is educed and exercised: In the Creation, Let there be light, etc. At the
Resurrection there is a Trump, and the voice of an Archangel, Arise ye dead,
and come to Judgment. In all Christ's miraculous cures there are some words
used, Be thou clean, and Be thou whole, and Be thou opened; and to Lazarus in
the grave Christ uses words of ministerial excitation, Lazarus, come forth: So
in converting a sinner, there is not only a secret power, but a sweet call and
invitation; some word by which this power is conveyed and represented in a way
suitable to our capacity. For all these Reasons does God work grace by calling.

Again, Gods people are well styled a called people, because 2 Reason.
they are so many ways called: from self to Christ, from sin to holiness, from
misery to happiness and glory. They are called from self to Christ, Mat. 11.
28. Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden: The main end of a call is to
bring Christ and the Soul together; every dispensation of God has a voice; and
God speaks to us by Conscience, by his Works, by benefits, by crosses, but
chiefly by his Word, the application of which by the Spirit is as it were an
awakening call: but the chief call of God is by the voice of the Gospel,
wherein the offers of grace are discovered to us; Come poor wearied Soul, come
to Christ, and thou shall find ease and comfort. Again, they are called from
sin to holiness, 1 These. 4. 7. God has not called us to uncleanness, but to
holiness: though the immediate end of divine calling be faith, yet the
intermediate end is holiness, as the ultimate end is glory. Thus we are called
out of Babylon into Sion, from the Tents of Kedar into the Tents of Shem, from
nature to grace, and the power of Satan into the Kingdom of God: in short, this
call is a separation from uncleanness, and all common and vile uses. Again,
they are called from misery to happiness and glory, from aliens to be friends,
from darkness to light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. from being enemies to be reconciled, from
bastards to become sons, from vessels of wrath to be heirs of Glory. With
respect to all these sorts of calling, it is termed sometimes an high calling,
Phil. 3. 14. sometimes an holy calling, 2 Timothy 1. 9. and sometimes an heavenly
calling, Heb. 3. 1. It is an high calling, because of the honor and dignity of
it; John 1. 12. Romans 8. 17. Rev. 1. 6.
it is no small matter to be children of God, coheirs with Christ, Kings and
Priests to God: Many are lifted up, because they have born Offices, and are
called to high places in the world; a Christian has a calling more excellent,
he is called to be a Saint, a spiritual King, an holy Priest to God. It is an
holy calling, because of the effect and purpose of it: Man's calling may put
dignity and honor upon us, but it cannot infuse grace; it may change our
condition, but not our hearts. It is an heavenly calling, because of the Author
of it, God by his Spirit; and because of the aim of it, the grace whereby we
are called came from Heaven, and its aim and tendency is to bring us thither:
see 1 These. 2. 14. 2 Pet. 1. 3. Called us to glory and virtue, etc. We are
first called to grace, and then to Heaven: first the sweet voice says, Come
unto me, and then the great voice, Come up hither: from self, sin and the world
we are called off, that we may enjoy God in Christ for evermore. You see the
Reasons, let us apply it now.

First, It serves to press us to harken to the Lords call; Use 1.
Many are kept off by vanity and pleasures, others by their own fears: To the
first sort I shall only represent the danger of neglecting Gods invitation, and
slighting a call, Prove. 1. 25, 26. Ye have set at naught my counsel, therefore
I will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear comes. Gods wrath is
never more terrible, then when it is stirred up to avenge the quarrel of abused
Mercy. Men cannot endure that two things should be despised, their anger or
their kindness: Nebuchadnezzar, when he thought his anger despised, he bids
them heat the furnace seven times hotter; and David, when he thought his
kindness despised, threatened to cut off from Nabal every one that pissed
against the wall. Certainly the Lord takes it ill when the renewed messages of
his love are not regarded; and that is the reason why where mercy is most free,
God is most quick and severe upon the refusal of it: The Lambs wrath is most
terrible, Psalm. 2. 10. No fire so hot as that which is inkindled by the breath
of the despised Gospel. What a terrible threatening is there in the place
alleged? I will laugh at their calamity: It is the greatest happiness when the
Lord rejoices to do us good, and the greatest misery when he rejoices to do
us evil; Gods laughing will certainly be the creatures mourning. Consider then
what an affront you put upon grace, when every vile thing is preferred before
it. When the Lord offered Canaan to the Israelites, and they preferred Egypt
before it, he swore, Psalm. 95. 10.
They should not enter into his Rest: And those that preferred a yoke of Oxen,
a farm, or marriage, before the Kings feast, the King protests against them,
Luke 14. 24. None of those that were bidden shall taste of my Supper: Who ever
have glory and grace by Christ, they shall have none.

For the other sort, that are kept off by their own fears, they are wont to
alledg; It is true, there is mercy in Christ for sinners, but Christ does not
call them: My Brethren, what do you look for? an audible voice to speak to you,
Thou John, thou Thomas, etc. In the tenders of the Gospel you are included as
well as others, and why will you exclude your selves? If God say, Sinners, you
should subsume and reply, I am chief. I remember it is said, Joh. 10. 3. Christ
calls his sheep by name, and leads them forth: How does Christ call them by
name? By speaking expressly to their case, as if he did strike them upon the
shoulders, and say, Here is comfort for thee. As at a feast, when there is a
dish that we affect set upon the table, though all the company be free to make
use of it, yet we say, Here is a dish for me: So should you apply and take to
your selves your own portion; though it be propounded generally, yet when God
directs the tongue of his Messengers to speak so expressly to your case, that
is all the calling by name which you can look for, since Oracles are ceased,
and therefore you should say, This was a dish provided for my hungry
Conscience, intended to me, etc. But they will reply, Sure there is no mercy
for me, I am so unworthy: I answer, The invitation takes no notice of worth,
but of thirst, Rev. 22. 17. Let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will
let him take of the water of life freely: Thou art not worthy, but thou art
thirsty, or else whence come these groans? And by the way take notice of the
pride that is in legal dejection: men are loath to be beholding to Christ, they
would be worthy before they will come to him; and therefore the Apostle uses
that expression, (...)* Romans 10. 3. They have not SUBMITTED to the
righteousness of God: A proud creature would fain establish a righteousness in
himself, and is loath to submit to take all from another: As an outward proud
man prefers a russet coat of his own before a silken garment that is
barrowed or given him by another. But they are such sinners, etc. Ans. The more
need to come to Christ; he came to call sinners, Mat. 9. 13. It is no matter
what thou have been, but what thou would be; Christ does not call us because
we are holy, but that we may be holy. Is it a rational plea in outward cases, I
am too poor to take alms? I am too filthy to go to the water to be washed? But
they have stood out against so many calls already, and scorned Gods counsel.
Ans. Wisdom calls scorners, Prove. 1. 22. Turn ye scorners, how long will ye
delight in scorning? It is a mercy that thou have one call more, do not
increase the guilt that thou complainest of. But I know not how to come to
Christ. Ans. The blind and the lame are invited to the wedding, Mat. 22. and
Wisdom calls fools, Prove. 9. 5. Whosoever is simple, etc. The stray Lamb is
brought home upon the Shepherds shoulders, Luke 15. Oh that these words might
be spirit and life to you!

Again, It presses us to make our calling and election sure, 2 Use.
2 Pet. 1. 10. that is, to evidence our election by our calling; for calling it
is but election put in act: Election is nothing but Gods love and intention to
bestow saving grace upon such and such persons; and calling is nothing but the
actual manifestation of Gods love, or the application of saving grace: Romans 8.
30. Whom he has predestined, them he called: Calling is the first and
immediate fruit of Election, by which it springs forth, and is exercised on
the vessels of mercy: So 2 These. 2. 13, 14. God has from the beginning chosen
you to Salvation, through the sanctification of the Spirit, and the belief of
the Truth, to the obtaining of the glory of God, whereunto he has called you
by my Gospel. Here is the whole method of Salvation; the first rise and spring
of mercy was at Election, which breaks out by effectual calling, and so
flows down in the channels of faith and holiness, till it lose it self in the
Ocean of everlasting Glory: So that by calling God executes in time what he
decreed before all time; and he that is called* may look backward upon eternal
purposes of grace, and forward upon an eternal possession of glory. Well then,
if we would get any assurance of Gods favor, or of our interest in everlasting
glory, the great business we should labor in, is to clear up our calling; it
is the freest and surest discovery of Gods love, and so fittest to bottom a
confidence or assurance: In elective love we have the best view of mercy, and a
call is the first discovery and copy of it; for it is an act of God, which
arises merely from his choice, preventing and anteceding not only the merit,
but the acts and industry of the creature: see 2 Timothy 1. 9. Other acts of Gods
bounty follow the acts of the creature, but this is the first motion God makes
to the Soul; he accepts us when we come, but he called us when we did not think
of coming: In short, Calling, it is the key of the Gospel, the plank that is
cast out to save a sinking sinner, a sure pledge of glory, which is therefore
called the high price of our calling, Phil. 3. 14. Once more, here we have the
clearest and most sensible experience of the work of grace: After conversion
the work may be carried on tacitly, and with more silence; but in calling and
conversion (as in all changes) the operations of grace are more sensible; we
may grow insensible, as a plant does: The step from sin to grace, is a work of
greater difficulty and power, then to go on from grace to grace; as the Apostle
makes it a matter of more ease to save a Saint, then to gain a sinner, Romans 5.
8, 9, 10. and therefore degrees cannot be alike sensible as change of state.
The Apostle speaking of the first conversion of the Thessalonians, he says, 1
These. 1. 9. Ye know what manner of entering we had unto you. The first
approaches of Gods Power and Word to the Soul, as they meet with more
opposition, so they cannot but be more sensible, and leave a greater feeling
upon us: It were strange if an Almighty Power should work in us, and we no way
privy or conscious to it, and all done as in our sleep; to think so, were to
give security a soft pillow whereon to rest, and to suffer men to go away with
golden dreams, though they feel no change in themselves, pleasing themselves
with the supposition of imaginary grace wrought without their privity and
knowledge. I would not press too hard upon any tender Conscience; I do foresee
the Objection that may be made, namely, That if Calling gives such a sensible
experience of the work of grace, how comes it then to pass that so few of Gods
children have assurance or any sense of their conversion? I answer, 1. It is
possible Gods Power may work in us, and we not be sensible of it; there is a
difference between our outward and inward senses: we may lose our spiritual
feeling; and inward sense does not so clearly discern its object, because of
the way in which God conveyeth his power; it is strong, but sweet; like the
influences of the Heavens, of a great efficacy, but scarce discerned: as there
was a great power wrought in the Ephesians, but they did not discern it so
sufficiently, Ephesians. 1. 18, 19. 2. It is the fault of Gods children not to be
sensible of the power that works in them; sometimes it is their carelessness,
sometimes their peevishness: Their carelessness, in not observing the
approaches of God, and how he works and breaks in upon their hearts in the
Word; so that the time of loves is not marked when it is present, nor
remembered when it is past. As God said of Ephraim, Hos. 11. 3. When Ephraim
was a child, I taught him to go, taking them by the arms, but they knew it not,
that is, did not observe it: So God communicates grace to his people, gives
in help and supports, but they observe it not. Sometimes it is peevishness and
perverseness of judgment; sense of sin, and many weaknesses, like a thick
cloud, hinder their clear discerning; God has called them, but they will not
own and acknowledge it, and so underrate their spiritual condition. 3. God does
not call every one in a like violent and sensible manner: some men's conversion
is more gentle and silent; whereas to others Christ comes like a strong man
armed, and snatcheth them out of the fire: some are drawn they know not how,
and love by a gentle blast sweetly and softly blows open the door; Ere ever I
was aware, etc. Cant. 6. 12. upon others the Spirit comes like a mighty
rushing wind, and they are carried to Christ as it were by the gates of Hell.
As in the natural birth, some children are brought forth with more ease, others
with greater pains and throws: so the new birth in some is without trouble and
delay; God opened the heart of Lydia, we read of no more, Acts 16. but others
are brought in with more horror of Conscience, extreme sorrow and desperation;
God bids men put a difference, Jude 22, 23. so does God himself. 4. This
different dispensation God uses according to his own pleasure; no certain
Rules can be given: Sometimes they that have had good education have least
terrors, as being restrained from gross sins; sometimes most terrors, because
they have withstood most means: Violent Mu^^t^ons, srom extreme to extreme* are
always m^re sudden and notable.
sometimes they that are called to the greatest services have most terrors,
that they may speak the more evil of sin, because they have felt the bitterness
of it; sometimes it is quite otherwise, those that are not called to such
eminent service drink most deeply of this cup, and taste the very dregs of sin,
and serve only as monuments of the power of Gods anger; whereas others are
spared, and public work serves in stead of sorrow and trouble of Conscience.
Again, sometimes men and women of the most excellent and acute understandings
are most troubled, as having the clearest apprehensions of the hainousness of
sin, and terribleness of wrath: Again, at other times it comes from ignorance;
as fears arise in the dark, and weak spirits are apt to be terrified: sometimes
these terrors fall on a strong body as best able to bear it, sometimes on a
weak, the Devil taking advantage of the weakness of the body to raise
disturbances in the mind: Many times in hot and fiery natures their changes are
sudden, and carried on in an extreme way; whereas soft natures, whose motions
are slower, are gently and by degrees surprised, they take impressions of grace
insensibly. Thus you see no certain Rules can be given; only in the general we
may observe, That this different dispensation makes the work of God in calling
more or less sensible: those that are brought in by the violent way and
roughly, must needs be sensible of that omnipotent pull by which their hearts
are divorced from their corruptions, and can discourse of the time, the means,
and the manner, and all the circumstances of their calling with exactness; as
Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 2. I knew a man in Christ fourteen years ago, etc. Now every
one cannot deliver a formal story, nor tell you the exact method and successive
operations of grace in conversion. 5. Though there be a different dispensation
used in calling, yet there is enough to distinguish the uncalled from the
called; Partly because though Gods call be not discerned in the acts of it, yet
it may be discerned in the effects of it: Conversion is evident, if not in
feeling, yet in fruit: Many works of Nature are for the convoy of them
insensible, but the effects appear: Eccles. 11. 5. We know not the way of the
spirit, nor how the bones grow in the womb; We know not the manner, point of
time, but yet the birth follows: They are not Christ's that neither know how
they are called, nor can give any proof that they are called. The blind man,
Ioh. 9. when they asked him, How did he come to open thine eyes? answered, How
he did it I cannot tell; but this one thing I know, that whereas I was blind, I
n^w see: Early or late the Soul will give this testimony, How I got him I
cannot tell, but I am glad I find he is here. Partly because where conversion
and calling is carried on more tacitly or silently, there will be something
felt and found in them; there is at least an anxiousness about their
everlasting estate: Every Soul does not walk in the region of the shadow of
death; but every Soul first or last is brought to What shall I do? which is
usually upon some secret or open sin into which God suffers them to fall
against Conscience: there will be care, though not horror; and solicitousness,
though not utter despair: No Soul ever came to Christ without a load upon his
back, though every one be not ready with the Jailer to kill himself for
anguish: You will be at a loss sometimes; it is easy security that goes on
from the cradle to the grave in the same tenor of hope without variation. There
will be a time when you will smite upon the thigh, and cry, What shall I do?
And as there will be some trouble found in them, so some change; all are not
converted from profaneness to Religion, some from civility to Religion, from
profession to sincerity, from servility to ingenuity: Time was when they were
careless of communion with God, prayed now and then out of custom, had no
delight in the Almighty, but now it is otherwise. Partly because there is a
constant calling, so that first or last we shall be sensible of the motions of
the Spirit, and the hearts answer: to some God speaks in thunder, to others
in a still voice, but to all he speaks; therefore did you ever discern Gods
calling and your answering? Psalm. 27. 8. The Lord said, Seek ye my face; my
heart said, Thy face Lord will I seek: There is no gracious heart but they are
often sensible of such a dialogue between God and the Soul; this discourse is
constant: he speaks to us by the injection of holy motions and the actual
excitations of his grace, and we speak to him by serious promises and
resolutions of obedience: God calls us into his presence often, and the heart
ecchoeth, Lo I come.

Well now, upon all these Considerations labor to get your calling evidenced,
that will clear up your title to the great privileges of grace; by it you may
rebuke your doubts and fears: When Conscience asks, What have you to do with
these comforts? to look upon your selves as objects of Gods Election? as heirs
of Glory? you may answer, I did not take this honor upon me, I was called of
God. But you will say, What are the infallible Notes and Marks of effectual
calling? I answer, These; I shall contract larger discourses: You may know your
effectual calling, Partly The first Evidence of Calling.
by the preparations made for it; though the work it self be done in an
instant, and many times when we least think of it, yet usually God makes way
for his mighty Work. As the husbandman harroweth and breaks the clods before
he throws in the seed; so by some preparative conviction God breaks the
heart, and makes it meet to receive grace: Redemption needed no preparation,
but Conversion does. Look as Moses brought them to the Borders, but Joshua led
them into the Land of Canaan; so usually there is some foregoing Law work,
though we are called properly by the Gospel; 1 These. 2. 14. Called by my
Gospel: The Law drives us out of our selves, but the Gospel pulls in the
heart to Christ. Look as in outward generation the matter is gradually prepared
and disposed, so is the Soul for the new birth: A man is awakened by the sight
of his own wretchedness, convinced of sin, and the evil consequences of it; and
then the Hos. 2. 14. Gal. 3. 1.
work is done by the mild voice of the Gospel; as Manna came down in sweet
dews. It is Gods way to speak terror before he speak comfort: Christ shows
the method, Joh. 16. 8. The Spirit shall convince of sin: The (...).
word is notable; to convince, is (...) Arist.
to show a thing to be impossible to be otherwise then we represent it: so the
Spirit convinces, and makes the person yield, and say, Certainly I am a
sinner, an unbeleever, a very wretch, that has no interest in Christ: This is
Gods method; We come to some certain issue about our being in the state of
nature, before we come to some certain issue about our being in the state of
grace; The Soul says, Surely I am stark naught, in a deplored lost condition.
Well then, if you had always good thoughts of your selves, or only a slight and
general knowledge, We are all sinners, etc. You are not prepared: The blind man,
Joh. 9. could say, I was blind: Were you ever brought to say, I was a wretch, a
miserable forlorn creature out of Christ? This feeds presumption and
security, because we never bring the debate to an issue concerning our being in
either of the states, but content our selves with blind guesses, and loose
acknowledgments, that we are all sinners, and Christ must save us, etc. This is
not enough, there must be a particular and humbling sense of sin: Unworthiness
and wretchedness felt, is the first occasion to bring us to Christ: Never a
poor Soul that takes sanctuary at the throne of grace, but he stands Romans 3,
19. Heb. 6. 18.
guilty there, and in danger of damnation.

2. Again, The next Note or occasion of discovery may be taken from the
instrument or means by which God has called us, namely the Word; 2 These. 2.
14. By my Gospel. Oracles and audible voices are not his usual course; some I
suppose Austins Toll and Lege was of this nature.
Christians talk of such things, but (to say the least of the mistake) they are
but the suppositions of an over-troubled fancy; delusions which God, who
brings light out of darkness, may at length order for good, and in the wisdom
of his Providence make use of them to bring off his people from their
discouragements. But usually Gods way of calling is by the Word, and most
usually by the Word preached, seldom otherwise; for God* loves to own and
honor the means of his own appointing with a blessing. I suppose scarce an
instance can be given of any converted by reading or meditation, that neglected
prophesying where it was to be had. I confess the Word may not work always in
time of hearing: There is a notable instance, -- My Soul failed when Cant. 5. 6.
he spoke; or rather it may be rendered, because of his speech: Now compare it
with the time of Christ's visit, verse. 2, 3. Open my Sister, my Dove, etc. while
Christ was speaking she is careless and sluggish, I have put off my co^^, how
shall I put it on? you see her heart was far from failing then; but when she
remembered it afterward, then her bowels were troubled: as Peter also was
wrought upon by the remembrance of Christ's words a great while after they were
spoken, Mat. 26. last verse. Thus many times God reviveth old truths, and
makes them effectual long after the time of delivery: The Word works then
either in the hearing, or in the remembrance, or deep meditation upon it. Well
now, Can you remember such an experience, when God called you by his Word, and
spoke comfortably to your hearts? Did he ever move you to go aside into the
Closer, that you might be solitary and serious, and consider of your condition?
Usually at our first call we are moved to go aside, that God and we may confer
in private; as Hosea 2. 14. God calls into the wilderness, that he may speak
to the heart: and Ezekiel was called into the field* that God might more freely
talk with him, Ezekiel. 3. 22. Arise, go forth into the plain, that there I may
talk with thee: So Cant. 7. 11. Come my Beloved, let us go forth into the
fields, etc. Usually his first motions are to go aside and consider; Christ is
bashful before acquaintance, and does not speak to us in company, but in
private: Did he ever thus invite you into secret places? did he ever call thee
by name, speak so expressly to thy case, as if he had said, Here is mercy for
thee, comfort for thee, here is thy portion? First or last Gods children have
such experiences: There is a Ezekiel. 16. 6, 7
time of loves which they cannot forget; at least a time wherein the Master of
the Assemblies fastened a nail in their hearts. Gods people are wont to talk
how seasonably, and yet how strangely Providence cast them upon such
opportunities; as David, Psalm. 119. 93. I shall never forget thy Precepts, for
by them thou have quickened me: Oh I shall never forget such an Ordinance, such
a Sermon, wherein the Lord was pleased to take notice of me, and to speak to my
heart: Weak impressions are soon razed out, but powerful effects of the Word
leave a durable mark and character that cannot be defaced.

3. The next Mark may be taken from the formal answer, or correspondent act of
the creature to the call of God, for that is it which seals our Election; for
otherwise many be called, but they are not chosen, unless the heart be
prevailed with to obey the call: Yea the notion of Vocation in its full
latitude, implies not only Gods act, but ours, our answer to his call. Christ's
sheep hear his voice: John 20. 16.
When Christ says, Mary, she answers, Rabboni, my Lord. Gods call is the
offer of grace, our answer is the accepting of grace offered; there must be
receiving, as well as offering: Vocation is not effectual unless it end in
Union; it is receiving that gives us interest, Joh. 1. 12. The Scriptures do
every where imply and signify this answerable act of the creature to the call
of God: God says, Seek ye my face and the Soul like a quick echo, Thy face
Lord will I seek, Psalm. 27. 8. So Ier. 3. 22. Return ye backsliding children,
and I will heal you; and then, Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord
our God. The Soul is enabled to do that which it is exhorted to do: God says,
Come to Christ, and the Soul says, Lord I come. Well then, is the call obeyed?
do you receive Christ for your Lord and Savior? The proper answer of the call
is the consent and full purpose of the heart to take Christ; for offering is
the call, and receiving is the answer: Have you subscribed and consented to
take Christ upon his own terms? as the Prophet, when he was to take a wife,
makes an offer, Hosea 3. I will be for thee, and thou shall be for me; Are you
content? Christ will be for you in all his graces, merits, benefits, if you
will be for him in all your motions, tendencies, aims: alas, your hearts know
that you are for your selves, lusts, interests, etc.

4. Again, You may know your calling by the concomitant dispositions of the
Soul that go along with such a return and answer: Where ever Christ is
received, he is received with worthy and suitable affections; these are most
notable. 1. Godly sorrow, Ier. 31. 9. They shall come with weeping and
supplication, and I will lead them: It is spoken of the Jews conversion; when
God comes to lead them, they shall bewail their hardness of heart and
unbelief: Such kind of workings there are in the heart of every returning
sinner; as, that God should look upon such a worthloss creature as I am, that
have all this while gainsayed, and stood out many an invitation! that ever God
should care for such a vile and stubborn wretch! seek to reclaim such a wayward
heart! Usually there are such mournful and self-humbling reflections, that get
the start of faith and comfort, and do more sensibly bewray themselves: Never
did any child of God get home to him, but smiting on the thigh, Ier. 31. 18.
and complaining of themselves before they could take comfort in God. 2. Holy
wonder, which arises from comparing their own wretchedness with Gods rich
mercy in Christ; and therefore the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Who has called
us out of darkness into his marvelous light; implying that Gods grace is most
wonderful at first conversion, as light is to a man that comes out of a
dungeon; woeful darkness makes it marvelous light: In this change there is
nothing but what is wonderful* both the sweetness and the power of that grace
by which it is wrought: The sweetness of grace* When God came to offer Abraham
the grace of the Covenant, he fell upon his face, Genesis 17. 3. in an humble
adoration and reverence* The power of grace; If Peter wondered at his
deliverance by the Angel out of that strong Prison, we have much more cause to
wonder that the yoke is broken, and that we are set free by Christ: the sweet
effects of this grace cause wonder; The peace of God which passes all
understanding, etc. 3. A free resolution and confidence; come what ever comes,
they will obey God. As Abraham being called obeyed God, not knowing whither he
went, Heb. 11. 8. So when they have a warrant, they will make adventures of
faith, though they know not the success; as Peter would cast out the net at
Christ's command, though there were little likelihood of taking fish; Howbeit at
thy command, etc. Luke 5. 5. So it is unlikely God will receive me to grace,
yet I will adventure, I know not what will come of it: Where Faith is sensible
of a Command, it does not dispute a duty, but accomplish it: The Spirit
speaks to the Soul, as the Disciples did to the blind man, Mark 10. 49. Be of
good comfort, rise, because the Master calls thee. I instance in these
dispositions, because they are most sensible.

5. It may be evidenced by the fruits and effects of a call; the call infers
a change of the former estate, both in heart and life.

1. There will be a change in the whole heart: In the mind and judgment, there
the activity of the new nature is first discovered; Ephesians. 4. 23. Renewed in
the spirit of the mind; in that which is most intimate and excellent there: In
our discourse and reason, all the discourses, debates, purposes and cares of
the Soul will be to please God: The mind is made a forge for holy uses, wherein
to debate and contrive how to carry on the work of grace, how to glorify God
in our relations, concernments; certainly this will be found in all those that
are called and converted. So in the will and affections there will be a
constant inclination toward God, as the chiefest good: Psalm. 19. 57. Thou art
my portion O Lord, I have said that I w'll keep thy Words: The Soul is
resolved; there is a decree issued forth in that behalf, to dedicate it self to
God and his Will: This is the great difference between men and men, in fixing
their chiefest good and utmost end; The Soul finding comfort in God, sets
the whole bent of her endeavors toward him. So for the other affections, which
attend upon the other act of the will, aversation and loathing: a Soul that is
called and converted hates sin, its own beloved sin, as the greatest evil:
Hosea 14. 8. What have I any more to do with Idols? Isai. 30. 22. Thou shall
say to it as to an abominable rag, Get thee hence. A keen displicency and
hearty indignation is kindled in the Soul against sin: when God changes a
Soul, he puts a disposition into it somewhat like his own nature; God cannot
abide sin, and a sanctified heart cannot abide it, Get thou hence, etc. the new
life has an antipathy to that which is contrary to it.

2. In the life there will be a change; men will walk worthy their calling, not
disgracing it by scandals, or unseemly practices: Ephesians. 4. 1. I beseech you
Brethren walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye are called; that is, suitable
to the purity, suitable to the dignity of it. When David was a Shepherd, he
thought of nothing else* but keeping his fathers sheep; but when God called him
to be a Shepherd of the people, then he had other projects, and was of other
manner of behavior: A new calling requires a new conversation. So 1 These. 2.
12. Walk worthy of God, who has called you to his Kingdom and his Glory: The
divine calling puts an honor upon you: it is not for Princes to embrace the
dung, nor for Eagles to catch flies; to be vain, voluptuous, carnal and
worldly, as others are: you are called to the fellowship of Saints and Angels,
will it become one of your hopes to drive on such a low design as a worldly
interest? If you saw a man laboring in filthy ditches, and soyling himself, as
poor men do, would you believe* that he were heir apparent to a Crown, called
to inherit a Kingdom? Who will believe your calling, when you stick in the mud
of pleasures, and and are carried on with such a zealous respect after secular
interests? The Apostle reproves the Corinthians for walking as men, 1 Cor. 3.
3. Some walk as beasts, others are of a more civil strain; but this is but as
men; you should walk more sublimely, above the ordinary rate of flesh and
blood. When Antigo^^^ was going into the house of ^^ harlot, one told him* Thou
art a Kings son* Oh remember your dignity, and walk worthy of your high
calling; walk as having the world under your feet, with an holy scorn and
contempt of sublunary enjoyments: And as you should walk worthy of the dignity
of your calling, so of the purity of it; He that has called you is holy, 1
Pet. 1. 15. and your condition is a^ holy calling, 2 Timothy 1. 2. and the end of
your calling is holiness, 2 These. 4. 7. God has called us unto holiness: all
which are so many engagements to urge us to the more care. A filthy loose
conversation will never suit with this calling* you are a shame and a stain to
him that calls you, if you walk thus: as some in the Prophet are said to
Ezekiel. 36.
pollute God, namely, as their pollutions were retorted upon God.

Let us now come to the Manifestations and Effects of this Calling, and the
first effect mentioned is Sanctification, [ Sanctified in God the Father*]
Where you may note two things. 1. The State, [ Sanctified.] 2. The Author of
it, [ By God the Father.]

First, The State, (...), to them which are sanctified; in stead of which some
Copies have, (...), beloved by God the Father: but let us keep to our own
reading, the other being a mistake, and in few Greek Copies. The Note Observat.
is, That Gods people, whom he has called out of the world to himself, are a
sanctified people. I shall show you, 1. What it is to be sanctified: and then,
2. Why Gods called people must be sanctified.

First, What it is to be sanctified; there are many acceptions of the term, the
most famous are two; to sanctify is either to set apart, or to cleanse; these
two notions will be enough for our purpose, if in each of them we suppose both
something privative, and something positive: as when it signifies to set
apart, you must conceive not only a setting apart from common use, but a
dedication to holy uses, or a setting apart for God, which is the most proper
acception of the word: So when it signifies to cleanse, you must not only
conceive a purgation from filthiness, but a plantation of seeds of grace; not
only an abolition of natural corruption, but a renovation of Gods Image. In
this method let us a little consider the thing in hand.

1. To sanctify, is to set apart, and dedicate: Now Gods people are set apart
Psalm. 1. 4. 2 Timothy 2. 21. Vessels of honor for the Masters use.
by God, and they dedicate themselves to his use and service. They are set
apart by God both in time and before time: Before all time they are set apart
by Gods Decree to be an holy seed to himself in and by Christ, separated from
the perishing world to be vessels of honor; as the Reprobate are called
vessels of wrath and dishonor: thus we are said to be chosen to be holy,
Ephesians. 1. 4. But then in time they are regenerated, and actually set apart:
Sanctification is an actual Election (as before) by which we are set apart from
the perishing world to act for God, and to seek the things that make for his
glory: Thus we are called Gods first fruits, which were the Lords portion,
James 1. 18. and is there made a fruit of Regeneration: And thus we are said to
be an holy Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 9. the Priests being men set apart to minister
in Gods presence: Now this Consecration infers an holy preciseness and
singularity in the godly, that they may keep themselves unspotted from the
world, James 1. 28. It was a proph^na^on in B^sh^zzar to drink in the Cups* of
the Temple.
as holy things were to be kept from a common use; and it implies that every
sin is a kind of sacriledg, it steals an holy thing from God. But over and
above all this, they dedicate themselves, or set apart themselves by the
consent of their own vows; Romans 12. 1. Present your selves, etc. as every man
was to bring his own sacrifice; and for this dedication the Lord calls, when
he says, My son, give me thy heart; because God loves to put the honor upon
us of a gift, when it is but a debt; and because our voluntary consent to this
surrender is a necessary fruit of grace, and the immediate effect of his own
choice.

2. To sanctify, is to cleanse, together with its positive act, to renew and
adorn with grace.

Let us first speak of the privative or cleansing work; this notion is
necessary to be added to the former: They that are sanctified must not only be
separated to an holy use, but must also be cleansed: as to sanctify signifies
to separate, so there is a difference between them and others; and as it
signifies to cleanse, so there is a difference between them and themselves.
They differ from others, because they are a people set apart to act and live
for God; they trade for God, eat for God, drink for God, more or less, all is
for 1. Cor. 10. 31
Gods glory, and so are a distinct company from the men of the world, who are
merely swayed by their own interests, a company that merely act for themselves
in all that they do. And then there is a difference between them and
themselves, for Sanctification is the cleansing of a thing that was once
filthy: 1 Cor. 6. 11. Such were some of you, but now ye are washed, but now ye
are sanctified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God:
they are not the same men they were before. We all come into the world polluted
with the stain of sin, which is purged and done away by degrees, and at death
wholly, and never before: When Christ comes to bring us to God as the fruits
of his Purchase, then we are without spot and blemish, Ephesians. 5. 26. The
Papists cavil, ^^^ trifle, when they argue from that place, that either we must
grant a perfection in this life, or a purgation after death, or how else comes
the Soul to be without spot and blemish* I answer, That place asserts the thing
to the comfort of the Elect, that once they shall get rid of the filthy spots
of sin* but for the time, most probably in the moment of expiring: As the Soul
in the very moment wherein it is joined to the body becomes sinful; so in the
moment wherein it leaves the body it is sanctified, and presented by Christ to
God; as many pious Souls breathe out their last with the profession of this
hope: Then we shall be cleansed indeed; now the work is in fieri, it is a doing:
The work of grace for the present consists in rubbing away the old filth, and
So obstinate is man's heart, that that is all that can be done; the weakening of
sin, but not the dest^u^tion of it.
weakening original corruption more and more; as also in washing off the new
defilement which we contract every day by conversing in the world: See John 13.
10. where our Savior alludeth to a man that has been bathing himself, but
after his return by treading on the ground again staineth his feet, and needs
another washing of his feet at least: So by conversing in the world, there are
stains and spots contracted, which must always be washed off by daily
repentance, besides our Tit. 3. 5.
general bathing at first conversion or regeneration. I have no more to say to
this cleansing work, but only this, That it is not merely like the washing off
of spots, but like the purging of sick matter or ill humors out of the body; it
is a work done with much reluctation of corrupt nature, and therefore it is
expressed by subduing our iniquities, Micab 7. 19. In outward filthiness there
is no actual resistance, as there is in sin.

But to speak now of the positive work, or the decking and adorning the Soul
with grace. As the Priests under the Law, when they came to minister before the
Lord, were not only washed in the great Lavor, but adorned with gorgeous
apparel: So to be sanctified, is more then to be purified; for besides the
expulsion of sin, there is an infusion of grace, a disposition wrought clean
contrary to what we had before, therefore called a new heart and a new spirit,
see Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27. from whence also there sloweth newness of life and
conversation; there is a new heart or conformity to Gods Nature, and a new life
or conformity to Gods Will? The pattern of that Sanctification which is wrought
in the heart, is Gods Nature or Image, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Ephesians. 4. 24. and the
pattern of that Sanctification which is wrought in the life, is Gods Law or
revealed Will, 1 Thef. 4. 3. the one is our ha^i^^al holiness, and the other
our actual.

1. For habitual Sanctification, or that which is wrought in the heart, I
observe, that it is As a child is true man, though not perfect man, as soon as
he is born; he has all the parts, though not the growth, and strength, and
statute.
through, but not full; there must be all grace, and every faculty must be
adorned with grace* ^^ These. 5. 23. The very God of peace sanctify you wholly*
I pray God your whole spirit, soul and body be preserved blameless until the
coming of Jesus Christ. All of man is made up of spirit, soul, and body, that
is the Theological distinction of the faculties: the spirit that is the more
rational and Angelical part of the soul, understanding, conscience, will ^^^^d
then there is soul, the lower part, the more brutish and sensual affections and
desires* and then body, the outward man, the instrument of soul, which needs
to be sanctified, that is, kept in a good order and frame, that it may not
rebel, or disobey the motions of the better part. You see All was depraved by
Adam, and all is renewed by Christ.
then every faculty must be seasoned with the new nature; this leaven must get
into the whole lump; the mind, memory, conscience, will, desires, delights, all
must be brought into conformity to the Image of God. And as every faculty must
be sanctified, so there must be every grace: In Conversion there is introduced
into the Soul a stock of truth, and a frame of grace* called in other terms the
anointing, 1 John 2. 27. and the seed of God, 1. John 3. 1^. There is a stock
of truth brought into the understanding to season that; not that every one that
is regenerate does actually know all truths, but there is a saving light and
knowledge of things necessary; they see enough to avoid courses of damnation,
and to cleave to the ways of God: and there is an inquisitiveness after truths,
and a suitableness to them when they are revealed; they are teachable, though
actually ignorant; there is something in their hearts that carries a cognation
and proportion to every truth, and claims kin of it when ever it is revealed.
And then there is a frame of grace; for the mind is not only enlightened, but
the will and affections are sanctified, and the heart inclined to choose the
ways of God, and to obey him when ever occasion is offered. The habits of all
grace are brought into the heart by Regeneration, as original ^in contains
the seeds and habits of all sin: though there be not explicit workings of all
graces at that time, yet they are introduced, and make up one sincere bent of
the Soul toward God, called holiness in truth, Ephesians. 4. 24. Thus you see the
new creature does not come out maimed, the person sanctified has all the parts
of a new man, not one member is wanting. But now though this Sanctification be
through, yet it is not full and complete for degrees; every part is sanctified,
but every part is not wholly sanctified: In the most gracious there is a double
principle, Hell and Heaven, Adam and Jesus, the flesh and the spirit, the Law
of the members and the Law of the mind: such a medley and composition are we
during the present state! We know but in part, and we are sanctified but in
part, and there being such a mixture in the princip^^^ of operation, every
action is mixed: It is notable, that there is no commendable act in Scripture
recorded, but there is some mixture of corruption in it, even in the most
Heroical exercises and discoveries of Faith: Moses believes, and therefore
smites the rock, but he smites twice; Sarah believes the promise, but gives
her maid to Abraham; Reb^^^^ was told that the elder should serve the younger,
and believes it, but yet she sets Jacob awork to get the blessing by a wile;
Rahab saves the Spies, but makes a lie, etc. Thus is our wine mingled with
water, our Cant. 5. 1.
honey with wax, and our silver with tin* All the trial is, that the better part
prevails; and that we are still growing and halting on to perfection, as the
morning Sun does to high noon, Prove. 4. 18.

2. For actual Sanctification, which stands in a conformity to Gods Will,
when the heart is changed so, as the life, thoughts, words, actions, all are
sanctified: there is a spirit of holiness working within, and breathing
without, in sanctified discourse and holy exercises, all the actions savor of
grace. Now our actions are sanctified and savor of grace, when they are
performed upon new Principles and new Ends.

1. New Principles, Duty swayeth the conscience, and love inclines the heart:
1 Timothy 1. 5. The end of the Commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and
good conscience, and faith unfeigned: No act is gracious, and an act of pure
obedience, unless it have these qualifications. It is not the matter that
makes the work good, but the principles: all that we do must come from a
principle of faith, love, and obedience; obedience respects the Command, love
the kindness and merit of the Lawgiver, and faith his bounty and reward: the
first swayeth the Conscience* the second inclines the heart, and the third
gives encouragement: This is to do duties with a Gospel frame of spirit:
obedience takes notice of the Laws of God, love of the kindness of God, and
faith of the rewards of God; and so obedience shows us the matter of the
duty, and faith the encouragement: so that what ever is done as an act of the
new nature or sanctified estate, it is an act of obedience out of gratitude
upon the encouragement of our glorious hopes and advantages in Christ: As if it
be asked, Why do I do it? 1 These. 4. 3. and 5. 18. His Will is motive enough,
God will have it s^.
God has commanded it* Why with such strength of affection and earnestness? 2
Cor. 5. 14, 15. Titus 2. 11, 12, 13, 14.
God has deserved it, because of his love and bounty in Christ: Conscience is
sensible of the obligation, and love and hope sweetens the duty. There is a
natural conscience of good and evil, which is known by legal ayms and carnal
motives: what is done out of natural conscience, is not done out of obedience
and thankefulness* but out of bondage, and with a servile frame of spirit; like
fruits that are ripened by art and force, not naturally nor kindly.

2. New Ends: here indeed the discovery is most sensible; Principles are more
hidden, and discovered mostly by ends; Now the only end must be Gods glory: All
that is done in the spiritual life, be it an act of piety, justice, temperance
or charity, it must be done with this aim, that God may be glorified by our
obedience to his Will* I owe this duty to God, and I must do it for Gods sake;
be it a duty of worship, or in your civil relation and traffic, as if I pray,
the last end of prayer must be Gods glory, whither I seek grace and pardon, or
the conveniences and supports of the present life: Grace still sublimateth the
intention of the creature, therefore carnal men are taxed for praying out of
self-interests; Hosea 7. 14. They have not cried unto me when they howled upon
their beds; they assemble themselves for corn, and wine, and oil: It is but a
brutish cry, when men seek only their own commodity and welfare; as beasts will
howl when they are sensible of any smart and injury; dogs or any brute beasts
may do the same, there is no act of grace in it. So in charity, many men make
it a kind of bargain and traffic, they do it to be seen of men, Mat. 6. 2. to
gratify their worldly interests, not to please God or honor God, for their
credit and repute, to be well thought of; and there Christ says, (...), that
is, they have that which they look for; for other things they give God a
discharge and acquitance. Briefly, the aims of men not regenerate or
sanctified, are either carnal, or natural, or legal. 1. Carnal, when men make a
market of Religion, their worship, righteousness and charity is set to sale,
and by a vile submission made to stoop to their own private interests; as the
Pharisees made long prayers to devour widows houses, that is, to beget a fame
and repute of honesty, that they might be entrusted with the management of
their estates: So some may pray to show parts, preach out of envy, and to rival
others in esteem, Phil. 1. 15. Often is this vile scorn put upon God, that his
worship is made a cover and pretense to unclean intents; which is* as if a cup
of gold made for a King to drink of, should be filled with excrements; or as if
we did set up another god beside him; for that which we make our utmost end, we
make it our God: as false Teachers are said to make their belly their God,
Phil. 3. 19. because all that they did was for belly cheer, to flow in
abundance of wealth and worldly pleasures, by this means setting up the belly
and the concernments of the belly in Gods stead. 2. There are natural ends: It
is grace (as I said) that sublimateth the intention of the creature: A carnal
man can go no higher then Self; as water cannot ascend beyond its spring: Now
all natural men are not hypocrites, to put on a pretense of strictness out of
design: the Apostle says, They do by nature the things contained in the Law,
Romans 2. 14. that is, upon the impulses of natural conscience, they avoid such
sins as Nature discovers, upon such arguments and reasons as Nature
suggesteth: If they worship, it is to satisfy their own consciences; if they
be strict and temperate, it is not out of reasons of obedience, but because the
matter of carnal pleasure is gross and burdensome, and hinders the free
contemplation of the mind; or because these pleasures emasculate and quench
their natural bravery, and so hinder their reputation in the world: if they be
just, it is to maintain commerce between man and man; if they be kind in their
relations, it is for their own peace and quiet; nothing is done as in and to
the Lord, as the Apostle enjoyneth, Ephesians. 5. God is neither at the beginning
nor at the end of any of these actions; the love of God is not their spring and
rise, nor the glory of God their aim: If they pray, there is no intention
beyond Self, and the welfare of their own natures; the matter is but the (...),
Romans 2. 15
outward work of the Law, and their aim is but the freedom and welfare of
nature. 3. There are legal ends: When wicked men are most devout, it is but to
quiet conscience, to satisfy God for their sins by their duties; they would
fain buy out their peace with Heaven at any rate: Micah 6. 6, 7, 8. Wherewith
shall I come before him? what shall I give for the sins of my Soul? They are
devout, charitable, that by diligence in worship, and exceeding in charity,
they may expiate the offenses of a carnal life: If peace of conscience were to
be purchased with money, they would not spare; they would rather part with any
thing then their corruptions, because nothing is so dear to a carnal heart as
sin. So that you see devout nature is very corrupt and perverse, and therefore
all its actions are justly hated of God: Prove. 21. 27. The sacrifice of the
wicked is an abomination, how much more when he offers it with an evil mind?
that is, to buy an indulgence in other sins, that he may sin them freely and
with leave from Heaven: In short, all their duties of worship and charity are
performed as a sin-offering, and not as a thank-offering; to satisfy God, not
to glorify him; usually they are extorted from him in a pang of conscience; as
a Mariner casts out his goods in a storm, or a traveller yields his money
when beset with thieves; there is no true delight in God or in obedience. And
thus I have showed you what it is to be sanctified in heart and life, which was
the first thing propounded.

Secondly, Let me now show why Gods called people must be sanctified, and that
briesly and in few words.

1. For the honor of God, of every Person in the Trinity, Father, Son, and
Spirit. For the honor of the Father, that his choice may not be disparaged:
Ephesians. 1. 4. He has elected us to be holy. 2 These. 2. 14. Chosen to the
sanctification of the Spirit.
There is some conscience in the world, that makes them adore strictness: mere
morality has some majesty with it in the eye of Nature, but especially Gospel
holiness; whereas looseness is looked upon with scorn and contempt; so that his
chosen people would be a dishonor to him if they were not sanctified:
therefore God the Father aims at it in all his dispensations; he chooses us,
that we may be of a choice spirit: as when Esther was chosen out among the
Virgins, she was purified and decked with ornaments, and had garments given her
out of the Kings Wardrobe; so we are made holy being chosen of God. And then he
calls us, that he may put this honor upon us in the eye of the world, to
make us like himself; Be ye holy, as he that has called us is h^ly, 1 Pet. 1.
15. It were monstrous that God should set his affections upon a people
altogether E^ demum vera est religio imita^i qu^m colis. Lactant.
unlike him; that he should call them to be so near himself, that continue
corrupt and carnal: It is the aim of his Providence as well as his special
grace; we are afflicted, that we may be partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12. 10.
threshed, that our husk may fly off: God certainly delights not in the
afflictions of his people; no, Psalm. 35. 27.
he loves the prosperity of the Saints, but he had rather see them in any
condition then see them sinful. Again, It is for the honor of God the Son,
whose members we are; Head and members must be all of a piece, like one
another: It were monstrous that Christ should have such a body as
Nebuchadnezzar saw in his dream, where the head was of pure Gold and the thighs
Brass, and the feet Iron, etc. and it were an odd sight, that a face of Europe
should be put upon the body of a Negro or Ethiopian; and as strange and odd it
is, that Christ should have a disproportioned body quite unlike himself; yea it
is little for his honor that he should be the head of an ulcerous body, as
well as a monstrous body: so much of sin as you continue, so much you disparage
your Redeemer, and put him to shame: therefore all Christ's aim is to make us
holy; for that end he redeemed us, that he might sanctify us, and make us a
glorious Church without spot and wrinkle, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. When Christ was
upon the Cross, in the height of his love, he was devising what he should do
for his Church to make her honorable and glorious, and he pitched upon
Sanctification as the fittest blessing that he could bestow upon us: Every
distinct Society must have some distinct honor and privilege; Now Christ had
set apart the Church as a distinct Society to himself, and therefore he would
not bestow upon her pomp and worldly greatness, other Societies had enough of
that, but holiness, grace, which is our splendour and Psalm. 93. 5. Holiness
becomes thy house, O Lord* for ever.
ornament: And indeed this was a far better gift then any outward greatness and
excellency could be; for moral excellencies are far better then civil and
natural: It is Gods own honor to be holy, therefore it is said, that he is
glorious in Holiness, Exodus 15. 11. He is elsewhere said to be R^m. 10. 12.
Ephesians. 2 4.
rich in mercy, but here glorious in holiness; his treasure in his goodness,
but that which he accounts his honor is his holiness or immaculate purity; as
you know among men their wealth is distinguished from their honor. But in this
gift Christ had not only respect to the excellency of it, but to our need and
want; Christ was then repairing and making up the ruins of the Fall; now we
lost in Adam the purity of our natures, as well as the favor of God; therefore
that the plaster might be as broad as the sore, he would not only reconcile us
to God, but sanctify us; his Blood was not only (...), a Price, but (...), a
Lavor, wherein to wash us and make us clean: as under the Law there was in the
Tabernacle a great Lavor as well as an Altar, to show we must be washed and
sanctified as well as reconciled to God: and Christ came not only to abolish
the guilt of sin, which is against our interest, our peace and comfort; but
also to destroy the power of sin, which is against Gods glory. And as this was
Christ's aim in Redemption, so also in the Gospel, and all the precious Promises
of it; he dyed that Ordinances might be under a blessing, and conduce to the
promotion of holiness; for so it is there in Ephesians. 5. 26. That he might
sanctify us by the washing of water through the Word: There is a treasure of
grace purchased, and left in the Church to be conveyed to us by the use of
these Ordinances. So John 17. 19. I sanctify my self for their sakes, that
they may be sanctified through the truth. When ever we come to the Word, or
enjoy the use of the Seals, we may expect to reap the fruits of Christ's
Purchase. Celsus objected against Christianity, that it was a sanctuary for
Villains and men of a licencious life: Origin answered him, that it was not a
Sanctuary to nourish them in their evil practices, but an Hospital to cure
them. As under the Law all the Cities of Refuge were Cities of Levites, and
Schools of Instruction: so Christ has made the Church a School, wherein to
learn the trade of holiness; and the Word, and the Seals, and all the
Ordinances look that way. Lastly, It is for the honor of God the Spirit, that
the called people should be holy, because they are his charge, in pupillage to
the Holy Ghost, for this end and reason, that they may be sanctified;
Sanctifica^ion is made his personal operation; The sanctification of the
Spirit, 2 These. 2. 14. and 1 Pet. 1. 2. He is to shape and fashion all the
vessels of glory, to deck the Spouse of Christ with the Jewels of the Covenant.
This is the great advantage that we have in the Economy and dispensation of
grace, that we have God to purpose it, God to purchase it, and God to work it;
the Father, Word and Spirit, who agree in one to sanctify the creature, and
make it holy. Now it is a great grief to the Spirit when the work does not go
on and prosper in the Soul; for he works us to this very thing, and is
therefore called the Spirit of holiness: it is not for his honor to dwell in
defiled temples, and to let the called people go naked, and without their
ornament. Well then, you see God for his honors sake will have his purposes
accomplished for which he chose us, and Christ his purchase made good, and the
Spirit who is left in charge to see all accomplished, he goes on with the wor^.

2. Another Reason why we must be sanctified, is, because of the hopes to which
we are called, and the happiness which we expect: now we cannot have it unless
we be holy: Heb. 12. 14. Without holiness no man shall see God: We are bidden
in that verse to follow peace, but chiefly holiness; (...) the masculine
article shows that it is to be referred to (...).
for it is not said, that without Peace no man shall see God: Peace may be
often broken in the quarrel of truth and holiness, and so Gods children may be
passively men of contention; aye but for all that they shall see God: but those
that are not holy he cannot endure their presence, and therefore they shall
never see his face, and enjoy him hereafter. Usually by a fond abuse we
restrain the word Saints to the Saints departed; I, but we must be Saints here,
or else we shall never be Saints hereafter: I mean true Saints; for by another
abuse the word Saints is made matter of pretense in some, and matter of scorn
by others; but to be Saints indeed, that is all the evidence you have to show
for your interest in your glorious hopes: What should others do with Heaven
that are not Saints? how can they see God, that have not a pure eye? A dusky
glass cannot represent the image: (...).
the degree of Vision is according to the degree of Sanctification. And what
should a carnal heart, that knows no other Heaven but to eat, drink and
sleep, and wallow in sensual delights, do with the inheritance of the Saints in
light? The Apostle says, we must be made meet for such a state, Col. 1. 12.
The vessels of glory are first seasoned with grace: Alas, otherwise carnal men
can no more tell what to do with Heaven, then Swine with Pearls. We do not look
for a Turkish Paradise, but a sinless state; not to bathe our Souls in carnal
pleasures, but to be Consorts of the immaculate Lamb; our hopes engage us to
holiness: 1 John 3. 3. He that has this hope purifieth himself as Christ is
pure: If his heart be fastened upon such an hope, as to see Christ as he is,
and t^ be like him both for temper of Soul and state of body, certainly he must
needs be an holy man; he will be practicing and trying here upon Earth how he
can conform to Christ, and begin his happiness as well as he can. Certainly he
that expects that his body shall be like to Christ's glorious Body, he will
possess his vessel in sanctification and in honor: he cannot use his body that
is under so great hopes merely as a strainer for meats and drinks, and a
channel for lust to pass through; his mind that shall see God, he cannot fill
it with chaff, or suffer it to be occupied with vanity, toying thoughts, and
vile cares, and unworthy projects: and his affections that should cleave to God
inseparably, to be prostituted to every base ^bject. Thus with respect to our
hopes we must be sanctified; the foundation and seed of glory Use ^.
is laid in grace, and that life began which we must live for ever*

It serves for Conviction: If Gods people are a sanctified people, then here
is but sad news for two sorts of persons. 1. The profane, that care not for
holiness, God has no birthright for such Esaus; the portion of the Lord are an
holy portion, but Deuteronomy. 32. 5.
these have a spot that is not as the spot of his children: See what John
speaks of such persons as wallow in their filthiness, 1 John 3. 8. He that
commits sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the beginning;
(...), he that tradeth in sin, and makes it his work and business: You may
presume that you belong to God, but you are of the Devil; you have not indeed
the least pretense of a claim, and do not go so far as hypocrites, being so
little careful to be holy, that you are not moral: Are you called? from what?
where is the least evidence of it? I, but Caspa^ s^res. in Miscellaneis. Multi
gloriantur cor suum bonum esse, etiamsi extus Vita non respondeat; decipiuntur
isti homines, nam si candela intus acc^nsa est, lucerna extus necessario lucet
and splendet; ^osito quod cor ^uum bo^^m est, tamen damnaberis quia Christus
^on judicat secundum cor sed secundum opera. If the Israelites had slain and
eaten the Passover, yet if the door posts were not sprinkled with blood, the
Angel would not spare them.
our hearts are better then we show for: This is to appeal to a witness that
cannot be found; it is all one as if a man should lay claim to another Land,
and pretend that he has lost the Evidences: your guilt is written in legible
characters, that he that runs may read it. 2. It convinces persons that
scoff at holiness: scoffing is the overflow of gall and malice, and a black
mark let it be found where it will be; in the general it argues a bad spirit,
but especially when Religion is made a byword and a reproach. When you deride
men for their holiness, you deride them for that which is the express Image of
the glorious God, and so deride God himself: Holy Brethren, as the Saints are
styled, Heb. 3. 1. should no more be a disgrace then holy Father, as God
himself is styled, John 17. 11. You hate God more then you do the Saints, if
you hate them for their holiness, which shines in them with a faint luster,
but is infinitely and originally in God. Take heed of the chair of scorners,
those are Rev. ^2. 15.
dogs that are without, that bark at the splendour of Gods Image, that make
Saints a word of disgrace: Scoffing Ismaels that will be mocking, are sure to
be cast out, Genesis 21. 9. they do not belong to God: The Apostle interprets that
mocking to be persecution, Gal. 4. 27. so it is in Gods account; and yet it is
always found in those that are born after the flesh: Profane spirits think
Religion a matter of nothing; and men are wont to mock at those* which make a
great matter of what they account nothing. Oh remember, holiness is the badg of
those which are the Lords called people, and it should be a matter of
reverence, not reproach.

Again, It serves for Caution, to prevent mistakes: Christians, Use 2.
look to your Sanctification; Psalm. 4. 3. Know that God has set apart him that
is godly for himself: The Beasts worshippers have the Beasts mark, Rev. 13. 16.
So also Gods children are stamped with his seal and impress; 2 Timothy 2. 19. The
foundation of the Lord stands sure, having this seal, etc. they are sealed
with a mark of preservation, The Lord knows those that are his; and they are
sealed with a mark of distinction, Let every one that names the Name of God
depart from iniquity. As Cain is stamped on both sides, so has Gods Seal a
double Motto; one that notes his owning the Saints, the other that notes
their tem^er and disposition, they depart from iniquity: Take heed then, have
you this seal and impress? There are many things that look like Sanctification,
but are not; I shall touch upon four, Civility, Formality, restraining grace,
and temporary grace.

1. Civility, which is nothing else but a fair demeanor in the world, or in the
Apostles expression, a fair show in the flesh, a darker representation of
holiness, rather Heathenish strictness then Christian: you may descry it by
these Notes. 1. It is usually accompanied with ignorance, and little knowledge
of Gods Institutions: Men live well, are no drunkards, no swearers, but know
little of God, have no insight in matters of Religion; like Nicodemus, a strict
Pharisee, but grossly ignorant, John 3. 10. Spiritual life begins with
knowledge, and ends in a rational strictness, and what they do, they do upon
principles; Conscience is swayed by the acknowledgment of Gods Will: others
live plausibly, but know not the ground and reason of their actions, and
therefore are soon satisfied, never troubled about imperfections, because where
there is no light, there is not that tenderness, which is found in real
Christians, who look into the purity of the Law, and are troubled because they
know so much of the Will of God, and do so far come short of it; as in a clear
glass the least mote is soon espied. 2. There is little of Christ in such
Souls; for a man that is satisfied with his own righteousness does not prize
Christ: Paul a Pharisee counted his works gain, which afterward he found to be
loss, Phil. 3. 7. by gain he means an advantage to procure the favor of God:
Self is wont to take up all their thoughts, and therefore moral strains suit
more with them, then Gospel comforts, and doctrines that breed faith: The Law
is more natural to men then the Gospel; and therefore with those that are of a
moral disposition, and no more, it finds better entertainment and welcome
then the Gospel does: there is no hungering and thirsting after Christ; they do
not see the need of the sweetness of his grace, of the help of his Spirit,
going on in a plausible moral course, without rub or difficulty: whereas in the
spiritual life Gal. 2 20.
Christ does all, and every day they see more cause to bless God for him. 3.
Usually there is some great prevailing s^n: Civility is but a freer slavery;
one way or another Satan holds them captive, and their honesty and fair show
to the world is but to serve their carnal interests, to hide a lust or feed a
lust, and most commonly this sin is worldliness: Christ's young man that had
kept all those things from his youth, had great possessions, and they were a
great snare to his heart, Mat. 19. 22. The sin of the Pharisees was vainglory
and ambition: some morsel there is reserved under the tongue, some sin kept
with the greater allowance from conscience, and the less shame from abroad,
because otherwise the life is fair and honest. 4. There is a greater care about
actions then lusts: Wrath, and pride, and wanton thoughts are digested, because
there is no violence and un^leanness in the conversation: Civility is all for
the carriage, nothing for tempering the affections to such an order and
moderation as becomes grace: Paul complains of his lusts, and the Law of sin
within, Romans 7. yea of such sinful workings as do not fall under the cognizance
and discovery of the light of Nature, Romans 7. 7. The first risings and
stirrings of sin forbidden in the tenth Commandment, the least rebellion of
Nature. Thus for Civility.

2. Formality, or pretended grace: you may be deceived in that; and therefore
the Apostle speaks of a (...).
true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24. in opposition to that which is feigned and
counterfeit: Now false grace is always acted by foreign and external
considerations; as pupils have not a principle of life within them, but are
moved by an external force: The hypocrites principles of motion are without
him, as carnal respects, self ends, etc. True grace has an inward propensity
to comply with the Will of God; there is a Law upon their bowels: by-ends work
by constraint, and carry the Soul contrary to its native inclination; a man
would not do such a thing, were it not for such ends: therefore the Apostle
says, 1 Pet. 5. 2. Feed the flock that is among you, not by constraint, but
willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind. When a man acts
genuinely in a work, his own heart carries him to it more then all outward
encouragements. Again, False grace is shy of Gods presence and sight: pretenses
are to deceive men; therefore such persons strive to get God out of their
thoughts, they know his eye will find them out: But now truth of grace is ready
to draw every thing into Gods sight; though they tremble to think what defects
God can find in them, yet they appeal to him for the sincerity of their hearts:
John 20. 17. Lord thou know all things, and thou know that I love thee;
He would not excuse miscarriages, yet for the general temper and bent of his
heart he re^erreth himself to Gods Omnisciency. So Job 31. 6. Let me be weighed
in an even balance, that God may know mine integrity; and yet elsewhere he
says, Job 42. 5, 6. Mine eye sees thee, and therefore I abhor my self in dust
and ashes: In the one place he appealeth to God, for he was confident that his
integrity would hold weight; and yet in the other he could even loath himself
when he thought of God, because of so many defects and failings. So David,
Psalm. 139. 23. Search me O Lord, and know my heart, etc. No doubt but David was
sensible that God could find enough in him; but Lord search, see if any thing
be allowed with full leave of conscience. Again, False grace does not grow,
unless it be worse and worse; Pretenses wither rather then thrive: God
complains, Ier. 7. 24. that they went backward rather then forward: False
grace is always declining till it be wholly lost; like bad salt, that loses of
its acrimony and smartness every day till it be cast to the dunghill: But now
true grace, from a grain it grows into a tree, Matthew. 13. from a morning
glimpse to a perfect noon, Prove. 4. 18. from smoking flax it is blown up into
a flame: The least meal in the Barrel, and oil in the Cruse, when it is fed
with a supply from Heaven, shall prosper into abundance: Nicodemus that at
first came to Christ by night, after boldly declares himself for him, John 19.
30. Grace gets ground upon the flesh, and holiness by degrees advances into a
triumph; Examine then whether you increase or decrease: if you go backward,
from zeal to coldness, from strictness to looseness; if you lose you care of
duty, and choyceness of spirit, and there be no complaining, it is a sign grace
was never wrought in truth. Once more, False grace is not accompanied with
humility: When men the more they profess, the prouder they grow and more
self-conceited, there is cause of suspicion: With true grace there always goes
along a spiritual poverty, or a sense of our spiritual wants; the more
knowledge, the more they discern their ignorance, compare 1 Cor. 8. 2. with
Prove. 30. 2, 3. the more faith, the more they bewail unbelief, and see a need
of increase and further growth: Mark 9. 24. Lord I believe, help mine unbelief.
Oh I want faith, what shall I do! still I am haunted with prejudicial and
lessening thoughts of Gods alsufficiency and goodness. It is excellent when the
Soul is thus kept hungry and humble under our enjoyments, and we Phil. 3. 13.
forget the things that are behind, because the things that are before us, or
not yet attained, are much more.

3. The next thing is See Mr Lyfords Ca^e^eehism, last edition* page 308, 309.
restraining grace, which is nothing else but an awe upon the Conscience,
inclining men to forbear sin, though they do not hate it. Now you may discern
it, partly because love is of little use and force with such kind of spirits;
they are chained up by their own fears: The great Evangelick motive is mercy;
Romans 12. 1. I beseech you by the mercies of God: The heart is most ingenuous
when it yeildeth to such entreaties: It is good to serve God with reverence,
but a servile awe has little of grace in it. It is true indeed, it is better
to have a slavish fear then none at all; therefore David says to them that
would be held in with no other restraints, Psalm. 4. 4. Stand in awe, and sin
not: to cool and charm their fury he makes use of the argument of Gods
vengeance; though this is also the fault of slavish spirits, that carnal
respects and thoughts of outward inconvenience do equally sway them, as a
servile fear of Gods Judgments. Again, you may know it, because it does not
destroy sin, but only prohibit the exercise of it: Abimelechs lust was not
quenched, yet God withheld him from sinning against Sarah, Genesis 20. 6. The
heart is not renewed, though the action be checked; as Israel had an adulterous
heart toward God, when her way was hedged up with thorns, Hosea 2. 6. Again,
it is their trouble that they are held in the stocks of Conscience; they would
fain be enlarged, and find out their own paths.

4. The next thing that looks like Sanctification, but is not, is common
grace: This is a distinct thing from all the rest, yet I call it common grace,
because it may be in them that fall away and depart from God: It differs from
Civility, because it is more Christian and Evangelical; from Formality, because
that is only in pretense and show, whereas this is a real work upon the Soul;
from restraining grace, because that is only conversant about sins and duties
out of a servile awe of God, but this seems to carry out the Soul with some
affection to Christ; it is a common work, good in its self, which God ordains
in some to be a preparation and beginning of the work of grace: Of this the
Apostle speaks, Heb. 6. 4, 5. where he calls it an enlightening, a taste of
Christ and of the powers of the world to come, and a partaking of the Holy
Ghost; meaning of the gifts of the Spirit, abilities for holy duties, etc. of
all which elsewhere; only now let me note three things. 1. That the light there
spoken of is not humbling. 2. The taste is not ravishing, and drawing out the
Soul after more of Christ. 3. Their gifts are not renewing and sanctifying.

1. That light is not humbling; He says, they are enlightened, but he does not
say they are humbled: Foundations totter that are not laid deep enough: The
more true light a man has, the more cause of self-abasement will he find in
himself: You can never magnify Christ enough, and you can never debase self
enough; and certainly Christ is most exalted when you are most abased, Isai. 2.
19. Dagon must fall upon his face, if you mean to set up the Ark; and if Christ
shall be precious to you, you must be vile in your own eyes; none have such
true revivings as the humble, Isai. 57. 15, 16. True humiliation is far from
weakening your comforts, it makes them more full and sure: therefore a main
thing that was wanting in those spoken of in Heb. 6. was humiliation, and their
fault was a rash closing with Christ in the pride of their hearts.

2. Their taste was not ravishing, and affecting the heart so as to engage it
to seek after Christ; they had but loose and slight desires of happiness*
glances upon the glory of Heaven and the comforts of the Gospel, which possibly
might stir up a wish, Oh that I might dye the death of the righteous, etc. they
were not serious and holy desires after Christ, after grace and strength to
serve him: The Saints that have a taste Romans 7. 24. Psalm. 119. 5.
groan after a fuller communion in his graces as well as comforts; that
experience which they have had of Christ, makes them long for more: But now in
Temporaries there is a loose asse^t and slight affection, a taste enough to
prevail with them to make some profession for a while, a rejoicing for a
season, etc.

3. Their gifts are not renewing and sanctifying; such possibly as may make
them useful to the Church, but do not change the heart: the Apostle says, they
were made partakers of the Holy Ghost; that is, had some share, it may be a
plentiful share of Church gifts, so as to be able to carry on duties to the
edification and comfort of others; but alas what is a man the better, if the
heart be oppressed with sins in the mean time, and be not upright with God? 1
Cor. 13. 1. Though I speak with the tongues of men and Angels, and have not
charity, I am become but as a sounding Brass, and tinkling Cymbal. Though you
can speak of the things of God with much enlargement and affection, pray
sweetly, all is but as tinkling with God if there be not saving grace: It is a
great evidence that we are such as the Apostle speaks of, when the affection
does not answer the expression of a duty, nor the life our knowledge, and gifts
have not a proportionable influence upon practice. So much for that Point.

Having spoken of the State, I come now to speak of the Author of it, God the
Father. But why is it so distinctly attributed to the Father? is not Christ our
Sanctification? 1 Cor. 1. 30. and is it not called the Sanctification of the
Spirit? 2 These. 2. 14. The Answer shall draw out the strength of the phrase in
these Propositions. 1. It is true, that the whole Trinity one way or other
concurreth to the work of holiness; those works ad extra are indivisa common to
all the Persons; the Father sanctifies, the Son sanctifies, and the Holy
Ghost sanctifies: the same may be said of preserving and calling. 2. Though
all work jointly, yet there are distinct personal operations, by which they
make way for the glory of each other; the love of the Father for the glory of
the Son, and the glory of the Son for the power of the Spirit. See how the
Scripture follows these things: You shall find first, that no man comes to
the Son but from the Father by Election; John 6. 37. All that the Father gives
shall come to me: so verse. 65. No man comes unto me, unless it be given him of
my Father. Look again and you shall find that no man comes to the Father from
the bondage of sin and Satan, but by the Son, through his Redemption and
Mediation; John 14. 6. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no man comes
unto the Father but by me. Again, you shall see no man is united to the Son but
by the Holy Ghost, who works in those whom the Father did choose and the Son
redeem; and therefore the Sanctification of the Spirit is as necessary as the
Blood of Jesus, 1 Pet. 1. 2. So that you see all have their distinct work; the
Inchoation is from the Father, the Dispensation by the Son, and the
Consummation by the Spirit: from the Father, in the Son, and through the
Spirit; there is Gods choice, Christ's purchase, and the Spirits application:
all are joined in one Verse, for indeed they must not be severed, even in the
place last alleged, 1 Pet. 1. 2. 3. Because the first distinct operation is
the Fathers, therefore the whole work in Scripture is often ascribed to him; he
is said to justify; The Iustifier of them that believe in Jesus, Romans 3. 26.
So he is said elsewhere to purge; John 15. 1, 2. I am the Vine, and my Father
is the Husbandman; he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit: All
depends upon the decree of his love: Christ does not work upon a person,
unless he be given to him by the Father; and therefore he being first in order
and operation, the whole work is made his work: Sanctified in God the Father.
Observe,

That Sanctification is Gods work, wrought in us by the Father. Observat. 1.
To cleanse the heart is beyond the power of the creature; it can no more make
it self holy, then make its self to be: We could defile our selves, but we
cannot cleanse our selves: Dominq ^rrare per me po^ui re^ire non pot^i. Austin
Meditar.
as the sheep can go astray of its self, but it can never return to the fold
without the shepherds care and help. Lusts are too hard for us, and so are the
duties of obedience: Non potest reddi nisi ab ^^ a quo potuil dari. Aug.
God that gave us his Image at first, must again plant it in the Soul: Who can
repair Nature depraved, but the Author of Nature? When a Watch is out of order
we send it to the Workman: We are his workmanship in Christ, Ephesians. 2. 10. God
takes it to be his Prerogative, Levit. 21. 8. I am the Lord that sanctifies
thee: Grace is his immediate creature: Man's will contributeth nothing to the
work but resistance and rebellion; and outward means work not, unless God put
in with them; else why should the same Word preached by the same Minister, work
in some, and harden others? all the difference arises from Gods grace, which
acts according to pleasure. Well then,

1. Let us wait upon God till the work be accomplished: Our wills are obstinate
and perverse, but God never made a creature too hard for himself; he is able to
do this thing for us, and it is our comfort we have such a God to go to. The
Heathens that groped and felt after God, were to seek of a power to quell their
lusts, and therefore were put upon sad remedies; whereas all is made easy to
you in the power of God through Christ. Crates gave this advice to one that
came to him to know how he should subdue the lust of uncleanness, he answered,
P^i^m sa^e(...) inde l^qu^u^. Tertul. in Apol.
that he should either famish himself or hang himself; they knew no remedy but
offering violence to Nature, or else death and despair. Democritus blinded
himself, because he could not look upon women without lusting after them.
Christianus solvis oculis foeminam. V^d^t Tertul. ibidem.
Now God teaches us to put out the eye of our lust, not of our bodies: Bless
God that you know whose work it is, and to whom to go for Sanctification.

2 Use. Praise the Lord when ever this work is accomplished; Not I, but grace;
it must not be ascribed to our works, or to any power that is in our selves,
but to Gods mercy, Christ's merits, and the Spirits efficacy: There is Gods
grant; To her it was granted to be covered with fine linen, the righteousness
of the Saints, Rev. 19. 18. God the Father gives leave or issues forth an
Authentic Act and Decree in the Court of Heaven; as Esther by the grant of the
King was supplied out of the Kings Wardrobe. Then there is Christ's merit; the
stream wherein we are washed flows out of Christ's own heart; 1 John 1. 7. The
Blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin. Then there is the Spirits efficacy;
no less power will vanquish the proud heart of man. It Is notable, that grace is
expressed not only by the notion of Psalm. 51. 10 Ephesians. 2 ^0 2 C^^. 4. 6.
Creation, which is a making things out of nothing; but also by Luke 11 21, 22
2 (...) 1. 15. 1 John 4. 4.
Victory, or a powerful overcoming of opposition: In Creation as there was
nothing to help, so there was nothing to resist and hinder; but in man there is
besides a death of sin, a life of resistance against grace; therefore
Sanctification must entirely be ascribed to God: we deserve it not, it comes
from the Fathers good will and Christ's merit; we work i^ not, it is accomplished
by the power of the Holy Ghost.

Again observe, That though the work of grace be immediately Observat. 2.
wrought by another person, yet our thoughts in believing must not stay till we
ascend and come up to God the Father. You shall see the Scripture carries out
our acts of faith to him every where: Romans 4. 24. If we believe in him, who
raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead; that is, in God the Father. So John 12.
44. He that believes in me, believes not in me, but in him that sent me: that
[ not] is not negative, but corrective; not only in me, but his thoughts must
ascend to the Father also, who manifests himself in me. So John 14. 1. Ye
believe in God, believe also in me. Both expressions may be imperative: Besides
believing in Christ, we must also believe, in God, as the first Fountain and
Author of grace. Now the Reasons are, 1. Because all grace begins with the
Father; the first in order of being, is first in order of working; It Is the
Father that flows out to us in Christ and by the Spirit: What ever Christ
has and is, he has from him as the original Author; 1 Cor. 1. 30. Of him
Jesus Christ is made to us Sanctification. The high Priest went into the
Sanctuary before he blessed the people; so does Jesus Christ sanctify you in
the Father and from the Father: as Mediator certainly he is to be considered as
Gods Servant and Instrument. Well then, Reason is in its progress, till it
climb up to the first cause of a thing; so should Faith; do not leave till you
come to the Father, who is the highest Fountain of grace. 2. Because what ever
is done to you by Christ, is done with a respect to his Fathers love: John 17.
2. Thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life
to as many as thou have given him: So see verse 6. I have manifested thy Name
unto them, thine they were, and them thou gave me: That was the ground of
Christ's respect, the Fathers donation, or the charge he received from him: and
therefore you must look upon the Fathers love as well as Christ's care; for in
all his respects to us he still acknowledges his obedience to the Father; and
indeed it gives us a double ground of hope: Causa ^^quam fili^^ ^o^ a^ a^ quia
ipsi a ^atre deman datum est, and causa our pater nob^^ savet, est quia hoc
filius ab ipso postulat and prom^retur. etc. See Stella at large de ^more Dei,
cap. 18.
the Son loves us because the Father required it, and the Father loves us
because the Son asks it; if Christ be faithful to his Father we are sure to
be loved, or if the Father have any respect and love to Christ. 3. Because it is
a great support and comfort to faith to consider of the Father in the act of
believing: two are better then one; and it is often made a privilege to have the
Father and the Son, 1 John. 1. 3. and 2. 23, 24. 2 John 9. and alib. There is
the Fathers love and the Sons merit; either severally will not yield that joy
and peace in believing, and therefore it is good to have them both together:
There is no access to the Father but in the Son: What will guilt do with
Justice? stubble with consuming fire? God out of Christ is terrible, rather
then comfortable; therefore it is said, 1 Pet. 1. 21. that by him we believe in
God; that is, by Christ through his merit we come comfortably to pitch upon God
the Father. So again, Christ separate from the Father does not yield such firm
grounds of confidence; there must be some act of the Father to give us full
security; for in the business of Redemption God the Father is represented as
the offended wronged party, who is to receive satisfaction: we are sensible of
the wrong and offense, Conscience feels that; we must be also sensible of his
favor and grace toward us: now when we see him first in all acts of grace,
that takes away all jealousy and scruple. 4. Because in the Fathers Love
there are many circumstances which are very engaging to the Soul, which are not
to be found in the rest of the divine Persons; for he being first in order,
has the chiefest work ascribed to him; but especially are not to be found in
Christ as Mediator: and because Christ as Mediator is most known to the
creatures, I shall prosecute this matter with respect to that Consideration. 1.
In the Fathers love and acts of grace there is an original Fullness; Christ's
fullness as Mediator is but derived out of the Fathers plenty; Col. 1. 19. It
pleased the Father that in him all fullness should dwell: And it is limited by
the Fathers Will in the dispensation of it; all that Christ dispensed was
according to the Charge and Commandment given him by his Father; see Mat. 20.
23. It is not mine to give, save to those for whom it is prepared of my Father:
Christ does not deny his Authority to give glory as well as grace; only he
shows how in all the dispensations proper to the Mediator he was limited by
the Will and Counsel of the Father: And so he denies to dispense the knowledge
of times and seasons, because the Father had kept it in his own Power, Acts 1.
7. So that now it is an engaging Consideration to remember that the Father,
whose Will is absolute, who has an original Fullness of all grace, that he
himself loves us, and is first in all acts of blessing. 2. In the Fathers acts
you have the purest and freest apprehension of love; he began and first broke
the business of our Redemption: God the Son can have an higher motive, the
Fathers Will; but God the Father can have no higher motive then his own love;
his elective love was the first rise and spring whence all that love that
passes out to the creature issues forth, and therefore here we have the
freest apprehension of love: there was a love of the Father anteceding the
merit of Christ; John 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son;
there was the most independent and free act of love.

It serves to press us to give a distinct glory in believing Use.
to God the Father: Get a right apprehension of the divine Persons, and the
several endearments with which their personal operations are represented. It Is
said, John 5. 23. That God will have all men honor the Son as they honor the
Father. God is most honored when your thoughts are most distinct and explicit
in this matter. Do not forget the Father, you are his gift as well as the Sons
purchase and the Spirits charge: If God the Father had not loved you before all
worlds, Jesus Christ would not have redeemed you; and if Christ had not
redeemed you, the Spirit would never sanctify you: and as the Spirit will not
work unless you look upon him as Christ's Spirit, John 16. 14. He shall glorify
me, for he shall receive of mine; so Christ came to glorify the Father, and to
finish his work, John 17. 4. Bless them and praise them all then. If you
receive any thing, see the Fathers bounty in it, the freeness and
everlastingness of his Love stamped upon what you have. So if you want any
thing, holiness, comfort, grace, pardon, reflect not only upon the fullness of
Christ's merit* but the freeness of the Fathers love: You deal with a God of
bowels and bounty; Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all are yours. There is a fond
affectation in some, to carry all things in the Name of Christ, even such acts
wherein the Father is most concerned* as the former Age carried all
Dispensations in the Name of God Almighty, without any distinct reflection upon
God the Son, in whom the Father will be honored, and by whom we have an access
to the Father: So many in this Age, in their popular discourses and prayers,
carry all things in the Name of God the Son, and with a fond and luscious
affectation ingeminate the Name, Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ* so that the honor
and adoration due to the other Persons is neglected and forgotten; whereas
Christ is to be acknowledged Lord in all Tongues and among all Nations, to the
glory of God the Father, Phil. 2. 11.

But now it is high time to proceed to the second and last Manifestation of
their effectual Calling, [ Preserved in Jesus Christ,] (...), kept in or by
him; the meaning is, they were not only sanctified for the present out of the
store and plenty of God the Father, but should for ever be kept in that estate
by Jesus Christ. The Point is, That Gods Observat.
called and sanctified people are preserved and kept in their state of grace
and holiness in and by Jesus Christ. The Point asserteth two things, that they
are kept by Christ and in Christ, that is, not only for his sake, but by virtue
of union with him; Jesus Christ is the Cabinet wherein Gods Jewels are kept; so
that if we would stand, we must get out of our selves, and get into him, in
whom alone there is safety. I might handle this latter Branch apart, namely,
that Union with Christ is the ground of our safety and preservation: but
because I am sensible that I have stayed too long upon this Verse already, I
shall content my self with handling upon this occasion the general Doctrine of
the Perseverance of the Saints: And first, I shall give you the state of it,
how far we may expect to be preserved. 2. The Grounds of Certainty and
Assurance in this kind.

First, How far we may look for Preservation: The Doctrine of Perseverance is
much impugned; but the Earth is never the more unsettled, because to giddy
brains it seems to run round: however let us grant what must be granted, and
then the truth will be burdened with less prejudice. Seeming grace may be lost;
Take from him that which he has, Mat. 25. 28. is Luke 8. 18. Take from him
that which he seemed to have. Blazing Comets and Meteors are soon spent, and
fall from Heaven like lightening, while stars keep their orb and station: A
building in the sand will totter; and Hypocrites be discovered before the
Congregation, Prove. 26. 26. Again, Initial or preparative grace may fail, such
as is spoken of Heb. 6. 4, 5. to wit, illumination, external reformation,
temporary faith, devout moods, some good beginnings, etc. Plenty of blossoms do
not always foretell store of fruit; some dye in the very pangs of the birth,
and are still born. Yet again, True grace may suffer a shrewd decay, but not an
utter loss; the leaves may fade when the root lives: In temptations Gods
children are sorely shaken; their heel may be bruised, as Christ's was, but
their head is not crushed: Peter denied Christ, but did not fall from grace;
there is a remaining seed, 1 John 3. 9. It Is notable what Chrysostom observes
concerning Christ's prayer for Peter, Luke 22. 32. I have prayed for thee that
thy faith fail not: (...). Chrysostom.
Mark (says he) he does not say, I have prayed for thee that thou should not
deny me, but I have prayed that thy faith should not altogether vanish and be
abolished. Once more, such grace as serves to our well-being in Christ may be
taken away, joy, peace, cheerfulness, etc. As a man may have a being, though
his well-being be lost; he is a man, though a bankrupt, though poor, though
sick, though diseased: so a Christian may be living, though he be not lively.
Yet further, The operations of grace may be obstructed for a great while: a fit
of swooning is not a state of death; there may be no acts, and yet their seed
remains; this may last for a long time: David lay in a spiritual swoon nine
months; for he awaked not till Nathan came to him, Psalm. 51. the title; and
when Nathan came to him, the child begotten upon Bathsheba was born; for he
says, 2 Samuel* 12. 14. The child which is born to thee shall dye. Yet further,
Grace if left to us would soon be lost; we showed that in Innocence: but it is
our advantage that our security lies in Gods promises, and not our own; that
we are not our own keepers; that grace is a Jewel not trusted but in safe
hands; that perseverance is Gods gift, not man's act; and that Christ has a
Charge to conduct the Saints, and keep them safe to everlasting Glory, John 6.
from 37, to 40. and John 10. 28. I give unto them eternal life, and they shall
never perish, neither shall any perish, non shall pluck them out of my hand: My
Father which gave them is greater then all* none is able to pluck them out of
my Fathers hand: They neither shall nor can; God and Christ are engaged in the
keeping of them* Christ by Gods Command as Mediator, and God by Christ's merit:
therefore he that separateth us from God must tug with Jesus Christ himself,
and be too hard for him also, or else he can never pluck them out of his hands.
If they should question Christ's power, because of the ignominy of the Cross;
the Fathers hands are also engaged, for our greater assurance: Can any creature
loose his eternal and almighty grasp? and pluck out those whom the Father has
a mind to keep?

We do not plead for any wild assurance and certainty of Perseverance; we do
not say that they that neglect means, or grieve the Spirit, and do what they
list, are sure that they shall not miscarry; that is against the nature of Gods
dispensation, and the nature of this assurance, and therefore but a vain cavil.
It Is against the nature of Gods dispensation; whom he makes to persevere, he
makes them to persevere in the use of means: Hezekiah had assurance from God
of life for fifteen years, yet he takes a lump of figs, and applies it as a
plaster to the boil, Isai. 38. 5, with 21. More clearly, Acts 27. 31. All
shall come to Land; but, Except ye abide in the ship ye cannot be safe: We are
sure of life as long as God has any service to do for us, yet we are bound to
get food and raiment, and to use all means to preserve life: This was Satan's
cavil against Gods protection over Christ, Thou art sure not to fall, therefore
neglect means, cast thy self upon danger, Mat. 4. 9, 10. You learn this
Doctrine from the Devil; Thou may do what thou lift, thou art sure to be
safe; it is the Devils Divinity. Again, It Is against the nature of this
assurance; he that has tasted Gods love in Gods way, cannot reason so: A child
that has a good father that will not see him perish, shall he waste and
embezzle his estate he cares not how? A wicked child may presume thus of his
father (though it be very disingenuous) because of his natural interest and
relation to his father; the kindness which he expects is not built upon moral
choice, but nature: but a child of God cannot, because he cannot grow up to
this certainty but in the exercise of grace; it is begoten and nourished by
godly exercises: and the thing it self implies a contradiction; this were to
fall away because we cannot fall away: You may as soon say that the fire should
make a man freeze with cold, as that certainty of perseverance in grace should
make us do actions contrary to grace.

Again, We do not say that a Believer is so sure of his conservation in a state
of grace, as that he needs not to be wary and jealous of himself; 1 Cor. 10.
12. Let him that stands, take heed lest he fall. There is a fear of Caution,
as well as a fear of diffidence and distrust; and there is a great deal of
difference between weakening the security of the flesh, and our confidence in
Christ: None more apt to suspect themselves then they that are most sure in
God, lest by improvidence and unwatchfulness they should yield to corruption:
Christ had prayed that Peter's faith might not fail, yet together with the other
Apostles he bids him Watch, Luke 22. 40, and 46. The fear of God is a
preserving grace, and taken into the Covenant; Jer. 32. 40. I will put my fear
into their hearts, and they shall not depart from me: This is a fear which will
stand with faith and certainty; it is a fruit of the same spirit, and does not
hinder assurance, but guard it; it is a fear that makes us watchful against all
occasions to sin and spiritual distempers, that we may not give offense to God:
as an ingenuous man that has an inheritance passed over to him by his friend
in Court, is careful not to offend him.

Again, This certainty of our standing in grace does not exclude prayer; Luke
22. 46. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation. Perseverance is Gods
gift, and it must be sought in Gods way; by Christ's intercession, to preserve
the Majesty of God, and by our prayers, that we may constantly profess our
dependence upon God, and renew our acquaintance with him; besides, by asking
blessings in prayer, we are the more warned of our duty; it is a means to keep
us gracious and holy: As those that converse often with Kings had need be
decently clad, and go neat in their apparel; so he that speaks often to God
is bound to be more holy, that he may be the more acceptable to him.

Again, It Is not a discontinued, but a constant perseverance that we plead for;
not as if an elect person could be quite driven out of the state of grace,
though he be saved at length; he cannot fall totus a toto in totum, the whole
man with full consent from all grace and godliness; he may sin foully, but not
fall off totally, no more then finally; there is something that remains, a
seed, an unction, a root in a dry ground, that will bud and scent again:
Briefly, true grace shall never utterly be lost, though it be much weakened,
but in the use of means it shall constantly be preserved to eternal life.

Once more, and I have done with the state of the Question: God does not only
require the condition of standing, or continuing in the exercise of grace, but
give it infallibly: The Precepts of the Covenant of Grace are also Promises;
Heb. 8. 10. This is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel,
etc. where all the Articles carry the form of Promises; God undertaketh to
fulfill our part in us, when we submit to the Covenant. So Jer. 32. 40. I will
put my fear into their hearts, etc. G^ds love will not let him depart from us,
Is^^. 54. 10. and fear will not let us depart from God.
If there be any breach, it must be from our departing from God, or Gods
departing from us: Now God never departs, his Love never permits him to
repent of giving his fear and putting his grace into our hearts; but all the
fear is of our departing from God: So some say, God will not depart from us, if
we be not wanting to our selves: And Bernard observed that our own flesh is not
mentioned Romans 8. What shall separate us from God? etc. Soli eum deserere
possumus propria voluntate, our own will may separate us and withdraw us from
God: And the Remonstrants, Though God does not repent doni dati, of what he
has given, yet we may repent doni accepti and retenti, of what we have
received, and grow weary of the service of God. But all is answered by Gods
undertaking in the Covenant; I will put my fear into their hearts* that they
shall not depart from me: He will give faith, and love, and fear, bestow and
continue such Graces as dispose the Soul to Perseverance.

Secondly, The Grounds of Certainty by which it may appear that we shall be
preserved in that state of grace, unto which we are called in Jesus Christ: The
Grounds are many; put them all together, and you may easily spell out of them
the Perseverance of the Saints.

1. There are some grounds on God the Fathers part; there is his everlasting
Love, and alsufficient Power. His everlasting Love: God does not love for a
fit, but for ever; From everlasting to everlasting, Psalm. 103. 17. before the
world was, and when the world is no more: Gods Love is not founded upon any
temporal accident, but on his own Counsel, in which there can be (...), Heb. 6.
18.
no change, because the same reasons that moved him to choose at first,
continue for ever: God never repented in time of what he purposed before all
time: Romans 11. 29. His gifts and calling are without repentance: By gifts he
means such as are proper to the Elect; and by calling, effectual calling;
such is (...), according to his eternal Purpose, of these he never repents: The
fruits of repentance in men are shame and sorrow; now God is never ashamed of
his choice, nor sorry for his choice, so as to wish it undone. And then the
other ground is his alsufficient Power; Almightiness is engaged in the
preservation of grace, by his eternal Love and Will, John 10. 28, 29. Can they
pluck Christ from the Throne? are they stronger then Christ's Father?

2. There are grounds on Christ's part; his everlasting Merit, and close Union
between him and us, and constant Intercession. For his Merit see Heb. 9. 12. He
is entered into the holy place, having obtained an eternal Redemption for us.
Legal expiations did but last from year to year, but Christ's merit for ever and
ever; his Redemption is eternal, not only as it is of use in all ages of the
Church, but in respect of every particular Saint: those who are once redeemed
by Christ, they are not redeemed for a time, so as to fall away again; that
would argue that the virtue of Christ's Blood were spent, and could preserve
them no longer; but they are for ever kept to Salvation. So Heb. 10. 14. By one
offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified: He has not only
purchased a possibility of Salvation, but all that we need to our full
perfection; it is not for a certain time, but for ever. Then there is a close
Union between him and us; this is the notion of the Text, preserved in Christ.
Sicut impossible est massam a p^sta s^p^rar^, etc. Luther.
Look as it is impossible to sever the leaven and the dough, when they are once
mingled and kneaded together; so Christ and a Believer, when they are united
together, there is no parting more: Can Christ's mystical Body be maimed? or
lose a joint? Then his constant Intercession, that is another ground, a Copy of
which we have in the 17 of John, where he says, Keep them through thy Name,
etc. and Keep them from the evil, etc. See Heb. 7. 25. He is able to save to
the uttermost those that come to God by him, for he lives for ever to make
Intercession for them: He is interceding with God, that the merit of his death
may be applied to us; and what is that? (...).
Salvation to the uttermost or to the end. The heirs of Salvation need not fear
miscarrying: Jesus Christ, who is the Testator, who by Will and Testament made
over the heritage to them, he also is the Executor, he lives for ever to see
his own Will executed; he dyed once to make the Testament, and he lives for
ever to see it made good: when ever we are in danger, he is entreating his
Father for supports and assistances of grace.

3. On the Spirits part, there is a continued influence so as to maintain the
essence and seed of grace: The Fathers love is continued by the merit of
Christ, that he may not depart from us; and we are preserved by the Spirit of
Christ, that we may not depart from him: He does not only put into our hearts
faith, fear, love, and other graces at first; but he maintains and keeps
them, that the fire may never go out: Our hearts are his temple, and he does
not love to leave his dwelling place: And besides, in the Economy of Salvation
it is his Office, to glorify Christ as his Vicegerent, and to be our Comforter;
therefore with respect to the honor of Christ, and the comfort of Believers,
he preserves and maintains that grace that is once really wrought in our
hearts. To preserve the glory of Christ thus, Christ you know has received a
Charge from the Father to lose nothing, John 6. 39. neither body nor soul,
nothing that belongs to an elect person: Now that he may be true to his
trust, he sends the Spirit as his Deputy or Executor, that his Merit may be
fully applied: It Is for the honor of Christ, that where ever the work is
begun, where ever he has been an Heb. 12. 2.
Author, there he may be a Finisher also. 'Twas said of the foolish Builder,
that he began, and was not able to make an end: this dishonor can never be cast
upon Christ, because of the power and faithfulness of the Spirit; he does
(...), Phil. 1. 6. go through with the work which he has begun; the Spirit is
to fit vessels for glory: he does not use to leave them half carved; he is
faithful to Christ; as Christ is to his Father: the Father chooses the vessel,
Christ buyeth them, and the Spirit carveth and fitteth them, that they may be
vessels of praise and honor. But this is not all, He preserves and continues
us in the state of grace as our Comforter; by working grace he puts us into an
expectation of glory and happiness; and to make it good, he carries on the
work without failing; therefore grace is called the first fruits of the Spirit,
Romans 8. 24. and the earnest of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 1. 22. and 5. 6. for it has
a double use, to be a taste and a pledge: it is a taste, to show us how good
eternal life is; and a pledge, to show us how sure it is: The first degree of
Regeneration is of this nature; it is an earnest or gage, assuring us of a more
perfect enjoyment; the livery and seisin of glory to come: As soon as a real
change is wrought, the Spirit of God does give us earnest; and will God lose
his earnest? will he give us a pledge, and fail our expectation? Surely no.

Let us now come to Application.

It presses us to persevere with the more care; it is no Use 1.
unreasonable inference: see 1 John 2. 27, 28. Ye shall abide in him: And now
little children, abide in him. Since we have so many advantages of standing,
let not us fall away: Oh how great will your sin be, if you should miscarry and
dishonor God! We pity a child that falls, when it is not looked after; but
when a froward child wresteth and forces it self out of the arms of the Nurse,
we are angry with it. You have more reason to stand then others, being brought
into an unchangeable state of grace; being held in the arms of Christ, God will
be very angry with your slips and failings: Mercy holds you fast, and you
seek to wrest your selves out of Mercy's arms: None can sin as you do, with
such frowardness, with such dishonor to God; you disparage the Spirits custody,
the merit of Christ, and the mercy of the Father. See Heb. 4. 1. Let us
therefore fear, a promise being left to us of entering into his Rest, lest any
should seem to come short of it. Look as some seem to stand* that do not, so
some seem to fall utterly that do not: A child of God indeed cannot come short,
but he should not seem, that is, give any appearance of coming short: When our
religious course is interrupted, and we give way to sin and folly, that is a
seeming to come short; and so you bring a scandal upon the love of God, as if
it were changeable; upon the merit of Christ, as if it were not a perfect
Merit: Scandalous Professors make Arminians; in an age of defection, no wonder
if men plead for the Apostasy of the Saints.

If you fall through weakness, be not utterly dismayed: Use 2.
As the Spinster leaves a lock of wool to draw on the next thread; so there is
somewhat left: when you are departed from God, you have more hold-fast upon him
then another sinner; a child, though a prodigal; go to him and say, Father.
David pleads the relics of grace yet left, Psalm. 119. 176. I have gone
astray like a sheep, seek thy servant, for I do not forget thy Commandments; as
if he had said, Lord, I have* sinned through weakness, but I hope there is some
grace left, some bent of heart toward thee. So the Church, Isai. 64. 8, 9. Now
O Lord, thou art our Father, etc. Yea God is angry when we do not plead: So
Jer. 3. 4. Will thou not cry, Thou art my Father? etc. You have an interest,
though you have been disobedient: Thus do, and your falls will be an advantage;
as you have seen men go back to fetch their leaps more commodiously.

When you stand, let it excite you to love and thankfulness; Use 3.
Nothing makes the Saints love God more then the unchangeableness of his Love:
When they see themselves safe in the midst of weaknesses, and Satan's daily
assaults, it does much indear God to their Souls. Certainly Daniel was much
affected with his preservation in the Lions den, when he saw the Lions ramping
and roaring about him, and yet restrained with the chains of Providence, that
they could do him no harm: So the children of God must needs love their
Preserver, when they consider what dangers are round about them; how little
they subsist by their 1 Samuel 2. 9.
own strength, and how much they have done a thousand times to cause God to
withdraw his Spirit from them; and therefore the great argument why the Saints
do love and praise him, is not only the freedom of his grace, but the
unchangeableness and constancy of it: His mercy endures for ever; it is several
times repeated, Psalm. 136. So Psalm. 106. 1. Praise ye the Lord; O give thanks
unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever. No form is more
frequent in the mouths of the Saints: and good reason; for alas, if we were
left to our selves, we should damn our selves every hour; we have a Jer. 5. 2
3. and 14. 10.
revolting heart: we are like glasses without a bottom, as soon as they are out
of hand they are broken; we cannot stand of our selves: and we have a restless
enemy, that desires to toss us and vex us, as wheat is tossed from sieve to
sieve, Luke 22. 31. and we have often forfeited Gods protection, and grieved
him day by day; were it not for everlasting Mercy, what would become of us?
Certainly they that do not love God for their preservation, they are not
sensible of their condition in the world; what a naughty heart they carry about
with them: It Is a miracle that ever grace should be preserved there where there
is so much pride, love of pleasures, worldly cares, brutish lusts; that such an
heavenly plant can thrive in the midst of so many weeds. Nor what a busy Devil
they have to do withal, who watches all advantages, as a dog that stands
waving his tail ('it is Chrysostom's comparison) and expecting a bit; and his
envy and malice is most bent against them that have most grace. Finally, they
do not consider that the world is full of snares and dangerous allurements; for
if they did, they could not choose but fall a blessing of God for Jesus Christ,
who yet fasteneth them as a nail in the holy place. I remember one of the
Fathers brings in the Flesh saying, Ego deficiam, I will surely fail and
miscarry; and the World, Ego decipia^, I will deceive them and entice them; and
Satan, Ego eripiam, I will snatch them and carry them away; and God says, Ego
custodiam, I will keep them, I will never fail them nor forsake them; and there
lies our safety and security.

It informs us, that if any fall often, constantly, frequently, 4* Use.
easily, they have no interest in grace: 1 John 3. 9. He that is born of God,
sins not; (...), he makes not a trade of sin; that is the force of the
phrase: Gods children slip often, but not with such a frequent constant
readiness into the same sin: As fair Meadows may be overflown, but Marish
ground is drowned with the return of every Tide; so are wicked men carried away
with every return of the temptation; therefore he that lives in a course of
profaneness, worldliness, drunkenness, his spot is not as the spot of Gods
children. You are tried by your constant course and walk, Romans 8. 1. What Is
your road? what do you do constantly, easily, frequently? I except only those
sins which are of usual incidence and suden surrection; as sudden stirrings of
passion in a choleric temper, and vanity of thoughts, and distractions in
duties, etc. and yet for these a man should be the more humble and watchful; if
they be not felt and striven against, and mourned for, it is a bad sign.

It provokes us to get an interest in such a sure condition. 5 Use.
Be not contented, 1. With outward happiness; things are worthy according to
their duration: Nature has such a sense of Gods Eternity, that the more
lasting things are, it accounts them the better: An immortal Soul must have
an eternal Good: Now all things in the world are frail and pass away, therefore
called uncertain riches, 1 Timothy 6. 18. it is uncertain whether we shall get
them, and uncertain whether we shall keep them, and uncertain whether we shall
live to enjoy them if they stay with us: All of this side grace is uncertain;
these things are usually blasted in their flower and beauty; as Herod was
stricken in the midst of all his Royalty: so that a man may outlive his
happiness, which is the greatest misery; or at least it must terminate with
death; there is no use of wealth in the other world. But now the better part
can never be taken from us, Luke 10. 42. and by seeking that we may have other
things with a blessing, Mat. 6. 33. 2. Rest not in gifts, they are for the body
rather then the person that has them; as many are carnal, and yet come behind
in no gift; God uses them like Negroes, to dig in the mines of knowledge, that
others may have the gold: Judas could cast out Devils, and yet afterward was
cast out among Devils. See 1 Cor. 12* ult. the Apostle had discoursed largely
of gifts, and then concludes thus, But yet I show you a more excellent way;
and what is that? Grace that abides and endures for ever, as in the next
Chapter. Many that have great abilities to pray, preach, discourse, yet fall
away: According to the place which they sustain in the body, so they have great
gifts, of knowledge, utterance, abilities to comfort, direct and instruct
others, to answer doubts, to reason and argue for God, for conference and holy
discourse, and yet fall foully; as those Heb. 6. 4. are said to be partakers of
the Holy Ghost, that is, to have a great share of Church gifts. Nay this is not
all, Gifts themselves wither and vanish when the bodily vigor is spent: The
glory of a man is as the flower of the grass, 1 Pet. 1. 24. By the glory of a
man is meant what ever excellency we have by Nature, wit, knowledge, strength of
natural parts, as well as wealth and riches: Many times we like the dry stalk
remains when the flower is gone; nothing but the gracious work of the Spirit
will last for ever. 3. Seeming and unsound grace; as Hymeneus and Alexander are
said to make shipwreck of faith, that is, false faith, 1 Timothy 1. 19. 20
false faith, such as begins in joy will end in trouble; it eases you for
the present, but you shall lie down in sorrow: General probabilities, loose
hopes, uncertain conjectures, vanishing apprehensions of comfort, all these
things soon come to nothing: The planting of true faith is troublesome at first,
but it leads to true comfort; otherwise you may look upon the Gospel with
some kind of delectation for a while; as thorns may blaze under the pot, though
they cannot keep in the fire: therefore do not rest in tasting the good Word,
Heb. 6. 5. in some slight and transitory comfort. Again, there is formal
profession; Many may begin in the Spirit, and end in the flesh, Gal. 3. 3. A
man may seem to himself and to the Church of God to have true grace; he may
profess the truth, escape the pollutions of the world, that is, foul gross
sins, yea and all this not out of a carnal aim, but out of a slight and
insufficient touch of the truth upon the Conscience, and yet fall away; like
the corn in the stony ground, that grew up, but had no root. But much more
[Christians] will that form which is taken up out of private aims fail and
miscarry: God delights to take off the mark and disguise of an hypocrite, by
letting them fall into some scandalous sin, or by changing the times and
posture of affairs, or by sending a storm: Paint is soon washed of; therefore
rest not in these outward and superficial changes, till solid and substantial
grace be wrought in you.

Is Comfort to Gods children; Grace is sure, and the privileges Use 6.
of it are sure. Grace it self is sure; through your folly it may be nigh unto
death, but cannot dye: This is the advantage of spiritual comforts, that they
do not only satisfy our desires, but secure us against our fears: The redeemed
of the Lord have an everlasting joy, Isai. 35. 10. Once in Christ, and for ever
preserved in Christ. Grace would be little better then temporal things, if it
did yield but a temporary refreshing. They weaken Christian comfort that make
Believers walk with Christ like Dancers upon a rope, every moment in fear of
breaking their necks. This is the comfort of a gracious heart, that as nothing
shall altogether cut him off from enjoying God, so nothing shall utterly make
him cease to love God. The children of God would be troubled if grace should
fail, though their privileges should not be cut off; you are sure of both. For
as grace is sure, so are also the privileges of grace: This was figured under
the Law; an Israelite could never wholly alienate his inheritance and title to
the Land; Levit. 25. 23. His title to the Land shall not be cut off, nor sold
for ever: This was a type of our spiritual inheritance in Christ, which cannot
be alienated from us; he might for a while pass it away, but it was to return
again; so those that are made coheirs with Christ, are never dis-inherited:
It Is true, we forfeit it by the merit of our actions, but God does not take the
advantage of every offense: It Is true, we lose the evidences that are in our
keeping, peace of Conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost; but the estate it self
is undefeasible, and cannot be made away from us. Sometimes we are under a king
of sequestration, and there is a suspension of comfort and grace; as the
Israelite might make away his inheritance for a time; but we shall recover
possession again, though not by our selves, yet by our Goel, our kinsman, or
him that is next of blood: As under the Law, if a person were not able to
redeem the inheritance, the kinsman was to redeem it; so Jesus Christ, our
kinsman after the flesh, he is our Goel, he interposeth by his merit, and
reconcileth us to God. Well then, You see grace is kept, and the privileges of
grace are kept in Christ: But now because comforts are never prized but in
their season, and men that have not been exercised in spiritual conflicts,
nauseate these sweet truths, they know not what it is to be left to uncertainty
when troubles come like waves one in the neck of another; therefore let us see
when this truth will be most sweet and seasonable. 1. In great troubles, when
God seems to hide his face; Oh how sweet is it to hear him say, I will not
forsake thee till I have performed all that I promised thee, Genesis 28. 15. all
this shall better thy heart, and hasten thy glory. In times of distress we are
apt to think that God has cast us off, and will never look after us more,
though formerly we have had real experiences of his grace: What a foolish
creature is man to weaken his assurance when he should come to use it? to
unravel all his hope and experiences in times of trouble, which is the only
season to make use of them. 2. In the hour of temptation and hard conflicts
with doubts and corruptions, when we are sensible of the power of sin, and how
difficult it is to remove it out of the heart, we are apt to say as David after
all his experiences, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27. 1.
and many times out of distrust give over the combat. Oh then remember now you
are preserved in Christ, and that nothing shall separate: as Sarcerius came to
Camerarius his wife, when she had been exercised with a long and tedious
conflict, and read to her the latter end of the eighth of the Romans, she brake
out in triumph, using Paul's words, Nay, in all these things we are more then
Conquerors. Oh Christians, neither sin, nor Devil, nor world can divide you
from Christ, for he Romans 16. 20.
did not only tread down Satan, but under your feet. 3. In times of great
danger and defection, either through error and persecution, as Saunders
trembled to think of the fire; especially when others fall fearfully, who were
before us in knowledge and profession of zeal and piety; when the first become
last; when glorious Luminaries are eclipsed, and leave their orb and station;
as the Martyrs were troubled to hear of the revolt of some great Scholars that
had appeared for the Gospel: When Hymeneus and Philetus, two eminent
Professors, fell, there was a great shaking, 2 Timothy 2. 18. But the foundation
of the Lord stands sure etc. that is the comfort the Apostle opposes in such
a case. 4. In times of disheartening, because of the difficulties of Religion,
when the use of means grows troublesome: to quicken you in your Christian
course, think of the unchangeableness of Gods love; all graces rise according
to the proportion and measure of faith; loose hopes weaken endeavors: 1 Cor. 9.
26. Irun, not as one uncertain. Those that ran a race gave over when one had
far out-gone them, as being discouraged and without hope: When hope is broken,
the edg of endeavors is blunted: Go on with confidence, you are assured of the
issue, God will bless you and keep you to his everlasting Kingdom. 5. In the
hour of death; when all things else fail you, God will not fail you; this is
the last brunt; do but wait a little while, and you will find more behind then
ever you enjoyed; death shall not separate: as Olevian comforted himself with
that, Vide Scult^tum in Isa^. 54.
Isai. 54. 10. The hills and mountains may depart, but my loving kindness shall
not depart from you; being in the agonies of death, he said, Sight is gone,
speech and hearing is departing, feeling is almost gone, but the
loving kindness of God will never depart. The Lord give us such a confidence in
that day, that we may dye glorying in the Preservation of our Redeemer.

VERSE II. Mercy unto you, and Peace and Love be multiplied.
WE are now come to the third thing in the Inscription, and that is the form of
salutation, delivered as all Apostolical salutations are in the way of a
prayer: In which we may observe, 1. The matter of the prayer, or blessings
prayed for, which are three, Mercy, Peace, and Love. 2. The manner or degree of
enjoyment, [ be multiplied.]

I begin with the matter, or blessings prayed for: It will not be altogether
unuseful to observe that diversity which is used in salutations. In the Old
Testament peace was usually wished without any mention of grace; as Psalm. 122.
8. For my brethrens and companions sake I will say, Peace be within thee: and
^an. 6. 25. Peace be multiplied unto you. But in the times of the Gospel grace
being more fully delivered, that was also added and expressed in the forms of
salutation: but yet in the times of the Gospel there is some variety and
difference: Sometimes you shall meet with a salutation merely civil; as James
1. 1. To the twelve Tribes (...), greeting: so Acts 15. 23. which was the usual
salutation among the Heathen: but most usually it is Romans 1. 17.
grace and peace; and in other places grace, mercy and peace, as 2 John 3. and
1 Timothy 1. 2. and here it differs from them all, for it is mercy, peace and
love: And Causaubon observes, that the Greek Fathers, if they wrote to a
earnal man, they would wish him grace, but not peace; if to a godly man, they
would wish him grace and peace too. To touch upon these things is sufficient.
From these Blessings mentioned in this place I shall observe something in
general, and then handle them particularly and apart.

First, In the general Consideration you may observe,

1. That spiritual blessings are the best blessings that we can Observat. 1.
wish to our selves and others. The Apostles in their salutations do not wish
temporal felicity but spiritual grace: Gods people pray for one another out of
the communion of the Spirit, and for themselves out of a principle of the
divine Nature; and therefore they do not seek wealth and honor for themselves
or one another, but increase of Gods favor and Image. It Is true, Nature is
allowed to speak in prayer, but grace must be heard first; our first and
chiefest requests must be for mercy, peace and love, and then Mat. 6. ^3 (...)
an additional supply, like paper and pack-thread, which is given over and above
the bargain.
other things shall be added to us; the way to be heard in other things, is
first to beg for grace: Psalm. 21. 4. He asked life of thee, and thou gave him
length of days for ever: Solomon sought wisdom, and together with it found
riches and honor in great abundance. Well then, if thou prayest for thy self
make a wise choice, beg for spiritual blessings; so David prays, Psalm. 106.
4. Remember me, O Lord, with the favor that thou bear unto thine own
people; nothing less would content* him then Favorites mercy: other blessings
are dispensed out of common pity to the generality of men, but these are
mercies privilegiate, and given to Favorites; now says David, of this mercy,
Lord; no common blessing would serve his turn: So Psalm. 119. 132. Look upon me,
and be merciful to me, as thou usest to do to those that love thy Name: Surely
that which God gives to his people, that is a better mercy then that which God
gives to his enemies. Again, these are mercies that cost God dearer; they flow
to you in the Blood of his own Son: yea, they are mercies that are better in
themselves; wealth and honor may become a burden, yea, life it self may become
a burden, but not mercy, not grace, not peace of Conscience; and therefore they
are better then life, Psalm. 63. 3. then wealth, then honor: none ever
complained of too much mercy, of too much love of God: These are blessings that
swallow up other miseries, yea, the loss of other blessings; grace with poverty
it is a James 1. 9.
preferment, peace of Conscience with outward troubles is an happy condition:
if there be a 2 Cor. 1 5.
flowing of spiritual comforts, as there is an ebbing of outward comforts, we
are not much wronged; therefore* first seek these bleseings. Again, If you pray
for others, pray for grace in the first place; that is an evidence of spiritual
affection: Carnal men wish such things to others, as they prize and affect
themselves; so also do gracious men; and therefore their thoughts run more upon
mercy, peace and grace, then wealth and honor and greatness. When a man
sends a token to a friend, he would send the best of the kind: These are the
best mercies; if you were to deal with God for your own Souls, you can ask no
better: You may ask temporal things, for God loves the prosperity of his
Saints; but these special blessings should have the preferment in your wishes
and desires of good to them, and then you are most likely to speed. Our Lord
Christ in the 17 of John, commends the College of the Apostles to the Father;
and what does he ask for him? dominion and worldly respect? Surely no, nothing
but preservation from evil, and sanctification by the Truth; these are the
chiefest Blessings we should look after as Christians.

Observe again the aptness of the requests to the persons Observat. 2.
for whom he prays, Those that are sanctified and called have still need of
mercy, peace and love. They need mercy, because we merit nothing of God,
neither before grace received, nor afterward: the very continuance of our glory
in Heaven is a fruit of mercy, not of merit; our obligation to free grace never
cease. We need also more peace: there are degrees in assurance as well as
faith; there is a temperate confidence, and there are ravishing delights, so
that peace needs to be multiplied also. And then love, that being a grace in
us, it is always in progress; in Heaven only it is complete: Take it for love to
God, there we cleave to him without distraction and weariness or satiety; God
in communion is always fresh and new to the blessed spirits: And take it for
love to the Saints, it is only perfect in Heaven, where there is no ignorance,
pride, partialities and factions; where Luther and Zuinglius, Hooper and Ridley
join in perfect consort.

Again, Observe the aptness of these requests to the times Observat. 3.
wherein he prayed, when Religion was scandalized by loose Christians, and
carnal doctrines were obtruded upon the Church; In times of defection from God,
and wrong to the Truth, there is great need of mercy, peace and love. Of mercy,
that we may be kept from the snares of Satan: Christians, whence is it that any
of us stand? that we are found faithful? It Is because we have obtained mercy:
They would deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect, Mat. 24. 24. Why is it
not possible to deceive the Elect as well as others? of what mould are they
made? wherein do they differ from other men? I answer, Elective grace and mercy
interposeth; it is not for any power in themselves, but because Mercy has
singled them out, and chosen them for a distinct people unto God. And we need
peace and inward consolations, that we may the better digest the misery of the
times; and love, that we may be of one mind, and stand together in the defense
of the Truth.

Again, Note the aptness of the blessings to the persons for Observat. 4.
whom he prays; Here are three blessings that do more eminently and
distinctly suit with every person of the Trinity: and I do the rather note it,
because I find the Apostle elsewhere distinguishing these blessings by their
proper fountains, as Romans 1. 7. Grace to you, and peace from God the Father,
and our Lord Jesus Christ: Sort the blessings right, there is grace from the
Father, and peace from Christ: So here is mercy from God the Father, who is
called the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 3. and
peace from the Son, for he is our peace, Ephesians. 2. 14. and love from the
Spirit; Romans 5. 5. The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy
Ghost, which is given to us. Thus you see every Person concureth to our
happiness with his distinct blessing.

In the next place, how aptly these blessings are suited Observat. 5.
among themselves; first mercy, then peace, and then love; mercy does not
differ much from that which is called grace in Paul's Epistles, only grace does
more respect the bounty of God, as mercy does our want and need: By mercy then
is meant the favor and good will of God to miserable creatures; and peace
signifies all blessings inward and outward, as the fruits and effects of that
favor and good will; more especially calmness and serenity of Conscience, or a
secure enjoying of the love of God, which is the top of spiritual prosperity:
And then love sometimes signifies Gods love to us; here I should rather take
it for our love to God, and to the Brethren for Gods sake: So that mercy is the
rise and spring of all, peace is the effect and fruit, and love is the return.
He begins with mercy, for that is the fountain and beginning of all the good
things which we enjoy; higher then love and mercy we cannot go, for Gods Love
is the reason of it self, Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8. Romans 9. 15. Isai. 45. 15. and we can
deserve nothing at Gods hands but wrath and misery, and therefore we should
still honor Mercy, and set the Crown upon Mercy's head (as further anon;) that
which you give to Merit, you take from Mercy. Now the next thing is peace; mark
the order still; without mercy and grace there can be no true peace: Isai. 57.
21. There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked; they say, Peace, peace, but
my God does not say so. Christ left his peace with his own Disciples, John 14.
27. and not as worldly and external peace is left, in the happiness of which
both good and bad are concerned; that is general, but this is proper, confined
within the Conscience of him that enjoys it, and given to the godly: It Is the
Lords method to pour in first the oil of grace, and then the oil of gladness:
Alas, the peace of a wicked man it is but a frisk, or fit of joy, whilst
Conscience, Gods watchman is naping; stolen waters and bread eaten in secret,
Prove. 9. 17. The way to true peace is to apply your selves to God for mercy, to
be accepted in Christ, to be renewed according to the Image of Christ;
otherwise sin and guilt will create fears and troubles. Again, the last thing
is love; great privileges require answerable duty; Mercy and peace need
another grace, and that is love: It Is Gods gift as well as the rest, we have
graces from God as well as privileges, and therefore he beggeth love as well
as mercy and peace; but it must be our act, though we have the grace from
above: We would all have mercy and peace, but we are not so zealous to have
love kindled in our hearts: Mercy, peace, all this runs downward, and
respects our interest, but love, that mounteth upward, and respects God
himself. Certainly they have no interest in mercy, and were never acquainted
with true peace, that do not find their hearts inflamed with love to God, and a
zeal for his glory; that as he has ordered all things for our profit, so we
may order and refer all things to his glory and honor. Mercy runs down from
God, and begets peace of Conscience, for peace of Conscience is nothing else
but a solid taste of Gods mercy; and peace of Conscience begets love, by which
we clasp about God again; for love is nothing else but a reverberation or
beating back of Gods beam upon himself, or a return of duty in the sense of
mercy: So in the Angels Song, Luke 2. ^9. Glory, peace and good* will. All
comes from good* will; that is the first couse ^* God* glory is the last end.
Under the Law the first and the tenth were the Lords; the beginning and ending
are his.
so that God is at the beginning and ending, and either way is the utmost
boundary of the Soul; all things are from him and to him.

Secondly, Let me handle them particularly and apart; 1. Mercy.
and first Mercy, which is the rise and cause of all the good we have from God:
The Lord would dispense blessings in such a way as might beat down despair and
carnal conf^^ence: Man has need of mercy, but deserves none: Despair would
keep us from God, and carnal confidence robs him of his glory; therefore as
the Lord would not have flesh to glory, so neither to be cut off from all hope:
Mercy salveth both; we need not fly the sight of God, there is mercy with him
why he should be feared, Psalm. 130. 7. False worships are supported by terror;
but God, that has the best title to the heart, will gain it by love and offers
of mercy. And we have no reason to ascribe any thing to our selves, since Mercy
does all in the Court of Heaven, and not Justice: If you reckon upon a debt,
you are sure to miss: It Is a part of Gods Supremacy, that all his blessings
should come as a gift; that he should act freely, and entertain us as a King,
not as an Host: Merit takes off something of his Royalty and supreme Majesty.
Touching the Mercy of God, give me leave to give you a few Observations.

1. I^ ^git ^^ta Scriptura ut credamus Deu^ esse misericordem. Luther.
It Is the aim of the whole Scripture to represent God merciful: It Is true, God
is infinitely just, as well as infinitely merciful; but he delights in
gracious discoveries of himself to the creature; he counts it his glory.
Moses was earnest with God to show him his Glory, and then God proclaims his
Name, Exodus 34. 5, 6. The Lord, the Lord, merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin, etc. In this description
there is more spoken of his Mercy, then of his Justice; and first his Mercy is
described, and then his Justice; for Justice is only added to invite men to
take hold of his Mercy, and to show that Justice is never exercised but in
avenging the quarrel of abused Mercy. So he is called a God of pardon, Nehem.
9. 17. as if wholly made up of sweetness. So 2 Cor. 1. 3. he is called (...).
Father of mercies, and God of all consolations; He is a just God, but he is
not called the Father of Justice: Mercy is natural to him; he counts it as
the proper fruit and product of the divine Essence.

2. Mercy is represented as his delight and pleasure: So Micah 7. 18. Mercy
pleases him: It Is an act exercised with complacency. Judgment is called his
strange work, Isai. 28. 21. God loves to bless and protect; to destroy is not
suitable to his disposition; it is a thing that he is forced to. Punitive acts
in the representations of the Word are more against his bowels, drawn and
M^^^ri^o^dia su^^^^ ^^ parla^ pe^^a^or^m ^l^^or co^it ut p^ni^^. S^l^.
extorted from him; as Jer. 44. 22. The Lord could no longer bear because of
your doings: their sins were so clamorous, that they would not let God be
quiet; he would bear no longer, unless they would make an Idol of him. But now
all acts of grace and favor are exercised with delight; I will rejoice over
them to do them good, Jer. 32. 41. It Is as pleasing to God to do it, as it is to
us to receive it. The Scripture, after the manner of men, does often represent
a Conflict in the Attributes about sinners; and if Mercy get the upper-hand,
it is always with joy and triumph; Jam. 2. 13. Mercy rejoices over Judgment:
but if he be compelled to strike, and Justice must be exercised, the Scriptures
represent a reluctation in his bowels; Lam. 3. 33. He does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the children of men; in the original, from his heart; but
is like a Father, with a rod in his hand, and tears in his eyes.

3. The Scripture represents God as exercising mercy, though with some
present disadvantage to his Glory: As mercy to the Ninivites, though the credit
of his Message lay at stake; Niniveh shall be destroyed in forty days; yet God
spared it; and therefore Jonah in a pet challenges him for it; Jon. 4. 2.
Lord, was not this my saying when I was in my Country? ^or I knew that thou
were a gracious God: As if he said, I knew 'twould come to this, that the
Prophets of Israel should be disgraced before the men of Niniveh; and to
threaten Judgments in his Name, is to expose our selves to derision; when we
have done our errand, free grace will make us all liars: To this effect did he
expostulate with God. God might easily destroy sinners with much honor to
himself; but he is long-suffering, even then when his patience for a while
seems to impair the revenues of Heaven. The World suspects his Being, the
Saints quarrel his Justice and question his Love, and all because the wicked
are prosperous, and God keeps silence. The great stumbling block at which
most have dashed the foot of their faith, is the suspension of due Judgments.
What was the effects of his patience to them of Aslyria and Babylon? The Lord
himself tells you, Isai. 52. 5. My Name every day is blasphemed; that was all
he got by it: his people suffered in person, and God himself in his reputation;
all that he got was blasphemies, and reproaches, and injuries. So Psalm. 50. 21.
I kept silence, and thou thoughtst that I was every way like thy self; that was
the effect; gross conceits of his Glory and Essence: When Judgments are quick
and speedy, the World is under greater awe, the confidence of the Saints is
strengthened and supported, and Gods honor is more clear and unstained; yet
with all these disadvantages to his Glory (if we may speak so) God forbeareth:
Certainly his heart is much set upon the honor of his Mercy, that God will
glorify it, though other Attributes seem to suffer loss.

4. The Scriptures speak much of his readiness to receive returning sinners:
Though they have done infinite wrong to his Holiness, yet upon repentance, and
as soon as they begin to submit, Mercy embraces and huggeth them, as if there
had been no breach; Luke 15. 20. I will go to my Father, and the Father ran to
meet him: So Isai. 56. 20. Before they call, etc. So Psalm. 32. 5. I said, and
thou forgavest, etc. So Jer. 31. 17, with 20. I have heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself, etc. and presently, Oh my dear and pleasant child. The first
relentings of the creature work upon the bowels of Mercy: Love's pace is very
swift, it runs to meet a returning sinner: Christ comes skipping over the
Mountains, Cant. 2. 8. He thinks that he can never be soon enough with us: He
would fain have the company of sinners, and therefore meets them more then
half way: When we but conceive a purpose, we presently receive the fruit of his
early mercies.

5. God does not only admit them to come, but of his own accord inviteth them
that are slack and backward. The Scriptures do every where record the
entreaties of God: he draws us with coards of Love; coards that are woven and
spun out of Christ's heart and bowels: In one place thus, Cant. 4. 8. Come away
from Lebanon, my Sister, my Spouse, from the Lions dens, from the mountains of
Leopards: Christ's love is hot and burning, he thinks we tarry too long from
his embraces. So Cant. 5. 2. Open to me my Sister, my Spouse, etc. Christ
stands begging for entrance: Lost man, do but suffer me to save thee; poor
sinner, suffer me to love thee: These are the charms of Gospel Rhetoric! So
Isai. 49. Harken to me, and attend to the words of my mouth, etc. Oh sinners,
you will not harken to me for the good of your Souls! You see none sings so
sweetly as the Bird of Paradise, the Turtle that chirpeth upon the Churches
hedges, that he may cluck sinners to himself: The Scripture is full of such an
holy witchcraft, such passionate charms, to entise Souls to their happiness.

6. They that constantly refuse the offers of his grace, are born with for a
long time: Romans 9. 22. (...). He endured with much long-suffering, etc. All may
bless God for patience; they owe an heavy debt to divine Justice, yet it is a
long time ere God puts the Bond in suit; though they dare him to his face,
yet they walk up and down without the arrest of Vengeance; He bears with them
years and years, after a thousand and a thousand affronts, from their cradles
to their graves: When they were green wood, they were fuel fit enough for
divine wrath. Oh consider, there can be no cause of this but his mercy to his
worst creatures: It Is not out of any delight in sin, for he is holy, and cannot
endure to look upon it, Hab. 2. 13. Of purer eyes, etc. it is not out of any
stupid neglect, He is just, and will not clear the guilty, Exodus 34. 7. it is
not out of any ignorance, He tells man his thoughts; nor for want of power so
men forbear, The sons of Zerviah may be too hard for them; but 1 Samuel 24. 19.
If a man finds his enemy, will he let him go well away? When they are in our
power, we satisfy our wrath and revenge to the full: But now God upholdeth all
things by the word of his Power; He can in a minute speak us into nothing: As
the impression of a Seal upon the water depends upon the Seal, if the Seal be
taken away the impression vanishes; So do our beings depend upon Providential
influence and supportation: If God should withdraw the word of his Power, we
should soon vanish and disappear; Therefore it is not for want of Power, but
merely out of Mercy that we are forborne: How may we wonder at this! We are of
eager and tart spirits, sharp-set upon revenge: Could we have put up so many
refusals of Love? such despights done to Mercy? such wrongs, such grievings of
Spirit, and yet have contained? The Disciples themselves, though holy men, when
they were sensible of being slighted in the Village of Samaria, called for fire
from Heaven, Luke 9. 54. Certainly we could not endure such a contradiction of
sinners: If thunderbolts were in our power, we should soon kindle a burning,
and turn the World into smoke and desolation.

7. It Is not only the aim of the Word, but of Providence, and of all the
Dispensations of God to the Creature, to represent him merciful. The whole
World is a great Volume, written within and without with characters and lines
of Mercy: Psalm. 145. 7. His mercy is over all his works; Every creature bears
the marks and prints of divine Goodness and Bounty. Once more, The World is a
great Theater and Stage whereon Mercy has been acting its part for these six
thousand years* Justice is to have a solemn triumph at the last day: Now and
then God has kept a petty Sessions, and given us occasion to say, Verily there
is a God that judges the world, as well as preserves the world: But the
greatest part that has been acted upon the Theater of the World, is Mercy; as
you will easily see, if you consider, 1. The black lines of Providence: If God
threaten, it is that he may not punish; if he punish, it is that he may not
punish for ever. In the sadder Providence, though there be misery at the top,
yet there is mercy at the bottom. Many times God threateneth, but it is to
reclaim; though he does Mutat sententiam sed non decretum. Bradwardine.
not change his counsel, yet he does often change his sentence, Jer. 18. 7, 8.
When the message is nothing but plucking up and pulling down, Free Grace comes
in with a sudden rescue, and prevents the execution. Mercy you see is forced to
use all methods, and to speak in the language of Justice, that men may be more
capable to receive it. Sometimes God punishes, but with what aim? that he may
not for ever punish: It Is we that make punishment to be a pledge of eternal
damnation; it its own aim it is a prevention; and so it proves to the Elect;
We are judged of the Lord, that we may not be condemned of the world, 1 Cor.
11. 32. So Hosea 2. 6. I will hedge up her way with thorns, etc. We should soon
grow vvorldly, and drowned in carnal businesses and projects, if God did not
come now and then and blast our enterprises, and make us see our folly. We are
puffed up, and God pricketh the bladder, 2 Cor 12. 7. How svveet is this,
when in the midst of Judgment God remembereth Mercy? Yea the very executions
of Justice are found to be one of the methods of Mercy. In the middle of the
first Curse God dropped out a promise of the blessed Seed; So often Mercy
overtaketh a Judgment, and makes it cease in the mid way. Look as there was a
conflict betvveen the tvvins in Tamars Womb, Zarah did put out the hand, but
Pharez broke out first; So is there betvveen Gods Mercy and Justice; Justice
puts out the hand in a threatening, or some beginnings of a Judgment, but Mercy
gets the start, and breaks out first. 2. Consider the white lines of
Providence: He entreats that he may do us good, and does us good that he may
do us good for ever. For his entreaties: It Is not duty so much that is in the
bottom of the Exhortation, as Mercy: To glorify Mercy is the last aim of God
and his eternal Purpose: He has accepted us in the Beloved, to the praise of
his glorious grace, Ephesians. 1. 6. God receives no profit; he entreats us not
that he may be happy, but that he may be liberal: See Prove. 9. 12. If thou be
wise, thou shall be wise for thy self; but if thou scornest, thou alone shall
bear it: God deals with us as earnestly, as effectually, as if the profit
were his own, but it wholy redoundeth to us. Again, He does us good that he
may do us good for ever: He trusts us with Luke 16. 11
Mammon, to prepare us for the true riches; and with the riches of grace, to
prepare us for glory. Look as men when they would put precious liquor into a
vessel, first try it with water to see whether it leaketh or no: so does God
try us with common mercies; he gives us an estate in the world, that being
moved with his goodness, we may look after an estate in the Covenant, and an
interest in Christ; and so fit us for Heaven. It Is our vvretchedness to make
our table a snare, and our welfare a trap: As the Sea turns all that it
receives into salt water, the fresh streams, the influences of the Heavens,
etc. so do carnal men assimulate and corrupt their comforts, and by little and
little all their blessings are cursed; for Mercy can bear any thing but a
constant abuse and neglect of it self: Certainly Gods revealed Will is
otherwise; that which comes from God, should lead us to God: see Romans 2. 4,
5.

8. Consider in how many notions Mercy is represented to us: Gods Mercy has
many Names; a distinct consideration of them yeildeth an advantage in
believing: for though they express the same thing, yet every notion begets a
fresh thought, by which Mercy is more taken abroad in the view of Conscience:
This is that pouring out of Gods Name spoken of Cant. 1. 3. Ointment in the Box
does not yield such a fragrancy as when it is poured out; and Spices do not
give forth their smell till they are chafed. Nothing is more conducible to
beget a trust, then distinct thoughts and conceptions of Gods Mercy. Let us
take notice of some places where it is set forth: See Psalm. 103. 8. The Lord is
merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy: The expression is
diversified; and I note it the rather, because in other places the same notions
of Mercy are punctually expressed: see Nehem. 9. 17. so Psalm. 14. 5. 8. and in
Joel 2. 12. Jonah 4. 2.
diverse other places: chiefly see that Exodus 34. 7. and you will find, that
this is the very* description which God has given of himself. Now what does
the Spirit of God aim at in this express enumeration and accumulation of names
of Mercy, but to give us an help in meditation, and that our thoughts may be
more distinct. 1. The first notion is Mercy, which is an Attribute whereby God
inclines to succor them that are in misery: It Is an Attribute that merely
respects the creature: The Love and knowledge of God first falls upon
himself; but Mercy is only transient, and passes out to the creatures: God
knows himself, loves himself, but he is not merciful to himself. And then it
respects the creatures in misery; for misery is Mercy's only motive: Justice
seeks a ^it object, but Mercy a ^it occasion; Justice requires desert, but
Mercy only want and need. 2. The next notion is Grace, which notes the free
bounty of God, and excludes all merit of the creature: Grace does all gratis,
Romans 3. 24.
freely, though there be no precedent obligation, or debt, or hope of
recompense, whereby any thing may accrue to himself; only that it may be well
with the creature. Gods external motive is our misery, his internal motive is
his own Grace and elective Love: Am I in want? there is mercy; Am I unworthy?
there is grace. Mercy respects us as we are in our selves worthy of
condemnation, Grace as compared with others not elected: The ultimate Reason of
the choice is Gods grace. The Angels that never sinned, are saved merely out of
grace; but men that were once miserable, are saved not only out of grace, but
also out of mercy. 3. The next notion is long-suffering, or slowness to anger:
The Lord is not easily overcome by the wrongs or sins of the creature, but
easily overcomes them by his own patience and goodness: He does not only pity
our misery, that is mercy; and do us good for nothing, that is grace; but bears
long with our infirmities. Nisi expectaret impium non inveniret quem
glorificar^^ piu^. Aug.
Alas, if God were as short and swift in the executions of revenge as men are,
God must create another World to raise up seed to Christ: If he did not wait
upon sinners, there would be none made Saints: We provoked him to cut us off
long since, but wrath is not easily heightened into rage, and therefore he
waits that he may be gracious, Isai. 30. 18. 4. Kindness or bounty, plenteous
in goodness; BERAB CHESID: Gods communications of his grace to the creature are
every way rich and full: You may say, God is merciful, gracious patient. But
will he be thus to me? Yes, he is plenteous in goodness, kind and
communicative; Psalm. 119. 68. Thou art good and do good; therefore David
goes to him for grace. Well then, study Gods Name, and answer all your
discouragements out of the descriptions of his Mercy.

9. Consider your own experiences: We have not As they said, We have heard that
the Kings of Israel are merciful Kings, etc.
only heard that God is merciful, but we have known it: All men may speak of
patience, and common mercy, and outward deliverances; but few improve them to a
spiritual use and purpose. 1. Consider Gods patience; How long has he waited
for your Conversion? and he that has spared you can save you. It Is said, The
wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23. the word implies that God is bound to pay
it by virtue of an implicit bargain, and agreement between him and the
creature: But as yet the hand of God has not found you out; you are indebted
to Justice, but Mercy stops the arrest of Vengeance: Many others have been
taken away in their sins, by a sudden arrow and dart from Heaven; Vengeance
has trodden upon the heel of sin; As Zimri and Cosbi unloaded their lusts and
their lives together; The Angels for an aspiring thought were turned out of
Heaven; Gehazi was blasted with Leprosy just upon his lie; and Lots wife
turned into a stone for a look, a glance upon Sodom; and Her^d smitten with
lice in the midst of his pomp and vainglory: and some have perished in the mid
way, Psalm. 2. in the very heat of some carnal and wicked pursuit; God can do
the like to you: therefore reason thus; If Mercy would not save me, why has
Mercy spared me? God might have sued out the Bond long since; what is the
meaning of the dispensation? Is God weak or unjust? or has he a mind to be
gracious? Surely he would not have spared me all this while, if he had not a
mind to save my Soul. Such reasonings as these many times give us the first
encouragement to apply our selves to God: Wicked men like Spiders draw other
conclusions, Psalm. 50. 21. But should not his patience, etc. Romans 2. 4. 2.
Consider Gods goodness, in giving thee food, and clothing, and honor, and
gladness of heart, and all this without thy desert; say, Certainly all these
benefits are but so many baits to catch my Soul; I see the Sun rises every day
with a fresh countenance, and shines upon the fields of just and unjust; to
what purpose? but to show that God is gracious without hire: This bodily Sun is
but an obscure type of the Sun of Righteousness, that is willing to display his
beams and wings over a poor languishing Soul. Common mercies are the tastes of
Gods love while you are sinners, and the common fruits of Christ's death, that
you may be invited to come for more: Why has he given me the unrighteous
Mammon, but that I may look after the true Riches? What a vile unthankful heart
should I have, if I should be contented with Mammon without Christ? and be like
Judas, with the bag in my hand, and the Devil in my heart? Gods children are
wont to make these gifts a step to higher dispensations: they know God, like
the good householder, brings forth the best at last; therefore they must have
something above and beyond all these things: Common hearts are contented with
common mercies; but they are still waiting when the Master of the feast will
bid them sit higher: I may have this and be damned; Where are the arguments of
his special Love? 3. Consider deliverances from imminent dangers: Then the
Curse began to seize upon you; but God snatched you out of the fire like brands
out of the burning, Amos 4. 11. or like a debtor that escapes out of the
Sergeants hands. Every deliverance is a temporary pardon: See Psalm. 78. 38.
Then he being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them
not; the meaning is, respited Vengeance, as appears by the Context. So Mat.
18. 32. He forgave them the debt; yet 'twas after required; the meaning is,
spared them for the present. Thus when God takes you out of the teeth and jaws
of Wrath, when you are delivered out of sickness and apparent danger, you have
a reprieve or a temporary pardon. Oh if you had dyed, you had dyed in your
sins, and so been eternally miserable: If the Lord had taken the present
advantage, you had been howling a sad note among the screech-owls of darkness;
For ever blessed be that Mercy that made a rescue.

10. Consider Gods invitations: Mercy points and beckneth to thee to come and
be saved: How many means has God used to call thee to himself? Every good
motion is a call; every Preacher a messenger sent from Heaven to invite thee to
Christ; every Sermon a new summons: Plead with thy self, Though God has not
drawn me, yet he has warned me. The Elect have no more favor in the general
means then thou have: Though Gods grace be limited by the pleasure of his
Wisdom, yet thou have a fair warrant and encouragement, and every way as good a
ground to come to Christ as others have; Whosoever, etc. John 6. 37. When the
Gospel does not exclude me, why should I exclude my self? Doubts that God will
not accept me if I come, are but foolish jealousies without a cause. But it is
time to leave off this meditation upon Gods mercy, which has carried me out so
far, and to come to the Uses.

It informs us, that those that would apply themselves to Use 1.
God, must make mercy their only plea and claim: Returning sinners have this
form put into their mouths, Hosea 14. 2. Take away all iniquity, receive us
graciously: Lord, we desire to be entertained by Mercy, to have our suits
dispatched by Mercy. So David professes that he had no other claim, Psalm. 13.
5. I have trusted in thy Mercy: (...) etc. Chrysostom.
Upon which Chrysostom sweetly glosseth; If any others have any thing to
alledg, let them plead it; Lord, I have but one thing to say, one thing to
plead, one thing upon which I cast all my hopes, and that is thy Mercy. So must
you come to the Throne of Grace; Lord, my plea is mercy, all the comfort I
expect to receive is from mercy. The Apostle I remember makes a challenge,
Romans 11. 35. Who has first given him, and it shall be recompensed to him
again? Is there any man that can enter this plea* This is due to me? Lord give
me what thou owe, I desire no more; let me have no blessing till I do deserve
it. Ch^^n^^^us Obs^r^a^ a^^ter (...) in dispu(...) quando cum ^ominibus sui
similibus ^i^a^tu^, aliter in meditationibus quando corem deo sistunt
conscientiam suam quosi co^sa dicenda ^ss^^, etc. Davenant de J^s^^ti^.
Meritmongers are best confuted by experience; Let them use the same plea in
their prayers, which they do in their disputes; let them say, Give me not
eternal life till I deserve it at thy hand; let them dispute thus with God or
with their own Consciences, when they are in the agonies of death, or under the
horrors of the Lords wrath. Surely men that cry up the merit of Works, are men
of little spiritual experience, and seldom look into their own Consciences?
Dare they plead thus with God in their agonies and horrors? The best claim Gods
dearest servants can make, is mercy. Possidius in the life of Austin reports
of Ambrose, when he was about to dye, he said thus, ^^^^ non ^^^ vixi u^ pudeat
inter nos vivere, etc. (...) quia ^onum (...) hab^o. Possidius in vita August.
Though I have not lived so that I should be ashamed to live among you; yet I
am not afraid to dye, not that I have lived well, but because I have a good and
gracious Master. This has still been the ground of the Saints confidence.

It exhorts us to use this encouragement to bring our Use 2.
Souls into the presence of God: Think of the mercies of God; The vile abuse of
this doctrine has brought a suspicion and prejudice upon it: but children must
not refuse their bread because dogs catch at it. When B^n^adad was dejected,
and in danger not only of losing his Kingdom, but his life, his servants
comforted him with this fame, 1 Kings 20. 31. We have heard that the Kings of
Israel are merciful Kings. You have heard how the God of Israel delights in
mercy: When you come for mercy, you speak to his very bowels. You shall read in
2 Samuel 14. 1. that when Joab perceived the Kings heart was to Absalom, then he
sets the woman of Tec^ah a begging: The Kings heart is to show mercy; he
has Ezekiel 18 21.
sworn, that he has no pleasure in his destruction; therefore take courage and
come to him: He has sent Christ to you, as a pledge of his good will and mercy,
why will you not come to him? He that had Love enough to give us Christ, has
Bowels enough to give us Pardon, and Bounty enough to give us Heaven, and what
ever we stand in need of: Fear not his Justice, Romans 3. 25, 26. and 1 John 1 9.
Justice and Mercy are made friends, Christ has taken up the quarrel between
them, so that nothing hinders but that God may act according to the natural
inclination of his own grace. And let not the multitude of your sins discourage
you; The free gift is of many offenses to Justification, Romans 5. 16. Take it
for the offenses of many persons (as the Context seems to carry it) and it is
an encouragement to think of the multiplied instances of Mercy, and how many
monuments of free grace we shall see when we come to Heaven, and that all this
while Mercy is not tired. Or take it for the many offenses of the same person,
and still it is an encouragement, that Mercy can so often bear with our vanity
and folly, and not only pardon several sorts of sin, but frequent relapses into
the same sin; He will multiply to pardin, Isai. 55. 7. If the Soul still draw
back, and be under discouragement, consider your own need: If the Lord were
never so tenacious, and hard to be entreated, yet such is your need that you
should follow him with uncessant complaints. It Is blasphemy to wrong his mercy
by lessening thoughts: But grant the sinner his supposition, yet you should be
instant, and try what he will do for importunities sake. See Luke 11. 8. (...)
and Luke 18. 5. (...), etc. In those Parables there is a kind of condescension
and yiedling to our unbelief; as if the Lord had said, If you will not believe
all this that is said concerning my Mercy, yet your want is great, that is
enough to make you earnest and frequent in your addresses to me; come and see
what I will do for your importunity; the unjust Judge was moved with the widows
clamor: be it as you imagine, that I have no bowels for creatures miseries,
nor ears for their requests, which yet is a blasphemy confuted by every object
in the world, the Job 38. 41. Mat. 6. 26. Luke 12. 2^.
young Ravens will tell you otherwise: but be it so, you are undone if I be not
merciful; see what I will do for constant asking. Upon all these encouragements
be persuaded to make an essay: faith at first stands but upon one weak foot;
Jonah 3. 10. ^o^l 2. 14.
Who knows but that God will be gracious? There is encouragement enough to
venture, though we do not know what will come of it: Take up a resolution to
make trial; you will find better welcome then you can expect; God desires to
exercise mercy as much as you desire to feel it.

It presses us in all our enjoyments to acknowledge Mercy: Use 3.
Ephesians. 2. 4. 1 Timothy ^. 13 Gen 33 6 Phil. 2 27.
The Saints are wont to do so: It Is good to refer all things to their head and
proper fountain: Every thing that we enjoy is the fruit of Mercy, especially
saving grace. It Is a sure sign a man has received no benefit by grace, if his
heart be not stirred up to praise it. We have cause to praise God for his mercy
above the Angels; I mean not only the bad Angels, with whom God entered not
into a treaty, he dealt with them in justice, and not in mercy; but even the
good Angels in some respects we have more cause to bless God then they have:
Gratitude respects the freeness and graciousness in giving, rather then the
greatness of the benefit. God was bountiful to the Angels in making them such
excellent creatures out of nothing; but he is merciful to us, notwithstanding
the demerit of our sins. There was no let in his doing good to the Angels,
Goodness flows out freely from an holy God to righteous creatures; but
wronged Justice interposed, and put in a bar against us; so that his Justice
must be satisfied, before Mercy can have a free course. We are a generation of
sinful men, the wretched offspring of fallen Adam; we had forsaken God, and
cast him off, which the Angels had not; and therefore though they have a large
experience of Gods goodness, yet they wonder at the grace showed to us, 1 Pet.
1. 12. But now much more is this mercy to be acknowledged, if we consider the
difference between us and other men, who it may be excelled us in moral
accomplishments; but God has passed them by, choosing us poor things of
naught, poor base creatures, that the glory might entirely redound to his own
grace. But especially should this Mercy affect us, when it has made a
distinction between us and others that were involved in the same guilt; when
one is taken, and another left; as the bad thief went to his own place, when
the good thief was taken to Paradise; and many of Gods Elect were as deep in
sin as those in Hell: I say, in all such cases we should still be crying out,
Mercy, mercy; for certainly Justice could make no such distinction; it awardeth
a like punishment to all that are found in a like crime; but Gods infinite and
eternal Mercy only makes the difference.

It Is Caution; Do not wrong Grace and Mercy, if it be Use 4.
the cause of all the good which we enjoy: this is to close up the Fountain,
and to make Mercy our Enemy; and if Mercy be our Enemy, who shall plead for us?
If Mercy be an Accuser, where shall we get an Advocate? But how do we wrong
Grace? I answer, Partly by neglecting the offers of it, when you make God speak
in vain, 2 Cor. 6. 2. It Is a great affront we put upon God, to despise him,
when he speaks to us in the still voice, and all the woi^gs and pleading of
Mercy do not move to look after our Salvation; though you do not despise, there
is danger in bare So those in Matthew did not deny, but make excuse, (...),
Matthew. 22. 5 They would not take it into their care and thoughts.
neglect, Heb. 2. 3. When all the charms of Mercy do no more work with you,
then a story of golden mountains, or Rubies and Diamonds fallen from Heaven in a
night dream; this neglect argues a greater suspicion and distrust of Gods
mercy, then doubts and troubles of Conscience do; Mercy speaks to them, and
they do not think the message worth the hearing or regarding. Again, You wrong
Grace by refusing it out of legal dejection, for by this means you straiten the
riches, and darken the glory of it; as if there were not more in Grace then
there is in sin; or as if an Emperors Revenue could not discharge a beggars
debt: The Prodigal could say, there was bread enough in his fathers house: If
we perish, it is not for want of mercy, but for want of faith: Grace is Gods
treasure; he is rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4. As far as we straiten grace, we
make him a poorer God. Again, We wrong Grace and Mercy by intercepting the
glory of it: It Is the greatest sacriledg that can be, to rob God of his Glory,
especially of the glory of his Grace; for that is his great aim in all his
transactions with man to make his Grace and Mercy glorious; see Ephesians. 1. 6.
Now when you think God accepts you rather then others for some worth and good
qualities that he sees in you more then others; it may be in this light of the
Gospel which we now enjoy such thoughts are not expressed, but Deuteronomy. 9 4.
if they lurk secretly in the heart, you think God foresaw you would bring him
more glory; you take the Crown from Grace's head, and put it upon your own. So
also you wrong Grace when you ascribe any thing to your power and strength: as
Joab sent for David to take the honor of winning Rabbath, 2 Samuel 12. 28. Lest
I take the City, and it be called after my own name: So send for God to take
the honor; Not I, but grace, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Throw the Crown at Grace's feet:
The industrious servant said, Thy pound has gained ten pounds, Luke 19. 16.
not my industry, but thy pound. Once more, We wrong Grace by turning it into
wantonness; see Verse. 4. it is made there to be an heavy charge and black note;
when men presume on Grace, and use it only as a dung-cart to carry away their
filth; Grace must bear all, and pardon all: as riotous children that have a
rich father care not how they spend, his estate shall pay for all. It Is a
mighty wrong to Grace, this, when you make it pliable to such vile purposes,
and father the bastards of your own carnal hearts upon Gospel encouragements:
It Is the Devils Covenant, not Gods, when you think that you may live as you
list, be at your own dispose, and mercy shall be at your beck, and you shall
have comfort when you please, and that you may sin freely because God pardons
freely, as if Mercy gave you a privilege and liberty to sin. In short, If a man
slackens any part of his duty for Mercy's sake, or lets loose the reins to vile
affections with more freedom, upon the presumption that God will not be
rigorous, he wrongeth Grace exceedingly; I say, if he grow more careless,
secure, negligent, not so constant in duty, not so watchful and strict in
conversation, or abateth ought of his humiliation for sin, he is a spider that
sucketh poison out of this flower. Lastly, We wrong Grace by slighting it after
a taste: At first coming to Christ, we make an essay and trial, and usually
then God gives us 1 Pet. 2. 3 Heb. 6. 4, 5. 6.
a taste to engage us to look for more: Now after trial you are not satisfied,
but return to your sinful courses again; and so do as it were proclaim to the
World that you found carnal comforts and pleasures to be better then communion
with God: This is but the interpretation of your Apostasy. The whole aim of the
Word is to persuade us to make trial of the sweetness of Grace; Now you that
have once tasted of it, and grow weary, do by your practice tell the World that
there is no sweetness in it at all, which is a great wrong to Grace and Mercy.

It Is high time now to speak of the second thing prayed for, which is Peace;
Whence observe, That Peace is a great Observat.
Blessing, one of the main Privileges of the Gospel.

I shall, first, Show you what it is: Secondly, Give you some Observations
concerning it; and thirdly, Come to Application.

1. What it is; It Is a tranquillity of mind, arising from the sense of a sure
estate with God. To this Peace two things concur. First, A sure estate, or
terms of amity with God: this is called in Scripture peace with God, and is the
immediate effect and fruit of actual Justification, Romans 5. 1. And then
secondly, There is a sense of this sure estate, or the reflex of this amity
upon the Conscience, and is usually called peace of Conscience, and is a
special privilege of Christ's spiritual Kingdom: see Romans 14. 17. the Apostle
speaks there of a peace which is ranked with joy in the Holy Ghost. But it
will be better opened to you in the ensuing Propositions.

1. Man by Nature is at enmity with God, and upon ill terms with him. When we
lost Gods Image, we lost his favor. This enmity is mutual; Man is an enemy to
God, and God is an enemy to man: On Gods part there is wrath, which is all that
we are born to by Nature, Ephesians. 2. 3. and on man's part there is hatred; we
hate God, because we love sin, Col. 1. 21. Gods enmity is suspended in the day
of his patience; Now and then Wrath breaks out, but it is not executed to the
full; sentence is past, but not executed: nay it may be reversed if we take
sanctuary at Grace; for God is now upon a treaty with us, or offer of peace;
therefore it is said, Peace on Earth, Luke 2. 14. The next World is a time of
vengeance and recompense; but during our earthly state God woeth us and
enviteth us to lay down the weapons of our defiance, and accept of terms of
Peace: Thus matters stand on Gods part. But now on our part this enmity is
carried on with a great deal of spite; We seek to destroy God, and to deface
all the memorials of him that are impressed upon the Conscience; we ungod him
in our thoughts and affections: it is a pleasing thought to us to suppose if
there were no God; as guilty prisoners wish there were no Judge, no Assizes,
that they may not be called to account.

2. Man being at enmity with God, all Gods creatures are at enmity with him:
Angels, men fire, air, water, they are all at Gods beck, and are ready to
destroy man when ever the Lord bids them; as good Subjects take part with
their Prince against Rebels: The Angels harken for the voice of his Word, Psalm.
103. If he do but hiss for the fly of Egypt, Isa. 7* it is ready presently: It Is
ill contesting with him that can command Legions; The fire says, Let me burn
his house or dwelling place; the water says, Let me drown his ships; the
Earth, Let me swallow him up quick as I did Corah and his accomplices. Certainly
the Lord cannot want instruments of Vengeance: Man as Gods creature is his own
enemy: God needs not fetch forces from without, there is enough within; the
humors of the body, the passions of the mind, all these are willing to serve
God as creatures for our punishment: so that if God should but arm our own
thoughts, our own affections against us, man is soon overwhelmed: Who can bear
the wounds given him by his own Conscience?

3. We being in this estate, can only be reconciled by Jesus Christ: He
obtains it by his Merit, and conferreth it by his Power. For his Merit, see
Col. 1. 20. and Isai. 53. 5. The chastisement of our Peace was upon him: It
will not stand with the Majesty of God to make Peace with us without
satisfaction: That there might be no wrong done to his Sovereignty, his Law,
his Truth, his Justice, his Holiness, it was meet that we should be chastised
either in our own persons or in our Surety; and also all the notions of the
Godhead are kept inviolable. Then for his Power; He works it at first, and
then maintains and keeps it afoot between God and us: He works it at
first, and brings it about thus, by opening the Gospel, wherein God is
revealed as pacified in Christ; which is the only doctrine that can calm the
Conscience, and establish the Soul in peace and hope: All false Religions are
accompanied with scruples and jealousies, Jer. 6. 16. there is no rest for the
Soul. And then he applies the Gospel by his Spirit: The Gospel is a sovereign
Plaster, but Christ's own hand must make it stick. There is a double ground of
enmity in man's heart, the guilt and power of sin; Christ wipeth guilt out of
the conscience by the application of his own blood, and weakeneth the power of
sin more and more: Sin is the Makebate, and Christ is the Prince of Peace, Isa
9. 6. The great end for which God set him up, was to plant grace in our hearts,
and so to work a friendship between God and us. But Christ is not only the
Author, but the great Conservator of the Peace between us and Heaven, Partly by
his Intercession: as foreign States have their Agents in Princes Courts to
preserve a mutual Correspondence; so Christ takes up all differences that fall
out between us and God, that no breach may ensue, Heb. 9. 24. Partly by a
further declaration of Gods love to the conscience, Isai. 26. 3. Partly by
stirring us up to watchfulness, that no occasion may be given on our part by
returning to folly, Psalm. 85. 8. Thus you see what Christ does; all is briefly
summed up by the Apostle in 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the
World: Where note, that our peace with God is a reconciliation or a peace after
a breach, and this reconciliation is mutual; God appears in a form of grace
and mercy to us, and we lay down cur enmity against God; he is gracious to us,
and we love and serve him: only observe, that God begins first, though he
the wronged party; he was reconciling: And mark again, it is in Christ, to show
it is sure: Those that are reconciled to men, are still in ^mbrage and suspicion
with them; they that have once been enemies, they may be again, therefore they
do not return to perfect grace; When the wound is cured, the scars remain: But
our reconciliation with God it is like the sodering of a vessel, which is
strongest in the crack; or as a leg broken, if well set, it is the stronger: so
are we upon firmer terms then we were in innocence; there was a possibility
of being at odds with God, which is now taken away.

4. God being reconciled in Christ, all things else are at peace with us: For
his League with us is offensive and defensive. Tranquillu^ Deus tranquillat
omnia.
My horses are as thy horses, and my chariots as thy chariots: God and all his
Confederates are in the League, or rather God and all his Subjects: as a Prince
does not only contract for his person, but his subjects and estates. Angels are
at peace with us; in stead of being Instruments of Vengeance, they become
ministering Spirits, Heb. 1. 14. A Christian has an invisible guard; Satan is
sensible of it, though we be not; he says of Job, Thou have hedged him round
about: Gods heirs are well attended; Angels vvait upon them at Christ's
direction. Other creatures serve us, as if they were in League and Covenant
with us; Stars, Winds, Seas, Beasts: Job 5. 23. Thou shall be in league with
the stones of the field, and the beasts shall be at peace with thee: They are
included in Gods League; which is as much as if there were an express
Covenant betvveen us and them, that they shall not do us harm; they are at the
beck of Providence, and therefore so far as it conduces to our good, at our
service: So Hosea 2. 18. I will make a Covenant for them with the beasts of the
field, and the fowls of the Heaven, etc. So for men, they are wolves one to
another, yet God can change them: The Gospel civillizeth, and pulls the beast
out of men's bosoms where it works least: see Isai. 11. 7* 8, 9. The hearts
of men are in Gods hands; he can either destroy their persons, or restrain
their rage, or turn out their respects to you: When a man's ways please the
Lord, he makes his enemies to be at peace with him, Prove. 16. 17. We think to
carry all by force and violence many times, but obedience to God is the best
way to gain the respects of men; as a key opens a door sooner then an Iron
bar: If you be in with God, you stop enmity and strife at the Fountain head.
So for peace with the Saints; Jesus Christ breaks down the partition wall,
Ephesians. 2. 16, 17, 18. removes prejudices and jealousies, changes interests,
clears up truths, and by his Spirit meekeneth their hearts that they be at
one: Surely Eodem sanguine Christi g^u^^^ti. Aug. Confess. de seipso and Alipio.
his Blood is the best cement and bond of friendship: Christ has called us
into a Body, that there might be peace in the Church, Col. 3. 15. Brothers have
defaced the feelings of Nature, but fellow members are wont to care one for
another: Peace with fellow Saints was his dying charge, his legacy, John 14.
27. his prayer, John 17. and his constant care now he is in Heaven. Then for
peace with our selves; Sin rendeth and teereth a ma* from himself, it makes a
mutiny in his own heart, Romans 2. 15. thoughts accusing and excusing by turns,
(...)* A man and his conscience are at odds, and a man and his affections: Now
we being reconciled to God, the foundation is laid for peace of Conscience,
that we and our hearts may talk together as loving friends, without scolding,
without reproaching And then Grace gives us a calm and contented spirit, which
eases us of a great deal of trouble; for a discontented man is his own burden:
We need the peace of God not only in our consciences, but to bear rule in our
hearts, Col. 3. 16. that we may refer all matters to Gods disposal, Psalm. 4. 8.

5. Though all things are at peace with us, yet some troubles are left for our
exercise, but not for our hurt and destruction. The peace of God it is a very
riddle, Phil. 4. 7. It passes all understanding: To sense who more wretched
then Gods children, hated, reviled, persecuted, afflicted? How are they are at
peace with God and all his creatures? I answer, The privileges of Christ's
Kingdom are spiritual; what ever troubles the Saints, nothing can harm them, 1
Pet. 3. 13. they may harm the man, but not the Christian: All things are at
peace with them, because they are at the disposal of a wise and gracious
Providence, and cannot do hurt to the better part; they work for good. Death
is at peace with them, which does the greatest hurt to the body: Ask old
Simeon, and he will tell you so, Luke 2. 29. Lord, now let thou thy servant
depart in peace, etc. They are sent for by their friend; the King of fears is a
grim messenger, but they know his errand, and therefore are not afraid.

6. In Heaven there is a perfect Peace; In the new Jerusalem all is quiet:
It Is just with God to give you that are troubled (...), rest, 2 These. 1. 7. And
there is a rest that remains for the children of God, Heb. 4. 9. there we
rest both from our sorrows and our labors; there is no trouble nor affliction
more; all privileges are at the height; no more apprehensions of Gods Wrath,
fears of death: there we are not only free from hurt, but danger; our exercise
is at end: there we do immediately behold the Kings face, which is not
granted us here; now we are in Absaloms condition, pardoned, reconciled, but
cannot see the Kings face. So much for the nature of this Peace, and the
Observations that open it to you. Let us now apply all.

If Peace be such an excellent Blessing, and a main privilege Use 1. Trial.
of the Gospel, then it puts us upon trial; Are we at peace with God through
Christ? If it be so, then, 1. Enmity is laid aside; Gods enemies will be
yours, and yours will be Gods; otherwise what peace? What do we talk of peace
with God, as long as we are in league with Gods enemy? What peace as long as
the whoredoms of thy mother Jezabel are so many? Our League with God is
defensive and offensive: Pax nostra bellum contra Satan^m. Tertul. ad Martyras.
There is a war with Satan, if we be at peace with God: The spiritual conflict
is the best evidence we have of our unity with God. With the wicked God is at
open war; There is no peace, etc. Isai. 57. 20. The Devil may be at a secret
peace with them, but God is at distance, and abhors all communion with them.
Christ is called the Prince of Peace, Isai. 9. 6. but it is to those that submit
to his Government, to his Subjects, he says, Take my yoke upon you, and ye
shall find rest, Mat. 11. 29. We are not in a capacity to receive this
Blessing, till we take an oath of allegiance to Christ, and continue in
obedience to him. 2. The next Note is, delight in communion with God: Job 22.
Acquaint thy self with him and be at peace. A man that is at peace with God,
will be often in his company: Bondage and servile awe keeps us out of Gods
presence; We cannot come to him, because we cannot come in peace. A man never
delights in duties of commerce with God, when either he has a false peace or
no peace: Duties disturb a false peace; and when we are raw and sour, we are
unfit for work. When a Peace is concluded between Nations that were before at
War, Trading is revived: so will it be between God and you; commerce will be
revived, and you will be trading into Heaven, that you may bring away rich
treasures of grace and comfort.

It presses us to make peace with God by Christ: We Use 2. Exhortation.
speak to two sorts, the careless and the distressed. 1. To the careless;
Consider, you are born enemies to God: They that loved him from their cradle
upvvard, never loved him: You must make peace with God, for you cannot
maintain war against him; Are you stronger then he? What will you arm? lusts
against Angels? And do you know the terror of his wrath? one spark of it is
enough to drink up all your blood and spirits, Job 6. 4. The present life is
but a vapor, soon gone: If God be angry, he can arm the least creature to kill
you: The whole Creation takes part with God; Adrian was strangled with a
Gnat. But death will not end your sorrovvs; none can punish their enemies as
God can; he can ruin your body and soul for ever and for ever: How will you
screech and howl like Dragons? But your torments are without end and without
ease: Be wise then, and do not sleep when your Pet. 2. 3.
damnation sleeps not; now is the time to make your peace with God; Ah that
you knew in this your day the things that belong to your peace, Luke 19. 41.
Peace must be had now, or else it can never be had hereafter; the day of
patience will not always last; therefore let us get into the Ark before the
Flood comes: It Is a dreadful thing to be under the Wrath of God, and you know
not how soon it will light; our care should be to be found of him in peace, 2
Pet. 3. 14. Christ is now a Savior, then a Judge; You will yell and howl for
mercy when it is too late. 2. I am to speak to distressed Consciences; Lift up
your heads, God offers you peace, he sent Angels from Heaven to proclaim it,
Luke 2. 14. The ground of the offer is good will, and the end of the offer is
only his own glory; God has no other reasons to move him to it but his own
good will, and no other aim then to glorify his grace; see Ephesians. 1. 6. and
therefore take hold of his Covenant of Peace, as it is called, Isai. 54. 10. He
is content we shall have peace upon these terms, and peace assured us by
Covenant. Certainly it is not a duty to doubt, nor a thing acceptable to God,
that we should always be upon terms of perplexity, and keep Conscience raw with
a sense of wrath and sin: Wherefore did Christ bear the chastisement of our
Peace? God is more pleased with a cheerful confidence then a servile spirit
full of bondage and fear.

It Is Caution: If Peace be a privilege of the Gospel, let Use 3.
us take care that we settle upon a right Peace, lest we mistake a Judgment for
a Blessing. It Is the greatest Judgment that can be, to be given up to our own
secure presumptions, and to be lulled asleep with a false peace. When the pulse
does not beat, the body is in a dangerous estate; so when Conscience is
benumbed, and suiteth not, it is very sad. The Grounds of a false and carnal
Peace, are, 1. Ignorance of our condition: Many go hoodwinked to Hell; a little
light breaking in would trouble all, Romans 7. 9. Sluttish corners are not seen
in the dark Iniqua lex est quae se exquinari non patitur. Tertul. Apol.
: Things are naught that cannot brook a trial: So you may know that it is very
bad with men, when they will not come to the light, John 3. 20. or cannot
endure to be alone, lest Conscience should return up it self, and they be
forced to look inward; their confidence is supported by mere ignorance. 2.
Sensuality; Some men's lives are nothing else but a diversion from one pleasure
to another, that they may put off that which they cannot put away; there is
bondage in their Consciences, and they are loath to take notice of it: Amos 6.
3. They drink wine in bowls, and put far away the evil day: This is to quench
the spirit without a metaphor: All their pleasures are but stolen waters, and
bread eaten in secret; frisks of mirth, when they can get Conscience asleep:
Ca^ns heart was a trouble to him, therefore he falls a building of Cities:
Saul to cure the evil spirit ran to his Music; and so usually men choke
Conscience either with business or pleasures* 3. From formality and slightness
in the spiritual life: First, Either they do not seriously perform duty; that
will make men see what carnal unsavory sapless spirits they have: He that never
stirs, does not feel the lameness of his joints: Formal duties make men the
more secure; as the Pharisee thought himself in a good case, because, etc. Luke
18. 11. but spiritual duties search us to the purpose, as new wine does old
bottles. Or else secondly, They do not exasperate their lusts, and seriously
resist sin: Tumult is made by opposition. When a man yeildeth to Satan, no
wonder that Satan lets him alone: Luke 11. 21. The goods are in peace, because
the Devils possession is not disturbed; he rages most when his Kingdom is
tottering Rev. 12. 12. Please the worst natures, and they will not trouble you:
There is no tempest where wind and tide go together: You let Satan alone, and
he lets you alone; this is a peace that will end in trouble.

I now come to speak of the third thing prayed for, and Love.
that is Love, which (being taken here not for Gods love to us, but our love to
God) may be thus defined; It Is a gracious and Definition.
holy affection, which the Soul upon the apprehension of Gods love in Christ,
returns back to God again by his own grace. The 1. Grounds and Causes of it.
Grounds and Causes of it are two; the one works by way of argument and
swasion, the other by way of efficacy and power.

1. It arises from the sense and apprehensions of Gods love in Christ. Love is
like a Diamond, that is not wrought upon but by its own dust: 1 John 4. 19. We
love him, because he loved us first. Love is like an echo, it returns what
it receives; it is a reflex, a reverberation, or a casting back of Gods beam
and flame upon himself. The cold wall sends back no reflex of heat till the
Sun shine upon it, and warm it first: so neither do we love God till the Soul
be first filled with a sense of his Love: And as Radius reflexus languet.
rays in their relection are more faint and cold; so our love to God is much
weaker then Gods love to us. Valdesso says, God loves the lowest Saint more
then the highest Angel loves God. Once more, The more direct the stroke and
beam is upon the wall, or any other solid body, the stronger always is the
reflection; so the more sense we have of the love of God, the stronger is our
love to him.

2. The next Cause of Love is the grace of God: there is not only an
apprehension of Love, but the force of the Spirit goes along with it: Our
thoughts, our discourses upon the love of God to us in Christ, nay our sense
and feeling of it, is not enough to beget this grace in us. Love is a pure
flame, that must be kindled from above, as the Vestal fire by a Sunbeam. 1 John
4. 7. Love is of God; that is, of a celestial or heavenly original. There is in
the Soul naturally an Romans 1. 30. (...).
hatred of God, and a proneness to mingle with present comforts, which can only
be cured by the Spirit of grace: Our naked apprehensions will not break the
force of natural enmity; and it is God that must circumcise and pare away the
foreskin of the heart before we can love him, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. There is a natural
proneness to dote upon the creature, and hate the Creator. Base creatures
neglect God, and pollute themselves with one another; and there is no help for
it till the heart be overpowered by grace. Thus for the Causes of Love.

The Object of Love is God himself; not merely as considered in himself, for so
he is terrible to the creature; but as God in Christ, for so he will be known
and respected by us in the Gospel, and so we have the highest engagement to
love him; not only upon the respects of Nature, as our Creator, but of Grace,
as our God and Father in Christ. Now God is the supreme Object of Love, and
other things are loved for Gods sake, because of that of God which we find in
them: as his Word, which is the Copy of his Holiness; his engraven Image; as
the Coin bears the image of the Prince; so it is said, Psalm. 119. 47. I will
delight my self in thy Commandments which I have loved. And then his Saints,
which are his living Image, as children resemble their father; so it is said,
Psalm. 16. 3. To the Saints, and to the excellent of the Earth, in whom is my
delight. And then other men, because of his Command, 1 Pet. 1. 5. Add to
brotherly-kindness, love. So his creatures, because in them we enjoy God, the
effects of his Bounty. But chiefly his Ordinances, as they exhibit more of God
then the creatures can: So that Love respects God and other things for Gods
sake.

Again, In the Description I take notice of the essence or formal nature of it,
and call it the return of a gracious and holy affection to God. Love is carried
out to its Object two ways, by desire and delight: Our necessity and need of
God is the ground of desire; and our propriety and interest is the ground of
delight: Desires are the feet of love, by which it runs after its Object;
and delight is the rest and contentment of the Soul in the enjoyment of it:
Because of our imperfect fruition in this life, Love bewrays it self by
desires mostly, or pursuing after God: See Psalm. 63. 8. My heart follows hard
after thee: It notes those sallies and earnest egressions of Soul after the
Lord, that we may have more communion and fellowship with him. In short, the
radical (if I may so speak) and principal disposition of Love is a desire of
Union; for all other effects of love flow from it: This is that makes the Soul
to prize the Ordinances, because God is to be enjoyed there; and these are
means of communion with him; Psalm. 26. 8. I have loved the place where thine
honor dwells. This makes sin terrible, because it separateth from God,
Isai. 59. 2. This makes Heaven amiable; the fairest part of our portion in
Heaven is a closer and nearer communion with Christ, Phil. 1. 23. This makes
the day of Judgment sweet, for then we shall meet with our Beloved in the air,
2 Timothy 4. 18. In short, this makes the Soul to take such contentment in
thinking of God, and speaking of God; it is the feast of the Soul; My meditation
of him shall be sweet, Psalm. 104. 34. Their Souls cannot have a greater solace
then to think what a God they have in Christ.

Having in some manner described the Love of God, let Reasons why we must love
God. 1. God has commended it.
me use some Arguments to press you to it.

First, God has commanded it: The sum of the Law is Love. When the Scribe came
to Christ, Mat. 22. 36. Master, which is the great Commandment in the Law?
Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
all thy soul, and all thy might: Mark, this is the first and great Commandment,
to love God; It Is not a sour Command, but sweet and profitable: God might have
burdened us with other manner of Precepts, considering his absolute right; to
offer our children in sacrifice, to mangle our flesh with whips and scourges;
but these are cruelties proper to the Devils worship. The Lord is a gentle
Master, and only desires the love of his servants; we have cause to thank him
for such a gracious Precept. If he should require us not to love him, this were
Hell it self; that is the Hell of Hell, that they which are there do not love
God. It Is our privilege as much as our duty. God loves all his creatures, but
has commanded none to love him again but man and Angels; so that it is the
great privilege of the Saints, to love God. It had been a great favor if God
had given us leave to love him: as it would be a great favor if a King should
give leave to one of his meanest Subjects to have the key of his privy Chamber,
to come to him and visit him, and be familiar with him when he pleases; how
would this be talked of in the world! yet this is not so wonderful, since the
King and the Peasant are both men; in their natural being they are equal,
though in their civil distinction and condition of life there be a difference.
But what a favor is this, that he who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
does not only permit his creature made by his own hands to come to him, and
love him, and deal with him when he pleases, but has expressly commanded it?
nay this is the great Commandment: Certainly God is very desirous of our love,
when he lays such an obligation upon us: Was there ever such a Master, that
made this to be his servants chiefest duty, that they should love him? Again, I
observe in Gods Command that the Precept runs thus, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. The
Lord would not lose one grain of the creatures love; Surely he valued it, when
he is so sollicitous about it. If we should see a wise man careful to preserve
the relics of what we counted a neglected weed, it would make us think there
were somewhat in it. We lavish away our love upon trifles, and God prizeth
every grain of it: you see he speaks as if he would not lose one dust of
love; all thy soul, all thy heart, and all thy might. When he bids us love
our neighbor, he sets limits to it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self;
but when he bids us love God, he requires all the heart: The only measure
is to love him without measure. The next place that I shall take notice of,
where the Precept is recorded, is Deuteronomy. 10. 12. And now Israel, what does the
Lord require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, and to walk in all his
ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord with all thy heart, and with all
thy soul? God does not require of us things without the sphere of duty; that we
should go into the depths of the Sea, toss mountains in the air, pluck the
stars from Heaven, etc. these things lie out of the power of man: He does not
require of us barbarous austerities* to offer our firstborn, to lance our
selves, to mangle our flesh with whips and scourges: He does not require of us
absolutely such things which some men can and ought to perform; not such a
measure of alms, what then would become of the poor? not such a degree of
wisdom and learning, what then would become of the simple and unlearned? But O
Israel, what has the Lord required of thee, but that thou should love the
Lord thy God? A duty to be performed by poor and rich, learned and unlearned;
what ever their estate and condition be, they may all love God: There are many
in Heaven that never were in a condition to give, but to receive, that were
never learned, and skilled in sciences, but none that never loved God.

Secondly, God has deserved love. Let us a little take notice 2 Reason, God
has deserved it.
of Gods love to us; He begins, and loves us, that we may love him again, 1
John 4. 19. If God should hate us, we were bound to love him, because of his
excellency, and because of our duty and obligation as we are creatures; how
much more when God has loved us, and bestowed so many benefits upon us? Love
is an affection which God will have repayed in kind: When he chideth us, he
does not expect that we should chide him again; when he judges us, we must not
judge him again: in these things the creature is not to retaliate: It Is true, we
do it too often, but still to our ^oss and blame. But now when he loves us, he
wills us to love him again; he loves us for no other cause but that he may
be loved; Love must be paid in kind: As water is cast into a Pump when the
springs lie low to bring up more water; so God sheddeth abroad his love into
our hearts, that our love may rise up to him again by way of gratitude and
recompense. Now in the Love of God we may take notice of the

1. Properties and of it.

2. Effects of it.

First, For the Properties of Gods Love, consider, Properties of Gods Love. 1.
The Ancientness.


1. The Ancientness of it; Psalm. 103. 17. From everlasting to everlasting, etc.
With reverence we may speak, ever since God was God he was our God: You may
track his Love from one Eternity to another; Before the world was he loved us,
and when the world is no more he loves us still: His Love began in eternal
purposes of Grace, and it ends in our eternal possession of Glory. It Is not a
thing of yesterday; he is our ancient Friend; He loved us not only before we
were lovely, but before we were at all. We adjourn and put off our love of God
to old age, and thrust it into a narrow corner: When we have wasted and spent
our strength in the world, we dream of a devout retirement: But the Lord
thinks he could never love us early enough; From everlasting to everlasting,
etc. We receive the fruits and effects of Love in time, but all comes out of
Gods ancient and eternal Love; this grace was provided for us before we were
born. Yea look upon Gods Love in time; how merciful was God to us before we
could show the least sign of thankefulness to him? He loved us a long time
before ever we had a thought of him: In infancy we could not so much as know
that he loved us: When we came to years of discretion, we knew how to offend
him, before we knew how to love and serve him: How many are there of whom it
may be said, God is not in all their thoughts? and yet all this while God has
thoughts of peace and blessing toward them.

2. Consider the Freeness of Gods Love: The value of all 2 The Freeness.
benefits arises from the necessity of him that receives, and the good will
of him that gives. God wanted not us, our love is no benefit to him; but we
wanted him, we are undone without him; yet he has more delight in pardoning
then we in salvation, and he is more ready to give then we ^ii (...)
to ask: He often calls upon us to call upon him; as if he were afraid we
would not ask, or not enough, or not soon enough, or not often enough. A man
would think that our wants should be importunate enough to put us upon
requests, and that we needed not enforcements to prayer; yet you see God does
not only prevent the request, but make the prayer, and stirs us up to utter
it. But we are not only needy creatures, but guilty creatures; and that God
should love us! When we were in our blood and filthiness, 'twas a time of
loves, Ezekiel. 16. 7. This is the great Miracle of divine Love, that a time of
loathing is a time of loves: And we will wonder at it more if we consider the
active and endless hatred of his Holiness against sin, and therefore why not
against sinners? The holiness of his Nature and Essence sets him against them;
and natural antipathies and aversations can never be reconciled; as a Man can
never be brought to delight in a Toad, or a Lamb in a Wolf. And consider again
his infinite Wisdom; We may love that which is not lovely, because we are often
blinded by inordinate affection; but now Gods Love is not blind, and overcome
with the vehemence of any passion, as man's is: this makes the wonder, there is
no blindness and passion in him that loves, and yet the thing that is loved is
vile and uncomely.

3. The frequency of the expressions of his Love: It would 3 Frequency.
weary the arm of an Angel to write down Gods repeated Acts of Grace; Romans 5.
17. The free gift is of many offenses unto Justification. We carry loads of
experiences with us to Heaven. Gods Book of Remembrance is written within and
without. This will be our wonder and amazement at the last day, to see such
huge sums cancelled with Christ's blood: Every day pardoning mercy is put in:
Our past lives are but a constant experience of our sinning, and Gods
pardoning. We are weary of every thing but sin; we are never weary of that,
because it is natural to us. The very refreshments of life by continuance grow
burdensome: Meat, drink, music, sleep, the chiefest pleasures within a while
need to be refreshed with other pleasures; Man is a restless creature, and
loves shift and change. But now we are never weary of sin; we have it from
the womb, and we keep it to the grave; and yet all this while we subsist upon
God: we subsist upon him every moment; We have life, and breath, and hourly
maintenance from him, whom we thus grieve and offend: Dependence should beget
observance, but in us it is otherwise: As a dunghill sends out vapors to
obscure the Sun that shines upon it; so do we dishonor the God of our
mercies, and grieve him day by day: How long has God been multiplying pardons,
and yet Free Grace is not tired and grown weary?

4. Consider the variety of the expressions of his Love: We 4. Variety.
have all kind of mercies, we eat mercy, we wear mercy, we are encompassed with
mercy as with a shield: The Apostle says, 2 Pet. 1. 3. He has given us all
things that pertain to life and godliness; that is (as I would interpret) all
things that are necessary to life natural, to life spiritual; to maintain grace
here, and to bring us to glory hereafter. He that has an interest in Christ,
his portion is not straitened; he has a right to all things, and a possession
of as much as Providence judges needful; therein we must not be our own
carvers: A man of mortified affections thinks he has provision enough, if he
has things necessary to life and godliness: and will you not love God for all
this? Certainly we do not want obligations, but we want affections. Look as too
much wood puts out the fire* and causes smoke; so the multitude and daily
experience of Gods mercies lesseneth the esteem of them: We have but too many
mercies, and that makes us unkind and neglectful of God. What shall I tell you
of Sabbaths, Ordinances, food, raiment? If a man would be but his own
remembrancer, and now and then come to an account with God, he would cry out,
Oh the multitude of thy thoughts to usward, how great is the sum of them!
Psalm. 139. Or if a man would but keep a journal of his own life, what a vast
volume would his private experiences make? how would he find mercy and himself
still growing up together? Shall I show you a little what a multitude of
mercies there are? I will not speak of the higher and choycer mercies, such as
concern the soul, but of such as concern the body: What a deal of provision is
there for the comfort and welfare of the body? I instance in these mercies,
partly because they are so common, that they are scarce noted; partly because
carnal men prize the body most, they prefer it above the Soul: now the Lord
would leave them without excuse; they that love the body shall not want
arguments to urge them to love God, since he has bestowed so much of his love
and care upon the body, to gratify all the senses not only for necessity, but
delight. There is light for the eye; the poorest man has glorious lamps to
light him to his labors: For the taste, such variety of refreshments of a
different sap and savor; For the smell, delicious infusions into the air from
flowers and gums, and aromatic plants; For the ears, music from birds and
men; and all this to make our pilgrimage comfortable, and our hearts better.
How many creatures has the Lord given us to help to bear burdens? how many
things for meat and medicine? If man had not been created last, after the World
was settled and furnished, we should have seen the want of many things which
we now enjoy and do not value: First God provided our house, and then
furnished our table; and when all was ready, then man is brought in as the
Lord of all. We are not affected with these mercies: How can we sin against
God, that can look no where but we see arguments and reasons to love him? As
Christ said, Many good works have I done amongst you, for which of these do you
stone me? So may the Lord plead, I have done many things for you; you cannot
open your eyes but you see love, you cannot walk abroad but you smell love and
hear love, etc. for which of those do you grieve me, and deal so despightfully
with me?

Let me now come to the Effects of Gods Love; I shall 2. The Effects of Gods
Love.
only instance in those three great Effects, Creation, Preservation, and
Redemption: Certainly that must needs be a great benefit, out of which there
flies not only sparks, but brands; and so that Love which can produce such
fruits and effects, 1. Creation.
must needs be exceeding great.

1. Creation, This deserves love from the creature: The fruit of the Vineyard
belongs to him that planted it; and whom should we love but him that gave us
the power to love? All that thou have, all that thou can see, that thou can
touch, is his gift, and the work of his hands: He gave thee the essence not of
a tree, a bird, a beast, but of a man, capable of reason, fit for happiness:
God made other creatures by a word of Command, and man by Council; 'twas not,
Be thou, but, Let us make man, to show that the whole Trinity assisted and
joined in consultation: He made other creatures for his glory, but not for his
love and service; God is glorified in them passively, as they give us occasion
to glorify God; the creatures are the harp, but man makes the music: All thy
works praise thee, and thy Saints bless thee, Psalm. 145. 10. How many steps may
a Christian ascend in his praise and thanksgiving? We might have been stones,
without sense; beasts, and without reason; born infidels, and without faith; We
might have continued sinners, and without grace: all these are so many steps of
mercy. But Creation is that we are now to speak of, and truly it deserves a
remembrance, especially Eccles. 12. 1.
in youth, when the effects of Gods creating bounty are most fresh in our sense
and feeling: We are always to remember our Creator, but then especially: The
aches of old serve to put us in mind of our ingratitude; but the strength, and
vigor, and freshness of youth, should make us remember the bounty of our
Creator. Look upon the body or the soul, and you will see that we have cause to
love him. In the body we find as many mereies as there are limbs: If a man
should be born blind or lame, or should lose an eye, or an arm, or a leg, how
much would he love him that should restore the use of these members again? We
are as much bound to love him that gave them to us at first, especially when we
consider how often we have deserved to lose them. We would love him that should
raise us from the dead: God is the Author of life, and the continual Preserver
and Defender of it. If we love our parents that begot us, we should much more
love God that made them and us too out of nothing. Take notice of the curious
frame of the body; David says, Psalm. 139. 16. I am wonderfully made;
accepictus sum, so the Vulgar rendereth it, painted as with a needle, like a
garment of needlework of diverse colors, richly embroydered with nerves and
veins. What shall I speak of the eye, wherein there is such curious
Worshmanship, that many upon the first sight of it have been driven to
acknowledge God? Of the hand, made to open and shut, and to serve the labors
and ministeries of Nature without wasting and decay for many years: if they
should be of marble or iron, with such constant use they would soon wear out;
and yet now they are of flesh they last as long as life lasts. Of the head,
fitly placed to be the seat of the senses, to command and direct the rest of
the members. Of the lungs, a frail piece of flesh, yet though in continual
motion of a long use. 'Twere easy to enlarge upon this occasion: But I am to
preach a Sermon, not to read an Anatomy Lecture. In short therefore, every part
is so placed and framed, as if God had employed his whole Wisdom about it.

But as yet we have spoken but of the casket wherein the Jewel lies; the Soul,
that divine spark and blast; how quick, nimble, various and indefatigable in
its motions? how comprehensive in its capacities? how it animateth the body,
and is like God himself all in every part? Who can trace the flights of Reason?
What a value has God set upon the Soul? He made it after his Image, he
redeemed it with Christ's Blood, etc. Well then, God that made such a body, such
a soul, deserves love; He that made the Soul, has most right to dwell in it;
it is a curious house of his own framing: But he will not enter by force and
violence, but by consent; he expects when love will give up the keys: Rev. 3.
17. Behold, I stand at the door and knock; if any man open to me, I will come
in and sup with him. Why should Christ stand at the door and knock, and ask
leave to enter into his own house? he has right enough to enter, only he
expects till we open to him.

2. Preservation: We are not apprehensive enough of ^. Preservation.
daily mercies: The Preservation of the World is a constant Miracle; The World
is hanged upon nothing (as it is in the Book of Job:) A feather will not stay in
the air; and yet what has the World to support it but the thin fluid air that
is round about it? It Is easy to prove that the Waters are higher then the
Land: so that we are always in the case the Israelites were in, when they
passed through the Red Sea; Nos sumus etiam tanquam in medio rubri maris (says
Luther,) the Waters are round about us and above us, bound up in an heap as it
were by God, and yet we are not swallowed up: It Is true, the danger is not so
sensible and immediate as that of the Red Sea, because of the constant rampire
of Providence, More particularly, from the womb to the grave we have hourly
maintenance from God. Look as the beams in the air are no longer continued then
the Sun shines; so we do no longer continue then God upholdeth our beings by
the word of his Power, Heb. 1. 3. Or as it is with a Seal in the Water, take
away the seal and the impress vanishes; so do we disappear as soon as God does
but loosen his Hand and almighty Grasp, by which all things are upheld and
preserved. But let us speak of those acts of Providence that are more sensible:
Into how many diseases and dangers might we fall, if God did not look after us
as the Nurse after her child? How many have gone to the grave, nay it may be to
Hell, since the last night? How many actual dangers have we escaped? God has
looked after us, as if he had forgotten all the world besides; as if his whole
employment were to do us good: He says, that he will no more forget us, then a
woman does her sucking child; and that we are written before him, and graven in
the palms of his hands, Isai. 45. 15, etc. as men tie a string about their
^inger for a remembrance, or record in a book such things as they would regard:
all these are expressions to describe the particular and express care of Gods
Providence over his children. Now what shall be rendered to the Lord for all
this? If we could do and suffer never so much for God, it will not answer the
mercy of one day: Certainly at least God expects love for love; Love him as
he is the strength of thy life and length of thy days, Deuteronomy. 30. 26. Every days
experience is new fuel to keep in the fire: The very beasts will respect their
preservers, they are loving to those that are kind to them; The Ass knows his
owner, and the Ox his masters crib; There is a kind of gratitude in the beasts
by which they acknowledge their benefactors that feed them and cherish them: But
we do not acknowledge God, who feeds us and upholdeth us every moment; There
is ^^ creature made worse by kindness then man: He that was made to be Master
of the creatures, may become their Scholar; there is many a good lesson to be
learned in their School.

3. Redemption: As a man when he weighs a thing, casts 3. Redemption
in weight after weight till the scales be counterpoysed; so does God mercy
after mercy to poyse down man's heart: Here is a mercy that is overweight in it
self; 1 John 4. 10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that God loved
us, and sent his Son to be a propitiation for our sins. If we had had the
wisdom to pitch upon such a remedy (as certainly it could not have entered into
hearts of men or Ephesians. 3. 10.
Angels) yet we could not have the heart to ask it; It would have seemed a rude
blasphemy in our prayers, to desire that the Son of God should come out from
his Fathers bosom and dye for us; Therefore herein is love, that is, this is
the highest expression of Gods Love to the creature, not only that ever was,
but can be; For in love only God acts to the uttermost: he never showed so
much of his Power and Wisdom, but he can show more; of his Wrath, but he can
show more: but he has no greater thing to give then himself, then his Christ.
At what a dear rate has the Lord bought our hearts? He needed not; he might
have made nobler creatures then the present race of men, and dealt with us as
he did with the sinning Angels, he would not enter into treaty with them, but
the execution was as quick as the sin; so the Lord might utterly have cast us
off, and made a new race of men to glorify his Grace, leaving Adam to
propagate the World to glorify his Justice: Or at least he might have redeemed
us in another way, (for I suppose it is a free dispensation opus liberi
consilij:) But John 3. 16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son; He took this way,
that we might love Christ as well as believe in him: God might have redeemed us
so much in another way, but he could not oblige us so much in another way; He
would not only satisfy his Justice, but show his Love: 'Twas the Lords design
by his Love to deserve ours, and so for ever to shame the creature, if they
should not now love him. Oh think much of this glorious Instance, the love of
God in giving Christ, and the love of Christ in giving himself. When the Sea
wrought and was tempestuous, and Jonah saw the storm, he said, Cast me into the
Sea, and it shall be calm to you; but the storm was raised for his own sake.
Now Christ when he saw the misery of mankind, he said, Let it come on me; We
raised the storm, but Christ would be cast in to allay it. If a Prince passing
by an execution should take the Malefactors chains, and suffer in his stead,
this would be a wonderful instance indeed: Why? Christ has born our sorrows
and carried our griefs, Isai. 53. 4. the very same griefs that we should have
suffered, so far as his holy Person was capable of them: his desertion was
equivalent to our loss, his agonies to our curse and punishment of sense; and
all this very willingly for the sake of sinners. It Is notable, he does with
like indignation rebuke Peter dissuading him from sufferings, as he does the
Devil tempting him to Idolatry, Get thee behind me Satan, compare Mat. 16. 22.
with Mat. 4. 10. He is well pleased with all his sorrows and sufferings, so he
may gain the Church, and espouse her to himself in a firm League and Covenant:
Isai. 53. 11. He shall see the travel of his Soul, and be satisfied; as if he
said, Welcome agonies, welcome death, welcome curse, so poor Souls be saved! As
Jacob counted the days of his labor nothing, so he might obtain Rachel; and
yet there is a vast difference between the love of Christ and the love of
Jacob: Rachel was lovely, but we are vile and unworthy creatures; and Christ's
love is infinite, even beyond his sufferings, and the outward expressions of
it; as the windows of the Temple were more large and open within then without.
Well then, every one of Christ's wounds is a mouth open to plead for love; He
made himself so vile, that he might be more dear and precious to us: Certainly
if Love brought Christ out of Heaven to the Cross, to the grave, should it not
carry us to Heaven? to God? to Christ, who has been thus gracious to us? Thus
God has deserved our love.

The third and next Argument is, God has desired it: What 3. God has desired
it.
does the Lord see in our hearts that he should desire them? If a Prince should
not only make love to a vile and abject creature, but seek all means to gain
her affection, you would count her very froward and unthankeful to give him the
denial. Christ does not only oblige us, but woo us: If man were such as he
should be, he would not need enforcements, because of the multitude of his
obligations; and if the Lord did deal with us as we deserve, he would slight us
and scorn us, rather then woo us: He does not want lovers, there are Angels
enough in Heaven, whose wills and affections cleave to him perfectly; yea God
does not need the love of any creature, all this wooing is for our sakes;
Wherein can frail men be beneficial to God? What increase of happiness has he
if all men should love him? It Is his happiness to love himself, and he would
have us to share in this happiness; therefore he threateneth, and promises,
and beseeches: As one that would gladly open a door, tries key after key,
till he has tried every key in the bunch; so does God try one method after
another to work upon man's heart.

He threateneth eternal torments if we do not love him: 1. Threatens.
1 Cor. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema
Maranatha: The form of speech implies the most dreadful curse that may be:
It Is not arbitrary, whether you will love him or no; you are either to love
him, or to perish eternally. Among men if love does not come kindly, we neglect
it; that which is forced is nothing worth: yet the Lord is so earnest after the
love of the creature, that he would have it by any means.

He promises: We have not only mercies in hand, but 2. Promises.
mercies in hope; not only obligations, but promises. It Is our duty to love God
if there were no Heaven; our obligations might suffice: yet what great things
has God provided for them that love him? 1 Cor. 2. 9. If a man should sell his
love, he cannot have a better Chapman then God, who is most rich and most
liberal. If an earthly Potentate should promise to them that love him half his
Kingdom, he would find lovers enough. God has promised glory, the Kingdom of
Heaven, and shall we not take him at his word? The Lord will give a gift for a
gift, because he has given us to love him; therefore he will give us Heaven as
the reward of love. Who ever heard that an hungry man was hired to eat? and
rewarded for tasting dainty food? or a thirsty man for drinking? The Love of
God is so excellent a privilege, that we should endure all torments to obtain
it; and yet God has promised a reward: yea he is pleased to bargain with us,
as if he were our equal, and we were altogether free before the Contract.

Again, He beseeches: We are cold and backward, therefore 3 Beseeches.
he uses entreaty upon entreaty, as if he were impatient of a denial: Out of
what rock was man hewn? God himself comes a wooing, and we have the face to
give him a repulse: and what does he woo for? but our hearts, which are his
already by every kind of right and title: Prove. 23. 26. My son, give me thy
heart. God is pleased to call that a gift, which is indeed a debt: Though the
heart be due, yet God will put this honor upon the creatures, to receive it
from them in the way of a gift: It Is but equity to give to God the things that
are Gods. Look upon the heart, see if any could make it, but God himself; Whose
image and superscription does it bear? Will thou refuse to surrender up to God
his right? God has made it, bought it, and yet he beggeth it. When thou have
been as earnest with God, and asked any thing regularly of him, did he deny
thee? It Is no benefit to him; he desires the heart of the creature, not that
he may be happy, but that he may be liberal; he would have thy heart that he
may make it bette* How easily do we give up our affections to any thing but
God, who has the best title to them? If the World or Satan knocks, we open
presently; We are as wax to Satan, and as stone to God; exorable and easy to
be entreated by any carnal motion: as some hard stones cannot be wrought upon
but by their own dust; so men are facile only to their corruptions, to their
own lusts, not to the motions of Gods Spirit.

Fourthly, The nature of Love shows that it is fit for nothing Fourth
Argument, The Nature of Love shows that we should love God.
but God: He has given us this faculty and disposition, that we may close with
himself. He that looks upon an ax will say 'twas made to cut; and he that
looks on love will say 'twas made for God. What is the genius and disposition
of Love? Love is nothing but an earnest bent and strong motion See
Neir^nbergius de ingenio amoris.
of the Soul to what is good for us: Every man has an inclination in his
nature to what he conceives to be good, Psalm. 4. 9. and grace does only direct
and set it right: All the difference between Nature and Grace is in fixing the
chiefest good and the utmost end: One great blessing of the Covenant is a new
heart, that is, a new and right placing of our affections. Well then, God is
summum bonum, the chiefest Good; even Nature cannot be satisfied without him,
but Grace finds all contentment in him: If there be any good in the
creatures, it is originally in him; He is the Fountain of living waters, where
comforts are sweetest and freest. The heart hunteth after good among the
creatures, which is but an image and ray of that perfection which is in God;
and who would leave the substance to follow the shadow? and prize the picture
to the disdain of the person whom it represents? 'Twere easy to prove that God
is the only, proper, eternal, alsufficient Good of the Soul: and if the heart
were not perverted and biased with carnal desires to other objects, it would
directly move to God, as all things do to their center; I say, were it not for
sin, we should no more need be pressed to love God, then to love our selves:
There need no great motives to press us to love our selves, Nature is prone
enough of its own accord; and if Nature had remained in that purity wherein it
was created, it would move to God of its own accord; as all things move to
their center, and there they rest. Now God is the Center of the Soul: The Souls
good is not honors, pleasures, profits: the Soul is a spirit, and must have a
spiritual good; it is immortal, and it must have an eternal good. By experience
we find that our affections are never in their due posture, but are like
members out of joint (or the arms when they hang backward) when they are not
fixed upon God; therefore there is a Domini s^cist^^os propter to and
irrequietum est co^ ^^s^^um d^ne^ perve^iat ad t^. Aug.
restlessness and dissatisfaction in the Soul: We Acts 17. 26, 27.
grope and feel about for happiness, and cannot find it; like Noah's Dove, we
hover up and down, and find no place whereon the sole of our foot should rest.
Well then, if God be the only alsufficient Good of the Soul, why do not we love
him more? If he be the Center of the Soul, why do not we move directly thither?
It Is a shame that a stone should be carried with greater force to its center,
then we to God; by its natural course it falls downward, and breaks all
things in the way, yea though it self be broken in pieces: But alas, how little
do we break through impediments to go to God? 'Twere a miracle to see a stone
stoped in the air by a feather: But now every vain thing keeps us off, and
intercepts our affections; sin has given us another center, and after grace
received we hang too much that way. Again, As love is for Good, so it is for one
Object; like a Pyramide, it ends in a point; affection is weakened by
dispersion, as a River by being turned into many channels: In conjugal love
(where friendship is to the height) there is but one that can share in it,
that is the Law of Nature; Mal. 2. 15. Did he not make one? yet he had the
residue of spirit: the meaning is, that God made but one man for one woman,
though he had spirit enough to make more; 'twas not out of defect of power, but
wise choice, that their affections to one another might be the stronger, which
otherwise would be weakened; as they are in the brutes scattered promiscuously
to several objects: so the true object of love is one God; he is loved for
himself, and other things for his sake. Once more, The force and vehemence of
love shows that it was made for God; Love is the vigorous bent of the Soul,
and full of heights and excesses, which if diverted to other objects, would
make us guilty of Idolatry, we should place them in the room of God: Still we
find; that men are besorted with what they love; as Sampson was led about like
a child by Da^ilah: all conveniences of life, pleasures, profits, are contemned
for the enjoyment of the thing beloved: Now these are heights proper to the
Divinity, to the infinite Majesty of God; To whom else is this vehemence and
this selfdenyal due? If we lavish it upon the creatures, we make gods of them;
and therefore covetousness is called Idolatry, Ephesians. 5. 3. and the Sensualist
is said to make his belly his god, Phil. 3. 19. There is such an excess, such a
doting in love, that if we be not careful in fixing it, before we are aware we
run into practical Idolatry and practical Atheism. There is an Atheism in the
heart, as well as in the judgment: Atheism in the judgment, is when we are not
convinced of the Being of God; In the heart, when our affections are not set in
God: this is more incurable, because the dogmatical Atheist may be convinced by
reason, but the practical Atheist can only be reformed by grace. Thus the
Nature of Love shows it.

Fifthly, The Nature of the Saints shows it; the new 5 Argument, from the
nature and disposition of the San^s.
nature has new affections; it bewrays it self by the new heart, as well as
by the renewed mind, Romans 12. 2. There are not only new thoughts, but new
desires and new delights; desires after God, and a delight in God, as the
fountain of Holiness. When we come to God at first, we love him out of
spiritual interest, for ease and comfort, and the benefit we gain by him;
Christ allows it, Come to me and I will give you ease, Mat. 11. 28. When fire
is first kindled, there is as much sin^ke as flame, but afterward it burns
brighter and brighter by degrees: A fountain as soon as dug runs muddy at
first, but afterward the stream grows more pure and clear. So does the love
of the Saints; at first it is but a love of interest, but by acquaintance we
love him out of a principle of the new nature, for his Holiness and Excellency,
because that which is in us in part, is in God by way of eminency and
perfection. Certainly likeness must needs beget love, and the Saints being
conformed to God, delight in him; so that then their love flows not so much
from profit and interest, as grace: yea at length out of a vehement complacency
of the new nature they love holiness above happiness or spiritual interest; and
S^ sic pecc^^i pudorem illi^ i^ferni horr^ren, etc. Anse^^r.
Hell is not so bad as sin in their account: there cannot be a worse Hell to
them then unkindness to God, or grieving his Spirit; and Heaven is amiable for
Gods sake, because he is loved there and enjoyed there; there are none of Gods
enemies in Heaven, and there they shall serve him and cleave to him without
weariness and wandering. Well then, There is such a disposition Psalm. 31. 23.
in the Saints to love God, which anseth not only from hope, because of the
great benefit which we expect from him; nor only from gratitude, or the sense
of his love already showed; but from an inclination of the now nature, and that
sympathy and Eadem velle and no^^^ ea demum vera est amicitia. Salust.
likeness that is between us, because we Prove. 8. 13. Rev. 2. 6.
hate what he hates, and love what he loves; and because God is the original
Fountain and Samplar of Holiness.

Well then, Saints mind your work; Do you indeed love God? Christ puts Peter to
the question thrice, John 21. A deceitful heart is apt to abuse you: Ask again
and again, Do I indeed love God? Evidences are these. Evidences of our love to
God. ^ Evidence, God will be loved alone.


1. If you love God, he will be loved al ne; those that do not give all to God,
give nothing; he will have the whole heart: If there were another God, we might
have some excuse for our reservations; but since there is but one God, he must
have all, for he does not love inmates. When the Harbengers take up an house
for a Prince, they turn out all; none must remain there, that there may be room
for his greatness: So all must avoid, that God may have the sole possession of
our hearts. The Devil that has no right to any thing would have a part, for by
that means he knows the whole will fall to him; Conscience will not let him
have all, and therefore he would have a part to keep possession: as Pharaoh
stood hulking with Moses and Aaron, if not the Israelites, then their little
ones; if not their little ones, then their herds; if not their herds, then
their flocks: but Moses tells him there was not an hoof to be left. So Satan,
if he cannot have the outward man, yet he would have the heart; if there be not
room enough in the heart for every lust, then he craveth indulgence in some
things that are less odious and distastful; if Conscience will not allow
drunkenness, yet a little worldliness is pleaded for as no great matter: But
the love of God cannot be in that heart, where the world reigne^th. Dagon and
the Ark could not abide in the same Temple; neither can the heart be divided
between God and Mammon. All men must have some Religion to mask their pleasures
and carnal practices, that they may be favorable to their lusts and interests
with less remorse; and usually they order the matter so, that Christ shall have
their Consciences, and the world their hearts and affections: But alas, they do
not consider that God is jealous of a Rival; when he comes into the heart, he
will have the room empty. It Is true, we may love other things in subordination
to God, but not in competition with God, that is, when we love God and other
things for Gods sake, in God and for God. When a Commander has taken a strong
Castle, and placed a Garrison in it, he suffers none to enter but those of his
own side, keeping the gate shut to his enemies; So we must open the heart to
none but God, and those that are of Gods party and side, keeping the gate shut
to others: We may love the creatures as they are of Gods side, as they draw our
hearts more to God, or engage us to be more cheerful in service, or give us
greater advantages of doing good; Of what party are they Bring nothing into thy
heart, and allow nothing there, that is contrary to God. When Sarah saw Ishmael
scoffing at Isaac, she thrust him out of doors: So when riches, and honor, and
the love of the world upbraid you with your love to God, as if you were a fool
to stand so nicely upon terms of Conscience, etc. when they incroach and allow
Christ no room but in the Conscience, it is time to thrust them out of doors,
that the Lord alone may have the pre-eminence in our Souls.

2. This love must be demonstrated by solid Effects, such 2 Evidence, The
Effects of Love. 1 Hatred of sin.
as are;

1. An hatred of sin; Psalm. 97. 10. Ye that l^ve the Lord hate an evil: With
love to the chiefest good, there will be an hatred of the chiefest evil.
Friends have common loves (as I said) and common aversations: Upon every carnal
motion does thy heart recoyl upon thee, and say, How can I do this wick dness,
and sin against God? Genesis 39. 9. or else, Is this thy kindness to thy friend?
or after such a deliverance as this, etc. Ezra 9. 13. Love to God will be
interposing and crossing every carnal motion.

2. By a delight in obedience: 1 John 5. 3. This is love, 2* Delight in
obedience.
that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous. Nothing
is diffcult and tedious to him that has any affection to his work. As the
Prophet cured the bitterness of the wild goards by casting in meal; so mingle
but a little love with your work, and the bitterness is gone. Sechem yeildeth
to be circumcised for Dinah's sake, because he loved her; and Jacob endured his
seven years service for Rachels sake: so will love make us obey God cheerfully
in things contrary to our natural inclination. Love and labor are often
coupled in 1 These. 1. 3. Heb* 6. 10
Scripture; and those that left their first works, had lost their first love,
Rev. 2. 4, 5.

3. Delight in Gods presence, and grief for his absence; or 3. Delight in Gods
presence and grief for his absen^^.
an holy sensibleness both of his accesses and recesses, to and from the Soul:
Can a man love God, and be content without him? If you lose but a ring which
you affect, how are you troubled till it be found again! Ye have taken away my
gods (says he,) and do you ask, What aileth thee? Judge. 18. 24. So when God is
withdrawn, all visits of love and influences of grace are suspended, and they
have no communion with him in their duties, should they not mourn? See Mat. 9.
15. Is spiritual love without all kind of passion? or are they Christians that
are stupid and insensate, and never take notice of Gods coming and going?

These are the Evidences; I shall only now suggest two Helps to keep up and
increase this love to God, and I have Helps.
done with this Argument.

1. Prize nothing that comes from God, unless thou can see his love in it.
God gives many gifts to wicked men, but he does not give them his love: The
possession of all things will do us no good, unless we have God himself; other
mercies may be salted with a curse. Gods children are not satisfied till they
can see him and enjoy him in every comfort and mercy. Esau was reconciled to
Jacob, and therefore Jacob says, Genesis 33. 10. I have seen thy face as the face
of God; 'Twas a token and pledge of the gracious face of God smiling on him.
Hezekiah was delivered out of a sickness, and then he does not say, Thou have
delivered me from the grave; but, Thou have loved me from the grave, Isai. 38.
17.

2. Prize nothing that thou return to God, unless there be love in it. We
accept a small gift where the party loves, and otherwise the greatest is
refused: If I give my body to be burned, and have not love, etc. 1 Cor. 13. 1.
Love is an act of grace by it self; other duties are not acts of grace, unless
they come from love; as alms, fasting, prayer, Martyrdom, etc. they are all
nothing; (...) (says the Apostle) I am not only little, but nothing. On the
other side, small things are made great by love; as a cup of cold water, a poor
woman's mite, they are accepted as coming from love.

So much for the matter of the Prayer; We come now to the manner or degree of
enjoyment, [ Be multiplied:] From whence note, That we should not seek grace at
the hands of God, but the increase and multiplication of it. In Doct.
managing this Point, I shall first give you Reasons to press you to look after
growth in grace: Secondly, I shall give you some Observations concerning it;
and so thirdly, Come to some Application.

First, The Reasons are these. 1. Where there is life 1. Reasons or Motives.
there will be growth; and if grace be true, it will surely increase. A painted
flower keeps always at the same pitch and stature; the Artist may bestow
beauty upon it, but he cannot bestow life: A painted child will be as little
ten years hence as it is now. So a pretense of Religion always keeps at the
same stay; yea when their first heats are spent, they are fearfully blasted:
But now they that have true grace are compared to a living plant, which
increases in bulk and stature, Psalm 92. 12, 13. and to a living child, which
grows by receiving kindly nourishment, 1 Pet. 2. 2. Therefore it is not enough
to get peace and love, but we must get them multiplied.

2. If we do not grow, we go backward, Heb. 6. compare the first with the
fourth verse, Let us go on to perfection; and then presently he treats of
Apostasy: We cannot keep that which we have received, if we do not labor to
increase it. They that row against the stream, had need ply the oar, lest the
force of the waters carry them backward; or as he that goes up a sandy hill
sinketh down if he do not go forward, Mat. 25. He that would not improve his
talent lost it: So here, we waste and consume what we have, if we do not
improve it. It Is dangerous to rest satisfied, and never go further; there is no
stay in Religion: all the Angels in Jacobs ladder were either ascending or
descending, continually in motion: There are no stinted trees in Christ's
garden; if they leave off to grow, they prove doated or rotten trees. An active
nature, such as man's is, mvst either grow worse or better; therefore we should
be as careful after the increase of grace, as we would be cautious of the loss
of grace.

3. It Is an ill sign to be contented with a little grace: Minime bonus est qui
mel^^r fieri no^ vul^. Bernar^us.
He was never good, that does not desire to grow better: Spiritual things do
not cloy in the enjoyment; He that has once tasted the sweetness of grace,
has arguments enough to make him seek further, and desire more grace: every
degree of holiness is as desirable as the first; therefore there can be no
true holiness without a desire of perfect holiness: God gives us a taste to
this end and purpose, that we may long for a fuller draught; as the clusters of
Canaan brought to Israel in the wilderness made them put on for the Country:
They are Hypocrites, and sure to be Apostates, that are contented with a taste,
Heb. 6.

4. Because we cannot have too much grace: there is no nimium in the internals
of Religion; you cannot have too much knowledge, too much love of God, too much
of the fear of God. In the outward part there may be too much done, and then it
proves will worship and superstition: The Apostle says, 2 Pet. 1. 11. That we
must give diligence, that an abundant entrance may be ministered to us into the
everlasting Kingdom of God and our Savior Jesus Christ. Some are Ephesians 2. 13.
afar off from the Kingdom of God, as persons ignorant and touched with no care
of Religion: Mat 12 34. Acts 26. 28.
Some come near, but never enter, as semi-converts and men of a blameless life;
these cheapen, but do not buy, and go through with the bargain: others enter,
but with greater difficulty, are scarcely saved, 1 Pet. 4. 18. saved as by
fire, 1 Cor. 3. 13. they make an hardshift to go to Heaven, and have only grace
enough to keep body and soul together (as we say) not a jot to spare: Others
enter with full sails, or as it is said, they have an abundant entrance
ministered to them, and yet all is but little enough; spiritual things cannot
exceed measure. But you will say, It Is said, Eccles. 7. 16. Be not righteous
over much. I answer, Either it is meant of an opinionative righteousness, be not
too righteous in thine own conceit; or rather of an indiscreet heat, or a rigid
and sullen severity, without any temper of wisdom and mod ration; otherwise in
real holiness there can never be enough.

5. God has provided for them that grow in grace a more ample reward;
according to our measures of grace, so will our measures of glory be; for they
that have most grace are vessels of a larger capacity, others are filled
according to their size: See S^a^^e^m. Dub. Evang. par^o 31. D^b 135. and alios
passin.
It Is indeed a question whether there be degrees of glory yea or no; But I
suppose it may easily be determined, He that sows sparingly shall reap
sparingly, whereas others have their bosoms full of sheaves: if a man with a
little grace should get to Heaven, yet he hinders his own preferment; Who
would have a thin crop, and a lean harvest?

6. It suiteth with our present state; here we are in a state of progress and
growth, not of rest and perfection: Grace is not given out at once, but by
degrees: Christ says, Joh. 17. 26. I have declared thy Name, and will declare
it: and Joh. 1. 50. Beleevest thou? thou shall see greater things then these;
There is more to come, therefore let us not rest in our first experiences: Paul
says, I have not attained, Phil. 3. When grace is wrought, yet there is
something lacking: He is a foolish builder that would rest in the middle of his
work; and because the foundation is laid, is careless of the superstructure.
The state of the Saints is expressed by a growing light, Prove. 4. 18. As long
as there is want, there should be growth; see 1 These. 4. 1.

7. Seeking the increase and multiplication of spiritual gifts, suiteth best
with the bounty and munificence of God. The Father, Son, and Holy Spirit have
rich grace for us; and we are most welcome, when we seek for most plenty: God
the Father is represented as rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. Romans 10. 12. We can
never exhaust the Treasures of Grace, and impoverish the Exchequer of Heaven:
So Christ has a rich and full merit, 2 Cor. 8. 9. to make us rich, etc. God
the Son aimed at it in all his sufferings and condescentions, that he might
make a large purchase for us, and we might not be straitened in grace. The
Spirit of God is poured out (...), richly, Tit. 3.6. There is mercy enough in
God the Father, merit enough in God the Son, efficacy enough in God the Spirit:
God is not wanting, if we be not wanting to our selves. If a mighty King should
open his Treasure, and bid men come and bring their bags, and take as much as
they would; do you think they would neglect this occasion of gain? surely no;
they would run and fetch bag after bag, and never cease. Thus does the Lord do
in the Covenant of Grace; you will rather want vessels then treasure.

8. It Is a necessary piece of gratitude: we would have mercy to be multiplied,
and therefore we should take care that Peace and Love be multiplied also, we
would have God add to our blessings, and therefore we should add to our graces;
see 2 Pet. 1. 5. When we have food we would have clothing, and when we have
clothing we would have house and harbor, and when we have all these things,
we would have them in greater proportion; the like care should we show in
gracious enjoyments; When we have knowledge, we should add temperance, and when
we have temperance, we should add patience, etc.

9. We may learn of our Lord Jesus to whom we must be conformed in all things,
Luc. 2.40. He grew in wisdom and stature: the meaning is his humane capacity
was enlarged by degrees according to his progress in age and strength, for in
all things he was l^ke us except sin, and our reason is ripned and perfected
together with our age.

10. We may learn of worldly men, Who Isay 5. ^.
join house to house, and field to field, and are never satisfied: So there is
an holy covetousness in spiritual things when we join Romans 1. 17
faith to faith, and obedience to obedience, one degree to another: our
Blessings are better, and the chiefest good should not be followed with a
slacker hand; it is our happiness to enjoy the infinite God, and therefore we
should not set a stint and limit to our desires: With what arts and methods of
increase does a covetous man seek to advance himself? he lives more by hope
then by memory, and what he has seems nothing to what he expects: So
should we Phil. 3. 14
forget the things that are behind, and reach forth to the things that are
before us: A covetous man seems the poorer, the more he has gotten: so
should we grow humble with every enjoyment, it is a good degree of grace to see
how much we want grace: A covetous man makes it the main work and business of
his life to increase his estate; He goes to ^bed late, rises early* eats
the bread of sorrows, and all for a little ^elf, the strength of lust should
shame us, should not we make Religion the business of our lives, and our great
employment? shall we be as insatiable as the grave to the world, when a little
grave serves the turn?

Secondly, the next thing which I am to do is to give you 2. Obser.
some observations concerning growth in grace, they are these: 1. To discern
growth, there is required some time, a total change which is far more sensible
than growth, that may be in a^ instant, then a sinner, now a Saint; but there
must be a competent time to judge of our growth, we cannot discern it by single
acts so much as by the great^r portions of our lives. As^nden^o ^on volando
ascinditur summi^as scalae Bernard.
We cannot so easily find out how we grow by every Sermon, as by comparing our
past estate with our present: we do not fly to the the top of Jacobs ladder,
but go up step by step, it is a work of time and so we may judge of our not
growing, if after a long time we are where we were, under the power of the same
prejudices, or the same doubts, or the same lusts still, see Heb. 5. 12.

Secondly, In the growing of Saints there is much difference, all the plants in
Christ's garden are not of a like height and stature, some that are more
publicly useful have theiy five talents, others but two; some thrive more and
grow of a sudden, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 3. Your faith grew exceedingly, others are weak
and slow, and yet they are fruitful: We all grow according to the measure of a
part, Ephesians. 4. That is, according to the rate of that part which we sustain in
the body, a finger grows not to the quantity of an arm, they all grow, but
the growth of all is not equal.

Thirdly, Growth in grace is always accompanied with growth in knowledge, 2
Pet. 3. 18. But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, etc. Plants that grow out of the Sun send up a longer stalk,
but the fruit is worse: some Christians pitch all their care upon the growth of
love, and take no pains to grow in knowledge; but this is not right, we should
always follow on to know the Lord, Hosea 6. 3. We read that Christ grew in
knowledge, we do not read that he grew in grace: Gods choysest saints are
always bettering their notions of God; Moses his first request was Tell me thy
name, Exodus.4. and afterward, show me thy glory, Exodus 33. Our fairest portion
in Heaven is the satisfaction of the understanding with the knowledge of God:
therefore if we would have grace multiplied, it must be through the knowledge
of God, 2 Pet. 1. 2. the more shine, the more warmth.

Fourthly, Growth of knowledge in the growing and increase, is less sensible
then the growth of grace, but afterward more sensible; as a Plant increases in
length and stature, though we do not see the progress, but afterward we know
that it has grown: growth in grace is always cum lucta, with many assaults,
and so more sensible, whereas the work upon the understanding, is more still
and silent; draw away the curtain and the light comes in without any more
stir, our ignorance vanishes silently and without such strife as goes to
the taming of carnal affections: but afterward it is more sensible, for we have
not always a spiritual feeling, but the effects of knowledge are standing and
permanent, Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were darkness. but now are light in the Lord.

Fifthly, Progress in knowledge is rather in degrees, than in parts and
matters known: I mean it consists not so much in knowing new truths, as in a
greater proportion of light; yet I say it is rather not altogether, for a man
may walk in present practices which future light may disprove and retract, but
usually the increase of a Christian is rather in the measure of knowledge, than
in knowing new things, the light shines more and more, Prove. 4. I know God
more, Christ more, the vanity of the world, more, the odiousness of sin: more,
that is more practically, and in another manner then I did before, old
Principles are improved and perfected: I speak this because of the danger to
which men expose themselves by expecting new light, keeping the soul from an
establishment in present Principles, and looking for new truths to be revealed
to them.

6^y, Of all Graces we need most to grow in faith, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 10. I desire to
see you that I may perfect that which is lacking in your faith. Luke 17. 5.
Lord increase our faith, and Mark 9. 24. Lord I believe, help my unbelief:
Faith is most defective, our assent is tremulous, our affiance weak; and faith
is most assaulted. All the temptations of Satan tend to weaken your faith: and
all other Graces depend upon the increase of Faith.

7l^, Growth in parts and gifts must heedfully be distinguished from growth in
Grace: many may grow in parts, that go back in Grace, you can only discern a
mere growth in parts and gifts by pride and self ends; knowledge puffs up: 1
Cor. 8. 2. When men grow in abilities and grow more proud and carnal, it is a
sad symptom.

8ly, The infallible signs of growth in Grace are three. When we grow more
spiritual, more solid, more humble.

1. More spiritual, the growth of wicked men is in spiritual wickedness less
debauched, but more malicious; so will our growth in grace be discerned by our
spirituality in our aims, when our ends are more elevated to Gods glory, etc.
In our grounds and principles, as when we resist sin out of love to God: and as
it is contrary to his purity and holiness, and when we are carried out against
inward corruptions, such as the world does not take notice off; not only
against sins, but lusts and thoughts, for that argues more light and more
love, so when we regard the spirituality of duties, serving the Lord in the
spirit: so when we relish the more spiritual part of the Word, plain and
solid preaching, rather then such as is garish and full of the pomp of words, 1
Cor. 2. 6. We speak wisdom among those that are perfect, the trappings of an
ordinance are baits to take the more carnal sort of hearers; See Plutarch in
hi^ Treatise (...).
Plutarch in his Treatise of growth in moral virtue, wherein are many notable
things applicable to growth in Grace; says, that a man that has made some
progress in virtue is like a Physician, that coming into a Garden he does not
consider flowers for their beauty as gallants do, but for their use and virtue
in medicine; So he does not consider speech for its fineness but fitness and
seasonableness to present use; the same holds good also in growth in grace,
the more we grow the more we regard the spiritual part of the Word and such as
is of a practical use and concernment.

2. More solid and judicious, Phil. 1. 9. I pray God your love may abound more
and more in all judgment there is a 1 Cor. 13. 11.
childishness in religion as well as nature, when we are led altogether by
fancy and affection, but afterward we grow more prudent, sober and solid:
Growth then is not to be measured by intenseness and vigor of affection that
goes and comes, and in the infancy of Grace our affections are most warm and
pregnant: Young men if they know their hearts have cause to complain of
Hypocrisy, as old men of deadness. Mr. Thomas Goodwin^, in a Treatise of
growth in grace.
A young tree may have more leaves and bloss^mes, but an old tree is more
deeply rooted, and young christians seem altogether to be made up of will and
affections, and ferverous motions, but have less of judgment and solidity,
many times of sincerity; as men in a deep thirst take down what is offered to
them to drink before they discern the taste of it, so acts of will outstart the
understanding; but in old men nature being spent, and through long acquaintance
with Religion, there are not such quick and lively motions; the one are sick of
love, have more qualms and agonies, the other are more rooted in love, and grow
more firm, constant, solid, rational and wise, in ordering the spiritual life.

3. More humble, as it is a good progress in learning to know our ignorance,
they that have but a smattering are most conceited. Plutarch in the fore
mentioned Treatise, tells us of the saying of (...). Plutarchus ubi supra.
Menedemus, that those that went to study at Athens at first seemed to
themselves to be wise, afterward, only lovers of wisdom, then Orators such
as could speak of wisdom, cast off all and knowing nothing with the increase
of learning, still laying aside their pride and arrogance: so it is with those
that grow in grace, by acquaintance with God, light is increased and made more
reflexive, and they are more sensible of their obligations to God, and so are
more tender, and by long experience are better acquainted with their own
hearts; and that's the reason why we have such humble acknowledgements from
them; Paul a sanctified vessel, yet calls himself chiefest of sinners, 1 Timothy
1. 15. and less than the least of the Saints, Ephesians. 3. 8. And Agur Prove. 30. 2.
3. Surely I am more brutish than any man, I have not the understanding of a
man, I have neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the Holy: So if
you did overhear the secret confessions of the Saints to God, you would think
them the vilest persons in the world, for so they are in their own sense and
representations to God.

Ninthly, The lowest evidences of growth in grace are longing for food; and
being humble for want of growth: for the first, Longing for food, see 1 Pet. 2.
2. life has a nutritive appetite joined with it, when that is strong it is a
sign the soul is healthy, it will grow: as we say of children that take the dug
kindly, they will thrive and do well enough. For the second, humble for want of
growth, see Mark 9. 24. help my unbelief: it is a sign you mind the work, and
are sensible of spiritual defects, which is a great advantage.

Tenthly, Growth is the special fruit of the divine grace, God gives the
increase, 1 Cor. 3. 6. Plants thrive better by the deaw of Heaven, then when
they are watered by hand: Grace that is necessary to every action is much more
necessary to every degree; in the Text the Apostle does not exhort but pray,
mercy peace and love be multiplied, our endeavors are necessary. As ploughing
and digging are necessary, but the Blessing comes from above. These are the
observations, let us now apply all. Use 1.


First let us be earnest with God for this increase, he has the riches of
Glory, Ephesians. 3. 16. which we cannot exhaust. You honor God when you go for
more, you want more and he can give more; when men are contented with a little,
it is a sign either of hardness of heart, they are not sensible of their wants
or of unbelief, as if God had no higher and better things to give us.

It shows us how far they are from being Christians, that care not for the
least degree of Grace, that do not spend a thought that way, these are far
from the Kingdom of God. Use 2.


Secondly, That are fallen back and have lost the savouriness of their spirits,
and their delight in communion with God; time was when they could not let a day
pass without a duty, nor a duty pass without some sensible experience of God,
but now can spend whole days and weeks and never give God a visit; time was
when there could not a carnal motion arise, but they were up in arms against
it; but now their hearts swarm with vain thoughts, and they can swallow gross
sins without remorse: improvident mispence of time was once a great burden, but
they have lost their tenderness and can spend a Sabbath unprofitably, and find
no regrete: their vain thoughts were wont to trouble them; but now not their
carnal practices, duty was once sweet, but now their greatest bondage:
certainly the candle of the Lord does not shine upon them as it did in the
months that are past.

Thirdly, Those that are at a stay had need look to themselves; stinted trees
cumber the ground, and they that go on in a dead powerless course, do hurt
rather then good; lukewarm profession is but the picture of Religion, and
painted things do not grow, but keep at the same pitch. If a man were a
Christian in good earnest, could he be contented with the present weakness of
his faith, imperfection of his knowledge, with this creeping cold way of
obedience?

VERSE III. Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write to you, of the common
salvation, it was needful for me to write to you and exhort you, that ye
should earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered to the Saints.
THe Apostle having dispatched the salutation, makes way for the matter of the
Epistle; this Verse is the Preface to the whole, wherein he proposes two
things:

1. The occasion of his writing. 2. The matter and drift of it.
1. The occasion of writing this Epistle, which was double,

1. His earnestness in promoting their good; Beloved, when I gave diligence to
write to you of the common salvation.

2. The urgencie of the present necessity, [It was needful for me to write
unto you and exhort you.]

In assigning his earnestness and zeal for their good, you may take notice of
three things, which I shall explain in their order.

1. A compellation of their persons, (...) [ Beloved;] a term usual in the
Apostles writings, the same word is used, 1 Pet. 2. 11. and there translated,
Dearly beloved: it notes not only that affection which by the law of nature
we owe to one another, Romans 13. 8. nor that love which by the law of bounty and
kindness we are bound to render to them that love us, Matthew. 5. 46. but that
singular love which we owe to them that are with us in Christ, which is always
expressed by (...) in Scripture, and we sometimes translate it [ Charity] often
[ Love,] the Rhemists always [ Charity;] whose tenderness in this point (as
one observes) is not altogether to be disallowed, lest it be confounded with
common and impure love expressed by (...), and charity] being a Church Word, is
wholly free from such indifferency and equivocation: So here instead of [
beloved] they render [my dearest] which fitly notes the tenderness* and bowels
that are in Christian affection.

From this compellation observe, That Christians should Doct.
be to each other as beloved; such dearness and entireness of affection should
pass between them, that they may entitle one another to their bowels, and
choiser respects.

Reasons are these. 1. None can have better grounds to love 1 Reason.
another, they are members of the same body, 1 Cor. 12. Brothers born of the
same womb, living in the same family, have defaced all the feelings of Nature,
and been divided in interest and affection; but surely no such Schism can
happen in the same body, who would use an arm to cut off a leg, or an hand to
scratch out his eyes, members care for one another. Now this is the relation
which Christ has left us, he has* not only called us into a family, but into
a body, Col. 3. 15 See the same pressed together with many other uniting
considerations, Ephesians. 4. 4. 5. 6. verses, There is one Body, one Spirit, even as
ye are called in one hope of your calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,
one God, and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.
Let us a little go over that place: The first engagement is [one Body] they are
Wennes, and monstrous excrescencies, not members, that suck all the nourishment
to themselves. Again, one member lacking, or out of joint, is a pain and
deformity to the whole. The next engagement is [one Spirit] which in all other
relations can only be had in fancy and imagination; friends speak as if they
lived by one common soul, but here it is so really, all Believers have the same
Spirit; I say in other relations (even in the nearest) every one is acted by
his own soul, but here by one Spirit we are Baptized into one Body, 1 Cor. 12.
13. What should divide us when we have the same Spirit? We have not all the
same measures, and that occasioneth some difference; as the Soul shows it is
self in some members more than in other, though it acts all, but the Spirit
is the same. The next consideration is [one Hope] Shall not the same earth
contain those, that expect to live in the same heaven? Luther and Zuinglius,
Cranmer and Hooper, Ridley and Saunders, shall all accord for ever in heaven;
and certainly it is through the relics of the flesh that they cannot accord
here: In other relations there may be divisions, because they have different
hopes, and it may be hopes that entrench and encroach upon the good of each
other; but here you have one heaven, and one hope, it is all for you; there may
be a difference in the degree of glory, but none to provoke pride, or feed
envy: How will bitter and keen Spirits look upon each other, when they meet in
glory? It follows [one Lord] We are in the same family, how will you look God
in the face if you fall, a smiting your fellow servants? Matthew. 24. 45. Then
[one Faith] There may be different apprehensions, and every one may abound in
his own sense in circumstances, but the Faith is the same, they agree in the
same essentials and substantials of Religion: The Enemies of the Church, though
divided in interests and opinions, yet because they agree in one common hatred
of the Saints, can hold together, Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalee, and the men of
Tire, did all conspire against Israel, Psa. 83. Like Sampsons Foxes, though
their faces looked several ways, yet were tied to one another by their tails,
and ran together to burn up the Cornfields, and shall not the people of God
agree, who all profess one and the same Faith? The next consideration is [one
Baptism] that is one badg of profession, 'twas a cause of difference among
Jacobs Sons, that one had a Coat of diverse colors, a special badg of
affection: Consider you are all brought in by the Baptism of Water, and the use
of ordinary means, none have a special and privilegiate Call from heaven above
the rest of their Brethren. Lastly, it follows [ one God, and Father of all]
You all worship the same God, there is nothing divides more than different
objects of Worship: Summus ut^iusq ind^ suror^^ul^o quod numina vi^inorum o^it
u t^^q* locus juv^nali.
When one scorneth what another ador^eth, it is extremely provoking; 'twas the
Plea used to Joseph, Genesis 50. Pardon the trespass of the servants of thy
Fathers God. Thus you see that we have be^ter grounds of love then others have.

2. None can have higher motives, as the love of Christ, 2 Reason.
Ephesians. 5. 2. walk in love, as Christ has also loved us; the Pagan world was
never acquainted with such a motive: Now none are affected and melted with the
love of Christ, but those that have an interest in it; therefore Christ
expects more love from Christians, than from others. Matthew. 4. 46. If ye love
them that love you, what reward shall ye have, do not even the Publicans the
same? The Publicans were accounted the most vile and unworthy men in that Age;
but a Publican would love those of his own party; therefore a Christian that is
acquainted with Christ's love to strangers, to Enemies, should manage his
affections with more excellency and pureness; the world is not acquainted with
the love of Christ, and therefore only loves its own, but we are acquainted
with it, and therefore should love others. See John 13. 34. See that ye love
one another, as I have loved you. Jesus Christ came from heaven, not only to
repair and preserve the notions of the Godhead by the greatness of his
sufferings, but to propound to us a more exact pattern of charity, and to
elevate duty between man and man.

3. None have a greater charge, Christ calls it his New 3 Reason.
Commandment, John. 13. 34. A new Commandment give I unto you, that ye love
one another: How new, since 'twas as old as the Moral Law, or Law of Nature? I
answer, it is called n^w, because excellent, as a new Song, etc. or rather
because solemnly and specially renewed by him, and commended to their care, as
new things and new Laws are, much esteemed and prized, or enforced by a new
reason and example his own death. So 1 John 3. 23. (...), This is the
Commandment, that we should believe in him whom he has sent, and love one
another as he gave Commandment: It Is made equal with Faith, all the Scriptures
aim at Faith and Love, 'twas Christ's dying charge, the great charge which he
left at his death, John 15. 17. These things I command you that ye love one
another: Speeches of dying men are received with most veneration and reverence,
especially the charge of dying friends, the Brethren of Joseph fearing lest he
should remember the injuries formerly done to him, they use this place, Thy
father did command us before he died, saying, etc. Genesis 50. 16. Let us fulfill
the will of the dead: When Christ took leave of his Disciples, he left this as
his last charge, think of it when thou art bent to quarrel, or to neglect
others: Shall I slight his last Commandment, his dying charge? It Is made the
Character of Christ's Disciples, Hereby shall all men know that ye are my
Disciples, if ye love one another; it is as much as your Discipleship, etc. It
serves to press you to 1 Use.
this amity and love; why should those that are to meet in the same heaven, be
of such an estranged heart to each other? certainly it comes from evil. In two
cases Gods people can agree well enough, in glory and in misery, in a Prison,
as Ridley and Hooper did, and in heaven as all do, in heaven where there is no
sin, and in a Prison where lusts lie low, and are under restraint: Oh then
labor for love and meekness, to which end take a few directions. 1. Honor the
least of Christ's where ever you find it, if any should despise others for their
meanness, it would be more proper to God to do so, than for any other, because
they are most distant from his perfection, but he will not despise smoking
Flax, Mat. 11. You do not know what a spark of glory and of the Divine Nature
may lie hid under Smoke, and a covert of darkness; Christ loved the young man
that had but some accomplishments of nature in him* Mark 1021. Jesus loved him,
much more should you, when you find any weak appearances of Christ, though they
do not come up to your measures. 2. Let not difference in opinion divide you;
'twere to be wished that Believers were of one heart, and of one way, that they
all thought and spoke the same thing, yet if they differ, cherish them for what
of God is in them: in a great Organ the Pipes are of a different size, which
makes the harmony and melody the sweeter; Whereunto we have attained, let us
walk by the same rule, and mind the same thing, Phil. 3. 16. Many men love to
impropriate Religion, as if there were nothing of God to be found but in their
own sphere; it is natural to a man to do so, we would be singular, and ingross
all repute of pirty, Or^hodoxy, and right worship to our selves. 3. Take heed
of letting love degenerate into compliance, there is the Ephesians. 4. 3.
Bond of the Spirit, and there is an 2 Cor. 6^ 14.
unequal yoke, there are Wards of love, and the Chain of Antichristian
interests, and you must be careful to make distinction, Isa. 54. 15. They shall
gather together, but not by me: There are evil mixtures and confederacies that
are not of God, which you must beware of, lest by joining with men, you break
with God, and turn love into compliance: The Image was crumbled to pieces,
where the toes were mixed of iron and clay, Dan. 2. Love may forbear the
profession of some truths; there is an having faith to our selves, but must not
yield to error.

4. There are some so vile, that they will scarce come within the circuit of
our Christian respect; such as are the open Enemies of Christ, and hold things
destructive to the foundation of Religion, John 2. Ep. 10. If any one bring not
this Doctrine, bid him not God-speed: Vile wretches must know the ill sense the
Church has of their practices; Elisha would not have looked upon Joram, had it
not been for Jehosaphat, 2 Kings 13. 4. When men break out into desperate rage
and enmity to the ways of Christ, or run into damnable errors, it is a
compliance to show them any countenance. Thus for the compellation.

2. The next circumstance in the occasion is, at stification of the greatness
of his love and care; (...), When I gave all diligence, he speaks as if it
were his whole care and thought to be helpful to their faith, and therefore did
watch every occasion: He adds [to write to you] that is a further testimony of
his love, that he would think of them absent to write, when he could not speak
to them. So that here are two things. 1. The greatness of his love. 2. The way
of expressing it by writing.

From the first [ I gave all diligence] observe, That offices Doct.
of love are most commendable when they are dispensed with care and diligence:
It Is not enough to do good, but we must do good with labor, and care, and
diligence: See Tit. 3. 14. Let ours also learn to maintain good works; in the
original (...), watch our good works, hunt out occaons: So Heb. 10. 24.
Consider one another, to provoke to love and good works: It Is not enough to
admonish one another, but we must consider, study one another tempers, that we
may be most useful in a ^^^ of spiritual communion: So Romans 12. 17. providing
for ^^ings (...) in the sight of God ^n^ men, (...), catering, contriving, as
carnal men do for their lusts, Romans 13 14. So for Ministers, it is not enough
for them to press that wherein they are most versed, or what comes next to
hand, but to study what will most conduce to the ends of their Ministry with
such a People, study to approve thy self a good workman, etc. Well then, try
your Christian respects by it the Spirit is most pure, not only when you do
good, but when you do it with care and diligence; wicked men may stumble upon
good, but they do not study to do good; common Spirits are moved to pray, but
they do not watch unto prayer Ephesians. 6. 17. that is, make it their care to keep
their hearts in order, and expressly to suit their prayer to their present
necessities; many may do that which is useful to the Church, but they do not
watch opportunities, and make it their design to be serviceable.

Again, let no care be grievous to you, so you may do good, I am willing to
spend my self, and to be spent for you, 2 Cor 12. 15. We cannot be wasted in a
better employment; so we shine, no matter though we burn down to the Socket, or
like Silkworms, die in our work, Phil. 2. 17. If I be offered upon the
Sacrifice of your Faith, I rejoice with you, etc. The greatest pains and care
even to a maceration of our selves, should not be unpleasing to a gracious
heart, certainly this is an expression will shame us; I gave all diligence, he
sought all opportunities, when we will not take them; Love will put us upon
searching out, and devising ways of doing good.

2. This love he would express by writing when he could Observat.
not come to them: Holy men take all opportunities to do good, present or
absent, they are still mindful of the Saints, and write when they cannot speak;
As Ambrose alludeth to Zecharias, writing when he was stricken dumb: A man
would Zecharias cum l^qui non potuit Scripsit.
think that absence were a fair excuse, a writ of ease served upon us by
Providence; yet godly men cannot be so satisfied, but all helps to promote the
common benefits; a willing mind will never want an opportunity, and they that
have an heart, will be sure to find an occasion; they give all diligence to
promote others welfare; and therefore use all means, take all occasions: Which
shows first how far they are from this temper that do nothing but by
constraint. A ready mind is a special qualification in an Elder, 1 Pet. 5. 2.
and a sure note of our reward, 1 Cor. 9. 17. But now when the Awe of the
Magistrate prevails more then love of souls, every thing is done grudgingly:
It Is Paul's advice, Be instent in season and out of season, 2 Timothy 4. 2. not
only at such seasons as are fairly offered, but where corruption and laziness
would plead an excuse. Christ discoursed with the woman at the Well when weary,
John 4. We have but a little while to live in the world, and we know not how
soon we may be taken off from our usefulness; that was Peter's motive, to write,
2 Pet. 1. 12, 13. 2. This shows their sottishness that are not careful to
redeem opportunities for themselves: Jude is studying which way to promote the
salvation of others, and many do not look to the state and welfare of their own
souls.

Again observe, That uniting is a great help to promote the Observe.
common Salvation: By this means we speak to the absent, and to posterity; and
by this means are the Oracles of God preserved in public Records, which
otherwise were in danger of being corrupted, if still left to the uncertainty of
verbal tradition: By this means are errors more publicly confuted, and a
testimony against them transmitted to future ages: Speech is more transient,
but writing remains; so Christ tells the Apostles that they should bring
forth fruit, and their fruit should remain, John 15. 16. Apostolical Doctrine
being committed to writing, remains as a constant rule of faith and manners,
and by the public Explications of the Church left upon record, we come to
understand the Dispensations of God to every age, what measures of light they
enjoyed, how the truths of God were opposed, how vindicated; Finally by writing
the streams of salvation are conveyed into every family as a common fountain by
so many pipes and conveyances* that in the defect of public preaching, good
supply may be had in this kind: Well then, it is an acceptable service to the
Church, which they do Judge. 5^14.
who can handlethe pen of the writer, when they send abroad a public testimony
against error, a public monument of their affection to the truth, the Goose
quil hatl^ smote Antichrist under the fifth rib; the Earl of Darby accused
Bradford for doing more hurt by his writings then preaching. Hezekiah's
servants are commended Scribant doctique indoctique Poemata passion: Juvenal.
for copying out the Proverbs of Solomon, Prove. 25. 1. They deserve not to be
censured, but commended and cherished that do service in this kind; I confess
there is no end of Books, pride and ambition may put many upon scribbling, and
filling the world with chaffs and vanity, so that there needetha restraint,
rather then an incitement: Councels have thought it worthy their care, Vide
Canones Apostolorum, (ut voca^t) Can. 60 Synod. Dordra^. Concilia de
corrig^ndis Ty^ographiae abusibus session^. ^22.
some merely blur paper, which is no small discouragement to modest and able
men; surely care should be taken to prevent abuse: writing is a more public
way of teaching, and men should not undertake it without a care. Jeremies
advice is good, Ne ad scribendum cito prosilias, and levi duceris insania multo
tempore disce quod doceas, Hier. ad Rusticum Mohachium. Be not too hasty to
write; that which is prepared for public instruction had need be prepared with
great deliberation: the the (...). Plutarchus in vita Numae.
vestal Virgins were ten years in learning, and ten years in practicing, and
ten years in teaching, and prescribing directions to others: when every
Sciolist will be obtruding his Notions upon the world, it is a great abuse; for
by this means useful men are discouraged, or if they publish their labors,
they are not taken notice of: As two or three grains of good corn are hardly
found out under an heap of chaff: But take away this abuse, writing is a great
help to the Church in practicals, that people may still be furnished with good
books in every age, old ones written long ago being neglected, or lying hid in
some private studyes, or else not coming up to the rate of present light, or
not answering the temper of the present age, not meeting with the sins, nor
encouraging the graces within use and exercise: Again in controversals there is
great use of writing; controversies not being so easily determined by the
judgment of the ear, as the eye Alternu vi^bus contensios^su^e sune u^e ^* d^e^
in ^e^eram traximu^* ^bstre^ent^bus ^t^a^ qu^busdam spectant^^us, ^ing^lo
umn^b^^o quodam veritas ^^^^ b^abatu^. ^er ul. co^tra lu^ae^s.
: In the clamor of disputations and violent discourse, usually there is such a
dust raised, that we cannot so soon discern the truth, as upon a calm debate,
and mature consideration of what is delivered in writing, which I remember was
the cause why Tertullian wrote his treatise against the Jews, lest the tumult
and noise of the dispute should be some prejudice to the truth. But of this
enough.

I come now to the next Circumstance in the insinuation or profession of his
readiness to do them good, and that is the object or subject concerning which
he would write to them, [the common Salvation,] a fit argument for Saints: The
Observe.
Apostles in their private and familiar letters were very spiritual; yea when
they wrote about their ordinary occasions, as Paul to Philemon. Still they were
ready to impart some spiritual gift, whether by conference or writing; those
Letters then should be most welcome to us that mind us of the best things.

But what was this common salvation? I suppose by it is meant that Salvation
wherein he and they, and all the Saints were concerned; this expression may be
conceived to be an Argument, either of the Apostles meekness, though he were an
Apostle, and they private believers, yet I and you have but one common
salvation, as Captains to indear themselves to their Troops will say [
Fellow-souldiers] as engaged in one common Warfare: or else of his holiness
[the common Salvation] that is, which I am to look after as well as you: or
else of his love to their salvation, which he would look after as well as his
own; the Saints carry on a joint trade to Heaven; they are all partners, and
Salvation lies in common between them: you are to promote mine, and I yours:
Well then, he having their faith and salvation in like respect with his own, he
was willing to write to establish them in the truth: I shall form the point in
the very words of the Text. That the Salvation of the peeple of God Observe.
is a common Salvation: not to good and bad; for it belongs only to a
peculiar people, but common to all believers: it is common to them in diverse
regards. 1. They all are chosen by the same grace; there is no special reason
why Paul should obtain mercy rather then John, and Andrew, and Thomas.
Free Grace acts upon the same terms. All Gods motives are taken from himself,
from his own bosom: For my own sake, says the Lord, Isai. 43. 25. There may
be a difference in the creature, John and Andrew may be otherwise tempered and
disposed then Paul and Peter: but Gods motives to choose both the one and the
other are still the same.

2. They have the same Christ; there is no other Name under Heaven, Acts 4. 12.
And Jesus Christ the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. In all
ages the Church has been saved by Christ, none of the holy ones of God had a
more worthy Redeemer then we have. Christ gave the same ransom to purchase
Heaven for me, and thee, and others: as under the Law the rich and the poor,
were to give the same ransom, Exodus 30. 15. The rich shall not give more, and
the poor shall not give less then half a sheckel. The price of Christ's blood
for all souls was equal, if they had a more worthy Christ to dye for them, you
might be discouraged.

3. You are justified by the same righteous one as far as another: The
righteousness of Christ is unto all, and upon all that believe, and there is no
difference, Romans 3. 11. In inherent righteousness, there is a great deal of
difference, one has more grace, and another has less; in sanctification there
are degrees, but as to imputed righteousness, they are all equal, none of the
Saints has finer linen, or are decked with a better vesture then you are;
there is a difference in the degree of faith, which receives this
righteousness, but there is no difference in the righteousness its self; Gemmam
an^^l^ c^rvae iucl^sam amplectitur and Gigas a ^ plectitur, and Pu^rulus ^ee^
G^gas ^o^tius ^am a^p^ctatur qu^m pue ^lus t^m^n m^net ann^lus aeq^e ^re^i^s^s
and g^mm^ aeque p^^ciosa. ^^the^n^^
a Giant, or strong man holds a precious jewel, so does a child; the jewel is
the same, though a man holds it with a stronger hand, it loses nothing of
its worth in the child's hand. So here, the righteousness is the same, though
the faith be not the same. Yea fourthly, As we have the same privileges, so
the same way all by faith; and the faith of the weakest as to the essential
privileges, is as acceptable to God as the faith of the strongest, 2 Pet. 1.
1. Simon Peter to them that have obtained like precious faith with us. It Is
Fides ^na and ^ad^o^ ^o^ respectu subje^^oru^ gradu^m sed speciti object(...).
like precious for kind, though not degree; of the same nature, worth, and
property, though every one cannot come up to the height of an Apostle. 5. They
are all under the same rule and direction. Gal. 6. 16. As many as walk by this
rule, peace on them, and the whole Israel of God. The way of error is
manifold, but there is but one path that leads to Heaven. 6. They are in one
mystical Body, ministering supplies to one another. Col. 2. 19. Not holding the
head, from which all the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered,
and knit together, increases with the increase of God. The head is the
fountain of all vital influences, but the joints and bands do minister and
convey the nourishments; the whole body is still increasing and growing up to
perfection, and they are helping one another, as the members of the same body
do continue the communion of the same Spirit, or by the continuity of the
parts, make way for the animation and quickening by the same soul.

What use shall we make of this? I answer, 1. It hinteth public care, that we
should help salvation forwards, both in our selves and others; rejoice in
others faith as well as in your own. Romans 1. 12. Comforted by the mutual faith
of you and me. His faith was a comfort to them, and their faith a comfort to
him; nay out of an excess of love and charity, Paul uses an expression not
imitable, Romans 9. 3. I could wish that I were accursed from Christ for my
brethren my kinsmen according to the flesh.

2. It checketh the impropriating of Grace and Religion, to such an order or
sort of Christians, such as was the ambition of former times, as if all
religion were confined within a cloister, or wrapped up in a black garment;
those were called religious houses, and those the Clergy, or God* portion, all
other were Lay, and Secular. Oh how far was this from the modesty of the
Apostles! Peter calls the faith of common Christians, like precious faith;
and Jude speaks of a Common Salvation. So the Jews before them, they confined
Gods choice to their Nation, they could not endure to hear of salvation among
the Gentiles, and of a righteousness that came to all, and upon all that
believe: we have an envious nature, and would fain impropriate common favors.
The Church of Rome would feign bring all the world to their lore, and confine
truth and faith and salvation within the precincts of their Synagogue; they
sieze upon and possess themselves of the Keys of Heaven, to open to whom they
please. Now God has broken down all pales and enclosures, they would fain rear
up a new partition wall: Corrupt nature envyeth that others should have a
fellowship in our privileges, therefore the same spirit still works; men do
so value their lesser differences, and that distinct way and opinion which they
have taken up, as if none could be saved but those of their own party and
persuasion: it is very natural to us to affixe holiness to our own opinions, and
to allow none to be good but those that jump with us in all things. There were
factions at Corinth, and those that said I am of Christ, were counted a faction
too, 1 Cor. 1. 13. as arrogating Christ to themselves, therefore the Apostle
writing to them, says, 1 Cor. 1. 2. To the Saints at Corinth, and all that
call on the Lord Jesus Christ, theirs and ours. We are apt to be rigid to those
that differ from us, and to be favorable to those that think with us. Tertul.
in ^raes^^^p* adversus Hae^^^cos.
Tertullian says of some in his time, Illic ipsum est promereri, it is holiness
enough to be one of them. Oh let it not be so among the people of God! do not
nullify your brethren. Romans 14. 10. Why d^st thou set at naught thy brethren?
(...)* Tertullian renders it, Cur molificus fratrem? When God has made a
Christian of him, why do thou make nothing of him? and cry up every private
opinion for another religion, as if none could be Saints and Believers but they
that think with you? Take heed of impaling the common Salvation, Enclosures are
against the Law.

3. It shows that there are not several ways to Heaven, there is but one
common Salvation to all the Elect, and one common faith, as Paul says. Tit. 1.
4. To Titus my own Son according to the common faith. There are a sort of
Libertines that think a man may be saved in any religion, so he does not walk
against his own light: Do not flatter your selves, all the Elect are brought to
Heaven the same way, whether Jew or Gentile, bond or free, there is a good old
way, Jer. 6. 16. which if we miss we are sure to perish.

4. It informs us who are best to deal in matters of religion: those that are
religious, that can call it a common Salvation; that is, common to them with
others, they have share in it, and therefore they can best defend it:
differences are aggravated when carnal men intermeddle in religious
controversies, but those are likest to deal with most purity of zeal and love
that can say your salvation is their salvation; so in the next verse, They turn
the grace of our God into wantonness, they that have an interest in grace
cannot endure to see it abused.

5. It forbids scorn of the meanest Christian, they have as good hopes
through grace as you have in Jesus Christ: all are one, Master and Servant,
rich and poor. Onesimus a poor runagate servant, yet being converted, Paul
calls him his faithful and beloved brother, Philem. 10. In earthly relation
there is a difference, yet in regard of the common faith and common salvation
we are all one.

I have now done with the first part of the occasion, his earnestness in
promoting their good. I now come to the second part, the urgency of the present
necessity [it was needful for me to write to you, and exhort you,] which is
said to show that this Epistle was not only occasioned by the fervency of his
own bone, but the present exigence and necessity as affairs then stood; the
School of Simon, the Gnostics, and diverse other heretics of a like loose
strain and libertine spirit, sought to withdraw and alienate them from the
truth, for that was the necessity here expressed, as appears by the next
verse; Exhortations the more necessary, the more pressing; need quickens both
writer and reader, and the less arbitrary things are, the more thoroughly we go
about them.

Observe from hence, That necessity is a time for duty; Observe.
necessity is Gods season to work, and therefore it should be ours; For a
season (if need be) ye are in heaviness, 1 Pet. 1. 6. Duties are best done,
when we see they are needful and necessary; things that are arbitrary are done
with a loose heart; the creatures duties toward God begins at the sense of
their own wants. Jam. 1. 5. If any man lack wisdom, etc. Well then, take this
hint for prayer, and other services; if there be a need, omit not to call upon
God: as when distempers grow upon the spirit, the heart's unquiet, the
affectious unruly, a deadness increases upon you, temptations are urgent, and
too strong for you, cry out of violence, as the ravished Virgins. So when
conscience is uncessantly clamorous, David could not find ease, till he
confessed, Psalm. 32. 5. Silence will cause roaring, and restraint of prayer,
disquiet. Again, If there be a need, omit not to call upon men by exhortation
and counsel; as when you see things grow worse every day, and can hold no
longer: the Kings danger made the Kings dumb son speak; Paul was forced in
spirit when he saw the whole City given to idolatry, Acts 17. 19. When we see
men by whole droves running into error, and ways destructive to their souls,
is there not a need? is it not a time to speak? men say we are bitter, but we
must be faithful: so they say the Physician is cruel, and the Chyrurgion a
tyrant, when their own distempers need so violent a remedy: can we see you
perish, and hold our peace?

Observe again, That Ministers must mainly press th^se Observe.
Doctrines that are most needful; it is but a cheap zeal that declaimeth against
antiquated errors, and things now out of use and practice: we are to consider
what the present age needs; what use was it of in Christ's time to aggravate
the rebellion of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram? Or now to handle the Case of Henry
the Eight's divorce, what profit hence to our present Auditories? There are 2
Pet. 1. 12.
present truths to be pressed, upon these should we bestow our pains and care;
usually when we reflect upon the guilt of the times, people would have us
preach general doctrines of faith and repentance. But we may answer, It is
needful for us to exhort you, etc. To what end is it to dispute the verity of
the Christian Religion against Heathens, when there are many Seducers that
corrupt the purity of it amongst our selves? In a Country audience, what
profit is it to dispute against Socinians, when there are Drunkards, and
practical Atheists, and Libertines, that need other kind of doctrine? He that
cries out upon old errors not now produced upon the public Stage, does not
fight with Ghosts, and challenge the dead: So again, to charm with sweet
strains of grace, when a people need rowsing, thundering doctrine, is but to
minister Cordials to ^ full and plethonick body, that rather needs phebotomy
and evacuations: it is a great deal of skill, and God can only teach it us, to
be seasonable to deliver what is needful, and as the people are able to bear.

Again observe, The need of the primitive Church was an Observe.
occasion to complete the Canon and rule of faith. We are beholding to the
Seducers of that age, that the Scripture is so full as it is: we should have
wanted many Epistles, had not they given the occasion. Thus God can bring light
out of darkness, and by errors make way for the more ample discovery of truth.

I have done with the Occasion, I come now to the Matter and Drift of this
Epistle: [ And exhort you that ye should earnestly contend for the faith that
was once delivered to the Saints.] In which there is a necessary duty pressed;
and these two Circumstances are notable; the Act, and the Object; the Act is to
contend earnestly, it is but one word in the Original, (...), but it is a word of
a vehement signification, and therefore fitly rendered to contend earnestly. 2.
The Object of this contention, which is, [the faith once delivered to the
Saints.] Fides est duplex, ^i^es q^ae cred^tur, and ^ides qua c^^d^^u^.
Faith may be taken either for the doctrine of faith, or the grace of faith;
both are too good to be lost, either the word which we believe, or faith by
which we believe; the former is intended, faith is taken for sound doctrine,
such as is necessary to be owned and believed unto salvation, which he presses
them to contend for, that they might preserve it safe and sound to future ages.
Now this faith is described, 1. By the manner of its conveyance, (...); it is
given to be kept, ^liquid tibi ^r^ditum non a te inventum aliquid quod
ac^epis^i, non exa^i^asti, etc. Vincensius Lyrinensi^.
it is not a thing invented, but given; not found out by us, but delivered by
God himself, and delivered as to our custody, that we may keep it for
posterity; As the Oracles of God in the Old Testament, were delivered to the
Jews to be kept by them, Romans 3. 1. 2. By the time of its giving out to the
world; the doctrine of salvation was given but once, as never to be altered and
changed, once for all. 3. The Persons to whom, [to the Saints,] so he calls
the Church according to the use of the Scriptures, or else by Saints is meant
the holy Apostles, given to them to be propagated by them. I shall first speak
of the Object, before I come to the duty it self; and because the description
here used will agree both to the grace of faith, and the doctrine of faith,
though the doctrine of faith be mainly intended, yet give me leave a little to
apply it to the grace; if it be a diversion, it shall be a short one.

1. This faith is said to be given. Observe, That faith is a Observe.
gift, so Phil. 1. 29. (...), Given f^e^^y.
To you it is given to believe. Ephesians. 2. 8. By grace ye are saved through
faith, not of your selves, it is the gift of God. We cannot get it of our
selves; a mere imagination and thinking of Christ's death is easy, but to bring
the soul and Christ together, requires the power of God, Ephesians. 1. 19. We
cannot merit it, and therefore it is a pure gift. God bestows it on them that
can give nothing for it: works before conversion cannot engage God, and works
after conversion cannot satisfy God. Well then, let us asmire the mercy of God
in the Covenant of grace. Christ is a gift, John 4. 10. If thou knew the
gift, etc. His right. ousness is a gift, Romans 5. 16. The free-gift is of many
offerces unto justification; and faith which receives this righteousness is a
gift: so that all is carried in a way of grace, in the Covenant of grace,
nothing is required but what is best owed. Again, it teaches us whither to go
for faith, seek it of God, it is his gift, all the endeavor and labor of the
creature will never procure it: But must we not use the means of prayer,
meditation, and hearing, etc? I answer, Yes. For 1. God dispenses it in a way
of means. Mark 4* 24. With what measure ye meet it shall be measured to you
again, and unto you that hear more shall be given: According unto the measure
of our hearing (if the Lord will work) is the measure of our faith. Acts 16.
The Lord opened Lidia's heart to attend to the things spoken by Paul; God
stirs up to the use of means, and whilst we are John 6. 44, 45
taught we are drawn. 2. Though faith be Gods gift, man's endeavors are still
necessary; for supernatural grace does not exclude the ordinary and natural
means: Marriage is necessary for the propagation of mankind, though the
rational Soul is from God; yea more care is had of women with child then of
brute beasts, because the fruit of the womb is the immediate work and blessing
of the Lord: so faith is of Gods planting, and therefore we should be the more
careful in the use of means.

2. This faith is said to be once given: This will also hold Observe.
concerning grace; for Where it is once planted it cannot be totally and finally
destroyed, rather it is continually supplied by the care and faithfulness of
God: see 1 Cor. 1. 8. and 1 These. 5. 24. and Phil. 1. 6. And those hypocrites
that fall off after a long profession seldom recover themselves by repentance,
Heb. 6. 6. 2 Pet. 2. 21. Well then, here is Comfort to the people of God, that
find so many lusts, and so many temptations, they think they shall never hold
out, faith is but once given; where it is really given, there needs not a
second gift. Again, here is Caution, Faith is a precious Jewel, if once lost
wilfully after the knowledge of the truth, it is not easily regained

3. Consider the persons to whom it is given; * it is not given to every one; 2
These. 3. 2.
for all men have not faith; and 2 Cor. 4. 3.
the Gospel is hidden to those that are lost: but it is given to the Saints, to
those who were chosen, that they might be Saints: which shows, 1. The
excellency of Faith, it is a privilegiate Observe. 1. Observe. 2.
and peculiar mercy. 2. That Believers are Saints; Faith gives an interest in
Christ, and therefore they must needs be holy; His Blood cleanses, 1 John 1.
7. His Spirit sanctifies, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Again, Faith it self has a cleansing
purisying virtue; Hearts purified by faith, Acts 15. 9. Faith applies the
Blood of Christ; and the hand of the Laundress is as necessary to cleanse the
clothes, as the soap wherewith they are cleansed: Faith waits for the Spirit;
it argues from the love of God: Faith and sin are like the poison and the
antidote, always working one upon another, till faith has gotten the mastery.
Well then, Is your faith sanctifying? Strong persuasions of an interest in
grace, and a loose life, will not suit: we are not perfectly clean and holy,
but there will be strong desires and earnest groans after more holiness; as
Psalm. 51. 10. and Romans 7. 24. Who shall deliver me? etc. that is, Oh that I
were; questions are put for wishes: so Psalm. 119. 5. Oh that my ways were
directed to keep thy Statutes: Yea there will be not only groans under, but
struglings against sin. A child of God may fall into sin, but he cannot rest in
it, and lie down with ease; as mud may be cast into a pure fountain, or stirred
up in it, but the fountain never cease till it work it self clean again.
Peter and David stepped aside, but they could find no peace till they were
reconciled to God: I will return to my first husband, then it was better then
it is now, Hosea 2. Again, you may know it by the drift and disposition of the
heart; Which way lies the bent of your spirits? and what are your constant
motions and operations? A man that is traveling another way may now and then
look back: How is your heart inclined? Psalm. 119. 112. I have inclined my heart
to perform thy Statutes always unto the end; Is there a constant inclination
toward God? 1 Chronicles. 22. 19. Now set your hearts to seek the Lord; Is the
heart set? what is your constant course and walk? Romans 8. 1.

But so much for this Digression, occasioned by the suitaableness of words, to
the grace of faith: Let us now come to the other acception, which is more
proper in this place, namely, as faith is put for the doctrine of faith: now
this was 1. Delivered. 2. Once delivered. 3. To the Saints.

1. Delivered Quod tibi creditu^ non a te intentum quod accepisti non
excogitasti. Vinc. Lyr. Mensis.
, not invented; it is not the fruit of fancy 1.
or humane devising, but has its original from God; 'twas delivered by him to
holy men chosen for that purpose, and by them delivered, by word of mouth to
the men of that age wherein they lived, and by writing for the use of after
ages: and delivered to be kept; it is a sacred Depositum which God has put into
the hands of the Church: Keep that which is committed to thy trust, 1* Tim. 6.
20. and to them were committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. I shall observe,
1. The Mercy of God in delivering this Faith or Rule of Salvation. 2. The Duty
of the Church concerning it.

1. The Mercy of God in delivering this faith to chosen men, Observat. 1.
that by their means the world might come to the knowledge of it. The doctrine
of Salvation first came out from God, and then was conveyed to us by the hands
of holy men; we are not sensible enough of the privilege: Psalm. 147. 19, 20. He
shows his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and Judgme^ts unto Israel, he has
not dealt so with any Nation, etc. It Is not a common mercy, for many Nations
want it; nor no casual thing: in the primitive times not only the doctrine of
the Apostles was directed and ordered by the Holy Ghost, but also their
journeys; the Gospel came not to them by chance, but as a special gift from
Heaven. But that we may be more sensible of the Privilege, I shall show you, 1.
The Benefit of the Word: By it Gods heart is opened to us, and our own hearts
to our selves; by it we are acquainted with the way of Salva^io^, and come to
understand the courses of the Lords Justice and Mercy, and in what manner he
will govern and rule the World, which are altogether unknown to them that have
not such a Revelation delivered to them. We should never have known the cause
of our misery, our fall in Adam, nor the means of our Recovery, Redemption by
Jesus Christ, if they had not been delivered to us in this doctrine and rule of
faith; we should never have known how to worship God, or enjoy God. If carnal
men should have a liberty to let Nature work, and set down a Divinity of their
own, what a goodly Religion should we have in the World? a very comely Chymaera
no doubt? For practicals it would be large enough I am sure, for natural
conscience hates fetters and restraints; in doctrinals it would be absurd
enough: Man can never take a right draught and image of God; Who can empty an
Ocean with a Cocklesh ll? And since the Fall we are grown quite brutish; our
conceits are not so monstrous in any thing as in the Worship of God. The Pagan
Philosophers, that were most profound in the researches and enquiries of
Reason, they sat abrood, and thought of hatching an excellent Religion; but
what was the issue? Professing themselves to be wise they became fools, Romans 1.
22. All that they produced was fables and high strains of folly, mixed with
popular Rites and Customs. There are many things necessary to Religion, which
the Angels themselves could not have known if they had not been revealed;
therefore their knowledge increases by observing Gods dispensations to the
Church, Ephesians. 3. 10. The way of Salvation by Christ is such a Mystery, as
could not have entered into the heart of any creature, no not of an Angel: If an
Angel had been to set down which way man should be redeemed, nay if all the
Cherubim and Seraphim, Thrones, Dominions and Powers had met together in a
Synod and Council, and had taken in all the world to their assistance, it would
have posed them all* to have found* out such a Way as God has appointed. But
not to speak of Mysteries. There is in the Word some Moralities suitable to the
Law of Nature, which was once written upon man's heart: but alas, now there
remains only some scattered fragments and obscure characters, so defaced that
they cannot be read; and how blind are we in these* things without the Word?
Witness the sottish Idolatry of those Nations that want it, worshipping stocks
or stones, yea a piece of red cloth, or what ever they saw first in the
morning: And witness those brutish Customs among other Nations, whereby
uncleanness and unnatural sins have been authorized by a Law. Therefore it is a
great mercy that something is delivered, and given out as a Rule of Faith and
Manners.

2. That this Tradition is written, and put into a stated course in those Books
which we call Scriptures. If the Revelation of Gods Will had been left to the
tradition of men of such a rank or order, what a liberty might they take of
coining Oracles, and obtruding their fancies upon the world: It Is a great mercy
that our faith does not depend upon uncertain suggestions, but some main
public Records, to which all may appeal and find satisfaction. Heretofore the
Lord revealed himself by Visions, Oracles, and Dreams, to persons of ancient
holiness and sanctity, that they might instruct others; which course was sure
enough, while the people of the world were but a few families, and the persons
entrusted with Gods message had authority and credit sufficient with the
present age, and lived long to continue the tradition with the more certainty
to future ages. But afterward the Lord was pleased to speak to his Church both
by Word and writing: His Word was necessary for further revealing and clearing
up the doctrine of Salvation; and writing was necessary, because when Precepts
were multiplied, it was needful for men's memories that they should be written;
the long life of Gods Witnesses was lessened, corruptions began to increase,
Satan giving out lying oracles and visions, idolatrous Rites and customs crept
into the Josh. 24. 3* Genesis 39. 2.
best families, the people of God were grown numerous enough to make a
Comm^nwealth and Politic Body; therefore to avoid man's corruptions and Satan's
deceits, the Lord thought fit that we should have a written Rule at hand, as a
public Standard for the trial of all Doctrines: Exo. 24. 12*
God himself wrote the first Scripture with his own Finger upon tables of
stone, and he commanded Moses and the Prophets to do the same, Exodus 17. 14.
and 34. 17. which dispensation of Word and Writing continued till Christ's time,
who as the great Doctor of the Church perfected the Rule of Faith, and by the
Apostles as so many public Notaries consigned it to the use of the Church in
all Ages: When the Canon began to be complete, the latter Apostles pressed the
receiving of it; and John as the last, and as one who outlived all the rest,
closes up his Prophecy thus, Rev. 22. 18, 19. If any man add, etc. and if any
man take away, etc. which does not only seal up the Book of the Revelations,
but the whole Canon and Rule of Faith; which indeed* was a great mercy to the
world; the Lord knew to what a liberty we inclined in divine things, and
therefore we needed to be tied up to a Rule, which here is given us.

3. The mercy of God appears in preserving it, that it may be delivered from
one age to another. No Doctrine so ancient as the Doctrine of the Scriptures;
it describes the whole History of the World from the very Creation, and the
original of all things: Where are there Records so ancient? and yet they have
been preserved even to our time. We have some ancient writings of the Heathens,
though nothing so ancient as Scripture; but these are not contrary to men's
lusts, and have been cherished by them, and yet they have felt the tooth of
time, and are in a great measure mangled; but the Word of God has been
maligned and opposed, and yet it continues, and holds up its head in the
world: not only the main Doctrine of the Scriptures has been continued, but no
part of the Word has been falsified, corrupted, destroyed: the world wanted
not malice nor opportunity; the powers of the world have been bent against it,
and corrupt persons in the Church have been always given to Gal. 1. 6, 7. 1 Timothy 6. 3.
other gospelling; but still the Scriptures have been wonderfully preserved, as
the three children in the furnace, not an hair singed, not a jot and tittle of
Truth perished.

4. That God does continually stir up men in the Church, and bestow gifts upon
them for the opening and application of this faith and doctrine of Salvation.
Christ that has given Prophets and Apostles to the Church to write Scripture,
has also given Pastors and Teachers to open and apply Scripture, that so still
it might be delivered to the Saints, and also to vindicate the doctrine of it
when opposed: Every age that has yielded the Poison has also yielded the
Antidote, that the world might not be without a Witness; if there has been an
Arrius, there has been an Athanasius; if a Pelagius, there is also an Austin;
the Church has never wanted help in this kind. Look as in War, as the Arts of
Battery and methods of destruction do increase, so also does skill in
Fortification; and in the Church God still bestows gifts for the further
explication of Truth.

5. That the Light comes to us, and shines in this Land. The Gospel is a
great National Privilege: To you is this Word of Salvation sent, Acts 13. 26.
Pray mark, it is sent; he does not say we have brought it to you, but it is sent,
it is a token sent from Heaven in love: there is a mighty Providence
accompanies the Gospel; the journeys of the Apostles (as I said but now) were
ordered by the Spirit as well as their doctrine: Acts 8. 26. The Angel of the
Lord said to Philip, Arise, and go toward the South, toward the way that
goes down to Jerusalem: They went not as their own good affection carried
them, but according to the Spirits direction. So Acts 17. 7, 8, 9. The Spirit
suffered them not, etc. as prophecy came not by the will of man, 2 Pet. 1. 20.
that is, the doctrine it self, so the delivery of it; the doctrine they had
from the Holy Ghost, and also their commission and pasport. You would stand
wondering, and think it a special benefit, if in a time of drought the rain
should fall on your field, and none else: if, as Gideons fleece, your heritage
should be wet, and all is day round about you; or if the Sun should be shut up
to others, and shine only in your Horizon, as it did in Goshen; this is a
better blessing, and God has a special hand in the progress of it; it goes
from place to place as the Lord will: Why should it come to us? our Monstra
Diabolica col^bant A^g^ptiaca nunc numero Vincentia. Gildas.
Ancestors were of all Nations most barbarous and portentous for their
Idolatries; why to us? No cause can be assigned but the free grace and gift of
God.

6. That it is given to us in our persons in particular in the power and
efficacy of it. It Is offered to the Nation, but bestow^d upon us: John 14. 12.
Why is it that thou will reveal thy self to us, and not unto the world? Others
have only Truth presented to them obiter, by the by, for your sakes; but you
are called according to purpose, Romans 8. 28. Though in the general means they
have a like favor with you, yet you may observe the particular aim of God in
continuing the Gospel to England for your sak^s.

Well then, Acknowldg God in the truths that are delivered Use.
to you out of the Scriptures. What ever means are used, God is the Author of
the doctrine, and the Disposer of the message; receive it as the Word of God,
and then it will profit you, 1 These. 2. 13. If you had an Oracle from Heaven
speaking to you on this wise, you would be more serious: It is as certain, yea
it is (...), a more sure Word, 2 Pet. 1. 19. more sure then the Oracle spoken of
in the Context: Regard the promises and threatenings of it with more reverence,
as if God in person had delivered them to you: If you receive it as the Word of
God, and not of men, what will you venture upon the promises of it? These are
bills of exchange given you, that you may draw your estate into another
Country, that you may lay up treasures in Heaven: Neglect of the opportunity is
a sign of unbelief. If one should proffer you an hundred pound for the laying
out of a penny, and you go away and never heed it, it is a sign you do not
believe the offer. The recompenses of the Word do far exceed all temporal
emolument; if you do not heed them, it is a sign you do not believe them. So,
what will you forbear upon the threatenings of the Word? If there were a Law
made, that every time we deceive or slander one another we should hold one of
our hands in scalding Lead for half an hour, men would be afraid of the
offense. God has told us that the wages of sin is death, that we shall be
plunged for evermore in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone; and yet
it does not deter us from sin, and giving offense to God. If a man were told
that he were in danger of a cruel death every moment if he did not presently
get a pardon, he would not sleep till it were done: Natural men are in danger
of Hell every moment by the sentence of the Word, and yet how backward are they
to make their peace with God?

Secondly, The word [ delivered] implies a leaving things in another hand by
way of trust, and so does not only note the mercy of God, but the duty of the
Church, to whom the Oracles of God are committed to be kept: Whence observe,
That God has delivered the Doctrine and Rule of Faith Observat. 2.
to the Church as a public Trustee, that it may be kept and employed to the
uses of the Truth. Let us a little see what is the Churches duty toward the
Truth: I answer, 1. To publish it to the present age. 2. To keep it and
preserve it for ages to come: So that to the present age we are Isai. 43. 10
Witnesses, to the future Trustees.

1. To publish, own and defend the Truth, by Profession and Martyrdom; and
therefore the Church is called the pillar and ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15.
namely in respect of men, and as it holds it forth to the world; and
therefore we ought to harken to the Churches testimony till we have better
evidence: We do not ultimately resove our faith into the Churches Authority,
for the Churches Authority is not absolute, but ministerial; as a royal Edict
does not receive credit by the Officer and Crier, he only declares it and
publishes it; yet the Churches testimony is not to be neglected, for faith
comes by hearing, Romans 10. 14. and this publication of the Church is a good
preparative inducem ut, John 4. 42. If we would know the truth of a thing till
we have experience we go to those that have experience, and ordinarily the
judgment of others whom we respect and reverence causes us to have a good
opinion of a thing till we make trial Non credere^ Scripturae nisi me Ecclesia
moveret Author it as. Aug.
our selves: in which respect Austin says, I had never believed the
Scriptures, unless I had been moved thereunto by the Authority of the Church;
as we should never have known Kings pleasure, unless the messenger had brought
us his Letters. The Church has not power to make and unmake Scripture at
pleasure, but only to communicate and hold forth the Truth; and till we have
further assurance is so far to be heard: We receive the faith of per Ecclesiam
by the ministry of the Church, though not propter Ecclesiam for the Authority
of the Church.

2. The next Office of the Church is to preserve the Truth, and transmit it
pure to the next age: As the Law was kept in the Ark, so was Truth delivered to
the Church to be kept. 1 Timothy 1. 11. The glorious Gospel committed to thy
trust: There is a trust lies upon us; upon the Apostles first to publish the
whole Counsel of God, and then upon Pastors and Teachers in all ages to keep it
afoot, and upon all Believers and Members of the Church, to see that after ages
be not defrauded of this privilege: We are to take care that nothing be Deuteronomy.
4. 2. and 12. 32.
added, there is enough to make the man of God perfect; nothing diminished;
none of the Jewels which Christ has left with his Spouse must be embezzel'd;
that it be not corrupted and sophisticated; for we are not only to transmit to
the next age the Scriptures, those faithful Records of Truth, but also the
public Explications of the Church in Summaries and Confessions must be sound
and orthodox, lest we intail a prejudice upon those that are yet unborn: Every
one in his place is to see that these things be accomplished. So much for the
Tradition it self.

Now for the Manner [ Once delivered,] that is, once for all, 2.
as never to be altered and changed; and when the Canon or Rule of Faith was
closed up, there was nothing to be added further, as a part of the authentic
and infallible Rule, though the daily necessities of the Church do call for a
further Explication. But you will say, You told us but now how the Word was
many times delivered, how then once? I answer, The Apostle speaks not of the
successive manifestations of Gods Will to Prophet after Prophet till the Old
Testament was perfected, but of that common doctrine which the Apostles and
Evangelists by one consent had published to the world, and which was now to
settle into a Rule, and so to remain without change till the coming of the
Lord. Observe, That the doctrine of Salvation was but once delivered, Observat.
3.
to remain for ever without variation. Paul chideth them for being withdrawn to
another Gospel, Gal. 1. 6. and Peter tells them to prevent the reception of
feigned Oracles, that they had a surer Word of Prophecy, 2 Pet. 1. 19. a safe
rule to trust to: and Paul bids Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 14, 15.
Continue in the things which he had learned: and our Lord says, Mat. 24. This
Word of the Kingdom shall be prea^hed to all Nations. Now the doctrine of
Salvation is but once delivered, 1. Because all is done so fully and perfectly,
that nothing can be added; there is enough to make us wise to Salvation, and
what 2 Timothy 3. 15, 17.
should Christians desire more? There is enough to make the man of God perfect,
that is, to furnish him with all kind of knowledge for the discharge of his
office; there needs no more; there is enough to make us wise to preach, and
you wise to practice; and it is certain enough, that you need not spend your
time in doubting and disputing; and it is full enough, you need nothing more to
satisfy the desires of Nature, or to repair the defects of Nature: here is
sufficient instruction to decide all Controversies, and assoil all doubts, and
to give us a sure conduct to everlasting glory. 2. Because this Rule can never
be destroyed: The Word has often been in danger of being lost, but the miracle
of its pr^servation is so much the greater: In Josiahs time there was but one
Copy of the Law; in Dioclesians time there was an Edict to burn their Bibles,
and Copies were then scarce and chargeable; yet still they were kept, and so
shall be to the end of the world, for the Sacraments must continue till Christ
come, Mat. 28. 20. and 1 Cor. 11. 26. and the Word must be preached till we all
grow into a perfect body in Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. not only de jure,
but de facto, not only it must be so, but it shall be so. Well then, expect not
new revelations, or discoveries of n^w truths beside the Word, Hold fast till I
come, Rev. 2. 25.
which is the immutable Rule of Salvation. Again, it checketh them that expect
new Apostles, endued with a Spirit of infallibility, to resolve all doubts and
questions: We must give heed to the Scriptures, till the day star arise in your
hearts, that is, till we have full communion with Christ; for our reward in
Heaven is expressed by the morning star, Rev. 2. 28. To him that overcomes I
will give the morning star. Again, it confuteth the Familists, that dream of
some days of the Spirit, wherein we shall have a greater light then is in the
Scriptures; they fancy the time of the Law to be the days of the Father, the
time of the Gospel to be the days of the Son, and the latter end of the world
to be saeculum Spiritus Sancti (as the Weigelians phrase it) the age of the
Holy Ghost, but foolishly, for these are Acts 2. 17 Heb. 1. 1.
the last times, and the holy Ghost was never more gloriously poured out then
at Christ's Ascension, and greater things cannot be revealed to us then God in
Christ reconciling the world: Lastly, it is for the comfort of the Saints, that
their Salvation is put into a stated course, and God has showed you what you
must do if you would inherit eternal life.

The next circumstance is the persons to whom it was delivered, 3.
[ to the Saints,] it may be understood of the Apostles, to whom it was
delivered to be propagated; o^ of the Church, to whom it was delivered to be
kept, and who in the constant use of Scripture are called Saints. Observe, That
Observat.
Saints are most interested in the acknowledgment, propagation and defense of
Truth. The Christian faith was delivered to Saints and by Saints, and none
receive it so willingly, and defend it so zealously, and keep it so charily and
faithfully as they do. 1. The men that the Spirit of God made use of as Penmen
were holy men, specially purified and sanctified for this work: 2 Pet. 1. 21.
Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost: And Ephesians. 3. 5.
Revealed unto his holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit: These men were the
fittest instruments to beget an external repute to the Word; Surely they would
not do any thing for their own ends, and obtrude their own inventions upon the
world as Oracles from God. A carnal man's testimony is liable to suspicion; Who
would count that wholesome that comes from a leprous hand? Yea those that were
not of eminent sanctity were not fit for such an employment: a novel doctrine
(such as the Gospel seemed to be in the world) needed all the advantages that
might be, to gain a title and interest in their belief; therefore did the Lord
make use of such holy and self-denying persons, who expected to gain nothing
but ignominy, poverty, afflictions, bonds, death; these things did abide for
them in every City. 2. Holy persons are only fit to preach the Faith; sancta
sanctis, holy men for holy things; it is an holy faith, and therefore fit to be
managed by holy persons, that their hearts may carry a proportion with their
work: Isai. 52. 11. Be ye clean that bear the Vessels of the Lord: The Officers
that carried the Vessels and Utensils of the Temple out of Babylon, were to
take care of their cleanness. God purified Isaiah when he sent him to reprove,
Isai. 6. 7. and the Priests under the Law that ministered before the Lord, were
to wash in the great Lavor; Regeneration is the best preparation for the
Ministry. Others disparage their testimony, and bring a reproach upon the
Gospel; People think we must say somewhat for our living, and so give us the
hearing, but that is all: Oh think of it, the credit of Christ lies at stake;
and since Miracles are ceased, all the external confirmation that we can add to
the Word is by holiness of conversation. The Levites first cleansed themselves,
and then cleansed the people, Nehem. 12. 30. The life of a Minister is much
either to edification or destruction; they take the lesson rather from your
lives then your mouths, and by your levity or vanity sin comes to be
authorized: in short, either your doctrine will make your life blush, or your
life will make your doctrine blush and be ashamed. 3. None are fit publicly
to defend the Truth, but the holy; they speak with more power, as from the
heart, and inward experience, and are more zealous as being more nearly
concerned; Erubescit quamvis ^^ praedam d^^ ctrina quam propria reprehendit
conscientia. Hieron. in Epitaph. Marcellae. We can do nothing against the
Truth, but for the Truth 2 Cor. 13. 5.
they that partake of Gods Nature, will soonest espouse Gods Cause and Quarrel:
and their zeal is most pure; Carnal men pervert religious differences, they
change the nature of them, turning them into a strife of words, or a contention
for interests; matters are not managed so purely as when there is conscience on
both sides: The Saints contend best for the Saints faith. Zeal in carnal men is
like fire in straw, quickly up and quickly down; but in the godly it is like
fire in wood, longer kept: Wisdom is justified of her children, Mat. 11. 19.
they are fittest to interpose. Again, false zeal is most passionate without
pity and meekness, but the flame is most pure and bright in an holy heart,
which is subdued to the power of Truth. 4. None receive the Truth so willingly
as the Saints do: Holy persons can best understand what was written by holy
men, they pierce into it more deeply; as Iron that is red hot runs further
into the board, then a sharp tool that is cold: Psa. 25. 14* John 7. 17.
God unbosometh himself to his familiars; Holy hearts are not clouded with the
mists of lusts and interests: (...) Nazi. Orat. (ut memini) 40. Holiness does
not blunt the wit, but sharpens; none have a worse spiritual sight then they
that lack grace, 2 Pet. 1. 9.
Where there is purity, there is brightness; the mind being separated from
gross things, is fitted for the reception of spiritual mysteries: Paul saw most
of God when he was blind to the world; the heart being taken off from the
world, is erected to things supernatural and of an higher cognizance. 5. None
retain the Truth more firmly then the Saints do. Manna was kept in a golden
Vessel, and so is Truth in a pure Soul: Titus 3. 9. Holding the mystery of
faith in a pure conscience. An unclean vessel sowreth the liquor that is put
into it; so does a carnal heart pervert the faith, and teint the judgment. Let
a man once be given up to some great lust, and you shall soon find him to be
given up to some roaring error also; and when once they come to make shipwreck
of a good conscience, they do not long hold the faith that was once given to
the Saints, for grace and truth always thrive together.

I come now to the main Observation that is to be drawn from these words; That
it is the Duty of Christians in times of Error and Seducement to contend
earnestly for the Faith once Doct.
given to the Saints. It Is their duty at all times, but then especially: 1.
That we may not discredit our selves and the Truth. 2. That we may not hazard
our selves and the Truth.

1. Let me first speak to the Discredit, and there I shall show, 1. That Truth
is honored by a bold and resolute Defense of it: We are not ashamed of it
though it be questioned and scorned in the world: Mat. 11. 19
Wisdom is justified of her children: Neither John's doctrine nor Christ's
doctrine would relish with the world, yet some had a reverend opinion of it for
all that. Psalm. 119. 26, 27. They make void thy Law, therefore I love it above
pure gold. In times of defection our love to God and the ways of God should be
the greater; as Fountain water is hottest in coldest weather. 'Twas an honor
to the Christian Religion that the Quid ergo malum in Christiana Religione
cujus reus gaudet, accusatio votum est and poena foelicitas. Tertul.
primitive Professors were glad of an occasion to dye for it, and the more it
was despised and persecuted the more did they own it; falsehoods cannot endure
the brunt of opposition. 2. That we may not dishonor our selves, and discredit
our own profession: He is but an ill servant of Christ, that will not serve him
when the Lord has need of him; when God distinguishes sides, and cries out,
Exodus 32.
Who is of my side, who? Times of Error and Seducement are searching trying
times: Light chaff is carried about with every wind, but the solid grain lies
still upon the ground: The approved are made manifest, 1 Cor. 11. 19. There is
a time not only to show love, but valor: Jer. 9. 3. They are not valiant for
the Truth upon the Earth. To be valiant for Truth is to defend it in time of
opposition, and to sparkle so much the more in an holy zeal because they
pervert the right ways of the Lord: A Christian must an heart as well as a
liver, not only love the Truth, but contend for it, and the more earnestly the
more it is opposed: The Apostle says, that a Bishop must hold fast the Word of
Truth, Titus 1. 9. (...).
The word signifies an holding it fast against a contrary force; as when a man
seeks to wrest a staff out of another hand, he holds it the faster.

2. The next Reason is, That we may not endanger and hazard our selves and the
Truth. 1. That we may not endanger our selves: It Is good to be able to defend
Religion when it is questioned; ignorant, secure and careless spirits will
certainly miscarry: Present Truths and present Errors have an aspect upon our
interests; we must determine one way or another: Now how easily are they
carried away with interests that have no principles, no (...), 2 Pet. 3. 17. no
proper ballast in their own spirits? Therefore let us strive to know the Truth,
to own the Truth in a time of trial; it is needful: All Errors and Heresies are
but men's natural thoughts gotten into some valuable opinion, because backed
with the defenses of wit and parts. What are all the learned Disputes against
the Truth, but the props of those vulgar misprisions and gross conceits that
are in the heart of every natural and ignorant man? We have all an heretic in
our bosoms, and are by nature prepared to drink in all kind of errors and lies,
and therefore we are said, Psalm. 58. 3. to speaklyes from the womb, because
these things are in our natures; Pelagiani omnes miscimur and cumsuper cilio
Pharisaico. Spanhem.
we are born Pelagians and Libertines and Papists. As in the new nature there
is a cognation and proportion between us and Truth, so in the old nature there
is an inclination to all manner of Errors. Luther says, Every man is born with
a Pope in his belly: And Mr Greenham has a saying, That if all Errors and the
memorials of them were annihilated by the absolute Power of God, so that there
should not the least remembrance of them remain, yet there is enough in the
heart of one man to revive them again the next day. Certainly what ever is
suggested from without does very well suit with the carnal thoughts that are in
our own bosoms: Look upon any error or blasphemy that is broached in the world,
and you will find it true: Is Atheism vented? The fool has said in his heart,
there is no God, Psalm. 14. 1. Gentilism or the doctrine of many Gods? So do we
set up many Gods; what ever we fear or love, that we worship; Whose god is the
belly, Phil. 3. 19. Every man naturally is a Pagan and Idolater: Pelagian
Tenets, wherein original sin is denied, are natural: Common people think they
had ever a good heart toward God; All these have I kept from my youth, Matthew.
19. 20. Chance and Fortune in a contradiction to Gods Decrees are a man's
natural opinions. So the doctrine of works and merit is in every man's heart:
What question more rife when we begin to be serious, then What shall I do? A
ceremonious ritual Religion is very pleasing to carnal sense; Conjectural
persuasions is but a more handsome word for the thoughts of ignorant persons;
they say they cannot be assured, but they hope well: Doctrines of Liberty are
very suitable also to corrupt nature; Cast away the coards, Psalm. 2. and Who is
Lord over us? Psalm. 12. 4. Nay all sins are rooted in some error of judgment,
and therefore they are called errors, Psalm. 19. 12. Well then, for our own
Caution we had need stand for the Truth, because Error is so suitable to our
thoughts; now when it spreads further, it is suitable also to our interests,
and then we are in great danger of being overset. 2. That we may not hazard the
Truth: When Errors go away without control, it is a mighty prejudice both to
the present and the next age. The dwellers upon Earth rejoiced when Gods
Witnesses were under hatches, and there was none to contest with them, Rev. 11.
10. Fools must be answered, or else they will grow wise in their own conceit,
Prove. 26. 4, 5. Error is of a spreading growing nature, therefore it is not good
to retreat and retire into our own cells from the heat and burden of the day;
let us stand in the gap and make resistance as God gives ability: Two Motives
will enforce this Reason. 1. The Preciousness of Truth: Buy the Truth, and sell
it not; it is a commodity that should be bought at any rate, but sold by no
means, for the world cannot bid an answerable price for it: Christ thought it
worthy his Blood to purchase the Gospel; by offering up himself he not only
procured the comfort of the Gospel, but the very publication of the Gospel;
therefore we should reckon it among our treasures and choicest privileges, and
not easily let it go, lest we seem to have cheap thoughts of Christ's blood* 2.
The trust that is reposed in us for the next age, that is an obligation to
faithfulness: We are not only to look to our selves, but to posterity, to that
Doctrine which is transmited to them; One generation teaches another: and as
we leave them Laws and other National Privileges, so it would be sad if we
should not be as careful to leave them the Gospel. Our fathers told us what
thou did in their days, Ps. 44. 1. Every age is to consider of the next, lest
we intail a prejudice upon them against the Truth: What comes from forefathers
is usually received with reverence: A vain conversation received by tradition
from your fathers, 1 Pet. 1. 18. If you be not careful you may sin after you
are dead, our errors and evil practices being continued and kept afoot by
posterity. All the World had been lost in Error and Profaneness, if God had
not stirred up in every age some faithful Witnesses to keep up the memory of
Truth. There is in man a natural desire to do his posterity good; Love is
descensive: Oh consider, how shall the children that are yet unborn come to the
knowledge of the purity of Religion, without some public monument, or care on
your part to leave Religion undefiled. Antichrist had never prevailed so much,
if men had thought of after ages; they slept and unwarily yielded to
incroachment after incroachment, till Religion began to degenerate into a fond
Superstition or bundle of pompous and idle Ceremonies; and now we see how hard
it is to wean men from these things, because they have flown down them in the
stream of succession, and challenge the authority and prescription of ancient
Customs. Look as sometimes the Ancestors guilt is measured into the bosom of
posterity, because they continued in their practices; Matthew. 23. 35. That upon
you may come all the righteous blood, etc. So many times the miscarriages of
posterity may justly be imputed to us, because they shipwracked themselves upon
our example: The fathers ate sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on
edg. Well then, let us perform the part of faithful Trustees, and keep the
Doctrine of Salvation (as much as in us lies) pure and unmixed.

It presses us to this earnestness of contention and zeal Use.
for the truths of God: We live in a frozen age, and cursed indifferency has
done a great deal of mischief. Christians! Is Error grown less dangerous? or
the truth of Religion more doubtful? Is there nothing certain and worth
contention? or are we afraid to meddle with such as shrewd themselves under the
glorious name of Saints? We will not oppose Saints, and so let the Truth go
that was given to the Saints, to be kept by them: Oh my Brethren, Paul
withstood Peter to the face, when Truth was like to suffer, Gal. 2. 11. So
should we withstand them to the face rather then make such sad work for the
next age, and leave our poor babes to the danger of error and seduction. What Is
become of our zeal? There is none valiant for the Truth upon the Earth:
Prejudices and interests blind men so that they cannot see what they see, and
are afraid to be zealous lest they should be accounted bitter. We have been
jangling about discipline, and now doctrine it self is like to escape us. In
the Name of God let us look about us; Are there not crafty Thieves abroad that
would steal away our best treasure? and in the midst of the scuffle cheat us
and our posterity of the Gospel it self? We have been railing at one another
for lesser differences, and now we begin to be ashamed of it: Satan hops that
Error and Blasphemy it self shall go scot-free. Ah my Brethren, it is time to
awake out of sleep; whilst we have slept the Enemy has come and sown tares:
What a tattered Religion shall we transmit to ages to come, if there be not a
timely remedy? To help you I shall show,

1. What we must contend for. 2. Who must contend, and in what manner.
1. What we must contend for, for every Truth of God according to its moment
and weight: The dust of Gold is precious; and it is dangerous to be careless in
the lesser Truths. Whosoever shall break the least of the Commandments, and
teach men so to do, etc. Mat. 5. 19. There is nothing superfluous in the Canon;
the Spirit of God is wise, and would not burden us with things unnecessary:
Things comparatively little may be great in their own sphere, especially in
their season, when they are the truths of the present age, and now brought
forth by God upon the stage of the World that we may study his mind in them.
Potius runt coelum quam pereat unamica veritatis. Luther.
Better Heaven and Earth should be blended together in confusion (says Luther)
then one dust of Gods Truth should perish. If the Lord call us out to the
defense of them, what ever comes of it we must be faithful: A man may make
shipwreck of a good conscience in small matters; say not, It is a little one,
and my Soul shall live: Harken to Satan, and this will be a little one, and
that shall be a little one, till we have littled away all the principles of
faith. I tell you, the world has counted those small things for which the
children of God have ventured their all it is your duty to take the little
foxes, Cant. 2. 15. The first appearances of Error are many times modest: There
is a chain of Truths; the Devil takes out a link here and a link there, that
all may fall to pieces: See 2 These. 2. 2. Let no man deceive you with such
doctrine as that the day of Christ is at hand: Why? they might say there is no
great danger in that? Peter says, the end of all things draws nigh, 1 Pet.
4. 7. The Seducers said, (...), it is at hand; and Peter says, (...), it
draws nigh; here is no great difference! Aye but be not shaken in mind (says
Paul) neither by letter, nor by word, nor by spirit, as if the day of the Lord
were at hand: that is, take heed of such suggestions under what pretense soever
they are brought to you, either of revelations or collections from my doctrine,
it is all a falsehood: Ne forte cu^ transisset te^pus quo cum credebant esse
venturum et venisse non cernerent etia^ caetera fallaciter sibi promi^^i
arbitrantes and de ipsa mer^ede fidei desperanit. Aug. Ep. 80.
Why is Paul so earnest? because Satan had an aim to make them look for the
sudden coming of Christ, which not happening accordingly to make them fall a
questioning all the Truths of God. So Genesis 3. 2. Ye shall not eat nor touch
lest ye dye; that was Satan's repetition; whereas God had said, Genesis 2. 17. Thou
shall surely dye: no great difference; but Satan got a great deal of advantage
by it, therefore be not ignorant of Satan's devices: The Council of Nice would
not gratify (...) and (...).
Arrius in a letter, and (...) and (...).
Nestorius in a letter: The lesser Truths are not to be slighted in their time
and place; they deserve an earnest contention: The Martyrs were not foolish nor
prodigal of their lives, they knew what they did when they durst not give place
for a moment.

All this is not spoken to justify undue rigors, such as are without any
temper of Christian moderation; or those frivolous Controversies about trifles,
such as have no foundation in the Word, as about the Observation of Easter,
between the Eastern and Western Churches, which difference grew so high that
they excommunicated each other; or about celebrating the Lords Supper with
leavened or unleavened bread; or the fierce bickrings between Chrysostom and
Epiphanius about Origens Books, set on by Theophilus, in pursuit of which many
were slain, the Senate house pulled down, and the great Church at
constantinople set on fire. Nor to justify mere verbal strifes about words and
names forbidden by the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 14. 1 Timothy 6. 4. Vain glorious men if
they can get but a different method or expression, cry no new light, and so
there is a great deal of noise stirred up about a mistake. Nor to justify the
breaking off Church Fellowship and communion, and making rents in the Body of
Christ, because of difference of opinion in smaller matters, when we agree in
the more weighty things: We are to walk together as far as we are agreed, Phil.
3. 16. and externals wherein we differ, lying far from the heart of Religion,
are nothing to faith and the new creature, wherein we agree, Gal. 5. 6. and 6.
15. The most weight should be pitched upon the fundamentals and essentials of
Religion; and when there is an agreement there, private differences in smaller
matters should not make us break off from one another: False zeal is unevenly
carried out to these lower things both in opinion and practice; and usually
young Professors are eager upon disputes, impatient of contradiction, and lay
out all their strength this way, to excuse their care in the more weighty
matters of Christianity; whereas the Kingdom of God does not stand in meat and
drink, but in peace, and righteousness, and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17.
The itch of disputing and zeal for an opinion, rather then Religion in the
main, are bad characters. Again, when men, though in the right, think there is
no Religion or holiness but within the compass of such an opinion, this is
censorious rigor, or to Eccl. 7. 17.
be righteous overmuch; or when a lesser dissent is loaded with all the odious
consequences that you can fancy in your thoughts, though disclaimed by the
party dissenting; when Eloi is turned into Elias, and things are perverted by a
mis-interpretation, as Christ's words were, John 2. 19. compared with Mat. 26.
61. Briefly, when men upon every small occasion draw all things to extremity,
and break out into As Rivet said of Montague, Non potest ille quenquam a quo
dissentit ver in levissimis sine convitiis mominare. Rivets Apol. pro
sanctissima Virgin Maria.
contumely, revilings, persecution, biting and devouring one another; it is not
zeal, but fierceness and brutish immoderation: Therefore all this excepted, it
stands us upon to be zealous even to sufferings for the lesser Truths, that
we may prevent the further ^ncroachments of Satan and Antichrist his eldest son
upon the liberties and privileges of the Saints.

But now besides the lesser things, there are Fundamentals and Essentials in
Religion, which challenge the choicest of our care and zeal, that they may be
kept entire and without violation; the ignorance of them is damnable, and the
denial heretical: to determine what they are is an undertaking of great
concernment to the Christian World, but of too high a nature for the present
Exercise. I shall only mention a few Points which seem to be (...) matters
concerning the Foundation; as the Creation of the World by God in six days out
of nothing, Gods Providence, man's misery by sin, ^^liverance by Christ, the
necessity of the new creature, the Resurrection of the dead, and the
everlasting Recompenses: These are Points of the greatest moment, though I
cannot but say that others also are Fundamental; There are diverse other
Fundamentals of the highest nature, as the Mystery of the Trinity into which we
are baptized, the V^nion of the two Natures in the Person of Christ, that
Scriptures are the Word of God, etc.
but these come to mind as being of the most practical concernment.

2. Who must strive, and in that manner. I answer, All in their place, and in
that way that is proper to them. 1. Private Christians must have a share in
this holy contention; their duty is partly to search out the truth, that they
may not fight blindfold, or by an unhappy mistake lavish out their zeal upon
fancies which they affect, or ordinances and doctrines of men: People are never
so furious, as when they have least ground and reason for what they assert; yea
and error never prevails so much as when Christians are all flame and
affection, without judgment, and do not understand the Reasons of that Religion
which they do profess: See 1 Pet. 3. 15. A reason of the hope that is in you:
and 2 Pet. 3. 17. (...), their own stedfastness; that is, such a stedfastness
as does arise from solid grounds in their own hearts, and not merely from the
consent of others. 2. To own the profession of the Truth what ever it cost
them; I say it is their duty to own the profession of the Truth, for the public
owning of the people it is a great let and restraint to Tyranny, and such
innovations as otherwise a carnal Magistrate would introduce into the Church by
force and power* See Acts 4. 21. They let them go because of the people: so
Mat. 14. 5. and 21. 46. And again, I say they must own it what ever it cost
them, for zealous defenses are a great honor to the Truth: The disputations of
the Doctors do not commend it to the world so much as the death of the Martyrs;
and therefore though you cannot dispute for the Truth, yet you should dye for
the Truth: Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, etc. Heb. 12. 4. We cannot be
at too much cost to preserve so precious a treasure to posterity; And here even
Ipsae foeminae sunt pobiscum in eadem confessionis gloria constitutae. Cyp.
Mart. Cum triumphantibus viris and foeminae veniunt quae cum saeculo dimicantes
sexum quoque vicerunt. Cyp. Sermon. de Lapsis.
women may put in a share, they have lives to sacrifice upon the interest of
the Truth, and usually they do not fall in vain. 3. To honor the Truth by
their conversations: there are heretical manners as well as heretical
doctrines; and there are many that are otherwise of an orthodox belief, yet
make others sectaries and disciples of their vices: some live Atheism; there
are Antinomians in practice: An Apostate is a practical Arminian: Therefore
Christians are called to hold forth the Word of life in their conversations,
Phil. 2. 16. and to make the doctrine of God the Savior comely, Tit. 2. 10. by
glorifying God in that course of life to which they are disposed: To preach and
write for the Truth, does not honor it so much as to walk in the Truth, John
Ep. 3. 4. Efficaeius est vitae qua^ lingu^ testimonium. Bernard.
and the life is a better witness of the reality of Religion then the tongue.
4. To comprise all in a few words what ever makes for the Truth, either with
God or men all that must the people do; We can do nothing against the Truth,
but for the Truth, says Paul, 2 Cor. 13. 8. To God you must pray, that he
would send forth not only Laborers, but Champions, Mat. 9. 38. not only such as
can handle the trowel, but the sword in the Battles of the Church: Gladiatores
perfectissimos non tantum magistri and praepositi sui, sed etiam Idiotae and
supervacue quique adhortantur de longinquo ut saepe se ipso populo dictata
suggesta profuerint. Tertul ad Mart.
To men, you are to quicken those that have gifts to look to their duty in this
kind; Say to Archippus, Take heed to thy Ministry which thou have received in
the Lord, Col. 4. 17. Many may be stired up by your exhortations, that
otherwise would lie useless in illeness and privacy; in the Battle the
Trumpeter has his use as well as the Soldier: Neither are they to be
admonished only, but assisted, and by that means you have an interest in the
glory of the work: John Ep. 3. 8. We ought to receive such, that we may be
fellow-helpers to the Truth; (...), co-workers; your helping hand is to the
action, and God will not be unmindful of it: yea if you bear any part of the
toil, by performing any labor of love to them, it shall turn to a good account
in the day of the Lord: Hezekiah's servants did but copy out the Proverbs, and
it is mentioned to their praise, Prove. 25. 1. All this may be done by persons of
a private gift and station.

2. There is something that the Magistrate may do; Romans 13. 4.
He is the Minister of God for good; not only for good Civil, but Spiritual;
and therefore does the Apostle bid us pray for them, that they may be keepers
of both the Tables, 1 Timothy 2. 2. that we may lead a quiet life under them in
all godliness and honesty. (...), etc. Arist. Polit. lib. 7. cap. 8.
Heathens have asserted, That it belongs to the Magistrates duty chiefly to
look after matters of Religion: Much more is it evident by the light of
Christianity: The Kings of the Old Testament are commended for their zeal in
this kind; and in the times of the Gospel it is prophesied that Kings shall be
the Churches nursing fathers, and Queens her nursing mothers, Isai. 49. 23.
which they cannot be if they suffer poison to be given to Gods little ones
without any let and restraint: It Is a clear truth, that if a man give up
himself to Christ, he is to give up himself to him in every relation; his wit,
wealth, parts, authority, all to be laid out for the use and service of
Christ: he that does not give up all, gives nothing; we are to be Christ's in
every capacity: Therefore a Magistrate as a Magistrate must not only
countenance Religion, but also discountenance Error, and hinder the spreading
of it within his charge. It Is by Christ Prove. 8. 1^.
that Kings reign, from him they received their power, and to him must they
give an account of the exercise of it in the great day of Recompenses;
therefore they are bidden to be wise and to kiss the Sun, Psalm. 2. 10, 11, 12.
which certainly notes more then a negative act or not opposing; there must be
something positive* a zealous defense of the Truth in their way, or else God
will reckon with them: Those Gallio's that are indifferent to Christ and
Antichrist, cannot expect a long and happy reign. I cannot see how they can be
true to Civil Interest, unless they be careful for the suppression of Error;
for when false doctrines are freely vented, it is to be supposed they will find
a general reception, for the most are the worst; and then when the generality
of a Nation are corrupted, National Judgments will not long be kept off, the
whole Body is sure to smart for it; for (as the Jewish Proverb is) Two dry
sticks will set a green one on fire: Besides, that Error is masterly and
bloody, and loves to give Law; therefore ere it be too late they should look
to the Civil Peace, for if men be quiet, God will not, when his Honor and
Truth and Worship is neglected. But of this more hereafter.

3. Ministers are to contend for the Truth; for by their office and station in
the Church they are Captains of the people in this War against Satan and his
adherents; therefore it is required of them that they should be able to handle
the sword and the trowel; not only to exhort by sound doctrine, but to convince
the gainsayers, Titus 1. 9. These are (...), 2 Timothy 2. 2. the faithful men, the
Feofees in trust, to whom Truth is committed; they are the salt of the Earth,
Mat. 5. 13. those that must season the world with gracious principles;
therefore they must above all others labor in the desence of the Truth,
otherwise they are compared to Is. 56. 10. 11
dumb dogs that bark not when the thieves come to steal away the treasure. Now
Ministers must contend, partly by preaching, warning the people of the Wolves
that are abroad, Acts 20. 29. Partly by disputing, Acts 15. 2. and 18. ult.
that by the knocking of flints light may fly out, and that Truth may beat its
enemy hand to hand in the open field: And partly by writing, Alteruis vicibus
contentioso fune uterque diem in vespedam traximus obst^epentibus etia^
quibusdam spectantibus, singulorum, nubilo quodam verit as obumbrabatur.
Tertul. contra Judaeo.
for many times disputes are carried on with so much tumult and popular noise,
that Truth is lost in the crowd; besides, by this means we are the help to
posterity, that together with the poison the antidote may be transmitted to
them.

VERSE IV. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old
ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into
lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
JVde having made way into their affections by a Salutation, which according to
the wont of the Apostles, breaths out spiritual and heavenly wishes for their
good; he does in the third Verse exhort and engage them to a constant defense
of the Truth; and now the necessity or occasion of such an Exhortation is
declared, namely, because false Teachers were got abroad, and had slily taken
up the general name and profession of Christians; therefore in faithfulness he
could not choose but warn them of the danger.

The whole Epistle is spent in the description of Heretics, their sins and
punishments: in this Verse they are described by four things. 1. By their
entrance into the Church, [ Certain men crept in unawares.] 2. By their
condition before God* [ who were before of old ordained to this condemnation.]
3. By the disposition of their spirits, [ ungodly men.] 4. By the course of
their doctrines and conversations, where two things are charged upon them: 1.
Abusing the Gospel, [ turning the grace of our Lord into lasciviousness.] 2.
Denying Jesus Christ in his Natures and Offices, [ denying the only Lord God,
and our Lord Jesus Christ.]

First, Let us begin with the description of their entrance into the Church, [
There are certain men crept in unaware^^] Some say they are not named, as not
being worthy, or rather it not being necessary, they being so plainly
described; and indeed it is usual with the Apostles, who rather dealt against
things then persons, to suppress the name, and describe the error or sin. But
what is the meaning of this first thing laid to their charge, they crept in
unawares? I answer, It may imply their entrance into the Church under a color
and show of profession: Wicked men may creep into Observat.
the best Church; God permits it not only for their own hardening, but for
our trouble and trial: Paul complains of false Brethren privily brought in to
spy out their liberty, Gal. 2. 7. and the adversaries of Jerusalem said, Ezra
4. 1. Let us build with you, for we seek your God as ye do; but 'twas with an
intent to hinder the work: so Simon Magus got to be baptized* Acts 8. as
thieves seek to be entertained in the house, that they may have the more
opportunity to work mischief whilst the good man is asleep. Learn hence to be
more watchful in admissions to the Church; no perils so great as those
occasioned by false Brethren: We think to fill the Church, but we do but fill
the house with thieves; wicked men ever prove a trouble: It Is an easy matter
to fill the Church by remitting the rigor and severity of discipline, but
Heaven is never the fuller, but the emptier; for wicked men are hardened and
confirmed in their own security, and the Church never fares the better,
Multiplicitis fidei populis fides imminuta est and cresantibus filiis matter
aegrotat, quantu^ copiae accessit, tantu^ disciplinae necessit, in audito
genere processus and re^essus, crescens simul et decrescens. Salvian de
Gubernat.
it loses in strength what it gets in breadth, as a river does, and zeal is
lessened the more the number is increased: yea wicked men usually prove a
trouble, and we come to wish afterward we had been more strict: it is said, Acts
5. 13, 14. Of the rest d^rst no man join himself unto them, but the people
magnified them, and Believers were the more added unto the Lord, multitudes
both of men and women: It Is spoken upon the occasion of the sudden death of
Ananias and Saphira; it terrified the hypocrites, but brought in more sound
Believers; for of the rest durst no man join, that is, of such as Ananias and
Saphira was, Believers in show, but carnal in heart; they saw 'twas not
dallying with God in such matters: Just so when the Church keep a straight
hand, hypocrites dare not join, but sound Believers will the sooner, and then
the Church though it be a lesser body, it is more sound, healthy and active. But
what Rule must we go by? we must go by outward and general profession: I
answer, This place will give us some direction; as far as we can discern men,
so far may we judge of them; for the entrance of these men is here declared to
be clancular and surreptitious; if the Church had known them, or looked to them
so warily as it should, the mischief had been prevented. Ecclesia exintentione
fideles tantum colligi^, and si nosset impios and incredulos eos aut nunquam
admitteret aut casu admissos excluderet. Bellar. de Ecclesiae, c. 10. Observat.
2.
Bellarmine himself confesses, That the intention of the Church is only to
gather Believers into a Body, and if it knew the wicked and unbeleeving, it
would either not admit them, or being admitted by chance, it would cast them
out. It Is good to be strict, lest by promiscuous admissions we bring in such a
mischief to the Church as we cannot easily get rid of.

2. It may note their intrusion or invasion of the office of preaching;
presuming without a Warrant, or coming into the fold not by the door, in the
regular established way, false Teachers usually running unsent, it is often
charged upon them in the Scriptures: None so prone to errors as those that have
a defect in their Calling. Christ when he prays for a blessing on the
Apostles labors, he uses that as an argument, John 17. 18. I have sent them
into the world: They that are loath to submit their gifts to public
approbation, draw a just suspicion upon themselves; How came they to you? did
they cre^p in? or were they solemnly admitted? When Elements are out of their
place they breed confusion: When men are out of their place they are not a
blessing, but a mischief to the Church.

3. The two former senses may be allowed, but I rather prefer a third; their
creeping into the peoples hearts and affections by plau^ble pretenses and
insinuat^ons, in stilling their errors drop by drop before they could be
observed, and pretending themselves to be friends of Truth and Piety. I do
prefer this sense, partly because he says only [ crept in,] without mentioning
either Church or Office; but chiefly, because this Epistle is but the
abridgment of the second Epistle of Peter, as will easily appear to those that
do compare them: now there it is said, ^ Pet. 2. 1. They shall privily bring in
damnable heresies, denying the Lord that bought them. From this sense observe,
That false Teachers use to varnish Observat. 3.
over and mask the face of Error with plausible pretenses, that unawares we may
take it into our bosoms: The Apostle speaks of their slights and cunning
craftiness, Ephesians. 4. 14. Their slights and pretenses are many, I shall touch
upon a few. First, Sometimes greater strictness; Col. 2. 18. Which things have
a show of wisdom, and neglect of the body: rigorous observances and outward
mortifications, as the Papists do* 2. Special meekness; Ravening Wolves in
sheeps clothing, Mat, 7. 15. Sic Sisinnius Novatianorum Episcopus apud Vedelium
in Prud. veteris Ecclesiae in Prol. c. 3, 4.
as if they were all for love and kindness; Absalom stole away the peoples
hearts by this artifice, 2 Samuel 15. 2. 3. Higher Gospel strain^; therefore does
Paul speak so much against the other Gospel, Gal. 1. 3. and the other Jesus, 2
Cor. 11. 4. namely, such an one as they had set up. 4. Selfdenyal; as some
false Teachers at Corinth would take no maintenance to disgrace Paul; see 2
Cor. 11. 12, etc. this was their glorying, that they would preach freely; and
whereas they contributed to the relief of Paul, to them it needed not. 5.
Greater learning and notions of a newer and more sublime strain; Oppositions of
science falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6. 20. Platonic speculations, ungrounded
subtleties. 6. Greater favor and liberty to Nature; They promise liberty, and
allure through the lusts of the flesh, 2 Pet. 2. 18. representing the faithful
Ministers of Christ, as envying the contentment of your natures, and burdening
you with exactions too rigorous; therefore the Apostle says, I am afraid lest
any through subtilty beguile you, as the Devil did Eve, 2 Cor. 11. 3. How was
that? I answer, By insinuating a kind of envy in God, as if he did begrudg them
the perfection and freedom of their natures; Genesis 3. 5. God knows that your
eyes shall be opened, etc. So they think others are too strict, and lay too
many restraints upon your carnal desires, and by this means allure many loose
and unstable Souls. 7. Many times pretending the defense of that Truth, which
they secretly impugn; as Pelagius talked altogether of grace; and Faustus
Rhegiensis dum capriose videri vellet pugnare contra Pelagianos, compertus fuit
Pelagio savens. Isiodor.
Faustus Rhegiensis pretending to oppose the Pelagians, did but more covertly
own their Cause.

Uses of this Point are diverse 1. For Information, it shows us the Reason why
we cannot set down the precise beginnings of Errors, because they are privily
brought in: Rev. 17. 5.
Mystery is written in the Whores forehead; The leak is not espied many times,
though the ship be ready to sink: The originals of Heresy are like the
Fountain of Nile, obscure and hidden; a man may lose himself in the Labyrinth
of Antiquity, before he can find them out. See the reverend and learned Dr
Ushers Answer to the Jesuits Challenge.
The Roman Apostasy is a Mystery of Iniquity, that stole into the Church
disguised and by degrees: So that the beginning of it is not so easily stated
as of other heresies that are full grown at their first appearance. 2. It
informs us of the odiousness of Error; it dares not appear in its own
colors, nor be seen in its own face: therefore Satan when he would set any
Error on foot, he makes choice of the most sub^il instruments, that they may
put a varnish upon it; as when he tempted Eve, he made use of the Serpent, the
most subtle of all the beasts of the field, Genesis 3. 1. whereas the Lord
chooses the plainest instruments, and has commanded them to use all
simplicity and godly conversation, 2 Cor. 1. 12. for Truth is so lovely in it
self, that it needs no borrowed colors, 3. It informs us what reason those
that are over you in the Lord have to press you to Caution; excuse their holy
jealousy, 2 Cor. 11. 3. all is but need: we must bark when we see a Wolf,
though in a sheeps garment; our silence and negligence does but give them an
advantage: Whilst the husbandman slept, the enemy came and sowed tares, Mat.
13. 35. 4. It presses you to skill and watchfulness; you had need be sound in
the faith, that you may discern between good and evil, yea to have your senses
exercised, Heb. 5. ult. A soft credulity is soon abused; Prove. 15. The simple
believes every word: There is no reason but knowledge should cost us pains as
well as gracious conversation; It Is a matter of great skill to be a through
Christian; there is a great deal of Sophistry and cunning abroad: if you follow
the cry, you are in danger of engaging in a confederacy against God; if you
stick to received Customs, there may be Error there too: if you run after every
Novellist on the other hand, you will soon be led into the bogs of Error and
Profaneness; therefore go to him for direction that has the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge. But you need not only skill, but care and watchfulness;
It Is not good to drink too freely of suspected Fountains: let not your
affections surprise your judgment; we admire the persons, the gifts, and so
easily swallow the doctrine: Try the spirits, 1 John 4. 1. 1 These. 5. 2^. When
there is counterfeit gold abroad, we use the Touchstone: Truth loses nothing
by being tried, and you lose nothing, for then your affections are better
grounded: Prove all things, no man is infallible; an implicit faith begets but
a fond affection.

Secondly, These Seducers are described by their condition before God, [ who
were before of old ordained to this condemnation,] (...) of old, that is, from
all Eternity, for so the matter here spoken of imports; (...), we translate it
before ordained, but the word signifies written as in a Book: it is usual in
Scripture to compare Gods Decrees to a Book; as Christ alleging Gods Decree
for his mission into the World, says, Psalm. 40. 8. In the volume of thy Book
it is written of me: The meaning of the metaphor is to show that these Decrees
are as certain and determinate as if he had a Book wherein to write them: Now
these are said to be written before of old, to show, that though they crept in
unawares as to the Church, yet not as to God; they fell under the notice of his
Decrees before ever they acted in this evil way. It Is further added, that they
were ordained or written down in Gods Book, (...), for judgment or
condemnation; the word is indifferent to either sense, for (...) is often put
for (...); thus it is to be taken here for condemnation, appears by that
place of Peter* (...), damnable heresies, 2 Pet. 2. 1. and verse. 3. Whose
damnation of a long time slumbereth not; as he says here, of old ordained to
this judgment: The meaning of the whole is, that they were such as were left to
themselves to bring upon themselves by their own sins and errors a just
condemnation.

That the object of the divine Decrees are not only men's ways, Observat. 1.
but men's persons: He does not only say that their condemnation was
pre-ordained, but they also were ordained of old to this condemnation. I
observe this, because many say that Gods Decrees do only respect actions and
the events; we see they respect persons also; we have no cause to mince
matters, when the Scriptures speak up to the point so fully and roundly.

Again from that [ ordained, or forewritten] observe, God Observat. 2.
has his Books and Registers, wherein the persons, behaviors, and eternal
estates of all men are recorded. At the Day of Judgment, these Books shall be
opened, Rev. 20. 12. Therefore it should be our care to be able to read that
our names are written in the Book of Life, then which there cannot be a greater
privilege, Luke 10. 20. And it presses Caution; all that we do stands upon
record; our speeches, Mal. 3. 16, 17. our thoughts, 1 Cor. 4. 5. our actions,
Jerem. 17. 1.

Again observe, That in all those things which appertain to Observat. 3.
the Judgment of sinners, God does nothing rashly, but proceeds by foresight
and pre-ordination.

Again, No man ever perverted the Truths of God but to Observat. 4.
his own loss. They were ordained to this judgment, that is, that by their sins
they should come to such a ruin: We play with opinions, but do not consider
that damnation is the end of them; The way of truth is the way of life, but
error tends to death.

These things might be observed, but I shall rather pitch upon two Points; one
particular, and restrained to the scope of the Context; the other general, as
being taken from the consideration of the expressions in their full latitude:
Observat. 5.
The first is, That Heresies and Errors do not fall out by chance, but
according to the certain pre-ordination and foreknowledg of God. There are two
Reasons for it, Nothing can come to pass without his Will, and Nothing can come
to pass against his Will. 1. Not without his Will: If a Sparrow cannot fall to
the ground without our heavenly Father, Mat. 10. 39. that is, cannot be taken
and slain without the Will of God, then certainly nothing can be imagined,
which God did not foresee, or which he could not have hindered: There is nothing
so small, but the Lord takes cognizance of it* nothing so evil, but he turns
it to good. Exempt any thing from Providence, and you weaken that respect which
is due from the creatures to God: If Satan may do what he will, and God only be
a looker on, then the Devil-worship of the Heathens would seem more rational;
'twas their custom first to appease the angry gods lest they should hurt them,
and then to invoke the propitious: Upon this doctrine we might fear the Devil
and carnal men, though God be propitious for many things are done whether he
will or no. 2. Not against his Will; for then God should make a creature too
hard for himself: Things may be against his revealed Will, for that is a Rule
to try the creatures; but not against his secret Will, for that would make God
impotent and weak: Things that are most against his revealed Will, yet fall
under the ordination of his secret Will; and whilst men break Commandments,
they fulfill Decrees: His revealed Will shows what should be done, his secret
Will what will be done. Briefly, the concurrence of God in and about the errors
of men may be conceived in these things. 1. He denies grace and light, which
might direct and sanctify; He is debtor to no man, and may do with his own
according to ^i^ good pleasure, Mat. 20. 15. He is not bound to give grace to
all, and therefore it is no prejudice to his goodness to pass by some. 2. He
leaves difficulty enough in the Word, that men who will not be satisfied may
be hardened: Mark 4. 11, 12. All these things are spoken in Parables, that
seeing they might see and not perceive; that is, for a punishment of their
wilful blindness and hardness: Corrupt nature stumbles in Gods plainest ways;
the Word is clear enough to them that have a mind to understand it, and yet
difficult enough to them that have a mind to harden themselves into a
prejudice. Non periclitor dicere (says Tertullian) ipsas Scripturas ita
dispositas esse, us materiam subministrar^nt haeretius: So the Lord himself
says, Jer. 6. 21. Behold I will lay stumbling blocks before this people; that
is, suffer them to stumble at their own prejudices. 3. God leaves them to
follow the course of their own hearts: he does not incline and compel their
wills, or infuse evil to them, only suffers them to follow the carnal bent,
and corrupt ambition of their own hearts, Hosea 4. 17. let him alone, 1 King.
22. 22. Go forth and do so; Psalm. 31. 12. I gave them up to their own counsels,
he hinders not their wickedness; Yea, permiteth it, that so his wise counsels
may take place. 4. God orders it for good, thereby bringing great advantage
to his own name, Exodus 9. 16. For this cause have I raised thee up to show in
thee my power, great shakings and tumults discover much of God to the world;
the Devil picketh out the most polished shafts in all the quiver of mankind:
and yet still the Lord maintains the Lot of his Inheritance: Yea, God does
not only advance his Name, and discover the glory of his providence, in
protecting the Church, notwithstanding Satan's factors, and the abettors of his
cause and kingdom: But also causes the truths that are questioned to shine the
more brightly, as being more strongly vindicated and asserted, as a Torch
shines the brighter when 'its waved with the wind; such times put men the more
upon the study and love of truth, doctrines not being taken up upon trust, but
sound conviction, besides error being permitted, manifests the approved, 1
Cor. 11. 19. as a quick smart wind severeth the solid grain, from the chaff:
and it is a means to engage our dependence upon God for knowledge and
instruction; Christ's Prophetical Office would lie idle and useless, were not
the chains of consent sometimes broken, and the language divided, some saying
one thing some another, as the difference between the Jews, and the Samaritans
about the place of worship, makes the woman to go to Christ for satisfaction,
John 4. 20. Once more, Gods permission of error conduces to the just ruin of
his enemies: Offenses must be, but woe be to that man by whom they come, Mat.
18. 6. 7. So 1 Samuel 2. 25. Elyes Sons would not harken to the voice of their
Father, because the Lord had a mind to slay them: By their own voluntary sins,
God brings them to their just ruin and condemnation, God lets them alone to
wanton and play away their own salvation, if they will turn Seekers, Familists,
Ranters, Atheists, Let them alone.

Uses. The Point may be applied many ways. 1. Here is comfort to those that
regard the affairs of Sion; all the confusion, and troubles that are in the
Church, are ordered by a wise God, he will bring some good issue out of them,
some glory to his Name, wherein the Saints rejoice as much as in their own
welfare; some good to the Church: Observe have not thou been more confirmed in
the truth? engaged to a more frequent recourse to Christ, in whom are hidden
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge? Have thou not seen more of Gods
Providence displayed by these tumults, etc. 2. It checketh fear, it is all in
the hands of a good God, as God tries you to see what you will do, so you must
wait upon God to see what he will do: let him alone, in and by all, he will
bring forth his work in due time. 3. It shows their wickedness that take
occasion to turn Atheists, from the multitude or errors, when the Church is
rent into so many factions, men foolish, as if there were no God, and the whole
Gospel were but an imposture, and well devised Fable; that is the reason why
Christ prays, John 17* Let them be perfect in one, that the world may know
that thou have sent me, (i. e.) that they might not suspect me for an
imposture: usually we find that thoughts of Atheism are wont to haunt us upon
these occasions; but there is little reason for it, for all these things are
fore-known by God, f^re-told by God, They must be* 1 Cor. 11. 19. Mat. 24. 6.
And never is there so much of God and of the Beauty of Truth* discovered, as
when errors abound; so that if there were not errors, there would be more
cause of suspicion, where all things run with a smooth and full consent and
were never questioned, then the strength and worth of them is not tried: But
the words of the Lord are pure words, as Silver tried in a Furnace of earth,
purified seven times, thou shall keep them O Lord, thou shall preserve them
from this generation, Psalm. 12. 6. 7. 4. It Is a ground of Prayer in times of
delusion: Lord this was ordained by thee in wisdom, let us discern the glory
in it and by it, more and more, the Church argues, that there was not only
Pilates malice and Herod's malice, but Gods hand and Counsel in the crucifixion
of Christ, Acts 4. 28. to do whatsoever thy Hand and Counsel determined before
to be done: Lord we know there is thy Counsel in it, and thy Counsel still
tends to good, etc. God loves to be owned in every Providence, and to be
entreated to fulfill his own Decrees. 5. It informs us what a foolish madness
it is, to think that God sees not the sin which we secretly commit: surely he
sees it, for he foresaw it, before it was committed: Yea, from all Eternity.

So much for the first Point, the next is, That from all Observat. ^.
Eternity some were decreed by their sins, to come unto judgment or
condemnation; Because this is one of the Texts which Divines bring to prove the
general Doctrine of Reprobation. I shall here take occasion. 1. To open this
Doctrine. 2. To prove it. 3. To vindicate it. 4. To apply it: In the First, you
will understand the Nature: In the Second, the Reasons: In the Third, the
Righteousness; In the Fourth the profit of this Decree.

1. I shall open the Nature of it in several propositions. 1. It Is an Eternal
Decree: Gods Internal Acts are the same with his Essence, and therefore before
all time, as believers are Elected before all worlds, Ephesians. 1. 4. so are sinners
reprobated, they are both in time and order, before ever the creature was, Romans
9. 11. Before the Creatures had done either good or evil, it was said, Jacob
have I loved, and Esau have I hated. Election and Reprobation are not a thing
of yesterday, and subsequent to the Acts of the creature; but from all
Eternity. 2. There is a Decree and preordination, not only a naked foresight
of those that perish: Some Lutherans say that Praedestination is proper only
to the Elect; but as to the Reprobate, there is only a praescience or naked
foreknowledge: no Preordination, least they should make God the Author of the
creatures sin and ruin; but these men fear where no fear is, the Scriptures
show that the greatest evil that ever was, did not only fall under the
Foreknowledge, but determinate Counsel of God, Acts 2. 23. 'twas not only
fore-known, but unchangeably ordained and determined. 3. This Decree of God, is
founded in his own good will and pleasure; for there being nothing higher and
greater then God, it is a great error to suppose a cause of his will, either
before it, above it, or without it: Gods actions do all begin in himself, and
his Will is the supreme Reason, Mat. 11. 26* Even so Father because it seemed
good in thy sight: Jesus Christ would give no other reason why the Gospel was
hidden from the wise and prudent, and revealed unto Babes: we are often
disputing, why of two men that are equal in misery, the one should be taken the
other left; why the Lord will show mercy to some that are no less unworthy then
others; but when we have all done, we must merely rest in the Will and good
Pleasure of God, Even so Father, etc. See Romans 9. 18. He has mercy on whom he
will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens: it is not from the foresight of
our wills receiving or rejecting grace proposed, for then man's will would be
made a superior cause to an act in God. 4. In this matter of Reprobation,
Preterition, and Praedamnation, must be carefully distinguished: look as in
Election, God has declared to bestow first, grace, and then glory, to the
Decree of giving grace preterition is opposed, to the Decree of giving glory,
^rdination unto judgment: now Gods Preterition or passing by, is merely and
barely from the good pleasure of God: But Praedamnation, presupposes
consideration of the creatures sin; both these parts of the Decree, are clearly
set down in the word: Preterition, or passing by, Rev. 17. 8. Whose names were
not written in the Book ^f life, from the foundation of the world, so again,
Rev. 13. 11. In other places you have Predamnation expressed, as 1 ^hes. 5. 8.
appointed unto wrath, and here ordained to this judgment. 5. Those who are
passed by, or not written in Gods Book, never attain to saving grace; it is not
given to them, Mat. 13 11. To them it is given to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom, but to you it is not given: Yea it is said to be hidden from them,
Mat. 11. 26. they may have common gifts, or be under such a common work of the
Spirit, as leaves them without excuse; but because the Lord has passed them
by, effectual grace is not given to them without which they cannot believe and
be saved, John 10. 26. Ye believe not because ye are not of my sheep, that is,
not elected of my Father, saving grace runs in the Channel of Election, so
Acts 13. 48. as many as were ordained to eternal life believed Gods special
gifts are dispensed according to his Decrees. 6. Men being left of God and
destitute of saving grace, freely, and of their own accord fall into such sins
as render them obnoxious to the just wrath and vengeance of God, Romans 11. 7.
The Election has obtained, and the rest were hardened, freely and of their own
accord, they turned all things to their own judgment and ruin: so Rev. 13.
11. The dwellers on earth did worship the whore, whose names were not written
in the Book of life, that is, they turned aside to Antichristian defilements,
and pollutions. 7. Gods Decree concerning such persons is immutable, it is not
rescinded and disannuled, but is fully executed and accomplished in the
damnation of the sinner; the Lords Counsels are all unchangeable, both as to
Election, 2 Timothy 2. 18. Heb. 6. 17. and as to Reprobation, no Reprobate can be
an Elect person, nor an Elect person a Reprobate, Job. 12. 14. He shuts up a
man and there can be no opening, and Job. 22. 13. He is in one mind, who can
turn him: In Gods Books there is no putting in and crosing out of names; but
as the number of the Elect is definite and certain, they cannot be more, and
they cannot be less, so also of the Reprobate. 8. This Eternal, Irrevocable
purpose of God, of leaving sinners to themselves, that by their sins they may
come to judgment, is for Gods glory, Romans 9. 22. What if God willing to show
his warth and to makd his power known, endured with much long suffering, the
vessels fitted to destruction. All Gods Decrees, Works, Providence, tend to
the further discovery of himself in the eye of the creatures.

2ly. Let me prove that there is such a Decree, by Scriptures, for reason here
has no place, take here three that are most full; the first is 1 These. 5. 9.
God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by Jesus Christ,
which plainly implies that some are appointed unto wrath: The second is, 1
Pet. 2. 8. where the Apostle speaks of some that were disobedient and refused
Christ, whereunto also they were appointed: The third place is Prove. 16. 4. God
made all things for himself, and the wicked for the day of evil: the drift of
that place is to show that both Creation, and Predestination were for Gods
glory, and he instanceth in that part of predestination which concerns the
wicked, because it is hardest to be digested and believed.

But now for the Reasons, why God has chosen some and appointed others by sin
to come unto judgment: I can only tell you that Gods judgments are past
finding out, Romans 11. 33. We must admire, we cannot search them to the bottom:
so far as God has revealed his Will, we may clearly judge that it is for the
discovery of his Justice and Mercy, neither of which could have been discovered
to the world with that advantage, had it not been for his double Decree of God
to save some and leave others to their own ruin: if grace were given to all,
how should the word know that God were free; again, if all were pardoned, how
should the world know that God were just: in Election, God discovers the
freeness of his grace, Ephesians. 1. 6. it is love, that we enjoy grace, elective
love, that we enjoy it alone: In Reprobation, God discovers his Sovereignty,
and by it, the security of his justice, and power of his wrath, Romans 9. 22. in
choosing one and leaving another, there God discovers his Liberty, and that he
does not act out of servile necessity, and his severity in the eternal pains of
them that perish in their sins.

3. Let me vindicate this Doctrine, which in the eyes of some seems to
blemish the Justice of God, to infringe the comfort of man; Yea to abolish the
duty of man; therefore it needs a little clearing, reason cannot easily
digest this strong meat: partly because we are apt to reprehend what cannot
comprehend, partly because this Doctrine checketh carnal ease and security,
which is usually fed with a general hope, and presumption. That the God that
made us will save us, that he will not damn his creatures, but is merciful to
all, etc. now this awakeneth us, when we hear that grace flows in a narrower
Channel: partly because aspiring man is loath to submit to this absolute
Lordship, and Soveraignity of God, that he should dispose of his creatures
according to his own pleasure: our ambition is to be (...) Lords of our selves;
Man that would be as God, takes it ill to be as a beast made to, be taken and
destroyed: Upon all these prejudices man is loath to receive this Doctrine,
therefore it needs to be cleared.

1. In regard of God, that you may not pollute and stain his excellency, with
impure and prejudicial thoughts: you will say, is God just, that only upon his
will and pleasure ordains his creatures to condemnation; has not the
Reprobates cause to complain if he has passed a Decree upon which their
condemnation does infallibly follow? I answer, 1. our understandings are not
the measure of Gods Justice, but his own will, things may be just, though the
reasons of them do not appear to us, humane reason grows giddy, by peeping
into the deep of Gods Decrees, our work is not to dispute, but wonder: Gods
freedom is a riddle to reason, because though we will not be bound to Laws, yet
we are willing God should be bound: Gods Actions must not be measured by any
external rule, things are good because God wills them, for his Will is
Justice it self. 2. The Electing of some, and passing by of others, is not an
Act of Justice, but dominion; for he does not act here as a Judge, but as a
Lord; it is a matter of favor not of right and wrong condemnation of a man for
sin, or punishing a man for sin, is act of Justice; but to have mercy, or not
to have mercy, that depends merely upon Gods will, otherwise it would follow,
that God were a debtor unto man: Justice supposes debt, or something due, no
wrong is done them in not giving grace, the Elect can speak of undeserved
grace, and the Reprobate of deserved punishment; when we are not bound to do
good, if we act according to pleasure, there is no injury, as in invitations,
preferments, and all acts of favor: we cannot endure that a right should be
challenged; the good man in the Parable pleaded, I may do with mine own as it
pleases me, Mat. 20. 15. The Lord may justly challenge grace as his own, and
therefore leave him to his pleasure in the distribution; for he is bound to
none. 3. Gods not giving grace to the Reprobate, is not their sin, but their
misery, Preterition made them miserable, but not sinful: it does not infer a
Coaction and compulsion to sin, sin follows upon it not as an effect, but a
consequent; as upon the absent of the Sun, darkness does necessarily follow,
and yet the Sun is not the cause of darkness: In grace God purposes, God
works, in sin God orders the sin, and makes use of it to the glory of his
Justice: but man sins freely: the water while it runs its own course,
serves the end of the Lord of the Soil, in driving Mils, and bringing fish
into his Ponds, and overflowing his Meadows, etc. So God causes not sin in
any, only permits it and endures it, and serves his righteous ends of it,
Romans 9. 24. He endures with much long suffering, the vessels of wrath, fitted
for destruction, he preprreth the vessels of mercy (as the Apostle there
expresses) but endures the vessels of wrath, while they fit themselves for
ruin. 4. Sin is the cause of punishment, though Gods will is the cause why
they are passed by, they are not punished because not elected, but because not
obedient, Wherefore does a living man complain, but for his sins, Lam. 3. 39.
it is here as it was in that case; David gave order to Solomon, that Joab and
Shime^ should not dye in peace, 1 King. 2. Yet David's order was no cause of
Joabs death, but his own treason, nor of Shimeis death, but his own flight: God
never damneth the creature, or decrees to damn it without respect of sin; Gods
Will is the cause of Preterition, his Justice is the cause of Predamnation, for
damnation is an act of punitive Justice: God is so just, that he does not
condemn any, but for sin; so gracious, that he does not condemn every man that
does sin. 5. The formal and proper end of God in Reprobation, is not the
eternal destruction of the creature; but the discovery of his own Justice or
glory, promoted or shining forth in and by that destruction: in Election God
desires and effects the salvation of a sinner in a subordination to his own
glory; but in Preterition, God endures a sinner with much long suffering, till
by his own destruction, he brings to him the glory of his justice, Ezekiel 23.
11. As I live says the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner, So Ezekiel. 18.
23. Have I any pleasure at all, that the wicked should dye? the meaning is, God
does not will these things with such a will as is terminated in the destruction
of the creature, but only orders them in a subornination to his own glory,
or in plainer terms, God delights not in the destruction of a sinner, as it is
the destruction of the creature; but as it is the execution of Justice: in the
execution of a malefactor, there is a difference between punishment and
destruction; his punishment is of the Judge, his destruction is of himself; so
in this case, Thy destruction is of thy self O Israel, Hos. 13. 9.

2. Concerning the second Objection, whether it does not infringe our comfort,
and discourage men from looking after their Salvation? If I am elected, I shall
be saved, if I am not Elected, I shall be damned: thus many men plead (say
they) and how will you stir up the negligent, and encourage the distressed,
supposing that doctrine which you have laid down.

I Answer, this scruple is but affected, not offered, and therefore should be
chidden, and not Answered: a questioning Gods secret will when we know his
revealed: Gods secret will has relation to his own actions, his revealed will
to ours; we must not look to Gods Will in the depths of his Counsel, but his
precepts: not what God will do himself, but what he will have us do; God says,
Believe in Christ and thou shall be saved, that is our rule, a Physician
offers cure to all that will come; 'twere a madness to dispute away the
opportunity, and say, I do not know whether he intends it to me: if men were
ready to perish in the deep waters, and a Boat should be offered to carry to
land as many as would come in it, to be making scruples when we are ready to be
drowned, whether this help be intended to us yea, or no, were a very fond
thing: in such cases we would not wrangle but thankful, take hold of what is
offered. 2. This Doctrine can be no ground of despair to any, because
reprobation is a sealed book* no man for the present can know his reprobation;
nor is to believe himself to be a Reprobate; but is called upon to use the
means that he may be saved: he is no Reprobate that falls into sin, but he
that persevereth in sin unto the end; therefore it is no good conclusion, I am
a sinner, therefore I am a Reprobate, it is midnight, therefore 'twil never be
day: this is a Book sealed with seven seals, none but the Lamb can open it. 3.
The opposite opinion, is encumbred with more difficulties and scruples: what
comfort can a man have in Universal Redemption? a man cannot have solid comfort
in that which is common to good and bad, to those that shall be damned, and
those which shall be saved, all comfort arises from a practical syllogism, now
make the practical syllogism, according to the principles of Universal grace,
Christ dyed for all men, I am a man, therefore for me, where humanity, or being
a man, is made the ground of claim and interest; and then unless with Puccius
and Huberus, we hold universal salvation, as well as universal redemption, the
argument will yield no comfort? how can I according to that opinion, comfort my
self in the death of Christ, when men maybe damned that have no interest in it.
4. As to the other part of this Objection, concerning the profit of this
Doctrine, and whether it does not take off men from industry, so some have
thought. But I Answer no, For, 1. God has enjoined the end and the means*
together: Except ye abide in the Ship, ye cannot be saved (says Paul to them
that sailed with him) a Decree was past for their safety, that not a man of
them should perish; yet they must abide in the Ship; God does infallibly stir
up the Elect to the use of means, as well as bring to such an end. 2. The right
use of the Doctrine of reprobation, is to put us upon examination or diligence;
upon, examination whether we believe in Christ, or have truly repented, that we
may make our calling and election pure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. For by this means is the
sealed Fountain broken open. Or upon diligence, in case you find no fruits of
Elective love: pray read, hear, meditate* wait, work out your salvation, etc.
3. The Doctrine of Election is of great use in the spiritual life, without it
we cannot understand the freeness of Gods love, which is the great means to
quicken us to praise God, and to beget love to God again: for as fire kindles
fire, so does love beget love; it is Gods glory to be served out of love, and
free consent: the devil rules his slaves by a servile awe: well then, if love
set love a work, and the best sight of Gods love be in Gods Decree; let them
say if they dare, that the Doctrine of Gods Decree, is an unprofitable
Doctrine: again, nothing takes off carnal confidence, and glorying in our
selves more then Gods choice, according to his own pleasure; nothing* is a
greater support in afflictions, especially in distresses of conscience. In
short, nothing is such a firm bond of love between believers, then the
consideration that they are all predestined from all eternity, to the
everlasting enjoyment of the same inheritance, those obligations which last
only for this world, cannot be so firm a tie.

3. The next Objection is, How can God call upon them to believe; whom he has
passed by in the Counsels of his Will, and intends never to give them grace,
without which they cannot believe? I Answer, God may require men to believe,
though he never intended to give them faith; for there is a great deal of
difference between his Decree and his Law: his Law shows what must be, his
Decree what shall be: God never said all shall believe, but he has said the
contrary, 2 These. 3. 2. but all must believe, that he has said again and
again, the Gospel does not signify, this or that man shall be saved; but
Whosoever believes shall be saved, as truly as it can be said to John or
Thomas, or any elect person, If you do not believe, you shall be damned; so
surely may it be said to a Reprobate, to Judas or any other, If you believe you
shall be saved: if the Reprobate have a like favor, with the Elect in the
general offer of grace they are left without excuse, the tender being so great
and so far the same unto both, though the Elects receiving be the effect of
specia grace; yet the Reprobates rejecting is without excause, he voluntarily
turnig back upon his own mercies.

So much briefly for the vindication of this Doctrine.

4. Let me now apply it. 1. Let the Elect so much the more admire Gods love to
them, because that some are passed by, your mercies are not every ones mercies;
Gods aim herein was, to commend his mercy to the Vessels of mercy, Romans 9. 23.
If he had passed us by, we could not have blamed his love; if he had punished
us eternally, we could not have blamed his justice; consider God has as much
interest in them as in you. All souls are mine says the Lord, Ezekiel. 18. 4. he
was their Creator as well as yours, and we are all in our blood involved in the
same condemnation; he saw as much of original sin in you as in them, we lay in
the same polluted Mass: Oh that free grace should make such a difference! He
had as much reason to choose Judas and Simon Magus as you; was not Esau Jacobs
Brother? Mal. 1. 2. in all points alike, but only in Gods choice, when men
choose it is for worth, who would choose crooked timber to make Vessels of honor?
yet thus does the Lord single out the worst and most depraved natures, to form
them into a people for himself; how sensibly many times did God make a
distinction between you and others in the same Ordinance: One is taken and
another left, and one is taken to grace, and another left to perish in his own
ways, others it may be were hardened by the same Sermon by which you were
converted! Oh how ravishing is the sight of Gods love in election, and the
distinct courses of his providence!

2. To press us to diligence: To make our Election sure, that we may be out of
the fear of being in the number of Reprobates; the great question that
concerns the comfort of thy soul is, Whether thou be ordained to eternal
Life, or no? Now, if thou be negligent and careless, and refuses to use the
means of salvation, the case is decided, though little to thy comfort; thou
judge thy self to be unworthy of eternal life, Acts 13. 48. A lazy, carnal,
careless man does but provide matter of despair for himself: there are some
steps to the accomplishment of the Decree of Reprobation: As sottish obstinacy
against the counsels of the word, a being given up to the spirit of error, a
constant neglect of means an hardening of our selves in the abuse of grace,
etc. all these are black marks; a man may recover, but your soul is nigh to
death, therefore beware, lest thou be found one of them who by sin are ordained
to come to judgment: Elyes Sons hearkened not to the Counsel of their Father,
because the Lord had a mind to slay them.

3. We are now come to that part of the description [ ungodly men]: (...)
The word signifies without worship, and is sometimes applied to Heathens and
men that live without the knowledge and worship of the true God; at other times
to wicked men that acknowledge the true God, but walk unsuitably to their
knowledge and profession: that we may find out who are these men, let us see
what is ungodliness, a sin much spoken of but little known: the word (as I
said) signifies without worship. Worship is the chiefest and most solemn
respect of the creature to God, and therefore it is put for the whole subjection
and obedience that we owe to him, and when any part of that service, respect or
honor is denied, or withheld, we are guilty of ungodlyness.

That Pagans and men out of the Church, are signified by the term ungodly,
appears by 1 Pet. 4. 18. If judgment begin at the House of God, where shall
the wicked and ungodly appear? where the ungodly are plainly opposed to the
House of God. Again, the unjustifyed estate is expressed by ungodlyness, as the
Apostle when he speaks of the justifying of Abraham and David, he gave the
Lord his Title, Rom, 4. 5. God that justifyeth the ungodly; and so Christ is
said, to dye for the ungodly, Romans 5. 9. The reason of which expression is,
because the people of the Jews were divided into* three ranks or sorts, there
were (...) the ungodly (...) the just, and (...) the good, or to keep their own
terms, there were Reshagnim, the wicked or violent, and Tsidikim, the just, and
Chasidim the good, or the bountiful; now (says the Apostle) scarcely for a
righteous man would one dye; that is, for a man of a rigid innocence, but for
the good man, that is, the bountiful, the useful, a man would even dare to dye;
but Christ dyed for us when we were Reshagnim, sinners, enemies, etc. Again,
more especially, ungodliness implies the transgression of the first Table, as
Romans 1. 18. where all sin is distinguished into (...), ungodliness, and (...),
unrighteousness, ungodliness in respect of duty to God, and unrighteousness in
respect of the duty to men; and also where sin is distinguished into
ungodliness and wordly lusts, Tit. 2. 12. So that it chiefly signifies that
part of sin whereby we rob God of his honor, respect and service, established
by the first Table, and it may be described to be a not giving God his right or
due honor.

To clear it further, let me tell you, that there are four Notions, which are
the ground of all Religion. 1. That God is, and is One. 2. That God is none of
those things that are seen, but something more excellent. 3. That God has a
care of humane affairs, and judges with equity. 4. That the same God is maker
of all things, without himself. And to these four Notions or principles, are
suited the four preceps of the first Table: in the first, we have Gods unity:
in the second, Gods Invisible Nature, and therefore Images are forebidden upon
that ground, Deuteronomy. 4. 12. In the third, the knowledge of humane affairs, even
of men's thoughts, and that is the foundation of an oath; for the third
Commandment does principally forbid perjury, and in an Oath, God is invoked as
a witness chiefly of the heart, in which his Omnisciency is acknowledged, and
appealed to as a Judge and Avenger, in which his Justice and Power is
acknowledged; the next principle that God is Creator and Governor of all
things, is established by the forth Commandment; for the Sabath at first was
instituted for that purpose, to keep up the memorial of the Creation in the
world. Now out of these specula^ive notions practicals flow of their own
accord, etc. that God is alone to be worshipped, obeyed, honored, trusted and
as far as we set up other confidences, or are ignorant of his excellency, or
deny God his worship and service, or serve him after an unworthy manner,
superstitiously, carelessly, hypocritically, or have gross opinions of his
Essence, or exclude the dominion of his Providence, or cease to invocate his
name so far we are guilty of ungodlyness.

More Distinctly and closely, yet let me note, that God is to be acknowledged,
as 1. The first cause. 2. The chiefest good. 3. As the supreme Truth, and
Authority. 4. As the last end; God is to be honored as the first cause that
gives being to all things, and has his being from none, and so if we do not
trust in him, or can trust any creature, rather then God: our Estates rather
then God, or do not observe him in his Providence: the effects of his Mercy,
Justice and Power, or do not acknowledge his Dominion in all events, and
sanctify the things which we use, by asking his leave and blessing in prayer:
we are guilty of ungodlyness. Again, God is to be acknowledged as the chiefest
good, and therefore if we do not know him, often think of him, delight in
communion with him, fear to offend him, care to please him, this neglect and
contempt of God is ungodgodlyness. Again, God is to be acknowledged as the
Supreme truth and Authority* and therefore if we are not moved with his
promises, threats, Counsels, as the Gentiles were moved with the Oracles of
their Gods; as Gods people of old, (when that dispensation was in use) with a
voice from Heaven, and do not submit to him, reverence him in Worship subject
our hearts and lives to his Laws, it is ungodliness: once more, God is the last
end, and therefore if in all acts Spiritual, Moral, Natural, even those of the
lightest consequence, we do not aim at Gods glory. Still it is ungodliness.

In this Method, I shall endeavor to open this argument. And 1. Let us
consider God as the first cause, and under that consideration, 1. Ignorance is
a branch of ungodliness, I name it first, because it is the Heu primae sc^lerum
causa mortalebus aegris naturam nescire dei.
cause of all disorder in worship or conversation; the Apostle says, 3. Epist.
John 11. He that does evil, has not seen God, right thoughts of God are the
fuel which maintains the fire of Religion, which otherwise would soon decay
and be extinguished: now generally people are ignorant of God, they know him as
men born blind do fire, they can tell there is such a thing as fire, because it
warmeth them, but what it is they cannot tell: So* the whole world, and
conscience proclaims there is a God: the blindest man may see that, but they
know little or nothing of his Essence, as he has revealed himself in his word:
The Athenians had an Altar, and the Inscription was to the unknown God, and so
do most Christians go on in a track of customary worship, and so worship an
Idol rather then God: so Christ tells the Samaritans, John 4. 22. Ye worship
ye know not what: It Is usual with men in a dark and blind superstition, to
conform to the worship of their place, not considering why, or whom it is they
worship: gross ignorance is a sign of no grace; for God has no child so
little but he knows his Father, Jer. 31. 34. They shall all know me, from the
last to the greatest, some have better education then others, greater helps and
advantages of parts, and Instruction; but they all have a necessary knowledge
of God: Again, gross ignorance is a pledge of future judgment, 2 These. 1. 7.
God will come in flaming fire, to render vengeance on them that know not God,
and obey not the Gospel: many poor ignorant creatures are harmless, they do no
wrong; Oh but they know not God, and that is wrong enough, Ps. 27. 11.
God will avenge it; to be ignorant of God that made them, is a matter of
sadder consequence then you are aware: by those that know not God, in this
place is meant, Pagans for it is contradistinct to those that obey no^ the
Gospel: but if there be vengeance for Pagans who have no other Apostles sent to
them, but those natural Apostles of Sun, Moon, and Stars, and have no other
Books wherein to study God: but Showrs of rain, and fruitful seasons, if there
be vengeance for them because they did not see and own a first cause? what is
there for those that shut their eyes against the light of the Gospel, surely to
be ignorant now, is a greater sin, then we think of. 2. When we do not depend
upon him, it is ungodlyness: trust and dependence is the ground of all commerce
between us and God; and the greatest homage and respect, which we yield to the
Creator and first cause: now when men trust any creature rather then God, their
estates rather then God, they rob him of his peculiar Honor: That there is
such a sin, appears by that Job 31. 34. If I had made gold my hope, or said
to the fine gold thou art my confidence: If I rejoiced because my wealth is
great, and my hand had gotten much, etc. Job to vindicate himself from
Hypocricie, reckons up the usual sins of Hypocrites, amongst the rest this is
one, to make gold our confidence: men are apt to think it the staff of their
lives, and the stay of their posterity, and so their trust being intercepted,
their hearts are diverted from God: it is an usual sin though little thought of:
the great danger of riches is by trusting in them, Mark 10. 23, 24. When men
are entrenched within an estate, they think they are safe, secured against what
ever shall happen, and so God is laid aside; let a man be entrenched within a
promise, and yet he is full of fears and doubts; but wealth breeds security,
therefore coveteousness is called Idolatry, Ephesians. 5. 3. and the covetous man an
Idolater, Col. 3. 5. not so much because of his love of money as his trust in
money; Phil. 3. 19.
the glutton loves his belly, and the gratifications of the Appetite, yet he
does not trust in his belly cheer, he thinks not to be protected by it, and
therefore though he rob God of his love, yet he does not as the covetous, rob
God of his trust; we are all apt to make such an Idol of the creature: poor men
if they had wealth, this were enough to make them happy, and therefore they
trust in those which have it, which is Idolatry upon Idolatry: whence it is
said, Psalm. 62. 9. Men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree a lie;
to appeareance men of low degree are nothing; but men of high degree are wont
to be trusted in, and therefore a lie, because by a righteous judgment of God
they disappoint our trust: But chiefly, is this secret Idolatry incident to the
rich; though they do not pray to their wealth, or offer sacrifice, but use it
as familiarly as any other thing, yet if it intercept their trust, they are
guilty of Idolatry; many that smile at the vanity Gentiles that worshipped
stocks and stones and Idols of gold and silver, do worse themselves, though
more spiritually, whilst they build their happiness and security upon their
estates, it may be they do not say to their riches ye shall deliver me, or to
their gold thou art my confidence: they do not use such gross language; for
covetous men may speak as basely of wealth, as another man, they may say I know
it is but refined earth, etc. but their hearts make it their only refuge and
stay, and their inward thoughts is, that they and their children cannot be
happy without it, which is a great sin, a setting up another God; for by this
means is their heart withdrawn from the true God to the world, and kept from
good works, least they part with that which is the staff and stay of their
lives.

3. When we do not observe his Providence; the blind world sets up an Idol
called chance, and does not acknowledge God at the other end of causes, as
swaying all things by his Wisdom and Power. 1. In afflictions, they think they
come by chance and ill luck 1 Samuel 6. 9. and Isa. 26. 11, As if instruments and
second causes did all, and the Lord were an Idle spectatour and looker on* and
had no hand in all that befalls us: Job better, The Lord gives, the Lord
takes, he does not look only to the Chald^an, the Sab^an, the Thief, but the
Lord: in all afflictions we should look beyond the creature, and not complain
of ill fortune, and chance, or stars or constellations or any thing on this
sid^ God. 2. In mercies, it is ungodliness when we do not see God in all our
mercies: wicked men receive blessings, and never look up, they live upon God
every moment; they have life and breath and motion and hourly maintenance from
him, and yet God is not in all their thoughts: as swine ravine upon the Acorns,
and never look up to the Oak from whence they fall; so they look no higher then
the next hand; but Gods children may be compared to Chickns that sip and look
upwards: The Lord complains of Israel, Hos. 2. 8. She did not know that I
gave her corn and wine and oyl^, and silver and gold; there cannot be a greater
sign of an ungodly spirit then this unthankful profaneness; this is that which
God expects from reasonable creatures, by way of homage, that we should own
him as Author of all the good, which we enjoy, other creatures live upon God,
but they are not capable of knowing the first cause as we are: Idolatry and
Atheism had never crept into the world, if men had considered who it was that
gave them fruitful seasons and showers of rain, and filled their hearts with
food and gladness, Acts 14 16, 17. And surely nothing feeds piety, and
maintains a constant awe of God, so much as thinking of God every time we eat
and drink, and enjoy any new mercy from him: but, alas, usually we forget
God, when he remembers us most, he is never so much dishonored as in eating
and drinking, and in the plentiful enjoyment of outward comforts.

4. Another part of ungodliness is, when we do not acknowledge his dominion
over all events, sanctifying the things we use and undertake, by asking his
leave and blessing. It Is robbery to use goods without the owners leave, so to
use any creature, food, or physic without 1 Timothy 4. 3, 4, 5.
sanctifying it by the Word and Prayer, that is, knowing our liberty and right
from the Word of promise, and asking God, leave and blessing in prayer, or to
go about any business or journey, or fixing our abode without inquiring at the
Oracle, all this is ungodliness: It Is our duty still to consult with God, Ye
ought to say if the Lord will, etc. Jam. 4. 15. It Is a piece of religious
manners, we forget to bid our selves Good speed when we do not acknowledge the
dominion of God in all these cases, Prove. 3. 5. In all thy ways acknowledge
him, and he shall direct thy paths. Gods children dare not resolve upon any
course til they have first consulted with God.

Secondly, God will be acknowledged as the chiefest good, and so we are guilty
of ungodliness:

1. If we do not often think of him; if we did not want hearts we cannot want
objects to put us in mind of God, (...), he is not far from every one of us,
Acts 17. 27. But though God be not far from us, yet we are far from God; he
that is every where is seldom found in our hearts: We are not so near to our
selves as God is near to us; who can keep his breath in his body for a minute
if God were not there? He is within us, and round about us in the effects of
his power and goodness, but we are at too great a distance from him in our
mind and affections: How many trifles occupy our minds? but the Lord can
seldom find any room there, God is not in all their thoughts, Psalm. 10. 3. Yea
when thoughts of God rush into our minds, they are like unwelcome ghuests, we
wish to be rid of them: wicked men abhor their own thoughts of God, because
the more they think of God, the more they tremble, as the devils do; therefore
the Apostle says, They like not to retain God in their knowledge, Romans 1. This
is far from the temper of Gods children, David says Psalm. 104. 34. My
meditation of him shall be sweet. It Is the spiritual feast and entertainment of
a gracious soul to think of God: none deserves our thoughts more than he, and
we cannot put them to better use: He thought of us before the world was, and
still great is the multitude of his thoughts to us ward; therefore it is vile
ingratitude not to think of him again: when we hate a person we cannot endure
to look upon him, and the hatred of the mind is showed by the aversation, and
turning away of the thoughts.

2. If we do not delight in communion with him, we do not honor him as the
chiefest good. Friends love to be often in one another company, and certainly
it is good to draw nigh to God; to preserve an acquaintance between him and us:
he has appointed his Ordinances, the Word and Prayer, which are as it were a
Dialogue and interchangeable discourse between God and the Creature; in the
Word he speaks to us, and in Prayer we speak unto him; he conveigheth his
mind in the Word, and we ask his grace in Prayer; in Prayer we make the
request, and in the Word we have Gods Answer. Well then, when men neglect
public or private Prayer, or opportunities of hearing, they are guilty of
ungodlyness, so far they break off communion with God, especially if they
neglect Prayer, which is a duty to be done at all times; a sweet diversion
which the soul enjoys with God in private, a duty which answers to the
daily sacrifice; therefore the neglect of Prayer is made to be a branch of
Atheism, Psalm. 14. 3, 4* verses. When men are loath to come into Gods presence
out of a love to ease and carnal pleasures, and care not if God and they grow
strange, or seldom hear from one another, it is a great evil: our comfort and
peace depends much upon frequent access to God: so when family worship, when
that is neglected, God is not honored as the chiefest go^d, the heathens are
described to be the families that call not on Gods Name, Jer. 10. 25. In many
places from one end of the week to the other, there is no Prayer and Worship in
the Family, and so the house which should be a Church is made a Stye: not a
swine about their houses but is attended morning and evening, and yet they can
find no time for the solemn invocation of the Name of God, what are they
better than Heathens?

3. If we do not fear to offend him. God will be served with every affection;
Love is of use in the spiritual life, and so is fear, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Perfecting
holiness in the fear of God. Love sweetneth duties, and Fear makes us
watchful against sin: Gal. 5. 6.
Love is the doing Grace, and Fear is Jer. 32. 40.
the conserving Grace. We have cause to walk in Gods ways, because we are
always under his eye. Love is necessary, that we may keep God always in our
hearts; and Fear, that we may keep him always in our eye: both of them are of
great use, but Fear we now speak of, which is the true internal root of all
obedience and worship, Eccl. 12. 13. when there is such a settled disposition of
heart, as that we dare not grieve him, nor affront him to his face (as
Ahasuerus said, Will he force the Queen before my face?) God is much honored,
but now when we are secure and careless, and forget God, and can sin freely in
thought, and foully in act without remorse, it is ungodliness. Fear is a Grace
of continual use: we cannot be always praising God, worshipping God, and
employed in acts of special communion with him, yet we must be always fearing
God; be thou in the fear of God all the day long, Prove. 23. 17. and elsewhere,
Blessed is he that fears always, Prove. 28. 14. A man has done with his
devotion in the morning, but he has done with God; we should think of him, and
remember that his eye is upon us all the day long: we must rise in the fear of
God, walk in the fear of God, trade, Jude 12.
eat, drink in the fear of God. Some Graces are as the Lungs never out of use
and exercise. More especially must fear be active when temptations and
corruptions arise, we must argue as Joseph, Genesis 39. 9.

4. If we do not care to please him: An ungodly man thinks of nothing less
than pleasing God, he neither cares to know his ways, nor to walk in them,
they are willingly ignorant, 2 Pet. 3. 5. They do not search that they may not
practice, and so err not in mind, but heart: We desire not the knowledge of
thy ways, Job 21. 14. They have not a Nolentes audire quod Auditum damnare non
possunt etc. Tertul. in Apol.
mind to know that which they have not a mind to do, as those that would
sleep shut the Curtains to keep out the light. A godly man is always approving
what is the will of God, Romans 12. 2. Ephesians. 5. 10. 17. he practices what he
knows, and is still searching that he may know more, as willing always to be
more useful for God: What have I to do more?

Thirdly: God will be acknowledged as the supreme Truth and Authority; and then
if we are not moved with Promises, Threats, Counsels, as with the words of the
great God, if we do not yield him reverence in his worship, and subject our
hearts and lives to his Laws, it is ungodliness.

1. We must receive the counsels of his Word with all regard and reverence; for
that is to receive it as the Word of God, 2 These. 2. 10. Heathens received the
Oracles of their Gods, and were much moved; we can drowsily hear of the great
things of salvation of heaven and the death of Christ, and the Covenant of
Grace, etc. and are not moved, no more moved than with a Fable or Dream. If a
man should make another an offer of a thousand pound for a trifle, and he
should accept it, you would not say, 'twas because he prized the trifle more,
that is improbable; but because he did not believe the offer: So when God
offers heaven upon such terms as he does, we do not honor him as the eternal
truth, but count him a liar, 1 John 5. 10. or else we would not neglect the
offer.

2. We must yield him reverence in his worship: God is said Psalm. 68. to be
terrible in the holy places: he is not only terrible in the high places of the
field, where he executes his dreadful judgments, nor in the depths of the
Sea, where the wonders of the Lord are seen, but terrible in the holy places,
where his Ordinances are dispensed, because there his holiness, which is the
astonishing Attribute, is most seen and remembered. We do not come to him as
the supreme Majesty, when we do not come with awful apprehensions, God is
dreadful there where he is most comfortable, Deu^. 28. 58. That thou may
fear this glorious and fearful Name, the Lord thy God: To have God for our God
is the ground of all our comfort and hope, and yet it is a glorious and fear full
Name: In Mal. 1. 14. the Lord urges two arguments why we should worship him
with reverence; one is, I am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts; the other
is, My name is dreadful among the heathen, implying in the first, that careless
and rude addresses to him are a kind of a lessening his Majesty, they do not
come to him as a great King, and do as much as in them lies, go about to
persuade the world that he is not the God that he is taken to be, so great, so
terrible, and glorious. The next argument is taken from his respect among the
heathens that know him by common providence, they that have but a glimpse of
his glory, that know least of his glory, yet know enough to fear him, and
reverence him: Therefore take heed of serving him in a loose and perfunctory
manner, you dishonor God exceedingly else, even then when you come to give
honor to him.

3. There must be a willing subjection of our hearts and lives to his Laws: It
must be a subjection of the heart; Gods Authority is never more undermined than
by a mere form of Godliness, 2 Timothy 3. 5. It Is the greatest ungodliness that
can be, for you rob the Lord of his Dominion over the conscience; Hypocrisy is
a practical Blasphemy, I know the blasphemy of them, etc. Rev. 2. 9. The life
also must be subject to God, by a conformity to his Laws: Men hate God as a
Lawgiver, they love him as a giver of Blessings: It Is the disposition of all,
that they would live at large, and have no God to call them to an account,
though to strike at the Being of God, and Doctrines of liberty are welcome to a
carnal heart; it is pleasing to think if there were no God, to hear that there
is no Law, no suggestions are more catching: The life must be conformed to Gods
Laws, for he will be honored in our conversations, as well as have his throne
set up in the consciences: It Is the glory of a Commander to be obeyed; I say to
one go and he g^eth, and to another come and he comes: God looks for glory
from you in this kind, he will have all the world know that his servants are
at his beck, that he has called you to his foot, Isa. 41. 2. the righteous
from the lust, he called him to his foot; that is, to go to and fro at his
command, if he say go they go, if he says come they come, these are the
people framed for his praise: he can bid them do nothing but they are ready to
do it with the loss of all.

4. God will be honored as the utmost end; and so if in all acts, natural,
moral, spiritual, if we do not aim at his glory, we are guilty of ungodliness:
In acts natural, and matters of the least consequence we must have a
supernatural aim, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Whether ye eat or drink* or whatsoever you
do, do all to he glory of God. If I take a meal, I must have an aim at Gods
glory in it; in civil acts, and Virtutes and vitia non officiis distinguuntur
finibus.
duties of mutual commerce, all must be done as in and to the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 22.
Ephesians. 6. 1. 5. 6. 7. We are to walk in our relations so as God may have honor.
In Spiritual acts of Prayer, Praise, and Worship, yea the whole ordination of
the spiritual life must be unto God; I live unto God, Gal. 2. 20. All the
motions and tendencies of the soul look that way: This is the difference
between Holiness and Godliness, Holiness more properly implies a conformity
to the Law, and Godliness an aim of the soul to exalt God, and so they are
propounded as distinct, 2 Pet. 3. 11. What manner of persons ought we to be in
all holiness and godliness of conversation? Well then look to your aims, and
in eating and drinking you set up Moloch, it is a Meat Offering, and
Drink Offering to appetite, if you do not aim at Gods glory: So in Trafique,
if you merely regard Wealth, you are a consecrated Priest to Mammon: In these
ordinary actions of Eating, Drinking, Trading, you may be guilty of Idolatry
before you are aware, and may set up Phil. 3. 19
the belly, or Mat. 6. 24
Mammon in Gods stead, nay in your very desires of Grace your ultimate aim must
not be self; We are accepted in the beloved to the praise of his glorious
grace, Ephesians. 1. 6. And in actions most sacred it is dangerous to look a squint,
it is to put dung in Gods own cup, when we make Worship a stale to our own ends.
In short, the Lord has given many things to the creature, that only which he
has reserved to himself is his glory, therefore he takes it ill to be robbed
of that.

Thus I have showed you the several kinds of ungodliness, some are more
refined, some more gross, but all naught. The worst sort is, when we do
contemptuously slight his providence, and disobey his Laws, hardening our
selves yet more and more, as Ahaz did, though the Lord had exercised him with
sharp afflictions, and living in open irreligion, and despite of God, casting
off yoke after yoke, till at length we have out grown the heart of a man,
fearing neither God nor men.

Well then, if we would not be counted ungodly, let us Use
take heed of all these sins.

1. How else will ye look God in the face at the day of Judgment; The ungodly
shall not stand in judgment, Psalm. 1. 5. That is, so as to be able to plead
their cause, and lift up the head, though they shall rise again and receive
their sentence; therefore ill rendered by the vulgar, non resurgunt, yet they
shall have no boldness, but hang their guilty heads for shame in that day; the
day of Judgment is appointed on purpose to take vengeance of ungodly persons,
see Jude 15. It Is the day wherein God that is now withdrawn within the Curtain
of Heavens, comes forth to manifest himself to the terror of all ungodly
ones.

2. There are great judgments inflicted upon them in this world, the Flood
swept away the world of the ungodly, 2 Pet. 2. 7. and 1 Pet. 4. 18. Where shall
the sinner and the ungodly appear? The Lords jealousy for his honor is very
great, and therefore none shall smart so soarly as the ungodly person: It Is
said Isa. 57. 17. He puts on jealousy as a cloak; the cloak is man's upper
garment, which is most visible; there is nothing so visible in Gods Providence
as his jealonsie for his honor; there is no sin robs God of his honor, so
much as ungodliness; so, it is said Exodus 34. 14. That jealousy is his name:
the name of a thing is the note of distinction, by which it is known and
differenced from all other things either of the same or another kind; so Gods
jealousy against those that rob him of his Honor, differenceth him from all
the Gods of the world; the Gods of the Heathens were good-fellow-Gods, and
could endure Rivals and Copartners; but this the Lord does severely punish,
none have fallen under the weight of his vengeance so much as they that deny
their respects to him, and go on whor^ing after another God.

3. It Is the great aim of the Gospel to prevent ungodliness, by discovering
more of God then was known before, and by finding out a way how the Notions of
God might be kept inviolable, and how we might come to the enjoyment of God;
and yet God suffer no loss of Honor: therefore the Gospel is called the
Mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16. and a Doctrine according to godliness, 1 Timothy 6. 3. men might be ungodly at a cheaper rate then now they can in these
days of the Gospel: now we have more means to know God, and more obligations to
respect God: more clear and certain notions of his excellency and glory.

4. Ungodliness is the root of all irregular courses: Abraham was afraid of
himself in Gerar: Why? The fear of God is not in this place, Genesis 20. 11.
Godliness is the great bulwork of Laws and all honest discipline; subjects are
not afraid of Princes, nor Princes of subjects, where the fear of God
prevails: there can be no true honesty without piety: the first part of the
Law, provideth for respects to God, as being the proper foundation of the
second, which contains respects to our neighbor: often it comes to pass by
Gods just judgment, that spiritual wickedness is punished with civil: See Hos.
4. 12. 13. and where men are not tender of Gods Interests, they do also
incroach upon civil rights and freedoms. Means and directions are these. 1.
Purge the heart from principles of ungodliness: there are many gross Maxims
ingrafted in man's heart; as that it is folly to be precise, that it was better
when there was l^ss knowledge; that it is in vain to serve God, that thoughts
are free; if we carry it fair before men, we need trouble our selves no
further: when men do their best, petty sins are not to be stood upon: that
Religion is but a notion and fancy: the Gospel a g^lden dream, etc. That such
principles are within us, appears by the sottishness of our practices and
course of living; for actions are the best Image of our thoughts, and these are
purged away by waiting upon the word, which discovers them, Heb. 4. 12. and
lays in good principles, Psalm. 119. 9. by which means they are destroyed. 2.
Suppress all ungodly thoughts as soon as they do arise, as, that there is n^
God, Psalm. 14. 1. Shame may lay a restraint upon the tongue, but the heart is
ever casting up such a thought as this is: So that God is not so harsh, but we
may take a little liberty in sinning: see Psalm. 50. 21. or that he takes no
notice of what we speak or do; he cannot see through the dark clouds, Job 22.
12, 13. When any such thoughts rush into your mind, check them, and actually
rebuke them, least they settle into a rooted Atheism. 3. Mortisie vile
affections: the judgment is tainted by the contagion of lusts, as a foul
stomach sends up fumes and gross vapors into the head; and so the principles
of godliness do quickly suffer an Eclipse; The pure in heart see most of God,
Mat. 5. 8. In fenny Countries the Air is seldom clear; so in hearts that lie
under the power of br^itish lusts, there are seldom clear and distinct thoughts
of God. 4. Keep close to Gods institutions; these keep up his presence and
memorial in the world, and so are the best preservative of godliness; false
worships are full of ceremonies, which darken the Nature of God Images beget a
gross opinion of God: no wonder if people grow blockish, that worship God in a
senseless stock or store. V^rro in Austin observed, that those that first
invented Images, did but increase error, and take away all fear of Religion.
God knows what is best for himself, and how by his own Institutions to keep
up the repute of his Nature and Essence: when man presumes to be wiser then
God, and leaves the certainty of Gods Institutions, for additions and
innovations of our own, that please us better, because they have (...), a show
of wisdom, Col. 2. 22* 23. all Religion goes to wrack. 5. Let us often
exercise our selves unto godliness, 1 Timothy 4. 7. delight to give to God the
Honor due to him; Love, Delight, Fear, to worship him often, to do all things
as aiming at his glory.

The next clause in the description of these seducers is, That [ Turning the
grace of our God into wantonness:] Where you may take notice. 1. Of their
Filthyness and brutish course of life, employed in the word [ wantonness,] in
the Original, (...), a word proper to luxury, and the impurities of lust, it is
derived from Alpha, an augmentative Particle: and Selga, the name of a Town in
Pisidia (says Suidus) whose inhabitants were infamous for Sodomi, and
weakening Nature by such prodigious filthiness as is not fit to be named among
Saints: and the persons here noted the school of Simon. The Nicholaitans, the
Gnostickes, and other impure Heretics of that age were for promiscuous
commixtures, and the free use of their fellow creatures (as some carnal
wretches in our age have learned to speak) without any respect to conjugal
relation, and those restraints which God and nature, and all civil Nations have
laid upon the lusts of man, as if men should use no more distinction and
confinement then the bests, yea gave up themselves to all manner of unnatural
lust, as in the process of this Epistle, we shall more fully discover. 2. The
occasion and encouragement of this wantonness, which doubleth the iniquity of
it* and is [ the grace of God,] by which is meant the Gospel when he called the
grace of God, as Tit. 2. 11, the grace of God has appeared unto us, teaching
us, etc. and in the Gospel chiefly, they abused the Doctrine of Christian
liberty, and free justification by Christ, this is primarily intended: you may
by analogy, enlarge the expression to commit all those other Doctrines which
libertines are apt to abuse; yea those gracious providence* which wicked men
do convert into fuel and nourishment for their sins. 3. The manner how so
excellent a thing as the grace of God, was made pliable to so vile a purpose,
for a man would wounder that things at so great and infinite a distance as the
grace of God and filthy lusts, should ever be brought to cast an aspect upon
one another; that is showed in the word [ turning] in the Original (...)
resting, transferring from its proper use. They offered violence to the
Doctrine of grace, that it might be conscious to such a monstrous birth and
production, as filthy lusts and carnal pleasures. 4. You have an hint of the
reason why the Apostle writes against them with such a zealous indignation, in
that word [ Our]* as if he said, that grace whose sweetness we have tasted,
whose power we have felt; of that God, who has been so kind to us in Christ,
whose glory we are bound to promote: shall we see our God, and that grace upon
which all our hopes stand to be abused to such an unclean use?

From the words thus opened, I Observe. 1. That the Observat. ^*
Gospel and grace of God in its self, is not pliable to carnal purposes,
yeildeth no carnal conclusions. [They turn it] says the Apostle, there is no
such thing gotten out of the Gospel without wresting, and till the art of a
deceiver has past upon it. I shall prove the point by three Arguments.

1. From the constitution of the Gospel, it yeildeth no leave Reason 1.
to sin but liberty to serve God: this is the great design of it, Christ came
not to reconcile God and our sins together; but God and our persons, to
reconcile our persons and destroy our sins: not to free us from the Law, but
sin; to free us from the service of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. not from the
service of God: In short, he came not to make the Law less strict, or sin less
odious, or us less holy; for perfection of the Law was never so clearly known,
as since the coming of Christ, See Mat. 5. and sin was never so odious, as
since the abundance of grace, they under the law sinned at a cheaper rate then
we can, because they did not sin against so much l^ve and kindeness, See Heb.
2. 2. 3. neither could Christ come to make us less holy or to dispense with our
care of holiness; for then he should come to deface the Image of God, and make
us more unlike God, which would not be a privilege but a burden to the new
creature; freedom from wrath and Hell is a privilege; but freedom from duty
and obedience is is no privilege: in the Gospel there is pardon for failings,
but not to encourage us in our failings, but our duties: We were never so much
obliged to duty as since the Gospel, because now we have more help and more
advantages, stronger motives, and greater encouragements: If we look backward,
we are bound in point of gratitude to serve the Lord, being redeemed hereunto
by the blood of Jesus; if we look forward, we are encouraged by the hopes of
eternal life: the Law could not persuade by such arguments as the Gospel does;
there is more of the Rule known, more of the Spirit poured out, to give us help
to observe it; so that from this short abridgement of larger discourses, it
appears, that the great design of the Gospel is to make us more like God, and
to free us from the slavery of the Devil, that we may be better servants and
subjects to God.

2. There are frequent and constant disswasives from this perverting our
liberty in Christ to the service of any fleshly design: The Spirit of God
foresaw how corrupt nature in us would tempt us to abuse our privileges to an
evil purpose; yea many had already attempted it in the Apostles days, as the
sect of the Nicholaitans, the school of Simon, and after them the Gnostics and
Basilikians, who under color of Evangelical liberty, gave up themselves to
lawless and brutish practices (as before was hinted) therefore by way of
prevention, disswasives are very frequent every where, as Romans 6. 1. What shall
we say then? Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid: As if
he had said, you will not want such corrupt Teachers, nay your hearts will be
mavelous apt to frame such kind of consequences and conclusions; but reject
them with indignation. So Gal. 5. 13. You are called to liberty, only use not
your liberty as an occasion to the flesh. Christ has done his part, purchased
glorious privileges for you; only take you heed that you do not abuse them,
your base hearts are apt enough: so 1 Pet. 2. 16. As free, but not using your
liberty as a cloak of malitiousness. Freedom by Christ will be an unfit cover
and pretense for so vile a practice.

3. Because in the Gospel its self there are quite contrary inferences and
conclusions from those which flesh and blood would draw from the Gospel: As to
instance; in any thing wherein the Gospel has been abused, to three ends has
it been abused, to Looseness, Laziness, Licentiousness. Now you shall see the
Word carries things in a quite contrary way to what carnal men do: to
Looseness: men have been the more loose and careless, because Grace has
abounded in the discoveries of the Gospel; but the Apostle disdaineth, it as a
most abhorrent and strange conclusion from Gospel-principles, Romans 6. 1. Shall
we continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid. (...), do not cheerish
such a vile and unworthy thought; the Gospel teaches quite contrary, see Titus
2. 11, 12. not wantonness, but weanedness, to deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts. So see Romans 6. 16. and 2 Cor. 7. 1. a Be gathers honey thence from
whence a Spider sucketh poison. Again, to Laziness: men are apt to lie down
upon the bed of ease, and say Christ must do all, and so exclude all use of
means and the endeavor of the creature: This is a foul abuse; for the
Scripture infers thence the care and work of the creature, because God does
all, Phil. 2. 12, 13. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling, for it is
God works in you both to will and to do. We must the more humbly wait upon
God in the use of Ordinances, because all depends upon his assistance. Again,
to Licentiousness: men have interpreted freedom by Christ in such a perverse
sense, as to cast off obedience to civil powers, either to Masters in the
Family, or to Magistrates in the Commonwealth; whereas the Word calls for
these duties upon this very ground, because we are made free by Christ, that
is, more ready and apt to discharge the duty we owe to God and man: in this
sense it is said, 1 Cor. 7. 22. That a servant is the Lords freeman; and 1 Pet.
2. 16. Obey Governors as free, but as servants of the Lord: Christianity
gives us a greater aptness, lays on us a greater engagement, the bond of
conscience; so that there is, as Sadvian speaks, in maxima liberate minima
licentia, a great deal of liberty by Christ, and yet the strongest engagement
to service that may be.

Let us now apply the point.

It serves to inform us in the first place, that carnal men are ill skilled in
consequences, from the very Gospel would they draw a liberty to sin, than
which from such premises no conclusion can be more strange; it is well worth the
observing to note the different arguings in Scripture from the same principles,
as see some instances, compare 1 Cor. 7. 29 with 1 Cor. 15. 22. the principle
in both places, is, the time is short: Now the Apostle in the former place
draws from it conclusions of strictness, temperance, and mortification; Let
us use the World as if we used it not, etc. But in the latter the dissolute
Epicure argues quite otherwise, Let us eat and drink for tomorrow we shall
dye, a quite different conclusion from the same principle: So here, Grace
abounds, let us be much in duty says the spirititual man, let sin abound
says the carnal. Again, compare 2 Samuel 7. 2. with Hag. 1. 2. I dwell within a
house of Cedar (says David) but the Ark of God dwells within curtains.
Surely I should have had more care of the Ark of God, now God has built me
such a stately Palace: But they in Haggai, We dwell in sieled houses, therefore
the time to build the Lords house is not come; so they might live in pomp and
ease they little cared how matters went with Gods house. Once more, I Sam. 3.
18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: he argues from thence
to meekness, and a submislive patience; but now compare 2 Kings 6. 33. This
evil is from the Lord, why should I wait upon him any longer; from the same
principle he argues himself into a murmuring, and fit of impatience. Thus*
carnal men are always out in their reasonings: A Parable in a Fools mouth
(says Solomon) is like a thorn in the hand of a Prove. 26. 9.
drunkard: When the spirits are disturbed by excess of drink, men have not an
even touch, and so when they would use a Thorn, or any sharp thing they wound
and gore themselves, so do wicked men being besotted with lusts, argue falsely
from the Grace and the holy principles of the world to their own destruction.

Again, it serves for caution, when you meet with such Use 2.
base inferences from Evangelical principles do not blame the Gospel, or the
Ministry and dispensation of the Gospel.

1. Not the Gospel, as if it were not clear enough, or faithful enough or wary
enough, such thoughts are wont to haunt us when we see gross errors creeping
under a shelter and pretense of Scripture, foolish men would give Laws to
heaven, we think God should speak more plainly, as if the Lord should make a
sun for them to see that shut their eyes: vain man will stumble in Gods
plainest ways, should things be never so clearly carried, a perverse
apprehension would make them obscure, Parables (which are the liveliest and
most sensible representations of things) hardened the Pharisees, Mark 4. 11, 12.
If men ruin themselves by their own false Logic we should not therefore accuse
God: they that have a mind to fall shall not want a stone of stumbling; they
that will only be feasted with comforts, no wonder if they contract a
spiritual sickness, and undo their souls by a misunderstood, and misapplyed
Gospel.

2 Do not blame the Ministry, and dispensation of the Gospel, because some
abuse Free grace, others cannot endure to hear it preached; but children must
not be kept from their bread, because Dogs catch at it; because some are drunk
with wine, and others eat to excess, shall the hungry man want his food? Shall
hungry consciences lose their portion for others abuse? No, no, if carnal men
serve their lusts of these truths, we cannot help it, we are not in the place
of God; we can only deliver the Doctrine, we cannot give them gracious hearts
to improve it. The Papists will not let the people have the Scriptures upon
this reason, for fear of abuses; and Gardener would not have this gap of free
Grace opened to the people* etc. The Devil has ever maligned a Gospel
dispensation: Let not us withhold the truth for fear of inconvenience: Let us
look to our commission, preach the Gospel to every creature, if men abuse it we
are clear, their destruction is just, as the Apostle speaks to this very
case, Romans 3. 8. Some slanderously report that we say, let us do evil that
good may come thereof, whose damnation is just: some gave out that Paul taught
that they might sin freely, that God might have the more glory in pardoning,
their damnation is just, if they went away with such a vile conceit (says he)
they learned it not from me. Musculus complains in one of his books, that no
place was so profane and irreligious as those where the Gospel had been
preached; and Adamus contzenius in Mat. cap. 24.
Contzen a Jesuit, citing this passage, cries out, See the fruit of
Protestantism, and their Gospel preaching; many are of his spirit, do even
hate the publication of the doctrine, of Grace, as if these were the cause of
men's miscarriage: If men abuse the truth we cannot help it, however visible
mistakes must be prevented, lest men go away with a Scorpion instead of Fish,
and a stone instead of Bread.

2. The next point, that though Grace its self be not pliable Observat. 2.
to such conclusions, yet wicked men are very apt to abuse it to the
countenancing and cherishing of their sins and lusts. You see here the abuse
of the Doctrine of the Gospel was very ancient, this spirit of Error wrought
betimes, the former days were no better than these, Eccl. 7. 10. In the
Apostles days, vile hearts did abuse good doctrine, Men were the same then
which they are now. when such kind of Errors have a second spring and
revolution* Indeed of all Errors these seem to be very natural; we greedily
drink in the poison of carnal liberty, but let me give you the reasons why
ungodly men take liberty and occasion from the Grace of God to serve their
sinful lusts and pleasures.

1. Because carnal hearts do assimulate all that they meet Reasons.
with, and turn it into the nourishment of their carnal lusts, as the salt sea
turns the fresh Rivers, and the sweet Showers of Heaven into Salt waters, so
do carnal men pervert the holy principles of the Gospel, or as sweet Liquours
are soon sowred in an unclean vessel, so do truths lose their use, and
efficacy when laid up in a carnal heart, and are quite turned to anopurpose.

2. Because they would fain sin securely, and cum privilegio, with a free
dispensation from God, and therefore seek by all means to entitle God to the
sin, and the sin to God; they would find a great deal of ease from gripes of
conscience if they could make God the Author, or at least the countenancer of
their evil practices, and therefore when they can rub their guilt upon the
Gospel, and pretend a liberty by Christ, the design is accomplished. Augustine
often takes notice, that the Heathens took the most liberty to sin, because
their Gods were represented as approvers and countenancers of such kind of
actions; if men could once make God an approver of sin, and giving leave to
satisfy our desires, the design of carnal nature were at an end, and they
would be freed of that awe of a divine power which is only left in nature as
the check and restraint of sin; and therefore because God has revealed so
much of his indulgence to the fallen creature in the Gospel, they strive to draw
all the passages of it that way, as if God had given leave to sin freely.

3. Because man is obedient naturally no longer than when under impressions of
awe and fear, the Hos. 11. 4.
cords of a man work little with us, like beasts we only put forward when we
feel the Goad: Violent means do more than gentle persuasions, and the sweet
strains of Grace. Usually where we are dealt with in that kind, we Deuteronomy. 32.
15.
wax wonton and kick with the heel, as an Asse-colt being suckled and full,
kicks her dam in the forehead.

4. Because we all naturally desire liberty, carnal liberty, to be left to our
own sway and bent, and therefore we catch at any thing that tends that way,
we would be as Gods, Lords of our own actions, and so are very apt to dream of
an exemption from all kind of Law but our own lusts, the Seducers bait was a
promise of liberty, 2 Pet. 2. 19. We would all be above check and control, and
have scope and roomth from our lusts, Psalm. 12. 4. Our lips are our own, who is
Lord over us? We would fain bring it to that, to be at our own dispose, to be
answerable to none, that should call us to an account: The tumult of the Nation
against Christ was about bonds and yokes, Psalm. 2. 3. The pale or the yoke is
grievous to us, see Job 11. 12. Jer. 31. 18. Now being so resolved to be free,
we are, willing to hear of liberty, and apt to abuse whatever sounds to that
purpose.

But now let us see how many ways the grace of God may be turned into
wantonness; a right knowledge of the evil may be a means to prevent it.

There is a Grace dispensed in the way of Gods providence which may be called,
the Grace of God, and is very liable to; abuse; a word of that before I come to
the main thing here intended. Thus we find the patience of God often abused,
when the Lord keeps silence in heaven, and does not presently thunder down
vengeance on the heads of sinners, we Psa. 36. 2. Zeph. 1. 12.
wallow in ease and fleshly delights, and dream of a perpetual happiness, and
think we shall do as well as the precisest of them all; Eccles. 8. 11. Because
vengeance is not executed speedily, therefore the heart is set in them to do
evil: Thus does man's venomous nature, suck poison out of so sweet an Attribute
as Gods patience! And as Gods patience is abused, so is also his goodness and
Bounty. When we are full and enjoy plenty, we grow wanton, and either despise
our mercies, Mal. 1. 2. Wherein have thou loved us? or, which is worse, despise
God himself; turn back upon the Mercie-seat, grow very negligent, cold and
careless in the Worship of God: nay many times the mind is efferated, and
grown brutish and insolent both toward God and man, Hos. 13. 6. According to
their Pasture so were they filled, they were filled and their heart was
exalted, they have forgotten me. Men have large Pastures, and strong lusts, and
then God is forgotten, there is not that care of God, that sense of duty, that
meekness of spirit, this is growing wanton with Gods; goodness. Once more,
there is another Grace of Providence which is apt to be abused, and that is,
the vouchsafement of Ordinances, or the means of Grace, in great plenty a
Mercy prized when it first comes among a people, but within a little while
they grow wanton, 1 Samuel 3. 11. The Word of God was precious in those days, for
there was no open vision: whilst Visions are scarce they are higly prized, but
when they are open and public, men begin to grow giddy, cannot be contented
with the simplicity of Gods Ordinances, but must be fed with ungrounded
subtleties, and quintessential extracts, when spiritual appetite grows
wanton, it is an ill sign, when plain truths will not down, and all things must
be carried in an airie, subtle, and notional way, God will have a scourge for
such a wanton people.

But let us come closer to the matter in hand: This Text speaks of Doctrinal
discoveries of grace, of the abuse of the Gospel, and the principles thereof:
now 'twere an hard task to give you an account of all the paralogisms and
corrupt inferences, which men draw from the Gospel, there is no Doctrine, but
one way or another, a carnal heart is apt to abuse it: the most usual abuses
are these.

1. The Doctrine of Election is abused, men say they may live as they list: If
God has elected them, they shall be saved, and so allow themselves in their
careless neglect of the means of salvation be not deceived: God that decrees*
the end, decrees the means: God has predestined us to be conformed to the
Image of his Son, Romans 8. 29. in grace here as well as in glory hereafter.

2. The Doctrine of the Attribut's of Gods mercy and long suffering. Men will
say they are sinners and so are others but God is merciful, and so poor
ignorant drunkards, Adulterers and swearers as they are, they dye with this
principle in their mouths, God is merciful, but be not deceived, neither
Fornicators nor Adulterers, etc. shall enter into the Kingdom of God: 1 Cor.
6. 9. So Ephesians. 5. 6. Let no man deceive you with vain words for because of these
things comes the wrath of God. Both these places show there were diverse which
had such deceitful thoughts, as if living and dying drunkards, Adulterres, etc.
they should go to Heaven: others abuse the long suffering of God to their
delaying and putting off their repentance, as if after a long vicious life
provided they could be devote at the last gasp, they should at length be saved,
and of* a sudden from Swine become Saints: as many delayed their Baptism
heretofore, because they would have longer time to sin in, and to walk after
their own lusts, and when they were warned of their licentious course; their
answer was, Tunc demum a peccatis de^stam cum baptizatus ero; When I am
baptized I will live otherwise: Thou fool, besides the uncertainty of thy
having time or grace to repent; this is a manifest abuse of Gods patience, and
will turn to thy greater ruin, Romans 2. 4. 5.

3. The Doctrine of Gospel grace is abused many ways. Sometimes to exclude the
fear and reverence of God, as if fear were an antiquated grace suiting only
with a legal dispensation: whereas the children of God think the more grace,
the more fear, Psalm. 130. 4. There is mercy with thee, therefore thou should
be feared, and Hos. 3. 5. They shall fear the Lord and his goodness: the
goodness of God does not make them presumptious; but is the greater matter of
reverence and holy trembling: fear is so far from being abolished in the
Gospel, that it continues in Heaven, it being an essential and necessary
respect from the Creature to the Creator. Again, it is abused to deny all
humiliation and sorrow for sins; yea all confession of sins, as if to be
humbled for sins were legal, whereas repentance and all the acts of it, is a
mere Gospel duty, the Law knew no such thing, and the truest and most genuine
sorrow arises from a sense of pardon, Zek. 12. 10. They shall look upon him
whom they have pierced, and mourn, So Luke 7. 47. that Christian Niobi loved
much and wept much, and all because much was forgiven; John speaks to
believers to them that walked* in the light to confess their sins, 1 John 1* 9.
we cannot have pardon in Gods way till this be done: if we confess, etc. it is a
condition not for which, but without which pardon is not obtained: it does not
show the cause but the order of graces working: again, sometimes it is abused to
the neglecting of circumspection and heed in us: we are preserved in Christ
(say they) and therefore we may be careless, and though we cast our selves upon
snares, temptations and occasions to sin: be confident that God will keep us;
the Devil sets upon Christ with such a temptation, Mat. 4. 6. Cast thy self
down, and he shall give his Angels charge over thee. Libertines scoff at the
niceness and scrupulousness of former professors, that were willing to keep at
such a distance from a temptation, as if their strict and exact walking were a
fruit of their darkness and legal spiritedness: whereas the Apostle makes it a
main property of of children of light; thus to do Ephesians. 5. 15. So Gods doing all
in the covenant of Grace, is abused to exclude all care of duty: and to keep
men in a lazy oscitancy, and gaping for grace without all care or endeavor on
our part: whereas God loves to be met with in his own way, and comes in with
supplies of grace, according to our diligence in the use of means: See Mark. 4.
34. and as it is abused to shut out all endeavors after grace; so all actings
and operations under grace: as if we were mere logs rather then rational
agents, and God so did all, that the act of our own faculties were quite
abolished, or suspended: whereas though the grace be from God, yet the act is
ours, for otherwise the faintness and defectiveness of the operation would be
chargeable upon him, and the Lord does so draw us, that we have a motion of our
own; draw me and we will run after thee, Cant. 1. 4. It Is he that treads down
Satan, but under our feet, Romans 16. 20. the Doctrine of Christian liberty,
which is one part of the Gospel is abused to exclude the Moral Law, as a rule
of duties to God and man: whereas the Apostle says, I am not (...), not
without the Law to God, but under the Law to Christ, 1 Cor. 9. 20. sometimes
it is abused to a living to the height of the Creature, (as some carnal wretches
phrase it) or an immoderate use of carnal comforts: whereas to restrain us in
this kind the Scripture forbids licentiousness in the use of the creatures
under such terms as do imply the lawful use; See Luke 17. 27 and Isa. 22. 13.
the things mentioned there are necessary for the supportation of life; but the
immoderate use is intended, because they did nothing else but mind these
things, He that will do all that he may, will soon do more then he should. The
doctrine of spiritual worship, and abolishing the shaddows of the Law, which is
another part of the Gospel, is abused to the neglect and contempt of
Ordinances, and acts of solemn worship, as if all were but forms, not suiting
with that spirituality unto which they think they are called in these days of
the Gospel, and so constant prayer is laid aside as a form, whereas God
calls for daily worship in this kind, Mat. 6. 11. and making conscience of
hearing the word: a form too low for them that pretend to live immediately upon
the spirit: whereas the Scripture joyneth word and spirit together, as
inseparable in the dispensation, Isai. 59. 21. and the Apostle in one Verse,
says despise not prophescying, 1 These. 5. 19. and presently Verse 20. Quench
not the spirit: implying, whosoever does the one, will, certainly do the
other; so the Use of the Seals, Baptism, and the Supper, as forms fit for
Novices; but they are of a more elevated strain, and above these lower helps,
enjoying so much in the inward and hidden man; whereas Christ has injoined
these Ordinances for the use of al sorts of Christians till he come again to
judge the World, see Mat. 28. 20. and 1 Cor. 11. 26. so instructing Children, a
form, though we have express command for it in Scripture, Ephesians. 6. 4. 'twere
easy to rake in this Puddle, but this taste may suffice. Use 1.


The Use of all is to make us more cautious and wary, that we may not be guilty
of this great sin.

It Is the error of the wicked, 2 Pet. 3. 16. it is a black mark to grow the
more wanton for mercies; secure, for patience; sensual, vain, negligent
careless, because of the free tenders of grace in the Gospel; there cannot be a
more evident mark of a man in a carnal condition: it is sad when our Table is
made a snare; but it is worse when the very Gospel is made a snare; for the
better things are, the worse is the abuse and more dangerous; look as it is a
mark of the Love of God to have all things work together for good to us, Romans
8. 28. So it is an argument of the hatred of God, when all things prove a snare,
and the very Gospel it self, the blessed Gospel of the glorious God is cursed
to us, Oh how said is their condition!

2. It Is a sin against Mercy, and those of all others are most dangerous, when
you abuse Grace, you make Grace your enemy; and it is ill for creatures when
Grace is their enemy, and there is nothing left for them but Justice and Wrath;
Justice will take up the quarrel of abused Mercy, and as Grace is despised, so
wrath takes place; they treasure up wrath, etc. Romans 2. 4, 5.

3. It Is soul ingratitude to turn our mercies into a provocation, to make a
Calf of our Earings, and to serve our lusts of Gods Providence, as he said of
Adam, that what he received (...) a Rib he returned (...) a Dart, alluding to
his fall by Eve; so he fight against God with his own weapons, what vile
ingratitude is that? See Jer. 5. 7. Ezekiel. 7. 20. To make Plenty the fuel of our
lusts, what is it but to Isa. 43. 24.
make God serve with our sins, and to grow worse for the Gospel, black and
tauny because the Sun of Righteousness has looked upon us? it is as it were to
give it out to the World, as if he did serve with our sins by his own consent,
and we had a license from heaven to do what we do.

4. It Is a great grief to the Spirit of God* when you abuse Grace, you do as
it were put your miscarriages upon him, when you call licentious walking,
Christian liberty; and neglect of duty, Gospel freedom; and godly sorrow,
legalism; and strict walking, superstitious niceness; you do as it were Father
your bastards upon the Spirit, and entitle the monstrous conceptions and births
of your own carnal hearts to his incubation and over-shaddowing; you think God
warranteth you in all this, and that is a high wrong to him, which he will avenge
in due time; see Psalm. 50. 21, 22. I remember the Prophet says, Jer. 4. 10. Oh
Lord thou have greatly deceived this people, because the false Prophets had
done it in his name; false doctrines make God to be the deceiver, and these ill
consequences drawn from the Gospel, are in effect charged upon the Spirit who
is the author of it.

Well then, learn the truth as it is in Jesus. Ephesians. 4. 21.

First, Make him your Teacher; flesh and blood will stumble in Gods plainest
ways, we cannot learn any Gospel truth of our selves, but we are apt to
pervert it to an ill use.

2. Take the whole doctrine together; for it is the truth as it is in Jesus,
otherwise it is the truth as it is in the mouth of a false Teacher, half truth,
has filled the world with looseness, when men divide between Christ's comforts,
and Christ's graces, his Priesthood and his Regality, his Benefits and his Laws,
these partial apprehensions spoil all.

3. As to your manner of learning, let it be saving, and such as tends to
practice; it is not enough to make Christ our Teacher, by using his Word, and
looking for the direction of his Spirit, and to make the whole counsel of God
our lesson, but also we must learn to a saving purpose, to put off the Old man,
to put on the New, and not to store the brain with knowledge so much as the
heart with grace: for to this end is the Gospel given to us not for science so
much as practies, to make us better rather than wiser and more knowing.

Another Use is Examination, to put us upon trial, whether Use 2.
we do not, yea, or no turn the Grace of God into wantonness: A man may be
right in Doctrine, and yet the constitution of his spirit may be naught. Again,
there may be a fond dotage on the name of Christ, and yet no real respect to
him, therefore it behooves us to search how the Gospel works with us.

1. Are you not the better for the knowledge of it, if you are not the better,
you are the worse; if you know Christ, and come short of the hour of his
Grace, you know him in vain, you make Christ and the Gospel an useless thing,
compare 2 Cor. 6. 1. with Col. 1. 6. there is a receiving the Grace of God in
vain, and a knowing the grace of God in truth, we receive it in vain when we
are nothing the better for it; and we receive it in truth when we feel the
sweetness and power of it upon our hearts and consciences; those that know the
grace in truth, are the more vigilent, more humble, more holy, they are more
diligent for the grace of God has a mighty constraint to urge us to duty, 2
Cor. 5. 14, 15. more humble, nothing so melting as Grace, Zech. 12. 10.
Unkindness after so much Grace as we have received in Christ is the great
reason and cause of godly sorrow: More holy, nothing kindles such a rage and
indignation against sin as Grace does, Ezra 9. 14 Should we again after such a
deliverance, etc. nothing persuades by such powerful arguments to the practice
of holiness, as grace does, See Tit. 2. 11. 12, 13, 14. Therefore what are you
the better, if it works not thus it is sad.

2. Are you the worse sensibly for the knowledge of the Gospel.

First, Do you grow more careless and neglectful of duties, as if now there
were not so much required of you? The Gospel never taught you that; but your
own corrupt hearts; it is true, the more Christ is preached, the more
Evangelical a man is in his duties; his heart is taken off more from resting in
them, he does not pitch his hopes upon the tale of number of his duties, and he
does not perform them out of bondage, but more clearly, knowingly,
comfortablely, as upon Gospel grounds; but still he will be performing: as
knowing that duties can never have too much of our care, and too little of our
trust: in the Gospel we have more help, therefore in all reason we should
perform more work: well then to grow more lazy, and less frequent in the
worship of God, and the use of the means of grace: the more we are acquainted
with Gods grace in Christ, is to abuse grace, which was given us to make us
more cheerful, not more slack and negligent.

Secondly, Less circumspect and wary in your conversations, loose walking is an
ill sign: Christ himself taught us, To enter in at the straight gate, and to
walk in the narrow way, Mat. 7. 14. When men seek more roomth and breadth for
their lusts, they pervert the end of the Gospel, for the Gospel only shows,
That the greatest sin is pardonable, but the least is not allowable: the world
is much for a shorter cut to Heaven; but when you have done all, you will find
that the good, old, long way is the nearest way home; still we must make
straight steps to our feet: mortify lusts, bridle vile affections, and keep
close to Rule. Sin is the same that ever it was, and the Law is the same, and
God is as Holy and as much delights in holiness as ever he did; we therefore
must be as strict as ever: it is but a carnal liberty to have leave to be
wanton, to be free to sin: Nature is very apt to hear in that ear, See 2 Pet.
2. 18. 19. but grace counts it no privilege.

Thirdly, If less humble, still you are guilty, a man commits sin and
finds no remorse, upon the pretense of Gods free grace in pardoning, this is
still the wantonness which arises from the abuse of the Gospel; Gods children
never loath themselves more then upon the remembrance of mercy, Ezekiel. 36. 31.
never melted for sin more, then when the warm beams of Gods love thaw their
hearts, that they should sin against a pardoning God, a gracious Father: a good
Master, etc. every mercy is a new stab at heart, Christ's look made Peter weep
bitterly, nothing affects them so much as grace.

The third point is taken from that Particle [ Our] (...), Observat. 3.
he mentions their interest in God to provoke them so much the more to zeal,
against errors, that were so scandilous to his grace. Note, That sense of
Interest in God begets the best zeal for the truths and glory of God. The point
consists of two Branches.

1. That Interest in God will beget a zeal for God: it troubles a good man to
see any one wronged, much more to see his own relation wronged, most of all to
see his God wronged: can a man profess love to God, and not espouse his
quarrel? friends have all things common, common love and common hatred, wrong
the one, and the other is not well at ease; so it is in the spiritual
friendship between us and God, Psalm. 69. 9. The reproaches of them that
reproached thee, are fallen upon me: injuries done to God and Religion, will as
nearly affect us, as those done to our persons; certainly they that can be
silent in the cause of God, have little affection to him, and are so tender of
wordly interests, do little value an interest in God: Wisdom is justified of
her children, Mat. 11. 19. they are Bastards and not Children, that are afraid
or ashamed to own their mothers defense, or can hug those in their bosoms that
are enemies to God and his grace, Psalm. 139. 21. Do not I hate them O Lord
that hate thee? am not I greved with them that rise up against thee? It Is an
Argument of his sincerity, that God and he had the same enemies, that he could
find no room in his heart for affection to them, that he had no affection to
God, when we came into covenant with God: we made a League with him offensive
and defensive, to count his friends ours, and his enemies ours, to hate what he
hates, and to love what he loves; therefore without breach of covenant we
cannot be silent in Gods cause* and friends to the enemies and abusers of his
grace.

2. The next Branch is, That their zeal who have an inteest in God, is the best
zeal: now it is the best partly because it is hotest, they that contest merely
for an opinion, are not so earnest as they that contend out of affection, as a
stranger seeing a man oppressed, may chide him that did the wrong, but a meet
relation, he will interpose and venture himself in the quarrel. So will one
that loves God, sacrifice all his interests for Gods sake: partly because it is
purest; carnal men may engage in Religious controversies, out of passion they
may stikle for their own opinion; but this fire is taken from a Common heart,
not from the Altar, it does not arise from any love to God, from any inward
relish, and taste of the sweetness of grace, but only from humor and
obstinacy, and wordly i^terest, we may as well be afraid of some men's zeal
against error, as of other proneness to it: Carnal persons keep a great coil,
and fill the world with clamor and rage, but their hearts do not flame with
zeal upon a proper interest and do not carry on things in Gods way.

The Use is to inform us of the reason why the spirits of godly men are so keen
against such errors as entrench upon the grace of God; why errors about
Christ are horrible to them, a very abomination to their thoughts; because
thereupon are built all their hopes, and in such matters they have most
experiences, therefore their hearts sparkle within them, others feel a cold
indifferency, but they a mighty pressure upon their spirits.

I now come to the last part of their description. [ And denying the only Lord
God, and our Lord Jesus Christ] observe their sin [denying.] The Object [ the
Lord Jesus Christ,] who is here described three ways. 1. By his absolute rule
and supremacy (...) the only Lord. 2. By his Essence, (...) God. 3. By his
Headship over the Church, (...), our Lord Jesus Christ

I shall first vindicate and then open the words, diverse take words
disjunctively, applying the first clause to the father: the second to the Son:
So Erasmus translateth it: God who is that only Lord, and our Lord Jesus
Christ: But as Beza observes: this is not the first time that he is taken
tripping in those places, which seem manifestly to assert the Godhead of
Christ; briefly then that the whole clause is to be understood of Christ, may
be proved by these arguments. 1. Because the parallel place in Peter, from
whence this seems to be taken, makes mention only of Jesus Christ, where
(...), the word of absolute Sovereignty is ascribed to him [ denying (...), the
Master that bought them,] 2 Pet. 2. 1. 2. Because to me it seems that Jude
would lay down all the prorogatives of Christ in his Natures, as God as man: In
his relation to the world, so a Master, to the Church, so a Lord, 3. By the
tennor of the words in the Original, where there is no new Article to divide
them and therefore all these Titles belong to the same person, (...). 4. Many
old Coppies (as Calvin says) read thus: denying Christ who is only God and
only Lord. 5. Because the heresy of these times struck at Christ, more then
God the Father, and only at the Father for Christ's sake; and therefore John in
his Epistles, speaks often of those that denied Christ: See 1 John 2. 22. and
1 John 4. 3. it is true the School of Simon and some other Sex, held forth many
fabulous things of God, and introduced multitude of Rulers by whom the world
was governed; but this was to exclude Christ, and to make void that
Sovereignty which the Scriptures assert to be committed into his hands: The
most ancient Heresies were those of the Simonians, Menandrians, Saturninians,
who denied the person of Christ; affirming Simon Magus to be Christ. And the
Valentinians, who denied his humane Nature, affirming that he brought his
substance from Heaven, and only passed through the Virgin Mary, like water
through a Conduite: there is but one Objection against this exposition, and
that is, if it be meant of Christ; then the Father will be excluded from being
God, for Christ according to the sense alleged, is said to be only Master,
only God and only Lord; I Answer, The expression does not exclude either of
the Persons of the Godhead, the Father or the Son; but only the Creatures, and
foigned Gods, especially those feigned Rulers and G^vornors of the world* which
the School of Simon, and the Nicholaitans introduced under the horrid names of
Barbel, Abrakan and Kavlakan, etc. and indeed such kind of expressions are
frequent in Scripture, as Isa. 44. 8. Is there a God beside me? yea there is no
God, I know not any: So Isa. 45. 5. I am the Lord, there is none else, there is
none besides me: All which expressions are meant of Christ, as appears not
only by the Titles of Savior and Redeemer, given to the God that there
speaks; but also by diverse passages therein proper to him; yea by a quotation
of the Apostles. Compare Isa. 45. 22. 23. with Romans 14. 11. and Phil. 2. 2.
Again you shall find like passages of God the Father, where ^e is said to be
only true God, Joh. 7. 3. This is life eternal to know thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent; which is not exclusive of other
persons, but of other Gods, and the Scriptures speak thus, because of the unity
of the Divine Essence, which all the persons communicate one with another.

The Exposition of the words now they are vindicated will be easy, [And
denying] this is done either openly or covertly. Openly, when Christ is clearly
renounced and opposed. Covertly, Christ is denied either by the filthy
conversation of Christians, or else by Heretical insinuations, striking at his
person and natures at a distance, both are intended for these seducers, though
they denied Christ, yet they had* their pretenses and illusions, this Christ
whom they denied is described, by his relation in the World [the only Master,
or Ruler] this word is opposed to their doting conceit of many Rulers, between
whom the Regiment of the World was divided, the next Title is [(...) God] so
Christ is called because of his divine nature, and then [ our Lord] he says [
our] partly to show that this was the Title that he bore in relation to the
Church, they being his peculiar people by his fathers gift and his own
perchase, partly to awaken their zeal by a consideration of the interest, which
they had in this Lord, thus denied; and then the other word [ Lord] is proper
to Christ's Mediator-ship, see 1 Cor. 8. 5. there remains but Christ's name
[Jesus Christ] the word [ Jesus] is opened Math. 1. 21. Thou shall call his
name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins, and it implies here
that Christ's Lordship shall be administered for the salvation of the Church; the
other word [ Christ] signifies anointed, which notes his designation from God
to be King, Priest, and Prophet, I do thus particularly open the terms, because
I suppose the Apostles scope is to give us a sum of the Christian Doctrine,
concerning the person, natures and Offices of Jesus Christ, all which were one
way or other impugned by the seducers of that age.

The points that might be drawn hence are many, for a taste take these.

That Jesus Christ is M^ster and Lord, (...), King of nations, Jer. 10. 7. and
King of Saints, Rev. 15. Observat. 1.
3. or as the Apostle in one place, Head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1.
22. he is over all things Supreme and absolute, but the Churches head, from
whom they receive all manner of influence, he has a rod of Iron to rule the
Nations, and a golden Scepter to guide the Church, in the World he rules by
his Providence, in the Church by his Testimonies, Psalm. 93. per totum. In the
World the attribute manifested is Power, in the Church, Grace; well then, here
is comfort to Gods people, your Lord is the Worlds Master, let the waves wave,
the Lord reigns, Psalm. 93. You need not fear, he is not only Lord to protect
you, but Master of them that rise up against you: Again, who would not choose
him to be a Lord when whether we will or no, he is our Master; and bow the knee
to him, that will else break the back; and touch his g^lden Scepter, least we
be broken with his Rod of Iron; and take hold of his strength by faith, least
we feel it in displeasure; Lord let me feel the efficacy of thy grace, rather
then the power of thine anger.

Observe again: That Christ is Lord and Jesus, he came Observat. 2.
to rule, and he came to save: I shall handle these two Titles. 1. Conjunctly,
and then, 2. Singly and apart.

1. Conjunctly, Let all Israel know that God has made this Jesus whom ye have
crucified Lord and Christ, Acts 2. 36. It Is usual to observe in Christ's style
and Title, a mixture of words of power, and words of goodness and mercy. See
Isa. 9. 6. and a tibi passim, now for what end? partly to show that he is a
desirable friend, and a dreadful adversary: partly to set forth the mystery of
his person, in whom the two Natures did meet, partly to show that he is not
good out of impotency and weakness; if we pardon and do good it is out of need;
God is strong enough to revenge, but gracious enough to save and pardon: Power
makes us cruel; Who finds his enemy and slays him not? if we forbear, it is
out of policy, not out of pity: the sons of Zerviah may be too hard for us,
but Christ who is the great Lord, he is also Jesus, he has the greatest power,
and the greatest mercy; mighty, but yet a Savior: Partly to show how we should
receive him; we should not only come to him for ease, but take his yoke, Mat.
11. 28, 29. Give him your hearts as well as your consciences; if Christ save,
let not sin Lord it. What a pitiful thing is it when men would have Christ to
redeem them, and Satan to rule and gov^rn them? (...), we will not have this
man to reign over us, Luke 19. 14. There the business sticks; the carnal mind
is enmity to the Law, Romans 8. Lusts cannot endure to hear of a restraint, and
therefore we oppose most Christ's Nomothetick power; like angry Dogs we gnaw the
chain: the language of every cardal heart is, our lips are our own, who is Lord
over us? Psalm. 12. 4. To be controled for every word, every thought, every
action, we cannot endure it. Oh consider Christ has many enemies, but they are
his chief enemies that do withstand his reigning, Luke 14. 29. Those mine
enemies that would not that I should reign over them, etc.

Secondly: Let us handle these two titles singly and apart.

1. He is Lord, Acts 10. 36. Jesus Christ he is Lord of all. As he is God he
has the same glory with the Father; as Mediator there is a dominion that
results from his Office; for so he is the heir of all things, the head of all
creatures, and King of the Church, and at the last day the Judge of all men.
But he is chiefly a Lord because of his heritage in the Church; a Lord over his
own people, who are given to him for a possession by God the Father, Psalm. 2.
8. and bought with his own blood, Acts 20. 28. and taken into a
Marriage-covenant with him, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. And as Sarah called her husband
Lord, so must the Church own Christ for Lord and Husband. Well then, let us
acknowledge the dominion of Christ, let him be Lord alone in his own house; let
us yield subjection and obedience to him; let us beware of depriving him of
that honor to which he has so good a right: You will say, who are those that
deny Christ his Lordship? I answer. 1. They that will not hear his voice, that
slight his calls; he inviteth them and prays them that they will look into
their hearts, consider their eternal condition, but they quench the Spirit,
smother light, resist all these motions; these will not hear Christ's voice; he
entreats, prays that we will come and put our souls under his Government,
and we in effect say, we are Lords and will not come at thee, Jer. 2. 31. We
are well enough, and shall do well enough without any such care and strictness.

2. They that cannot endure his restraints, Jer. 31. 18* Thou art as a bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke. They cannot endure to hear of denying their fashions,
their lusts, their pleasures, their vain thoughts, when every thought, and
every desire must be under a Law; so much time spent in duties, such gravity in
the conversation, such awe in their speechs, they break off like a wanton
heifer; vain and licentious spirits will not be yoked and clogged thus, Mal. 1.
14. What a weariness is it? Sacrifice upon sacrifice! such waiting upon God!
they cannot endure it. Man is compared to a wild Asse-col^, not only for
grosness of conceit, but for un^a^edness and wildness, Job 11. We would roam
abroad without restraint.

3. They are given up to strong and inordinate desires of liberty; when men
quarrel at duties rather than practice them, think it a kind of happiness to be
free, and that there is no freedom but in sinn^ng, and following the bent and
sway of their own hearts, are all for breaking bands, and dissolving cords,
Psalm. 2 4.

4. These are bewrayed by a proud contempt, and obstinacy against instruction
and reproof, Jer. 5. 5. I will go to the great men and speak to them, but
these have altogether burst the yoke, and broken the bands, they had cast off
all respect and obedience to God, Jer. 13. 15. Hear, give ear, be not proud,
etc. So Heb. 13. 12. Suffer the words of exhortaiion, etc. Some spirits are
impatient and recoile with the more violence upon a reproof, and storm and vex,
which argues much unsubjection of heart to Christ.

Secondly: he is Jesus, which signifies a Savior; now Christ is a Savior
positively as well as privately, he gives us spiritual blessings, as well as
freedom from misery, Joh. 3. 17. That they should not perish but have
everlasting life. Again, he is a Savior, not only by way of deliverance but
by way of prevention, he does not only break the snare, but keep our feet from
falling: He is as a Shepherd to lead the flock, as well as a Physician to heal
the diseased: We do not take notice of preventive mercies, and yet prevention
is better than escape. Again, he is a Savior by merit, and by power; for he
has not only to do with God but with Satan; God is to be satisfied, and
Satan overcome, and therefore he rescueth us out of the hands of Satan, and
redeemeth us out of the hands of Gods Justice. To rescue a condemned
Malefactor, and take him by force out of the Executioners hands, is not enough,
the Judge also must be satisfied, and pass a pardon, or the man is not safe:
Christ has pulled us out of the power of darkness, Col. 1. 13. and in him the
Father is well pleased, Mat. 3. 17. There needs also power to work upon our
hearts, as well as merit to satisfy God. Before his Exaltation he redeemed us,
then he deserved it, and therefore it is said, We have salvation by his death, 1
These. 5. 9. After his exaltation he works it, and so we are saved by his
life, Romans 5. 10. So that living and dying he is ours, that living and dying we
may be his; we have the power of his Exaltation as well as the merit of his
humiliation. Once more, he saves us not only for a while, but for ever, and
therefore it is called an eternal salvation, Heb. 5. 9. not only from temporal
misery but from hell and damnation, not only the body is saved but the soul,
and the soul not only from hell but the fear of hell, Heb. 2. 14. from the
fear as well as the hurt, from despair and want of hope, as well as from the
misery it self. Yet again, he saves us not only from the evils after sin but
the evil of sin, Mat. 1. 21. He shall save his people from their sins, there is
the chiefest part of his salvation. He does not only save us in part, but
saves us to the uttermost, Heb. 7. 25. He gives us life, and all things
necessary to life. Well then,

1. Bless God for Jesus Christ, that he took the cure of our salvation into
his own hands, he would not trust an Angel, none was fit for it, Isa. 59. I
looked and there was no Savior, therefore mine own arm wrought out salvation;
there are poor creatures, like to perish for want of a Savior, I will go down
and help them, as Jonah when he saw the tempest, Cast me into the sea; so when
we had raised a tempest, cast me in (says Christ) Lo I am come to do thy will.

2. Get an interest in Christ, Luke 1. 47. My spirit has rejoiced in God my
Savior. Interest is the true ground of comfort and rejoicing, what must we do
to get this interest? I answer,

1. Reject all other Saviors, Acts 4. 12. There is salvation in no other:
nothing could save Noah and his Family but the Ark; if they had devised Ships,
they would not hold out against the deluge; especially take heed of making
Christ of self, setting up thy own merit, or thy own power, the one in effect
renounceth his humiliation, the other his exaltation: Christ came to save that
which was lost; the sinking Disciples cried out, Master save us, we perish.
It Is long ere God brings us to this; till you are lost, why should you make
choice of a Savior; swimming is not a thing that can be practiced a shore or
on firm land; till we are brought into distress we will never look for a
Savior.

2. Be earnest with God for an interest, and for the manifestation of it, Psalm.
35. 3. Say unto my soul I am thy salvation: When the Soul has chosen God, Lam.
3. 24. The Lord is my portion says my soul, I Will have no other Savior, but
I Will desire the Lord to ratify it by his consent; I am thy salvation. Those
that would make use of Christ's salvation in a temporal way pressed on him,
untiled the house to come at him, so should we force our selves upon him by an
holy boldness.

Again, from the words observe, The Son of God was Observation.
Christ that he might be Lord and Jesus; anointed of the Father that he might
accomplish our salvations. This anointing signifies two things.

1. The quality and kind of his Office. 2. The Authority upon which it was
founded.
First, it notes the nature of his Offices under the Old Testament three sort
of persons were anointed, Kings, Priests, and Prophets, and all these relations
does Christ sustain to the Church. Men that were to be saved lay under a
threefold necessity, ignorance, distance from God, and inability to return to
him; suitably Christ is a Prophet to show us our misery; a Priest to provide a
remedy; a King to instate us in that remedy; therefore according to these three
Offices does the Scripture use words in describing the benefits we have by
Christ, John 14. 6. I am the way, the truth, and the life. Christ is the way As
a Priest, for his oblation and intercession, we have the boldness to come to
God; the truth as a Prophet, the life as a King; take life either for the royal
donatives of Grace or Glory. So 1 Cor. 1. 30. He is made to us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemp^ion. We are ignorant, foolish
creatures, therefore Christ is made to us Wisdom as a Prophet; we are guilty
creatures, and therefore righteousness as a Priest; sinful creatures,
therefore sanctification; miserable creatures, liable to deach and hell*
therefore redemp^ion, and both these as a King: 'twas necessary that the way of
our salvation should be opened, effected, and applied, therefore did Christ
first come from heaven as a Prophet to preach the Gospel, and then offer up
himself through the eternal Spirit as a Priest, and last of all seize upon the
Mediatorial throne, as King of the Church. Well then, if our blindness and
ignorance troubles us, let us make use of Christ's Prophetical Office, that he
may teach us the whole counsel of God; if we are haunted by troubles, and the
accusations of our own conscience, let us sprinkle our hearts with the blood of
our high Priest, that they may be pacified; if we have any desire to be
granted, let us make use of his intercession; if we be discouraged by our own
weakness, and the power of our spiritual enemies: let us run for protection to
our King through whom the Saints are more then Conquerors.

2. It notes the Authority upon which his Office is founded, he was anointed
thereto by God the Father, who in the work of Redemption is represented as the
offended party, and supreme Judge; and so it is a great comfort to us that
Christ is a Mediator of Gods choosing: when Moses interposed of his own accord,
he was refused; blot me out of thy book: no says the Lord, The soul that
sins, him will I blot out of my Book: but now Jesus Christ took not this
honor upon him, but was called of God thereunto; 'twas the will of the Father:
so that when we come to God, though we cannot say he is mine, yet we can say,
Lord he is thine: a Savior of thy setting up, thou have Authorized him, and
wilt own thine own way, etc.

Once more observe, (which indeed is a point that lies Observat. 4.
full in the eye of the Text) That Jesus Christ the master of the world and
Lord of the Church is true God. For it is said here [ denying the only Lord
God, and our Lord Jesus Christ] It would seem a strange thing that I should go
about to prove the God head of Christ were not blasphemy grown so common, and
appearing abroad with so bold a forehead; heretofore it was a grievous
abhomina^ion to the children of God, when such a thought rushed into their
minds; but now some promote it as a settled oppinion: it is Satan's policy to
loosen a corner stone, though he cannot wholly pull it out, he striveth all
that he can to make the main Articles of Religion seem at least questionable:
But Christians be not shaken in mind, the foundation of the Lord stands
sure; I confess I should wholly omit such disputes; in fundamental Articles, we
shouldnot allow a scruple; Thou shall not enquire after their Gods, Deuteronomy. 12.
30. But when such conceits are not only Sathanical injections, but men's
settled opinions, it is good to establish the heart in such principles as this
is: that Christ is God, appears by express Scripture, where he is called the
true God, 1 John 5. 20. the great God, Tit. 2. 13. to show that he is not a God
Inferior to the Father, but equal in power and glory, and that not by
courtesy and grant, but by Nature. So he is called the Mighty God, the
everlasting father Isa. 9. 6. and God over all, Romans 9. 6. proofs so evident
and pregnant, that they need no illustration, and that he is a God equal to the
Father, appears also by express Texts of Scripture, Phil. 2. 6. He was in the
form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with God, and Col. 2. 9. in
him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily: the Saints are made partakers
of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 5. but in him the whole Godhead dwelt
personally, and all this was no usurpation of a mothers right; the Jews would
have stoned him, because he said God was his Father, making himself equal with
God; therefore he meant it not in an ordinary sense, and indeed if he be a God,
he is a God by Nature, for God will not give his glory to another. Again, God
he must needs be, if you consider the work he ought to do: the work of the
Mediator could be dispatched by no inferior agent: as Prophet, he was to be
greater then all other Prophets and Apostles; for the great Doctor of the
Church ought to be Authentic a Lawgiver from whose sentence there is no
appeal: A Lord in his own house, Heb. 3, 6 one to whom Moses was but a servant,
for to him he gave the Law, Heb. 12. 29. One that is to be a Foun^ain of*
wisdom to all the Elect, 1 Cor. 1. 30. One that must not only teach but give
eyes to see, and ears to hear, and an heart to learn: consider him as a King, a
finite power cannot break the force of enemies, pour out the spirit, raise the
dead, bestow grace and glory, and become an original fountain of life to all
the Elect; all these things are proper to God, the glory which he will not give
to another: Consider him as a Priest, and there is two Acts, Oblation and
Intercession, and still you will find that he must be God; for his Oblation,
he must be one that could offer up himself, Heb. 9. 14. and therefore must have
power over his own life, John 10. 18. to lay it down and take it up, which no
creature has: And he must offer himself one for all, 2 Cor. 5. 15. the person
that suffered was to be infinite, as good and better then all theirs that
should have suffered, as they said to David, thou art better then a thousand of
us; and this suffering was to be but once: now the wages of sin are eternal
death, something there must be to compensate the eternity of the punishment,
and nothing could counterpose eternity, but the infiniteness and excellency of
Christ's person, as a payment in Gold takes up less room, then a payment in
silver, but the value is a^ much: 'twas necessary that he should overcome the
punishment, for if he were always suffering, we could have no assureance that
God were satisfied, and the end was to expiate sin, nothing but an infinite
Good could remedy so great an evil, the person wronged is infinite, so is the
person suffering; and then his death was not only to be a ransom, but a price,
not only (...), but (...): a surety to an ordinary creditor, pays the debt,
and freeth the debtor from bonds; Christ was to bring us into grace and favor
with God, and to merit Heaven for us: now for the other act of his Priesthood
his Intercession; so he was to know our persons and our wants and necessities,
as the high Priest had the names of the twelve* Tribes on his Breast and
shoulders, Exodus 28. 12* 29. and then he is to negotiate with God in the behalf
of all believers, and to dispatch blessings suitable to their state: and who can
do this but God who knows the heart, and tries the reins? in short, to be a
^it Intercess^ur for all the El^ct he is to know our needs, thoughts, sins,
prayers, desires, purposes, and to wait on our business day and night, that
wrath may not break out upon us, so that his work as mediator, shows him to
be God.

Well then we learn hence.

1. That Christ is a proper Object for faith, faith is built Uses.
on God, 1 Pet. 1. 21. and Christ is God, and therefore his merit was
sufficient to redeem the Church, who is therefore said to be purchased by the
blood of God, Acts 20. 28. this makes him able to sanctify us, and purge us,
for his blood was offered through the eternal spirit, Heb. 9. 14. as God he
knows our wants; for as to his divine nature he knows all things, and then
he has an humane nature, that has had experience of them he is able as God,
to give in the supplies of the spirit, to save to the uttermost, Heb. 7. 25.
God manifested in our flesh, is a firm Basis for ^aith and comfort.

2. Since he was God by Nature, let us observe the love of Christ in becoming
man; men show their love to one another when they hang their Picture about
their neck: what did Christ when he took our Nature? to see the great God, in
the form of a servant, or hanging upon the Cross, how wonderful! God manifested
in our flesh is a mystery fit for the speculation of Angels, 1 Timothy 3. 16. with
1 Pet. 1. 11. it would have seemed a blasphemy for us to have thought it; to
have desired it: among the Friars, they count it a mighty honor done to their
order, if a great Prince when he is weary of the world, comes among them and
takes their habit, and dies in their habit: certainly it is a mighty honor to
mankind that Christ took our nature and dyed in our nature, and that he was
made sin, made man, made a curse: Let us desire to be made partakers of his
nature, as he was of ours, this is our preferment to be be partakers of the
divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 5. as this was his abasement, the Sun of righteousness
went backward, there was the miracle; and let us use our selves more honorably
for the time to come that we may not defile that nature which the Son of God
assumed.

3. It Is an invitation, to press us to come to Christ, and by Christ to God:
The great work of the Ministers is like that, of Eli^zer, Abraham's servant, to
seek a match for our Masters son; our way to win you, is to tell you what he
is, he is God man in on person, he is man that you may not be afraid of him:
God that he may be sufficient to do you good; the Lord of Lords, King of Kings,
the heir of all things: the Savior of the world: this is your beloved, ye
daughters of Jerusalem: He knows your wants, is able to supply them, though
you are unworthy: come, he needs no portion with you, we can bring nothing to
him, he has enough in himsell, as Esther the poor virgin, had garments out of
the Kings Wardrobe, Esther 2. 12. and the perfumes and odors given her on the
Kings cost; therefore come to him, it is danger to neglect him: see that ye
refuse not him that speaks from Heaven, Heb. 12. 25. it is God wooeth you,
he will take you with nothing* he is al su^^^cient, you bringing him nothing but
all* necessity, ^e will protect you, maintain you, give you a Dowry as large a^
heart can wish: Therefore leave no^ till you come to I am my Beloveds, and he
is mine.

I come now to the Word, implying their guilt, (...), Observe. 5.
Denying* Observe, That it is an horrible* Impiety to deny the Lord Jesus: When
he would make these Seducers odious, ^e gives them this character. Now Christ
is many ways denied, I shall refer them to two heads, In Opinion, and Practice.

1. In Opinion, So Christ is denied when men deny hi^ Natures or Offices. 1.
His Natures; His Deity or Humanity: As those ancient and wicked Heretics ^^ion
and Cerinthus; and that is the reason why John begins his Gospel (which was
last written) with a description of his Godhead, and is so zealous against
them in his Epistles; as also Jude and Peter. E^ion, Cerinthus, and
^^arpocrates, and others, held* he was begotten as others are, by the help of a
man. M^^^^ held the Son of God to be a part of his others substance. Satur^ius,
Basilides, Cordion, with other^ denied the Humanity of Christ, saying, He only
appe^r^^ in the shape of a man. Samosatenus held God was not otherwise in
Christ then in the Prophets. Eutiche^ held there was in Christ but one Nature
which was made up of the c^mmixture of his Flesh with his Divinity, as water is
m^^ed with Wine* Nestorius would give him two Personalities, because he had
two* Natures. The Marcio^ites* affirmed* Christ suffered not really, but in
show. Thus you see how busy the Devil has been, and always is, about this
main Article.

2. His Offices of King, Priest, and Prophet have been denied by none, as I
remember, but yet often made void, and of none effect. Antichristianism is
perfectly the evacuating of Christs-Offices: The Papists set up Head against
Head, which is the spirit of Antichristianism; They make void his Priestly
Office by Indulgences, Purgatory, Doctrine of Merit: Hi^ Prophetical Office, by
Doctrines of men, and unwritten Traditions. So Socinians make void his
Priesthood, by denying his satisfaction; and Papists make void the other act of
his Priesthood, by setting up Mediators of Intercession, etc.

2. Christ is denied in Practice; and so 1. By Apostasy, and total Revolt from
him; Matthew. 10. 33. Whosoever shall deny me before men, etc. None sin as
Apostates do; for they do as it were, after Trial, and upon deliberate
judgment, acknowledge the Devil the better Master; they first for sook Satan,
and then came to Christ, and then they go back again from Christ to Satan; and
so do as it were tell the world, that with him is the best service; and
therefore it were better they had never known the way of righteous^ess, etc. 2
Pet. 2. 22. 2. By not professing Christ in evil times, for no^ to profess, is
to deny: see Matthew. 10. 32, 33. and Mark 8. 38. in an age when men prove
disloyal in the Duty of the Covenant, called there an Adulterous generation:
Some are ashamed for fear of Disgrace, as well as afraid for fear of danger to
own Christ, and the ways best pleasing to him, this is to deny him. 3. Men deny
Christ, when they profess him, and walk unworthily and dishonourably to their
Profession: Actions are the best Image of men's Thoughts; now their Actions give
their Profession the Lie; Titus 1. 16. They profess they know God, and in works
they deny him. So 1 Timothy 5. 8. If any provide not for his own house, he has
denied the Faith; that is, done an act incompatible with the Christian Faith,
of which he makes profession; which is Interpretative, a denying the Faith.
For the more clear opening of this, consider these Propositions.

1. An empty profession of Christ is not enough, Now Christ is every where
received, it is easy to profess his Name. To be a Christian in ^eart and
Conscience was far more easy to them in the Primitive times, then be so in
Name and Profession, the Powers of the world being against that way: whereas
the difficulty on our part lies on being Christians in heart; it is no disgrace
now to be a Christian outwardly; that opposition and scorn which was then cast
upon Christianity, would now be cast upon Judaism, or Turcism, or Paganism: The
winds blow out of another corner, and that which was their discouragement, may
be our Motive, to wit, The Countenance of Civil Powers; all advantages lie this
way. If in Christ's time they followed him for the loaves, now John 6. 28.
Gilbert. in Cant.
they may much more: Quandoquidem panis Christi jam pinguis, factus est (says
Gilbert) tractatur in Conciliis, disceptatur in Judiciis, di^putatur in
Scholis, Cantatur in Ecclesiis, quaestuosa res est nomen Christi: The world is
well altered since the first flight of Christianity abroad; the Kings, and
Princes, and Wise men of the World were then against it, every where was it
hooted at as a novel and improbable Doctrine, but since (by long prescription
of time) it has gotten esteem in the world, and is made the public profession
of Nations; and Kings and Princes have brought their glory into the Church; now
Christ is handled in Councils, disputed of in the Schools, and preached of in
the Assemblies* so that the general profession of Christianity is a matter of
no thanks: It Is easy to be good where there nothing to draw us to the
contrary; and therefore when Christ comes to judgment, Paganism and loose
profession of Christianity shall fare alike; for loose Christians are but Pagans
under a Christians name: see Jer. 9. 25* 26. The days shall come, that I will
punish all them that are uncircumcised, with them that are circumcised; Egypt,
and Judah, and Edom, and the children of Ammon, and Moab; for these Nations are
uncircumcised in flesh, and the house of Israel are uncircumcised in heart.
It Is no advantage to bear Gods mark in our Bodies, and to hove no fruit of it
in our Souls; This is but to cloth our selves with the leaves of the Vine,
without partaking the sap. What difference is there between those who in a
loose Christian profession are addicted to Luxury, wantonness, quarrelling,
prodigious lusts, and the Votaries or Worshippers of Mars; Venus, Bacchus, and
Priapus? Only the one appear in their own colors, and show what they are; and
the other, though they are as low and brutish in their practices, pretend to an
higher Name, even to the sacred Romans 2. 25.
and excellent name of Christians: Alas! your Circumcision shall be reckoned
Uncircumcision, when you have not the fruit of it.

2. Profession of Christianity without answerable practice, makes us in worse
case than an Heathen, that is ignorant of Christ, and salvation by him: see 1 Timothy 5. 8. He is worse then an Infidel. Poor Pagans are not so well enlightened,
instructed, and acquainted with such rich and glorious mercy, with the great
things of Eternity, with the assistances of God the Spirit; they have not such
Rules as we have, nor such Advantages as we have, nor such Obligations as we
have, nor such Encouragements as we have: If a man on Horseback comes slower
then a man on Foot, we blame him the more, because he had more help: So are
Carnal Christians in worse case then the Heathen, because God may justly expect
more from them. To be brought up in a Princes Court and to be still of rude and
servile conditions, is worse in them then in those that follow the Plough all
days of their lives: So to be trained up in the Courts of Christ, and to come
short of the Heathens in Morality and strictness of conversation 'twill be
worse taken of us, then of those that never heard of Christ: The more we
profess the Truth, the more we condemn ourselves in our evil practices, and
therefore must needs be worse then Heathens, for we practice that by voluntary
choice, and perverse inclination, which they practice by education, they know
little better: So that the more excellent the Religion is which we profess, the
more vile and base is our disobedience; for our profession will be a sore
witness against us, that we knew better, and had encouragements to do better;
we justify the Heathen, but we condemn ourselves, as Israel justified Sodom,
Ezech. 16. 5^. but by her profession so much the more disproved her own
carriage; see verse. 63. time will come when you will wish you had never known
the way of righteousness; and as Job cursed the day of his Birth, so will you
the memory of that day wherein you were added to the Church.

3. Profession accompanied with some rash and fond affection to Christ, is not
enough to acquit us from denying him. Many in an heat and humor will be ready
to die for their God, and yet deny him ordinarily in their lives: as a
quarrelling Ruffian will stand up for the honor of his Father, who yet by his
debauched courses is the very grief of his heart; it may be he wishes his
death to enjoy the Inheritance, yet if any other should speak a disgraceful
word of him, he is up in Arms presently, and ready to fight with him* So some
^^^ pretend much affection to their Religion, and are ready to ^^ him that
shall question it, or to venture their own lives in the quarrel; and yet none
do this Religion so great a despite and dishonor as they do themselves by
their ungodly conversations: The Apostle supposes that some may give their
Bodies to be burned, that have not Charity, 1 Cor. 13. 1. for all this ado is
not for their Religion, but their humor: If their Religion were rightly
understood, they would not endure it, because it altogether disproveth such
practices as they delight in; and all that they do is no more then they would
do for an Idol, if they were born there where Idols are worshipped. The
Blasphemies of a Pagan, or an open Enemy to Religion, do not touch Christ so
near in point of honor, as the scandalous Behavior of a Christian; when
Pagans declaim against him, it is but the malice of an enemy; Dogs will bark,
it is their kind; but your disobedience to his Laws, and unsuitable carriages,
does far more dishonor and represent him as an ulcerous Christ to the world*
because you pretend so much affection to him, and can live in such a fashion;
you would be taken for his greatest friends, and so in effect you make the
world believe that he does approve your Doings.

4. Christ may be denied, though there be a stricter Profession of his Name,
and some faint love and relish of his sweetness. Besides the loose National
Profession of Christianity, which God in a wise Providence ordains for the
greater safety and preservation of his Church, there may be a strict personal
profession, taken up from inward conviction, and some taste and feeling, and yet
Christ may be denied for all this; as some that had tasted the good Word,
turned aside to the world, and so are said to crucify him, rather then to
profess him, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. The Apostle intends some Hebrews that did mix
Moses with Christ and Judaism, to save their goods: So elsewhere he speaks of
some, that had a form of godliness, but denied the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
By the Form, meaning the strictest garb of Religion then in fashion: this is to
deny Christ, when we deny the Virtue and Power of that Religion which he has
established, and will not suffer it to enter upon our hearts.

5. The means to discover false Profession is, to observe how we take it up,
and how we carry it on; whether we embrace it upon undue grounds, or match it
with unconsonant practices.

1. We embrace it upon undue grounds, if we take it up merely upon Tradition,
without a ^ight of that distinct worth and excellency which is in our Religion;
for then our Religion is but an happy mistake; the stumbling of blind zeal upon
a good object; and all the difference between you and Pagans, is but the
advantage of your Birth and Education, standing upon an higher ground does not
make a man taller then another of the same growth and stature that stands
lower; their stature is the same, though their standing be not the same: So you
are no better then Pagans, only you have the advantage of being born within the
pale, and in such a 1 Chronicles. 17. 4. Ephesians. 1. 3.
Country where the Christian Religion is professed. You do according to the
Trade of Israel, and live (...), as the fashion of your Country will carry it;
and as Beasts follow the Track, so you take up that Religion which is entayled
upon you.

2. If we match it with unsuitable practices. These may be known, if we do
consider what is most excellent in the Sea my Comment on James from page 146.
to page 149.
Christian Religion. Elsewhere I have showed that the glory of the Christian
Religion lies in three things; In excellency of Rewards, and purity of
Precepts, and sureness of Principles of Trust.

^. In the Fullness of the Reward* which is the eternal enjoyment of God in
Christ; therefore they that do not make it their first and chief care, to seek
the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness Matthew. 6. 33. that are like Swine, in
preferring the will of carnal pleasures before communion with God, or in the
Scripture expression, Love pleasures more then God, or prefers the profers of
the world before everlasting happiness; they whose lives are full of Epicurism,
Atheism, Worldlyness, it is not a pin to those whether they be Pagans or
Christians; for acting thus heathenishly, thus brutishly, they do but polute
that Sacred and Worthy Name.

2. The perfection of the Percepts, which require a full conformity of the
whole man to the Will of God; More particularly Christian precepts are
remarkable for Purity and Charity: for Purity, and therefore revellings and
banquettings and chambering, are made to be customs of the Gentiles; 1 Pet. 4.
3. things abhorrent from the Christian Religion; they that are yokeless, and
live according to the swinge of their own lusts, or else that only fashion the
outward Therefore a merciless disposition is made a denying the Faith. 1 Timothy
5. 8.
man, make no conscience of thoughts, lusts, etc. they do not live as
Christians: for Charity, nothing is more pressed then giving* 'twas Christ's
maxim, It is better to give then to receive, Acts 20. 35. and also forgiving;
one great strain of his Sermon is Love to enemies, Matthew. 5. 43, 44, 45, 46,
47, 48. Christ when he brought from heaven the discovery of such a strange love
from God to man, would settle a wonderful love on earth between man and man.

3. For sureness of Principles of Trust, the whole Scripture aims at this, to
settle a trust in God, and therefore it discovers so much of Gods mercy, of
his particular providence of the contrivance of salvation in and by Christ; so
that to be without hope, is to be like a gentile for they are described to be
men without hope, 1 These. 4. 13. and carking and distrustful care is made the
sin of the Gentiles, Matthew 6. 31, 32. this kind of solicitude is for them that
know not God, or deny his providence over particular things.

Well then, Take heed of denying Christ, it is an heavy sin, it cost Peter
bitter sorrow Matthew. 26. 75. Will you deny Christ that bought you? 2 Pet. 2. 2.
Now they deny Christ, whose hopes and comforts are only in this world; Christ
is not their God, but their Belly, Phil. 3. 19. Libertines are not Disciples of
Christ, but Votaries of Priapus. Merciless and revengeful men do cond^mn that
Religion which they do profess: in short, they do not only deny Christ that
question his Natures, or make void his Offices, but they that despise his Laws,
when they do not walk answerably, or walk contrary.

VERSE 5. I will therefore put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this;
how that the Lord having saved the People out of the Land of Egypt, afterward
destroyed them that believed not.
WE have done with the Pre^ace, I come now to the examples by which the Apostle
proves the danger of defection from the Faith; the first is taken from the
murmuring Israelites; The second from the Apostate Angel; the third from the
be^stly Sodomites. That you may see how apposite and apt for the Apostle's
purpose these instances are, I shall first insist upon some general
Observations.

First Observe. That Gods ancient Judgments were ordained Observe. 1.
to be our warnings and examples. The Bible is nothing but a Book of
Presidents, wherein the Lord would give the world a Document or Copy of his
Providence; All these things are happened to them for examples: 1 Cor. 10. 11.
When we blow off the dust from these old experiences, we may read much of the
counsel of God in them; their destruction should be our caution: His Justice is
the same that ever it was, and his Power is the same, his vigor is not abated
with years, God is but one, Gal. 3. 20. that is, always the same, without
change and variation, as ready to take vengeance of the Transgressors of the
Law as of old; for that is the point there discussed: So 2 Timothy 2. 13. He
abides ^aithful, he cannot deny himself: In all the changes of the World God
is not changed, but is where he was at first: Surely we should tremble more
when we consider the examples of those that have felt his Justice; for God
keeps a proportion in all his dispensations: If he were strict, and holy, and
just, then he is strict, and holy, and just now. He that struck An^nias, and
Saphyra dead in the place for a lie, that made Z^chary dumb for unbelief, that
kept Moses out of the land of Promise for a few unadvised w^rds that turned
Lot's wi^e into a Pillar of Salt for looking back, is the same God still, not a
jot altered; his judgments may be more spiritual, but then more terrible.

Again, Answerable practices make us partakers of their guilt, and therefore
involve us in their punishment^ Imitation is an evidence of approbation; A man
may have more sins charged upon him then those committed in his own person; you
are partakers of their evil deeds that lived before you, if you do as they did;
it may be the memory of those that formerly fell under the weight of Gods
displeasure is execrable to you, yet your walking in the same course is a sign
that you like their practices, and therefore you must expect their judgments
with advantage and usury* Matthew. 23. 35. That upon you may come all the
righteous blood that was shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel,
to the blood of Zechariah the son of Barachia^; whom ye slew between the Temple
and the Altar. Why upon them? And how did they slay him? No doubt the memory of
Cum was accursed among the Jews, but they walked in the way of Cain, and so
were to receive Cain's judgment with advantage; No doubt the memory of the
murderers of Zechariah the Prophet was hateful to them, but they continued
Prophet-killing, and Prophet-huting; and therefore did implicitly approve his
murder, and so are said to slay him: Jude 1^. it is said, These perished in the
gain saying of Kora^* How can that be, when they were not as yet born? These
Seducers lived long after, but following them in their sin, in their rui^e they
had a sure pledge of their own destruction: when we see others fall into a deep
pit, and yet will adventure the same way, as we sin the worse, so our judgment
will be the greater.

Well then, Let us make every instance of the word a Uses.
warning, and apply it for our Use; it is excellent when we read the Scriptures
with a spirit of Application in the miscarriage of others, we have experience
at a cheap rate, and in their misery we have as sure a proof of the evil of
sin, though not as costly, as if we had felt it our selves.

Again, When wicked men flourish, be not dismayed: How has God judged sinners
of like kind? What say your Scripture presidents? I went into the Sanctuary,
there I understood their end, Psalm. 73. 17.

Again, it shows how vain their conceit is, that God will not deal so
severely with us if we continue in our sins as he has done with others in
former times, when the Scriptures were written; Gods judgments (I confess) are
more spiritual, but every way as severe to them that continue in their sins;
heretofore they were written with death, now with deadness: Nadab and Abihu
were quickly dispatched Lev. 10. 3. etc
for their unhallowed approaches to God in worship; many come now that do not
sanctify God in their hearts: their judgment is more spiritual, the
Ordinances which should quicken, harden them: Bears devoured the children that
2 Kings 2. 23* 24, 25.
mocked the Prophet; many sit taunting by the walls that are not torn ^n pieces
by Bears, but they are posting to hell apace; tarry but a little while, and God
will tear them in pieces, and there shall be none to deliver, Psalm. 50. Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram were swallowed up quick; the earth Number. 16.
cleaves to receive them that made a cleft in the Congregation: Many act as
tumultuously as they, and no doubt their day is coming: Lot's wife whose heart
hankred after her possessions, was turned into a pillar of Salt for looking
Genesis 19.
back: They that revert, and after they are embarked with Christ, run ashore
again, as soon as they see a storm a coming, shall have their reward in due time.

The next thing which I observe in these instances is, The Observe. 2.
impartiali^y of Divine Justice; for in all the examples brought, there are
some circumstances upon which others would expect an exemption from wrath, as
the interest of the Israelites, they were God's own people; the dignity of the
Angels they were as it were fellows of God, and Courtiers of Heaven: the beauty
and excellency of the country of Sodom: and in all the instances ye may observe
the judgments fell on multitudes and societies, or collective B^dies: All the
murmuring ^sraelites, All the Apostate Angels, All the Inhabitants of the four
Cities. Observe then, That no outward Privilege can avail us in the day of
wrath* and so 1. Gods justice knows no relations; He spared not Christ, Romans
8. 32. He spared not the Angels, 2 Pet. 2. 5. He spared not his people of
Israel, etc. 2. None have a privilege to sin* and th^^efore none are exempted
from punishment, the Law includes all, the Son, the Servant, them that sit on
the Throne, and those that grind at the Mill, none have a license from heaven,
and a privilege to sin above others. 3. Wicked men do not spare God, and
therefore God does ^^t spare them; They abuse his Justice, his Mercy, they
spare not his glory, his Laws, and as they are impartial in sinning, no
restraints withold them, so God is impartial in punishing.

Lean not then upon these reeds, when wrath makes inquisition Uses.
for sinners, outward privile^ges are of no use, it is happy for them alone that
are found in Christ Phil. 3. the Avenger of blood had nothing to do with the
manslayer in the Ci^y of Refuge; when God is about to strike, no^e but Christ
can hold the blow; See the vanity of other things; 1* Outward Profession is
nothing, your Circumcision becomes uncircumcision; God disclaimeth interest in
a sinful people; Thy people which thou have brought out of the land of Egypt
(says God to Moses) when they had corrupted themselves, Exodus 32. 7. in scorn
and disdain. Thy people, he will not own them for his Sheep, Deuteronomy. 32. 5. 2. No
dignity can exempt us, the Angels were cast down t^ places of darkness. Dignity
does not lessen, but aggravate sin; where much is giv^n, much is owed, and much
will be required. Tophet is prepared for Kings* for Princes is it prepared. 3.
Not outward excellency, as the pleasant Land of Sodom: The Disciples thought
the goodly buildings of the Temple, would move Christ to pity, Luke 21. 5, 6.
but Christ tells them, not one stone should be left upon another: Saul was
checked for sparing the best: Justice is not dazzled with outward splendour. The
Lord threatens to punish the dainty Daughters of Sion with a scab* Isa. 3. 17.
etc. 4. Not any society or multitudes of m^n: He spared not the old world, 2
Pet. 2. 5. No leagues and combinations can maintain your cause against God,
though the wicked go hand in hand, they shall not escape unpunish^d Pro. 11. 21,
Briars and Thorns may be intricated, and infolded one within another, but when
a devouring flame comes amongst them, they do not hinder, but increase the
burning. Universal evils are above man's punishment* but not Gods; there is no
safety in following a multitude to do evil. So that nothing will serve as a fit
screen to interpose between wrath and you, but only Christ.

Thirdly, I observe, that in all these instances, there was Observe. 3.
some preceding mercy, more or less: The Angels had the dignity of their
Nature; the Israelites had the Testimony of Gods presence, and were delivered
out of Egypt; the Sodomites had Eternal Blessings, and the preaching of Lot,
Gen* 19. 9. It Is Gods usual course to give a people a taste of his mercy, ere
he di^cover the power of his anger: Judgment is his last work there is some
mercy abused before it comes, which does abundantly clear God in the
judgments that come upon the sons of men: Their ruin may be sad but never
undeserved; God has not left himself without a witness, but we are lest
without ^xcuse.

Fourthly, Once more I observe, that in all these Instances Observe. 4.
God had still a care to put a distinction between the just and the unjust; the
race of ^srael was not destroyed, but only them that believed not: The good
Angels were preserved* the bad only fell from their first estate: Sodom
perished in the flames, but Lot escaped; when the multitude is so corrupt, that
we know not how they shall be punished, and the rest preserved, let us think of
these instances, let us refer it to God, he knows etc. 2 Pet* 2. 9.

I come now to the words, in which you have a preface; and the first instance
of Gods judgment, which was on the unbelieving Israelites. In the Preface you
may take notice of his purpose [I will put you in remembrance] his insinuation
[though ye once knew this]

I begin with the first part, his purpose [I will put you in remembrance] from
thence ob^erve, That it is a great part Observe. 5.
of a Ministers duty to be a Remembrancer. We are remembrancers in a double
sense. 1. From the people to God, to put God in mind of his peoples wants; so
it is said Isa. 62. 7. Ye that are the Lord's remembrancers: Christ is the
Church^s advocate, but we are the Churches Solicitors, to represent the s^d
condition of the Church to God. 2. From God to the people; and so we are to put
them in mind of the being of God, the riches of his grace, the necessity of
obedience, the preciousness of their souls* the many dangers that lie in their
way to Heaven, etc. These are standing dishes at Christ's Table: That this is a
great part of our Office, appears by those places, 1 Timothy 4. 6. I^ thou put
the Brethren in remembrance of these things, thou shall be a good Minister of
Jesus Christ: And Paul speaking of his Apostleship, says, Romans 15. 15. As one
that puts you in remembrance, through the grace given to me, See 2 Timothy 2.
14. Tit. 3. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 12. 13, 14. 2 Pet. 3. 1. So there are two Psalms that
bear that Title; A Psalm of David to bring to remembrance. Psalm. 38* and Psalm.
70. The great use of Sacraments is, to put us in remembrance of Christ, 1 Cor.
11. 24. Yea, one great employment of the Spirit, is to bring things to our
remembrance, Ioh. 14. 26. all which intimates. 1. Our forgetfulness and
incogitancy, Truths formerly understood are soon forgotten, or not duly
considered and kept in the view of conscience. 2. The benefit of a good memory:
A bad memory is the cause of all mischief; but a lively remembrance of truths,
keeps the mind in a good frame. 3. That however it be with natural, yet
spiritual knowledge, is a reminiscence, or reviving the 1 Cor. 15. 2. Heb. 12.
7.
seeds infused in the New Creation. 4. That a Minister discharges his duty,
when he teaches his people things vulgar and already known, as well as those
which are rare and less known; if he be but a remembrancer it is enough; we are
to bring forth things both new and old; we count him a wanton prodigal that
only furnishes his Table with rarities, neglecting wholesome meats because
they are usual. 5. The necessity ^f a standing Ministry, if not to instruct,
yet to keep things in remembrance, because the most necessary truths are few
and soon learned; men presently begin to think they know as much as can be
taught them, and so neglect Ordinances; whereas one great use of the Ministry,
is to keep truths fresh and savory in the thoughts and memory; the Heathens
^oon lost the knowledge of God* because they were without a public Monitor,
that might keep this knowledge still on foot; the sound of the Trumpet infuseth
a new courage; so does every Sermon beget new affections, though we knew the
Truths delivered before: Coals will die without continual blowing; so will
graces languish, without often warnings and admonitions.

The next thing in the Preface is the Insinuation [though ye once knew this.]
That word [ once] needs to be explained; his meaning is not that formerly
they had known, but now forgotten it; neither is [ once] to be referred to
(...) as if the sense were, I will once put you in remembrance, but by [ once]
is meant once for all; that is, ye have certainly and irrecoverably received
this as a Truth: This clause will yield us these Notes.

1. That it is the duty of every Christian to be acquainted Observe. 6.
with the Scriptures; the Apostle presumes it of these Christians to whom he
wrote: Now this is necessary in regard of our selves, that we may know the
solid grounds of our own comfort: every man would look over his charter, Search
the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life: John 5. 39.
Particular and distinct Scriptures are a great advantage in temptations; Sic
scriptum est, is Christ's own argument against Satan, Matthew. 4. No Christians
so unsettled in point of comfort or opinion, as those that are unskilful in the
word. Heb 5. 14. In regard of others it is necessary, that we may discharge our
duty to them; Let the word d^^^ll in you richly, teachi^g and admonishing one
another, etc. Col. 3. 16. None but full vessels will run over: Job 32: 18.
Ignorant Christians are barren and sapless in discourse; Private Christians
must be full of knowledge, not only to have knowledge enough to bring
themselves to heaven, but to admonish others, see Romans 15. 14. Well then, do
not put off this care to others, as if it were proper only to Scholars, and men
of a public calling, this is every man's work that has a soul to be saved,
it is popish ignorance to be contented with an implicit belief, you may best
trust your own eyes; when the Sun shines, every man opens his windows to let
it in; we busy our selves in other books, why not in the Word? Austin was
pleased with Tully's Hirtensius, but he cast it away, because he could not find
the name of Christ there: it is the description of a godly man, His delight is
in the Law of God, and in his Law does he exercise himself day and night Psalm
1. 2. There are the chaste delights of a child of God, not in Play-books, and
idle Sonnets; How many sacrilegious hours do most spend in these trifles? Good
Books should not keep us from the Scriptures; Water is sweetest in the
Fountain: Luther professes Luth. in Gen* cap. 19.
that he could wish all his books forgotten and utterly laid aside, rather then
that they should keep men from reading the Scriptures themselves. Christians
study the Word more, that you may have Promises, Doctrines, Examples ready, and
more familiar with you; to be ignorant in a knowing age, is an argument of much
negligence, Heb. 5. 14. Now Religion is made every one's Discourse, Will you
alone be a stranger in Israel? As the many helps ^all upon us to study the Word
more, so the many Errors which are abroad: all error comes from unskilfulness
in the Scriptures, Matthew. 22. 29. Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures; in the
dark a man may soon lose his way.

To cure this mischief, let me press you 1. To read the Scriptures in your
Families, se^ up this Ordinance among other parts of Worship there, it is a
Family Exercise, that your children may be trained up in them, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
It Is a good Closet exercise for your own private instruction, none of you is in
too high a Form; the Prophets searched them diligently, 1 Pet. 11. 12.

2. Read them with profit, so as you may understand them, and apply the
Doctrines and Examples you meet with there; Ask thy soul, Vnd^rstandest thou
what thou read? Acts 8. 30 or as Paul* Rom 8. 31. What shall we say to these
things? The Scriptures are not to be read for delight, but for spiritual profit
and use.

3. In cases of difficulty use all holy means, pray to God, the Spirit is the
best Interpreter; Pray before, Pray after, as you do for food, if God answer
not at first, cry ^or knowledge, li^t up thy voice for understanding: Call in
the helps which God has given, many private helps of Commentaries, but above
all, despise not Prophesying. Consult with the Officers and Guides of the
Church, Ephesians. 4. 14. Mal. 2. 7.

2. Observe again, That those Truths which we understand Observe. 7.
already* they had need be pressed again, and revived upon us, See 1 John 2.
21. Our Knowledge is but weak, the eye of the mind is opened by degrees; our
Memories are weak, and commands must be repeated to a forgetful Servant; our
Affections are slow, not easily wrought up to the love of good things. When the
Wedge will not enter with one blow, we follow it home with blow upon blow: Well
then we say, 1. Repetitions are lawful for you, it is a sure* thing, Phil. 3. 1.
Christ in the Gospels, and Paul in the Epistles do often repeat the same
passages: Till you be affected with them, we must inculcate necessary
Principles again and again: God speaks once, yea twice, when men regard it
not, Job 33. 14. Consider men are dull to conceive, slow of heart to believe:
The way to pierce the hard stone, is by often dropping: apt to forget heavenly
Truths: Leaky Vessels must be filled again, Heb. 2. 1. We must repeat, to make
shame more stirring. Peter was troubled when Christ said the third time, Love
thou me, John 21. 17. Let this which has been said prevent censure, look upon
it as a providence, when the same Truth or Sermon is presented again, Surely I
have not meditated enough of this truth, I am not enough affected with it,
therefore the Lord has again brought it to my thoughts, or there is some new
temptation that I shall meet with, that I may find the need of this old Truth,
etc. 2. That it is a spiritual disease, a Surfeit of Manna, when men must still
be fed with new things; no truths are too plain for our mouths, or too stale
for your ears; the itch of novelty puts men upon ungrounded subtleties, and
that makes way for error, or hardness of heart, though you hear nothing but
what you are acquainted with be content; they were carnal people that
complained they had nothing but the old Burden, Jer. 23. 33, 34. Take heed of
the Athenian itch, many times it argues guilt: we cannot endure to have an old
sore rubbed again; as Peter was troubled when Christ spoke to him the third
time (as I noted before) that his Apostacy should once more be revived. 3. It
may justify two duties of great use, Meditation, and Repetition in our
Families. Meditation, for it is good to remember Truths that we do already know.
Once has God spoken, and twice have I heard it, Psalm. 62. 11. we should go
over and over it again in our thoughts* first we learn, and then we meditate;
S^udy finds out a truth, and Meditation improveth it; as first the meat is
taken in, and then the digestion is afterward: Conscience preaches over the
Sermon again to the heart; while the thing is new, it does more exercise study
then meditation; but when we have once learned it, then our thoughts should
work upon it; for meditation is the improvement of a known truth. 2. Repetition
in our Families, let them hear it again and again, the third blow may make the
nail go: If people were humble and sober, they would have new and fresh
thoughts every time a truth is revived upon them: at first hearing many are
lost through the wandering and distraction of our thoughts* things which upon
the review may be brought to hand again, at least youth and children must have
line upon line, as when they learn to write the same letters, and the same
Copy are written over again and again, till the figure of them be formed in
their fancies.

I have done with the Preface, I come now to the first instance produced [ How
that the Lord having saved the people out of the Land of Egypt, afterward
destroyed them that believed not] (...), the term is of an honorable use in
this place [ the people] for the peculiar people of God, the holy and elect
Nation* that had the Law and the Covenants of Promise, this people after they
were delivered, and that by so great and solemn a deliverance as that out of
the Land of Egypt, were afterward destroyed; so that it is ill standing upon
privileges: Though many of them to whom the Apostle wrote, had renounced
Gentilism, and were (as it were) come out of Egypt, and made God's people by
visible profession; yet after all this, they might be destroyed in case of
disproportionable practice, or disobedience to God in that profession. Of
Israel's destruction, see Number. 14. 37. 1 Cor. 10. 10. Libertine Christians
shall fare as bad as obstinate Jews, that is the drift of his Argument.

From this clause observe, That after great mercies, there Observe. 1.
do usually follow great judgments, if great sins come between: as after their
deliverance out of Egypt, they were destroyed for Unbelief: This may be proved
from Christ's advice to the man cured on the Sabbath d^y, John 5. 14. Thou art
made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto th^e. There is the mercy,
the duty thence inferred, and the judgm^nt that does avenge the quarrel of the
abused mercy: Often it comes to pass that many men's preservation is but a
reservation to a worse thing, to a greater judgment; So see Joshua 24. 20. He
will turn again, and do you hurt, after he has done you good. So Isa. 63. 10.
He b^re them in the arms of his Providence, but they rebelled and vexed his
spirit, and he was turned to be their enemy. None usually have greater
judgments, then such as formerly have had sweet experience of mercy: Why?
There is no hatred so great as that which arises out of the corruption of
love: Disappointed love, abused love grows outrageous. When Amnon hated
Tamar, it is said, The hatred wherewith he hated her, was greater then the love
where with he loved her. As it is thus with men, such a proportionable severity
we may observe in the Dispensations of God, after a taste of his mercies,
Joshua 23. 15. It shall come to pass, as all good things are come upon you,
which the Lord your God promised you, so the Lord shall bring all evil things
upon you, until he has destroyed you, when ye have transgressed the Covenant
of the Lord your God. No evils like those evils which come after mercy. No sins
are so great as those sins which are committed against mercies; there is not
only filthiness in them, but unkindness, Psalm. 106. 7. They provoked him at the
Sea, even at the red Sea: Mark, it is ingeminated for the more vehemence, that
at the Sea, even at the red Sea, where they had seen the miracles of the Lord,
and had experirience of his glorious deliverance, that there they durst break
out against God. See the contrary in Judges 2. 7. Certainly the more
restraints, the greater the offense, when we sin not only against the laws of
God, but the loves of God, etc.

Well then, 1* It informs us, that there may be danger after deliverance;
there are strange changes in providence, Man in his best estate is altogether
vanity, Psalm. 39. When you are at your best, as the Sun at the highest, there
may be a Declension.

2. It Is a warning to those that enjoy mercies; Sin no more, lest a worse thing
come unto you: The next judgment will be more violent. There are some special
sins which you should beware of, even those which testify our unthankfulness
after the receipt of mercies: As 1. Forgetting the vows of our Misery. Jacob
voweth Genesis 28. 22. but he forgets his vow, and what followed? Horrible
disorders and confusions in his Family: Dinah deflowred, Reuben goes into his
Fathers Bed, a murder committed upon the Sichemites under a pretense of
Religion, and then Jacob remembers his Vow: We promise much when we want
deliverance, and when we have it, God is neglected; but he will not put it up
so, by sad and disastrous accidents he puts us in mind of our old promises. 2.
When you kiss your own hand, bless your dragge, ascribe it to your merit and
power: Habb. 1. 16. Deuteronomy. 9. 4. for these things are our mercies blasted. 3.
When we grow proud, self confident: If you were never so high, God will bring
you low enough; it is a great skill to know how to abound. She remembered not her
last end, therefore she came down wonderfully, Lam. 1. 4. when we forget the
changes and mutations to which all outward things are obnoxious, God will give
us an experience of them. 4. When you continue in your sins, the judgment is
but gone cum animo revertendi, to come again in a worse manner: See Psalm. 106.
43.

2. The next observation is taken from the cause of their destruction,
intimated in those words [ that believed not] Many were the peoples sins in the
wilderness, murmuring, fornication, rebellion, etc. But the Apostle
comprehends all under this [ they believed not] Unbelief is charged upon them
as the root of all their miscarriages elsewhere, as Numb. 14. 11. and Deuteronomy. 1.
32. Whence observe, That Observe. 2.
unbelief brings destruction, or is the cause of all the evil which we do or
suffer.

In handling this point, I shall open 1. The hainousness of Unbelief. 2. The
Nature of it. 3. The Cure of it.

1. The hainousness of the sin, that we will consider in 1. Hainousness.
general, or more particularly.

The general considerations are these.

1. No sin does dishonor God so much as unbelief does, it is 1. In general.
an interpretative blasphemy. a calling into question of his mercy, power,
justice, but especially of his truth; 1 John 5. 10. He that believes not God,
has made him a liar; You judge him a person not fit to be credited; the giving
of the lie is accounted the greatest injury and disgrace amongst men; for truth
is the ground of commerce and humane society: So that to say a man is a liar,
is as much as to say a man is unfit to keep company with men: But especially is
this a great injury to God, because he stands more upon his word, then upon
any other part of his name, Psalm. 138. 2. He has magnifyed his word above all
his Name: We have more experience of God in making good his word, then in any
other thing. As faith honors God, so does unbelief dishonor him; what God
does to the creature, that does faith to God; God justifies, sanctifies,
glorifieth the creature, and faith is said to justify God, Luke 7. 29. To
justify, is to acquit from accusation; So does faith acquit Gods truth in the
word, from all the jealousies which the carnal world, and our carnal hearts do
cast upon him. Faith is said to sanctify God, Numb. 20. 12. To sanctify, is
to set a part from common use; and God is sanctified when we set God aloof,
above all ordinary and common causes, and can believe that he will make good
his word, when the course of all things seems to contradict it. Faith is said
to glorify God, Romans 4. 20. We glorify him declaratively, when we give him
all that excellency which the word gives him: Now because unbelief accuses
God, limiteth him to the course of second causes, and denies him his glory,
therefore is it so heinous and hateful to God.

2. It Is a sin against which God has declared most of his displeasure. Search
the Annals, surveigh all the monuments of time, see if ever God spared an
Unbeliever: Hence in the wilderness the Apostle says they were destroyed for
Unbelief: Many were their sins in the Wilderness, Murmurings, Lustings,
Idolatry but the main reason of their punishment was, they believed not; look
to their final excision and cutting off, why was it? (...) for unbelief were
they broken off, Romans 11. 20. not so much for crucifying the Lord of life; the
Gospel was tendered to them after Christ was slain; 'twas for not believing or
refusing the Gospel: If you will know what company there is in hell, that
Catalogue will inform you, Fearful, and Unbelievers, etc. Rev. 21. 8. if you
look to temporal Judgments, that Nobleman was trodden to death for distrusting
Gods power 2 Kings 8. 2. and could only see the plenty, but not taste of it:
Nay it is such a sin as God has not spared in his own children: Moses and Aaron
could not enter into the land of promise, because of their unbelief; Numb. 20
12. So Luke ^. Zechary was struck dumb for not believing what God had revealed.
Christ did never chide his Disciples so much for any thing as for their
unbelief, Luke 24. 25. O ye fools, and slow of heart to believe: and Why doubt
ye, O ye of little Faith? Matthew. 8. 26. he chideth them before he chideth the
wind, the storm first began in their own hearts.

3. It Is the mother of all sin; the first sin was the fruit of ^ Qualitas malae
vitae initium habet ab infidelitate. Aug.
unbelief, we may plainly observe a ^aultring of assent, Genesis 3. 3, 4, 5. and
still, it is the ground of all miscarriages, of hardness of heart, and
Apostasy, Heb. 3. 12, 13. He that believes not the judgments and threatenings
of the word, will not stick to do any evil; and he that does not believe the
promises, will not be forward to any good: All our neglect and coldness in holy
duties, comes from the weakness of our faith, there is a decay at the (...)
did we believe heaven, and things to come, we should be more earnest and
zealous: Many are ashamed of Adultery, Theft, Murder, but not of Unbelief,
which is the mother of all these.

4. Final Unbelief is an undoubted evidence of Reprobation. See John 10. 26. Ye
believe not, because ye are not of my sheep: And Acts 1^. 48. Unbelief is God's
prison, wherein he keeps the reprobate world, Romans 11. 32. He has shut them
up under unbelief, etc. And shall I continue such a black note upon my self? I
know not how soon God may cut me off, and if I die in this estate, I am
miserable for ever; Lord I desire to believe, help my unbelief.

5. It Is a sin that depriveth us of much good, of the comforts of providence.
Nothing does ponere obicem, bar and shut out God's operation in order to our
relief, so much as this sin; Mark 6 5. He could do no mighty work etc. So John
11. 40. Said I not unto thee, if thou would believe, thou should see the
glory of God. So also of the comfort of Ordinances, Heb. 4. 2. The Word
profited not, because it was not mixed with faith in them that heard it. So for
Prayer, James 1. 7, 8, 9. Nay it barreth heaven gates. it excluded Adam out of
Paradise, the Israelites out of Canaan, and us out of the Kingdom of heaven,
Heb. 3. 17, 18.

Well then, Let us see if we be guilty of this sin; Take heed (says the
Apostle* Heb. 3. 12.) lest there be in any of you an evil heart of Unbelief;
Many have an unbelieving heart when they least think of it: It Is easy to
declaim against it, but hard to convince men of it, either of the sin, John 16.
9.
or of lying in a state of Unbelief; it is the Spirit's work, The Spirit shall
convince of sin, because they believe not in me. There are many pretenses by
which men excuse themselves, some more gross, others more subtle. Many think
that all Insidels are without the pale among Turks and Heathens, alas, many too
many are to be found in the very bosom of the Church: The Israelites were
God's own people, and yet destroyed because they believed not: Others think
none are unbelievers but those that are given up to the violences and horrors
of despair, and do grossly reject, or refuse the comforts of the Gospel; but
they are mistaken, the wholl word is the object of Faith, the commandments and
threatenings, as well as the promises, and carelessness, and neglect of the
comforts of the Gospel, is unbelief, as well as doubts, and despairing fears:
Matthew. 22. 5. But they made light of it: He is the worst unbeliever that scorns
and slighteth the tenders of Gods grace in Christ, as things wherein he is not
concerned. Briefly then, Men may make a general profession of the name of
Christ, as the Turks do of Mahomet, because it is the Religion professed there
where they are born; a man may take up the opinions of a Christian Country, and
not be a whit better then Turks, Jews, or Infidels; as he is not the taller of
stature that walks in an higher Walk then others do: They may understand
their Religion, and be able to give a reason of the hope that is in them, and
yet lie under the power of unbelief for all that; as many may see Countries in
a Map, which they never enter into. The Devil has knowledge, Jesus I know, and
Paul I know, etc. And those that pretend to knowledge without answerable
practice, do but give themselves the lie, 1 John 2. 29. Besides Knowledge there
may be assent, and yet unbelief still; the Devils assent as well as know; they
believe there is one God, James 2. and it is not a naked and inefficacious
assent, but such as causes horrors, and tremblings. They believe and tremble:
and they do not only believe that one article, that there is one God, but other
articles also, Jesus thou Son of God, Art thou come to torment me before my
time? was the Divel's speech; where there is an acknowledging of Christ, and
him as the Son of God, and Judge of the world, and increase of their torment at
the last day upon his sentence: Assent is necessary, but not sufficient; Laws
are not sufficiently owned when they are believed to be the Kings Laws, there
is something to be done as well as believed: In the primitive times Assent was
more then it is now, and yet then an unactive assent was never allowed to pass
for faith. Confident resting on Christ for salvation, if it be not a resting
according to the word, will not serve the turn, there were some that leaned
upon the Lord, Micah 3. 11. whom he disclaimeth; it is a mistaken Christ they
rest upon, and upon him by a mistaken Faith. It Is a mistaken Christ, for the
true Christ is the eternal Son of God, that was born of a Virgin, and died at
Jerusalem; Bearing our sins in his Body upon a Tree, that we being dead unto
sin, might be alive unto righteousness, 1 Pet 2. 24. the true Christ is one
that gave himself for us, that he might purify us to be a peculiar people,
zealous of good works, and is now gone into heaven, there to make Intercession
for us, and will come again from heaven in a glorious manner, to take an
account of our works, Tit. 2. 13, 14. But now when men lie under the power and
reign of their sins, and yet pretend to rest upon Christ for salvation* they
set up another Christ then the word holds forth; and as the Christ is
mistaken* so is the Faith: it is not an Idle trust, but such as is effectual to
purge the heart; for the true faith purifieth the heart, Acts 15. 9. If besides
profession, knowledge, assent, and a loose trust, they should pretend to
assurance, or to a strong conceit that Christ died for them, and they shall
certainly go to heaven; this will not excuse them from unbelief, this is (...),
the grand mistake, that the strength of Faith lies in a strong persuasion of
the goodness of our condition, and the stronger the persuasion, the better the
faith. If this were true, hardness of heart would make the best faith, and he
that could presume most and be most secure and free from doubts, would be the
truest believer, and the goodness of our condition would lie in the strength of
our Imagina ion and conceit: Alas, many make full account they shall go to
heaven, that shall never come there* The foolish Virgins were very confident,
and the foolish Builder goes on with the building, never suspecting the
foundation: nay, let me tell you, Assurance of a good condition as long as we
lie under the power and reign of sin, is the grossest unbelief in the world;
for it is to believe the flat contrary to that which God has revealed in the
word: therefore none abuse the Lord, and question his Truth so much as these
do; Where has God said that men that live in their sins shall be saved? nay,
he has expressly said the contrary, be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor
Adulterers, nor Idolaters, etc. 1 Cor. 6. 9. so that you give God the lie, or
conceit that he will break his word for your sakes; nay (in a sense) you even
dare him to make good his truth: He has said, Be not deceived; you shall never
enter, etc. and you say, Though I am an Adulterer, a Drunkard, a Worldling, I
shall go to heaven for all that, Now in a little while you shall see whose word
shall stand, God's or yours. Jer. 44. 28.

Once more, The word is not supposed to be without all kind of power; men may
have some relish of good things, and some experience of the powers of the world
to come, and yet be in an unbelieving state: See Heb. 6. 5. Where the Apostle
speaks of a common work, opposed to (...), to things that do accompany
salvation, v. 9. or have salvation necessarily annexed to them; they may have
some feeling of the power of the truth, and yet afterward make defection out
of a love to the world, and worldly things; they may have many spiritual gifts,
change their outward conversation, make a glorious profession* and be thereupon
enrolled among the Saints, yea be of great use and service in the Church,
though for their own ends and interests, remaining all this while unrenewed,
and having their worldly inclinations to honor, esteem, pleasure, profit
unbroken and unmortified; for there is no such enemy to faith, as a carnal
worldly heart: Therefore let men pretend what they will, when they are as eager
upon the world, as if they had no other matters to mind, and the love of
outward greatness does sway with them more then the love of heaven, and the
praise of men, more then the approbation of God, and carnal ease and pleasure
more then delight in God, How can they be said to believe? John 5. 44. for such
kind of lusts and earthly affections are inconsistent with the power and vigor
of saving faith, therefore till the bent of the heart be toward heavenly
things, and carnal affections be soundly mortified, unbelief reigns; I pitch
it upon this evidence, partly because the great drift of conversion is to draw
off the soul, as from self to Christ, and from ^in to holiness, so from the
world to heaven; See 1 Pet. 1. 3. Begotten to a lively hope: and 1 John 5. 4.
He that is born of God, overcomes the world: As Soon as we are converted, the
heart is drawn and set toward heavenly things; partly because the main thing
to be believed, next to God's Being, is his Bounty, Heb. 6. that we may make
God our rewarder: and partly because the main work of Faith is to draw off the
soul from sensible things to things unseen, and to come, Heb. 11. 1. so that
whatsoever glorious profession men make, or whatsoever service they perform in
the Church, or whatsoever experience they have in the enlargement of gifts, yet
if they be careless of things to come, and eager after the things of the world;
Faith is not thoroughly planted: for a main thing wanting in these temporaries,
was a resolution to serve God for God's sake, or to make him their play master,
which can never be, till carnal inclinations to the honors, pleasures, and
profits of the world be subdued, and we are willing to lay down all these
things at Christ's feet, taking only so much as he shall fairly allow us for
our use.

Thus much for the hainousness of unbelief in the General.

2. Let me tell you, that all unbelief is not alike heinous, 2. In particular.
as will appear by these considerations.

1. Total reigning unbelief is a black mark, such as lie under it, are in the
high way to hell. John 3. 18. He that be-2lieveth not, is condemned already:
The Law has condemned him, and whilst he remains in that estate, the Gospel
yeildeth him no hope, John 3. 36, The wrath of God abides on him; and if he
die in it, he is miserable for ever, Rev. 21. 8. Fearful and Unbelievers are
reckoned among the Inhabitants of hell. First he is condemned by that ancient
sentence, That whosoever sins shall die; which is not reversed, but stands
in full force till faith in Christ, John 8. 24. If ye believe not that I am he,
ye shall die in your sins: and if we continue refusing the counsels of the
Gospel, to the condemnation that is already, to the condemnation of the Law,
there is added a new condemnation, for despising the Gospel: But now partial
unbelief where faith prevails, though there be many doubts and fears, leaves
a man obnoxious to temporal judgments, but not to eternal ruin.

2. All unbelief is the more heinous, the more means you have to the contrary,
as counsels, warnings, promises clearly held forth; See John 15. 22. If I had
not spoken to them, etc. and John 2 19. Light is come into the world, etc. The
word is preached (...), for a witness, Matthew. 24. 14. with Mark 13. 9. first to
them, and if not received, then against them; Did not I warn you says Reuben
to his Brethren? Every offer and warning will be as so many swords in your
Consciences. One observes well, That twice Despaigne on the C^eed.
Christ marvelled, once at the unbelief of his Countrymen the Galileans, that
had so much means, Mark 6. 8. and another time at the faith of the Centurion a
stranger, Mat. 8. 10. who had so little means: it is a thing to be marvelled at,
that a people should have so much means, and profit but little: Wonder is a
thing that proceeds from ignorance, and Christ though not ignorant, yet would
express all humane affections; and the rather, that we might look upon it as a
strange and uncomly thing, not to believe after so many helps vouchsafed to us.

3 The more experiences, comforts, evidences, and manifestations of God's power
and presence we have had, the great^r the unbelief: This was that which
provoked the Lord against Israel, to destroy them in the Wilderness. Numb. 14.
11. How long will it be ere ye believe in me for all the words that I have
showed? God traineth up his people by experience, that they may know what he
can or will do for them; and therefore by every experience we should grow up
into a greater courage and strength of faith and as David, draw inferences of
hope against the present danger from the Lion and the Bear, 1 Samuel 17. 36. or
as Paul he has and does, and therefore will, 2 Cor. 1. 10. otherwise these
experiences are given in vain: Christ was angry with his Disciples for not
rememb^ing the miracle of the loaves, Matthew. 16. 9. when they were in a li^e
stra^t again; when we show a child a letter here, and the same letter again in
another word, and the same again in a third, if he should be to seek when we
show him again the same letter in the next word, we are angry, and think our
teaching lost: So when God gives an evidence of his power and care in this
strait, and in a condescension to our weakness, gives us a like evidence
again, and in a third strait he teaches us how to read and apply a promise,
and yet upon the next difficulty we are to seek again, God is angry with us,
because his condescentions are lost: and in this sense God is more angry with
the unbelief of his children then of others, because they have more
experiences, and are so ready to distrust him that never failed them.

4. The more deliberate our unbelief is, the worse, in times of inconsiderate
passion, and in a fit of temptation it may break out from God's children. David
when he spoke in haste, was fain to eat his words, Psalm. 116. 11. I said in my
haste all men are liars, Samuel, and all who had told him of the Kingdom, I
shall never live to see the promise fulfilled; so Psalm. 31. 22. I said in my
haste I am cut off, nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my Supplications:
in a fit, discontent may break out, but it is presently opposed and checked, but
when it grows into a settled dist^mper, then it is worse: as that in Psalm. 73.
was a more lasting temptation; therefore David calls himself Be^st, verse. 22.
for his foolish and brutish thoughts of providence.

5. Where unbelief is expressed and put into words, there it is more heinous:
Unbelieving thoughts are a great evil, but when they break out into murmurings
and bold expostula^ions, with or against God, then they are worse; it is better
to keep the temptation within doors, that if the fire be kindled, the sparks
may not fly abroad to enkindle others; you grieve God by your thoughts, but you
dishonor and disparage him when they break out into words, Mal. 3. 13. Your
words have been stout against me, says the Lord: It Is a greater daring to avow
openly, and publish our suspicions of God, and discontents against him, Deuteronomy.
1. 34. The lord heard he voice of your words, and was wroth, saying, not one of
these shall enter my rest. Others may be perverted, and make ill use of our
infirmities.

6. Where there are professions to the contrary, there the unbelief is the
worse. After these things do the Gentiles seek, Matthew. 6. 32. Christians are
not only instructed to do better, but profess to do otherwise; Distrust is a
Pagan sin, you are acquainted with a particular providence, with an heavenly
father, with the happiness of another world, and for you to be worldly,
distrustful, to make it your business what you shall eat and drink, that is a
most unworthy thing: for a professed Infidel that believes not eternity, that
never heard of God's fatherly care, nor of heaven or hell, to be altogether in
the world, this were no such marvel; but for you that profess to believe the
Gospel, to have your hearts fail and sink upon every occasion, and to be under
the tyranny of distracting cares, how sad is it!

Thus much for the hainousness of Unbelief, which I was willing to represent
thus at large, that you might see what just reason there was that God should
destroy those in the wilderness that believed not.

The next thing thing is to open the nature of it. I shall here give 1. The
kinds. 2. The Notes whereby this sin 2. The nature of Unbelief.
may be discovered. For the kinds of it: Unbelief is twofold, Negative.
Positive.


1. Negative Unbelief is found in those to whom the 1. The kinds of it.
sound of the Gospel never came, or to whom God has denied the means whereby
faith might be wrought in them, the want of means is not their sin, but their
punishment, or misery at least; and therefore they are not condemned so much
for want of Faith in Christ, as for not obeying the Law of Nature, for sinning
against that knowledge which they received in Adam; now they never received the
light of the Gospel in Adam, neither had Adam the knowledge thereof revealed to
him, but by special grace after the fall, when he stood in the quality of a
private person, then was the promise of the Woman's seed revealed to him,
therefore they that never heard of Christ, are not condemned simply for not
believing in him; ^ for their sins against the law At the last day there is a
difference made between them that know not God (i. e.) by the light of nature,
and those that obey not the Gospel (i. e.) answer not Gods ends in revelation
of the Gospel. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
they are condemned, not for their unbelief against the Gospel; that is the
reason why Christ when he had said John 3. 18. Every one that believes not, is
condemned already, presently adds by way of explication, This is the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, etc. as restraining it to
positive Infidelity; though without Christ they can never be saved, yet God
will not damn them for this reason, for not believing in Christ, for he never
gave them the means of the knowledge of Christ.

2. Positive Unbelief, which is found in them that have means to believe in
Christ, and yet neglect and refuse him, and the offers of grace and life in
him, and so continue in the state of nature. This is twofold.

1. Total. 2. Partial.
1. Total unbelief, in those that continue professed Infidels after the tenders
of the Gospel; as the Word where it came found different success, as at
Antioch, Acts 13. 48. at Iconium, Acts 14. 1, 2. at Athens, Acts 17. 34. many
refused to make any profession.

2. Partial, When men are lustred with some general profession, and gained to
some owning of Christ, but do not fully believe in him, not cordially embrace
him; either through the weakness of their assent looking upon the Gospel only
as probable, or out of the strength of their worldly and carnal affections,
they relish not, and esteem not the counsels and comforts of the Gospel, not
the comforts and hopes of the Gospel, because they are matters of another
world, and lie out of sight and reach, but worldly comforts act more forcibly
upon them, as being more suited to their hearts, and at hand, and ready to be
enjoyed: Thus Israel out of Unbelief despised the pleasant land, Psalm. 106. 24.
counted it not worth the looking after; and the counsels of the Gospel they
refuse out of an indulgence to fleshly lusts: as there is in the Gospel the
History and Doctrine of salvation, so there are counsels of salvation which
must be obeyed, and therefore we hear of obeying the Gospel, 2 These. 1. 8. and
the obedience of Faith elsewhere.

This unbelief is again twofold, 1. Reigning. 2. In part broken, though not
wholly subdued.

1. Reigning Unbelief is in all natural men, who are not only guilty of
unbelief, but described by the term unbelievers, as being persons never
thoroughly gained to the obedience of the Gospel, or the acceptance of Christ,
and life and peace in him. It bewrays it self, 1. By hardness of heart; they
are not moved nor affected with their own misery* nor with redemption by
Christ, and the great things of eternity depending thereupon; nor the
invitations of grace, calling them to the enjoyment of them, Acts 19 9. And
diverse were hardened, and believed not, etc. an hard heart is one of the Divel's
impregnable Forts, not easily attached by the force and power of the Word: Men
are born with an hard heart; we bring the stone with us into the world, and by
positive unbelief, or by slighting offers of grace made to us, it increases
upon us: Hardness of heart is known by the foolishness of it, when seeing we
see not, and hearing we hear not, Acts 28. 26, 27. when we have a grammatical
knowledge of things, but no spiritual discerning; it is also known by the
insensibleness of it, when men have no feeling of terrors by the Law, of peace,
joy, and hope by the Gospel, no taste of the good word at all, but are as
stones, unmoved with all that is spoken. 2. By a neglect of spiritual and
heavenly things, they do not make it their business and work to look after
those things, Matthew. 22. 5. (...), They would not take it into their care and
thoughts.
But they made light of it, and went one to his Farm, another to his
Merchandise. Your callings are not your (...), your work and main business,
that is to look after an interest in Christ, therefore when, this is the least
thought of, and the Farm and the Merchandise ingrosseth all our time and care
men believe not; Could they slight Christ and holy things if they did soundly
and thoroughly believe the Word of God? Would they not find some time to mind
their souls? Looking after the inward man, that is the main care; and men would
first regard it, if they did believe that the soul were so concerned both in
point of danger and hope, surely when men take no heed to the great offers of
the Gospel, they do not look upon it as a certain truth. 3dly. By secret
suspicions in their own souls against the truth of the Gospel; that profane
wretch said hae^ fabula Christi* they look upon it as a Golden dream to make
fools fond with it, and that all opinions in religion are but a Logomachy, a
mere strife of words, or a Doctrine to set the World together by the ears, as
Gallio, Acts 18. 15. or a fancy and fond superstition, Acts 25. 29. and that we
need not trouble our heads about it, these are the natural thoughts which men
have of the Gospel, such thoughts may rush into the heart of a Godly man, but
they are abhominated and cast out with indignation, but in wicked men they
reign and dwell, they live by these kind of principles: I remember Christ says
of his Disciples, (...), John 17. 8. they have known surely that I came out
from thee, the light of faith is an undoubted certain light; but in wicked men,
their assent is mingled with doubting, ignorance, error, and sottish
prejudices against the Doctrine and Worship of God, Matthew. 3. 14. natural
Atheism in them is not cured; and that faith which they pretend to, and
profess, is but a loose wavering opinion, not a grounded and settled persuasion
of the truth of the Gospel, Coll. 2. 2*
the assurance of understanding (as the Apostle calls it) depends upon
experience and an inward sense of the truth, and is wrought by the holy Ghost.
1 Cor. 2. 4. and therefore (I suppose) proper to the Godly. 4 By rejecting the
counsels of Salvation, see Acts 13. 46. Luke 7. 31. all natural men, are
children of disobedience, ^ph 2. 2. out of pride scorning either the messages
of God, folly ^o him, 1 Cor. 2. 14. or the messengers, ^s not this the
Carpenters Son? Mark 6. 3. ^oining and fencing with the word, and defeating the
methods of Grace used to gain them, Romans 10. 21. guilty of an obstinate
frowardness it is a people that do err in their hearts, Psalm. 95. 11. not in
their minds only, but their heart* as if they did say, we desire not the
knowledge of t^y w^i^s Job 21. 14. 5. By the unholinesse of their lives, the
Apostle says, 2 Peter 3. 11. We that look for such things, what manner of
persons ought we to be in all holiness and godliness of Conversation? from
whence we may plainly infer; that they which are not such manner of persons, do
not look for such things as faith infers, obedience: where the Prince is,
there his train will be, so is unbeleef known by disobedience; when men live as
carnally and carelessly as an Infidel, there is not a pin to choose between them.
6. When men hear the Word, and never make application, or convert it to their
own use, it is a sign they are under the power of reigning unbelief, in faith
there is assent or believing the Word to be the Word of God; or that it is a
faithful saying* 1 Timothy 1. 15. and then consent or approbation of the Word, as
a good word or worthy saying, and then application or converting the Word to
our own use; so in unbelief many doubt of the truth of the Word, others
acknowledge not the worth of it, they do not glorify the word, Acts 13. 48.
most that speaks well of the word and approve it in their consciences, do not
urge their own hearts with it* What do we say to these things, Romans 8. 32. and
know it for thy good, Job 5. 27. the Word is far sooner approved then applied,
and yet till it be applied it works not, when we see our selves involved and
included in the general promise and precept, and are accordingly affected, then
are we sa^d to believe, in Psalm. 27. 8. the injunction is plural, seek ye my
face; but the answer is singular, thy face Lord will I seek, thus must all
truths be applied, and that in their method and order, for there is an Analogy
and proportion between them, as the Doctrine of man's misery, that I may
consider this is my case, and having a feeling of it may groan for deliverance,
the Doctrine of redemption by Christ, that we may put in for a share, and
assure our own interest; the Doctrine of the thankful life, that we may deny
our selves, take up our cross and follow Christ in the obedience of all his
Precepts. The first Doctrine must be made the ground of complaint; the second
of comfort and hope; the third, of resolution and practice: But when we suffer
these truths to hover in the brain without application, or hear them only as
children learn them by rote, never thus reflecting* What am I? What have I
done? What will become of me? etc unbelief remains undisturbed. 7. By
Apostasy or falling off from God, the great business of faith, is by patient
continuance in welldoing, to look for glory, honor, and immortality, Romans 2.
8. but now to tire and grow weary, or to fall off from God as not worthy the
waiting upon argues the height and reign of unbelief, what ever faith we
pretended unto for a flash and pang. 8. Desperation, when conviction grows to
an height, and legal bondage, gets the Victory of carnal pleasure, Genesis 4. 13.
My sin is greater, etc. and Jer. 18. 12. Th^re is no hope, etc. when men think
it is in vain to trouble themselves, their damnation is fixed and therefore
resolve to go to hell, as fast as they can, such desperate wickedness may
there be in the heart of a man.

2. Unbelief in part broken, and so it implies the remainders of this natural
evil in the Godly; in whom though faith be begun, yet it is mixed with much
weakness, Mar. 9. 24. Lord I believe, help my unbeleef, this unbelief is
manifested. 1. By a loathness to apply the comforts of the Gospel; it is the
hardest matter in the World to bring God and the soul together, or to be at
rest in Christ, when we are truly sensible we draw back, Luke 5. 8.
depart from me (says Peter) for I am a sinful man, and he should rather say,
draw ^igh to me, the poor trembling sinner thinks so much of the judge that
he forgets the father, though the soul longs for Christ above all things, yet
it is loath to take him for comfort and reconciliation, but floateth up and
down in a suspensive hesitancy. 2. By calling Gods love into question upon
every affliction, and in an hour of temptation unravelling all our hopes, See
Isa. 49. 14. and Judges the 6 and 13.
see Psalm 77 7, 8, 9, 10. If the Lord were the God of the Mountains and not of
the Valleys, we are wont to say if God did love us, why is this befallen us?
those are fits of the old distemper, Christ when crucified would not let go his
interest, but cries out, My God, My God. 3. By fears in a time of danger,
carnal fears such (...) do perplex us, when we are employed in Christ's work and
^ervice, as the Disciples that were embarked with him, were afraid to perish in
his company, Why are ye so fearful, O ye of little faith, Matthew. 8. 26. filial
fear or reverence of God is the daughter of faith; as distrustful fear is the
enemy of it; trouble is the touchstone of faith, if we cannot commit our
selves to God in quietness of heart, it argues weakness; God has undertaken
to bring his people out of every straight, in a way most conducing to his
glory, and their welfare, Romans 8. 28. and therefore when the word yields up
no support, Psalm 119. 50. and the promises of God cannot keep us from sinking
and despondency of heart we bewray our unbelief. 4. By Murmurings in case of
carnal disappointment, discontent argues unbelief, they quarrel with Gods
Providence, because they believe not his promises, Psalm. 106. 24. They
believed not his Word, but murmured in their Tents, it is ill and they cannot
see how it can be better: So Deuteronomy. 1. 32. with 34. in this you believed not the
Lord your God. 5. By carking in case of streights, bodily wants are more
pressing then spiritual; here faith is put to a present trial, and therefore
here we bewray our selves, Matthew. 6. 30. Shall he not much more cloth you, O
ye of little faith, he does not say of no faith, for the temptation is incident
to a Godly man; they do oftener bewray their unbelief in distrusting God about
outward supplies then about eternal life, which yet I confess is very
irrational; for if a man cannot trust God with his estate, how shall he trust
him with his soul, and to a considerate person there are far more prejudices
against eternal life, than against temporal supplies, look as it was a folly in
Martha to believe that Lazarus should rise at the general resurrection, and to
distrust his being raised from the dead after four days lying in the Grave,
John 11. 24. so it is a great folly to pretend to expect life eternal, and not
to be able to depend upon God for the supplies of life temporal. 6. By coldness
and carelessness in the spiritual life* if men did believe that heaven were
such an excellent place, they would not so easily turn aside to the
contentments of the flesh, and the profits of the world, men have but a
conjectural apprehension of things to come of the comforts of another World; as
things at a distance, sometimes we see them, and sometimes we lose their sight,
so that we are not certain whether we see them, yea or no; so it falls out in
heavenly matters, we are poor short sighted creatures, 2 Pet. 1. 9. sometimes
we have a glimpse of the glory of the World to come, some flashes, and again
the mind is beclouded; and that is the reason why we mind these things so
little, and seek after them so little, a steady view and sound belief would
engage us to more earnestness: they that believe the high price of our
calling, will press on to the mark, Phil. 3. 14. surely men do not believe
that heaven is worth the looking after, otherwise they would seek it more
diligently, Heb. 6. 14. a poor beast that is going* homeward goes cheerfully.
8. Indirect courses to get a living and subsistence in the World, as if God
were not All-sufficient, Genesis 17. 1. to break through where God has made up
the hedge, argues that we do not depend upon him, as by temporising, or by
unjust gain: This for a fit and in some distemper may be incident to Gods
Children.

3. The last thing in the method proposed, is the cure of 3. The cure of
Unbelief.
unbelief, God by his mighty power can only cure it, Ephesians. 1. 19. but the means
which we must use may be reduced to two hearts, 1 Cautions, 2 Directions.

1. Cautions, 1 Take heed of setting God a task, Psalm 78. 20* Can the Lord
prepare a Table in the Wilderness, etc. so Matthew. 26, 40. if thou be the Son
of God, come down from the Cross, this is to go beyond the promise, and to
indent with God upon conditions of our own making, so Matthew. 4. if thou be the
Son of God turn these Stones into Bread, so when we prescribe to God in matter
of allowance. We would have God maintain us at such a rate, be so fed, so
clothed, have so much by the year, such Portions for our Children, he that
will be rich, etc. 1 Timothy 6. 9. God never undertook to give us meat for our
lusts, when we subject his Providence to our direction, and prescribe what he
shall do for our satisfaction, we do but make a snare for our selves. 2. Take
heed of betraying faith, by distrusting present means, it is an usual thing.
Luke 16. If one come from the dead they would believe, if we had Oracles or
Miracles, or God did speak to us from Heaven as heretofore, then we should not
faulter in our trust as we now do; but by this excuse you impeach the
Scriptures, Moses and the Prophets are a sufficient ground for says, and
extraordinary means will not work on them, upon whom ordinary do not prevail
there were weaknesses then, and so there will be, whatsoever Dispensation God
use, Man is Man still they believed not though he opened the Clouds, and
commanded Manna from Heaven, Ps. 78. 23. 3. Take heed of ^ff's in principles of
Faith, Foundation stones if laid loose endanger the whole building, take notice
of the first hesitancy, Genesis 3. Yea has God said? So Matthew. 4. 3. If thou be
the Son of God, etc. there was a plain Oracle from Heaven determining it a
little before, Thou art my beloved Son, but the Devil would fain draw it to an
IF. 4. Beware of sin, doubts are the fumes of sin, like the vapors that come
from a foul stomach, uprightness begets serenity and clearness, as in
nature there is often a (...), a circular generation, vapors beget showers,
and showers beget vapors; so in moral and spiritual things, there is such a
circular generation, unbelief makes way for sin, and sin for unbelief, sin
will weaken trust, it cannot be otherwise; shame, and horror, and doubt, these
are the consequences of sin, God never undertook to bear us out in the Devils
work.

2. Directions. 1. Strengthen your Assent to the Word of God, fire if well
kindled will of it self burst out into a flame, so assurance and comfort would
more easily follow, if there were a through and undoubted assent, to the truths
of the Word, we take them up hand over head, and then when a temptation
comes, no wonder that the building tottereth, when the foundation is so weak,
there are several degrees of assent, conjecture which is but a lighter
inclination of the mind to that which is probable; opinion, which is a stronger
inclination to think, that, that which is represented is true; but there is
formido oppo^ti, it is mixed with hesitancy and doubts, (...) weak faith; or
firm adherence upon sufficient conviction, yet doubts may arise and in time of
temptation, this degree of Assent may be overborn; but above this, there is a
through certainty or assurance of understanding, Col. 2. 2. We should never
cease till we come to this; it is a great mistake to think that we need not look
after the settling of our assent to the truths of the Word: but take these for
supposed, but in an hour of temptation we are made sensible of our folly
herein; and if I am not mistaken much of our carelessenesse and unsetlednesse
of life does proceed from hence. 2. In settling assent begin with natural
principles, and then go on to those which are spiritual and mystical. As Gods
Being, and Gods Bounty in the everlasting rewards, Heb. 11. 6. the necessity of
purity and holiness, Heb. 12. 14. the fall and misery of the creature, and
then our redemption by Christ, etc. I observe the Apostles when they came to
gain men to faith; began with truths suited to their capacity and present
understanding: With the vulgar they evince Creation and Providence, by
arguments taken from showers of rain, and the courses of nature, Heb. 14. 16,
17. with the Philosophers they urge the notions of a first cause, and a first
mover, and those inclinations in nature toward an eternal good, Acts 17. 3.
Urge your hearts with the truths you assent too, and work them upon your
affections, Romans 8. 31. Heb. 2. 3. and Job 5. 27. 4 They observe the
disproportion of your respects to things present, and things to come. If the
Judgment Seat were fi^ed, and the Books opened, how would natural men tremble,
now faith should make it as present, Heb. 11. 1. the Apostle ^aith, I saw the
dead small and great stand before the Lord, etc. Revel. 20. 12. faith which is
the evidence of things not seen, should see it, as if it were in being* the
light of faith, differs not from the light of Prophecy* in regard of the
certainty of the thing which is to come or the assured expectation of it, the
light of Prophecy requires a special Revelation* and differs in degree from
the light or sight of ^aith, as it causes rapture and exstatick motions; but
as to the seeing of things to come with certainty there they agreed; well then
if you would discern the strength or weakness of your faith; observe how
differently you are affected with what is present, and what is future. So also
how differently you are ^ffected with things visible, and things invisible,
with things temporal and eternal; if upon easy terms you might have a good
bargain for lands and riches, how readily would men embrace the offer? for
temporal profit what pains will they take? but now in things of
soul-concernment we are not alike affected, which is an argument we do not
believe them; in all cases it is good to put spiritual things in a parallel
temporal instance we are taught that wisdom* Mal. 1. 8. Offer it now to the
Governor, etc. would we do thus to an earthly Potentate as we do to God? If an
able potent friend promise help in troubles, how are we cheared with it? If God
promise the same things we are little comforted; if every offense that we
commit were liable to the notice of man, and our punishment should be to hold
our hand in scalding Lead for half an hour* men would be more afraid to offend
(then now they are) in the sight of God, who knows all their thoughts, and
has threatened eternal torment; if the tasting of such a meat would bring
present death, who would be so foolhardy as to meddle with it; nay, when a
thing is but likely to do us hurt, as some meats, in case of the Cholick, Gout,
or Stone, how cautious are we? To conclude all, let me give you Chrysostomes
supposition, for besides unbelief there is somewhat in the strength of evil
inclination, suppose a man mightily desirous of rest and sleep, so that he can
hardly hold open his eyes, and there were an offer made him of free and
undisturbed rest for one night; but in case he gave way to it, to be held under
an hundred years torment, would he venture and with so great an hazard gratify
his drowsy humor; yet such is our fearlessenesse and security, that we can
run the hazard of eternal torment, for a little carnal satisfaction; if a man
were sentenced to death and in danger of execution every moment, would not he
bestir himself and improve all his interest for a pardon, we are all cond^mned
already; but how few are solicitous to get a copy of their discharge. 5. Bewail
the relics of unbelief* Mar 9. 24. 6. Chide your hearts for your dejection and
distrust of Gods providence, as Ps* 42. 5. Why art thou so disquieted O my
soul, etc. and Psalm. 77. 10. this is my infirmity, it is the duty of a gracious
man to rebuke his fears, to chide himself for admitting mistakes of Gods love,
suggestions of unbelief and disputes against the promises. 7. Consider how
willing Christ is to help you, he carries home the stray lamb upon his own
Shoulders rejoicing, Luke 15. 5. how he prizeth the weak beginnings of faith,
smoking Flax will he not quench, Matthew. 12. 20. takes notice of the green
Figs, Cant. 2. with a mild condescension indulgeth our infirmities, reach
hither thy fingers Thomas, John 20. This for the Cure of Unbelief.

VER. 6. And the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation, he has reserved in everlasting Chains under darkness unto the
judgment of the great day.
IN this Verse you have the second instance from the Apostate Angels, who
notwithstanding the dignity and height of their nature, upon their rebellion
were left to a dreadful punishment, in this instance there is an argument not a
pari (as in the former verse) but a majori ad minus, not from a like case, but
from the greater to the less; for if God spared not such creatures, as by the
grace of Creation were advanced to such an excellency of being; certainly he
will not spare us what ever Gospel privileges we have, if we walk unsuitably.

In these words observe 1. The Sin of the Angels [ they kept not their first
estate] 2. Their Punishment which is twofold.

1. Present and felt. 2. Future and decreed.
1. Present which is also double: 1. Paena damni their less [they left their
own habitation] 2. Paena s^nsas, their punishment of pain or sen^e [ he has
reserved in everlasting Chains under darkness.]

2. Future and Decreed [unto the judgment of the great day.]

Because I will not perplex the discourse by grasping at too much at one time,
I shall discuss each circumstance a part, and in distinct explication. I begin
with the phrases The Angels Sin.
implying their sin and fall. [And the Angels] the expression is plural, to
no^e the great number of those which fell [their first estate (...)] the word
may be translated either their principality or their beginning, and which is
all one; first estate, if you translate it principallity, it will well enough
suit with the scope of the Apostle, and the Angels are often called
Principallities in Scripture, because of their great power and excellent
nature: So Col. 1. 16. Thrones, Dominions, Principallities and Powers; all
which terms imply the dignity of the Angelical nature; nay, the Devils
themselves because of that power and cunning which they still retain, are
called principallities, Ephesians. 6. 12. We wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but
against Principallities and Powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this
World. If you translate it beginning or first estate; it will more fully
express the misery and fall of the Apostate Angels, they being not only
departed from the excellency and p^w^r, but from the integrity and
righteousness* wherein they were first created: So that the point is, that the
Angels are fallen from: the condition of their original excellency and
integrity.

So Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 4. (...), God spared Doct.
not the Angels that sinned, etc. and John 8. 44. the Devil abode not in the
truth, because there is no truth in him; that purity and integrity wherein they
were created is there called truth, because truth is the perfection of any
rational creature, and that holiness which they had was only to be kept up by
the truth or right notions of God; in opening this point I shall inquire

1* Wh^^ was this (...) 2. What was their sin, or how they departed from it* 3.
How they came to sin. 4. The number of them that fell. 5. The Time.
I do confess the Scriptures do speak somewhat sparingly of the nature or fall
of Angels, it being calculated chiefly for the use of man; but some hints there
are which we shall take notice of, and improve not to satisfy curiosity, but to
serve profit. 1. What is this first estate from which they are departed. I
answer their original condition of holiness and happiness; every creature
which the Lord made, he saw it to be good, much more the Angel whom God created
for his own train and company, they are called the Sons of God, Job 38. 7.
because they bore his Image, and that in a more eminent degree then man, as
being wholly spiritual substances, just, holy, pure, in all qualities
representing God their father; it is said of man, thou have made him little
lower than the Angels, Psalm. 8. 5. when man was at his best there was an
inferiority, the image of God was given to us in a less degree, although we
were placed above all visible creatures, yet then the Angels we were a little
lower; that they were excellent, appears in that the Angelical obedience is
made the pattern of ours, Matthew. 6. 10. And our happiness in heaven is
expressed by the condition of their nature, Matthew. 22. 30. They are as the
Angels of God in Heaven; yea, it is notable that when the Scriptures would
express any excellency, they use to say it is fit for Angels; thus Manna is
called Psalm. 78. 25.
Angels food, not as if they needed food, spirits are not capable of corporal
refreshments; but if so high a creature should need food, he could have no
better. So the tongue of Angels 1 Cor. 13. 1. that is, with a tongue becoming
creatures of so perfect an understanding; but you will say these expressions
are meant of the good Angels; I answer that at their first creation, they had
the same common nature and excellency, as appears by the name of Thrones,
Dominions, and Powers, which they yet retain in common with the good Angels;
yea and by that power, wisdom, and knowledge which is yet left; in their
innocence they were alike good, and alike happy, and could contemplate and
behold God, and embrace him with delight as others did; all that is
Supernatural in the good Angel, is, the grace of confirmation; by which they
abide in the knowledge and l^ve of God, whereas others left (...) their first
estate, and it is probable this grace was given to the good Angels, in the very
moment of their creation, before any merit of theirs, or use of their natural
abilities, as appears by the others sudden fall, and because they are chosen
in Christ who is the head of Men and Angels, Col. 1. 16.

2. What was their sin, there is a great deal of difference among Divines about
it, for herein they proceed by guess and conjecture, rather then any c^rta^n
proof. Howbeit there is enough to vindicate Gods justice against them, quae vis
peccata (says Aquinus) sunt in malis Angelis; according to his opinion they
have the guilt of all sin upon them, as tempting man to every sin; but what was
the special formal sin, is not so easily determined, some say, affectati^n of
the Divi^ity; others say, flat Rebellion against the Law of their Creation, or
rash attempts against the Empire and Sovereignty of God; others envy, because
of the humane nature exalted above the Angelical in Christ, he took not the
seed of Angels, Heb. 2. 16. but whether that mystery were made known to them is
uncertain, rather there are probabilities to the contrary; for the good Angels
know it now by Gods dispensations to the Church, Ephesians. 3. 10. others think
R^bellion against a particular Law given to them, as that concerning eating the
forbidden fruit was to man, whether it were affecting an higher degree above
their Creation, or refusing their office and ministration about man, or
confidence in their own gifts and received excellency, in a matter of so great
incertainty; it is hard to determine. To state their sin, take these
Propositions. 1. The Law which made their act to be sin, was the Moral Law, as
being the Copy of Gods holiness, his revealed will to all rational creatures,
and they are said to sin, 2 Pet. 2. 4. and (...) sin is (...), a 1 John 3. 4.
transgression of a Law; and of no other Law do we read, but of the moral Law,
which (as is probable) was given to the Angels, excepting only such things as
are not suitable to a spiritual nature; the Commandment concerning Adultery or
unlawful Propogation, for they Mat. 22. 30
neither marry nor give in marriage, a thing proper to the bodily life. 2. The
most likely thing in their sin was Pride, there is Pride in every sin, namely a
despising and contempt of the Commandment; and this is a sin agreeable enough
to a spiritual nature, as Adultery, Drunkenness, and such sins are proper to a
corporal and sensitive nature, (...) (says Chrysostom) (...): To prove it,
the Gregory. Austine. D^mascen, etc.
Fathers usually quote that place Isa. 14. 12. How art thou fallen from H^aven
O Lucifer Son of the morning, for thou have said in t^y heart, I will ascend
above the heights of the Clouds, I will exalt my Throne above the Stars of God,
I will be like the most high: But these are but metaphorical Passages
concerning the King of Babylon, and the ground of the mistake was; because the
Angels are often in Scripture set forth by Stars, as Job 38. 7. That testimony
which is most cogent, is in 1 Timothy 3. 6. Ordain not a novice, lest being lifted
up with Pride he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil; this is, lest he make
himself guilty of that sin for which the Devil was condemned and rejected of
God, namely, of Pride, and See my notes there.
James 3. 15. Pride is called Divelish Wisdom; the sin is often to be read in
the judgment that follows it, Gods throwing them down from the dignity of
their estates, was a sign that they aspired above it, and it may be collected
from the first temptation, ye shall be as Gods, as himself said in the sense of
the fathers, eri sicut altissimus. so to our first Parents he said, eritis
tanquam di^: 3. They do best that make it a compound sin, accommodating all
opinions; for look as there are many sins in that one Act by which Adam fell,
Unbelief, Pride, Ingratitude, Disobedience, etc. so in this act of the Angels
there might be many sins* for though Pride be a chief sin in it, yet what kind
of Pride it was, or how discovered it cannot be determined every opinion is
affected with equal probability, it might be envy at man, as we see the good
Angels rejoiced at their happiness, Job 38. 7. Luke 2. 14, 15. and ^uke 15. 7.
or affectation of worship, as we see now they delight in it, or any other
rebellion against Gods Empire and Majesty.

3. How they came to sin the Angels being created pure, they had no lust within
to incline them, being in heaven they had no object without, to draw and allure
them, there was no evil ^racture, no tempter how could they sin? I answer it is
probable that many of the Angels sinned by temptation, and seducement, and that
one great Angel now called Beelzebub first fell, and drew the rest after him,
Mat. 25. 41. the Devil and his Angels, and Mat. 10. 25. Beelzebub the Prince of
Devils, it was the name of the Idol of the Ekronites, 2 Kings 1. 2. and
signified the God or Lord of flies, now because the Jews knew that they were
Devils, that were worshipped in the Idols of the Gentiles* they gave the names
of the Idols to the Devils or evil Angels, and the chief of the Devils they
called by the name of Be^lzebub. So Matthew. 12. 24. implying, one that was the
Prince of the unclean spirits called Devil, Satan, the great Dragon, and the
God of this World; from all which we may probably collect, that there was a
Prince or Chief of the Apostate Angels, who was the Ringleader in this Faction
and Rebellion against God. 2. Because the question returns how came the first
Angel then to fall? I answer it is hard to conceive how sin came into the Angels
first; all that we can say, is this, that the Angels were created good, yet
mutable and free, and they voluntarily chose not to abide in their own estates.
All the answer Austine would give to this question was, Deus non sunt, they are
not God; it is God's Prerogative alone to be immutable, they might sin because
they were creatures; and Aquinus gives this reason, God cannot sin, because
his act is his rule, but all creatures though never so pure, if not assisted by
Grace may sin, Job 4. 18. he charge his Angels with folly; there is
mutability in the Angelical nature, there called folly: Certainly God was not
the cause of their fall, by infusing evil to them; 'twas the error of the
Manichees, to say they were created evil, nor by his prescience for that
inforceth not, nor his voluntary permission, for they were left to their own
sway, nor his decree, for that is within himself, and does not compel the
creature; neither is God to be looked upon as consenting to the action, in that
he did not hinder them from it; or in that he did not sustain them by his own
Grace, for he owes this Grace to none, and gives it when and to whom he
pleases; and in the Angelical nature, as well as the humane, he would discover
his justice and mercy, and the freedom of his dispensations.

4. The number, how many fell? the Schoolmen are too rash; some say, just as
many fell as stood; others, that a third part fell, abusing that place, Rev.
12. 4. That the Dragon drew a third part ^^ the Stars of Heaven after him:
Whereas that is meant of defection in the Church* certain we are, many fell,
and therefore it is said Angels in the Text; that the number is great appears
in that the World is full of these evil spirits, and an whole Legion which
contains some thousands, is said to possess one man, Luke 8. 30.

5. For the time, in the general very soon, therefore it is said, John 8* 44.
That Satan was a Murderer from the beginning: And 1 John 3. 9. The Devil
sins from the beginning, that is, presently after his Creation, created
these Angels were, 'twas the error of V^le^^ius and Basilides in the age next
the Apostles, that they were not crea^ed but begotten of God, these primitive
Monsters broached it to the disgrace of Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of
God, but that they were created, see Coll* 1. 16. and Psalm. 148. 2. and
created they were in time some of the Gr^ek Wri^ers supposed the Angels to be
made before ^^e World; but there is no ground for that, there being but one
beginning of all created Beings; and it is said, before the beginning nothing
was made Jo^n* 1. 3. therefore created they were the second day with the
Heavens as being of the same matter, as man was made when his sea^ and dwelling
place was perfected; so the Angels, when their seat and place of residence was
prepared, Moses mentions* them, not because he treats of the visible World,
and corporal Beings, now it is certain that being created, the^^ sinned ere man
fell, for the Devil in and by the Serpent seduced Eve, 2 Cor. 11. 3. therefore
probably they fell a little after their Creation, not in the very instant that
it might appear they were not naturally evil, it is probable that some time
interceded between their creation and defection but a very little time, to show
the mu^uability of the Creature.

Let me now apply what has been spoken, and press you Use.
to consider it in your thoughts, and to consider it with observation and
application to your selves. 1. Consider it with observation, and there is
scarce a matter that can be more profitably* amplified in your thoughts, we
have the most impartial view of things in another person: Oh think of this
dreadful instance the fall of the Angels. 1. Observe that such excellent
creatures fell, Angels themselves were created excellent but mutable;
certainly, we that Job 4. 18.
dwell in houses of clay, and whose foundation is in the dust had need be more
cautious, if they be mutable, we are weaker and more mutable, to see such
glorious stars leave their station: and fall from heaven like lightning, it
should make us poor creatures tremble and look to our own standing, lest we
also fall, 1 Cor. 10. 12. self confidence is the next way to ruin, God only
cannot sin because his act is his rule, there may be a great height, strong
abilities, rare accomplishments of nature and grace; and yet you see these
cannot exempt us from shameful falls without the divine concurrence, the
Angels were the Courtiers of Heaven, the glory of the Creation in the first
rank of the created Beings, and yet they fell, who can presume to stand when
Angels fall? 2. They fell soon, a little after their Creation, there is no
created excellency but if left to it self, will quickly undo it self; how soon
do creature perfections fade? Surely there is no stability but in Christ; as
the Angels, so Adam fell a little after his Creation, Psalm 49. 12. Adam being
in honor abides not, in the Original, abides not for a night; and if it be
applied to the first Adam, it implies that he left the honor of his innocence
the first day* in the morning innocent, and at night a sinner: our new state in
this regard is better then innocence, and the grace of regeneration 2 Timothy 2.
1. My Son be strong in the Grace that is in Christ Jesus
exceeds that of creation: the Lord would still keep the creature depending,
our estate in Christ only is sure, because there our strength lies in
another: let us then work out our Salvation with fear and trembling: If Angels
fell, and Adam fell, when they had no such mixed nature and divided principles
as we have, what will become of us? Neither Man nor Angel can be kept without a
surety; and unless Christ be continually present with his own gifts, there is
no standing. Thirdly, they fell dreadfully, and from Angels became Devils,
exercising thest, lying, envy, murder toward men: the best things corrupted,
become worst; as no Vinegar so tart as that which is made of the sweetest Wine;
when men sin against light and grace they become cruel* the revolters are
profound to make slaughter, says the Prophet, Hosea 5. After profession the
fall is most desperate: their latter end is worse then their beginning, 2 Pet.
2. 20. What a malice have these evil Angels now against God and man, they go
about seeking whom they may devour, none so bad as Apostates. Fourthly, their
fall made way for ours, by this means there came to be a Tempter in the World,
the fall of Angels occasioned the fall of man, and the fall of man the coming
of Christ: do but go home with reverence, and observe how by the bare
permission of God the Divine Decrees were accomplished, and wonder at the
purity of that unspotted providence that is conversant above sin and evil, but
not conscious to it: the Angels led the way, and man followed, and so occasion
was given for the discovery of the manifold wisdom of God to men and Angels,
Ephesians. 3. 10. Fifthly, so many fell as were not elected by God, there was
Election and Approbation among the Angels, among the most glorious Creatures
God would show the liberty of his Counsels, not only amongst men, the lower
sort of rational Creatures, but among Angels: Therefore the Apostle speaks of
Elect Angels, 1 Timothy 5. 2. Why should Clay murmer, when Gold is refused? if
some of the Angels were appointed to be vessels of dishonor, who art thou that
reply upon God; (...), Romans 9. 20. that will be disputing the sovereignty of
God: And ask the reason why he gives grace to some and not to others, wonder
at it, till thou can understand it, disputare vis mecum? mirare mecum*
Augustine.
and clama O Altitudo! Gods Decrees are hard meat, not easily digested by
carnal reason: a proud creature cannot endure to hear of Gods sovereignty, it
awakeneth our security to hear of a distinction in the Counsels of God, and
that grace runs in a narrower channel then whole Mankind; do but consider
amongst the Angels, some are past by, and others confirmed: and who art thou O
man that replyest? Sixthly, In the Election of Angels pardoning mercy is not so
much glorified as in the election and calling of men; then was grace showed but
not mercy, Vide* Irenaeum lib. 4. cap. 78. Damas lib. 2. Orth. fid. cap. 3. Et
Neiremb. Theoph. etc.
none of the fallen* Angels were saved, but fallen man is called to grace in
Christ: we were all in our blood when God said Live, the whole lump and mass of
mankind was fallen; probably next to the free Counsels of God, that was the
reason the whole humane nature fell, but not the whole Angelical nature, but
only a part of it, so that the Kind it self needed not to be repaired; their
sins argued more malice because of the height of their understanding; they
sinned without a Tempter, but the reason of reasons is the will and gracious
good pleasure of God, who was willing to show pardoning mercy to us, and not to
them, the good Angels had confirmation but we redemption, we are reconciled,
they continued, love after a breach made, is more remarkable. Seventhly, from
the sin in general, by which they fell, was by pride; see the danger of this
sin it always goes before falling, the Angels lost their holiness out of a
desire of greatness, they would be over all and under none; it is dangerous when
men mind rather be great then good. In Scripture we have two notable instances
of the fall by pride, and our restoration by humility, the Angels fell by pride
and aspiring; and Christ restored mankind by being humble, lowly, and
submitting himself even to the death of the Cross: Adam would be as God, and
so ruined us; and Christ that was God became as man, and so saved us: to
counterwork Satan, he lays aside the glory of his Godhead, he lays aside
the glory of his Godhead and puts on an humble garb; saving as not by power,
but by suffering: well then, look upon pride as the sure forerunner of a fall.
Eighthly, Observe the particular fact is uncertain though the general sin may
be known, as how this pride was discovered, whether in a thought, or by some
bold attempt is not known; it does not so much pertain to edification and
salvation to know their sin, as to know our own: The Scriptures direct us to
look inward, it is more for our profit to keep out Satan's power, then to know
the circumstances of his fall; let us not fall with him, Peter would know John's
end, but Christ rebukes him, what is that to thee? follow thou me; Joh. 21.
20, 22. We betray our duties by our curiosity, surely we should be more at
home, and look to our beam, that we may not ascite others before the chair of
censure, but our selves before the tribunal of conscience. Ninthly, Observe
that the first sin that ever was, was a punishment to its self, they kept not
their first estate, the sin is expressed in such a phrase as does imply their
loss, duty has its reward in its mouth, as the sacks of the Patriarchs their
moneys; so sin its punishment, never think that you shall get any thing by
offending God, you do but defile, and debase, and degrade your selves from your
own excellency when you sin: it is Hell enough to turn away from God, and misery
enough to polute and stain an image in our souls; the fall of the Angels is
described to be a departure from their own happiness.

Secondly, Consider it with Application to your selves, First, apply it for
humiliation, we left (...), our first estate as well as the Angels, God made
man upright, but they sought out many inventions, Eccles. 7. 29. Read your own
guilt and Apostasy in the sin of the Angels; usually the Page is whipped to
show the Prince his fault; but here the Princes and noblest part of the world
are set out to us for examples, that in their ruin and dreadful fall we might
understand our own. Do but observe the Parable, they had (...), an original
estate of happiness and holiness, and so we, they fell soon, so we; they fell
by Pride, so we; the Angelical fall is our glass; we are a kind of Devils, and
Apostates from God: they were driven out of Heaven, so we out of Paradise: they
are punished with darkness, and so we. Secondly, apply it for Caution, there is
a new beginning in Christ, the Apostle says, Heb. 3. 14. We are made partakers
of Christ if we ^old (...), the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the
end. If we should break with God again upon this new stock, there will be no
more sacrifice for sin, faith which is the gift of Gods grace, is the beginning
and root of a new life in Christ: if we should forfeit this, we cannot expect
God will deal with us any more.

We are now come to the phrases that imply their punishment, Secondly the
punishment of the Angels.
and that we made to be twofold, Present and Future, the first part of the
present punishment is paene d^ni, their loss employed in that clause [ leaving
their own habitation] in which their guilt is further intimated, for the
Apostle here makes it to be their act, but Peter in the parallel place makes
it Gods act, 2 Pet. 2. 4. God spared not his Angels that sinned, but cast them
down to Hell, without further diversion we may take up the point thus, That the
Apostate Observe.
Angels upon their sin and fall departed from that place of happiness and glory
which before they enjoyed. So Rev. 12. 8. Their place was found no more in
heaven, and the great Dragon was cast out, that old Serpent called the Devil
and Satan, which deceives the whole world, he was cast out into the earth,
and his Angels were cast out with him. That Scripture I confess is mystical,
and speaks of the overcumming of Satan in this present world, and casting
him out of the Church, which is there expressed by Heaven, as the World by
Earth: For I observe in that book the Church is sometimes expressed by terms
suitable to the Jud^ical state. So in Rev. 11. 2. The Church is called the
Temple, and the World the Court, and sometimes by the Celestial state, and so
the Church is called Heaven* and the World Earth; but however there is a plain
allusion to Satan's first fall from Heaven, as the ground of these expressions,
and therefore I may use that place as a proof in this matter, that you may
understand the loss of the Angels: give me leave to lay down these
propositions. 1. The place of their Innocence was Heaven, round about the
Throne of God, where the good Angels do continually behold his face, and stand
before him, Dan. 7. 10. In such a blessed place, and in such blessed company
was their (...), their abode or habitation: when God disposed the several
Creatures into proper mansions and places of abode, he took the Angels into his
own train and glorious attendants, that they might be still with him, other
Creatures were his Servants, those his Courtiers, that is, his Household and
ordinary Servants that were to attend as in his Chamber of Presence. 2. In this
place they were to enjoy God and glorify God, their happiness was to enjoy
God, their duty to glorify him; Cor. 13. 12.
there they behold his face, Matthew. 18. 10. for vision and sight of God is the
happiness of rational Creatures, and therefore our happy estate is expressed by
beholding him* face to face: and David says, Psalm. 16. 11. in thy presence, or
in thy face is fullness of joy, in Heaven then did God manifest himself to
them, there they were to applaud his Counsels, receive his Commands, to love
God with the most perfect embraces of their will, and to fulfill his
Commandments, harkening to the voice of his Word. 3. From this place they are
now driven into the lower parts of the World* as being a place more fit for sin
and misery: that the place into which they are driven is the bottom and center
of the Earth, cannot be shown out of Scripture, rather the contrary; for
sometimes they are said to fly up and down in the air, and therefore is Satan
called the Prince of the power of the air, Ephesians. 2. 3. and the other Devils,
Principalities and spiritual wickednesses in high places, Ephesians. 6. 12. They
aspire to get as high as they can, but they can get no further then the Regions
of the ^ire; and sometimes they are said to compass the earth to and fro, Job
1. 7. The Earth is Satan's walk and circuit, where he seeks to do mischief, and
sometimes they are in the Sea, Matthew. 8. 33. for as yet they are not in that
prison and place of torments* where they shall abide for ever under the wrath
of the Lord: therefore when Christ checketh their power in the world, they
expostulate with him, Jesus thou Son of David, ar^ thou come to torment us
before our time, Matthew. 8. 29. and besought him that he would not cast them
into the great deep; by which some understand the final place of their
residence and torments, even the lowest place of the world, most remote from
the highest Heavens, which place as yet they have not entered: but how is it
said that they are already cast down into Hell, 2 Pet. 2. 4. (...), I Answer,
that expression does only note the dreadfulnesse of their fall from so glorious
a mansion, to such a place of misery, and because where ever they are, they
carry their own Hell with them, though by Gods permission they are as yet
suffered to remain in the Air or Earth. 4. Departing from Heaven, they departed
from all the happiness and glory which they enjoyed there, namely, that light,
which they had in their understandings to behold God, that power in their wills
to love and s^rve him, in stead of which they are filled with darkness and
malice and become the unreconsilable enemies of God and Man; as to their light,
their gracious knowledge is quite extinct, their natural knowledge much
Eclipsed, and their experimental knowledge, not enongh to engage their hearts
to God; as to their integrity and holiness, in stead of a will to love and
serve God, there are nothing but obstinate purposes to do evil, and endeavors
to hinder the glory of God, and the good of Man, 1 Pet. 5. 8. lest we should
enjoy that happiness which he has left. Hence those titles given then in
Scripture, as Rev. 12. 9.
Devil, which signifies a Slanderer, Satan which signifies an Enemy, the
Tempter, Matthew. 4. 1. because he daily solliciteth us to evil, (...), the evil
one, Matthew. 5. being full of wickedness himself, he makes it his study and
care to propagate it in others; Belial, 2 Cor. 6. 15. unprofitable, as good for
nothing, (...), the destroyer, because he works mischief; the old Serpent,
Rev. 12. 6. because under the shape of the serpent he poisoned Eve; as to their
power, it is much broken and limited, they are held in the chains of
providence, they could not do hurt to the herd of Swine without permission,
Luke 9. 26. 5. Though they have lost much of the glory and power annexed to
their habitation, yet many tokens of the divine image do as yet remain in them:
holiness is (as we said) utterly lost, he sins from the beginning, 1 John 3.
8. that is, does nothing else but sin; and Acquinas says well, Hoc est Angelis
casus, quod hominibus mors, their fall into sin to them is as death to us: but
now in other things they have much left, as man after his fall is like a
drisled picture, and had only enough left to show what he once was, so the
Angels though they are much fallen from the excellency of their nature, yet
there is enough left to show that once they were glorions creatures: that which
remains may be referred to two heads, their great cunning and active power.
1. Their knowledge and cunning is great, they have much natural and
experimental knowledge, so as they can discern hidden causes, and virtues which
escape the flight of man's reason and understanding; they know how to apply
active to passive things, can guess notably at future events, but as for a
certain knowledge of them (unless of such things as depend upon necessary
causes) that is proper to God, and accordingly he challenges it, Isa. 41. 23.
show the things that are to come, that we may know that ye are Gods, etc.
Therefore the Devils Oracles were either false or doubtful, as 2 Kings 22. 16.
great skill in Arts and tongues they have as appears by their teaching those
things with wonderful facility to those that have familiarity with them See my
Notes on Jam. 2. 19.
in divine things, they know enough of God and his justice, as to feel an
horror impressed upon themselves, Jam. 2. 19* Luke 4. 34. Acts 19. 15, besides
they are of wonderful sagarity to judge of men's hearts by the gestures, the
motion of the blood and spirits, and other such external signs, for directly
they do not know the thoughts. that is the privilege of God. 2. Their power is
great still, though limited, so that it cannot be exercised but when and where,
and as God will; they are able to raise tempests, to bring fire from Heaven, as
they did, to ruin Jobs house and children, Job 1. they can deceive with lying
miracles, but true miracles can only be wrought by a divine power; being of
much sagacity and skill in the secrets of nature, they may poison the air,
destroy the bodies of men, infest and trouble beasts and cattle, in short do
all that lies within the compass of a natural cause where God permits:
Again they may possess the bodies of men, hinder the Godly in the execution of
their duty; over rule the spirits of wicked men, and act and stir them up to
wrath, lust, filthiness, Ephesians. 2. 3. besot them with error, etc. it would
require a distinct discourse, to open this power to you: they cannot create new
beings, nor raise dead bodies, nor compel the will of man, they can do mira,
but not miracula, etc. Let me now come to observe somewhat of practical
concernment from what has been spoken.

1. That God has proper places where the Creatures Partical Observations
thence.
shall perform their duty and enjoy their happiness, as the Angels had Heaven
which was (...), their proper place, so Adam* had Paradise, and the Saints the
Church; it is misery enough to be thrown out of that place where God manifests
himself, he that was cast out of the Church was given up to Satan, 1 Cor. 5.
5. in the Church, Christ rules; in the World, Satan; it is good to keep to the
Shepherds Tents, Cant. 1. 8. the Angels left their first estate, at the same
time that they lost their own habitation, it is dangerous to leave our own
place, to be cast out of the Congregations of the Faithful, where God dwells
and is glorified, he inhabiteth the praises of Israel, Psalm 22. 3. that is in
the Church where he has praise, and we have benefit, the Church is the Gate of
Heaven, Genesis 28* 17. where God is, there Heaven is; Cain himself could bewail
his misery in being turned out from the Church, he had the whole earth before
him, but (says he) I shall be hid from thy face, Genesis 4. 14. that is, I am
turned out from the place of thy worship, and where thy name is called upon:
it is sad to be banished from the Lords gracious presence.

2. Sin depriveth us of Gods presence, this is the Wall of separation between
us and God, Isa. 59. 2. Your sins have separated, etc. it not only provokes
God to stand at a distance from us, but works a strangeness in us, and
makes us shie of his presence, it cast the Angels out of Heaven, Adam out of
Paradise, Cain out of the Church; well then, when you are tempted to folly,
bethink with your selves, God could not endure the sight of Angels, when once
they were defiled with sin; if I should yield to this temptation* I should
never endure God, nor he me; this will either cause the spirit to leave me, or
me to leave the Throne of Grace; guilty souls cannot sustain the presence of
God, and God does not own the presence of guilty sinners. Peter said Luke 5. 8.
Depart from me, for I am a sinful man: And God says, Depart from me into
everlasting torments, Mat. 25.

3. Observe again Jude makes it their act, and Peter Gods Act: Jude says,
they left their own habitation, and Peter, God cast them down: and punishments
are voluntarily contracted, founded upon some act of ours: God may pass by a
creature out of his mere will, but he damneth not, till we provoke him; first
there is a voluntary aversion from God, and then God turns away from us,
Hosea 13. 9. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, our ruin is caused by the
free motion of our own wills: God punishes not willingly, and as delighting in
our destruction; we sin, and so freely depart from our own happiness; we leave,
and then he casts down.

4. God casts Satan out of Heaven. Do you imitate your heavenly Father, cast
Satan out of your hearts. Who would entertain him whom Heaven has spued out?
it is said Rev. 12. 8. That Satan and his Angels found no more place in Heaven;
Oh then, give him not place to dwell in your hearts, Ephesians. 4. 17. do not
entertain wrathful, or lustful motions: God decreed that the evil Angels should
be cast out of Heaven, and Christ died that they might be cast out of your
hearts, Joh. 12. 21. Now shall the Prince of this world be cast out: Oh let him
not erect a new Heaven and Empire in your souls! his great aim is, now he
cannot get into Heaven, to dwell in the hearts of men.

5. Angels, Creatures of the highest exeellency are not spared when they sin; 2
Pet. 2. 4. God spared not the Angels, etc. wonder at the patience of the great
God to us sinners; if a King be angry with his offending Nobles, should not the
skullions tremble? how come we to be of this side Hell? Go home and adore that
Grace that has kept you out of the chains of darkness, Lam. 3. 23. It is of
the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, not swallowed up quick not cast down
to Hell; if the Angels in the very Infancy of their Creation were so soon
punished for the first offense, Lord what did thou see in us, that after so
many offenses we should be yet alive? it is mercy, pardoning mercy that gives us
our beings! we fail not because compassions fail not

6. Angels were forced to leave their habitation; when they changed their
nature, they changed their estate: let all sinners tremble! consider the
instance, and you will see that no dignity and worth of the Creature is of any
avail, nothing can keep off the strokes of vengeance, but the blood of Jesus
Christ; they were Angels, glorious Creatures, their sin but one, and probably
that in thought, yet how dreadful is their punishment? cast out of Heaven, kept
in chains of darkness for a severer vengeance! Oh then, how should we tremble
that have drunk in iniquity like water? surely God is the same, he does no less
hat^ pride, obstinacy, and contempt of his grace now, then he did in times
past, God is but one, Gal. 3. 20. he acts according to the same tenor of
justice now as heretofore, etc.

7. From the word (...), their own place, observe the true dwelling place and
rest is Heaven; 'twas the habitation of the Angels, and the rest of the Saints;
Oh long for your home, let your hearts and your hopes be there, enter upon your
eternal inheritance by degrees; the Angels left their habitations, do you be
always traveling thither, let your* Col. 3. 1.
hearts be in Heaven; Phil. 3. 20.
your conversations be in Heaven ere your persons, there are good Angels still,
blessed companions, Heb. 12. 22. 23. an innumerable company of Angels and
Spirits of just men perfect* An Heathen could see out of a glimp^e of the
souls immortality, O preclamor illum diem, cum ad illud animorum concilium
atumque proficiscar. There you shall see the vacant rooms of the Apostate
Angels occupied by the Saints. Say woe is me, that my pilgrimage is prolonged,
Psalm. 20. 5.

8. They were cast from Heaven into this world; do but look-upon the World in a
right notion; Satan that was not fie for Heaven, is cast out into the Earth,
as a meet place for misery and torment* he is called the Ruler of the darkness
of this world* Ephesians. 6. 12. and the God of this World, 2 Cor. 4. 4. it is
punishment enough to the Apostate Angels to be cast out into the World: the
World is the Devils workhouse and prison; one calls it Satan's Diocese; who
would be in love with a place of bondage and punishment?

9. The Devil and his Angels are in the World, let us be the more cautious; he
compasses the Earth to and fro, no place can secure you from his temptation,
he is every* where ravening for the prey with an indefatigable and unwearied
diligence, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Let us look about us, Woe to the inhabitants of the
Earth and the Sea; for the Devil is come down to you, Rev. 12. 12. Where ever
you are, Satan is, near you, the World is full of Devils; when you are in the
Shop, the Devil is there to fill your hearts with lying and deceit, as he did
the heart of Ananias, Act. 5. when you are in your closets, and when you have
shut the door upon you, you do not shut out Satan, he can taint a secret duty;
when you are in the house of God, Ministering before the Lord, Satan is at your
right hand ready to resist you, Zach. 3. 1. He is ready either to pervert your
aims, or to divert your thoughts; We had need keep the heart in an humble,
watchful praying frame; God has cast out the Angels out of Heaven, and now
they are here upon earth, tempting the sons of men to folly and inconvenience:
be watchful, the world is the Devils Chess-board; you can hardly move back or
forth, but he is ready to attach you by some temptation.

10. When grace is abused, our dejection i^ usually according to the degree of
our exaltation, the Angels from Heaven are cast down to Hell, the highest in
the rank of creatures are now made lowest; corruptions of the best things are
most noisome. Thou Capernaun which are exalted to Heaven, art now brought down
to Hell, Matthew. 11. 23. 'Twas one of the chief Cities of Galilee, and where
our Savior usually conversed; it is a kind of Heaven to enjoy Christ in the
Ordinances, but now to slight this mercy, will bring such confusions and
miseries as are a kind of Hell to you; slighting of grace (of all sins)
weighs heaviest in Gods balance.

11. Spiritual judgments are most severe, and to be given up to obstinacy in
sin is the forest judgment; it is diabolical to continue in sin; the Angels
left their habitation, and what followed? they lost their holiness.

12. Loss of happiness is a great judgment, it is Hell enough to want God; the
first part of the sentence, depart from me, Matthew. 25. 41. is most dreadful,
loss of Heaven is the first part of the Angels punishment; we in effect say
now, depart from us, Job. 21. 14. but God will then say, depart from me; ye
shall see my face no more, etc.

Thus we have dispatched the first part of the Angels punishment, their loss,
we now come to the other part, their poena sensus, their punishment of sense,
or pain, [b^ has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness] where there is
an allusion to the state of Malefactors or condemned men, who are kept in
prison till execution: now the evils of a prison are two. 1. The darkness of
the place. 2. The hard usage of the evil doer, suitably to which the Apostle
used a double notion, 1. They are reserved in everlasting chains. 2. Under
darkness.

1. Begin with the first part [ In everlasting chains.] Whence two notes, 1.
That the Angels are kept in chains, 2. That those chains are everlasting.

1. They are kept in chains. But what chains can hold Angels? can Spirits be
bound with Irons? I Answer. I Answer they are spiritual chains, suitable to the
spiritual nature of Angels: such as these, 1. Guilt of conscience, which
binds them over to judgment; the consciences of wicked Angels know that they
are adjudged to damnation for their sin; this is a sure chain, for it
fasteneth the judgment so as you cannot shake it off, it is bound and tied upon
us by the hand of Gods justice. The condition of a guilty sinner is frequently
compared to a prisoner, Isa. 42. 7. Isa. 49. 9. Isa. 61. 1. and sin to a prison
wherein we are shut up, Romans 11. 32. Gal. 3. 22. and guilt to chains or bonds
laid upon us by God the Judge, Prove. 5. 22. Lam. 1. 14.

2. Their obstinacy in sinning, They are fallen so as they cannot rise again,
they are called Ephesians. 6. 12.
Wickednesses as sinning with much malice and obstinacy; as if you should say,
wickedness it self; the Devils sin is as the sin against the Holy Ghost, a
malicious, obstinate, spiteful opposition against the Kingdom of Christ: such
an hatred against God and Christ, that they will not repent and be saved; their
despair begets despite, and being hopeless of relief, are without purpose
of repentance: they do, foolish creatures, add sin to sin, and harden
themselves in an evil way, which is as a chain to hold them in Gods Prison,
till their final damnation, see 2 These. 2. 11, 12. Where error and wilful
persisting in disobedience, is made to be Gods prison, wherein reprobate
creatures are held till their punishment be consummate.

3. Utter despair of deliverance, they are held under their torment by their
own thoughts, as a distressed conscience is said to be bound up, Isa. 66. 1. to
them here remains nothing but a certain fearful looking for judgment and
fiery indignation, Job 10. 37. release they cannot look for, more judgment
they do expect, Matthew. 8. 31. Art thou come to torment us before our time;
their prison door is locked with Gods own Key, and as long as God sits upon
the Throne they cannot wrest the Key out of his hands.

4. Gods power and providence by which the Angelical strength is bridled and
overmastered, so as they cannot do what they would; thus Rev. 20. 2. Satan is
said to be bound up for a thousand years, that is, in the chains of Gods power,
which are sometimes streighter and sometimes looser: the Devil was fain to ask
leave to enter into the herd of Swine, Matthew 8.

5. The chains of Gods eternal decree. As there is a golden chain, the chain
of Salvation, which is carried on from link to link, till the purposes of
eternal grace do end in the possession of eternal glory, so there is an Iron
chain of reprobation, which begins in Gods own voluntary preterition, and is
carried on in the creatures voluntary Apostasy, and ends in their just
damnation; and when once we are shut up under these bars, there is no opening,
Job 12. 14.

Secondly, These chains are eternal chains, because the wicked Angels stand
guilty for ever, without hope of recovery or redemption. Every natural man is
in chains, but there is hope to many of the prisoners: Christ says, go forth,
but those chains upon the evil* Angels are for ever and ever, now ad
custodium, ^o keep them and hold them in their lost estate; hereafter ad
poenam, they are continued upon them as a part of their final punishment, when
much of the liberty which now they have, shall be abridged*

From hence observe these practical Inferences.

1. That sins are as it were bonds and chains: a wicked See my notes on James
1. 25.
man is in bondage here and hereafter; now in snares, and then in chains, here
taken captive by Satan in his snares, 2 Timothy 2. 26. and hereafter bound up
with him in chains. Sin it self is a bondage, and Hell a prison: were there
nothing in sin but the preson^ slavery; it is enough to dissuade us; but alas
this is not all, there are not only snares, but chains; in the fall of the
Angels, how many notions are there offered to us to discover the evil of sin?
they left their beginning, and lost their habitation, and then chains of
darkness: he that has a mind to be a beast, or a devil, let him be a sinner.
If you mean to quench your reason, to eclipse the glory of your Creation, to
disturb the quiet of your spirits, and instead of calmness and serenity of
conscience, to bring in horror and confusion; if you mean to enthral and
captiva^e your souls to every base affection, and to be at the command of
every corrupt desire, then go on freely, as you do in sinning against God; but
alas the present thraldom is nothing to what is future, all the sins that you
commit will be as so many Chains, binding you over to an eternal and just
damnation. The good Angels are at liberty to serve God, when the evil Angels
are shut up in the prison of their own obstinacy and wickedness: remember this
when you are convinced of a sin which you cannot leave, and fear lest it prove
a chain of everlasting darkness.

Secondly, those chains and bonds can never be broken by us; the Angels cannot
break them themselves, and Christ will not, for their day of grace is past;
every ones chains would be eternal, if Christ did not loose them, and open the
prison door to poor Captives, Isa. 61. 1. this is our advantage above the
Angels, that an year of liberty is proclaimed to us, and an opening of the
prison to them that are bound; Christ himself was bound with our chains, the
Prophet says, Isa. 53. 8. he was taken from prison, and from judgment, he was
in prison that we might go free^ If the ^edge had given us up to the Officer,
and the Officer had cast us* into pr^so^, how long would it have been, ^re we
had paid the ulmost farthing, Luke 12. 58. others that reject the mercy
offered in Christ, can never wrest themselves out of the hands of justice, but
do for ever remain under the power and wrath of the living God* Hebr. 10. 30.

Thirdly, The Devil is in chains, a cruel spirit, but under bonds: his power is
less then his will and malice, he is wrathful, that we may not be secure; he
is chained, that we may not despair: he has no power, but what is given him
from above, and when God puts any of his servants into Satan's hands, he
keeps Satan in his own hands: if you be in Satan's hands for your exercise,
remember Satan is in Gods hands for your comfort and safety: He had not power
over the herd of Swine without leave, Matthew. 8. 31. suffer me, etc. so Luke 22.
31. he could not sift Peter till he had a commission, Satan has desired, etc.
Ioh. 1. 12* Job 2. 7. Satan could not so much as touch Jobs estate or skin
till leave obtained, nay he could not deceive Ahab a wicked man, till God said
Go, 1 King. 22. 21, 22. he is but Gods executioner, he sent his evil Angels
among them, Psalm. 78. 49. God gave commission for the plagues of Egypt, and
then the evil Angels had power to execute them: the godly need not fear Satan,
as a disobedient Angel, he is cast into the chains of Gods justice and power;
and as head of the Kingdom of darkness, his power is more restrained by the
death of Christ, John 12. 29.

Fourthly, Observe how weak the Creatures are, when God marches in judgment
against them: guilt of conscience is one of the fallen Angels chains, if God
will but arm our own thoughts against us, he needs not bring forces from
without, there is enough in that to sink us into Hell: The Law needs not
bring Brimstone from Heaven to burn sinners, nor open the mouth of the great
deep to drown them, nor shatter the frame of nature about our heads; alas, we
cannot bear up under the burden of our own consciences, or the weight of our
own grief, when he lays his finger upon the conscience, who can bear it? The
Angels excel in strength, and yet the impressions of honor laid upon them, are
too hard for them to grapple with all, Prove. 18. 14. a wounded spirit who can
bear? as if he had said, I challenge all the world, to bring me a man that is
able to deal with his own conscience when God armeth it against him.

Fifthly, That spiritual judgments of all others are most secure, to have sin
punished with obstinacy and hardness in sinning. This is nothing but to have
the Devils chains laid upon us, a sad intimation, that we are given up to
chains of darkness, frogs and lice, and hailstones were but soft judgments to
Pharaoh's hard heart: unless God should send us quick into Hell, there cannot
an heavier judgment befall us, nay certainly it were better to be given up to
Hell torments, if there could be any expectation of deliverance, then to be
given up to a spirit of sinning; for there is no end of that; say then, Lord
what ever judgment thou bring upon me, bring not thy heavy judgment of an
hard heart; it is better by far that you should live miserably, then sin freely
without remorse. But what sins bring on this spiritual judgment? I answer, 1.
an unthankful abuse of Gods gifts, The Devils had a glorious and excellent
nature, but they were not thankful, observe it when you will, you will find it
true, that no man was ever punished with hardness of heart, but some former
merciful dispensation was abused: the Heathens were not thankful for the light
of nature, and therefore God gave them up to vile affections Romans 1. 22, 24.
Others received not the love of a truth, and therefore God gave them up to
believe a lie, that they might be damned. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12. the very sin
against the Holy Ghost is so called because it is a despighting grace received,
or a divellish opposing of the grace and supernatural work of the spirit, by
which the mind is convinced of the truth. 2. Sinning against the light, that
was Satan's sin, who was full of light, and sinned in the very face of God, and
it is his sin still, malice having only put out the light of prudence, but not
of his understanding, so that he knowingly sins; so wicked men Romans 1. 8.
imprison the truth in unrighteousness, and then God gives them up to the sway
of their own lusts and passions: there is more of malice in sins against light,
you laugh at Christ before his face, out-dare Heaven and Conscience, Esther. 7.
8
will he force the Queen before my face* etc. 3. Sinning with the light, When
malice sets wit a work (as it does in the Devils) against God and the Church;
it is Sathanical to be wise to do evil, to make no other use of our parts then
to plot wickedness, pervert the truth, and undermine religion, Jer. 4. 22.
They are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge: when you make
religion yield to policy, or bend policy to ruin religion, then your wisdom
has undone you, Isa. 48. 4. Malice against God and goodness, This is Satan's
direct sin, when men will not only be wicked themselves, but adversaries and
malicious opposers of all that is good: This is not only to be sinn^rs, but
Satan's, Acts 13. 10. O thou Child of the Devil and Enemy of all goodness,
Cain that hated his Brother, because his works were righteous, was the Devils
Patriarch. 5. A sottish obstinacy and wilfulness, When will and humor is
lifted up against conviction, Jer. 2. 25. Ier. 44. 18. they will not, because
they will not, foolish wilfulness meets with penal hardness, he that will
wink shall not seethe Sun, shine it never so brightly, such men do but lay
Satan's chains on their own will and understanding. 6. A senseless security,
notwithstanding the growth and increase of sin, when men lose all feeling and
restraint, and grow more wicked, but less tender, Ephesians. 4. 19. and so men sin
freely, foully, wax worse and worse, and add new lincks to the chains of
darkness.

Sixthly, There is little reason that we should adore him, whom God holds in
chains of darkness, that we should exalt him whom the Lord has cast down, and
make a God of him; who has made himself a Devil. All sins do, as it were, set
the Crown upon Satan's head, these especially. 1. False Worship, Satan is the
Head of Idolaters, if the sacrifice were offered in an unbecomming manner, God
says, it was a sacrifice offered unto Devils, Levit. 17. 7. In all false
worships the Devil is served either directly, or obliquely, either by
consequence or in the intention of the worshippers, thence those expressions,
Table of Devils 1 Cor. 10. 21. they sacrificed to Devils and not to God, Deuteronomy.
32. 17. You gratify Satan if you be not right in worship; those among
Christians that worshipped toward an Idol of Gold and Silver, are said to
worship Devils, Rev. 9. 20. Satan is (says Synesius) (...). a lover of
Images, and a Patron of false worship. 2. Worldly conversation; he is called
the God of this World, 2 Cor. 2. 4. sensual, covetous, proud men are Satan's
Votaries, at his beck and pleasure, and will you be one of the number? when
Christ came to dissolve Satan's works, John 3. 8. will you uphold them? 3. B^se
fear of wicked men; you do but fear the Devil in them, Rev. 2. 10. Fear not,
behold the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, He that will deny the
truth for fear of men, prefers the Devil before God. 4. Being of the faction
of the wicked, there is a corrupt party in the world, over whom Satan usurpeth
Empire and Domination; Rulers of the darkness of this World, Ephesians. 6. 14. Col.
1. 13. cry not up a confederacy with these, take heed how your soul enters
into that secret. I confess it is ingeniousness, a matter of Christian skill and
art, to find out the snare that we may escape it: Generally they are the
Antichristian dark part of the world such as are led with a blind zeal and
rage to oppose the interest of righteousness; such as oppose the Gospel with
rage and lies, John 8. 44. Ye are of your father the Devil, and his l^sts will
ye do. Many that deny Satan, yet may be of his Faction and Party

We are now come to the second part of the punishment of pains, taken from the
other inconvenience of a prison [(...) under darkness] in allusion to
Malefactors, who are cast into Dungeons, where besides the load of Irons, the
very darkness of the place concurreth to their misery; light is pleasant, as
giving us the sight of what is grateful in the world, of which when we are
deprived, the mind like a Mill falls and works upon its self. Peter says
[ in chains of darknesse] as implying that God did bind them fast with their
darkness and horror, as with a chain, but our Apostle here seems to make
them two distinct parts of their torment, as certainly it is a more full
description of it. Well then, the proposition will be, That the Apostate Angels
are kept under darkness.

Darkness in Scripture represents three things, first, Observe.
Ignorance, secondly, Sin, thirdly, misery; as light the contrary quality,
implies Knowledge, Holiness, and Happiness, because light discovers all
things. It Is put for knowledge, because of all bodily qualities, it is most pure
and unmixed, therefore it is put for holiness, because it is wonderfully pleasing
and delightful to sense, therefore it is put for glory: so contrariwise
darkness, which is nothing else but the absence and privation of light,
signifies ignorance, Romans 2. 19. Sin, 1 Pet. 2. 9, Misery: Psalm. 107. 11. Now
all these three make way for one another, Ignorance for Sin, and Sin for
Misery, the understanding being the great Wheel of the Soul, if it be not
right, nothing can be right, Matthew. 6. 22. ignorance makes us stumble upon
sin, and by sin we fall into the pit of everlasting darkness.

If you ask what kind of Darkness is intended here? I answer, though all may be
employed; yet chiefly the darkness of misery is here intended, they being cast
down from the light and glory of the highest Heavens, into dark and obscure
babitations, where they want the sight of God, and the light of his
countenance, as when the Sun is gone, there is nothing but darkness in the
world; so being banished out of the presence of God, they are fitly said to be
held under darkness; for as the Sun is to the corporeal world, so is God to the
world of Spirits, Psalm. 4. 6. now their Sun is Eclipsed, and by the
interposition of the dark cloud of their sin and obstinacy; they cannot have
the least comfortable glimpse and fruition of God: to which also may be added,
the horrible apprehension of their loss, and that terror and discomfort that
lies upon them, for they have only so much light left, as serves to increase
their torment; I confess it is disputed by Divines, whether the Devils can
grieve for the loss of the light of Gods countenance, or the want of the
beatifical vision, and the ground of doubting is, because there is in the
Devils an extreme averseness, enmity, and hatred of God and his Glory; but
certain, as they are rational creatures, they cannot but be sensible of their
loss, as also the damned spirits are, and so great a loss of happiness (for
that is the consideration under which they are sensible of it) must needs breed
horror and torment; they do, not mourn for the absence of God as the Saints do.
out of a principle of holiness, and because God is lovely in himself, but as
profitable to them; and this sense as it is accompanied with despair, so with
blasphemy and hatred of God, surely every part of the sentence that is
pronounced upon wicked men, is fitted to beget terror in them, and therefore
depart from me, is apprehended as a misery, as well as go into everlasting
torments. Add further to their darkness that despair that is upon them, and
fearful looking for of the fiery indignation of the Lord, which desperate
sorrow is expressed by utter darkness, and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 22. 13.

Let me now come to some observations.

1. Darkness is the Devils punishment, the highest misery of the highest rank
of reasonable creatures. Oh why should we love that which is the misery of the
fallen Angels! as our Savior speaks of some that love darkness rather then
light, John 3. 19. that is error rather then truth, l^sts rather then Christ,
ignorance rather then knowledge. It Is one of the saddest arguments of man's
dreadful fall, that he ^s in love with his own misery, we should hate sin, and
we hate the light that reproves it: ignorant people love a foolish Ministry,
Gods faithful witnesses are their torment. Rev. 11. 10. the carnal world would
feign lie down upon the bed of ease and sleep* light is troublesome, those that
let them alone are their Idols and darlings, the blind lead the blind, and
both fall into the ditch, it is evil not to know the will of God, it is doubly
evil when we desire not to know; the one sort err in their minds, the other in
their hearts: spiritual darkness is far worse then bodily, when Ely was
stricken blind he desired some body to lead him by the hand, Acts 13. 11. In
such a case we count our happiness to light upon fit guides, in spiritual
darkness it is quite otherwise, we cannot endure a faithful guide the Prophets
prophecy lies, and the people love to have it so, a blind people are al for
blind guids.

2. Light that yeildeth us no comfort is but darkness, Satan has knowledge
left, but no comfort, Jam. 2. 19. they believe and tremble, the more sense they
have of Gods being and glory, the greater horror have they upon their spirits:
it is very miserable when we have only light enough to awaken conscience, and
knowledge enough to be self condemned To know God but not to enjoy him, that is
the Devils punishment, Oh then never leave till your thoughts of God are sweet
and comfortable, Psalm. 104. 34. Satan cannot but abhominate his own thoughts
of God, for he cannot think of him without torment; but it is otherwise with
gracious hearts, that meditation which is the Devils terror, is their solace
and support, Gods name to them is as an ointment poured out, Cant 1. 3. full of
fragrancie and reviving: rest not then, till you can see God with such a light
as gives you fruition and comfortable enjoyment of him, in thy light shall we
see light, Psalm. 36. 9. there is light in thy light, but all other light is but
darkness.

3. Do but bserve the difference between God and Satan God is light, 1 John 1.
5 and Satan darkness, God dwells in light, and Satan is reserved in chains
under darkness the first creature that God made in the world was light and the
first gift of the spirit is illumination, but now all Satan's aim and work is to
bring in darkness, to blind the mind, 1 Cor 4. 4. ignorance is the very
foundation of his kingdom Ephesians. 6. 12. Well then, the more dark, the more like
Satan a Child of God is a Child of light, and what have we to do with works of
darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11. there should be such a contrariety between you and sin as
there is between God and Satan; say then these actions would only become my
night of ignorance and folly, night work is unseemly for the day, Romans 13* 12.
the day is at hand let us cast off the works of darkness; leave these things
to the Bats and the Owls, if there be a difference, and contratrariety b^tween
Christ and Belial, who are the chiefes of either state, so between the persons
that heard under them; What communion is there between Christ and Belial,
between light and darkness, 2 Cor. 6. 14.

4. So much darkness as remains in you, so much advantage has Satan
against you. The dark part of the world is the seat of his Empire; Rulers of
the darkness of this World, Ephesians. 6. 12. His subjects are the children of
darkness, and all the advantage that he has over the Children of Light, is,
because of the darkness that is in them: whosoever therefore lies under a
state of darkness, is under the power of Satan. The great work of the
Ministry, is to recover them, to turn them from darkness to light, Acts 26.
18. and so from Satan to God: Oh the sad condition of such persons that are
bound together with Satan in chains of darkness! Poor Creatures, how are they
hurried to and fro? from wrath to Pride, from Pride to Lust, from Lust to
Filthiness, from Filthiness to Worldliness: Oh then! awake you that sleep,
and the Lord shall give you light, Ephesians. 5. 14. What a blessing is it, when it
can be said of us, what the Apostle said of the Ephesians, ye were darkness,
but now are light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 8. As soon as you have received light
and grace, you are translated out of Satan's Power and Kingdom, and put into
the Lords.

5. The darkness of sin is punished with the darkness of mis^ry. The light
whereby we are directed and perfected is the same; the state of grace is a
marvelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9 and the state of glory, the inheritance of the
Saints in light. Col. 1. 12. So sin is but darkness begun. Hell is called
utter darkness, Matthew. 8. 12. (...), a darkness beyond a darkness; as
Augustine glosseth in his Homilies, In tenebras ex tenebris in foeliciter
exclusio, the damned are but thrust out of one darkness into antoher; from
ignorance to sin, from sin to torment: it is very observable, when Solomon
compares the way of the just and the way of the wicked, he compares the one
to light the other to darkness, Prove. 4. 18. 19. The way of the just is as the
shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day; and the way of
the wicked is as darkness. By the rule of contraries, as one is a growing
light, so the other is an increasing darkness: from twy-light to starlight,
from starlight to thick darkness: they quench the light of nature, choose
worldly happiness, grow regardlesse of eternity, are hardened in their way,
and at length given up to everlasting horror and confusion of faces, to whom
the mist of darkness is reserved for ever, 2 Pet. 2. 18. Mists of error are
justly punished with mists of darkness. The men there spoken of, were clouds
and mists in the Church; and therefore the mists of eternal darkness are kept
for them, as a fit and proper portion.

6. The danger of refusing and abusing light. Those that were Angels of light,
are now held in the chains of darkness: see it every where made good; the
blackest evening has been sent usually after a glorious day; those that once
enjoyed Noah's preaching, were afterward the spirits in prison, 1 Pet. 3. 18,
19. He that had not a Wedding Garment on for the feast, was cast into utter
darkness, Matt. 22. 13. Abuse of light, and means, and privileges, will
surely make our condition gloomy and uncomfortable.

7. When we are cast out from God, nothing but darkness ensues, utter
darkness, and weeping and gnashing of teeth. It Is our utmost happiness to
enjoy God, and it is our utmost misery to want him; the Devils know it, and we
shall one day know it: pray for the light of Gods countenance more then for
Corn and Wine, and Oil, Psalm 4. 6. One glimpse of the favor of God would turn
Hell into Heaven, and give us such a strong and sweet joy, as would swallow up
all kind of sorrows; it is the absence of the Sun makes night; certainly they
have hard hearts that do not mourn when they have lost the sight of God: When
the Bridegroom is gone, then shall they mourn, Mat. 9. 15. Alas, how the
drooping hearts and withered face of Nature, seem to mourn for the absence of
the Sun? and how are all things cleared and revived at Spring again? and shall
not we mourn for God the Sun of the intellectual world? Pharaoh was most
affrighted with the Plague of Darkness, Exodus 10. 4. Yea the Devils themselves
are sensible of the loss of the light of Gods countenance: when God shuteth up
himself in a cloud, let our bowels be troubled for him, Lam. 3. 44.

8. The World in comparison of Heaven is but a dark place. It Is the place where
the Devils are cast, and they are held under darkness. It Is an obscure corner
of the Creation; a place fit for our trial, but not for our reward; in a
spiritual consideration it is but a great and vast dungeon, where we cannot have
so dear sight of God as elsewhere. It Is Satan's walk, a place of danger and
defilement: it is much if we can keep our selves unspotted in such a nasty hole,
James 1. 27. 2 Pet. 2. 18. The inheritance which is given to the Saints, is
given to them in light; let us look for that, and long for that, and Col. 1. 12.
God dwells in light, 1 Timothy 6. 16 he dwells there, where he discovers
most of his glory, and that is in heaven.

We have done with the present punishment of the Angels; we come now to that
which is future, employed in those words [ unto the judgment of the great day]
by judgment is meant the sentence of condemnation which* shall pass upon them,
before the eyes of the whole world, and then the consequents, which are eternal
misery and torment.

Observe. That at the day ^f judgment the punishment of Observe.
the Devils will be greater then now it is.

The Devils punishment is for the present great, as you have heard, but they
are in expectation of greater, Mat. 8. 31. Art thou come to torment us before
our time? There is a time coming, when the wrath^ of God shall be increased
upon them, and this time is the day of judgment, the great day of the Lord,
when they shall be brought* forth before the Tribunal of Christ and his Saints:
the good Angels shall come as Christ's companions, and the evil Angels as his
prisoners. See* Matthew. 25. 31. and 2 Thessalonians 1. 7. and 1 Cor. 6* 3. This is a day
that will work upon their envy, thwart their pride, to see the glory of Christ
and of the good Angels, and the Saints: after this they shall be adjudged to
horrible torments. Hell is their Freehold and Portion, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels, Matthew* 25 41. The Quality and Nature of their torment we cannot
so easily determine, nor what that fire that shall burn spirits, only the
Scripture shows they are Rev 30. 7.
cast into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, where they shall
suffer torments without end, and without ease. When Heavens joys are full,
then are Hell torments full also: and therefore though for the present, they
are under Gods wrath, yet they do not taste the dregs of it; he exercises some
patience toward them; they have an Empire and a Ministry in the world, but
when all former things are done away, and Christ's glory is fully shown to the
world, then will he take full vengeance of his enemies. Well then, from hence
Learn.

1. That the wicked's judgment is not as yet full. At the great day, then
shall it be more increased, upon the Union of Body and Soul; they shall drink
the dregs of the Cup of Wrath unmixed. In this life we are adding sin to sin,
and in the next God will be adding torment to torment; Oh what a sad train of
judgments follows a sinner! for the present he has Hell in his own
Conscience; they sip of the cup of wrath in the bondage and horrors now upon
them, and at death these are more revived, and made more lively and active: but
consider, after all this there is worse behind, torments insufferable,
presently upon the separation, for then they are in prison, 1 Pet. 3. 9.
detained in a fearful expectation of further judgment, Luke 16. 14. I am
horribly tormented in this flame; but after this at Christ's coming to
judgment, these torments are increased; and therefore the Apostle speaks as
if he did not take vengeance before, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. He shall come in flaming
fire to render vengeance, etc. Because then it is fully executed; do not add
drunkenness to thirst, lest God add to your plagues*

2. The most miserable Creatures are suffered to enjoy some degree of Gods
patience. For the present God is patient, as to the fallen Angels, sure I am to
sinning man, in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall dye: the full
execution of that sentence is put off to the day of judgment; Reprobates are
endured with much long-suffering, Romans 9. 22. Intermissions God gives in this
life, respite to bodies till the last day: adore his goodness, do not abuse it.

3. Origens charity was too large, who dreamed of (...)* a flaming River,
through which all creatures were to pass, and so to be purged, and then at
length to be saved, even the Devils themselves, whereas they are kept for a
severer judgment.

4. When you see wicked men endured, and not presently cast into Hell, be not
astonished, God has a Ministry for them as for the evil Angels: Some are
reserved to the day of judgment, 2 Pet. 2. 9. that is, their punishment
respited for the greater triumph of that day.

5. One judgment may make way for another, the chains of darkness for the
judgment of the great day. Let no man please himself, in that he suffers
afflictions in this world, these may be but the beginnings of sorrow; God is
terrible to poor sinners as well as rich; you may be miserable here, and yet
not escape in the world to come: do not think the worst is past, some have a
double Hell, such miseries here as are pledges of everlasting torments
hereafter.

6. Devils fear the great day. An Atheistical lose Christian is worse then
Satan, he scoffeth at that at which the Devil trembles. There are Atheists in
the Church, but there are none in Hell.

7. Angels are brought to judgment. None are exempted, at the great day you
shall see those glorious Creatures bound with chains of Darkness; the Kings
and Captains are brought in trembling before the Lambs Throne, Rev. 6. 20. and
great as well as small appear before that great Tribunal, Rev. 20. 12.

8. The Angels are plunged into the depth of Hell, when Saints enter into their
Masters joy. God loves a returning sinner, before an Apostate Angel.

There is one point yet behind, with which I shall conclude Observe.
this verse; and that is, That the day of judgment is a great day. It Is so in
many regards.

1. Because it is the consummate Act of Christ's regal Office. Rea. 1.
Of all Offices Christ's Kingly Office is the most eminent: now the Kingly
Office was never discovered with so much luster and glory to the world as then:
the eminent act of other Offices do more belong to his abasement; as his
Oblation an eminent act of his Priestly Office was to be performed upon earth,
so his Prophetical Office was much discharged in delivering the Doctrine of the
Gospel whilst he was here; but of his Kingly Office we had but a very little
glimpse, during his abode upon earth, in his whipping the buyers and sellers
out of the Temple, and his entrance into Jerusalem, when they cried Hosanna in
the streets, Matthew. 21. And now in Heaven Christ is supreme, but his
sovereignty lies under a cloud and vail. All things are put under him. But
carnal sense objects, We see not as yet all things put under him, Heb. 2. 8.
But at the last day Christ will show himself to be King indeed, both in
rewarding his friends, and in an absolute conquest over his Eenemies, which are
the two great parts of his Regal Office: therefore the day of judgment is
called (...), the day of the Lord, 2 Pet. 3. 10. as being the day wherein
Christ shall manifest himself to be a Lord indeed. First, in rewarding his
friends. When David was Crowned at Hebron, then all that followed him in the
wilderness, were rewarded according to the merit of their place and service;
before they had hard service, and little wages, but then were made Captains of
thousands, and Captains of hundreds, and Captains of fifties. So they that are
true to the interest of Christ, may meet with many a frown and hard
entertainment in the world, but you will not repent of it in the day of Christ's
Royalty, Matthew. 25. 34. Then shall the King say, etc. He is called the Son of
man before; but then you will find a King rewarding all his subjects. Peter was
troubled about his petty losses, Master (says he) we have forsaken all and
followed thee; what had Peter to forsake? A Net? a Cottage? a Fishing Boat? A
great All! We are apt to think much of what we part with upon Christ's score; if
we suffer but a disgraceful word, a small inconvenience, a frown, we presently
say, what shall we have therefore? But we need not seek another Play Master then
Christ, he will not be behind hand with us when the day of payment comes. See
Matthew. 19. 27, 28. (...), In the regeneration ye shall sit with me on thrones of
glory, etc. that is, at the day of judgment, which is the great regeneration
when Heavens are new, Earth new, Bodies new, Souls new, all is new, then we
shall be no losers by Christ.

2. In an absolute conquest over his enemies, the stoutest faces shall then
gather blackness, and the stiffest knees bow to him: There is an expression,
Isa. 45. 23. I have s^orn by my self* and the words shall not return, that to
me every knee shall bow, and ev^ry mo^th shall swear. Now this expression does
concern Christ's sovereignty and full victory over his enemies; for this
Scripture is twice alluded unto in the New Testament, and in both places
applied to Christ. The first place that I shall take notice of is Phil. 2. 10.
where the Apostle says, That to Christ ev^ry knee shall b^w, and every tongue
shall call him Lord, which is the same with that which is spoken in the
Prophet, and is there made to be the first of Christ's Ascension when he was
solemnly inaugurated into the Kingly Office; but the Prophecy receives not its
full and final accomplishment till the day of judgment; to which purpose the
same Scripture is cited by the Apostle, Romans 14. 10. We shall all stand before
the judgment seat of Christ, for it is written, As I live (says the Lord) to
me every knee shall bow, and mouth shall confess. So that the bowing of knees,
or stooping of enemies is not fully accomplished till then. Christ does now
often overruled the councils and projects of his enemies, and smite them with a
soar destruction, but there is not such crouching and trembling, so sensibly
now to be discerned as there will be at that day.

Secondly, the day of judgment is a great day, because Reas. 2.
great things are then done, which will appear if you consider the preparations
for that day. 2. The day it self. 3. The confequence of it.

1. The preparations for Christ's approach, the Scripture mentions two, 1. The
Archangels trumpet. 2. The sign of the Son of Man.

1. There is that great noise and terror of the voice of the Lord, which is to
be managed by some special Angels, by which all the world shall be, as it were,
summoned to appear before Christ's Tribunal, See 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16: and Matthew. 24.
31. Some expound this Trumpet Analogically, some Literally: they that expound
it Analogically, think it signifies the power and virtue of Christ forcing all
the world to appear before his judgment seat, which is therefore called a
trumpet, because the solemn Assemblies among the Jews were summoned by sound of
Trumpet; but why may we not take it Literally, and in propriety of speech, for
the audible sound of a Trumpet? sure I am at the giving of the Law, the voice
of the Trumpet was exceeding loud; and the like may be, when he comes to take
an account of our keeping the Law, a sound of a Trumpet, as a terrible sommons
to all the world, and a near sign of Christ's approach, as John Baptist was the
forerunner of his first coming, who was the voice of one crying in the
wilderness; So is the Arch. Angel at his second coming, a terrible blast there
shall be, such as shall be heard all the world over, startling the dead out of
their graves; men do not here the voice of God now, for now he speaks by his
Angels or Messengers, in a still voice: but then all the dead shall hear and
live.

2. The sign of the Son of Man, spoken of, Matthew. 24. 30. what it is we cannot
certainly tell, till experience manifest it; some think a strange Star as at
his first coming, the wise men were conducted to him by a Star; others the
sign of the Cross, as being Christ's badge, by which he is known in the world;
for the great subject of the Gospel is Christ crucified, called therefore the
Word of the Cross, and this they think shall appear in the Heavens, as it did
to Constantine when he went to fight against Maxentius with this word, (...),
by this sh^lt thou overcome; though by the way Eusebius describes that vision
as in the figure of ch the first critical letters of Christ's name: This way go
many of the Ancients, making the Cross to be Christ Ensign and Royal Banner
which he will display in the Heavens, as Kings when they make their triumphant
approach, have their Banners carried before them. But I dare not thus
dogmatize: others more probably interpret it of some forerunning beams of
Majesty and Glory (like those streaks of light before the Sun be risen) which
shall darken the great luminaries of the world, and strike a terror into the
hearts of men, as Paul was stricken with such a terror at the sight of Christ
Acts 26. 13. He saw light from Heaven, above the brightness of the Sun, shining
round about him: noteable it is, that these fore-running beams of Christ's
Majesty and Glory are sometimes expressed by light, and sometimes by fire; by
light to express the comfortablenesse of it to the Godly, as the light of the
Sun does not scortch but revive and refresh: by fire, 2 Thessalonians 1. 8. (...), to
show the dreadfulnesse of it to the wicked, to them it is as flames and
devouring burnings.

2. Let us consider the day it self, and the great things done therein, it is a
day of Congregation of all mankind, there Adam may see all his posterity at
once; but especially is it a day of Congregation, in respect of the Saints who
are now scattered in diverse Countries, Towns, Houses, where God has any work
and service for them; but then shall meet together in one Assembly and
Rendezvous called, Psalm. 1. 6. called the great Congregation of the just, as
the wicked shall be herded together like straws and sticks bound in a bundle,
to set one another on fire, Drunkards together, and Adulterers together, They
shall be bound in bundles, etc. Matthew. 13. 41. and so increase one another
torment; So shall the Godly meet in a Congregation, and never separate more:
here the Godly are dispersed as the Stars are scattered throughout the
firmament; here they live intermingled with wicked men, Jacobs Cattle and
Labans Cattle together; but then the Sheep shall be separated from the Goats,
and be all drawn into a body by themselves. Again it is a day of manifestation,
the Lords Decrees and Counsels are manifested; creation and providence are but
subservient means in order to the triumphs of this day, that the glory of his
grace may be advanced in the salvation of the Elect, and the glory of his
justice in the punishment of the wicked; who upon this account are said to be
made for the day of evil. Pro. 16. 4. where the Holy Ghost pitcheth upon that
part of the decree which is hardest to be digested. The making of the wicked
for the glory of the Lords justice in that day. The wisdom of God in the
courses of his providence is then manifested, for the story of the world is
brought before the Saints; we see providence now by pieces, but then the whole
contexture of it; the secrets of men are then manifested; and upon what
principles and ends they have acted, 1 Cor. 4. 6. The truth of the promises and
threatenings is then manifested, in the day of Gods patience there is a
darkness and vail upon the Scriptures, we cannot see how they are made good;
but in the day of Gods recompense we shall: what promises, threatenings,
prophesies mean: but chiefly is it a day of manifestation in regard of the Sons
of God, Romans 8. 19. All is now hidden, Christ is hidden, and the Saints are
hidden, their life is hidden, Gal. 3. 3. their glory is hidden, 1 John. 3. 2.
but then Christ shall appear, and we shall appear with him in glory, as Moses
told the Rebels, Numb. 16. to morrow the Lord will show who are his; the first
born and only begotten son of God then is manifested, Christ will appear in
all his royalty and glory, as the great God and Savior, and Judge of the
world, as the great God; therefore it is said, he will appear in the glory of
the Father, Matthew. 24. 13. Matthew. 16. 27. the mystery of his person will now be
discovered to the uttermost, and therefore he will appear in such a glory as
never creature was capable of, nor can he guess at it, we may by the glory
discovered at the giving of the Law, when Moses shook for fear, Heb. 12. 19. by
the light that shone at his Incarnation, Luk 2. at his Transfiguration, Matthew.
17. by those beams of Majesty which broke out from him when the Soldiers came
to take him, John 18. 6. by his appearance to Paul; it struck him blind for
three days, Acts 9. by Isaiahs terror, when he saw God in a vision, Isa. 6.
And as he will manifest himself to be the great God, so the true Savior of
the world: the manner of his appearance shall make a full recompense for his
abasement: at his first coming John was his fore* runner (as we have said) now
an Arch Angel, then he came with a few fishermen, now with a multitude of
Angels; then riding on the Colt of an Ass, now up ^n the Clouds; then as the
Son of Man, now as the Son of God; then in the form of a Servant, now in the
glory of the Father; then Crowned with Thorns, now Glory and Ho^ou^; then to
teach righteousness, now to reward righteousness; then in the similitude of
sinful flesh, Romans 8. 3. now the second time without sin, Heb. 9. 27. At his
first coming* he was not a sinner, b^t he came in the garb of a sinner*
^fflicted, miserable, we judged him as one forsaken of God, but now he comes
as one discharged of that debt and burden, and as one highly honored by God
the Father. Once more he comes in all things befitting the worlds Judge,
accompanied with Angels as his attendance, sitting upon a visible Throne that
he may be seen of all, heard of all; in earthly Judicatories, when great
Malefactors are to be tried the whole majesty and glory of a Nation is brought
forth; the Judge in gorgeous apparel, accompanied with the flower of the
Country, Nobles and Gentry, and a great conflux of people: So hear, Christ
comes forth as the Judge, accompanied with Angels and Saints, powerfully
executing the work of that day; And the only begotten Son of God is
manifested: but this is a day of manifestation, not only of the Son, but of
the Sons of God; namely, the Saints, who are then set forth in their best
robes. In Winter the tree appears not what it is, the sap and life is hidden
in the roo^, but when Summer comes all is discovered: so now it does not
appear who are Gods, nor what they shall be, but at this day all is manifest;
When Christ shall appear, we shall appear with him in glory; they shall attain
to that fullness of glory, as their hearts could never conceive: it is said 2
Th^ss. 1. 10. Christ will be admired in them, the Angels shall stand wondering
what Christ is about to do with Creatures that but newly crept out of dust and
rottenness; every one of them shall shine as the Sun; and what a great and
glorious day must that be, when there is a constellation of so many Suns? They
shall share with Christ in the glory of his Kingdom, as being associated with
him in judging the world: The upright shall have Dominion over them in the
morning, Psalm. 49. 14. those that are now scorned, persecuted, opposed every
where, in the morning of the Resurrection, when they awake to meet Christ, then
shall they have dominion over the carnal world; therefore sentence* begins
with the godly, as execution does with the wicked; the Elect are first
acquitted before the ungodly are condemned, that they may join afterward with
Christ in judging the world, 2 Cor. 6. 2.

Again, it is great in regard of the manner of process, but of that see verse 15.

3. The consequences of this day they are three. 1. The sending of the persons
judged into their everlasting state. 2. The resigning up of the Kingdom to the
Father. 3. The burning of the world.

1. The sending of the persons judged into their everlasting estate, the Elect
into glory, and the wicked into torments, Matthew. 25. 34. Come ye blessed of my
Father, etc. you have been too long absent from me, come receive the fruit of
your faith and hope; but verse 41. Go ye cursed etc. they are banished out of
Christ's presence with such a terrible ban and proscription, as shall never be
reversed As Humans face was covered and so led away to execution: so are they
chased out of Christ's presence with horror, yelling, and houling, with the
voice of Dragons, and begging for mercy, but find none. Now from this sentence
there is no appeal, it is pronounced by Christ as God-Man. On earth many times
Gods sentence is repealed, if the nation will rep^nt, etc. Jer. 18. 8. and so
though God does never change his d^cree; he does often change his sentence; but
the day of patience is now past. and therefore this sentence can never be
recalled. Again, the execution is speedy. Here many times the sentence is
passed, but sentence is not speedily executed upon an evil doer. Eccles. 8. 11.
Once more, this execution beginning with the wicked in the sight of the just,
(...), gather ye first the Tares, etc. Matthew. 13. 30. which works the more
upon the envy and grief of the wicked that they are thrust out whiles the godly
remain with Christ, seeing execution done; and the godly have the deeper seuse
of their condition (...), etc. Contraries put together do more heighten one
another, in the execution of the wicked they may see from what they are
delivered by grace. Again the sentence is executed upon the whole man, and that
for ever, body and soul are partakers as in the work, so in the punishment and
reward; and it is eternal for the reward is built on an infinite merit, and the
punishment is eternal, because an infinite Majesty is offended; and in the next
world ^on are in their final estate without possibility of change; therefore
God is never weary blessing the good and ^^^sing the wicked.

2. The next consequent is, the resigning and giving up the kingdom to the
Father spoken of* 1 Cor. 15. from 24, to 28. Kingdom may be put for Ro^al
Authority or Subjects governed* as the people we call sometimes the Kingdom of
England, or Kingdom of France, Christ is ever head of the Earth and in Heaven
we subsift not only by virtue of his everlasting merit, but everlasting
influence, for he is the life, John 14. 6. And therefore I take Kingdom here
in the latter sense for the subjects or the Church who are resigned or
presented to God, Ephesians. 5. 27. as the fruits of Christ's purchase, as a prey
snatched out of the teeth of Lions: the form of presentation you have, Heb. 2.
13. Behold I and all the little ones which thou have given me: Oh what a great
and glorious day will this be* when we shall see Christ and all his little ones
following him, and the great Shepherd of the Sheep going into his everlasting
folds, and all the Elect in his company, with their Crowns on their heads,
singing O grave! where is thy victory? O death! where is thy sting? when all
enemies shall be broken, and the Church lodged in those blessed mansions, what
applauses and acclamations will there be between them and Christ, between them
and the Angels, them and their fellow Saints? how should we strive to be some
of this number?

3. The next consequence is, the burning of the World, which is set forth at
large in 2 Pet 3. per totum. The passages there are literally to be taken; for
the fire there spoken of, is compared with the Waters of Noah, which was a
judgment really executed; and by this fire (it is probable) the world will not
be consumed but renewed and purged; for it is compared to a melting fire, 2 Ret*
3. 10. And the Apostle says elsewhere, the creature shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption, Romans 8. 21. And in the everlasting estate God will
have all things n^w, even the world it self: the use of this renewed world is
either for an habitation to the just, or that it may remain as a standing
monument of Gods wisdom and power. 1. This burning does not go before the day
of judgment, but follow after it; for it seems to be an instrument of
vengeance on the wicked, 2 Pet. 3. 7. I will not be so bold with the Schoolmen,
as to say that the faeculent and drossie parts of this fire are reserved for
the torment of the wicked in Hell for ever: but in the general we may safely
say that it is an instrument of Gods vengeance on them. Well now, that day which
has such an end and cloze, must needs be a great day: Sodoms fire was
dreadful, but nothing to this burning; that was of one particular place, but
this of the whole world; that was a preparative warning, but this the last
expression of his wrath against the ungodly world. Many give diverse witty
reasons for this burning, a taste may not be unwelcom, under the Law the vessel
that held the sin-offering was to be purged with fire, so the world, where sin
has been committed. The object of our Adulteries is burnt and defaced, that we
may know the anger of the Lords jealousy Ludolphus in vita Christi.
the old world was destroyed by Water, propter ardorem libidimis, because of
the heat of lust, and the present world burnt with fire, propter temporem
charitatis, because of the coldness of love in the latter days. But of such
kind of allusions more then enough.

You see then by all this, that the day of judgment is a great day, let us now
apply it.

If it be a great day, let us regard it more seriously; Application.
for all things should be regarded according to their weight. This is the
greatest day that ever we shall see, and therefore we shall be more affected
with this day then with any thing else; we have slight thoughts of things to
come; and therefore they do not work with us, can we expect such a day, and not
spend a thought upon it? Oh Christians look for it more, long for it more,
provide for it more.

1. Look for it, Phil. 3. 21. Titus 2. 13. Every time you look up to the
clouds, remember you have a Savior, that in time will come from thence, and
call the world to an account; faith should always stand ready to meet him, as
if he were upon his way, as Rebecca spied Isaac afar off; so does faith which
is the evidence of things not seen. Look within the curtain of the Heavens, and
spy out Christ as preparing for his coming. If he tarrieth longer then we
expect, he is not stack. 2 Pet. 3. 9. But we are hasty; he wants no affection
to us* his delights were with the sons of men before they were created, Prove.
8. 31. And certainly now he is so deeply interested in u^, as having bought us
with his blood* he desires to enjoy what he has purchased: it is not want of
love keeps ^im away, nor want of truth, God is punctual in his promises even
to a day, Exodus 12. 41. even the selse same day* etc. If all things were ready
he would come presently: therefore wait and look still, they were not deceived
that expected his first coming in the flesh; 'twas said, a Virgin shall
conceive, was it not done? that God would bring his Son out of Egypt; was it
not done? that he should ride to Jerusalem upon the foal of an Ass, and was it
not done? Surely the God that has been faithful all along hitherto, will not
fail at last.

2. Long for it. The faithful, love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 8. This is the
great day which they long to see, that they may meet with their beloved, and
see him in all his Glory and Royalty. They have heard much of Christ and tasted
much of Christ, and they love him much, but yet they have not seen him; they
know him by hearsay, and by spiritual experience, but never saw his person,
whom having not seen you love, etc. They have seen his picture crucified before
your eyes, Gal. 3. 1. beholding at in a glass the glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.
18. therefore they cannot be satisfied till this day comes about; Oh when
shall it once be, the spirit in the Bride says come* Rev. 22 17. Nature says
not come, but tarry still; if it might go by voices, whether Christ should
come, yea, or no, carnal man would never give their voice this way. The
language of corrupt Nature is, depart, Job 22. 14. Carnal Men are of the Devils
mind, art thou come to torment us before our time? Matthew. 8. they cannot endure
to hear of it, but come, Oh come, says Grace: this day we have cause to long,
for not only upon Christ's account but our own; it is the day of our perfection
as well as Christ's royalty: now every thing tends to its perfect state, so
does a Christian, then there is perfect holiness and perfect freedom: we never
find Christ a Savior to the uttermost till then, to the glorified spirits; he
is but a Savior in part, some fruit of sin is continued upon the body; but
then body and soul are united and perfectly glorified to enjoy God in Heaven:
Christ then comes to make an end of what he had begun; he first came to redeem
our souls, and then our bodies from corruption, the body is a captive in the
grave, when the soul is set at liberty; it is held under the power of death till
that day: the Butler was not afraid to go before Pharaoh, because Joseph told
him he should be set at liberty, lift up your heads, it is a day of redemption,
Luke 17. 28. Christ comes to loosen the bands and shackles of death, to think
and speak of that day with horror, does ill become him that looks for such
great privileges.

3. Provide for that day* It Is called the great and noteable day of the Lord,
Acts 2. 20. it should be the whole employment of our lives to prepare for it;
but how shall we provide for that day? I answer, by making peace with God in
and by Jesus Christ. When Jacob heard that Esau was coming with a great power
and force, he sends to make peace with him: we hear of a great day coming,
when the Lord shall descend from Heaven with a shout, and all his holy Angels
with him. 1. Let us compromise all differences between us and him, we are
advised so to do, Luke 14. 32. While he is yet a great way off, he sends an
Embassage, and desire^h conditions of peace. We need not send to the Lord, God
makes the offer to us; let us lay down the weapons of our defiance, and accept
of the terms proposed. 2. If you would provide for this day, clear up your
union with Jesus Christ, he is the Judge, and there is no condemnation to them
that are in Christ, Romans 8. 1. Will the head contemn his own members. If we
abide in him, we shall be able to look him in the face, we shall have boldness
in that day, 1 John 2. 28* then though it be a great day, it will not be a
terrible day to us. 3. Frequent Communion with him at the Throne of Grace. When
familiar friends meet together after long absence, what a sweet interview is
there? what mutual embraces and endearments pass between them? So acquaint
your selves with Christ aforehand, Job 22 common acquaintance with them in
external worship will not serve the turn, Luk* 13. 27. We have eaten and drunk
in thy presence, and heard thee in our streets; and yet Christ says, I know
you not; there must be an holy intimacy and sweet experience of him, you must
know him in the spirit. 4. By holy conversation both as to the matter and end
of it. For the great end of this day is, that grace may be glorious; other
things are honored in the world, as power, and strength, and cunning, and
civil endowments, but then eminency in grace comes to be crowned, 2. P^^. 3.
12. We that look for such things, what manner of persons ought we to be in all
holiness and g^dlinesse of conversation? There are two words there used,
holiness and godliness; the one relates to the matter of our actions, that
we should do things good, and just, and pure. The other to our end and aim; we
must do all this as in and to the Lord, making him the supreme end of all that
we do. 5. We may press you to heavenliness in your choice, where lies your
Treasure? If the enjoyment of the world be your chiefest good, that will be of
no use to you, in that day, in a disdain to our choice, all worldly things are
burnt before our eyes; but if your happiness lies in heaven, thither you are
going to take full possession of it; at the last day wicked men cannot murmer;
Gods judgments are but their own choice, if the Goats be placed on the left
hand, and the Sheep on the right, It Is but according to their proposterous
affections here in the world, Prove. 3. 16. Length of days are in her right
hand, and in her left hand riches and honor. Eternity is the right hand
blessing. Now if you despise a blessed eternity in comparison of those left
hand blessing, riches and honor, no wonder that your own measure is
recompen^ed into your bosoms. 6. Love the breathren. This is the great day
when all the Saints meet together; and how can we expect to meet with them with
comfort, if we should not love them, 1 John 4. 16, 17. There we shall have
boldness, etc. It will be a joyful meeting when those whom we have loved,
prayed for, fasted with, and (if necessity did require) relieved, shall then be
found in such esteem and honor. 7. Mercifulness to the poor, see Matthew. 25.
35. 36. with 42. and 43. verses. Christ has told us aforehand what questions
he will ask when he comes, have you fed? have you visited? have you clothed?
etc. It Is good that we should be prepared of an Answer. 8. Faithfulness it Gods
ordinances, and the matters of his house. Our Lord is gone, but he will come
again to take an account how matters have been managed during his absence; the
usual period which is fixed to Ordinances, is the Lords coming to judgment. 1
Cor. 11. 26. Ye do show forth the Lords death till he come. And 1 Timothy 6. 14.
Keept his Commandment without spot, until the appearing of the Lord Jesus
Christ. He has left his Ordinance in his Church as a pledge of his coming, and
to keep the great promise still afoot, therefore above all things they should
be kept pure and incorrupt.

Verse. 7. Even as Sodom and Gomorrah and the Cities about them in like manner,
giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set
forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.
IN this verse is the third example, fitly suited to the former, the Angels had
the blessings of Heaven, the Israelites of the Church, and Sodom of the World.
But the Angels upon their Apostasy lost Heaven; the murmuring Israelites were
shut out of Canaan; and the Sodomites were together with their fruitful soil
and pleasant land destroyed; you see Heaven mercies, and Churth mercies, and
World mercies are all forfeited by the Creatures ingratitude. This last
instance is propounded as the first part of a similitude, the reddition of
which is in the next verse.

In the words observe, 1. The places or people judged, [ Sodom and Gomorrah,
and the Cities round about them in like manner] those two Cities are only
mentioned here, as also Genesis 19. 14. because the principal, in Hosea 11. 8. two
others are only mentioned Admah and Zeboim, but Deuteronomy. 29. 23. all four are
mentioned, the whole land is brimstone, salt and burning like the overthrow of
Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim which the Lord overthrew in his anger and
in his wrath. Now the Cities are mentioned rather then the Persons to note the
utter destruction of the places together with the inhabitants; for that clause
[the Cities about them in like manner] in the original (...), the word for [
them] is in the masculine gender; whereas [ Cities] the next Antecedent is in
the feminine; therefore some refers it to the remote Antecedent* the Angels and
Israelites as they were punished, so Sodom and those Cities in like manner. So
Junius, but I suppose because [Cities] does not only imply the places but the
inhabitants; therefore the masculine gender was used by the Apostle.

2. Their sin is specified [ giving themselves over to fornication and going
after strange flesh.] Here are two great sins charged upon them. 1. The first
is [ giving themselves over to fornication*] (...), the word is unusual, and
therefore diversely rendered. One translation, [ defiles themselves with
fornication] the vulgar, ^x fornicatae, as noting the strangeness and
abhominablenesse of their lust, but that is employed in the next expression, our
translation fitly rendereth it by such a phrase as signifies their excess and
vehement addictedness to unclean practices. 2. The next fin is [ going after
strange flesh] It Is a modest and covert expression, implying their monstrous
and unlawful lusts, contrary to the course and institution of nature, a
fil^hinesse scarce to be named, from them called Sodomies; the Apostle Paul
expresses it thus, Rom 1. 27. Leaving the natural use of the Woman tkey b^^ned
in their lust ^ne t^wards another, men with men working that which is unsce^ly.
It Is called here [ strange flesh] (...)* other flesh, as being other then what
nature has appointed, or because it is impossible that man and man in that
execrable Act should make one flesh, as man and woman do. 3. Their judgment is
set down [ suffering the vengeance of eternal fire] Sodom we know and the
Cities round about it were consumed by fire and brimstone rained down from
Heaven; which though a dreadful, was but a temoral fire: in what sense does the
Apostle call it here eternal life? some to mollify the seeming austerity of
the phrase, read thus, [ were made an example of eternal fire suffering
vengeance] that is, in that judgment which was executed upon them. God would
give the world a Type and Figure of Hell. Others by eternal fire? understand
the duration of the effects of the first temporal punishment; the soil
thereabout wearing the marks of Gods curse to this day. Others not much
differing from the former: by eternal fire understand an utter destruction* and
labor to evince it from the use of the phrase in a like sense, and the parallel
place in Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 6. he turned the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into
ashes, and condemned them with an overthrow, that is, utterly destroyed them;
but why we need to be so tender I know not, the Sodomites being generally
represented as men under everlasting judgment, Matthew. 11. 24. and the temporal
judgment making way for eternal* though as to the state of particular persons
we judge not. See Rivet in Genesis exercit. 97. page 474.

4. Here is the end and all of the judgment [ are set forth for an example]
that is, to be a noteable document and instruction to the world, to keep them
under the law of God; and therefore every in the prophetic threatenings of the
word is this instance alluded unto.

The words are explained, but how shall we accommodate them to the Apostles
purpose? I answer, very well; there is a fit correspondency between the case in
hand and this example, the Sodomites went after strange flesh, and these
Apostles after strange opinions: These errors and opinions of theirs tended to
sensuality, and so still there is a greater suitableness; The School of Simon,
the Nic^laitans, the Gnostics did defile themselves with monstrous and
abominable lust as the Sodomites did: and therefore he threatens them with a
destruction like to that of Sodom, yea with eternal fire figured thereby
especially they having been formerly enlightened with some knowledge of the
truth, which the Sodomites were not. Let me now come to the Observations.

Cities and Countries suffer for the evil of the Inhabitants, Observe. 1.
as Sodom and Gomorrah and the Cities round about them were consumed with fire
and brimstone, and turned into a dead like. Original sin brought on an Original
curse; Adams fall, a curse upon the whole earth, Genesis 3. 17. Cursed is the
ground for thy sake, thorne^ and thistl^s shall it bring forth to thee: and
actual sins do bring on an actual curse, Psalm. 107. 34. He turns a pleasant
land into saltness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. A Traitor
forfeits not only his life but his goods, so do we not only forfeit our
persons, but all our comforts into God hands, and it is but fit that the earth
should be to us after all our labors, what we are to God after all his
husbandry bestowed upon us; we are barren of good fruits as to God, and so
justly may the land be to us. I Remember the Apostle says the Creature was
made subject to vanity, (...), not willingly, Romans 8. 19. the creature has
only a natural tendency and inclination, and that carries it to its own good;
we had free will and choice, but abused it, and so brought our selves and the
creature under the bondage and thraldom of corruption, so that the earth which
was intended to be a monument of Gods glory is now a great part a monument of
Gods displeasure and our rebellion; It Is observable on the contrary side, that
the glorious times of the Gospel are expressed by the restoration of the
creatures, Isa. 30. 23. 24, 25, 26. and Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8. For as the condition
of the Servant does depend on the Master, so does the state of the creature
upon our conformity or disobedience to God. Well then avoid sin, if not in pity
to your poor souls, in pity to the poor creatures, to your poor country; as
David said, What have these poor Sheep done? So what have the Creatures done
that you kindle a burning under their glory? See Jer. 2. 18 19. The land is
laid waste, an City burnt without an inhabitant; What is the cause of all
this? even our sins against the Lord, that a man shall be the ruin of his
Country and native soil; this should go nere to us; shall we turn this pleasant
land into saltness and lay these dwellings waste! these streets into ashes!
carnal men are usually moved by carnal arguments, and tremble more to hear of
the loss of their estates then of their souls: we are startled to hear of
scarsity, and famine, and fires, and pestilences: all these are the fruits of
sin.

Those Cities were utterly destroyed, and accordingly is Observe. 2.
the destruction of Sodom put for an utter overthrow. See Isa. 13. 19. Zeph* 2
9 Jer. 48. 18. Jer 50. 40. 2 Pet. 2. 6. Thence, that in judgments wicked men
may be brought to an utter destruction. The Synagogue of Satan may be utterly
destroyed but not the City of God, in the saddest miseries there is hope of
Gods Children that their dead stock will bud and sent again, Zach. 9. 12.
Prisoners of hope, the cutting off of root and branch, is the judgment of the
wicked, Mal. 4. 1. Their memorial may be blotted out but Syons cannot, it is the
design of the enemies to extinguish the memory of the Church, and many times to
appearance there is none left, yet out of their ruins and ashes, there
springs up a new brood, and holy seed to God, they are sorely afflicted,
Psalm. 129. 1, 2. yet Christ stands his ground, they are not wholly prevailed
over, the Church may visibly fail but not totally; well then, in the midst
of sad miseries; bless God for a remnant, it may be bad* but it is not as
Sodom, Isa. 1. 9. In times of general defection there will be two or three
berries in the top of the uppermost bough, Isa. 17. Some that may continue the
name of God, and survive the Churches troubles, that may yet praise him. Again,
do not inhaunt with the wicked, and suffer your souls to enter into their
secret evil societies, may be absolutely destroyed root and branch: Sodom was
condemned with an overthrow; it is seasonable advice, come out of her my people,
lest you partake of her plagues, Rev. 18. 4. Babylon that was a nest for
unclean sinners, will be made cage for unclean birds.

From that [ and the Cities about them in like manner.] Observe, likeness in
sin will involve us in the same punishment; Observe. 3.
they perished and the other Cities in like manner: none had safety but Lot,
who consented not, but grieved for these impurities, 2 Pet. 2. 8. Gods wrath
makes no distinction Quos una impietas prophanavit, una sententia delicit
(says Ambrose) they were found in the same sin, and therefore surprised by the
same judgment, the destruction of the transgressors and sinners shall be
together, Isa. 1. 28. That is the one as well as the other, by what names or
titles soever distinguished. Why? I answer, fellowship in evil can neither
excuse sin, nor keep off wrath: it cannot excuse sin, nothing more usual then
for men to say; they do as others do; if you do as others do, you shall suffer
as others do: example does not lessen sin but increase i^, partly because their
own Act is an approbation of the Act of others: immitation is a postconstat,
and so besides your own guilt, you are guilty of their sins that sinned before
you, partly because it is hard to sin against example, but we sin against
conscience; we allowing that in our selves which we formerly condemned in
another: partly because it is a sin against warning to stumble at the stone, at
which we see others stumble is an errot, and without excuse: Non ego sum
ambitiosus sed nemo aliter Romae vivere potest, etc.
Say not then it is the fashion and guise, how can we do otherwise? be not
conformed to the fashions of this world: you should be like Lot, chaste in
Sodom, or like those Christians that were godly in Nero's Court. Again, it does
not keep off wrath; multitudes and single persons are all one to avenging
Justice, the devouring burning of Gods wrath can break through Briars and
Thorns. It Is said Prove. 11. 21. Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not
be unpunished. Consederations and societies in evil are as nothing to the power
of God: though sometimes the Sons of Zerviah, powerful oppressors, with their
combined interests may be too hard for men. Well then, learn to live by rule,
and not by example, and propose the sins of others to your grief, not
imitation: have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, b^t
reprove them rather, Ephesians. 5. their practice will never afford you excuse, nor
exemption. Your duty is to be good in a wicked age, sresh like fish in the salt
water, follow not a multitude to do evil, wickedness is never the less odious
because it is more common, it is not safe always to keep the road, the bad way
is known by the breadth of it, and the much company in it, Matthew. 7. 13. to
walk with God is praise worthy, though none do it besides thy self, and to walk
with men in the way of sin is dangerous, though millions do it besides thee.

Again, from that. [ And the Cities about them in like Obser 4. ^*
manner] the lesser Cities imitated the greater, Admah and Zeboim followed the
example of Sodom and Gomorrah; An error in the first concoction is seldom
mended in the second, if sin pass the heads and chiefes of the people, it is
taken up by others under their command; when the first sheet is done off,
others are printed by the same stamps. Majestrates are public fountains of
good or evil, to the people over whom they are set: if they be cold and
careless in the worship of God, given to contempt of the Ministry, enemies to
Reformation 'twill be generally taken up as a fashion by others. When the head
is sick, the whole heart is faint, Isa. 1. 5. Diodorus Sieulus tells us of a
people in Ethiopia, that if their Kings halted, they would maim themselves that
they might halt likewise, if they wanted an eye, in a foolish imitation they
would make themselves blind, that they might comply even with the defects and
Diseases of their Princes: the vices of them in place and power are authorized
by their example and pass for virtues; if they be slight in the use of
Ordinances, 'twill be taken up as a piece of Religion by inferiors to be so too.

From the first crime here specified [ giving themselves Observe. 5.
over to Fornication] That Adulterous uncleanness does much displease God. When
they were given over to fornication, they were given over to judgment. 1. This
is a sin that does not only defile the Soul but the Body, 1 Cor. 6. 18. Every
sin that a man does is without the body, but he that commits Adultery
sins against his own body: most other sins imply an injury done to others,
to God or our Neighbor: this more directly an injury to our selves, to our own
bodies: it is a wrong to the body considered either 1 These, 4. 4.
as our vessel, or as the 1 Cor. 6. 9.
Temple of the holy Ghost: if you consider it as our vessel or instrument for
natural uses, you wrong it by uncleanness: namely, as it destroys the health
of the body, quenches the vigor of it, and blasteth the beauty, and so it is
selfemurder: if you consider it as Temple of the Holy Ghost, it is a dishonor
to the body to make it a channel for lust to pass through, shall we make a sty
of a Temple? abuse that to so vile a purpose which the Holy Ghost has chosen
to dwell in, to plant it into Christ, as a part of his mystical body, to use it
as an instrument in Gods service, and finally to raise it out of the grave, and
conform it to Christ's glorious body? The dignity of the body well considered,
is a great preservative against lust. 2. It brawneth the soul, the softness of
all sensual pleasures hardneth the heart, but this sin as being the consummate
act of sensuality much more, Hosea 4. 11. Whoredom and Wine take away the
heart; these two are mentioned, because usually they go together, and both take
away the heart, besot the conscience, take away the tenderness of the
affections: so that men are not ashamed of sin, insensible of danger, and unfit
for duty; and so grow saplesse, careless, senseless. 3. Next to the Body and
Soul, there is the name, now it blotteth the name, Prove. 6. 33. a wound and a
dishonor shall ^e get, and a reproach that shall not be wiped off. Sensual
wickedness is most disgraceful, as having turpitude in it, and being sooner
discerned then spiritual. 4. It blasteth the estate, Heb. 13. 4 Whoremongers
and Adulterers God will judge; he will judge others, but surely these, and that
remarkably in this life 5 This does exceedingly pervert the order of humane
societies, Solomon makes it worse then theft. Prove. 6. 29, 30, 31. 32. A
Thief steals out of necessity, but here is no ^^gent necessity; the loss
here is not repairable, as that which is made by theft: it brings in great
confusion in families, etc. therefore Adultery under the Law was punished by
death, which theft was not. 6. It is a sin usually accompanied with
impenitency; namely, as it wears out remorse, and every spark of good
consciences; read those cutting places, Prove 22. 14. The mo^th of a strange
woman is a deep pit, and he that is abhorred of the Lord shall fall therein: so
Prove. 2. 19. none that go unto her return again, do they take hold of the ways
of life? So see Eccles. 7. 26, 27, 28. verses. It is sin into which God uses
to give over Reprobates; Solomon says he knew but one returning. Well then, be
not drunk with the Wine of Sodom, and do not scruze out the clusters of
Gomorrah: Whoredom is a deep ditch or gulf, wherein those that are abhorred of
the Lord are suffered to fall; beware of all tendings that way; do not soak and
steep the soul in pleasures; take heed of effemina^y (...), the soft or
effeminate shall not enter into the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6 9. Beware of
lustful glances, Matthew. 5. 28 Of rolling the fancy upon undone objects heart
defilement makes way for corporal; lust begins in wanton eyes many times,
and it is fed by a delicacy and unworthy softness Guard the senses, cut off the
provisions of the flesh, avoid occasions, be employed. Again, if you have
stumbled into this deep ditch, repent the more speedily, the more seriously,
the case is sad* but not altogether desperate; we read of a possibility for
Publicans and Harlots entering into the Kingdom of God. Bewail your estate as
David does, Psalm. 51. His Adultery lest a stain upon him, Except in the matter
of Vriah, etc. Job says, it is a fire that consumes to destruction and will
ro^t out all your increase, Job 31. 12* therefore quench it the sooner, etc.

Again, from the other sin, [ and going after strange Obser. 6.
flesh] Observe sin is never at a stay; first, uncleanness, and then given
over to uncleanness and then strange flesh; when a stone runs down hill it
stays not till it comes to the bottom; a filthy sinner is growing more
filthy still, until he has out grown the heart of a man, as the Sodomites
did, m^n with men working that which is unseemly; a sin which none but a Devil
in the likeness of a man would commit, a sin that has filthiness enough in
it, to defile the tongue that speaks of it. Well then, here is a glass
wherein to see the wickedness of our natures, who would think reason should
invent so horrid an Act? Rom 1. 27. they had no more original corruption, then
thou and I have; if God remove the bridle, whither shall shall we run? Let
wicked men consider hence, how foolishly they promise themselves immunity from
drunkeness adultery, or any gross wickedness. Caution any of them against
those things, no I warrant you (say they) do you think I am such a wretch? is
thy servant a dog? 2 King. 8. 13.

From that, [ the vengeance of eternal fire] The wicked Observe. 7.
Sodomites were not only burnt up by that temporal judgment, but cast into
Hell, which is here called Eternal fire: Hell is set forth by two notions, a
Worm that nev^r dies, and a fire that never goes out, Mark 9. 44. In both
which expressions there is an allusion to the Worms that breed in dead bodies,
and the fire wherewith they were wont to burn their dead in former times. And
the one implies the Worm of Conscience, the other the fire of Gods wrath. 1.
The Worm is bred in the body its self, and therefore fitly represents the
gnawings of Conscience; the Worm of Conscience consists in three things,
there is memoria prae^eritorum, sensus praestutium, and metus futurorum. First,
Conscience works on what is past the remembrance of their former enjoyments
and past pleasures Luke 16. 25. Son remember that thou in thy life time, etc.
so of time wasted, opportunities of grace slighted, the folly of their own
choice, etc. all which are sad reflections to them. Secondly, There is a sense
of the present pain; here when they were corrected they were senseless, like
stocks and stones; but then there being nothing to mitigate their grief or
beguile the sense of it, no carnal pleasures wherein to steep conscience: there
must needs be sense and feeling joined with a bitter discontent at their
condition. Thirdly, For the future their condition is hopeless; despair is one
ingredient into their torment, Heb 10 27. there remains nothing but a fearful
looking for the fiery indignation of the Lord. Thus for the Worm.

2. The next notion is that of the Text fire, or the wrath of God transacted
upon them. In the sufferings of the damned God has an immediate hand, H^b. 10.
33. no creature is strong enough to convey all his wrath; in being this wrath
the capacity of the creature is enlarged to the uttermost; and in their
punishment God sets himself a work to show the glory of his strength, Romans 9.
22. he withholds the Creature with one hand, and punishes it with the
other: If his anger be but kindled a little, and a spark of it fly into the
conscience, the poor Creature is at his wits end: but how dreadful will their
portion be, against whom Psalm 78. ^^.
he stirs up all his wrath? the humane nature of the Lord Christ in a just
abhorrency recoyled when he was to taste of this cup: we that cannot endure the
gripes of the Chollick, the torment of the Stone, the pain of the Rack, how
shall we dwell with devouring burnings? and all this is for ever. As our
Obligations to God are infinite, and as we turn back upon eternal happiness
offered in the Gospel, used as the Majesty offended by sin is infinite, so that
we cannot restore the honor to God which we have taken away. Therefore by just
reason is our punishment eternal. In the other World men are in their final
estate; the fuel continues for ever, the Creature is not abolished, and the
fire continues for ever, the breath of the living Lord still keeps the flame
burning We think a Prayer long, a Sermon long; what will Hell be? In the night
if we cannot sleep, we count the hours, and every minute seems tedious. Oh
what will they do that are tormented night and day for ever and ever? Rev. 20.
10* Now this is the portion of all that forget God; Oh who would run this
hazard for a little temporal satisfaction? the scourges of conscience that we
meet with here, are too great price for the short pleasures of a brutish lust,
much more the Worm that never dies, the Fire that shall never be quenched.

There is one note more, and that is from that clause [ are set forth for an
example.] Observe thence, That Sodoms Observe. 8.
destruction is the worlds great example. Both Peter and Jude show that this
was the end of Gods judgments upon Sodom, that they might be an example to all
that live ungodly.

You will say, what have we to do with Sodom? their sins being so unnatural,
their judgments so unusual 1. As to their sins, I enquire, are there none of
Sodoms sins amongst us? If not going after strange flesh, yet fornication; if
not fornication, yet pride, and idleness, and fullness of bread? I say again,
though our sins be not so great in themselves, yet by necessary circumstance
and aggravation, they may be greater; as impenitency, unbelief, abuse and
neglect of the Gospel, despising the offers of grace; the grossest sins against
the Law are not so great as sins against the Gospel, Matthew. 11. 24. It shall be
more tolerable for Sodom, etc. We sin against more light, more love, etc. 2. As
to the judgments, though God does now adays smite a Country with judgments
immediately from Heaven, or make it utterly unuseful, as he did Sodom; yet his
dispeasure is no less against sin; and if not the same, a like judgment, one
very grievous may come upon us.

This being premised, let us come to open this example, in which these three
things are considerable. 1. The Ingentia. Beneficia. Flagitia Supplicia.
state of Sodom. 2. The sins of Sodom. 3. The judgment. The first will show
you Gods mercy, the second their guilt, the third Gods justice. Usually these
three follow one another, great mercies make way for great sins, and great sins
for great judgments.

1. I begin with the state of Sodom. There 1. the quality of the place; there
were sundry goodly Cities, of which Sodom was the principal, fairly situated in
the plain of Jordan, full of people, and well supplied with Corn, Wine and Oil,
and all earthly contentments; it is said, Genesis 19. 10. Sodom was pleasant, and
as the Garden of the Lord. And yet afterward this was the place which was the
Scene of so much wrath and utter desolation. What may the wourld learn from
hence? that we must give an account for common mercies; God reckoned with the
servant that had but one Talent, Matthew. 25. The world is a place of trial, all
men have a trust committed to them; The Talents of the Heathens were fruitful
seasons, food and gladness. Act 14. 17. God that never left himself (...),
without a witness, has left us (...), without excuse: a plentiful soil does
not argue a good people, but a good God. Sodom was pleasantly and richly
situated. If we had nothing else to answer for, but an Island of blessings, how
poorly have we discharged this trust? 2. Take notice of their late deliverance,
four Kings made war upon them, by whom they were carried captive, and rescued
by Abraham, Genesis 14. 15, 16 Deliverances from war and captivity leave a great
engagement; When God has once spared us, if we repent not, the next turn is
utter destruction. Deliverances if not improved, are but reprivals; we are not
so much preserved, as reserved to a greater misery; hoisted up, that our fall
may be the more dreadful; snatched out of one misery, that we may be cast into
a worse: Oh what have we to answer for our late deliverances! Sodom was but
once saved in war, we many times; it is to be feared that passage records our
doom, Psalm. 166. 43. Many times did he deliver them, but they provoked him by
their counsel, and were brought low for their iniquity: deliverances not
improved are pledges of certain ruin. 3. Gods patience in bearing with them:
Sodom for a long time slept quietly in their sins unmolested, undisturbed;
Misericordia mea suadet ut parcam peccatorum clamor cogit ut puniam. Salvianus.
the times of Sodom cry to me: the Lord proffered Abraham, if there were but ten
righteous persons found there, he would spare the Cities: in four Cities not
ten righteous persons! God is silent as long as their sins would let him be
quiet; but then when he could no longer bear, he goes down to take vengeance:
how long does the Lord protract the ruin of these wicked Cities? justice is
his strange work, but it is his work; mercy does much with God, but not all,
justice must be heard, especially when it pleads on the behalf of abused
mercy; God that would spare the sinner, yet hates the sin. When a people do
nothing but weary justice, and abuse mercy Dominus Christus a dcmino patre
Council. Syrm.
the Lord will rain from the Lord, etc. Gen 19. 24. Christ will enterpose for
such a peoples destruction; Heaven will rain down Hell upon a people so
obstinately wicked. The Lord is gracious, but not senseless: as he will not
always contend, so not always forbear. 4. Lots admonition, it seems he
frequently reproved them, and therefore do they scorn him, Genesis 19. 9 This one
fellow came in to sojourn amongst us, and he will needs be a Judge; his soul
was not only vexed with those lewd courses, but as occasion was offered, he
sought to dissuade them. Thence learn, That God seldom punishes without
warning: the old World had Noah's ministry, and Sodom Lots admonitions: the Lord
may say to every punished people, as Reuben to his breren, Did not I warn you,
and you would not hear? Genesis 42. 22. Seldom does he hew a people with the
sword, but first he heweth them by Prophets: means of conviction aggravate both
the sin and the judgment: Ah we have a clearer light, and therefore must
expect an heavier doom, Matthew. 10 15. sins are aggravated not only by the
foulness of the Act, but the degrees of light against which they are committed
Sodom sinned sorely, as to the act, but they could not sin against so much
light as we do; therefore it shall be easier for them at the day of judgment.
5. They had the benefit of Magistracy, those were Cities that were brought into
government, we read of the King of Sodom, Genesis 14 2. but it seems he did not
enterpose his Authority, but rather connive at, and tolerate the wickedness of
this people; yea rather approve and partake with them in their abominations.
Consider when the vices of inferiors are dissembled and winked at by
Governors, the Lord himself takes the matter in hand: and then look for
nothing but speedy ruin, the guilt of a Nation is much increased when sin is
tolerated, yea favored and countenanced, especially when righteousness is
rather restrained and curbed then sin, as the affronts done to Lot witnessed;
the end why Magistracy was ordained is then perverted, 1 Timothy 2. 2. Romans 13. 5.
namely, for the punishment of evil doers and that goodness be encouraged; they
were punished for allowing the filthiness of strange flesh. What will become
of us if Magistrates should be careless and wink at, yea countenance strange
opinions, as horrid and as much against the light of Christianity, as that was
against the light of Nature.

Secondly, let us look upon the sins of Sodom. See Ezekiel. 16. 49. Lo this was
the iniquity of thy Sister Sodom, pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of
idleness, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy; to which
add the sins of the Text, and then this black roll is complete. I shall
consider, 1. The Sins* 2. The Aggravations.

1. The Sins. 1. Pride; It Is hard to enjoy plenty, and not to grow haughty;
prosperous Winds soon fill the Sails, but blowing too strongly, overturn the
Vessel; how few are able to carry a full Cup without spilling? to manage plenty
without pride? men grow rich and then high minded, and that is the next way to
ruin. 2. Idleness, an easy careless life makes way for danger, God sent
all into the world for action, standing pooles putrify, and things not used,
contract rust; so does id^e persons settle into vile and degenerate lusts. 3.
Fullness of bread; that is corporal delights, Luke 17. 28. They eat, they
drunk, they bought, they sold, they builded; their whole lives were but a
diversion from one pleasure to another; how soon are earthly comforts abused
into luxury and excess? Fullness of estate makes way for fullness of bread,
and many beastly sins. 4. Unmercifulness, you never knew any Prodigal, but
they were also uncharitable; as Sodom here and the Epicure, Luke 16. and you
shall see James 5. 4, 5* those that nourished their hearts as in a day of
slaughter, oppressed the laborers; they that set their hearts for ease and
pleasure, know not the bitterness of grief, and therefore do not
compassionate it in others, Amos 6. 6. 5. Uncleanness, and fornication, this
follows on the former; fullness of bread must be emptied and unladed in lust.
6. That beastly wickedness employed in the Text. When the Angels came to
destroy them, because they were of a comely visage, they came raging at the
doors, Genesis 19. as usually wickedness is increased to the height when God
comes to punish it. Well then if we put all these together, they were a lazy,
easy, secure, oppressing, filthy and unclean people: we may wonder more at
Gods patience that he bore with them so long, then at his justice, that he
punished them so sorely.

2. The Aggravations: 1. Shamelessness, Isa* 3. 9. they declare their sin as
Sodom, they publish it as Gomorrah* when a people are past shame they are past
hope, such do dare God to punish them. 2. Contempt of reproof, a sure
forerunner of ruin, when the reprover of sin is blamed more then the actor.
Lot seemed as one that mocked, Genesis 19. 14. when Gods Messengers are contemned,
he can hold no longer.

Thirdly, their judgment. The Lord rained from the Lord fire and brimstone
upon them. Observe here, 1. The suddenness the Sun shone in the morning as at
other times, Genesis 19. 23. they had not the least fear of any such mischief at
hand; God usually surprizeth a people in their security* after a great calm
comes a storm. Perish in the mid way, Psalm 21. 11. in their full carere,
Sulpher futorem hab^t^ignis ardorem.
when they dream of no such matter. 2. The equity; The sin was like the
punishment. They first burned with lusts, and then with fire: they burnt with
vile unnatural lusts, and therefore against the ordinary course of nature, fire
falls down from Heaven: in this fire there was stink for their filthiness.
Thus does God retaliate; Nadab and Abihu offered strange fire, and they were
consumed with strange fire coming down from Heaven. Job professing his
innocence in case of Adultery, otherwise let my Wife grind to another, and a
stranger bow down upon her, Job 31. 11. implying that God would punish him in
his own bed, if he had violated another: in the Gospel we read, Luke 16. that
he was denied a drop that would not give a crumb* etc. 3. Observe the power of
God, God a little before had drowned the world with Water, now he consumes
Sodom by fire, all the Elements are at his beck, the Creatures are his Hosts,
Job. 37. 6. If God say be thou upon the earth, they presently obey; if we find
sins God will find punishments, he can execute judgments by contrary means,
now drown and then burn. 4. The severity of God, he raineth down fire and
brimstone, which is Map and Type of Hell, Isa. 30. last, Rev. 21. 15. The
calamities that light upon the Godly are Phil. 1. 28.
a token of Heaven; namely, as they work to purify us from sin; but those on
the wicked are Types of Hell, preambles to future woes, as darkness on the
Egyptians was a figure of utter darkness. So these were first turned to
destruction, and then into Hell; it is sad to think of the judgment past;
worse, of judgment to come.

Thus God delights to make those that have been examples to others in
sinning, examples to them in punishment.

Verse. 8. Likewise also these filthy Dreamers* defile the flesh, despise
dominion, and speak evil of dignities.
IN this verse you have the Apodosis of the former instance [ likewise] is the
Adverb, that implies the connection between the the two terms of a comparison,
they perished that went after strange flesh, so these filthy Dreamers that
defile the flesh, etc. shall perish. In the words you may observe, 1. A
description of their person [ filthy Dreamers] 2. A discovery of their sins two
are mentioned in this verse. 1. (...), their impurity [they de l* the flesh*]
2. (...), their tumultuous carriage toward superiors, expressed in two
phrases. First they de p^sed domini n Secondly, they speak ^vil of dignities.
What these two phrases import is some question, some think the first notes
their judgment and affection, the second* their speech and practice* Some
think two kinds of government are here understood, and refer dispising of
Dominion to contempt of Magistracy and public Government, and speaking evil of
Dignities to the private Government of Masters, 1 Timothy 6. 1. 2. which was also
despised by these wretches, under the pretense of Christian liberty. Others
more properly understand the first cause of Civil Government, usually expressed
in Scripture by (...), or Domination: and speaking evil of Dignities, is fitly
referre^ to the traducing and opposing of Government and Governors
Ecclesiastical, as Apostles, Pastors* Teachers, and Elders. The Officers of the
Church are called (...), the glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8. 23. and what we
translate [ speak evil of Dignities] is in the original [ speak evil of
Glories] but of this more anon.

Let me open the words [ likewise] In the original there are many words* (...),
likewise notwithstanding, that is, though there be so many* and such apparent
instances of Gods judgment, and those set before us for an example; yet they
being blinded with their wicked passions, are not afraid* but boldly cast
themselves upon the hazard of the same ruin. [ Filthy Dreamers] the word in
the original is (...) lead, inspired* or acted by Dreams, or deluded by
Dreams. Beza renders it Sopiti, being lulled asleep, as noting their
security. I suppose rather the dotage of error, by which they were as it were
bewitched and enchanted: our translation seems to carry it another way, as
applying it to nocturnal polutions, because dreaming is joined with defiling
the flesh. And Peter charge these persons with rolling their fancies upon
unclean objects, 1 Pet. 2. 14. or possibly it may be taken literally, the
persons here noted pretending to dreams inspired by associate and assistant
spirits. See Eusebius* l^b 4. cap. 7. The next phrase is [ defile the flesh] that
is, polute themselves with libidinous practices, 2 Pet. 2. 10. they walked
after the flesh in the l^st of uncleanness; and that under a pretense of the
Gospel, Vide ^renaeum passim de Haer. Valentin. The Nicholaitans taught
community of Wives, and that it was an indifferent thing to commit Adultery*
Rev 2. 6. 14* The Gnostics gave themselves up to all manner of prodigious and
incestuous polutions: whence from their obscenity and beastly life, they were
called Borborites. See again Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 7. Epiphan. har. 26. How many
ways they did defile the flesh we cannot with modesty express: the Heathens
who made no distinction, charged these impurities upon the Christians in the
general, as if they used the unlawful company of their Mothers, and Sisters,
etc. The next phrase is [ despise Dominion*] (...), the word (...), signifies
to remove a thing out of its place, with some scorn and indignation; and so it
implies their utter enmity to civil policy and government, 2 Pet. 2. 10.

They despise Government, presumptuous are they, and self willed: [(...),
Dominion] some apply this to the Dominion of Christ, which by their fables of
the Aeones, or Lords Rulers they did set at naught, but of that in the fourth
verse, but now he speaks of the Government of Men; and there is an emphasis in
the word [(...), Dominion] which is more then if he had said (...), Rulers, for
they did not only despise their Magistrates, or men invested with Superiority,
but Magistracy it self, as a thing unfitting for believers, and such as were
made free by Christ to endure? The last part of the charge is [ they speak evil
of Dignities] or as it is in the original [ blaspheam Glories] by which some
understand Angels, as Clemens Alexandrinus; these impure Heretics devising
things unworthy, and mis-beseeming the Angels; rather I suppose it implies
their scorns, curses and reproaches cast upon the Officers of the Church, who
are the Glory of Christ, and the practice is afterward compared with the
rebellion of Corah, who rose up, not only against Moses but Aaron, Numb. 11.
In the whole you have a lively description of our modern Ranters, Level^^rs,
Familists, Quakers* who by dreams are led on to defile the slesh, and to
despise all Authority* both in Church* and Common wealth, and that with bitter
curses and evil speakings, so that our days afford us but too clear a comment
on the expressions of this Scripture: it is sadly fulfilled before our eyes! I
come to the Observations.

From that [ filthy Dreamers] Note That the erroneous Observe. 1.
thoughts of wicked men are but a Dream. It Is but Fryerlike, to follow an
allusion too far, only a little for illustration: wicked men are Dreamers: 1.
In regard of their state and condition, every carnal man is in a state of a
deep sleep, Isa. 29. 10. snorting upon the bed of ease, without any sense of
the danger of their condition, as Jonah in the ship was found asleep when the
storm arose, they sleep, but their damnation sleeps* not, 2 Pet. 2. 3. 2. In
regard of the suitableness between their vain thoughts and a dream. A dream
you know tickleth with a false delight, and deceives with a vain hope.

1. Tickleth with a false delight, they hug a cloud (as we say) instead of
Juno, and embrace the contentments and pleasures of the World instead of the
true riches, a carnal man's running from pleasure to pleasure, is but a sweet
dream, a fit of mirth and pleasure while conscience is asleep, Psalm 39. 6.
they walk in a vain shadow, they imagine a great deal* of felicity and
contentment in their condition; but when they come to Isa. 50. 11.
warm themselves by their own sparks they lie down in sorrow.

2. Deceives with a vain hope, as where the Prophet compares the dream of the
enemies of the Church, to the dream of a night vision, Is. 29. 7. 8. And it
shall be as an hungry man dreameth, and behold he eats, but he awaketh and his
soul is empty: or when as a thirsty man dreameth, and behold de drinks, but
be awaketh, and behold he is fain^, and his soul has appetite. So it is with
them, all their hopes are dashed in an instant: the foolish Virgins slept, Mat*
25. and when they slept they dreamed, that the door of grace would still be
open to them, but they found it shut: many flatter themselves with fair hopes,
till they awake in flames, but then all is gone.

Take heed then of being deceived by your own dreams* and the fictions of your
own brain: there are no dreams so foolish as those we dream waking, as
Epiphanius says of the Gnostics: 'twas not (...), a sleeping Dream that they
were guilty of, but (...), the dotage of their minds, putting them upon
fancies, as monstrous and incoherent as men's thoughts in a dream: waking dreams
are most pernicious: There are two sorts of these dreams, 1. Dreams in point of
opinion, when we hug error instead of truth. 2. Dreams in point of hope, when
we cherish presumption in stead of faith.

1. Dreams in opinion, which are very rife now, the Mundus senes^ens patitur
phantasi^s. Gerson.
old world is apt to dote: Idle and ungrounded nations how plausible soever,
are but the dreams of a misty sleepy brain: to prevent these take these
Rules. 1. If you would beware of Dreams, beware of a blind mind, men sleep in
the dark, and in sleep fancy gets the start of reason, indistinct thoughts do
easily dispose to error; and an half light will certainly abuse you, the simple
believes every word, Prove. 14. 15. 2 Suffer not your selves to be blinded, 1.
Not by vile affections: men would fain have that true which is pleasing, and
most accommodate to their own interests: vile affection takes away tht light
of reason, and leaves us only the pride of reason: and therefore none so
confident and touchy in their opinions, as they that are misled by lusts and
interests; how easily do we exasperate our minds, and invent prejudices against
an hated truth: if the weights be equal, yet if the balances be not equal,
wrong will be done, when the heart is biassed before the search and swayed with
some carnal desire or interest, the judgment is obscured and cannot consider
of the weight of what is alleged, there is an Idol in the heart, Ezekiel. 16. 4.
2. By vulgar prejudice, that the Devil may keep the world asleep, it is his
usual trick to burden the ways of God with clamor, and vulgar prejudice, a
dream or lie dares not combat with truth in open field, and therefore
fortifying against it with popular arguments, that the ways of God may be
suspected rather then tried; and usually it falls that error is more specious
at the first blush; Gods providence suffering his own ways to be under the
cross, and the worlds displeasure; now in such a case men keep at a distance,
and are loath to search least they meet with trouble of conscience for not
obeying the truth, or trouble from the world for crossing their customs and
fashions. 3. By personal administration, in spiritual things we learn to dream
from one another, Deuteronomy 13. 3. Zech 10. 2. No man must be set up in Gods chair,
and their dictates followed, as if they were infalliable.

3. Study the word, else there is no light in what is Isa. 8. 21.
brought to you, it is but only a dream and dotage of men's brains, and the
closer you keep to the Letter of the Word* the better: many are perverted by
mystical interpretations when men bring that to the word, which they do not
find there; the Letter must not be receded from, as long as it is capable of any
commodious interpretation: now this word must be hidden in the heart, Psalm.
119. 9. and dwell in us richly, Coll* 3. 16.

2. There are dreams in point of hope, and so 1. Some wholly mistake in the
object, and dream of an eternal happiness in temporal enjoyments, Psalm. 49. 11.
So Luke 12* 19* Rev. 18. 9. 2. Others dream of attaining the end without using
the means; they live in sin, and yet hope to dye comfortably, and go to Heaven
at length for all that, as if it were but an easy and sudden leap, from
Dal^lahs lap, to Abraham's bosom; and the pleasures of sin for a season would
be no hinderance to the enjoyment of the pleasures of Gods right hand for ever
more. A vain Dream, see Luke 16 25 and Jam. 5* 5. 3. Others mistake about the
means, because they have a cold form, they are apt to be conceited of their
spiritual condition and estate, Rev. 3* 17. If you would not Dream in this
kind, examine your hearts often, examination is like a rubbing of the e^es
after sleep, and reviving of conscience, the recollection of* our dreams; a man
laugheth at his dreams when he is awake, and fancy is sited before the tribunal
of God, vain apprehensions fly away. Again, be sober and watchful, 1 Pet. 5.
9. 2 Thessalonians. 5. 6 Confessing sin it is telling our dream, when we are awake and
come to our selves, Jer. 31. 17.

From that [defile the flesh] Observe, That dreams of Observe. 2.
error dispose to practices of sin and uncleanness, and impurity of Religion
is usually joined with uncleanness of Body: which comes to pass partly by
the just judgment of God, who punishes spiritual fornication with bodily, Hos.
4. 12. 13. They have gone an whoring from their God, therefore their Daughters
shall commit whoredom, and their Spouses adultery. That is Gods course, that
the odiousness of the one may make them see the heinousness of the other: see
Romans 1. 24. Partly by the Anima quae fornicata est Deo castaesse non posset.
Aug.
influence of error, it perverteth the heart, a frame of truth preserves the
aw of God in the soul, and a right belief makes the manners Orthodox: all
sins are rooted in wrong thoughts of God, 3 Ep. John 11. Either in unbelief or
misbeliefe; unbelief is the Mother of sin, and misbeliefe the Nurse of it; it
springs from distrust, and is countenanced by error: Partly because the
design of most errors is to put the soul into a liberty which God never
allowed; some errors come from the pride of reason, because it will not veil
and strike sail to faith; but most come from vile affection, a carnal heart
must be gratified with a carnal Doctrine, 2 Pet. 2. 18. They promise liberty,
etc. Errors are but a device to cast off Christ's yoke, and to ^ull the
conscience asleep in a course of disobedience. Well then, avoid error of
judgment if you would avoid filthiness of conversation; men first dream, and
then defile the flesh, abominable impurities (unless temper of nature and
posture of interests hinder) are the usual fruit of evil opinions: Truth is the
root of holiness, sanctify them by thy truth thy word is truth, Joh. 17. 17.
Gods blessing goes with his own doctrine, 2 Pet 1. 22. Again, those that have
taken up the profession of a right way of Religion should beware of staining it
by such kind of practices, nothing makes the ways of God suspected so much
as the scandals of those that profess to walk in them, walk in the light as
children of the light; Ephesians. 5. otherwise you will be a reproach to the truth,
and deprive it of its testimony.

Again, observe, That sin is a defilement, it staineth and Observe. 3.
darkneth the glory of a man, Matthew. 15. 20. this defilement was employed in the
washings of the ceremonial Law, and in Baptism, we are washed as soon as we are
born* because we are sinners as soon as we are born; surely they that glory in
sin, do but glory in their own shame; it is but as if a man should boast of his
own dung, and count his spittle an ornament, when you count graceless
swearing, mightiness to drink, revenge, pride, a glory to you, you do the
same: there is nothing makes us stink in Gods nostrils but sin. Psalm. 14. 3.
They are altogether become filthy, so much sin as you have about you so much
nastinesse; gain is pleasant to those that are taken with that kind of lust;
but the Scripture calls it filthy lucre, 1 Timothy 3. 3. all sins* are compared
to filthy garments, Zech. 3. 4. Jude 19. and Isa. 30. 22. desire to be washed
and that thoroughly, Psalm. 51. 2.

Again observe, That of all sins, the sin of uncleanness Observe. 4.
or unlawful copulation is most defiling: it defiles the whole man, but
chiefly the body: and therefore it is said [ they defile the flesh] it staineth
the soul with filthy thoughts, Matthew. 15. 20. it staineth the Name, Prove. 33.
But in a singular manner it poluteth the body, 1 Cor* 6. 18. in all other
outward sins, though the body be the instrument, yet it is not the object of
them; all other sins do abuse objectum extra positum (as Piscator explaineth
it) as a Drunkard, Wine; an Epicure, Meats; a Worldling, Riches; all these are
objects without us: but here the body is not only the instrument but the
object, Romans 17. 24. God gave them up to uncleanness to dishonor their own
bodies. So see 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4. it wastes the strength, and beauty of the body,
Prove. 5. 9, 10, 11. hinders our serviceableness, and does not consider that
this body is consecrated to God, Romans 12. 1. and 1 Cor. 6. 15 a Temple of the
holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19. interested in hopes of Glory, Phil. 3. 21. and
therefore puts it to so vile an use as to be an instrument of lust. Christians,
shall those 2 Pet. 2. 14.
eyes which are consecrated to God to behold his works be windows to let in
sin? that body which is the holy Ghosts Temple be made the member of a Harlot?
and so wasted in the service of lust, as to become a clog to us, and wholly
useless, as to any gracious purposes: are not your beauty, health, strength,
concernments too good to be spent upon so vile an interest? take heed then of
all uncleanness, both conjugal consisting in excess, and immoderating of lust
in the married estate, si vinim ex Apotheca tua, etc. you may not be drunk with
your own Wine; nor quench the vigor of nature by excess in those pleasure
which the Laws of God and men do allow you: and also of uncleanness
Adulterous, which is more brutish when men scatter their lusts promiscuously
without confinement to one object.

From that [ Despise. Dominion] Observe, that errors especially Observe. 5.
such as tend to sensuality, make men unruly and Antimagistraticall. Dreamers
that do defile themselves, do also despise Dominion; Now this comes to pass,
partly from the permission of Gods wise and just providence, who suffers such
miscarriages to awaken the magistrate to a care of truth, if not in zeal for
Gods glory, yet out of a sense of his own interest, and upon reason of state;
the Commonwealth being troubled by those who first began to trouble the
Church, (...); new Doctrines put men after an itch upon new Laws, and false
Religions are usually turbulent; partly because persons loose and erroneous
would free themselves from all awe, both of God and Man, as it is said of the
unjust Judge, that he feared neither God nor Man, Luke 18. So with those men,
error takes off the dread of God, and sedition the dread of the Magistrate,
that so they may more freely defile the flesh. God has two Deputies to keep a
sinner under awe, Conscience and the Magistrate; now false doctrine benummeth
conscience, and then that all Authority may be laid aside, the rights of the
Magistrate are invaded, that as conscience may not stand in the way of their
lust, so not the Magistrate in the way of their sin, that there were anciently
such libertines in the Church appears by Gal. 5. 13. and 1 Pet. 2. 16. and 1
Cor. 7. 20, 21, 22, 23* vain man would fain be free and yoaklesse, neither
would he have his heart subject to God, nor his actions to man's censure:
partly, because all errors are rooted in obstinacy, and that will bewray its
self, not only in Divine and Spiritual, but in Civil things, see 2 Pet. 2.
10. But chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness:
Presumptious are they and self willed* they are not afraid to speak evil of
dignities. Usually errors sear the conscience, and give the sinner a front and
boldness, so that God is not only dishonored, but civil societies disturbed
as Nazianzen observes of the Arians; they began in blasphemous language
against Christ, but end in tumultuous carriage against the peace of the
Commonwealth; for (...). Nazian. Orat. 25.
(says he) how shall we hope that they will spare men, that would not spare
God? Often it falls out that they that please not God are also contrary to
all men, 1 These. 2. 15. Tully an Heathen observes the same, ^ietate adversus
Deos sublata fides etiam and soci^tas humani generis, etc. Partly because
opposition to Magistracy is a kind of indirect blow and aim at God, and that
either as it is his ordinance, Rom 13. or a kind of resemblance of his glory; I
have said you are Gods, Psalm 84. 6. So that it is a contempt of God in his image
and picture; look as under the Law God forbade men cruelty to the beasts, as
not to destroy the Dam from the Young, loses the Kid in the Mothers milk, etc.
but such kind of Prohibitions might be as a fence and rail about the life of
man; so respect to Magistracy is a kind of fence about his own. Dignity and
divine Glory: Magistrates being representative Gods (...); and therefore
through their sides they strike at God himself. Partly because the end of
Magistracy is to suppress evil, Romans 13. 5. an indesinite speech is equivolent
to an universal, in a matter of necessary duty, and the universal particle is
expressed elsewhere, Prove. 20. 8. A King that sits upon the Throne of
judgment scatters away all evil with his eyes: all evil that falls under
his cognizance, whether it be of a Civil or Spiritual concernment; we must not
limit and distinguish where the word does not; I know there be some that do
defulcate and cut off a great part of that duty which belongs to the
Magistrate, confining his care only to things of a civil concernment, but
preposterously, truths according to godliness, belonging also to his
inspection, upon which ground we are bound to pray for them, that they may come
to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 2. 2. and under them we may lead a quiet
life in all godliness and honesty; where it is plainly employed that the
converted Magistrate is to look to the countenance and maintenance of
godliness as well as honesty. Well then, sensual Heretics being doubly
obnoxious, as sensual, as venting errors, no wonder that they rise up in
defiance of Gods Ordinance.

It shows us the evil of inordinate lustings; we may Use 1.
learn hence whence they proceed, and whither they tend; they proceed from the
pride and obstinacy of error: Men dream and are then licentious, and it tends
to the casting off of all duty to God and Man; nip this disposition in the bud;
it is in all our natures, man is born like the wild asses colt, Job. 11. 12. not
only for rudeness of understanding, but untamedness of affection: we love to
break through all bonds and restraints, as if none were Lord over us, Psalm. 12.
3.

It informs us what will be the issue when libertism Use 2.
abounds, even an utter confusion. See Socrates Sch^last. lib. 5. Eccle. 4.
11. in proem. Non nunquam tumultus Ecclesiarum antegress^, reipublicae autem
confusiones, consecuta sunt. The ruin of the Weal public is brought on* by
pestilent and evil doctrines. So our Divines at the Synod of Dort. Cavendum
est, ne qui magistratu conniver^e res novas in Ecclesia meliantur, eodem etiam
repugnante idem in republica. effi^iunt. Tully in his Book De legibus, says,
That the glory of Greece presently declined, when the people were given malis
studiis, malisque doctrinis, to evil manners, and evil opinions; let us lay
these things to heart. I do not love to enveigh against the times, and to
endulge the petulancy of a mistaken zeal, but the Kings danger made Croesus
dumb son to speak.

It may take off the prejudice that is often cast upon Religion, Use 3.
and the true ways of God, it is not truth that troubles Israel, but error; 1
Kings 18. 18. I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers house, in
that ye have forsaken the Commandments of the Lord; 'ts an old slander that
strict Religion is no friend to Commonwealths: as soon as Christianity began
to fly abroad in the world, it was objected against her, as if it were
prejudicial to civil power and greatness, thereby to defeat her of the
patronage of Princes, and to hinder them from becoming nursing fathers, Isa.
49. 25. Magistracy being that power which is left able to suppress or advance
Religion: the Devil striveth all that he can to incense it against her: there
is a natural and wakeful jealousy in Princes over their Dignities and
Prerogatives, and therefore the enemies of the Church have ever sought occasion
to represent the people of God as enemies to their just power; So Christ was
accused, Luke 23. 2. and Paul, Act. 24. 5. But altogether without cause, it is
true, if Religion be not kindly received, it brings a judgment there where
it is tendered, as the Ark where it was irreverently handled, brought a plague
upon the Bethshemites, 1 Samuel 6. 19 but yet a blessing upon the house of Obed
Edom, so Religion where it is worthily treated brings a blessing, otherwise a
judgment: let the world say what it will, it is a friend to Magistracy, partly
by its commands enforcing civil duties by a sacred bond and obligation, See
Prove. 24. 21. Matthew. 22. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 17. Eccles. 8. 2. Partly by its
influence, meekning the hearts of men, and obliging them to faithfulness,
(...). Vid. E^seb lib. 2. de vit a Constant. Sozom lib: 6.
Those that are faithful to God, I shall expect them to be faithful to me (said
Constantines Father) certainly none live* so sweetly under the same government
as those that are united in the same faith, or cemented together with the same
blood of Christ. Partly, by the indulgence of Gods providence, who is wont to
favor those States, where true Religion is countenanced and vigorously owned;
Oh that our Magistrates would regard this; there wisdom lies in kissing the
Son, Psalm. 2. 10. Christ came not to gain persons but nations to his obedience,
and the more that is effected, though it be but by a public profession, the
more safety may they expect; it is but a necessary thankfulness of the powers
of, the world to him, to whom they owe their Crowns, Prove. 8. 17. Let us pray
for them that God would raise their zeal, and make them more cordial in the
support of Religion. An Heathen said, aut undiquaque religionem tolla, aut
usque quaque conserva, either wholly abandon Religion, or maintain it more
entirely.

It shows us what little reason Magistrates have to Use. 4:
countenance, and spread their skirt over obstinate and impure Heretics; such
spirits being usually most opposite to Magistracy. They do but nourish a Snake
in their own bosoms, and cherish a Faction, that in time will eat out their
bowels: were there no respects of Religion but only those of Civil Policy,
they should not be so sleepy in this case; but you will say, is it lawful for
them to intermeddle in matters of Religion, and to use any compulsive power? I
answer, yes verily; they bear not the Sword in vain; we have frequent instances
in the word of good Kings, whose zeal is commended for so doing, and frequent
injunctions: also to this purpose, the Levites are commended for assisting
Moses in the execution of those that worshipped the Calfe, Exodus 32. 26, 27,
28. Abraham was to command his Children, Genesis 18. 29. Asa commanded Judah to
worship God, and the thing was right in the eyes of the Lord, 2 Kings 14. 23,
24. So see 2 Kings. 15. 23. and Esra 10. 8. So 2 Kings 34. 32, 33. And that
promise. Isa 43. 23. I know I touch the soar of this age, and that this is a
truth much prejudiced, therefore I shall first remove the prejudices, and then
state the question.

1. Remove the prejudices; The first is taken from the Austine changed his his
mind twice and was at last for compulsion.
Fathers or Primitive Christians, who almost generally express themselves
against planting Religion by the Sword and compulsive force; defendenda est
Religio non ^ccidendo sed monendo non saevitia sed patientia, so Lactantius:
and suitably others: I answer, were Religion now to be planted, these sayings
would take place, Pagans are not to be compelled, but enlightened, taught, not
destroyed; and yet in such a case it is a question not easily resolved, whether
the Magistrate, if he had power, were not bound to compel his people, though
professed Pagans, to hear or attend upon the Ministry of the Word, it being the
ordinary means of working faith. Augustine determines that a Christian in
such a case should improve his power for Christ. Faelix necessitas quae ad
meliora nos cogit, foris inveniatur necessitas and nascitur intus voluntas; and
a little after, non quia cogantur reprehendant, sed quae cogantur attendant,
it is a favor that the Magistrate will take care to bring them to the means of
salvation. Again, in such a case they are to be kept from scandalizing and
blaspheaming the true Religion; that is the least a Magistrate can do for
Christ: But where a people are Christianized, and do profess the true
Religion, they should not be set free to Ateh^ism, Error, and Apostasy.

2. Another prejudice is, that the examples before mentioned are brought from
the Old Testament, and so propose to the policy of the Jews. I answer, some
alleged were before Moses Law, as that of Abraham and Jacobs commanding his
family to put away their Idols, Genesis 35. 2. And the injunctions in the old
Testament were built upon reasons of imm^table equity, as Gods glory, the
danger of infection, etc. and so concern us as well as them, and the thing in
question is agreeable to the light of nature, there being instances of Pagan
Princes, who were so far convinced of their duty to the true God, that they
enjoined his worship, punishing the contempt thereof; See Esra 6. 11. so Esra
7. 26. and Dan. 3. 29. The Gentiles by the light of nature saw it to be
suitable and agreeable to right reason. Arist. Polit lib. 7. cap. 8. says the
first thing that falls under a Magistrates care is (...), a care of divine
worship. The Athenians banished Protagoras for speaking doubtfully, and by way
of extenuation of their Religion, and burnt his Books: besides all this the
reason why we have only presidents in the old Testament, is, because the
people of the Jews were the only State that were acquainted with the knowledge
of the true God: we have some prophesies that the like should be done in the
New, Isa. 49. 23. and Zech. 13. which concerns Gospel Times, Isa. 60, 10.
Rev. 21. 24. we were worse provided for then they were in the Old Testament, if
men that had the Plagnesoar of Heresy running upon them, should without
restraint be permitted to come into all companies.

3. Another prejudice is 'twill make men Hypocrites; I answer with Athanasius,
would to God all were got so far as Hypocrites, it would certainly be better
for the Christian world; but however duties must not be left undone for ill
consequences.

4. Prejudice, this will make way for persecution, and the calamities of the
Godly upon every change of the Princes mind. I answer, if the Lord see
persecution necessary for the Church, we must endure it, and so we shall be
gainers, both by good Princes and bad: by the persecution of evil Princes,
Truth is made glorious; by the ministry of the good, error is suppressed and
dis-countenanced; God would oblige us the more to pray for them in power, Ps.
72. 1. and 1 Timothy 2. 2. and he has promised to hear such prayers and provide
Nurse Fathers for the Church. Sometimes a wicked Magistrate understanding his
duty, may by the overruling power of God in his conscience, be withheld from
persecuting the Truth, yea carried out to the suppression oferror. When Paulus
Samosatenus revolted from the Orthodox Christian Faith, and would yet retain
the Bishopric of Antioch, the business was brought to Aurelian a Pagan
Emperor, who removed him.

Secondly, I shall state the point, and show you how far compulsion it
necessary. 1. The Magistrate should use no compulsion before care had, for
better information, and resolution of the doubting Conscience, otherwise the
practice were fell and cruel, like that of false Religions that brook no
contradiction; consc ences scrap^lous must not be too hardly dealt with all: Ex
officin a curvi^ium solunt argumenta and quos sermon ribus decip^ e^on possunt
gladits ^l^m^nt ^ss^ f^riendos. Ambros.
to answer arguments by a Prison, or the Fires, is a Popish Topic, and to
supply in rage what wants in strength of reason, and clearness of light, is
but a butcherly violence; punishment and compulsion should not be hastened as
long as there appears a desire to be informed, with meek endeavors after
satisfaction. The Apostle Paul is for two Almonitions before Church censure,
Titus 2. 10. And the cen^ure of the Magistrate should no^ p^ecede that of the
Church. 2 In things indisferent, Christian toleration and forbearance take
places, all men never were nor ever will be in this world of one and the same
opinion* no more then of the same feature and complexion. There is a due
latitude of allowable differences, wherein the strong should bear with the
weak, `Rom. 15. 1. Ephesians. 4. 2. Gal. 6 1. There are some lesser mistakes of
Conscience, and infirmities incident to all men; namely, such as are consistent
with Faith, the main and fundamental truths and principles of salvation and
charity, as not tending to foment Faction in the Church, or Sedition in the
Commonwealth; but if either of these limits be transgressed, circumstances may
make these lesser things intolerable, as Paul withstood Peter to the face,
though otherwise he did not count the matter great, Gal. 2. 11. yet when it was
urged to the scandal of the Churches, he thought it worthy of a Contest: and
here it belong^th to Christian Princes, as to defend truth, so to see that
Peace be not violated for Rites and Ceremonies, and lesser differences that lie
far from the heart of Religion. I am persuaded that want of condescension to
brethren, has brought all this confusion upon us, etc. 3. A gross error kept
secret, comes not under the Magistrates cognizance, but the diffusi^n and
dissemination of errors he must take notice of, as when men infect others, and
openly blaspheam Christian Doctrine, he bears not the sword in vain. The
mind and conscience as to any power under God is sui juris, thoughts are free;
it is a saying in the Civil Law, Cogitationes poenam nemo patitur, all command
is exercised about such things as fall within the knowledge of him that
commands; now God only knows the heart, quis mihi im o^^t necessitatem
creden^i quod nolin (says Lictantius) v l quod v. lim non credendi. Theodosi^s
and Valentinian in their Law concerning the Heretic, give this limitation*
sibi tantummodo nocitura sentiat, aliis ob^utura non panda* Subscriptions and
Inquisitions into men's consciences, we cannot but justly condemn. 4. Error*
according to their nature and degree merit a different punishment, Jude ^ 9.
and Esra 7. 26. 5. Blasphemy, Idolatry, and gross Heresy are to be put into
the same rank with gross, vicious actions and supposed (if entertained after
the receiving of the truth) to be done against light and conscience. Paul says
of the Heretic that he is (...), after due admonitions, Ti^^s 3. 11. Therefore
in some cases these may be punished with death; as Baals Prophets were slain, 1
Kings 18. 40. and E^. 21 20. Lev. 24 16. But of the whole Question elsewhere.

Again, I observe from the same clause, That it is a sin to despise Dominions;
For it is here charged upon Observe. 6.
these Seducers. It Is a sin, because it is against the injunctions of the world,
Romans 13. 1. Titus 3. 1. We are apt to forget our civil duties, or to count them
Arbitrary, as if the same Authority had not established the second Table as
well as the first, and it is a sin because Magistracy is Gods Ordinance, the
general instructi^n of it is of God though the p rticular constitution of it be
of man. Compare Romans 13. 1 with 1 Pet. 2 13 Government it self is of God, but
this or that special manner or form o^ government is not determined b^ God,
which is the difference between Civil and Ecclesi stical Government, for there
the particular form is specified, as well as the thing it self appointed.
Again, it is a sin because dominion preserves human S^cieties; so that we
should trespass against the common good and public order if we should desp^se
this help, yea against the Law of our own Natures; man being by nature a
sociable creature. Well then, let us obey every Ordinance of man for the Lords
sake. The public welfare is concerned in our obedience, as also the honor of
Religion, both which should be very dear to one that fears God: the public
welfare better bare many inconveniences then embroyl the Country in War and
Blood. We are bidden be subject (...), to the froward, 1 Pet. 2. 18. And the
honor of Religion, God will have the world know that Christianity is a friend
to civil policy, see 1 Pet. 2. 15. and Matthew. 7. 27. We learn hence too, that
they are but libertines that think that Religion freeth them from the
subjection which they owe to God or man; it does not exempt us from our duty,
but enable us to perform it: may take such a liberty in civil things that they
begin to grow contemp^uous even in divine, and so cast off Gods yoke, as well
as the Magistrates.

The last expression is that [ speak evil of Dignities] or of [ Glories] by
which probably Church Officers are intended, Observe. 7.
such being spoken against in that age, John. Ep. 3. 10. and expressed by the
word [ Glories] a term given both to the Apostles and other Officers of the
Church. Note, There is a respect due to persons invested with Church power.
This is established by Gods Ordinance, and therefore should not be set at
naught, neither should the persons invested with it, be evil spoken of, that
obedience is required to them, see Heb. 13. 17. and respect and honor, see 1 Thessalonians. 12. 13. and 1 Timothy 5 17. that they should not be lightly evil spoken of,
1 Timothy 5. 19. though for their persons and outward estate they are mean and
desp^cable, yet they are called to an high employment, and have the promise of
a great pow r and presence with them Matthew. 16. 19. John 20. 23. Their regular
proceedings are ratified in the Court of Heaven; we are fallen into an age
wherein no persons are more contemptible then Ministers, nothing less valued
then Church Authority: it is become the eye-soar of the times; not to speak of
those barking Shim^is the Quakers, and their ^oul mouthed language taught them
by the Father of lies; surely others have not such a reverence of Gods
Ordinance, as they should have.

Verse. 9. Yet Michael the Archangel, when contending with the Devil, he
disputes about the body of Moses, durst not bring against them a railing
accusation, but said, the Lord rebuke thee.
THe Apostle had charged the Seducers, against whom he wrote, with opposition
of Magistracy, and contemptuous speaking against those lights which God had set
in the Church; he now comes to aggravate their effrontery and impudence, by
the carriage of Michael the Archangel toward the Devil In the Comparison
there is an Argument a majori ad minus, from the greater to the less, which is
evidently seen in all the circumstances of the Text.

1. In the persons contending, Michael the Archangel with the Devil: If
Michael so Excellent in nature, so high in Office, contending with Satan an
impure Spirit, already judged by God, used such modesty and awe, who are they,
sorry Creatures, that dare despise persons invested with the Dignity and Height
of Magistracy.

2. There is an aggravation from the Cause [ when he disputed with him ab^ut
the body of Moses] a matter just, and in which the mind of God was clearly
known, and dare they sp^ak evil of things they know not? that is, in matters so
far above their reach, to take upon them to ensure and determine.

3. There is an aggravation taken from the disposition of the Angel [ he durst
not bring against him a railing accusation] His holiness would not permit him
to deal with the Devil in an und^cent and injuri^us manner. But these rashly
belch out their reproaches and curses against Superiors without any fear.

4. In the manner of speech [ the Lord rebuke thee] The whole judgment of the
cause is referred to God; but these Gn^sticks take upon them, as if the whole
judgment of Things, Persons and Actions were left in their hands, as our
modern Quakers take upon them to curse, and to pronounce dreadful judgments
upon Gods most holy Servants according to their own pleasures. The sum of the
whole is this, if an Angel that is great in power durst not bring against the
worst Creatures in the very heat of contention about a good cause, any undue
language and reproach, certainly it is an horrible impudence in men to speak
contemptuously, yea in a cursing and blaspheming manner, of those whom God has
advanced to Superiority in Church or Commonwealth.

This is the sum of the words, but because this Scripture is difficult, before
I come to the Observations, I shall premise some explicatory Questions.

Quest 1 Whence had the Apostle this story? the Scriptures making no menti^n of
it?

Answ. 1. The substance of it is in Scripture, we read, Deuteronomy. 34. 6. that the
body of Moses was secretly buried by the Lord; but now for the circumstances of
it, he might receive them by divine Revelation; which are here Authorized and
made Scipture, and indeed it is usual with the Penmen of holy Writ, to add
such circumstances as were not mentioned in the place where the History was
first recorded, as in Exodus we read of the opposition of the Magicians to
Moses; but their names are mentioned, 2 Timothy 3. 8. As Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses. The whole story of their contest with him is in the Talmud and
in Apulei^s and other. Histories; we read, that these were famous Magiti^ns, So
Psalm. 105 18. we read that Joseph's f^et were hurt in Fetters, and he was laid
in Iron, which in the story in Genesis appears not; so Moses quaking, Heb.
12. 21. and the following of the Water of the Rock, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2. Those
things might be received by Tradition, or Divine Inspiration, or were extant in
some known Book and Record then in use. Origin quoteth a Book (...), about the
assumption of Moses for this History, some remainders of which are in the Books
of the Jews unto this day. Capellus I remember repeateth a long tale out of the
Book called Rabbah, or the mystical Expositions of the Pentateuch, concerning
the alteration between Michael and Samuel, or the Archangel and the Devil
about the body, or rather soul of Moses. And how God to save it from Samuel,
sucked out his Soul from the Body by a kiss; but the story is so fabulous,
that I shall not repeat it: see Cappelli Spicelug. in locum page 128, 129.

Quest. 2. Is this a real History, or an Allusi^n?

Answ. 2. There are three opinions about this. 1. One is, that it is a
figurative expression of Gods care for his Church; and they that go this way by
the body of Moses, understand either the whole body of the Levitical worship,
or else the community of Israel represented in Joshua the High Priest, who
stood before the Angel of the Lord Zech. 3. 1, 2. and Satan at his right hand
ready to resist him, and the Lord said unto the Lord, the Lord rebuke thee, the
Lord that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke th^e; In Joshua the L^vitical worship
newly restored is figured, and the Angel of the Lord, before whom he stood, is
Christ the Judge, Advocate, and Defender of the Church, and the Lord, that is
the Lord Christ, called the Angel before, puts forth the efficacy of his
mediation against this malicious opposition of Satan. So some accommodate this
Text to the sense of that place, and the main reason is, because of the form
here used, The Lord rebuke thee; this sense is argute, but not so solid. Junius
who first propounded it, seems to distrust it; the reason is of no force, for
the same form might be used on diverse occasions: and my reasons against it are,
because these expressions are Typical and Visional, now to make a Type of a
Type especially in the New Testament, which usually explaineth the difficulties
of the Old, seems irrational, and though by Michael Christ may be intended;
yet the change from Joshua to Moses is too much forced. 2. Others conceive that
it is not an History, but a Talmud^ck fiction and Parable: and that Jude in
citing it does not approve the story as true, but only urges it upon them for
their instruction, who were mightily pleased with these kind of Fables; as the
Fathers against the Heathens did often make use of their own stories and
fictions concerning their gods, such condescentions are frequent: But against
this opinion, it seems to be urged here by way of down right assertion, not
as an argument ad homines, and by Peter on the like occasion, 2 P^t. 2. 11.
Whereas Angels that are greater in might and power bring not a railing
accusation against them before the Lord. I say, he does not try it as a Jewish
Fable, but as a real argument taken from the nature of the holy Angels. 3.
There is another opinion, That it is a real History, namely, that the Devil was
earnest to discover the place of Moses grave, and to take up his body again,
wherein he was resisted by Michael, some principal and chief Angel, and his
attempts made fruitless by this holy and modest address to God, The Lord
rebuke thee.

Quest. 3. The next question is, who is meant by Michael the Archangel.

Answ. 3. Michael is the name of his Person, and Arch Angel of his office;
Michael signifies, he is strong God, or who is like the strong God; and
therefore some apply it to Jesus Christ, who in many places of Scripture is set
forth, as head of Angels, See Exodus 3. 2. with 4. and Exodus 23. 20, 21. 22 Genesis
48. 16. and in Dan. 12 1. and Dan 10. 13. Jesus Christ seems there to be
intended by Michael, he being the Prince of Israel. But there is no necessity
of interpreting those places in Daniel, of Christ; much less is he in^ended
here, it being beneath the dignity of his person to contend with the Devil,
which though he did in his humiliation, Matthew. 4. yet to do it before, that was
unworthy of him; besides that phrase [ he durst not] is not so applicable to
Jesus Christ; and besides Christ and the Archangel are in Scripture
distinguished, yea Peter applies this to Angels in general, whereas Angels, 2
Pet. 2. 11. But you will object how can any creature be called Michael, equal
to God in power and strength? I Answer, it may be taken absolutely, and so it is
proper to Christ, who is Gods fellow, Zech. 13. 7. 2. Comparatively, and so it
may be applied to him who is highest in dignity among the Creatures, and is
next to God in excellency, and strength, and so it may imply the highest Angel,
as in Hell therei^ a Beelzebub, or a chief Devil; therefore it is said, Matthew.
25. The Devil and his Angels, so in Heaven there may be a Michael, one highest
in order among the blessed Angels.

Quest. 4. Why should the Devil so earnestly dispute about the body of Moses?

Answ. 4. The Rabbis among other of their Fables, interpret it of the desire
which the Devil had to destroy Moses by death, there being no man like Moses,
that saw God face to face; therefore his rage was great against him, and he
sought to destroy him; and to this purpose apply that of the Psalmist, Psalm 37
1. The wicked watches the righteous, and seeks to slay him. Among Christians
some say this striving was before, some after his burial; some before his
burial, as Junius, that his body might not be removed out of sight, but he
might satisfy his rage and malice upon it, in abusing it. But that is not so
probable, the body being suddenly disposed of by God to some secret place of
burial Some say after burial the Devil sought to take it up again* and upon
that ground arose this contention between him and Michael. But why should the
Devil contend so much about the buried body of Moses? To answer this we must
consider what might be the ends of Gods concealing his burial; possibly this
might be one, Least in a preposterous zeal, they should yield honor to the
dead body of such a famous and excellent Prophet, and so it might become a
snare to the people: possibly there might be something Typical in it; the dead
body of Moses was buried in an unknown place, least they should take it up, and
carry it into the Land of Canaan, to signify the abolition of the legal
Ordinances, under the Evangelike flate: So that to revive the Antiquated
Ceremonies of the Law now, is to but rake up Moses his dead body; Now the Devil
may be supposed to contend for the body of Moses, partly out of obstinate
curiosity, whereby sinful creatures are strongly inclined to desire things
forbidden: Partly to defeat the purposes of God: but chiefly by dead Moses, to
set up himself in the hearts of the living* seeking thereby to provoke them to
a worship of his relics or remains.

These questions premised, the explication of the words is easy, [ Michael the
Arch-Angel] that is some principal Angel deputed to this Ministry and service
[when he contended with the Devil, (...)] the word signifies an altercation or
contention in words, a dispute with the Devil [about the body of Moses] about
the knowledge of the place of his Burial; [ durst no^] his sear of God, modesty
and meekness would not permit him, [ bring against him a railing accusation]
(...), the judgment of blasphemy, or such unworthy Language as the heat of
contention is wont to provoke and extort from us. [But said, The Lord rebuke
thee] it is a modest referring of the matter to Gods cognizance, or a prayer
that the Lord would check this malicious opposition.

Observations are many. 1. Observe, That to aggravate Observat. 1.
their virulency, he compares it with the modesty of an Archangel, whence
note, That pride and contempt in them of a low degree, is less tolerable then
in those whom God has advanced to an higher rank and sphere Partly because
th^se have less temptation to be proud; and when a sin is committed without a
temptation, it is a sign that the heart is strongly inclined that way; as there
needs no force to make a bowl run downhill, because of its natural tendency:
their wants and meanness should keep them humble, we look that the fire should
go out when the fuel is taken away, when men have nothing to be proud of, the
want of an opportunity should make men at least forbear the sin. Partly,
because they have more reason to be humble, as the rich and grea have reason to
be thankful, so the poor have reason to be humble; with a low condition there
should be a lowly mind, it is better to be of an humble spirit with the lowly,
etc. Prove. 16. 19. Well then, poverty and pride are most unsuitable, pride is
allowable in none, but in the poor most prodigious; it is an odd sight to see
those of the highest Rank to turn fashionists, and display the E^signs of their
own vanity, but when servants, and those of a low degree, put themselves into
the Garb, these are prodiges of pride; as the modesty of the Archangel, was an
upbraiding to the pride of the Gnostics, so should those that are advanced to
the highest degree of honor, shame the meaner sort, with your comely plain.
Again, to see men of the greatest sufficiences, humble in style and mind, and
denying their great Parts for the sake of the simplicity of the Gospel; it is a
shame that persons of low parts should be puffed up, and appear flaunting in
the pomp of words, or blustering in Greek and Latin sentences, as if all
reading and learned worth, were their own; as the Apostle condemned the
Corinthians for the pompous use of Tongues in the Church, and shameth them by
his own example, 1 Cor. 14. 18. I thank God I speak with tongues more then you
all, yet rather, etc*

Again, To take down pride, look to others whom God has set higher, and yet
are more humble, as usually the higher the Sun, the less shadows it casts.
Usually Gods children carry a low mind in an high condition; James* 1. 10. they
are rich, yet made low, that is, lowly. If in the fullness of Riches, Honors,
Parts, and Enjoyments, they are so meek and humble, why should I that have less
temptations, be more proud? They are lifted up by God, but not in their own
spirits, I am a worm in a much lower Sphere, and yet of a prouder heart! they
are aff^ble, meek, modost* why am I so fierce and impatient of contradiction?
Once more, If the judgments of God light upon greater Personages for their
pride; say, what will become of me? in me it is more odious: If God destroy
those whose height is as the height of Cedars, Amos 2. 9. surely the Reed
should tremble: Many times mean and base people that have no tincture of
ingenuity; and are of no name or quality in the world have pride enough to be
bitter enemies to Gods children, David says, Psalm. 35. 15. The abjects
gathered themselves together to make Songs against me, when as God rebukes
Kings for their sakes; If he visit the Throne, will he not visit the Ale bench?
What scorn will he cast upon this saucy dust? these spightful worms that have
only malice enough to snarle, and can go no further; If the great men of the
earth tremble, shall the bondmen go free? Rev. 16. 15. But chiefly upon this
occasion would I commend to you, the example of the Lord Christ, to take down
pride; this is an example that will shame us indeed, what ever the pride be;
are you puffed up with pride of vain conceit? Christ stripped himself of all
his glory, Phil. 2. 7. with pride of revenge? men are loath to strike sale, to
seek to an enemy, they scorn it: Jesus Christ, though such an excellent person,
loved us first, 1 John 4. 19. sued to his enemies: is it disdain of our
condition, pride of murmurings? he made himself a worm and no man, and when he
was rich in the glory of the Godhead, became poor for our sakes, Matthew. 10.
24. The Desciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord: if we
be scorned, would we be better dealt with, then our master was; many times you
have seen a Master do the work of a servant to shame him, so did Christ: do but
think of Christ's excellency, and your own base condition, as here, to shame the
brutish Gnostics, the Apostle tells them, they took more upon them then a
glorious Angel.

Again, From the Archangels contending about the body Observat 2.
of Moses: The Devil would discover Moses his Grave, and the Archangel is
ready to resist him: The Note is, That God has Angels, and Archangels, that
are always ready to defend a good cause; They are many, the King of Heaven has
a brave Court. Dan. 7. 10. A thousand thousand Minister to him, and ten
thousand times ten thousand stand before him, Christ says he could pray for
twelve Ligions in an instant, Mat. 26. 53. Now a Legion in the least
computation is six thousand Foot* and seven hundred Horse: they are able, they
excel in strength; one Angel slew 185000 in one night, Isa. 37. 36. They are
always ready attending on Gods commands, Psalm. 103. 20. They rejoice in names
of service, more then names of honor. They are swift in execution, they are
described to have six wings a piece* Isaiah 6. 2. as being at the Lords beck,
and ready to execute his Command as soon as* they hear the word: All which,
First, Informs us of the danger of wicked men in opposing a good cause; they
fight not only against men, but against Angels. 2. That Angels have more to do
in humane affairs then we are aware of; there are evil Angels assisting in the
Counsels against the Church, and good Angels resisting, in those days of
conflict; The Combat is not only between men and men, but between Angels and
Angels, Dan. 10. 13. The protection of the holy Angels is invisible, but true
and real. 3. Here is comfort to Gods children, when they are embarked in an
hazardous, but in an holy business; there are far more with us, then can be
against us, 2 Kings 6. 16. there is God the Fathers power on the Churches side;
The Son puts forth the strength of his Mediation, Zech. 3. 2. The spirit
comforts and animateth us, and then holy Angels are employed as instruments;
The Lord Jesus and his Angels will stick to the Church, when none else dare,
Dan. 10. 21. There is none holds with me in these things, but Michael your
Prince When all humane strength falls, Christ by their Ministry can uphold
the affairs of the Church, omnipotency is a great deep; usually we look to
means, and can better conceive, of the operations of finite Creatures, then of
the infinite God, therefore does the Lord represent the help of the Church, as
managed by these powerful instruments: only now take heed that you do not
betray your succors, nor defraud your selves of their protection. 1. By
neglecting to seek to the God of Angels. Dan. 10. 12. From the first day thou
did set thine heart to understand, and did chasten thy self before thy God,
etc. we are not to pray to them, but for them, to the Lord. 2. By unwarrantable
practices, for then you join with Satan to their grief, Psalm. 34. 7. The Angel
encampeth about them that fear him. A good cause should be well managed, and
then trust God, who, if he sees fit to glorify himself by our deliverance,
rather then our sufferings, can find means enough to save us, when men fail.

Observe again, That Angels have a care not only of the Observat. 3.
souls, but of the bodies, yea even of the dead bodies of the Saints* as
Michael disputed with the Devil about the body of Moses. That you may
understand the particular care which the Angels have about the people of God, I
shall open it to you in several Propositions.

1. It Is certain, The Angels had a great care about the people of God in
ancient times, Examples are, found every where in the word of God; Lot was led
out of Sodom by Angels, Daniel taught by an Angel, Cornelius answered by an
Angel, an Angel withstood Balaam in the way, Numb. 22. An Angel walked with the
three children in the fiery Furnace, Dan. 3. 25. An Angel shuts up the
mouths of Lions, that they might not hurt Daniel in the Den, Dan. 6. 22. An
Angel comforted Paul in the Tempest, Act. 27. 23, 24. Scarce any remarkable
thing befell the people of God, but it was accomplished by their ministry.

2. The Ministry of Angels though not so visible and sensible, as heretofore i^
not wholly ceased; The privilege of it belongs to all Saints, Heb. 1. 14.
Are they not ministering spirits sent forth for the Heirs of salvation? all that
are called to inherit a blessing, were under their tutelage, so see, Psalm. 91.
12. and those instances alleged in the former Proposition, are patterns and
presidents by which* we may know what to expect; their tutelage then was more
visible and sensible, because the Church newly planted, needed to be confirmed,
but God would have us live by faith, and expect all our supports in a more
spiritual way* though we have not visible apparitions, yet we have real
experiments of their succor; the evil Angels appear not, yet we doubt not of
the hurt done by them; in the first times of the Gospel, Christ's bodily
presence was necessary, but now only his spiritual.

3. The proper object of their Ministry and care* are the children of God,
wicked men are not under their covert and protection; it is true, they may be*
under a general care, as Hagar and Ishmael, who are set out in Scripture, as
the Types of those that are rejected by the Lord, yet Genesis 21. 17. An Angel of
the Lord came and stood by Hagar, and said, the Lord has heard the cry of the
sad: though possibly this might be, as he was Abraham's Son; dogs in the House
have the Crumbs.

4. The Ministry of the Angels is over all the children of God, without
exception, not only Moses, but the meanest Saint is under their care; Gods love
to his people is not dispensed with respect to their peculiar pomp and
greatness, Mat. 18. 10. Offend not these little ones, for their Angels beheld
my Fathers face; it is chiefly meant of those that are little in esteem and
account in the world; the message of Christ's birth was brought by Angels to
Shepherds, feeding their flocks in the fields, Luke 3.

5. As no Saints are excepted from receiving the benefit of their Ministry, so
no Angels are excepted from being employed in i^: Michael contendeth with
Satan, and the Apostle says, (...), Are they not all, etc. Heb. 1. 14. The
Archangels themselves are ministering spirits; it is a rash boldness in the
Schoolmen to exempt any from this Office, what an instance is here of Gods
love, that the highest Angel should not be exempted from a care of the lowest
Saint.

6. That every single believer has his proper and allotted Angel to attend him
from his birth to his death, is rather matter of problem and dispute, than
positive assertion; there are some Scriptures make it probable* but not
certain; sometimes we read of one Angel attending many men* and at other times
of many Angels attending one man, as Jacob had many, Genesis 32. 1, 2. Gods Host,
etc. so Elisha, 2* Kings 6. 17. Elisha prayed and the Mountains were full of
Chariots and Horses of fire, that is, that is of Angels coming to offer help
in that case: It Is true, the opinion of a particular Angel Guardion was
ancient, Plato says, (...), and among the ancient Fathers, places of Scripture
are brought for it, that are full of probability, not cogency; one is that of
the old Testament, Genesis 48. 16. The Angel which redeemed me from all evil,
bless the Lads, etc. in which passage he seems to ascribe his preservation
and deliverance to* some particular Angel; but to this may be replied what was
before alleged of the Host of God, going along with him, and by this Angel is
meant the Lord Christ, who is alone the object of worship, and adoration; and
who because of the frequency of his personal appearance and mediation between
God and man, is set forth under the term of an Angel: The Rabbines expound it
of the Angel of Gods presence: Another place is, Mat. 18. 10. Their Angels see
my Fathers face, not the Angels, but their Angels; but the word there may only
imply their common interest in the whole Host of God; Christ does not say that
every one of them has an Angel: as for instance, it may be said, these
Prisoners have their Keepers, these Scholars have their Masters, these
Soldiers have their Captains, it does not follow that every one has a
particular Keeper, Master, Captain, etc. Another place is Acts 12. 15. When the
Maid said Peter was at the door, they distrusting her report, said, it is his
Angel; This place may be answered thus, That sayings of men in Scripture are
not all Scripture, or a part of our rule; and that many things were spoken by
the Disciples in their rudeness, which are not altogether justifiable; but
because this place is the main* let me examine it a little: Three opinions
there are about the place: Some understand it John's Disciples are called (...),
Angels, or Messengers of John Luke 7. 24.
Appellativ^ly, it is his Angel, or Messenger, sent by him out of Prison. But
R^oda heard Peter's voice, and that was the ground of the sayings: Others
understand it of some Angel come to give notice of his death, but that is
groundless: Lastly, some as Chrysostom, of a particular tutelar Angel; but
whence does it appear that these Angels had the shape and habit of those they
kept, and Angels do not use to knock at doors, and wait for opening: and if
Peter had a special Angel, it follows not that all have; the meaning probably
is, It Is a spirit that has assumed his shape.

7. Though it be not certain that every particular believer has an Angel
deputed to his attendance, yet in the general, there is an assurance of a
Guardianship, and Tutelage from the Angels; the Heirs of salvation have them
among them; if the whole City has a sufficient Guard, it is as good as if every
Citizen had a distinct Soldier to defend him; nay, it is more for our comfort
that we have many rather then one, we have to do with many enemies, and
therefore we need much assistance, Psalm 91. 12. He shall give his Angels charge
over thee: Many Angels are charged with our safety, and though they be not so
particularly conversant about us (as the other opinion conceives) yet they
behold the face of God, and are always in his presence, and wait for his
command, Psalm. 103. 20. who so cares for every one as if he had none to care
for besides him.

8. This Tutelage is from their first conception in the womb, till the
translation of body and soul into glory; survey all the passages of life from
the Womb to the Grave, nay, after death, till the Resurrection, the Ministry of
Angels does not wholly cease: their care begins as soon as the child is
quickened in the womb, for then they have another distinct charge to look
after; and as they are servants of providence by their help they are born and
brought into the world, Gods providence takes date thence, Gal. 1. 15. and
they, I say, are instruments of providence, they watch over us in infancy and
childhood; little ones are committed to their custody, and Babes and Sucklings
have their Angels, Mat 18. Jesus Christ was provided for in his Cradle by an
Angel, Mat. 2. 13. The Devil rampeth about the Elect whilst they are yet in
their swaddling clothes; That expression, Rev. 12. of the Dragons seeking to
devour the man*child, as soon as he was born, is figurative, but it alludeth to
what is true: Again, as we grow up they rejoice at our conversion Luke 15* we
read of joy in Heaven over a* sinner that repente^h; you cannot gratify the
Angels more then in your conversion to God; the Devil seeks to hinder it as
much as he can, but they rejoice when a brand is plucked out of the burning
Zech* 3. Again after conversion, they watch over us in duty and danger, and
temptations, in duties where Satan is most busy to hinder, Zech. 3. 1. they
are most helpful; the Angels are in the Assemblies of the faithful, 1 Cor. 11.
10. So in dangers, when Peter was in prison, God sends him an Angel to bring
him out, Acts 12. Ruffinus speaks of a young man, a Martyr on the Rack, that
had his face wiped by an Angel, and refreshed by him in the midst of his pains:
nay, in casual dangers, which we cannot foresee and prevent, Psalm. 91. 12. He
shall give his Angels charge over thee, that thou dash not thy foot against a
stone; so in Temptations, Mat. 4. 11. they ministered to Christ, when he was
tempted by the Devil; they came to show how God will deal with his people in
like cases: Once more, they are with us to comfort us in death; in the midst of
his Agonies the Lord Jesus was comforted and refreshed by an Angel, Luke 22.
43. so they are with the faithful, helping and easing them in their sicknesses:
After death they carry our souls to Heaven, as Lazarus was carried into
Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. 22. Though the body had not the honor of a pompous
burial, yet the soul is solemnly conveyed by Angels, and gathered up into the
communion of the souls of just men made perfect; as Christ himself also
ascended into Heaven in the company of Angels, Acts 1. Once more, after death
they guard our bodies in the Grave, as the Angels guarded Christ's Sepulcher,
Mat. 28. 2, 3, 4. God did set his Guards, as well as well as the Highpriests:
Their last Ministry and service about the faithful, is to gather up their
bodies at the last day They shall gather up the Elect from the four winds, Mat.
24. 31 and then their Office and charge cease.

9. This Tutelage is ever administered according to Gods pleasure, Psalm. 103.
21. Ye Ministers of his that do his pleasure, not their own, not ours, but his
pleasure; the help of Angels is more powerful, but no more absolute then the
help of other means, for it depends still on the will of God, as all other
means of defense and outward support do; their employment is to attend us, and
serve us, according to the Lords direction.

Let us now apply what has been spoken. First, It serves for Information, to
show us,

1. The care of God for the Elect; He ingageth his own Use 1.
power for our preservation, as also the Mediation of Christ, the conduct of
the Spirit, and the Ministry of Angels: In Zech. 1. you have a Schem of
providence, the man that stood among the Myrtle Trees, sent the Angels too and
fro, throughout the earth, and then they come and give him an account of what
passes in the world; The Man is Jesus Christ, who to pre-figure his
Incarnation, is thus represented, and he has all the Angels at his command, to
send them forth as the condition of his Church requires; and they as his
Intelligencers and Agents, are to bring him notice how all affairs and matters
pass in the world; Thus does the Lord set forth himself to our capacity, and
that we who are used to means, may the better believe in him.

2. The Condiscention, and humility of the Angels, they rejoice in names of
service* more then in names of honor, and will perform Offices of respect to
the meanest Creatures an Angel clothed with light and glory, would come to the
Shepherds, and do not refuse at Christ's direction to wait upon those who are
despised and rejected of men.

3. It informs us of their mankindness, which shameth our envy, their love is
great to mankind, and are affectionately desireous of our good, and therefore
decline no Office of love and service to us; they rejoiced when the world was
created as a dwelling place for man, Job. 38. 7. And again at the coming of
Christ, which was man's restoring, Luke 2. 13. And so at the calling and
conversion of a sinner, Luke 15. 7. when we come to be possessed of our
privileges in Christ.

4. It informs us of the dignity of the Saints, what a price does the Lord,
and the holy Angels set upon the meanest Christian; Gods own Court is their
Guard: certainly a godly man though of the meanest calling, should not be
contemptible; there is somewhat in holiness more then the world sees; some
worth in it, or else God would not set such a Guard upon it, a Guard so full of
state and strength; 'twas a mighty favor for Mordicai to have a Courtier of a
great King to wait upon him for one hour: We have Angels that still attend and
wait for our good.

5. It informs us of the obedience of the Angels in the lowest services; God
says, go, and they go, though it be to wait upon poor and mean Creatures; we
usually dispute commands when we should practice them, and stick at duties that
have any thing of abasement, and self-denial in them, in the Lords Prayer we
are brought to this pattern, Mat. 6. Thy will be done in earth as it is in
Heaven, that is, by the holy Angels; it should be done by us with like
readiness and submission: No Office or employment that God calls us to,
should be looked upon as too mean and base for us, the Angels that excel in
strength, when God commands, being willing to condescend to the Guardianship
of men.

Secondly, It serves for Exhortation to the children of Use 2.
God.

1. To wait for the Angels help, Do you keep in Gods ways and in your Callings,
and you shall have safety and defense, when the Lord sees it fit for you;
remember you are a spectacle to God, Men and Angels, in all your actions,
trials and sufferings, and bear up with a confidence, becoming Christians,
though you can do little as to the promotion of Christ's interest; What cannot
God do by his Angels?

2. To behave our selves as those that do expect this help, not tempting God,
not grieving the Angels; We should take heed how we carry our selves in regard
of this honorable attendance; our sins and vanity offends them, as it does
God* Let was a man of a mixed nature, yet vexed with the impure conversation of
the Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2. 8. Angels are pure and holy Creatures, that still
abode in the truth; pride, lust, and vanity, is very offensive to them,
especially impurities and undecencies in Gods worship, about which they have a
special attendance; therefore the Apostle bideth the women to cover their heads
because of the Angels, 1 Cor. 11. 10. their fashion being to come into the
Congregation with loose dishevelled locks, he minds them of the presence of
the Angels: We may use a like Argument to women to cover their naked Breasts,
now their immodesty is grown so impudent as to outface the Ordinances of God.

3. To observe this when it is bestowed upon us; The Angel of the Lord encampeth
round about them that fear him; and then, Oh come taste and see, Psalm. 34. 7, 8.
When deliverances are strange and wonderful, and there is the least concurrence
of visible causes to defend Christ's interest, remember that all things visible
and invisible, were created by Christ, and for Christ, even Thrones,
Principalities and Powers, Col. 1. 16.

Thirdly, Here is Reproof to wicked men that perform the Use 3.
Devils Ministry act the part of the bad Angels rather then the good; despise,
slander, oppose, seduce, and tempt the children of God: how dare thou
despise those whom the Angels honor? you think them unworthy of your
countenance and company* when Angels disdain not to vouchsafe them their
service and attendance; you slander those whom they defend, and oppose and
persecute them whom they are engaged to protect; and wrong them whose Angels
behold the face of God; and tempt and seduce them, whom they rejoice to see
brought home to God.

I have but one word more, and I have done with this Observat. 4.
Point. Get this interest if you would be under this Tutelage; get an interest
in Christ, and then you get an interest in the Angels, their Angels, etc. Mat.
18. 10. they are not called Gods, but theirs, hereafter the Saints shall be
(...), like the Angels in Heaven, Luke 20. 30. and here, till we have this
glory, we shall have their defense.

In the next place, somewhat may be observed from the style and Character of
this Angel, Michael the Archangel* That there is an order among the Angels,
both good and bad; they have their distinct heads, we read of Michael, and we
read of Beelzebub; there is an order in Hell, thence that expression, Mat. 25.
41. The Devil and his Angels, which seems to intimate a Prince among the
unclean spirits; much more is there an order among the good Angels. God that
made all things in order, would not endure confusion among those heavenly
Creatures, for that would seem to infringe their happiness: but now to define
this Order, and the several degrees of it, were but to intrude our selves into
things we have not seen, Col. 2. 19. See Rivets Cathol. Orthodox. de Aug. Grad.
Cyril calls it (...), the domineering of bold spirits: The Schoolmen take
upon them as if they knew all the particulars of their government and
distinction; but in things not revealed there can be no certainty; the Apostle
indeed speaks of several ranks of invisible Creatures, Col. 1. 16. Thrones,
Dominions, Principalities, and Powers; but who can particularly define their
Office and Order? a distinction there is, but what it is we know not: however,
the general consideration is useful. Partly to show us the necessity of order
and subordination, no Creatures can subsist without it; they that are against
Magistracy, are against peace and happiness; the Angels and Devils are not
without their Heads and Princes. Partly to represent to us the Majesty of God;
He has Angels, and Archangels, Thrones' Dominions, Principalities and Powers;
our eyes are dazzled at the magnificence and luster of earthly Kings, when we
see them surrounded with Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls, and Barons: Oh what poor
things are these to those Orders and degrees of Angels, with which God is
environed? Partly to acquaint us with the happiness of the everlasting estate:
It Is the misery of the wicked, that they shall be cast out with the Devil and
his Angels, and our happiness that we shall make up one Church and Assembly,
with Angels, and Archangels, Heb. 12,

Somewhat may be observed from the matter of the contention, Observat. 5.
the body of Moses, which the Devil would abuse to Idolatry, that is the reason
why he was so earnest in the contest: Note, That the Devil loves Idolatry; all
false worships either directly, or by consequence, tend to the honor of the
Devil; therefore Idol* Feasts are called the Table of Devils, 1 Cor. 10. 31.
Now it is observable that those Sacrifices which were offered to the true God,
but in an unbecoming manner, are called the Sacrifices of Devil, Levit. 17. 7.
compare it with verse. 3. 4. Though they killed a Goat, or an Ox, or a Lamb, to
the Lord for a Sacrifice, because 'twas in the Camp, and not before the
Tabernacle; God says* they shall no more offer Sacrifice to Devils: so it is
said of Gods own people* Deuteronomy. 32. 17. They sacrifice to Devils, and not unto
God; in their intention it was unto God, but in the issue, and necessary
interpretation of it, 'twas to the Devil: Now the Devil delights in Idols and
false worships: Partly in malice to God: the Lord* above all things is most
tender of his worship, and therefore Satan is most busy to corrupt it: There
are two things that are dear to God. His Truth, and his Worship; now Satan
bends his strength and spite, to corrupt this Truth with error, and his
Worship with superstition. Partly in malice and spite to men, God is a jealous
God; Satan knows that corruptions of worship do not go unrevenged, Psalm. 16.
4. Sorrows shall be multiplied on them that hasten after another God, of all
sinners they shall not escape; the severest revenges of God have been
occasioned by prevarications in worship, as Lev. 10. 3. on Aarons sons, strange
fire in the ^ ensors brought down strange fire from Heaven, so 1 Samuel 6. 20.
There were 50000 Bethshemites slain for an undue Circumstance: so the breach
made upon Vzzah, 2 Samuel 6. 6, 7. the Devil is not ignorant of this, and
therefore longing for man's destruction, seeks to hasten it as much as he can
by Idolatry, and false worship. Partly out of pride, he is constant in evil,
and abode in pride, though he abode not in the truth, he would fain be
worshipped, and assumed into a fellowship of the Divine Honor and glory; he
^aith to Christ, Mat 4. 9. Fall down and worship me, and I will give thee all
these things, the Devil is not Changling though he does not retain his place,
he retains his pride; nothing so pleasing to him as Worship and Adoration,
and so he can get it any way from the creatures, be is contented.

Well then, it shows us.

1. What care we should take to be right in worship* both Use 1.
for the object and manner: it is Idolatry not only to worship false Gods in the
place of the true God, but to worship the true God in a false manner, and both
sorts do gratify the Devil; when he cannot hold the people under utter
blindness and Paganism, he is glad if he can draw them to undue Rites and
Ceremonies in worship; therefore let us hate the least kind of Idolatry, if we
would not prog for the Devils Kingdom: David says, Psalm. 16. 4. I will not
take their name into my lips, that he would abhor the very mention of Idols: so
Hosea 2. 16. God would no more be called Baal, though it signified Lord and
Husband, because the Title had been applied to Idols; The Israelites when they
took Cities, they changed their names if they had any tincture of Idolatry,
Numb. 32. 38. Nebo and Baalmeon, their names being changed; so exact should we
be in keeping from Idols.

2. Let us beware of Idolatry, Satan loves it, and that is motive enough; we
should hate as Christ hates, and love as he loves, Rev. 2* 6. and on the
contrary, love what Satan hates, and hate what he loves, naturally we are
wondrous prone to this sin, and therefore Idolatry is reckoned as a work of the
flesh, Gal. 5. 20. man naturally has a corrupt, and working fancy and
imagination, which depending upon sense, forms fleshly conceptions, and
notions of God; and therefore are we so prone to err in this worship: it is not
needful, (I hope) to speak to you of Paganish, and Popeish Idolatry: Let me
only now dissuade you,

First from making the true God an Idol in your thoughts, by forming
apprehensions unworthy of the glory of his Essence, Psalm. 50. 21. Thou
thoughtest that I was altogether like thy self; Now thus we do when we conceive
him of such a mercy as to hold fellowship with one that continues under the
full power of his sins, so weak as not to be able to help in deep extremities,
Zech. 8. 6. Of a rigorous and revengeful disposition, as not to pardon injuries
and offenses, upon submission and repentance, Hos. 11. 8. of a fickle nature,
so as to fail in his promises, Numb. 23. 19. Thus it is easy to turn the true
God into an Idol of our own brains. To remedy this, consider God in his works,
and in Christ. In his works, Cyril I remember observes that before the flood,
we read of no Idolatry. Aquinas adds a reason to the observation, because the
memory of the Creation was then fresh in their thoughts: Again, look upon God
in Christ, you heard before in Levit. 17. if they did not bring their Sacrifice
to the Tabernacle, it was called a Sacrifice of Devils; The Tabernacle was a
Type of Christ; you make God an Idol* when you worship him out of Christ, For
the Father will be honored in the Son* John 5. Therefore when ever you go to
God, take Christ along with you.

Secondly, From setting up any Idol against God in your affections, when you
set up any thing above God in your esteem, especially in your trust; that is an
Idol, covetousness is twice called Idolatry, Col. 3. 5. Ephesians. 5* 5. because it
does withdraw our affections from God; yea our care, our esteem, our trust,
which is the chiefest homage and respect which God expects from the Creature:
I mention these things because I would speak somewhat to practice, and because
Satan is gratified with spiritual Idolatry, as well as with that which is gross
and bodily.

From that Clause [ about the body of Moses] once more Observat. 6.
observe, That of all kind of Idolatry, the Devil abuses the world most with
Idolatrous respects to the bodies and Relics of dead Saints. If you ask why, I
answer. Partly because this kind of Idolatry is most likely to take, as being
most plausible and suitable to that reverend esteem which we have of those that
are departed in the Lord; and so our Religious affections become a snare to us:
Partly because when men become objects of Worship and Adoration, the Godhead
is made more contemptible, and men's conceits of a divine power, run at a lower
rate every day. Partly because this malicious fiend hops this way to beat the
Lord with his own weapon; when the bodies and Relics of those Saints, who by
the famousness of their examples were likely to draw many to God, do as much,
or more, withdraw men from him; and superstition does as much hurt, as their
example did good. Partly because the Devil by long experience has found this
to be a successful way in the world, Lactantius proves it, that the Idolizing
of famous men, was the rise of all Idolatry; and Tertullian in the end of his
Apology, observes the same, that Heathen Idolatry came in this way; sub
nominibus and imaginibus mortuorum, by a reverence to the images of dead men,
whose memory was precious amongst them: Nin^s or Nimrod, the first Idolater,
set up his own dead Father B^lus; whence came the names of Baal and Bell, for an
Idol: The Teraphim* stolen by Rachel* Gen* 31. 35* were the images of their
Ancestors, whom Laban worshipped; so in the primitive times, before any other
Idolatry was brought into the Church, they began with the Tombs and Shrines of
the Martyrs.

First, It shows us the first rise of Idolatry; respect to Use 1.
the Relics and Remains of some men, famous in their generations: Satan
attempted it betimes, not only among the Heathens, but among the people of God;
he contended for the body of Moses, that he might set it up for this use; but
that which he could not obtain then, he has effected now in the Roman
Synagogue, by the Arms, the Legs, the Hands, the Feet, the Pictures of the
Martyrs: surely such a known Artifice, and ancient method of deceit, (a man
would think) should long ere this have been discerned, but that God has given
them up to believe a lie: Well might the Antichristian state be called, Rev.
11. 8. Babylon, Sodom, and Egypt; that is, Babylon for Idolatry* S^dom for
filthyness, and Egypt for Ignorance and darkness; the same Idolatry being
practiced, which was in use in the darkest times of Paganism: Heathenism and
Popery differ but little, only the names are changed, a new Saint for an old
Heathen Idol; their canonizing, and the Heathens (...), are much alike; so are
their Saints, and the Heathens and Heroes and middle poners: only that the
Papists have put many in the Calender, which either never were in the world or
else were wicked and traitorous; as our B^cket, and St. George, an Arrian
Bishop, that so the Devil might be doubly gratified, by the Shrine it self, and
that by the canonization of the infamous person, sin might become less odious.

Secondly, It shows the perverseness of men, who are apt superstitiously to
regard the Relics of them dead, whom they despised living: Moses was often
opposed living, and after death likely to be adored; as it is often the
condition of Gods people, to live hated, and dye Sainted. Vetus morbus est
(says Salvian) quo mortui sancti coluntur, vivi contemnuntur: The Scribes and
Pharisees garnished the Tombs of the dead Prephets, and killed the living, Mat
23. 29, 30. And the Jews in the fifth of John, pretended love to Moses, and
showed hatred to Christ; posterity honors them whom former ages destroyed:
living Saints are an eyesore, they torment the world, either by their example,
or their reproofs, Rev. 11. 10. Heb. 11. 7. but objects out of sight, do not
exasperate, and stand in the way of our lusts; this fond affection is little
worth; those that were ready to adore Moses would not imitate him.

Again from that [He durst not] (...), he had not Observat. 7.
the boldness to do any thing contrary to the Law of God, or unbeseeming his
Rank and Ministry: Note, That sin is a bold contest, or a daring of God: Every
sin is an affront to the Law that forbids it, 2 Samuel 12. 9. Wherefore have
thou sinned in ^espising the Commandment? a sinner does in effect say, What
care I for the Commandment? I will go on for all that; but a godly man fears
the Commandment, Prove. 13. 13. If a Law of God stands in his way, he durst
not go forward; he fears more to break a Law, then to meet with the Devil in
all his ruff, or any opposition from the world; this is a holy timerousness:
whereas on the contrary, no such boldness as in sinning: it is not only a
despising of the Law, but a contest with God himself, 1 Cor. 10. 22. Do we
provoke the Lord to jealousy, are we stronger than he? will you enter into the
lists with God? as if you could make your part good against him? Ezekiel 22.
14. He that sins against light and conscience, he bids open defyance to the
Majesty of God; and his lust and Gods will do contend for the mastery. Let this
make us afraid of sin, it is a daring attempt of the Creature against his Maker;
a challenging of God to the Combat; well might the Apostle say, that the
carnal mind is (...) enmity against God, Romans 8. 7. Therefore when you are
tempted, consider, What am I now a doing? Shall I challenge the Combat of my
Maker? Draw Omnipotency about my ears? An Angel durst not: How can I do this
wickedness, and sin against God? Genesis 39 9. Again, It informs us what is the
proper remedy against sin; an holy awe and fear; therefore the first and
chiefest point of true wisdom, is made to be the fear of God, Prove. 9. 10 so
Prove 14. 21. this keeps the soul from daring. Jobs es^hewing evil is ascribed
to his fearing God, Job 1. 1. There are two Grounds of this fear, Gods Power,
and Goodness.

1. Gods Power, Shall we contend with Him who can command Legions? surely he
will always overcome ^hen he judges, Romans 3. 4. and have the best of it at
last, and so this sin will be my ruin: there is a difference between striving
with him in a sinful, and wrestling with him in a gracious way, there God will
be overcome by his own strength, Command ye me, etc. Isaiah 45. 11. but when
you have the confidence to contest with him in a sinful way, what will become
of you? Psalm 76. 7. Thou, even thou art to be feared, and who can stand in thy
wrath when thou art angry? Man may make his part good against man, but who can
cope with the Lord himself?

2. Gods Love and Mercy. That should beget a fear, or an unwillingness to
displease God, Hosea 3. 5. They shall fear the Lord and his goodness; not only
abstain from sin (as a Dog from the bait, for fear of a Cudgel) out of
bondage, or servile fear, but out of an holy childlike affection to God, and so
do not only forbear sin, but abhor it; it is base and servile, when we are moved
with no other respects but our own danger; there is an holy fear, which arises
from grace, and partly of nature: an Archangel durst not, that is, the
holiness of his Nature would not permit him; there is an holy reverend fear, by
which we fear to offend our good God, as the greatest evil in the world; and it
arises partly from the new Nature; and partly from thankfulness to God,
because of his Mercy in Jesus Christ.

I have done with this Note when I have told you, That boldness in sinning,
resembles the Devil; but an holy fear resembles Michael; it is Devil like to
adventure upon sin, without fear and shame: Satan had the impudency to seek to
defeat the Lords purpose of burying the body of Moses, but the good Angel in
opposing him, durst not bring a railing accusation. Certainly, They that fear
neither God nor man, Luke 18. 7. have out-grown the heart of a man, and are
next to the Devils; many account it a praise to themselves when they are bold
to engage in vilanous actions and attempts; Oh to be presumptious and
self-willed, is the worst 2 Pet. 2. 10.
Character that can be given to a man; a stubborn boldness argues a seared
conscience.

Once more from that [(...) He durst not] That Observat. 8.
the Angels are of a most holy Nature, which will not permit them to sin:
Therefore they are called holy Angels. Mat. 25. 31. and the Devils unclean
spirits: In their Apparitions they usually came in a Garb that represented
their innocence, as at Christ's Sepulcher, there were two Angels in white, the
one at head, the other at feet, where Jesus had lain, Mat* 28. 4. so to Daniel,
Dan 10. 5. one appeared having his loins girt with fine Gold of Vphaz, with
long white Robes; Gold, to show his Majesty; in white Robes, as an Emblem of
purity and holiness: see Acts 10. 2. Now this holiness they have partly by the
gift of God in their Creation, God made them so at the first, which may beget
an hope in us men; the same God must sanctify us, that made the holy Angels:
surely he can wash us, though never so filthy and make us whiter then snow,
Psalm 51. 7. Partly by the merit of Christ, which reached to things in Heaven
as well as in earth Col. 1. 20* Ephesians. 1. 10. if those places be not cogent, but
be thought to intend the glorified Saints; yet because they are called Elect
Angels, 1 Timothy 5. 21. And all election is carried on, in and by Christ, Ephesians. 1.
4. It seems probable at least, that they have benefit by him; yea Heb: 12*
22, 23. they are made a part of that general Assembly, of which Christ is the
Head, and so by consequence, they are members of the redeemed society, which
should encourage us the more to come to Christ: Angels have much of their
whiteness from being washed in Christ's blood; they are preserved in Jesus
Christ as well as we, and have their confirmation from him, or else they had
fallen with the other Apostate Spirits.

Again, This Holiness is the more increased and augmented,

1. By their constant Communion with God, for their always beholding his Face,
must needs beget the more holy awe and reverence: Michael durst not, etc. It Is
a great advantage to holiness, to set God before our eyes, and to foresee him
in all our ways, Psalm 18. 23. I was upright before thee; that is, the thought
of his being before God made him more sincere; He that does evil has not seen
God, in the third Epistle of John, verse. 11. that is, has no acquaintance with
him, the good Angels being so near the chiefest good, are at the greater
distance from evil.

2. By their continual obedience; They do his Commandments, hearkening to the
voice of his word, Psalm 103. 20. exercise perfecteth and strengthens every
habit; the Angels, the more they do the will of God, the more they hate what is
contrary to his will; the evil Angels grow worse by frequent acts of spite and
malice, and the good Angels better by frequent acts of duty: For the first, see
1* John 3. 8. The Devil sins from the beginning, Satan is still a sinning,
and his whole life a continued act of Apostasy: so the good Angels, are always
doing, they rest not day and night, Rev. 4. 8. Surely 'twill be a matter of
great advantage to exercise our selves unto godliness, the greater will be our
hatred of sin, and delight in obedience: as on the other side, the exercising
of the heart unto sin, does much strengthen and increase it, 2 Pet. 2. 14. In
Heaven, where Use 1.
there is continual duty, there is no sin.

Let us apply it now.

First, It serves to humble us, we are the next rank of reasonable Creatures,
but how do we differ from them? their natures engage them to holiness, and ours
being corrupted engage us to sin; their nature will not permit them to sin, and
our nature will not permit us to do that which is good, Romans 7. 21. and yet the
Angels are ashamed of this their nature; they cover their faces, when they
behold Gods* Job. 15. 14, 15. What is man that he should be clean? and he that
is born of a woman that he should be righteous? Behold he puts no trust in
his Saints; yea the Heavens are not clean in his sight. These holy Angels, when
they compare themselves with God, are abased; and should not we much more? See
also Job 4. 19.

Secondly, It serves to stir us up to holiness: you will say, where lies the
Motive? I Answer,

1. We are bound as well as they; they behold his face, and we behold his face
in a glass; we are under a Law as well as they, yea commanded to observe their
pattern, Mat. 6. 10. Thy will be done on earth as it is in Heaven. The examples
of the Saints on earth, are no fit Copy for us to write after, for there we
shall find many of the Letters set awry; in their lives, corruption is more
visible then grace; therefore Christ gives us a Copy from Heaven that we might
aim at the holiness and perfection of the Angels: it is but equal that we who
expect to be like the Angels in glory, Luke 20. 36. (...), should be like them
in grace now: many would strive to be as Angels for gifts and par^s, but not
for holiness; for exact purity, and cheerfulness. and readiness in service,
which yet are the things propounded to our imitatation; the Devil retains
cunning since his Apostasy; to be wise to do evil, is to be like the bad
Angels, not the good; if you would not be cast out with them hereafter, you
should not take their Copy and example for imitation, but that of the holy
Angels.

2. We are bound more then they, as being of an inferior rank: and acts of
submission and obedience, do chiefly oblige inferiors, the Angels themselves
are inferior to God; but dwellers in Houses of clay, much more; that passage
of the Psalmist is emphatical, Psalm. 103. 20. The Angels that excel in strength
do his Commandments: shall the Peasant scorn that work in which the Prince
himself is engaged? if the glorious mighty Angels durst not sin against God, we
should not much more: When John would have worshipped the Angel, he says, Rev.
22. 9. See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant: Ah who would decline
the work, when an Angel is our fellow servant? when these mighty spirits put
their necks to the work of the Lord, shall sorry man be excused?

3. We are the more bound for their sakes, because of their Tutelage, they are
present with us: we are awed by a man of gravity, much more should we be by the
presence of an Angel: When Cato was upon the Stage, they durst not call for
their obscene Sports; there is an Angel always by you; What reports (think you)
will they carry to Christ, if they should see any thing that is unseemly? 1 Timothy 5. 21. I charge you before God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect
Angels, etc. The holy Angels are as it were, the Spies, and Intelligencers of
Heaven, and do acquaint Christ not only with our miseries, but our sins: Gods
omni-presency is a great depth, we cannot fathom it with our thoughts, and
therefore it works but little with us; the nearer things come to the manner
of our presence, the more do they affect us: consider the Angels are present
with you in the Room where (it may be) you are acting your privy wickedness.

Again we had need be holy, the rather for the Angels sake, because else we
shall lose their Tutelage; they care not to take notice of an impure, obstinate
sinner, Psalm 34. ^* The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear
him: they that fear God themselves, delight most in them that do likewise:
sutableness of Spirit and life, breeds an holy and sweet familiarity between
us; they delight to keep us, and go with us here, that they may lay a
Foundation for a more familiar acquaintance in Heaven: Now shall we grieve such
blessed companions! When Balaam went to curse the people of God, a good Angel
resists him, Number. 22. 22. If an Angel stood in the way of a Sorcerer, much
more do they seek to stop and prevent the miscarriages and offenses of Gods
children; will you break forth or go on violently, when an Angel stands in
the way? and leave their Tutelage for a lust? they are holy, and disallow all
carnal enterprises, and would withstand the execution of them: will you
constrain them to forsake you? You know how it sped with Josiah, when he would
not turn his face, but go out without the defense of God and his Angels, see 2 Chronicles. 35. 22. He was wounded in the battle, and goes home and dies,

Thirdly, It teaches us to be more awful, all fear is not slavish; the Angels
that have a pure nature, are afraid to sin, we have a mixed nature: corruption
is already gotten into our souls, and therefore have more need of caution; as
they that have an enemy without, and a treacherous party within, have need to
watch and ward; fear is all the remedy left us: we cannot stop the flux of
natural corruption, but we may withstand an actual temptation; as the Angels
resist the admission of sin: so let us withstand the increase and propagation
of it; we are always in the presence of God, and shall we affront him to his
face? fear keeps the Angels pure, and us holy, them from the admission of
sin, and us from the commission of it: so Solomon says, Blessed is he that
fears always, Prove. 28. 14. that is, not that perplexeth himself with
needless terrors and scruples, that were a torture, not a blessedness; that is
the Devils fear, who believe and tremble: But when we are always cautious, out
of a deep respect to God, that we dare not offend him at any time, this is a
blessed fear, like the good Angels fear; as Michael here durst not bring a
railing accusation.

The next Point is from that [a railing Accusatio^] in the Original it is (...),
the judgment, or sentence of Observat. 9.
Blasphemy, or evil speaking: The meaning is, such unworthy Language as would
not become any serious judgment or process; and because the Angel* was a party,
not a Judge, we translate it not a railing Judgment, but a railing Accusation.
Thence observe* That to the worst* Adversary, in the b^st cause, railing and
reviling must not be used. Michael when contending with the Devil about the
body of Moses, etc. The Reasons are,

1. Because such Reproaches come from an evil principle, contempt or passion;
both of which argue pride; one that over-valueth himself, disdaineth others,
and stormeth when he is crossed, as a full stream roareth and swells, when it
meets with a dam and obstruction.

2. Such Reproaches are most unsuitable to matters of Religion; the God of peace
will not be served with a wrathful spirit, and Christ's warfare needs no
carnal weapons. Christianity of all Religions is the meekest and most humble;
the Foundation of it is the Lamb slain; and the consignation, and sealing of
it, is by the Spirit, who descended in the form of a Dove, both emblems of a
modest humility; and should a meek Religion be defended by the violence and
fury of our passions? Cursing does ill become them that are called to inherit a
blessing, 1 Pet. 3. 9.

3. They are flatly against the word; the Scripture is a great friend to the
peace of humane societies, for it condemns the least offensive word and
gesture, Isa. 58. 9. Thou shall put away from thee the yoke, and the putting
forth of the finger; a gesture of indignation, and therefore God would have it
laid aside, even the putting forth of the finger, as well as the yoke broken:
So see Mat. 5. 22. But I say unto you, whosoever is angry with his brother
without a cause, is in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say unto his
brother Racha, is in danger of the Council: and whosoever shall say thou fool,
shall be in danger of Hell fire. The Scribes and Pharisees had restrained the
fifth Commandment, to the gross act of murder; Christ tells them, that rash
anger, with all the expressions of it, is murder: His expressions allude to
the Courts of the Jews, three there were especially among them; the lowest, the
middle, and the highest: There lowest Judicatory was of three men, who took
cognizance of lighter matters; as injuries and strifes about goods, and things
of a pecuniary concernment: this Court was set up in lesser Towns, that had few
inhabitants: The second Court was of three and twenty men, before whom the
weightiest causes were brought; concerning the life of a man, all Capital
crimes, or if an Ox had goared a man or woman; or in case of any abominable
commixtion with a Beast, if a woman approached to a Beast, etc. Levit. 20. 16.
This Court was set up in all the Cities of P^laestina, and was called the
lesser Sanhedrim; and because Jerusalem was the head City, the Seat of the
Prince, and Temple was there; therefore in that City were two of these lesser
Sanhedrim, the lower Sat in the Gate of the Mountain; that is, that Gate which
gave entrance to the Mountain of the Temple; the other being the higher, Sat
in the Gate of Efra, near the Porch of the Temple. The third Judicatory was the
greater Sanhedrim, which consisted of seventy men, in imitation of the Council
of God to Moses, Numb. 11. 16. This was the highest Judicatory, from whence
there was no Appeal, as there might be from the lower Courts to this: into this
Assembly were chosen such as did excel others for Nobility and Wisdom; and
that by a solemn laying on of hands; strangers or unclean persons, or common
people, might not come nigh unto them: To this Tribunal were referred all
doubtful matters, too hard for inferior Courts to decide, Deuteronomy. 8. 8. 9. as
also all things that did belong to the twelve Tribes, or to the whole Nation;
all things that concerning the High Priest, matters of war, and peace, the
false Prophet, etc. therefore Christ says, Luke 13. 33. It cannot be that a
Prophet should perish out of Jerusalem, that being the City where the Sanhedrim
sat, by this Court was Christ condemned, and the Apostles, Acts, Chap. 4. 5.
and Steven, Chap. 6, 7. and Paul, Acts 23. 1. They sat in a part of the
Temple, called Gasith; their punishments were strangling, beheading, storing,
burning; those that were condemned to be burned, were burnt in the Valley of
Hinnon, and in great cases besides his co^p^ral death, the Malefactor was
appointed and accursed to the judgment of Hell: Let me apply all to the present
case: Christ does not meddle with the lowest Court* the judgment of three men,
because Capital matters did* not belong to their cognizance; and his intent is
to show what a Capital matter the least expression of anger is: Whosoever is
angry* with his Brother without a cause (says he) is in danger of judgment;
that is, of the judgment of twenty three men, to show that rash anger is before
God a Capital matter. And whosoever shall say to his brother Racha* thou vain
and w^^less f^llow; this was the lowest kind of contumely, then in use; some
make it only an Interjection of indignation: [ is in danger of the Council]
that is, of the Sanhedrim, which notes, that Anger expressed, though in the
lowest way, is an higher fault then single and b^re anger, as the fault was
greater for which they appeared before the higher Sanhedrim, then that for
which they appeared before the twenty three Judges: [ But whosoever shall say
thou fool] This notes a higher contempt, as implying a charge, not only of
weakness of nature, but of sin and wickedn^ss, [he is in danger of Hell fire]
which was the highest judgment of the Sanhedrim, to burn them in the Valley of
Hinnom, and to leave them accursed till the Lord come; and so proportionably it
notes the greatness of the crime, which is committed in slandering and
reproching our brethren; it is a most odious sin before God: for in allusion to
man's judgment, he shows, that though there be degrees in the sin, and will be
in the punishment, yet the whole kind is very displeasing to the Lord.

4. Because Reproaches have an influence, and do exasperate rather then
convince: The Dog that follows the game with barking and bawling, loses the
prey; and there is not a more likely way to undermine the truth, then an
unseemly defense of it: Satan is mightily gratified (if men had eyes to see it)
with the ill managing of Gods cause.

First it serves for Information, to show us the vanity of Use 1.
those excuses by which men would disguise their wrath and passion; What will
you plead, I am in the right way, it is Gods cause. Answ. Passion is blind, and
cannot judge, James 1. 20. The wrath of man works not the righteousness of
God; the wrong way may be usually descryed by the excesses and violences of
those that are engaged in it: if we be in the right, extremities and furies of
passion, are not lawful, our religious affections may over-set us; when
Religion which should limit us, is made a party to engage them; it is hard to
keep bounds; a stone the higher the place from whence it falls, gives the
more dangerous blow; so the higher the matter about which we contend: usually
our Anger falls with the more violence, and is the more unmortified, because
of the pretense of zeal: if the erring parties offend through ignorance,
remember a bone out of joint must be settled again with a gentle hand, Gal. 6.
1. Are they opposite stubborn? in meekness instruct those that oppose
themselves, 2 Timothy 2. 25. when their absurd opposing is apt to tempt us to
rage, passion and reproach, we must contain our selves; the hasty Disciples knew
not what spirit they were of.

Do they provoke, revile, wrong us first? Answ. The railing and ill dealing of
another, does not dissolve the bond of our duty to God; to return injury for
injury, is but to act over their sin; 'twas bad in them, and it is worse in us;
for he that sins by example, sins doubly, as having had experience of the
odiousness of it in another: Qui malum imitatur, bonus esse non potest: revenge
and injury differ only in order of time, the one is first, the other second in
the fault, and 'twas no excuse to Adam that he was not first in the
transgression: Christianity teaches us a rare way of overcoming injuries, not
only by patience, but doing good to those that wrong us, Romans 12. 17. and 1
Pet. 3. 9. render not reviling for reviling, but contrariwise blessing; we have
for our pattern Christ, who being reviled, reviled not again, 1 Pet. 2. 23. and
herein he was imitated by his Disciples, 1 Cor. 4. 13. (...), being defamed we
entreat, a Motto which I would have prefixed to all rejoynders, or replies to a
virulent opposition; Calvin's modesty concerning Luther, is notable; Etiam^i me
diabolum vocarit eum tamen insignem Dei ser^um agnoscam, Though he should call
me Devil, yet God forbid but I should account him an eminent servant of Christ.
'Twas once an Argument for the truth of our Religion, that the Scriptures
contained a Doctrine that could not be of men; as forbidding revenge, which is
so sweet to nature, and commanding us to do good to them that hate us.

But shall I suffer my self, and in me the cause of Christ, to be trampled upon?

Answ. You are allowed a modest vindication of the truth, and your own
innocence, Prove. 26. 4, 5. Answer not a fool according to his folly, least thou
be like him. Answer a fool according to his folly, least he be wise in his own
conceit. You will say here is hot and cold, in one breath: I answer, Solomon
speaks of a scoffing, railing fool; and the meaning is, do not imitate him in
his foolish passion; this were to be evil, because he is so; and it is against
reason, that because I am sensible of undecent carriage in him, therefore I
should allow it in my self; but yet Answer him that is to the purpose, and with
solid reason beat down his presumption and ignorance, with a meek, but a strong
reply; such as may check his pride, but not imitate his folly: It Is observable,
when 'twas said to Christ, John 8. 48, 49. Thou art a Samaritan, and have a
Devil; he answered not a word to the personal reproach, but where his Commission
was touched, to that he replyeth, saying, I have not a Devil, but I honor my
Father: it is but weakness of mind, or strength of passion, to regard personal
invectives. In short, we may answer, but not with harsh and contumelious
language.

Secondly, Here is a Direction to public persons, and those that can handle
the Pen of the Writer; Passion is apt to Use 2.
teint our Religious defenses, but check it, Michael durst not bring a railing
accusation, leave all unhandsomeness of prosecution to them that defend an evil
cause; The servant of God must be gentle and patient, 2 Timothy 2. 24. Opprobrious
Language does but darken a just quarrel and contention: But you will say, may
we not reprove the sins of men, and that somewhat sharply? I Answer yea, it is
lawful, as appears both by the practice of the Prophets and Angels, yea of
Christ himself, and also by the precepts of the word; Paul says, Tit. 1. 7.
That a Bishop must not be selfwilled, and soon angry; and yet he bids him
(...) to rebuke some gainsayers sharply; there is a great deal of difference
between railing and a reproof: a Sermon without some warmth and keenness in it,
is but like a Cold oration; men that speak from their brain will speak coldly,
because they only declaim against things for fashions sake, without any sense
or touch upon their hearts; an affectionate pleading, for Christ, is like
strong-water; whereas a formal narration is but like River water, without any
strength and vigor: They that love Christ, will be zealous for his Truths and
Ordinances, and zeal cannot deliver* it self without some smartness and
earnestness; but a cold indifferency, is more ^ame and ^lat: But then this must
be done with great caution, you had need look to your spirits. Partly because
Satan loves to corrupt a Religious affection. Partly because in these
businesses God is not only engaged, but our selves; and many times the savor
of the main River is lost, when it is mingled with other streams; too too often
do we begin in the spirit and end in the flesh: The Cautions which I shall
give, respect. 1. The Object, or Cause. 2. The Persons. 3. Manner. 4.
Principle. 5. End.

1. The Cause must be regarded, that it be real and weighty; weighty it must
be, it is prepostreovs to be all of a fire, about questionable truths, and
matters of a less regard: the flaming Sword was set about Paradise: And real it
must be, the sin we reproove must be manifest, and the faults we charge,
apparent, Mat. 5. 22. If any be angry with his brother without a cause, etc.
otherwise Christ and his Apostles called Racha, Mat. 23. 17. O fools and blind,
and Luke 24. 15. O fools and slow of heart to believe, etc. and Gal. 3. 3. Oh
foolish Galatians, and James 2. 20. O vain man, etc. but in all these cases,
there was a cause; false and rash imputations, are but railing, zeal being a
fierce and strong passion, you must not let it fly upon the throat of any
thing, but what is certainly evil.

2. The Persons must be considered, weak sinners are to be distinguished from
the malicious, and the tractable from the obstinate; Gods tender Lambs, though
straying, must be gently reduced; put a difference, says our Apostle, verse.
19. Ad evangelizandum non maledicendum missus ^s, said Oecolampadius to
Farrell, who was a good man, but a little too violent, Thou were not sent to
revile, but to preach the Gospel; but on the other side, there is a difference
to be used in the case of Hypocrites, that gain by that repute and esteem which
they have; Christ himself inveyed against the Pharisees, asperrimis verbis, in
the roughest ways, Mat, 23. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites,
etc. we may pluck off the disguise from an Hypocrite, especially when they
seduce and deceive the miserable multitude by an opinion of holiness; the
Pharisees and Sadduces to keep up their repute, submitted to John's Baptism, but
does he treat them gently? no, Mat. 3. 7. O generation of Vipers, etc. So Paul
to Elymas the Sorcerer, Acts 13. O thou full of all subtilty and mischief, thou
child of the Devil, and enemy of allrighteousness, will thou not cease to
pervert the holy ways of the Lord? in these cafes there is a regard had to
others, that they may not perish by too good an opinion of such deceivers; and
here that of Solomon is of regard* Prove. 28. 4. They that forsake the Law,
praise the wicked, and they that keep the Law, set themselves against them; a
vigorous opposition does better here then a cold dislike.

3. For the manner, with our zeal we should still manifest love and compassion;
and our way of dealing must rather be rational then passionate; there is an
holy contemperation of zeal and meekness it we could hit upon it; the same
spirit that appeared in cloven tongues of fire, appeared also in the form of a
Dove: the work of righteousness may be sown in peace, Jam. 3. 18. The Churches
Garden thriveth by the cool gales of the North wind, as well as the suliry heat
of the South, Cant. 4. last, Gods cause should neither be neglected nor
a^sparaged by an indiscreet carriage.

4. Concerning the principle, see that it be good, it must not be zeal for our
private concernments, but for the glory of God not a strange fire, but an holy:
fire; Moses was the meekest man upon earth in his own cause, Numb 12. 3. When
Miriam and Aaron* spoke against Moses, the man Moses was meek above all mon of
the earth: when our zealous contests come from an heart bleeding for Gods
dishonor, from hatred of sin, a fear of the public, then they are right: Lot
was vexed not with Sodoms injuries, but Sodoms filthiness, 2 Pet. 2. 8. When
love of our neighbor, desire of his amendment, we are loath to suffer sin upon
him* puts us upon this earnestness, your heart is upright with God: but when we
seek to disgrace the men rather then to condemn the sins, and we rage most upon
the hazard of our own interest, and can be earnest against some sins and
errors, and comply with worse; it is not zeal for God, but for a purity.

5. Great regard must be had to the end; a Reproof aims at the conviction or
conversion of a sinner, but censure at his disgrace and confusion: our aim must
be as right as our passion is strong, what ever we do must not be done out of a
spirit of ostentation or popularity, or to keep up a devotion to our own
interests: John Baptist sharply reproved the Pharisees, not when contemuing his
person, but when coming to his Baptism.

There remains nothing of the ninth Verse to be discussed Observat. 10.
but the last Clause, [ The Lord rebuke thee] Though Michael does not rail, yet
he refers the matter to God: Whence observe, That in Religions contests we
must carry we the opposition, though not in an unseemly manner. Michael does
not let Satan alone, so we must not let errors alone, and the Devil to carry it
clearly without rub and opposition; many under a pretense of meekness, are
still and silent in the cause of Christ: cursed is this peace, and meekness
when we let the envious man sow his tares, and we never give warning. Gods
Messengers are compared to watchful Dogs when the Wolf comes we must bark, if
the sleepy world be troubled at it, we must bear their reproach.

Again, He refers it to God, who is the fittest Patron Observat. 11.
of his own causes: In our contests about Religion, God must especially be
sought unto for a blessing. Michael contended but said, the Lord rebuke thee;
disputing times should also be praying times: prejudices will never vanish,
till God send out his light and truth, Psalm. 43. 3. and if the Devil be not
prayed down as well as disputed down, little good comes of our contests.

VERSE. X. But these speak evil of the things they know not, but what they know
naturally, as bruit Beasts; in those things they corrupt themselves.
IN this Verse he shows the disproportion between them and the Archangel; he
was modest in a known good cause, but these are contemptuous, and given to
railing in matters of which they are wholly ignorant: Two faults are charged
upon them in this Verse. 1. Pride, in condemning things without knowledge. 2.
Wickedness, in abusing the knowledge they had.

[ But these, (...)] the Seducers spoken of in the Context, [ speak evil,
(...)] take liberty to belch out their reproaches [ of the things they know not]
what are those things? Some say, the Dignities before spoken of; others the
Mysteries of the Christian faith: For the former opinion, that clause may be
alleged, verse. 8. (...) speaking evil of dignities; and so it will imply that
they were ignorant of the nature of Angels, with whom they pretended so great a
familiarity; as to know their courses, services, (...), Vide Iraeneum.
conjugations; or else of the nature of Church-Ordinances, they taking upon
them to speak so reprochfully of the Offices which God has set in the Church:
or of the nature of civil power and Magistracy, they allowing themselves in
such intemperate Language: But for the latter opinion, the universal Particle
in the Text, (...), Whatsoever things they know not; so Peter's phrase is
general, 2 Pet. 2. 12. But these as natural bruit beasts, made to be taken and
destroyed, speak evil of the things they understand not: The scope of both
these Apostles being to set out these deceivers as ignorant and brutish
sensualists; and yet under a pretense of great and more curious knowledge than
others had (wherefore they were called Gnostics) for my part, I shall
interpret the clause generally of their ignorance in all truly spiritual
matters, which was bewrayed in that they did deliver their sense in matter of
Magistracy, and Church Ministries, with some impudence and reproach, [ But what
they know naturally, as bruit Beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves]
before I come more particularly to open the words, let me tell you, that there
is some difference about that clause [ as bruit Beasts] to what part of the
sentence it is to be referred; if to the former part, thus [ What they know
naturally, as bruit beasts] then the sense will be that knowledge which they
have in common, with the beasts: man is in part an Angel, in part a Beast; in
his reason, and upper part of the soul, he resembles an Angel; and in his
appetite and senses, a Beast. What they know by their senses and brutish
desires; that will be the sense, if you allow of this first reference: If to the
latter part, thus, [ in those things as bruit beasts they corrupt themselves]
then it will suit with the parallel place in Peter, 2 Pet. 2. 12. (...) as
natural bruit beasts, made to be taken and destroyed; and it will imply that
they degenerated into beasts, notwithstanding that natural knowledge wherewith
they were endowed; but to speak my own thoughts in this matter; the former
reading is more agreeable to the posture of the words in the Original, (...),
What they naturally as bruit beasts know, in those things they are worse then
beasts, corrupting and defiling themselves, by the excesses of the sensual
appetite; as in eating and drinking and the use of the woman in common
copulation, as if there were no Law, nor limited use of those things which yet
they might discern in the beasts themselves, and the dictates of their own
consciences.

This being premised, I come to explain the words [ what they know (...),
naturally] There is a three fold light. 1. Sense or Instinct. 2. Reason. 3.
Grace, and accordingly as a man is furnished, he may said to be (...),
spiritual, or furnished with the light of grace, or (...), which we translate
natural, 1 Cor. 2. 14. it signifies one that has nothing but the light of a
reasonable soul. Lastly, (...), merely natural, which signifies one guided by
the blind motion, and instinct of nature, without reason, counsel and choice,
as the beasts are, so it is said here, what they know naturally; that is, what
they understand by natural inclination, or the mere judgment or preception of
sense to be good or evil [ in those things they corrupt themselves] (...), are
corrupted, so Erasmus, but the word is not simply passive, but after the form
of the Congregation, Hitkp^ph among the Hebrews which infert passionem in se,
it implies such a passion as we cause to our selves, But how do they corrupt
themselves, sinfully or penally? I answer both ways, sinfully they corrupt and
defile themselves, and so drive down punishments, both upon their souls and
bodies, 2 Pet. 2. 12. They shall perish in their corruption.

Having made this way, I come to the Observations: And Observat. 1.
in the first place observe, That truth is usually slandered out of ignorance,
because men do not understand the ways and things of God, therefore they do
condemn them: in the Apostles days, the Doctrine of the Cross was accounted
foolishness by those that knew least of it; and afterward the Christian
Religion was condemned, because it could not be heard; Simul ac desinunt
ignorare, desinunt odisse, so Tertullian in Apol. when they knew it, they could
not hate it: it is the Devils cunning to keep us at a distance from truths, and
therefore burdeneth them with prejudices, that we may suspect rather then
search; and condemn that out of ignorance, and upon vulgar clamor, which upon
knowledge, we could not choose but love and profess: and it is man's
perverseness, and pride, to speak evil of things above his reach, and to
disprove that which they have not attained unto or cannot understand: Nazianzen
speaks of some ignorant people that condemned learning, because they had not
the happiness to attain to it (...), says he, Orat. 20. that their own
deficiency being the more common, might be less odious; or to instance in an
higher case, Papists and carnal men, scoff at imputed righteousness, assurance
or salvation, and the testimony of the spirit, because they are things they are
utterly unacquainted with: Well then, when we declaim against things, we should
speak out of advised knowledge, not rash zeal, See John 3. 11. We speak that
which we know and testify, that which we have seen: zeal, as it must have a
right aim, so a solid ground, to proceed upon: it is a vain thing to begin at
the affections, and to hate before we know, Prove. 18. 13. He that answers a
matter before he hears it, it is a folly and shame to him, if you light
right, it is but an happy mistake and stumble: quid i^quies quam ut oderint
homines quod ignorant, eri^r^si res meretur odium, Tertul. ut supra. When our
affections out-start our judgment, men grow obstinate in their ignorance, and
will not know what they have a mind to hate; Malunt nescire quia jam ^derunt,
as Tertullian goes on: rash prejudices engaging men in opposition; they will
not own the truth when represented to them having hated it without knowledge,
they hate it against knowledge, and so are hardened against the ways of God,
which is the case of many, who in a blind zeal have appeared against the
public Ministry and Ordinances; and being engaged, are loath to strike sail,
and lay down their defyance, when sufficient conviction is offered.

Observe again, Blockish and stupid men are most bold in reproching: Observat.
2.
a fools wrath falls very heavy, because it falls with all its weight,
there being nothing to restrain and stop it, Prove. 27. 3. A stone is heavy, and
sand is weighty, but a f^^ls wrath is heavier then them both, when the mind is
void of judgment, it is more overcome and carried out in the way of a naughty
passion; usually we find it, the weakest spirits are most violent, there being
nothing of judgment to counter-ballance affection; men are all flame and rage:
Liquors when they run low, and are upon the dregs, they grow more tart and
sour, so it is usually with the dregs of men, for when they are weak and run in
low parts, their opposition is most troublesome: What ado in the Ministry have
we with young heady Professors, that have more heat than light? And how trouble
some are those wild sectuaries, that have only knowledge enough to prate a
little against the undoubted Ordinances of Jesus Christ? or there being nothing
of knowledge and civility to restrain them, they easily give vent to the
excesses of their passion, by clamor and evil speaking.

From the second part of the charge, observe, That men Observat. 3.
of corrupt minds are usually sensual, and sensual men are usually men of
corrupt minds, an unsound heart is best sheltred under unsound Doctrine; and
earnal delights blunt and weakens the edge and intention of the mind, so that
they are very liable to mistakes: Therefore on the one side, we should labor
to keep the mind right, and sound in the faith: fish flinct first at the head,
when the judgment is poisoned, the teint is soon conveyed to the affections: On
the other side, add to your knowledge temperance, 2 Pet. 1. 6. The Apostle
joineth these, because many times men of the greatest parts are overcome by
apposite; and some say, that temper of body which is fit for *wit and
Schollarship, is much inclined this way. Solomon so famous for wisdom and
knowledge, was entised by women: Oh let not fleshly lusts betray you, that is
the best knowledge that ends in temperance, or begets an holy moderation in
the use of sensual pleasure; if we cannot govern our affections, we know
nothing as we ought to know; nay otherwise, your knowledge will be corrupted by
your affections; many Errors take their rise and beginning from evil manners,
and filthy lusts.

Observe again, That wicked men left to themselves, do but Observat. 4.
abuse and corrupt that natural goodness and knowledge which they have in them.
Natural abilities are soon depraved with evil habits; he that had but one
Talent is called a wicked and slothful servant, Mat. 25. 26. slothful for not
growing better 2 Pet. 1. 2.
and wicked for growing worse: naturally we are blind, and we cannot endure to
be enlightened, 2 Pet. 3. 5. Ye rather we put finger in natures eye, and then
there comes on judicial blindness, Romans 1. 28. we suffer lusts to blow ou^ the
candle of reason, and then we are justly left to the power of vile affections;
certainly they do but flatter us that say there is a power in nature, as to
conversion, and turning to God; we are so far from improving our selves, that
we corrupt our selves in what we know naturally, and suffer brutish lusts to
blind the mind and harden the heart.

Once more observe, Sin where it reigns, turns a man Observat. 5.
into a bruit beast, Psalm. 49. 12. Man being in honor, abides not, he is like
the beasts that perish; the meaning is, ^he abode not in the honor of his
creation; hence compared to Wolves for their cruelty, Dogs for their
filthiness; to Horses and Mules for the rage of lust^ to a wild Asses Colt; for
wildness and dullness of understanding, See Jer. 5. 8 Eze^. 20. 23. Job 11. 12.
Rev. 22. 15. You may see here, to what sin will bring you, with Nebuchadnezar
we out-grow the heart of a man, what he did through that deep melancholy that
f^ll upon him by Gods judgment, Dan. 4. 32. we do spiritually; if we had the
head of a Horse, or the face of a Swine, or the Hoofs of an Ass, how should we
be looked upon as Monsters; but to have the hearts of the beasts, is worse, to
be like them in the inward man, is more monstrous in the sight of God: Consider
this, sin makes a beast of you; nay, it makes you worse then the beasts; The
Ass knows his owner, etc. Isai. 1. 3* they are serviceable to their
benefactors, but thou art a Rebel against God that made thee, and has kept
thee all thy days. The sluggard is put to school to the Ant, Prove. 6. The
beasts know their stint and measure; an Horse or a Dog will not be drunk, etc.
Shall I speak one word more? Sin does not only make a beast of you, but a Devil
of you, Joh. 6. 70. One of you is a Devil; the Devils said, What have we to do
with thee, Jesus thou son of David? and wicked men, What is the Almighty?
depart from us we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.

Again observe, It Is a sign of a man turned beast, to follow the passions and
lusts of corrupt nature, Why? For then the Observat. 6.
government of reason is renounced, and all is yielded up into the hands of
Lust and Appetite; in men reason should have the chief governance, and exercise
a coercion and restraint over our affections; but now when we yield up our
selves to the passionateness of lust, and are transported with violence of it,
it answers to that rage which reigns in the beasts: I shall take occasion
here; to show you how many ways a man turns beast.

1. By an addictedness to sensual pleasures and delights: it is the beasts
happiness to enjoy pleasures without remorse, they have no conscience, they are
not called to an account, etc Now he is not worthy the name of a man (says
Tully) that would willingly spend one whole day in pleasure; We may take
pleasures sometimes, but they should not take us, that is, we should not be
vehemently addicted to them.

2. When in the use of these delights we keep neither modesty nor measure, this
is but like swine to wallow in our own filthiness, a beast can do no more; nay,
many a beast would not do so much.

3. When men live by Appetite rather than Reason and conscience, feeding
without fear, and nourishing the body, but taking no care to refresh the soul,
This should humble many that think highly of themselves, they do but carry a
beasts heart under a man's shape; while they are wholly given up to sensual
delight, pampering the body, when in the mean time, the precious, but neglected
soul, may justly complain of hard usage.

In the last place observe, That sensuality does but make Observat. 7.
way for corruption, you may counterpoise the temptation to the sin, with the
punishment; usually secret sins, and sweet sins, meet with an heavy punishment:
secret sins that do not betray us to shame, may yet beget horror, when we think
of what will ensue; and sweet sins, that entice our affections, to prevent them
we may counterballance one affection with another, delight with fear: Well
then, to check the brutish rage of sensual inclinations: Say, This will tend
to my corruption, and perishing for ever; They that sow to the flesh shall reap
corruption, Gal. 6. 8. carnal pleasures turn to an ill account in the issue, so
Romans 8. 13. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye. The Lord fenced Edom with
a flaming Sword, so is the Garden of carnal delights fenced with the wrath of
God; we ran a great hazard to enter in: say then, shall I for a superfluous Cup
adventure to drink a Cup of wrath unmi^^ed? For pleasures here, for feit the
pleasures at Gods right hand for evermore? For a little wanton dalliance, loose
the embraces of Christ, when he comes out to receive the Saints to himself at
the last day? God forbid.

VERSE. XI. Woe unto them, for they have gone the way of Cain, and ran greedily
after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Corah.
HEre the Apostle comes to reckon up their sins, and he does it by examples,
which are suited so, that they may imply both the sin and the punishment: Three
are produced in this Verse; That of Cain, to note their malice and cruelty:
That of Balaam, to note their covetensness and seduction: That of Corah, to
note their faction and sedition, against Magistracy and Ministry, as Corah and
his accomplices rose up against Moses and Aaron.

[Wo unto them] it is Prophetically spoken, not execrat^rily as a threatening, or
denuntiation, not as a curse. [For they have gone in the way of Cain] Cains
example is produced, because he was the first and chief of them that departed
from the true Church and pure service of God, Genesis 4. 16. Cain went out from
the presence of the Lord, and dwelt, etc. Tertullian says he was the Devils
Patriarch, the first root of the carnal seed, or of the seed of the Serpent, in
whom persecution began: Now Cains way was a way of murder, he slew his
Brother, because he was more righteons and godly then himself, 1 John 3. 12.
and so they go in his way, that have an envy and hatred against their holy
brethren; which many times proceeds so far as violence, persecution and
murder: This instance is fitly applied to these Seducers; for (if the Targum of
Jerusalem say true) besides the particular grudge, which Cain* had against
Abel, about the acceptance of his Sacrifice: There was a dispute which happened
between them in the field, concerning the providenes of Gods last judgment, and
world to come Vide Nieremberg. Strom. 1. cap. 17. and Glassium. l. 1. Philol.
sacrae. page 60. and Christolog. Mosaicae dissert. 5. p. 165.
Non est judicium nec judex nec saculum aliud, nec merces bona pro justis nec
paena pro impiis: nec Dei misericordia creatus est, mundus nec ejus
misericordia regitur, eo quod suscepta est oblatio t^a cum benepla^it^, mea
ver^ ^^, Tarq* Hieros. So were these Seducers exasperated against the Orthodox,
not only because of the greater presence of God among them, but also because of
difference of judgment, about Christ, the world to come, and Providence, with
other wholesome Doctrines, by which godliness is maintained: Again, Cain slew
Abel, so were these Gnostics ready to break out into all violence against
those that dissented from them, and stirred up the Jews to persecution against
the Christians: Cain after this murder was haunted with his own Ghost, and
trembled where ever he came; so does Cains end attend Cains course, such
quakings and fears of conscience following them, where ever they went: it is
said, The Lord set a mark upon Cain, Genesis 4. 15. what this mark was, is much
disputed; most say it was a continual trembling and quaking throughout his
body, Vide Aug. lib. 12. contra. Faust. cap. 12. Chrysostom. hom. 19. in Genesis And
the Sept. render that, Ge^, 4. 12. [ Thou shall be a Vagabond upon the earth]
(...), Thou shall be groaning and trembling upon the earth; and the word Nod,
the name of the place where he sojourned, is by interpretation, agitatio
commotio, quaking or trembling: (...), and Basil seleuc. apud Neiremb. stromat.
1. page 23. which if so, our wicked Quakers may see who was their Patriarch.
Now from this first instance observe.

First, That the practice of wicked men now, and the practice of Observat. 1.
wicked men from the beginning, is still the same Multi adhuc sunt qui clavum
sanguine Abelis rubentem circumferunt.
: Cains Club (as Bucholcer speaks) is still. carried about in the world
stained with the blood of Abel, see Gal. 4. 29. But as then, he that was born
after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the spirit, even so it is
now: So 'twas then, so it is now, so it will be while the spirit of the Devil
works in the world; we have the same original sin which they had in former
times for a long time a disease runs in the blood, and is continued in a
line and family; but after some generations it is worn out; but this filth will
still run as long as there is a channel of carnal generation to convey it:
Again, we have the same Devil to tempt us, who ever is converted, he will never
turn Christian to be sure; and there are the same provocations and occasions to
exasperate men's corruptions: Well then, let us not be over troubled, there is
no new thing under the Sun; the same Devil that rages now, has been a
murderer from the beginning, John 8. 44. The same Devil that deceives now, was
a liar from the beginning: are there those now that separate from all Churches
of Christ? there were Donatists in former time, are there now that deny the
Godhead of Christ? There were Arians then, are there now Ranters, Familists?
and there were Gnostics then, are there bloody enemies of the truth? every Age
can yield its Cains: Again, if we would better know the state of our times, let
us blow off the dust from our old presidents; the Devil does but play over the
old game, and though the Scene be shifted and furnished with new Actors, the
Plot is the same.

Observe again, Heretics and Libertines usually turn persecutors, Observat. 2.
for it is said here, They go in the way of Cain: Satan that is a liar is also a
murderer, a false way cannot subsist without the props of blood and cruelty,
witness the Circumcellians the Priscillianists, the Arians, the Donatists; the
Tragedies at Munster: An erroneous opinion is touchy, and therefore efferates
the minds of men against those that oppose it: believe not Seducers then, when
they come in sheeps clothing, it is but that they may get a power to play the
Wolves the better: and when Libertines increase, let Magistrates look about
them, there are Clouds gathering together toward a dismal storm; and though
they seem to be meek and full of love, while their party is contemptible; yet
when they grow considerable they appear in their colors: Again, let us bless
God for the peace we enjoy; there are swarms and droves of Locusts abroad, but
blessed be God that there is a restraint upon them, that there is a spirit of
perversity mingled with their counsels: I tell you, the great danger of the
latter times, is from Libertines, many fear a second deluge of
Anti-Christianism; but that is not so probable as the seditious insurrections
of Sectaries: What sad havoc will be made of the people of God, when once
these bloody minded wretches get power? The latter times (...), perilous times,
2 Timothy 3. 1. Why? from what sort of men will the danger arise? not from the
Antichristian, or Popish party, so much as from a Libertine party, from
Quakers, Ranters, Anti-Scripturists, Familists, etc. The Antichristian party
carries things by power, and wordly greatness, but this party there described,
is a creeping party, that gets into houses, leads captive silly women, verse
6. the Antichristian party abuses the Sword of the Magistrate; but this is a
traiterous party, heady, high minded, verse 4. a party rising up against
Magistracy: The Antichristian party are stiff and obstinate in their old
forms, but this is a party of seekers, looking for new discoveries, holding
nothing certain in Religion; ever learning, and never coming, (...), to the
acknowledgment of the truth, verse. 7 In short, the party there described, are a
party that deny civil reverence, natural affection, and are contemptuous
despisers of the true and holy servants of Christ; and all this carried on
under a pretense and form of godliness; this is the party from whence I fear
such danger and disturbance, if the Lord put not an hook into their Jaws, or do
not awaken the Magistrate to look to the safety, not only of Christ's interests,
but his own: Cursing Balaams will soon prove bloody Cains, and wicked seducers,
tyrannous oppressors.

The next part of the Description is [ And ran greedily after the error of
Balaam for reward. His story begins Numb. 22. and his Tragedy you have,
Numb. 31. 8. Baalam cursed Israel for hire against his own conscience, so did
these pervert the truth.
Balaam had linguam venalem, Oracles to ^ell; so they adulterated the Doctrine
of the Gospel out of covetousness and filthy lucre. Simon Magus, out of whose
School the Gnostics came, would you know, buy and sell the holy Ghost, Acts 8.
Now after this error it is said, they ran greedily, (...), were poured out,
it is a metaphor taken from a River overflowing the banks, or from a thing
poured out from a Bucker, with a full current or stream.

Now from hence Observe,

1. That the Devil en^iceth his slaves to diverse sins; as to Observat. 3.
the malice of Cain, so to the covetousness of Balaam.

2. That men are usually carried into errors by the bait of Observat. 4.
gain and worldly profit, 2 Pet. 3. 3. Through covetousnes shall they with
feigned words make merchandise of you; that which is the root of other evils,
is often the root of Heresies or sect making: souls are a precious commodity,
Christ thought them worthy of his own blood, but seducers count them cheap
ware, for their own gain and worldly interests, they care not how they they
betray souls; yea, Christ himself is sold by them as Judas purchased a field
with the reward of iniquity, Acts 1. 18. Oh then beware of covetousness, it is a
great snare; a covetous man, the Devil has him upon the hipp, and how far, or
whither he will carry him, he cannot tell: Balaam had many good gifts, God is
said to have put words into his mouth, Numb. 23. 26. he asked council of the
Lord, loath to go; yet covetousness by degrees wrought upon him.

3. From the word (...), Men sin with full bent of Observat. 5.
heart, and are carried out violently against all restraints of conscience; as
Balaam, notwithstanding the checks and disappointments which he met with in the
way; The dumb Ass forbidding the madness of the Prophet, 2 Pet. 2. 16. yet was
still hurried on by the violent impulsions of his own lust, and greedy desire
of reward; so the Apostle speaks of some that work uncleanness with
greediness, Ephesians. 4. 19. The motions of lust are rapid and violent, we are in
earnest when we do the Devils work; a stone runs down-hill with a swift
motion, because of its propension and tendency that way: Oh when shall we learn
to serve God as we have served Satan; our work is better, our wages better, and
our Master best of all: When shall we pour out our hearts* in prayer, as we do
in sin? In the business of Religion we act with a great deal of dividedness and
partiality; our evil works are merely evil, but our good by no means can be
purely good.

4. Again observe. That covetousness is a violent, headstrong lust; you would
think uncleanness is most violent, as Observat. 6.
having a rage, and a passionateness in it, it is so; but covetousness is more
strong, as engaging not only the lighter part of the affections, but the will
it self, 1 Timothy 6. 19. He that will be rich, etc. fits of lust are earnest for
the present, but this is the constant and more deliberate bent of the heart
toward that which is evil; watch the more, that your feet be not taken in this
snare.

The last instance is, [ perished in the gainsaying of Corah] this is produced
to note their factious practices; you have the story of him, Numb. 16. being
overcome with ambition, he would take upon him the Priesthood; he and his
accomplices made head against Moses and Aaron, but he perished in the attempt;
and so will these likewise that rise up against Magistracy and Ministry, as
surely as if it were already accomplished; and therefore though they were not
as then born, yet they are said to perish when Corah perished: From hence note.

That ambition breeds faction, hence Corah gainsayed; Observat. 7.
Diotrephes loves the pre-eminence, and therefore troubled the Church, in the
3 Epistle of John 10. All stirs begin first in our own lusts, men are
discontented with their estate, would be higher, and therefore break rank:
Lanctantius observes of the troubles of his age, thus. Fuerunt quidam
nostrorum vel minus stabilita fide, vel minus docti, vel minus eauti; qui
dissidium facerent unitatis and ecclesiam dissiparent, sed ij quorum fides fuit
lubrica, cum deum nosse se and colere simularent, augendis opibus and honori
students, affectabant maximum sacerdotium, and a potioribus victi, secedere
cum suffragatoribus suis maluerunt quam eos far prae positos, quibus
concupiebant ante praeponi, etc. Lactant. de vera sapientia lib. 4. to cap. 30.
it is an excellent thing to be contented with our own station; Jesus Christ was
chadal ischim, Isa. 53. 3. the leaving off of men, or contented to be in the
lowest rank, if God has denied thee any condition in the world which thou
affectest, thou art not worthy of it, or it is not fit for thee, etc.

2. Observe, Ambition that carries men against Ministry Observat. 8.
carries them against Magistracy also: Corah and his companions rose up
against Moses and Aaron, the Church and Commonwealth, are like the soul and
the body; the one fares the better for the welfare of the other; and seditions
spirits will brook no restraint, let them alone in the Church, and they will
soon disturb the State also. But of this before, verse 8.

Once more, The levelling humor is no new thing in the Observat. 9.
Church of God; their plea was, Numb. 16. 3. all the Lords people are holy, or
Saints, and why should any be set over them? let us beware then of that parity
which some affect; there must be Rule and Superiority, or all will come to
naught: God made the world to consist of Hills and Valleys, and in Church and
State there must be Governors, and governed, Teachers and taught; it is Corahs
sin to invade Offices without a call, and to destroy that Order which God has
established.

Again Observes Schisms and factions in the Church, bring Observat. 10.
destruction in the end: Those that made a cleft in the Congregation, the earth
cleaved to swallow them up; Christ says, Woe be to that man by whom offenses
come, Mat. 18. 7. it is sad to take offense, but worse to give it, all the
mischief that ensues will be reckoned to your score; surely men would be more
tender in this Point, if they did but think of, the punishment that sensibly
overtaketh the disturbers of a well ordered society.

Again Observe, The Scripture speaks of things to come Observat. 11.
as already past, for it is said, these perished, etc. so Rev. 14. 8. Babylon is
fallen, is fallen, what is threatened is as certain as if it were already
accomplished; so also for promises, you have the mercy, if you have the
promise; by Gods word all things were created and do subsist: Let it be, was
enough to make a world, when God says in shall be, is not the thing sure,
though unlikely? has Gods word lost any thing of its creating power? God
counts our work done, when but intended, Abraham offered, etc. Heb. 11. 17.
Well then, let us be able by faith to see the ruin of wicked men when they
reign most.

Lastly Observe, Wicked men may read their destruction in Observat. 12.
the destruction of others that sinned before them: They transgress the same
Law, and God is as tender of it as ever; and there is the same providence to
take vengeance, which is as mighty as ever; and they act out of the same lusts
which God hates as much as ever, sin is not grown less dangerous now in the
latter days, surely then a man would think the old world should grow wiser,
having so many presidents: Pride may see its downfall in Nebuchadnezar,
sedition in Corah, Rebellion in Absalom, violence in Cain; painted
adulterousness in Jezebel, disorders in worship, in the fall of the
Bethshemites, the breach made upon Vzziah; the usurping of sacred Offices
without a Call may see its danger, in the leprosy of Vzziah: there is searce a
sin of the pestilent influence, of which we have not some example, which is set
up like a mark in the way, in effect saying, Take heed, enter not here, it will
prove your ruin and destruction; or Look upon me and be godly.

VERSE. XII. These are spots in your Feasts of Charity, when they feast with
you, feeding themselves without fear. Clouds they are without water, carried
about of winds, Trees whose fruit withers, without fruit twice dead, plucked
up by the roots.
IN the former Verse the Apostle sets them forth by examples, in this by
similitudes: Let us go over the expressions a part, as the Text offers them [
These are spots in your Feasts of Charity] (...), the word also signifies
Rocks, but is fitly here rendered spots, for it is in Peter, (...), 1 Pet. 2.
13. spots they are and blemishes -- so he called them as being in themselves
defiled, and to others disgraceful: or because defiling with their presence,
and infecting by their example, [in your Feasts of love or charity] these were
Suppers used in the primitive times, either to manifest their brotherly union,
or for the comfort and refreshing of the poor in obedience to Christ's
Injunction. Luke 14. 12, 13. though little observed for the ends for which they
were at first appointed; divisions being hereby nourished, 1 Cor. 11. 21. each
faction by themselves taking their own supper, and the poor excluded, 1 Cor.
11. 22. Some dispute the lawfulness of them, it being an addition to the Lords
Supper, taken up in imitation of the Heathens, and blasted by Gods providence
in the very beginning, never approved, and (it seems) but slightingly spoken
of: Your love Feasts, says our Apostle; however, they might be lawfully used.
Tertullian shows a lawful use of them in his time, Tert. in Apol. cap* 39.
Coimus in Caelum ut ad Deum quasi manu fausta, etc. We meet together (says he)
that by an holy conspiracy we may set upon God by a force that is welcome to
him, where prayers are made, and the Scriptures opened; and after this meeting
a Supper began with prayer, Non prius discumbitur quam oration ad deum
praegustetur editur quantum esurientes capiunt bibitur quantum pudicis est
utile; and their discourses were such as did become the ears of God, and after
washing they sang a Psalm, and so soberly departed: Now these sensual persons
did defile the love Feast, the infamy of their lives being a scandal to the
meeting, and the Church fared ill for their sakes, for Peter makes them to be
spots, not only for their disorderly carriage at the meeting it self; but
because of their constant course, 2 Pet. 2. 13. They count it pleasure to riot
away the day time: Partly by their undecent words and actions, when the
Christians were met together, giving up themselves to excess, 1 Cor 1. 21. some
are drunken, and libidinous practices, for this was frequent in the meetings of
the Gnostics.

Observe hence, That sensual persons are the spots of a Christian society; they
are not only filthy in themselves, but bring a dishonor upon the whole Church,
whereof they are members, Heb. 12. 15. Take heed lest any root of bitterness
spring up amongst you, whereby many may be defiled; now what that root of
bitterness is he shows you, verse. 16. Lest there be any fornicator or
profane person as was Esau, who sold his Birthright for a mess of Pottage.
When any root springs up, or breaks out into a scandalous action, the whole
society is defiled, therefore it shows that such are discovered, for
otherwise we should turn a Church into a Stye, their spot is not as the spot of
his children, Deuteronomy. 32. 5. they have not Gods mark, but Satan's: Calvin
observed, that nothing does mischief the Church so much as remisness, and
kindness to wicked men; partly as they do infect by the taint of their evil
examples, and partly as they bring infamy upon the Body; therefore cut off
these ulcerous members: Again, we learn that the purest Churches have their
spots: In Christ's Family there was a Devil, John 6. One of you is a Devil: You
would be scared to see a Devil come among you; every malicious sinner is a
Devil, and every sensnal sinner is a Beast; such may now and then creep into
the Church, but they should not be allowed there; they that put off the nature
of man, are unfit for the communion of Saints; these are spots to be washed
off: Holiness is the Churches Ornament, Psalm. 93. last* Holiness becomes thy
House, O Lord, for ever. Again, they that are in a Church should be the more
careful; you defile your selves else, and the society whereof you are members;
yea, your miscarriages reflect upon Christ himself: Carnal Christians carry up
and down in the world the picture of the Devil, and put Christ's name upon it,
and so expose it to scorn and derision in the world. 'Twas an old complaint of
the Gentiles, mentioned by Cyprian in his Book de duplici Mar^yrio, the words
are these, Ecce qui j^ctant se redemptos a Tyrannide Sathanae; qui praedicant
se mortuos mundo, nihilo minus vincuntur a cupiditatibus suis, quam hos quos
dicunt, teneri sub regno Satha^ae, quid p^odest ill^s Baptismus, quid prod^st
Spiritus sanctus, cujus arbitrio dicunt se temperari? etc. So in Salvians time,
the Heathens were wont to upbraid the Christians thus, Vbi est Catholica Lex
quam credunt? Vbi sunt Pi^ta is and C^sti atis exempla quae discunt, Evangelia
lgunt and impudici sunt, Apostolos audiant and ineb^iantur, Christum sequu^tur
and capiunt? etc. They talk of an holy Christ, and yet are unjust unclean,
wrathful, covetous; of a meek patient Christ, and yet are rapacious and
vi^lent; of holy Apostles, and yet are impure in their conversations: Our
Author goes on thus, Sancta a Christianis ^ierens ^^ sancta Christu^
do^^isset* aestimari a culioribus potest iste qui colitur, quomodo bonus
magister cujus tam m^los ^sse videmus Discipulos: If their Christ were an holy
meek Christ, they would be better. Now judge you whether such wretches be not
spots both to Christ and the Church, a disgrace to Head and Members; therefore
all Church members should be more watchful and circumspect than others, le^t
they give occasion to those that watch for their halting, to speak evil of the
way of God.

The next clause is [ When they feast with you.] The word signifies, to feast
liberally together: this is added, to show, that they perverted the nature of
the meeting, and made that an action of Luxury, which was at first an action of
charity; in the Feasts of the godly there was moderation and temperance, but
these were blithe and jocund, filling their paunches at the charge of the
Church: What we translate feasting with you, others read feasting upon you; and
Peter 2 Pet. 2. 13. Sporting themselves with their own deceivings, while they
feast with you: that is, by carnal Gospelling, and subtle devices, justifying
their own intemperance. Whence note,

That it is an odious filthiness to make Religion serve our Observat. 2.
bellies, and to turn charity into luxury. This is here charged upon them, and
often practiced in the world, Romans 16. 17. They serve not our Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own belly; Christ has the name, but the belly the respect:
so Phil. 3. 19. whose God is the belly. When men aim at nothing but their own
ease and pleasure, they set the belly in Gods stead: Among the Papists,
Religious houses are but so many s^yes of filthiness; and the charity of well
meaning persons diverted, to feed the luxury of a few slow-bellies: Well then,
those that live upon Church maintenance, should be the more sober and
temperate; though a double portion will well become them that take double
pains, yet you should take heed of luxury, that you may not be corrupted with
ease, that you may have enough for charity; that you may silence the clamours
of the world, your temperance and sobriety should be known to all men. Paul
gives such an account of his life, as will shame most ministers when they
think of it, 2 Cor. 11. 27. In weariness and painfulness, in watchings often,
in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness; and Paul had
his enforced fasts, his voluntary fasts, notwithstanding his great pains; our
lives should carry some proportion; we do not always suffer persecution* but we
should still have a weaned heart in the fullest estate that does befall us:
certainly maintenance would be more cheerfully given, if well used,

Feeding themselves without fear,] (...), feeding themselves as a Shepherd does
his sheep; it notes their excess, eating beyond all measure, and without
respect to that communion that should be among Saints: they fed themselves, not
others; their own bodies, not others souls, Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3. Ye feed your
selves, but the flocks have ye not fed. Whence note,

That at our Meetings and Feasts we should have respect to Observat. 3*
Christian communion; Not only take in meats, but give out gracious discourses
and instructions: Christ when he sat at meat, raises their thoughts to a
better Banquet, Luke 14. 15. Blessed is he that shall ^at bread in the Kingdom
of God: when the body is fed, let not the soul be neglected; the word of God is
(...), the food of souls, it should not be wholly banished from our Tables, at
every meal, the devil usually brings his dish, when our hearts are warmed
with the use of the creature, he sets our corruptions a working, and we are
ready to censure, or to brawl, or jest in an unseemly manner; it is but reason
that Christ should set his dish upon our Tables also; and it being a solemn
time of coming together, we should take occasion to quicken each other to the
love of God, and an affectionate remembrance of our Creator, by whose bounty we
enjoy what is set before us, that the spiritual appetite may be refreshed as
well as the bodily.

Here is yet another word in this clause, (...) [ without fear.] The meaning
may be either without fear of God, or without fear of the Church, or without
fear of the snare in the creature. If you take the first sense* without fear of
God, you may either understand it of his presence or judgments. 1. Of his
presence, They had no dread of him before whom the Assembly was met. Note
thence,

It Is sinful to sit down at meat, without thoughts of God. Observat. 4.
You shall see it is said Exodus 18. 12. That the Elders of Israel did eat bread
with Moses his father in law before the Lord; that is, in his presence: when
thou art eating bread, thou art before the Lord; as the Psalm 145. 15.
eyes of all things look up unto him for meat in due season, so are Gods eyes
upon us, upon our carriage and behavior, therefore still retain a dread of his
presence; the fear of God is a grace that is never out of season: Be thou in
the fear of God all the day long; not only in the morning, when immediately
employed in acts of worship, but in thy shop, at thy meals; as the lungs are in
continual exercise whether we are sleeping or waking, so are some graces: Who
is it that gives us food and gladness? Acts 14. Shall we forget God, when he
remembers us most? The Lord forbid; when his creatures* are in our hands, let
his eye be in our thoughts, Deuteronomy. 8. 10, 11. when thou have eaten, and art
full, beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, 'twill be a good curb to
our loose and vain affections.

2. Without a fear of his judgments. Thence note, That Observat. 5.
riot and voluptuous living, brings a brawn upon the heart, and men that are
given up to a luxurious course, grow secure. They that did drink wine in bowls,
did put far away the evil day, Amos 6. 3. that is, all thonght and sense of
approaching judgments: When Jerusalem was grown riotous, she grew careless;
and therefore God bids the Prophet, to eat his bread in trembling, Ezekiel. 18.
22. well then, avoid immoderation in carnal pleasures, as you would avoid
security and hardness of heart. We lose our tenderness, by bathing and steeping
the soul in these delights; Epicures are past feeling, Ephesians. 4. 19. and the
Wanton is said to be dead while she lives, 1 Timothy 5. 6. Wine and women take
away the heart, Hos. 4. 11. as they do extinguish every spark of conscience,
and abate of the vigor and tenderness of our affections: 'Twas and it is the
opinion of Libertines, that it is perfection to get the victory of conscience,
and to live as we lift, without any trouble and sense of danger, possibly such
a thing may be aimed at here; it is the perfection of sinning (I confess) to do
evil, and then to choke the Conscience with carnal pleasures, that we may not
fear evil.

2. You may expound it, without fear of the Church then assembled, in such an
holy meeting they were not awed from riotous practices: Whence Note,

That sensuality makes men impudent. Partly because Observat. 6.
where spiritual sense is gone, shame is gone; partly because when the bodily
spirits are warmed with wine and meat, men grow bold and venturous; Solomon
says Prove. 23. 33. the drunkards heart shall utter perverse things; in such a
case men take a liberty to speak or do any thing that is unseemly: I do not
exclude this sense, because Peter in the parallel place makes them all along
presumptuous and sensual, 2 Pet. 2. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

3. You may expound it, without fear of the snare in the creatures. Whence
observe,

In the use of pleasures and outward comforts there should Observat. 7.
be much caution. When Jobs sons feasted, he falls to sacrifice, l^st they
should have sinned against God, Job 1. 5. It Is good to be jealous of our selves
with an holy jealousy, lest unawares we meet with a snare in our Cup, or Dish:
At a feast there are more guests then are invited, evil spirits haunt such
meetings, they watch to surprise us in and by the creature, and therefore we
should watch, especially if we be given to appetite, then put a knife to thy
tbroat, as Solomon says, that which is sweet to the palate, may wound the
souls, and gluttony may creep upon good men before they are aware, as Austin
confesses, that he was far from drunkenness but crapula nonnunquam surrepit
servo ^uo; sometimes he would eat too much, but (says he) Lord thou have now
taught me to use my meat as my medicine, to repair nature, not to oppress it;
an holy course, and to be imitated: Christians you may think it needless that
we should speak to you about your meat and drink, as if the light of Conscience
were pregnant and active enough to warn you in such cases: Oh! but you cannot
be too cautious the throat is a slippery place, and a sin may get down ere you
are aware: Christ did not think it needless to warn his own disciples of
excess, Luke 21. 34. Take heed to your selves, lest ye be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, etc.

The next clause is [Clouds. They are without water, carried about of winds]
Here now comes in an heap of similitudes to express their vain arrogance and
oftentation, in professing themselves to be far above what indeed what they
were; though they were unapt to teach, and to every good work reprobate, yet
they gave out as if they were illuminate men, and of an higher attainment than
others. The first similitude is in these words [(...), clouds without water.]
Aristotle called barren and light clouds, such as are carried up and down with
the winds, (...); and to these are the Seducers likened; because, though they
seem to look black, and promise rain, yet they do not give us one drop, one
wholesome notion that may occasion more light in the understanding of saving
Doctrine, or any further relief for the poor thirsty conscience* or any more 2
Pet. 2. 17.
forcible excitement to the practice and power of godliness: The Apostle Peter
has two similitudes, Wells without water, and Clouds carried about with a
tempest, but here they are contracted into one; if you will have the holy
Ghosts own comment upon this similitude, see Prove 25. 14 He that boasts of a
false gift is like clouds and wind without rain: That which is observable is:

1: That the word of God is like a moystening rainy cloud, Observat. 8.
Deuteronomy. 32. 2. My doctrine shall distill like the dew, and my* speech like the
small rain; among the Hebrews the same word signifies to teach and to rain;
Well then* let us as parched ground, wait for the droppings of Gods clouds: in
this time of drowth, when you go abroad into the fields, you shall see the
grass burnt, and turned into stubble, and the earth gaping for a refreshing,
and with a silent eloquence begging for the influences of the Heavens, every
chap is a mouth opened to swallow up the clouds as soon as they fall, or a cry
to the God of Heaven for a little rain; just so should you come to wait upon
God in the word; My soul desires after thee as a thirsty Land, Psalm. 143. 6.
Oh for a little refreshing from the presence of the Lord in his Ordinance;
promise your selves also that from the word which you would from rain, Isa. 55.
10, 11. this is the means by which the grace of God soaketh into the heart to
make it fruitful.

2. False Teachers are Clouds without rain; It Is the proposition of the Text;
Partly because they make show of Observat. 9.
more then they have, they boast of a false gift, Prove. 25. 14. There is a
great deal of show to affect the minds of the simple, but little of substance
and truth, like boxes in the Apothecaries Shop, that have a fair Title, but no
Medicine in them; much pretense of light and spirit, and when all comes to all,
there is nothing but pride and boldness: Aperiunt fontes doctrine, sed non
habent aquam scientiae; they will adventure to rain, when they have but a few
heat drops, a few poor fragments of truth, which being disguised and
transformed into some strange conceits, are cried up for rare mysteries and
seize: However, thus much we learn from them, That it is seducer-like, to
promise more then we can perform, and to be much in the pretense, when we have
little of real and true solid worth. Partly because they do not that good to
others which they promise to do; Satan will always be found a liar, it is the
property of his instruments to beguil men into a false expectation: Papists cry
up their Masses and Indulgences, which yet do not one penny worth of good:
Preachers that study pomp and edification come with much fancy and appearance;
but alas these airy notions are too fine for the conscience; seducers pretend
to some heights of discovery, as if they would carry you into the third Heaven,
but you are where you were at first; they promise you hidden Manna, rare
discoveries of Christ; but is your heart the better? two things they never do,
which may be explained by two properties of rain: Namely, Refreshing the earth
and making it fruitful.

1. Refreshing the earth, Do they offer any Doctrine that will give the
conscience solid comfort and relief in distress? here you will find them barren
Clouds; the Locusts tormented the dwellers on earth* Rev. 9 5. they tickle the
fancy for a while, but when you come to dye, and are serious, you must return
to the old truths to find rest for your Ier. 6. 16.
souls; your fancies then are like the Brooks of Teman consumed out of their
place: when Pharaoh was under any trouble, Moses and Aaron must be sent for,
his Magicians could not satisfy him nor ease him.

2. To make the earth fruitful, do you find holiness improved by their Notions,
2 Pet. 2. 19. They promise liberty when you are the servants of corruption;
they promise a new way of mortification, but still your bondage under your
lusts is increased.

Again in the third place, false Teachers are light, easily driven up and down
in various motions: Carried about of winds 'tit said in the Text, sometimes
with this opinion and sometimes with that; as light clouds yield to the motion
of the winds, the winds are there corrupt passions, lusts, and interests, Ephesians.
4. 14. Be not t^ssed about with ever wind of Doctrine, (...), carried round the
Card and compass; when the chain of truth is once broken man is at large, and
being taken off from his bottom, left loose to strange contrary winds; we see
many scrupulous persons, that at first made conscience of all things, afterward
to grow so loose as to make conscience of nothing.

Again, they are as clouds driven with a tempest, so Peter, they do not yield
rain, but breed Factions and Schisms and turbulent Commotions; light Clouds are
driven with great violence: Well then, Mark them that cause div^sions and
off^nces, Romans 16. 17 they are not what they seem to be; you will sind in the
end that you get nothing by dancing after their pipe.

We go on with the Verse [ Trees whose fruit withers, twice dead* pluck^d up
b^ the roots] this is the second similitude; here are four Properties of evil
Trees reckoned up by way of Gradation*

The first is [ Trees whos^ fruit withereth] let us first look to the Grmatical
interp^etation of these words, and then the sense and accomodat^on of them:
(...), the vulgar reads ^bores Autumnales Lethifer Autumnus Juvenal.
, in Autum things begin to decay and Trees loose both fruit and leaves, and so
would some explain it like trees that loose their leaves in Harvest time, and
bring forth no fruit: some go another way making it an allusion to a particular
experiment of young plants, who if they flower at Autumn, husbandmen take it
for a sure sign that they will dye: But simi^itudes are taken from things usual
and known; I suppose therefore the Apostle uses the word in its native and
original signif^cation, it is derived (...), from corrupting fruits, and the
mean(...)g is, they bring forth no fruit but what is rotten and withered; and
so it is applied to these seducers, whose lives were not full of good fruits;
they pretend much, but what fruits do you find? more Holiness, true
Mortification, Strictness, Piety to God, or Equity and Mercy to men? nay rather
all manner of bruitishness disobedience to civil powers, neglect of God, abuse
of Gospel, contempt of their Betters, etc.

Observe, Corrupt Doctrine produces corrupt fruits: Observe. 10.
Principles have an influence upon the life and conversation, our Savior
directs us to this way of scrutiny and trial, Mat. 7. 16 By their fruits you
shall know them; How can that be since they do easily counterfeit an holiness;
'^i; said before, they come in sheeps clothing. I Answer, Pretenses will not
last long; observe them narrowly, and you will find the wolf breaking out; I,
but may not a good way be promoted by men of an ill life? Answ Look to the Sea
Dr Hammond pract. Cat. p. 14^. 145.
fruits of the Doctrine, if it has no influence upon strictness, but be only
curious, and tend to foment pride, malice, envy* sedition, and turbulent
practices, and contempt of Superiors, certainly it is naught, who ever brings
you that Doctrine, what ever holiness they pretend in other things: on the
contrary side, the wisdom that is from above, is full of good fruits, J^mes 3.
17. Mercy, Justice, Piety, Strictness, meekness, etc. The Lord seals the
integrity of faithful Teachers by guiding them to holiness; and by his
judgments suffers Hypocrites and Seducers to discover their filthiness and
shame, that they may be manifested to the Congregation, Prove. 26: 26. Holiness
has been the usual badge of truth, and the professors of it, when watched have
been in no point liable to exception, but in the matter of their God. Pliny
could find no fault with the Christians, but that they worshipped one Christ,
whom they owned for a God, and had their Hymns Antelucanos, their morning
meetings, and Songs of praise to him: one of the Notes by which the inquisitors
of the Waldenses descryed them, was that they were sobrii and modesti vultu and
habitu, of a sober deportment, and modest garb: But may not seducers put on a
demure garb, as Swenckfield, prayed much, lived soberly, but his Doctrine
tended to looseness, destroyed the person of Christ, etc. I Answer as before,
you must consider the aim of the Doctrine, which is not always to be discovered
by the life of the first br^acher of the error; Satan may transform himself
into an Angel of light; to set on a design of darkness, paint will in time wear
away. Cito ad naturam ficta reciderunt suam, 2 Timothy 3. 9. They shall proceed no
further, for their folly shall be made manifest to all men, they begin with
great shows at first to gain credit and entrance, but a discerning eye may find
the deceit, and in due time God will discover them to the Congregation: Well
then, try ways and persons by this Note,

1. Ways, men do not easily teach point blank contrary to their manners, surely
the Devil would not assist to bring holiness in fashion, and promote Christian
practice; observe the fruits and evils both of their lives and Doctrines, in
two cases it is a pure Note: 1. When there is a fair compliance between
principles and practices, if neglect of God, mutinous practices, fraud,
injustice, contempt of civil dignity, be the very aim and design of the
Doctrine, and accordingly men live, this is of the Devil. 2. If it be so
generally, and in the most zealous of this way, some men are of a reserved
temper, not disposed to gross and sensual wickedness, and so can counterfeit
the better; and possibly* so much of truth as they do retain, in the midst of
their errors may somewhat operate to sanctification; ^^d on the other side, a
true way may be prejudiced if we should look to one or two, a street is not
measured by the sink and channel, but if it be usual, and for the most part so,
then their principles are corrupt. 3. We may not be always enticed to a course
of weakness, or gross wickedness; if it be to a dead powerless course, or
formality, if it weaken the life and power of godliness in you, from such turn
away, 1 Timothy 3. 5. your love to God, and delight in God, and converse with him
in the spirit, is forcecibly lessened, fear the influence of such an opinion.

2. You may judge Persons by it, especially your selves; where ever there is
grace, there will be fruits of grace, and corrupt fruits show a naughty tree;
if the clusters be clusters of Sodom, and the grapes grapes of Gomorrha, it
shows the Vine was of that race and kind. Ephesians. 5. 9. The fruit of the spirit
is righteousness, goodness and truth; the Apostle instanceth in such fruits as
concern civil commerce; partly because by these we adorn our profession, and
set it off to others; partly because here we have a frequent trial, these
graces being of a daily use and exercise.

But I would rather apply it, by way of Exhortation to those that profess the
truth, to honor it in their lives; let your Manners be Orthodox, least you
expose the ways of God to suspicion, Mat. 3. 8. Bring forth fruits worthy of
repentance, (...), beseeming the change of your minds.

2. The next evil property is (...), without fruit, and Observat. 11.
in the Application it implies that they bring no honor to God, no good to
others, neither are they wise for their own souls: To be barren and unfruitful
under a profession of Christ, is a sign of great Hypocrisy; he that hid his
Talent is called a naughty servant, and because of his unprofitableness cast
into utter darkness Mat. 25. A Vine is good for nothing if it be not fruitful,
not so much as to make a pin in the wall Now God compares Israel to an empty
vine, Hos. 10. 11. because they poured out all their strength, and time, and
care upon their own interests: Well then Be not barren and unfruitful in the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 8: Grace is an active thing where it is,
it will show it self; garden trees must not be like the trees of the forest,
if you would be fruitful.

1. You must be planted with a right seed; a wild vine will yield but wild
grapes: The Trees of righteousness are of the Lords own planting, Isa. 61, 3.
and when you are grafted into the Noble Vine, Christ Jesus, then are you laden
with Clusters, like the Vine of Eshcol, John 15. 2. In me ye shall bring forth
much fruit.

2. There must be good husbandry and culture, Isa. 5. 2. 3 Psalm. 13. 14.
Planted in the Courts of God, etc. that's the kindly soil; good fruit needs
the manure of Ordinances, wild plants grow and bear of their own accord.

3. This fruit must be ripe, not buds and blossoms, but fruit; you must not be
almost, but altogether; there must be not only the flowers and leaves of
profession, but the solid works of godliness; it is said here, trees without
fruit, but it is not said here, trees without leaves, see John 15. 4. here are
branches in the Vine that are only Pampinarii.

4. Fruit is for the owner, the profit of trees returns to the husband man
and master, see John 15. 8. and Phil. 1. 11. the spiritual life begins in
God, and its tendency is to him: God must have the glory of all, but you shall
not be without the comfort of it, Romans 6. 22. Ye have your fruit to holiness,
and the end everlasting life, the grave is but a winter, it takes off your
leaves and verdure for the present, the sap and life remains in the roots.

The next evil property taken from trees, and applied to men, is [(...), twice
dead] if you apply this to the trees, they may be twice dead, either in regard
of fruit, as a barren thing is said to be dead, as the deadness of Sarahs womb,
Romans 4. 19. Or in regard of substance, rotten, and like doaty trees, growing
worse and worse; or twice dead, by an Hebraisme, very dead, as double is put
for much; but now if you look to the reddition of this similitude, these
seducers are twice dead, both in regard of their natural estate, dead in
trespasses and sins, and their Apostasy, or decay of that life which they
seemed to have by the grace of the Gospel: wilful defection making their case
incurable, Heb 6. 5, 6. 2 Pet. 2. 20.

Now in this description you may observe a gradation, 1. Whose fruit withers.
2. Without fruit. 3. Twice dead. First bad fruit, and then leaves, and then
rottenness. Note, Observat. 12
That deceivers and hypocrites grow worse and worse: you have it from the
Apostle Paul also, 2 Timothy 3. 13. But evil men and seducers shall wax worse and
worse, deceiving and being deceived; they deceive others, and the devil
deceives them; the two states are now at a stay, wicked men grow worse and
worse, and godly men grow better and better: observe then which way is your
progress and growth; the glory of the Lord in Ezekiel, departed by degrees,
first, from the holy place, then from the Altar of burnt offering, then the
threshold of the house, then the City, then the mountain which is on the East
side of the City; it stood hovering there as loath to be gone: So the Spirit of
God does not all at once depart from men, but by degrees: first men suspect
duties, then dispute against them, then shake them off, and then come to
beastliness and profaness: Or if you will take the graduation thus, first God
is cast out of the Closet, private intercourses are neglected, then out of the
Family, then out of the Congregation, and public Ordinances seem useless
things, and then blasphemies, and a profane vertiginous spirit ensues: first
men begin to wrangle, and sceptically to debate matters of Religion, and within
a while to oppose the truth, the beginning is foolishness, and the latter end
is mischievous madness, Eccles. 10. 13.

Again, I observe, Men that fall off from the profession of Observat. 13
the truth, are twice dead. To natural, they bring on judicial hardness; when
they seemed to make some escape from the misery of nature, they relapse into it
again, and then their chains are doubled: As a prisoner that has once broken
prison, if taken again, is laden with irons; Two ways do natural men come to
be twice dead, By custom in sinning, and by a revolt from God after they had
given their names to him: By custom in sinning, for by that means they are
hardened in their way, and given up to a reprobate mind, so as to lose all
sense of sin, Romans 1. 26. 28. and by revolt from God, those that will after
trial forsake him, no wonder if God leave them to their own choice, to be held
under the power of the Devil, by a dark and foolish heart.

There is one clause yet remaining [(...), plucked up by the roots.] and then
trees are past all hope of springing and sprouting again; and so it fitly
notes their incurable Apostasy; in this latter clause is set forth, 1. Their
being deprived of all spiritual communion with Christ and his mystical body. 2.
Their incapacity to bring forth fruit. 3. Their readiness for burning and
destruction. Note,

That barren and corrupt Trees shall utterly be rooted out of Observat. 14
Gods Vineyard: they shall not have a visible abode and standing there: Now
this is brought to pass, partly by their own act, 1 John 2. 19. They went out
from us, because they were not of us; for if they were of us, they would have
continued with us: they separated themselves from the communion of the
faithful, to which they did never truly belong, both from the doctrine
professed in the Church, and fellowship with them in the use of Ordinances,
partly by Gods act, an act of judgment on his part, Romans 11. 20. for unbelief
were they broken off; partly by the act of the Church, by which scandalous
sinners are taken from among them, 1 Cor. 5. 13. Put away from among your
selves that wicked person: well then, let us walk so, that this heavy
judgment may never be laid upon us, let us get a real union with Christ, for
then we can never be broken off, you can no more sever the leven and the dough,
then a Christ and a Believer, etc. Walk with the more caution, Be not high
minded, but fear, it is dreadful to be cast out of the true Church; the finger
that is cut off from the hand, is also cut off from the head: That censure, if
rightly administered against us, should be matter of great sorrow and
humiliation to us, etc.

Verse 13. Raging Waves of the Sea, foaming out their shame; wandering Stars, to
whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.
HEre are two other comparisons, the one taken from raging Waves, the other
from wandering Stars: For the first [ Raging Waves of the Sea, foaming out their
own shame] There is a great deal of variety among Interpreters in the
application or accommodation of this similitude, some go one way, some another;
Waves are not more various and uncertain in their motions, then they in their
expositions; some apply it to their levity and inconstancy, some to their
restless activity in sin, some to their turbulency, others to their pride and
ostentation; in such uncertainty what shall we fix upon? Two things will direct
us, the scope, and the force of the words: The scope of the Apostle in all
these similitudes is to show, that these seducers were nothing less then what
they pretended to be: Clouds, but dry barren clouds; Trees, but such as bore
either none, or rotten fruit: Waves that seemed to mount up unto heaven, and to
promise great matters, as if they would swallow up the whole earth, but being
dashed against a Rock, all this raging and swelling turns into a little foam
and froth. So Calvin applies it to the Libertines, who scorn and disdain the
common forms of speech, and talk of illumination and edification, so that their
hearers seem to be wrapped into the heavens, but alas they suddenly fall into
beastly errors.

From the scope observe, That spiritual Boasters will certainly Observat. 1^.
come short of their great promises: All is but noise, such as is made by empty
vessels; in the latter times you are troubled with boasters, 2 Timothy 3. 2. men
that boast of depths, and seem to be wise and knowing above the ordinary sort,
that will pretend to show you new ways; a shorter cut to heaven, and rare
discoveries of Christ, and Gospel light, etc. but alas to the issue, they leave
you much more the servants of sin then you were before.

But leave a little examine the force of the words; the whole similitude
alludeth to what is said of wicked men in general, Isa 57. 20 The wicked are
like a troubled Sea, that cannot rest whose water c^st up ^ire and dirt.

Observe in the first place that they are Waves* which Observat. 2.
notes their Inconstancy, Genesis 49 4. Reuben is as unstable as water* water*
you know) is moveable, soon furled and driven too and fro by the winds, so were
these carried about with every wind of Dostrine, Ephesians. 4. 14. Note thence,

That Seducers are unse^l^d and uncertain in their opinions; so 2 Pet. 3. 16*
Unlearned and unstable; if you ask why? Because they are not rooted and
grounded in their profession, but led by sudden affection and interests* rather
then judgment; they are unstable, because unlearned; such as do not proceed
upon clear and certain grounds, and those whom they work upon are of no
principles, beguiling unstable souls: well then, discover them by their levity,
you will never have comfort and certainty in following them, who like weather
cocks turn with every wind. Ecebolius is infamous to all ages, see Socrat*
Scholast lib. 3. cap. 2* He was Professor of Eloquence at Constantinople under
Constantius, zealous of Christian Religion under Julian a P^gan, and when he
was dead, he professed Christianity again; but, then he came weeping to the
Church (...), Tread upon me unsavory ^lt, and cast me to the dunghill,
Constantius Colorus* though an Heathen both Zozomen and Eusebius give us the
story) yet loved constancy and faithfulness in men as to their profession; he
made proclamation, that whosoever would not sacrifice, should be discarded, and
no more retained in pay with him; but when many false* Christians h^d renounced
their profession for gain, and pre er^ing their civil Interests, he would not
receive them saving, (...): How can they keep (...) with their King and
Emperor, that would faulter in an higher matter in the business of their God
and Religion, for a small and petty Interest. Much to the same purpose there is
a passage of Theod^rick King of the Goths, who loved a Deacon who was of the
Orthodox profession, though he himself was an Arrian; the Deacon to please the
King the more, changes his Religion, and professes Arrianism also; but he
beheadeth him, saying, (...), If thou have not kept thy faith with God, how
will thou preserve a good Conscience in thy duty to men? The story is in
Theodoret: Some are merely Waves, rolling hither and thither in a doubtful
uncertainty.

2. Waves of the Sea; There you have their restless activity, they are always
tossed too and fro, Jer. 46. 23. The Lord shall trouble Damascus, that she
shall become like a fearful Sea that cannot rest, so these cannot rest from
evil, 2 Pet. 2. 14. Eyes full of Adultery, that cannot cease from sin. Observe.

Usually wicked men are of an unquiet spirit, restless in evil: Observat. 3.
They are acted by Satan, who is a restless spirit, and there is a great
correspondency between their activeness in sin, and the importunity of Satan's
malice, 1 Pet. 5. 8. He goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour: Now you shall see the like diligence and readiness in his instruments,
they walk the devils round, Matthew. 23. 15. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites; for ye compass Sea and Land to make one Proselyte, etc. Blind zeal
leads on men with an incessant rage, to poison others with their error, and
draw them to their sect: Well then, we may learn diligence from our enemies;
Shall they be more busy to pervert the truth, then we to propagate it? Dan.
12. 4* Mary shall run too and fro, and knowledge shall be increased: Once more
learn, that it is a sign of a naughty heart to be restless in sin, Prove. 4. 16.
They sleep not unless they have done mischief, and their sleep is taken from
them unless they cause some to fall.

3. Raging waves of the Sea, there you have their turbulency, they fill all
places with troubles and strifes.

Wicked Seducers are usually of a turbulent and impetuous Observat. 4.
spirit. Why? Because they are urged by their own pride and vanity, and have
lost all restraints of modesty, and are usually (as to their constitution) of
violent and eager spirits: Well then, be not born down with impudence and rage,
there may be during attempts, and much resolution in an ill cause: Besides,
it is an hint to the Magistrate to look to seducers betimes, for they are raging
waves.

4. The next expression is [ foaming out their own shame,] as a raging sea
casts up mire and dirt; or it alludeth to that scum and froth which the Waves
leave upon the rocks, and so it notes the abominab^eness of their opinions and
practices. Whence note,

That though Errors come in blushing, and with a modest Observat. 5.
dress, yet usually they go out of the world with a great deal of shame. They
dash against the rock upon which the Church is built, and what is the issue?
They are covered with froth and foam; 1 Cor. 3. 13. The day shall declare it,
that is time, whose daughter truth is; have a little patience, and you shall
see, that all that is but hay and stubble, which is accounted gold; when
worldly interests are unconcerned, and the heat of contention a little allayed,
that men may have more clear discerning, and the world has had a little more
experience of the fruit of false ways and opinions, there will not need any
great confutation; evil men will sufficiently bewray their own filthiness:
Guicciardine says of the expedition of Charles the 9th into Italy, that he came
in like lightning, and went out like the snuff of a Candle; so errors come in
like a raging wave, as if they would bear all before them, but they go out like
foam and froth, in scorn and infamy: Well then, observe the fruitlesness of all
Satan's attempts; the gates of hell shall not prevail against this Rock, Matthew.
16. 18. By the gates of hell, is meant strength and counsel power and policy;
for in the gates was their Ammunition, and seats of Judicature: they that seek
to slaver the Church* or deface the truth, which is the foundation of it, they
do but spit against the wind, the drivel is returned upon their own faces: We
often betray our trust and faith by our passions; we have not an holy greatness
of mind to look above every trouble; contend for God, but wait upon him; Satan
may prevail a long time, but he can never carry it clearly from Christ: the
Arrians had a day of it, but they soon grew infamous for their cruelty and
baseness.

We come now to the next similitude [ wandering stars,] (...), it may be taken
two ways, properly, or improperly. 1. Properly, for the stars which we call
Planets, or wandering, though indeed no stars wander less then they do; they
have their name from the opinion and common judgment of sense, because they
are not carried about the whole circuit of the heavens, but in a shorter orb
and course, in themselves they have certain stated motions, and do keep thr
just points of their compass; the Sun knows his going down, Psalm. 104. 2.
Improperly, There are a second sort of wandering stars, which Aristotle calls
(...), running and gliding stars; not stars indeed, but only dry exhalations
inflamed, which glare much, and deceive the eye with an appearance of light,
but soon vanish, and are quenched: Now these glancing shooting stars, do
excellently express the quality of these Seducers, who pretended great
knowledge, being therefore called Gnostics, and gave out themselves for
illuminate and profound Doctors, but were various and uncertain in their
motions, and soon extinguished and obscured. It Is notable that the Apostle
ransacketh all the elements for comparisons whereby to set them forth; The Air,
Clouds without water; the Earth, barren rotten Trees; the Water, there he
compares them to raging Waves; the Fire, to wandering stars, which are of a
fiery nature: A fruitful fancy can make use of all the world, and a willing
mind cannot want objects of meditation. But let us come to observe something
from this similitude.

The guides of the Lords people should be stars* but not wandering Observat. 6.
gliding stars. These seducers pretended to be stars, and great lights of the
Church (which is the office of the ministers) but were indeed wandering stars,
and such as did seduce, and cause to err.

First, Stars they should be, 1. In regard of the light of doctrine. Matthew 5.
14. Ye are the light of the world, that's Christ's honor, John 1. 9. but he
takes his own crown, and puts it upon his servants heads, they are the light
in a subordinate sense; stars, though not the Sun; he is the original and
fountain of all light, and we are used as a means to convey it to others; thus
John is called, John 6. 35. a burning and a shining light: He uses our service
to dispel the mists of error, the right of profaness, and the darkness of
false worship: you had need prize those whom God has set over you, they are
light, and will 2 Samuel 21. 17
you quench the light of Israel. 2. In regard of the luster of their
conversations; it is said of all Christians, Phil. 2. 15. that they should shine
as lights in this world; they are the bright part of the world, as the stars
are the shining part of heaven; as the star directed the wise men to Christ, so
they must shine to light others by their example to him, as it is required of
all Christians, much more of Ministers, who are placed in an higher orb and
sphere; alas we are but dim lights, we have our spots and eclipses, but this
sets the world a talking.

Secondly, They must not be gliding falling stars, that's charged upon these
seducers, a false teacher, and a falling star symbolizeth in three respects. 1.
It Is but a counterfeit star; so is he an Angel of light only in appearance, 2
Cor. 11. 14. a true Christian should covet more to be* than to seem to be; to
be light in the Lord, before he is a light in the world; Hypocrites are all for
appearance 2. In respect of the uncertainty of its motion; falling stars are
not moved with the heavens, but with the motion of the Air, hither and thither,
and so are no sure direction; so are they unconstant and unstable in the
doctrines which they teach, running from opinion to opinion; vagabond lights,
that seduce, not direct; as meteors, mislead travelers out of the way. 3. In
regard of the fatal issue; a wandering star falls to the ground, and becomes
a dark slime and jelly; so their pretenses vanish at length, and they are found
to be those that were never enlightened and fixed in the firmament of God;
counterfeits cannot last long, we see stars shoot in the turn of an eye, and
Satan's instruments fall from heaven like lightning.

Well then, for a guide to heaven, choose a star, but not a wandering star; n^w
light is admired, but it should be suspected rather; usually we are rather for
things new than excellent, homini ingenitum est magis nova quam magna mirari,
says Seneca, We gaze more on a Comet than the Sun: check this itch, those that
are various, and given to changes, are no lights for you; and if they be not
burning and shining lights, avoid them; true stars have influences, they do not
only enlighten and fill you with notions, but inflame and stir you to practice.

The last clause of the Text is [ To whom is reserved blackness of darkness for
ever.] having described them in several Metaphors, he comes to speak again of
their punishment, continuing the last Metaphor, (as some suppose) as garing
Meetors after a while vanish into a perpetual night and darkness, and are no
more seen and heard of; so these vanish, and are swallowed up of the horrors
of eternal darkness: In this threatening three things are noteable. 1. The
dreadfulness of the punishment. 2. The sureness. 3. The suitableness of it.

1. The dreadfulness in two circumstances, 1. The nature of it, 2. The duration
of it.

1. The nature of it, (...), the blackness of darkness; it is an Hebraism for
exceeding great darkness, called in the Gospel (...), outer darkness; as being
furthest from God the Fountain of life and glory, and so expressing that
extreme misery, horror and torment which is in Hell. Hell is a da^k and dismal
region, where men lie deprived of the light of Gods countenance; tormented with
presence of Devils, and become the burden of their own thoughts* calling to
remembrance their past sins, and having an active sense of their present pains,
and dreadfully looking still for future judgment; but of this See verse 6. on
those words, [ chains of ever last^ng darkness] and ve. se 7. those words [
^t^rual sire]
before* Well then, let us not begin our Hell our selves, by shunning Gods
presence; by preferring carnal pleasures before the light of his countenance:
by remaining in the night or darkness of ignorance or error; by darkning the
glory of our holy profession* through scandalous living; by sinning against
conscience, and so providing food for the gnawing worm, or matter of despair to
our selves to all eternity; Briefly, let us beware of a dark and doubtful
condition, it carries too great a proportion with Hell, the more bondage we
have, the more fearful looking for of judgment, the more are we like the
damned, as the more assured and possessed of Gods love* the more like the
blessed; joy in the Holy Ghost is the Subburbs of Heaven.

2. The next thing is the duration [ The blackness of darkness FOREVER,]
Thetorment prepared for the wicked is everlasting, their worm dies not, and
their fire is not quenched, Mark 9. 44, This is the Hell of Hell, that as the
torments there are without measure, so without end; vivere nolunt mori
nesciunt, here they might have life and would not, and now would have death and
cannot* Rev. 20. 10, tormented for ever and ever: Woe alas, it is for ever! Poor
wicked wretches, whose bodies shrink at the prick of a Pin, or the flame of a
candle, how will they endure those endles^ pains? when their restless thoughts
shall have run through thousands of years, they must look for more; the the
pains of the damned are eternal: partly because of the greatness of the Majesty
against whom they have sinned; we are finite creatures, and so not fit to judge
of the nature of an offense against an infinite God; the Law giver best knows
the merit of sin, which is the transgression of the Law, as a Jeweler knows
the price of a Jewel, and can best give sentence in the case what he is to pay
that has lost or spoiled it; with man offenses of a quick execution meet with
a long punishment, and the continuance of the penalty in no case is to be
measured with the continuance of the act of sin; Saelus non tempor is
magnitudine sed iniqu tatis magnitudine metiendum est: Partly because man
sins as long as he can, he sins in aeterno suo (as Aquinas) and therefore
is punished in aeterno Dei; we would live for ever to sin for ever* Wicked men
are not changed in Hell; melted mettle grows hard again; the bad theif had
one foot in Hell, and yet dies blaspheming; their Judgments are changed not
their hearts; they would have dallyed with God longer, greeved his spirit here
in the world longer, but that their Candle went out, etc.
in Hell the desire of sinning is not extinguished or mortified: Partly because
they despised an eternal happiness, and therefore do justly suffer an eternal
torment: Partly because they are in their final estate peace upon earth, Luke
2. 14. here God is upon a Treaty with us; but there we are beyond a possibility
of repentance and pardon. Partly because their obligations to God are infinite,
and so their punishment rises according to the excess of their obligations:
Well then, this represents the folly of sinners, that will run the hazard of
eternal torments for a little temporal satisfaction, as he cried out, For how
short a pleasure have I lost a Kingdom? When he had parted with his Sovereignty
for a draught of water; so you, out of a desire of present contentment, forfeit
Heaven, and run the hazard of the horrors of everlasting darkness; therefore
to counter-ballance the violence of a temptation, it is good to think of it: Can
I dwell with everlasting burnings? if a man be sick in the night, he tumbleth
and tosseth and tells the hours, and wishes it were day: Oh what will a man
do that is h^ld under an everlasting night and darkness? We are wont to think a
Sermon long, a Prayer long; what will hell be? When conscience shall repeat
over the passages of our lives, and remember us of the wrath of God that
endures sor ever? here sin is ever working, all the day it runs in the
mind, all the night it plays in the fancy; we begin the morning with it, and
end the day with it, and in the visions of the night it easily gets the start,
and out runs reason and conscience, there the guilt of it will torment us
day and night, and man is ever haunted with his own horrors, and the wrath of
God inflicted upon him.

So much for the terribleness of the judgment, now secondly let us consider
the sureness of it, (...), it is reserved: Observat. 9.
Hell sorment is sure, prepared, kept, for the wicked: so Mat. 25. prepared for
the Devil and his Angels; Heaven is prepared for the Saints, and they for it;
in one place it is said, The Kingdom prepared for you; in another, Vessels of
mercy aforehand prepared unto glory: so is Hell, fitted for the wicked, and
they fit themselves for Hell; God prepares the Saints and sits them, but
endures the wicked, and bears with them whilst they fit themselves for
destruction, see Romans 9. 22, 23. Carnal men may lord it abroad for a while, and
ruffle and shine in worldly pomp, but the blackness of darkness is kept for
them.

3. Observe the suitableness of the judgment to the sin, he says darkness, not
fire: Clouds that darken the truth are justly punished with the mists of
darkness for ever, see 2 Pet 2. 17. they that would quen^h the true light, are
cast into eternal darkness, God loves to retaliate, that men may read their
sin in their judgment here in the world, we may do it in mercy to the Saints;
Jacob that came the younger, for the elder, to blind Isaac, had the elder
daughter given him instead of the younger. Asa that put the Prophet in the
stocks, was diseased in his feet; but in Hell he does it for the greater horror
to the wicked; they that choose left hand blessings, Prove. 3. 16 are justly
placed with the Goats on the left hand, Mat. 25. he that denies a crumb, could
not receive a drop; they that cared not for Gods company, are then banished out
of his presence, and to those that loved darkness more then light, is the mist
of darkness reserved for ever.

Verse 14. And Enoch also the seventh from Adam, Prophesied of these, saying,
Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints.
THe Apostle urges another Argument to imply the destruction of those
Seducers; and that is, The Prophecy of Enoch: whether this Prophecy were
written or no^, the same spirit that spoke in Enoch inspired our Apostle, if he
received it by Tradition, it is here made Authentic and put into the Canon Vid.
Bez. and Estium in loc.
; The Jews have some Relics of this Prophecy in their Writings, and some talk
of a Volume extant in the primitive times, consisting of 4082. lives, called
she Prophecy of Enoch; but that was condemned for spurious and Apocryphal:
Tertullian says there was a Prophecy of Enoch kept by Noah in the Ark, which
book is now lost, be it so; many good books may be lost, but no Scripture; but
most probably, 'twas a Prophecy that went from hand to hand, from father to
son; Jude says Enoch Prophesied, he does not say it is written, as quoting a
passage of Scripture: But why should he rather produce Enochs Prophecy, rather
then a passage out of the Authentic books of Scripture, where are many such
to this purpose. I Answer, 1. It was done by the providence of God, to preserve
this memorial to the Church. 2. Because ancient things are more venerable, for
by all men's confession those times were most simple and free; partium studio,
from factions and partialities, therefore all along the Apostle brings
instances of the most ancient date.

[ And Enoch the seventh from Adam,] that is inclusive, putting Adam for the
first; but why is this circumstance mentioned? I Answer, 1. To commend the
Antiquity of the Doctrine, the seventh in descent from Adam, intimates that
judgment was to be administered by Christ, 2. Some observe a mystery, the
seventh person was a Prophet, as the seventh day was holy. 3. I think it is to
distinguish him from Enoch the son of Cain, who was the third from Adam, as
Enoch the son of Seth was the seventh, see Genesis 4. 17. [ Prophesied] that Enoch
was a Prophet is clear here, and may begathered from Gen* 5 2^. where he is
said to walk with God, a phrase proper to those that served the Lord in some
near way of ministration; it is there applied to Enoch who was a Prophet, and to
Noah Genesis 6. 9. who was a Preacher of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 5. and to Eli. 1 Samuel, 2. 30. who was a Priest [Of these saying] Of these, because of such like,
it is a general Prophe. sie brought down to a particular case and instance. [
The Lord cometh] that is, the Lord Jesus appointed to be the Judge of the
world; nay mark it, [ Behold the Lord cometh] as putting it before their eyes:
[ commeth] (...), is come, that is, he shall as certainly come as if he were
come already: the Jews say the great excommunication Maranatha, was instituted
by Enoch, the word signifies, The Lord comes [with ten thousand of his
Saints] it may be rendered with his holy Myriads, or ten thousands, an uncertain
number for a certain, that was their highest and roundest reckoning; the
meaning is with huge multitudes of Angels and Saints: as the Apostle, 1 These.
3. 13. At the coming of the Lord Jesus with all his Saints, Zech. 14. 5. The
Lord my God shall come, and all thy Saints with thee, not only the Angels, but
the Saints do help to make up the tryumphs of that day.

The Notes are these.

1. That what is spoken in the word in general does as much concern us as if it
were spoken to our own persons; Enoch Prophesied of these, etc. Particulars are
comprised in their generals, some Scriptures speak directly to every single
person; the Decalogue is most express this way, Thou, thou, etc. as aiming to
awaken every one to a sense of their duty, God does as it were talk with every
of our persons imediately: the Gospel indeed speaks largely, come all ye,
etc. as excluding and exempting none out of the hopes of it, yet sometimes the
Gospel speaking as particularly as the Law, especially where the condition is
annexed to the offer, as Romans 10. 9. If thou beleevest in the Lord Jesus with
thine heart, etc. if you, as speaking to me, if thou, as speaking to thee, and
every other man in particular: Well then, though the word speaks generally,
take home your own share, as men cut a passage out of the common River to water
their own fields, let not the Scriptures speak in vain, James 4. 5 we are all
concerned, when his speech is directed to men of our condition: Psalm. 27. 8.
Thou saidest seek ye my face, and David sub-sumeth, Thy face Lord will I seek.

2. Prophecy or Preaching the word is ancient, for Enoch the seventh from Adam
Prophesied, still some have been set a part for this work; Enoch was a Prophet,
and Noah a Preacher of righteousness; it is said that in the latter end of six
thousand years, we should be rooting up an ancient Ordinance, that has stood
from the beginning of the world till now; in the old time before the Law, there
were some to teach, every master in his family, churches were then in houses,
and some special Prophets to instruct in public, and continue the tradition:
under the Law also there were some solemnly set apart for the work of the
Tabernacle, and Prophets immediately called to deliver the special messages of
God, not only for the instruction of the present age, but to increase the
Canon, or rule of faith and manners, even for our comfort; and in Christ's time
Apostles were added to unvail the figures of the Law, and deliver the Gospel
more clearly; and when once the Canon was settled, and enough delivered to make
us wise to salvation, some were set apart by the constitution of Christ as
Pastors and Teachers to explain and apply Scripture; and though all the Saints
be Kings and Priests to God, yet the office ministerial must not be invaded;
for as spiritual Kingship is no warrant to disturb the Magistrate, or to wrest
the exercise of authority out of his hands, so spiritual Priesthood does not
lay the Ministry in common, but still there must be some set apart for that
work; if we grudge at the institution, we repine at Christ's bounty to us, and
in effect, bid him take his gift to himself, for in the day of his Royalty, or
Ascension, he gave gifts to men, some to be Apostles some Prophets, some
Pastors, some Teachers, etc. Ephesians. 4. 11.

3. That the Doctrine of the day of Judgment is ancient, Observat. 3:
long since foretold. Enoch prophesied of it, yea the sentence of death
pronounced in Paradise did imply it, and the Lords messengers have ever urged
the terror of it: many passages in Moses may be applied to this purpose, Deuteronomy.
32. David clearly says, Psalm. 50. 22. I will set thy sins in order before
thee; now consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and
there be none to deliver. So Solomon, Eccles. 11. 9. Remember that for all
these things thou shall come to judgment. 'Twere needless to tell you of
Daniel, Joel, Malachy, Christ, Paul, Peter, John, Jude: still this truth was
pressed in the Church, nay the Lord was pleased to grant some intimation of it
to the heathens, (...), etc. in the fragments of the Sybils, in Eusebius by the
light of nature the Philosophers had some dark and uncertain guesses at such a
thing, Conscience is soon sensible of the truth of it, as Felix trembled when
it was mentioned, Acts 24. the ancient judgments of drowning the world, and
burning Sodom, were types and forerunners of it: Well then, entertain this
doctrine with the more certainty, verum quod primum, that which is first, is
true: we are secret Atheists, can a man believe judgment to come, that
walloweth in sin and profaness? Our actions are the best image and expression
of our thoughts; the Apostle says, the latter days shall yield scoffers and
mockers, 2 Pet. 3. there may be Atheists in the Church, but there are none in
hell, we deny and doubt of that at which the devils tremble, if the Spirit,
Scripture, Conscience, Reason will not teach men, there is no other way of
learning but by feeling and experience.

Enoch prophesied, the man that walked with God, he could see the day of
judgment, though so far off:

Those that have most communion with God, do most discern Observat. 4.
his mind. Let a man walk humbly and closely with God, and he is near, not only
the root of life, but the fountain of light, Psalm 25 14 The secret of the Lord
is with them that fear him: when the Disciples doubted of any thing, they
pointed to him whom Jesus loved, and who leaned in Jesus bosom, John 13. 21,
22, 23, 23* those that are in Christ's bosom, know his mind; well then, if we
would pry more deeply into the things of God, walk humbly and closely with him;
there is a promise, John 7. 17. He that will do the will of God, shall know
what doctrine is of God: (...). Naz.
Pure souls are soonest enlightened, and they discern most of the Lords counsel,
who are not darkened wits Lusts and Interests.

5. From that [ Beh^ld] he speaks of this day of the Observat. 5.
Lord, as if it were instant, and before their eyes:

We should always real^ize the day of the Lord, and represent it to our
thoughts as near at hand. It Is the work of faith to give things absent, and at
a distance, a present being in the heart of a Believer, Heb. 11. 1. Six
thousand years agone Enoch said, Behold he comes; it is not for us to fix the
seasons which the Father has put in his own hands, there may be much of snare
and temptation in that; therefore the Apostle Paul reproves them, that
confidently gave it out, that the day of the Lord was at hand, 2 Thessalonians* 2 24.
(...), instantly to come, * Austin gives a reason of it thus, ne forte cum
^ransisset tempus, tempus quo eum credebunt esse futurum de ipsa mercede fidei
desperarent; self they should question all, when deceived in the time of their
fore-setting; which indeed experience has verified: In the year of Christ one
thousand and one, when many vain opinions and conceits of the end of the world
were disappointed, men began publicly to assert, Mundus est incorruptibilis,
Bar. ad annum 1001. The faith of all truths is shaken, by the disappointment of
a rash confidence: but though we are not punctually to state the time, yet the
thing being certain, faith should represent it to the thoughts as actually
present, and we should live as if the Trumpet were always sounding in our ears,
and the Judge were sat, and the books opened, to put off the thought of that
which will one day, and within a short time come about* is a spice of Atheism,
Amos 6. 3. for things foretold in the Word should be as certain, and have a
like influence upon us, as if they were already accomplished. Behold the Lord
is come.

6. From that [ with ten thousand of his Saints,] When Observat. 6.
Christ comes to judgment, his Saints come to judge the world with him. When
the wicked are filled with amazement, they come in Christ's company; partly that
the world may know what shall be done to the men whom God will honor, and that
Christ may be admired in the glory he puts upon them, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10 partly
that Christ may make them partakers of the mediatory Kingdom, therefore they
are associated with him in judging the world, Matthew. 19. 28. their suffrage is
required, as approving the sentence of the Judge, 2 Cor. 6. 2. partly for the
greater sorrow of the wicked, they shall be judged by mean men, whom they once
hated and persecuted, Psalm* 49. 12. The upright shall have dominion over them
in the morning, that is of the resurrection, they counted their lives madness
and folly, but now they are exalted: partly to make amends for the perverse
censures of worldly men, now they are judged every day; counted the off
scowring and reproach of men, but then the Lord will clear up their innocence,
and they shall sit as Justices with the Judge upon the Bench. Well then 1. Be
Saints, if you would have a Saints privilege; Fellons may be jovial in the
Prison, but they tremble at the Bar; they are happiest that have joy and
boldness at Christ's appearance; when wicked men come like miserable captives,
how shall the Saints arise out of their graves like sons of the morning? They
and Angels intermixed in the train of Christ, what is wanting here, is richly
made up there. 2 Walk as those that shall be associated with Christ in judging
the world; walk with Christ now, and you shall come with him then; follow the
Lamb wheresoever he goes, when he is crowned at Hebron, he will not forget his
old companions, cleave to him, cry not up a confederacy with them, that cry up
a confederacy against him; he will say to you, you have been with me in all my
sufferings and sorrows, now you shall be with me in my glory, Matthew. 19. 27,
28. Again, Judge the world now, condemn them by your lives, as knowing that you
shall condemn them hereafter by your vote and suffrage. N^a^ condemned the
world, Heb. 11. 7. a serious Christian is a living reproof; a carnal professing
hypocrite, justifies the wicked; ye have justified your sister Sodom, see
Ezekiel. 16. but a sincere Christian condemns them.

7. From that [ with ten thousand of Saints] At Christ's Observat. 7.
appearance his train shall consist of multitudes of Saints and holy Angels.
Now they are but as two or three Berries upon the top of the uppermost bough,
scattered here and there, as God has work and service for them to do, but when
they appear together in that great rendezvous, they are a number which no man
can number, see Rev. 5. 11. and Rev. 7. 9. it is a comfort against the paucity
and smalness of those that are upright with God; in heaven we shall have
company enough, Gods family when it comes altogether, is very numerous, or
rather innumerable, Heb. 12. 23, as the wicked shall be exposed to the
fellowship of devils, and persons like themselves, where the company shall add
to the torment, so shall we be called to Psalm. 1. 5.
a great Assembly, and to bear a part with that glorious train which comes
with Christ.

Verse 15. To execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly
amongst them, of all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed,
and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.
HAving described the Judge, with his attendants, he comes to describe his
work, which is to convince, and execute judgment, together with the persons
against whom he will thus proceed [ All that are ungodly amongst them] as also
the grounds and reasons of the Process, because of their ungodly practices, and
hard speeches against Christ.

Some say the 14th verse does only contain the prophecy of Enoch, and that
these words are the Apostle's application or explication of it, but improbably,
the words running on in a continued sense or form of speech, and the
application is at the 16th verse.

[ To execute judgement] it is an hysteron proteron, the last act is put first,
execution before conviction or arraignment, [upon all] that is, upon all such
as are here spoken of, upon all the ungodly, for judgment is not executed upon
the Saints, but for them. [ And to convince] (...), it implies such a clear
proof, that we see it is impossible things should be otherwise at the day of
judgment, wicked men are speechless, Matthew. 22. and self condemned [all that
are ungodly amongst them] that is, amongst the wicked, and the severity of the
process is chiefly bent against those that are ungodly [ of all their ungodly
deeds] in the Greek, the deeds of their ungodliness; now ungodliness here is
not taken in its proper sense for denying God his due honor and worship, but
for any opposition against his servants, worship, truth [ which in an ungodly
manner thy have committed] (...), which argues the malice spite which they
bewrayed in their oppositions and reproaches [and of all their hard speeches]
(...), [ hard] as applicable to things as well as speeches; our speeches are
here intended, as appears by the following clause; wicked practices and an
evil tongue are seldom severed; that by hard speeches is meant any proud,
taunting, cursed, or contumelious language, see 1 Samuel 2. 3. in the Hebrews,
and Psalm. 94. 4. How long shall they utter and speak hard things, and the
workers of iniquity boast themselves [which ungodly sinners] not only sinners,
but ungodly sinners, for the greater emphasis, see Psalm. 1. 1. [against him]
that is, against himself, against his person, or messengers, or truths,
ordinances, for what is spoken against any of these, is spoken against Christ
himself.

This verse is large, and full of points; but because the doctrine of the day
of Judgment has been already touched upon, and ungodliness opened at large
verse 4. therefore the briefer notes will serve the turn.

1. Christ's second coming is to judgment; so it is said in the Text, He shall
come with ten thousand of his Saints to execute judgment. Of his first coming
it is said. John 3. 17. God sent not his Son to judge the world, but that the
world through him should be saved; he came not then as a Judge; but as a
Redeemer, offering and procuring grace and life, when we frustrate the end of
his coming as a Redeemer, we make way for the end of his coming as a Judge, and
he that then came to us, will now come against us.

2. When Christ comes to judgment, one great part of his work will be, to
convince sinners, and that openly, publicly. Some think that the whole work
will be dispatched in the Conscience, without any audible and external voice,
both* as to ex^mination and sentence; others think the trial and conviction
shall be in the conscience of a sinner, but the sentence audibly pronounced,
and because the punishment is too light upon body and soul, the ear is to
receive it, as well as the Conscience feel it: I conceive, that conviction,
trial, and sentence, will be all open and public, though I cannot expressly
say, that every particular sin shall be discovered before the whole world, yet
enough manifested to show the sentence just, as their unfaithfulness in their
callings, their opposition of God and Godliness, their oppression of his
servants, their neglect o grace, etc. with all the circumstances and
aggravations of it, as the gracious opportunities and means which they have
enjoyed, stirring serm^ns, motions of the spirit, checks of Conscience, blessed
methods of love and mercy, etc. God keeps an account of these things; those
passages which imply Gods reckoning with his people in the world, are but
pledges of what he will do at the day of our last account: now here God takes
exact notice of the long time, and many means which we have enjoyed, as Luke
13. 7. these three years etc. it alludeth to the time of Christ's ministry, he
was just then entering upon his last half year, as by a serious harmonizing the
Evangelists will appear, John 2. 54. This second miracle did Jesus in Canah of
Galilee; account is kept of a former: 1 Kings 11. 9. -- appeared to him twice,
so these 23. years, and J^r. 25. 3. all this is remembered and produced to
convince the sinner.

This conviction implies two things. 1. The opening of the Conscience, Rev.
20. 12. The books were opened, that is, the book of Conscience, and the book of
Gods remembrance; the consciences of men shall then be extended to an exact
view of all their works and deeds past; it is wonderful, but it shall be done by
the mighty power of God; for it is said here, he shall convince them of all
their ungodly deeds, and hard speeches; their works and words are not lost and
forgotten, but do follow them into the other world, and stand in the view of
Conscience, challenging the sinner, tu nos See Hosea 7. 2. Psalm 49. 5.
egisti, opera tua sumus; sinner, these are the things which thou have done and
spoken, we will not leave thee, but bring thee to judgment; then is that
expression made good, Numb. 32. 23.
their iniquities shall find them out, our old sins, and carnal practices were
long since forgotten and worn out of memory, so that we think we shall never
^ea^ of them more, but there they find us out, and pursue us to Christ's
Tribunal. 2. There is an outward publication and manifestation of all these
sins, or of most of them, before the world; for the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 4. 5.
hidden things shall be brought to light in that day; that is, not only called
to remembrance by the sinner himself, but exposed to the notice and censure of
others, as the context there shows: so Eccles. 12. 14. it is said, secret sins
shall be brought to judgment, if only discovered to the conscience of the
sinner, they are still kept secret: wicked men are already in a great measure
convinced, yea and condemnd in their own consciences, it is then Gods design to
shame them before all the world, how otherwise shall the suspected innocence of
his servants be vindicated, and Saints and Angels applaud the equity of his
judgments, unless they have some cognizance of the matter for which wicked men
are condemned? Now these sins may be discovered many ways, either by their own
confessions, and pitiful complaints extorted from them by the power of God,
they shall wail and bemoan their case thus probably, Oh that ever I despised
Christ, oppressed his servants, opposed his truth, slighted the seasons of
grace, etc. see Rev. 6. 16, 17. or by the sentence of Christ, in the
pronouncing of which, there is some repetition of their sins, see Matthew 25. 41,
42, 43. and also by the testimony of the good and bad Angels against them: The
good Angels and Guardians of the Saints, are sensible of the injuries done to
them, and may possibly accuse you to Christ upon that score, Matthew. 18. 10. the
Devil, who is now a Tempter, will then be an Accuser: One of the Fathers
brings in the Devil pleading thus, Domine sit meus per culpam, qui tuus esse
noluit per gratiam, etc. Lord let him be mine by sin, who would not be thine by
grace; I never died for him, had no heaven to offer him, only a little carnal
pleasure or profit, and this was enough to draw him from thee, etc. yea
further, the Ministers, and other godly persons, by whose example they have
been reproved or condemned, may give testimony against them, John 5. 45. there
is one that accuses you, even Moses, etc. the cries of those whom they have
oppressed and wronged, may possibly be renewed, James 5. 4. Abel's blood may
cry out against Cain afresh, starved souls may cry out against a lazy Minister,
oppressed subjects against a bloody Magistrate, the neglected poor against
those that have shut their bowels against them; as on the other side the godly
poor that have bin refreshed and relieved by the bounty of the rich, are said
to receive them into everlasting habitations, Luke 16. 9. Again, the example of
those that have had less means may be produced against them, because they went
further in a way of compliance with the Lords purpose, Matthew. 12. 41, 42.
Others with whom we have sinned may complain of us; Dives was afraid lest his
Brethren should come into the place of Torment, Luke 16. 28. which might be a
means to increase his anguish, they sinning by his example; I have produced
these suppositions, only to make the conviction at the day of judgment more
intelligible and effective.

Again observe, when Christ has convinced, he will condemn, Observat. 3.
and when he has condemned, he will execute: Conviction now makes way many
times for conversion, but then for confusion; now God kills, that he may make
alive, but then they are presently transmitted and sent into their everlasting
estate: Let us imitate the method of Christ's process in our judging our selves,
let us examine judge, execute, not our selves, but our sins; voluntary acts
prevent enforced.

From that [ Of all their ungodly deeds, etc.] Observe, That the process of the
last day chiefly lies against the ungodly. Observat. 4.
These are expressly mentioned in the Text, unrighteousness is a cause of Gods
wrath, as well as ungodliness, Romans 2. 18. But ungodliness does chiefly
provoke; for the first part, and chiefest part of the Law, provideth for our
duty to God, ex ordine modum, ex loco statum, and dignitatem Tertullian.
uniuscujusque praecepti etc. The dignity of every command is known by the
command of it; now in the first place, godliness is required, and then
righteousness, or a care of moral duties.

If you would know who are ungodly, see the notes on verse 4. where they are
described at large, all Atheists, peeuliative and prastical Pagans, sinners
that slight the offers of Christ, that neglect communion with God, and are
touched with no reverence and dread of his Majesty, all these are ungodly
persons, and also all that scof at Religion, and holiness of conversation, that
despise the Ordinances of God, oppress and persecute his servants; hate his
truths, these are all in the Scripture branded with the same mark, as I could
easily show you, if I l^sted to dilate upon this argument.

Now none of these will be able to hold up the head in the day of Judgment,
Psalm. 1. 5 The ungodly shall not stand in judgment, nor sinners in the
congregation of the righteous; for since they hate or neglect God, how shall
they be able to look him in the face, or appear among his servants? They that
have despised the 1 Timothy 3. 6. 1 Timothy 6. 3.
mystery of godliness, how can they expect the reward of godliness? You that
mock at godliness, make Duties the objects of your scorn, not your care; how
will Christ scorn you at the last day? Well then, if you would have the day of
judgment comfortable to you, be not only just and strict, but godly, for
godliness is a notion distinct from holiness, 2 Pet. 3. 11. it is not enough to
do actions just and good, but we must do them upon the sight of Gods will, and
with aims at his glory: Holiness implies a conformity to the Law of God, but
godliness an enlightened respect to his glory, now a Christians whole life
should have such a tendency and ordination, for it is called a living to God,
Gal. 2. 19.

Once more observe, These ungodly men are the rather Observat. 5.
judged, because they commit sin with an ungodly mind, or sin with a sinning
mind; for so it is in the Text; ungodly deeds ungodly committed: A child of God
may fall into wickedness, but he does not commit it wickedly, with a full
consent; men are not condemned for infirmities but iniquities; as a child of
God cannot act with such liberty, purity and perfection in the ways of God, as
he does desire, so in the ways of sin he cannot do what he would, nor be
carried out with such a full bent and purpose of heart, as wicked men are,
because of the opposition of the new nature; to this latter sense is it said,
Gal. 5. 17. Ye cannot do the things that ye would, as will appear by a serious
inspection of the context: wicked men follow the Derils work with all their
might, Micah 7. 3. They do evil with both hands, earnestly, the Lord that is
tender of those that sin through infirmity, yet takes notice to the purpose
when men sin for sins sake, and their hearts are largely and eagerly set upon
it; those that are discaimed at the day of judgment, are called workers of
iniquity, Mat. 7. 23. such as make a business and a trade of it; a godly man
does not so much act sin as he suffers by it, peccatum patitur non facit,
Bernard. He does not pour out his whole heart this way, there are constant
dislikes in the soul, which are a let and restraint to him; usually the sins of
the godly are either sins of ignorance, incogitancy, sudden surreption, and
daily incursion, if they sin deliberately there is not such a spite and rage,
as there is to be found in the sins of the wicked.

From the next clause [ and their hard speeches] Observe, Observat. 6.
Not only the deeds of ungodly men, but their speeches are brought into
judgment; words do not perish with the breath with which they are uttered, no,
they remain upon record and we are to give an account of them at the last day,
Mat. 15. 36. and James 2. 12. Men are more serious in their actions, but in
their speeches rash and inconsiderate, and those that dare not act evil, dare
yet speak; Oh consider if Christ did only call us to an account for our
actions, and our words were free, 'twere another matter; but he reckons with
us about our speeches, therefore so speak, and so do, as those that would be
judged by the Law of the liberty.

Once more from thence observe, That of all speeches men's hard speeches shall
be produced at the day of judgment: Now what are these hard speeches? I Answ.
either such as have anger in them, as Solomon speaks of the froward mouth and
perverse lips, Prove. 4. 22. when men breath nothing but fire, and drop coals
instead of words; or such as have pride in them, or contempt of others, as when
we lessen their abilities, insult over their miseries, They speak to the grief
of those whom thou have wounded, see Psalm. 94. 4. or triumph over their slipps
and failings: this is to pour salt and vinegar into new wounds.

Again, such as have bitterness and malice in them, as calumnies and
reproaches, Psalm. 64. 3, 4. They bend their bows to shoot their Arrows, even
bitter words; By whisperings and clancular suggestions they wound the credit of
Gods servants, and so bring them into dis-esteem with others. Well then, be not
hasty to utter hard speeches, especially against Gods children, Numb. 12. 8.
Were ye not afraid to speak against my servant, against Moses? The repetition
of these hard speeches will be sad notes to your ears at the last day.

The next Note is, That of all hard speeches those are the Observat. 8:
worst which do most directly reflect upon the honor and glory of Christ; for
so it is in the Text [ hard speeches spoken against him,] Now hard speeches
against Christ are either blasphemies against either of his natures; the
Ebionites denied him to be God; the Valen inians made him a fantastical man,
or a man only in appearance, or murmurings against his providence and regiment
of the world: Your words have been stout against me, Mal. 3. 15. When we tax
and excuse providence, as if the Lord were blind careless, unjust or injurious
in his dealings: The Lord shall not see, he shall neither do good nor evil, how
should the most high know? or when we scoff at his word, as these, Jer. 23. 33.
The burden of the Lord, the burden of the Lord, everymans word shall be his
burden, because the Prophets usually began their Sermons with this Preface, The
burden of the Lord, they scoffingly were wont to say, what burden have you for
us to day? Now says the Prophet, this shall return into your bosoms, your
words shall be your burden: So also when we speak against his ways, calling
zeal fury, strictness a foolish preciseness, and godliness puritanism: Oh
Christians, these hard speeches will cost dear, here or hereafter; Mat. 12. 32.
^
it is possible that blasphemy repented of may be forgiven, but when you are
brought home to Christ, 'twill cost you bitter pangs, and a sound remorse.

Verse 16. These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts, and
their mouth speaks great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration
because of advantage.
HEre the Apostle comes to make Application, and to prove that these were
such as Enoch had described, and therefore liable to the judgment threatened:
Here are several things charged; I shall take them in order:

The first thing is, their unsatisfiedness with their present condition,
expressed in two words, 1. Murmurers, 2. Complainers.

The first word (...), signisieth such a muttering as men use when they are
under a passion and discontent: The other word (...). signifies blamers of
their lot and portion; namely, of that portion which is set out for them by
God; the one implies their discontented thoughts the other their qeurelous
expressions. Note hence,

That murmuring is a great sin; It Is so charged here Observat. 1.
upon the Seducers. I shall first show what murmuring is: Secondly prove that
it is a great sin.

1. What it is, Or Sibbus.^
one says well, it must needs be known because it is so commonly practiced; but
if you will have me describe it, I shall say it is the scum of discontext, or
the vent of impatience, or such bold expostulations and complaints as flow from
an exulcerated mind: In the Text, you see first men mutter, and then complain,
the heart boyleth with impatience, and then the froth is cast out in passionate
speeches and complaints: humble complaints are not murmuring, else there would
be no room for prayer; but bold expostulations are murmurings, when we complain
rather of God then to God, taxing the administration of his providence, as if
he dealt too hardly with us; so that in effect murmuring is an anti-providence,
first cherished by repining thoughts, and then vented and uttered in bold and
uncomely speeches; thoughts are audible with God, but it is worse when thoughts
are not controled, but break out openly in words tending to Gods dishonor; if
the fire be kindled in our bosoms it is some kind of victory if we smother it,
and will not let the sparks fly abroad.

There are several kinds of murmuring, either against men, or against God,
though in the issue all be against God, against God about men.

1. Against men, and so either against our equals or superiors.

1. Equals, when we murmur because they are admitted to the same privileges
with our selves, see Mat. 20. 11. They murmured against the good man of the
louse, saying, these last wrought but one hour; so Luk 15. This thy son
devoured his living with harlots, etc. and Beza, of some that reproached him
with the sins of his unregenerate condition: Hi homines invident mihi gratiam
divinam, surely these men are angry because God has showed me mercy: there is
an envious nature in man, we would all shine alone, and enclose the common
salvation; to upbraid men with late conversion is all one as to make it a
crime, because they are born but yesterday, it is to take up that filth which
God would have covered.

2. Against Superiors, especially because invested with Magistracy or
Ministry, some men are of a yokeless libertine spirit, will acknowledge no
other Law but their own lusts, as in the Text: Murmurers, walking after their
own lusts, think Magistracy to be an incroachment upon their freedom, and
therefore cannot away with any established order; and as for Ministry, that all
the Lords people are holy, Numb. 16. 3 what need any to be set a part for that
work; thus would they level all things in Church and Commonwealth, as those
Rebels rose up against Moses and Aaron: but though not against the Office, we
may murmur at the persons that are advanced, as if we would teach God how to
govern the world, and whom to lift up and cast down: or else by finding fault
with their government without a cause; some presumptuovs persons that never
learned obedience, are always unsatisfied; 'twas * observed of Egypt, that it
was Loquax est ingeniosa in contumeliam praefectorum provincia, si quis forte
vitaverit culpam, contumeliam non ^ff^git; many such ungoverned spirits there
are that are always traducing public government, especially when it is most
faithfully managed, and to the discouragement of Opinionists and evildoers;
God will not suffer this evil to go unpunished, Exodus 16 8. and 1 Samuel 18. 7.
the calling is his Ordinance, the persons are designed by his providence, and
the work concerns his glory, and therefore God takes himself to be much
interested in the querrel.

2. There is a murmuring which is immediately against God himself, since the
fall man is always quarrelling with his Maker, either against his Decrees or
his Laws or his Providence.

1. Against his Decrees, proud man cannot endure to hear of Gods absolute
Sovereignty, we will do what we will but we will give leave to God to do what
he will: The good man of the house was fain to plead his right, Mat 20. 15
Shall I not do with my ^wn, etc. we can see no reason, why God should pass by
one and choose another; though we can see no reason, it is enough it is Gods
pleasure, Mat. 11. 26. God has his arcana imperii, as well as earthly Princes,
and we have cause to admire what we cannot understand, things may be just,
though his reasons appear not to us; God is not bound to give us an account, or
to tell us all his secrets; humane reason grows giddy by prying into the
depth of Gods Decrees; it is good to change disputes into wonder and reverence,
Rom, 9. 10 Who art thou Oh man that disputest with God? we may chop Logic one
with another, the potsheards of the earth with the potsheards of the earth, but
Gods prerogative is above the tribunal of our reason.

2. His Laws, a proud creature cannot endure to hear of restraints, we could
love other things in God, but not his legislative power, Romans 8. 7.
the carnal mind will never stoop, but complains of him as harsh and severe,
as if he had forbidden us the satisfying of those desires which he has planted
in us; the Israelites murmured thus, the Land was a good Land, but there were
Giants and Sons of A^ak: Numb. 13. 32. the Heaven promised is a good Heaven,
but the way is rough and unpastable, duties are difficult and it is cumbersome
to thwart our lusts; the project of carnal nature is to find out an easy and
smooth path to etern^l happiness, see Psalm. 106 24 25. They despised the
pleasant land, they b^leeved not his word, but murmured in their Tents, Heaven
figured by the Laud of Canaan, is not counted worth the pains and difficulty of
getting thither.

3. His Providence, in general when the wicked prosper; it is a temptation that
has shaken the tallest Cedars in Lebanon; David, though a Steward, he was
ashamed of it, and counts it brutish ignorance Psalm. 73. 22. so Jerem. 12. 1.
2, 3. and Habakkuk chap. 1, But let us come to temptations that are of a more
particular and private experience: We murmur either for what we want, or for
what we have lost, or for what we affect.

First for what we w^nt, as soon as we are straightened, we complain presently,
this is not so bad as when we murmur out of wan onness, the Israelites (I
observe) did sall a murmuring either out of want, and then they were spared, as
for want of waters, Exodus 5. 14. for want of meat Exodus 16 2. want of bread,
Numb. 20. 3. but at other times out of wantonness; they loathed Manna, must
have Quails, but then some special judgment or other brake out upon them; but
however it is bad enough, when our necessities extort these complaints from us;
want is a time of praying not of murmuring, the Throne of Grace was erected for
a time of need, Heb. 4. 16. but it is man's usual custom to change duties into
sins, as admonition into censuring, instead of speaking to men, we speak of
men, so instead of complaining to God, we complain of God, and so make
murmuring take the room of prayer. Necessity is a time to put the promises in
suit, to try faith, to awaken affections, not to provoke murmurings; I was dumb
and opened not my mouth, says David, Psalm. 39. We may open our mouths in
confessions of sin, humble narratives pleading of promises, but not in self
justifications, stormings against Providence, or words of unbelief and
impatience, so we must be dumb and not once open our mouths.

Secondly, For what we have lost, we complain when God takes away such a
child, or such a comfort, or blasteth such a confidence of ours, as our
affections were much set upon, and in bitterness of heart speak unworthily of
God and his dispensations, see 2 Samuel 18 33. we hate going back a degree or
two, and count it miserable to be once happy, etc. but oh Christians remember
when any thing is lost it is a wonder all is not gone; Job lost all, and yet
blessed God, Job 1. 23. Sencea.
abstulit sed and dedit, He took, but he gave first: That we were once happy,
shows we have not always been miserable, our Pilgrimage might have been
wholly evil and uncomfortable, shall we receive good and not evil at the hands
of the Lord, Job 2. there is much gone, but somewhat left, that little that is
left is more then we have deserved; many in the world would be glad of our
Relics, has he taken ought from us? he might have taken more, he takes part
that gives all; all is his own, he reserved the property to himself; as much
right as we had to our comforts was long since forfeited: If God has lent us
blessings and demand them again, shall we grudge them to the right owner? it is
needful now and then that God should take our comforts from us, when we have
gotten a carnal pillow under our heads, we are apt to fall into a deep sleep,
and dream many a fond dream till God take it from under us; he withdraws
comforts to see how we will take it, and bear up upon our great and everlasting
hopes, Heb. 10. 33. Ye took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, etc. you will
say that was by Martyrdom, but your loss by an ordinary providence; and will
not you let God take us willingly as thieves and persecutors, you have the same
encouragements, a beter and enduring substance.

Thirdly, For what we affect: We are wont to murmur at the smalness of our
portion, we have not so much as others, our condition in the world is not so
great, so rich, so honorable, as theirs; we have but a single, but they a
double, a Benjamins portion: Oh but consider this it mere murmuring, God never
undertook to maintain all his children at the same rate, and we cannot expect
so much; variety of conditions is necessary for the preservation of the world,
levelling is not Gods dispensation; some must be high and some low; the wise
preserver of all things distributeth his gifts variously, wealth to one, skill
to another, strength to a third, one must reign, another serve, and all for the
common good* a piece of Arras is composed of several parcels; we should all
famish for company, if all were of one sort, who should endure the handy
labors? how low soever thou art, thou art there where God has set thee, and
there thou must tarry till the said invitation of providence call thee higher.
Look backward thou have made some increase: Jacob took notice that his was
become two droves, Genesis 32. 10. though when he first came into the Country he
had nothing but his staff in his hand: many of Gods children are not so high as
thou art, if you murmur; what should others do that have less; we cast our eyes
forward on those before us, and because we have not so much as they, so good
trading, houses so well furnished, such honor and esteem in the world, all is
as nothing; h you do not look about you to the thousands that come short of
you; you say why should not we thrive as they? be preferred as they? Joseph
knew why Benjamin had a larger mess, though the rest at the Table did not; so
does the Lord know why he goes to one, and not to another.

Secondly, Let me show you the hainousness of the sin, by the causes of it. 2.
By the injustice of it.

1. The causes of murmuring are many, but all naught, as 1. Pride and
Self-love, when men are conceited of themselves, they storm that others are
preferred before them; a proud man must needs be discontented, because he sets
an high price upon himself, and when others will not come up to his price, he
is troubled; you will find such a proud thought rising in your heart, that men
of your worth are not taken notice of, and yet they that deserve least,
complain and murmr most; the best say, I am not worthy: real worth is humble,
the laden boughs hang their heads, the Nettle mounteth, when the Violet lies
shrouded under its leaves, and is only found out by its own scent: All Gods
blessings are low to him that is high in his own eyes.

2. Impatience. We cannot endure the least inconvenience, touchy nature would
be at ease, tumbling and wallowing in all kind of pleasure; therefore as soon
as we are touched in our skins, we fall a murmuring, Why is this evil befallen
me? and Why should I wait upon the Lord any longer? An unsubjection of Will to
God, will inevitably put us upon repining.

3. Presumption of merit, where all is of free cost, there is no complaining;
Men ascribe to themselves, when they prescribe to God what he shall do for
them* or how bless them; every thing is welcome, where nothing is deserved; if
you keep a man of Alms, you take it ill that he should not be pleased with his
Diet: when we look to desert, we may wonder more at what we have, then what we
want; God would do us no wrong, if we were reduced to a less pittance* if in a
prison, it is a favor we are not in hell: a Malefactor would be glad to commute
his punishment, a greater for a less, death for exile; exile for loss of
estate, and then the whole for a part: Can a firebrand of hell murmr? there
is our desert, but we think God is bound and that it is a wrong that he takes
no more notice of us, wherefore have we fasted, etc. Isa. 58. I am not as other
men, etc. Luke 18.

4. Carnal affection, Quod enixe concupiscunt ut sit, contabescunt quod esse
non possit. Gilbert in cant. 19.
We are too ravenous and greedy upon outward things, and therefore the
disappointment breeds the more vexation, our desires and hopes of more,
destroy the memory and consideration of what we have: God gives sufficiently
to satisfy our necessities, and we seek to supply our lusts: Lust is more
given to murmuring then necessity; Nature is contented with a little, it is soon
satisfied, but lust enlarges the desire as hell.

5. Unbelief and Distrust, Psalm. ro^. 24, 25. They believed not his word, but
murmured in their tents: Men quarrel with Gods providence, because they do not
believe his promises; distrust will be sure to breed discontent; it is ill for
the present, and they cannot see how it will be better; they could not believe
that the wilderness was the way to Canaan; that God can love one whom he
corrects; and therefore as soon as they feel the smart of the rod, they give
vent to their passions.

Secondly, The injustice of it, it is injurious to God, to others, to our
selves: 1. It Is injurious to God; murmuring is a sin that pulls God out of
the throne; you enter into judgment with him; as David on the other hand
prays, Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, Murmurers either
deny his providence, or tax it: Implicitly they deny it, as if God did not set
out to every man his portion, if men did believe that God did govern the world,
even as he made the world, why do they not complain of creation as well as
providence; we would laugh at him that would murmr because God did not make
him an Angel, or a Star, why is it not as ridiculous to murmr because God
has made thee a subject, and not a Prince, a beggar, and not a rich man; a
servant, but not a master; but that they own the hand of God in one, and not in
the other; as if the world were governed by blind chance. Or else they tax
providence, of indiscretion or unrighteousness: it is mavelous to see how
murmuring robs God of all his attributes; it clippeth his Sovereignty we
will not let him do with his own as it pleases him; the great contest between
him and us, is, whose will shall stand, his or ours; it limits his power, and
slghts it; when God does not satisfy us, we think he cannot, Psalm. 78. 20. We
set him a task* and if God perform it not, we question his sufficiency; it is a
contention with our Maker* an entering into the Lists with God, as if we could
make our party good against him, Psalm. 78. 17. We tax his wisdom: Men will be
teaching God how to govern the world for we prescribe to him, as if he did not
understand what is fit for us, he pleases us not in his wisest dispensations,
and bear it out, as if we could mend his works, Job 21. 22. Shall any teach God
knowledge, seeing he judges th^se that are high: They that disallow of Gods
proceedings, take upon them to be Gods Teachers: Twa^ a blasphemous speech of
Alphonsus, Si Deo a consiliis ad^uisset in creatione Mundi, multa sc consulius
ordinaturum. If he had been of Gods Council when he made the world, he would
have ordered many things better. Many abhor the blasphemy, and yet think almost
to the same effect: if they had the governing of the world, such men should not
prosper, and such and such things should not be done: thus do we Job. 38. 0.
darken counsel with woe ds without knowledge, and cast a reproach of folly and
injustice upon Gods providence. Quantum lib^t saepe obligati hoc solum memincr
unt quod negatum est, Plin. Ep. 4. l. ^. Non quod habit number(...) quod non ab^t
op^at. M^nil.
Again, to his goodness* we are injurious, by disvaluing what we have, in
comparison of what we expect, Mal. 1. 2 Wherein have thou loved us? As if they
had nothing, because not fully what they expected; it is man's nature to forget
what is granted, and pitch only upon what is denied; as children in a pet;
throw away what they have, if you do not give them more: says Haman, All this
avails me nothing, etc* Esther 5. 13. and the whole Kingdom of Israel would
not content Ahab when he falls sick for Naboth's V^eyand, 1 Kings 21. 4. As
in the body, if one humor be out of order, or one joint broken, the soundness
of all the rest avails us nothing a little is enough to set the creature a
complaining. His Justice also we tax, as if he did defraud us of our due; we
think somewhat is due, or else why do we complain, Matthew. 20. 13: Friend, I do
thee no wrong, etc.

2. It Is injurious to others, it puts us upon acts of violence and sedition,
the murmurers are called rebels, Numb. 17. 10. Schism in the Church, and
sedition in the Commonwealth are but the fruits of murmuring; men do like their
own rank and station, and then murmr, and then perturb all; Oh that I were a
Judge, says Absalom, and afterward breaks out into open rebellion; thin
exhalations end in great storms; servants would be masters, and the poor would
be rich, and subjects would be in office and power; and by giving vent to their
repining thoughts, inflame the zeal of persons like minded with themselves,
till all be embroyled in blood and confusions.

3. It Is injurious to our selves, man is a foolish creature, what does he get
by complaining of God? Who shall right us? Before what Tribunal will you put
him in suit? Of all sins murmuring is most unreasonable, but very peruitious;
what do we get by it but disquiet and judgment? It Is like spitting against the
wind, the drivel is returned upon our own heads; disquiet it breeds us; a
murmuring spirit is a greater evil then any affliction, like a sour vessel, it
turns all things that are put into it into sowrness; most men's misery arises
from their discontent, if their heart and their condition were suited, they
would do well enough in the world, we trouble our own peace; if we could learn
to frame our minds to our estates, as the skilful Musician lets down the
strings a peg lower when the tune requires it, we should pass to heaven more
comfortably. Again, it brings down judgment; expressions tending to Gods
dishonor, have a loud cry in his ears: Mi iam was smitten with leprosy for
murmuring, and Dathan and Abiram swallowed up alive; fiery serpents, and
plagues, and exclusion out of Canaan, were Isreal's judgments when they were
sick of the fret: see 1 Cor. 10. 10. Neither murmr ye, as some of them
murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer.

Let us now make Application, Beware of murmurings, it is a greater sin then the
world takes it to be; here I shall speak of two things, 1. Murmuring at the
Times and public changes which have happened amongst us. 2. Murmuring in our own
private case.

1. Murmuring at the Times, it is a repining age we live in, many factions are
disappointed, and therefore the most are full of discontent, forgetting that
all this is the work of a wise God: Mistake me not, I list not to become the
Times Advocate, it little beseems us to be Patrons of public miscarriages,
or Factors for any Private Interest.

Therefore let me proceed with the greatest Scripture evidence and conviction,
and state what is murmuring at the Times: It Is forbidden Eccles. 7. 10. Say not
thou that the former times were better then these; for thou do not enquire
wisely concerning this: Now what is the sin taxed in this Scripture? I answer,

1. Not godly sorrow, and complaining to God, and bewailing the corruptions of
the times: No, the Mourners in Sion are marked for preservation, Exek. 9. None
are better friends to public Interest; 'twere well if these Doves of the
Valleys had more company; this is no sin, for this is the only way of entering
our protest, and being free from the corruptions of the age, God has bound up
all Politic Bodies in the same bundle, and we are concerned in others sins;
it is the art of divine mercy by this means to prevent public ruin, by
interesting his people in the welfare of those places where they live, that
every man in this place may be sensible of present sins, and approaching
judgments, two dry sticks will set a green one a fire: Can you blame the
children of God then if they mourn, and enter their protest against the
iniquity of the Times? The Corinthians were not clear of the incest committed
amongst them, till they had mourned, then the Apostle says, now ye are clear
in this matter: 2 Cor. 7. 11. surely they that are involved in the guilt
concerned in the judgment, had need mourn.

2. Not zeal in public reproof. Isa. 58. 1. C^y^aloud, spare not, etc. vitium
saeculi is no excuse; if we spare, God will not spare, i^ we hazard our bodies
in bearing our testimony, we save our souls: we must cry out upon sin with a
full throat, and that again and again, provided we be clear in our Principles
and Ayms, and do it without clamor, and popular Invectives: When a fire is
kindled in a City, we do not say coldly, yonder is a great fire, I pray God it
do no harm: in times of public defection, we are not to read taine Lectures
of contemplative Divinity, or fight with Ghosts, and antiquated Errors, but to
oppose with all earnestness the growing evils of the world, what ever it cost
us.

3. Nor yet an holy dislike and singularity, standing aloof from public
corruptions, as Lot in Sodom, and Noah walked with God in his generations, Genesis
6 9. Gods children most commonly are forced to walk in a counter motion to the
times, Paul when he had accused the times as evil, advises Christians to walk
circumspectly, Gal. 5. 16. Worldly wisdom would draw quite another conclusion.
The times are bad, let us do as well as we can; there is no living in the world,
unless we yield a little; the Oak is rent to pieces with the fury of the wind,
when the willow boweth and bends; shall we alone resist such a torrent? Thus
would we reason; but the spirit does not loosen the reins, but straighten them
upon this consideration; the days are evil, therefore be circumspect, that is,
be careful to keep close to rule, left you be blinded and perverted by the
subtleties of those that lie in wait to deceive, and elsewhere shine as lights
in the midst of a perverse generation: Dead fishes swim with the stream, there
is a difference between subjection to God, and compliance with men, etc.

But now positively, What is the fault there reproved? I Answer, 1. Foolish
murmurings, or such a fond and unthankful admiration of former times, that we
have not a good word for the present; Tacitus observed it, vitio malignitat is
humane vettra laudantur, praesentia fastidio sunt; it is a common evil, men are
praising past times, and declaiming against the present; querulous natures are
never pleased, neither full nor fasting; past temptations are forgotten, and
therefore present evils ^eem worst, and laziness many times occasioneth
complaints: Many repine against God because he has given us our lot in such an
age, wherein public contests put us upon the trouble of prayer, discourse, and
diligent searching in the mind of God, now usually to excuse other duties, we
fall a complaining.

Again, private discontent may exasperate some, things are not suitable to
their humors and interests; no wonder if Demetrius and the Copper*Smiths call
those evil times when the Gospel is like to get up, because their craft is like
to go down and they are not* favored as they do desire: Again, sottish
carnality may be in the wind, carnal men will extol the happiness of former
times; their great hospitality and kind neighborhood, their honest dealing,
and good devotion; what a merry time it was, and how plentiful all things were
before the new Gospel came in, and they had nothing; but Moss and Mattens, as
those sots, Jer. 44. 18, 19. Formalists cry up the goodness of the old Religion
to disparage times of reformation; so the Roman Empire thrived more under false
Gods; then under the Christian Religion, wherefore Augustine wrote his Books,
De civitate. Dei, to answer that charge; Christians these times* may be the
worse for those that went before, we may smart for their blood and Idols, and
hatred of the people of God; judgments were then in the causes, as the clouds
gather before the rain falls.

2. When we pass over the good, and look only upon the evil; we should ^counter
balance our affictions with our mercies; Shall we receive good and not evil at
the hands of God Job 2. it is railing to gather up the failings of others and
not to take notice of their graces; so it is a railing against providence, and
an ill office to be only like flies pitching upon a sore place: is there no
blessing with all this bad? with our temporal calamities have we not some
increase of spiritual privileges? as in the wilderness they had Gods presence,
though they had a tedious passage of it; the free use of Ordinances will
countervail all public burdens, some suppose that Solomon in that Eccl. 7.
10. alludeth to the peoples murmuring in his time, there was a Temple building,
but the Taxes were great, and therefore they cried the former t^mes were better
then these, see 1 King. 12. 4.

5. When we charge our guilt upon the times, man is apt to transfer his faults
upon others, and obliquely upon God himself, The woman which thou gave me,
etc. and so usually the times wherein we live are such, etc. why? God ordered
them, and if you were as you should be, the times could not hurt you, a great
deal of fire falls upon a stone and it burns not, but a dry chipp soon
takes fire; men think if they be corrupt the sault is not theirs but the
times; it is yours certainly, it is bad men make bad times, as I shall show anon.

Let me now give you a few Remedies.

1. When your hearts storm, look back, there were inconveniences in the
wilderness, but a sore bondage in Egypt; a good memory is an help to
thankfulness, for my own case, when I am brimfull, I consider the times that
are past See 2 Chronicles. 15. from 3. to the 6.
when there was no peace to him that w^nt out or came in, when private meetings
were a conventicle, and in public we could only sigh, not speak; when May
poles and carnal sports were preferred before the Sabbath, when afternoon
Preaching was suppressed to make way for those sports; when 'twas a crime to go
from a doa^ing service-Reader to hear the Preaching of the word; surely they
that are so ready to return into Egypt, have forgotten their bondage; when
their cry came up to God because of the anguish of their souls; our hard
Taskmasters, the domineering Prelates, and their oppressing filthy Courts are
forgotten, our promiscuous communions, and the flat and cold repetitions of an
imposed liturgy quite forgotten; so the confinement of Preaching, and the
restraint of Doctrines; these things are out of feeling, and therefore out of
remembrance: one great defect the people of God are troubled withal, is a bad
memory, Mich. 6. 5. Oh my people remember, etc. I tell you if we did but
remember how we were Prelate-bitten, we would not murmur, but give thanks.

2. There is nothing now under the Sun, Eccles. 1. 7. We say, Is there any
sorrow like unto my sorrow? things never were as they are now; certainly you do
not rightly enquire after this matter, the world is the world still, men have
ever had the same principles, the same corruptions, the same temptations, there
were Donatists then, as well as Separatists now, Pelagians then as well as
Arminians now, Arians then as well as Socinians now, all new lights are but old
darkness revived, neither new, nor lights; it is easy to parallel what is most
odious; there is a circular motion of opinions and fashions, as the Sun
returns every year to the same points of his compass.

3. All comes to pass by Gods providence, he is the great Master of the
Scenes, that presents the world with a new Stage, both of Acts and Actors, 1 Samuel, 2. 7, 8. The Lord makes poor and makes rich; he brings low, and he
lifts up; he raises up the poor from the dust, and lifts up the beggar
from the dunghill to set them among the Princes, and make them inherit the Crown
of glory, for the pillars of the earth are the Lords, and he has set the world
upon them: The government of the world is in Gods hands, and he casts down
some, and raises up others from beggary to Sovereignty, from the dunghill to
glory: you see there his course is contrary to levelling, he will have some
upon the Throne of glory; and you see again, that God has an hand in all the
mutations and changes that fall out in the world: and that these mutations are
frequent, the world is tossed to and fro like a bill from hand to hand, that
Gods Sovereignty and Dominion over events may the better appear, and that power
may not want a bridle, nor the low condition, a comfort; again, that all the
Kings of the earth do hold their estates of God; say then, If God has set up
these persons, let me see what God will do with them.

4. The good of times is not to be meas^red by the carnal quiet of them;
Physic provokes ill humors, better they should be stirred then lie still and
foment a disease; God usually comes with a Fan and a Sword, we should not
murmur against the Sword, because of the benefit of the Fan,

5. If every one did amend himself, the times would soon amend: M^nd thy self
and as many as are under thy charge, and mourn for others, and thou have no
cause to compl^in, Joshua 24. 15. I and my house will serve the Lord, if every
one did sweep before his own door, the common filth would be sooner carried
away, usually complainers do least, as the crafty Lapwing will go up and down
fluttering and crying, to draw the fowler from her own nest; we have some
secret nest of our own, and we are loath it should be rifled and exposed to
public view.

6. The worse the times are, the more exercise for grace; we have more
opportunities of showing love to God then formerly, and zeal for his interests,
and industry in finding out the right way; man is never contented, sometimes we
question Gods love if we meet with no opposition, and and yet we complain when
the ways of God are opposed.

7. There is an Antiperistasis in grace as well as nature, you should be better
in bad times, as fountain water is hottest in winter, and fire scaldeth most in
frosty weather, or stars shine brightest in the darkest night, see Phil. 2. 15.
when the air is infectious we are the more carefu^ of our diet.

8. Complaining will not excuse duty, it argues little faith, is not Christ
King? does not he reign? little obedience, and care of reformation; a gracious
heart is most apt to return upon 'its self; if the times be bad, what have I
done to make them better? if not, thou art one that have made them worse.

9. He that is not good in bad times, will be naught in better, Isa. 26. 10. In
the Land of uprightness will he ded unjustly, a sick man thinks to have ease
in another bed in another room carry him thither his pain continues; if a
carnal man had lived in the Prophets times, or the Apostles time, he would be
the same as now, see Mat. 23. 29, 30. A bryar is a bryar where ever it grows,
change of times will not do the work without a change of heart: Adam sinned in
Paradise, the Apostate Angels in Heaven; Lot was unchaste in the Mountains,
where were none but his own family, in an howling Wilderness where they had no
outward enticements, the Israelites were given to fleshly lusts.

2. The next Part of Use is to rebuke murmuring in our own private case; by way
of consideration take these helps.

1. A little is enough, too much is a snare, Luke 12. 15. Man's life consists
not in the abundance of what he possess^th, the wants of nature are very few,
till lust make it ravenous, a garment too long will soon prove a dirty ragg,
the greater gates open to the greater temptations and cares; it is an hard
lesson to learn to abound, Phil. 4. 12. we say such an one would do well to be
a Lord or a Lady, it is an harder thing than you think it to be, a little
suffices to keep us till we come to Heaven; if we have clothes for warmth,
though not for pomp, it is enough, Qui Christum curat non multum curat quam de
praciosis cibis stercus conficiat. Hierom.
what need a Christian care how finely dust and ashes be wrapped up, or of what
stuff his excrements be made of.

2. God has an hand in all things, Psalm. 39. 9. Isa. 38. 15. God is the Party
with whom we have to do in sickness, or any other trouble, every wheel moves
according to the motion of first, when we see the hand of God it is a piece of
religious manners to keep silence.

3. God sees what is fittest for us, if a man should be left to carve out his
own portion, he would be his own greatest enemy; none has more love then God,
more wisdom, and justice, then God; therefore count the present estate best,
because it is of his choosing, should the shepherd choose the pastures or the
sheep? we are all for the delicacies of pleasure and prosperity; children think
green fruit the best diet because it suiteth with their appetite; what a
strange creature would man be if he were what he would be himself? well then,
let us leave it to God to choose our portion and to appoint us what part we
shall act in the world, usually we set up a court in our own affections, and
enact Laws; prescribe to providence, we would have this and we would have that,
and when our expectations are not answered, we fall a murmuring, it is very hard
to repeal the decrees of our own will, therefore it is good to resign our selves
to the disposal of providence, as David does, 2 Samuel 15. 26, 27. and to keep
our desires low, till Gods will be declared; it is easier to add then to
substract, and to ascend with providence, when the master of the feast bids
us to sit higher, then to be compelled to descend and lie in the dust.

4. If it be bad, it might have been worse, in regard of Gods absolute power
and our desert; your sufferings are not so great as your sins, Ezra. 9. 13. Thou
have punished us less then we have deserved* God is too just to do us wrong; if
he will exchange Hell for Babylon* there is much of mercy in it nothing of
injustice; if you do not deserve this usage from the hands of men, you have
deserved this, and much more from God; it is deserved of God, and therefore to
be born patiently, it is not deserved of men, therefore to be born cheerfully;
whose cross would we bear, Christ's or the Thieves Cross? when we suffer
deservedly and as Malefactors, we bear the Thieves Cross.

5. The Lord disposes all for the benefit of his own people, so that if it be
not good for the present, it will turn to good. Romans 8. 28. if God should not
thus exercise us, we would have more cause to complain; he is too gentle a
Physician that lets his Patient dye for want of putting him to the trouble of
physic; consult with Gods aim, rather then your present feeling; let him cut
and burn here, that he may save hereafter, Domine hic ure, hic seca, etc.

6. Murmuring is so bad in none as in Gods children, it does not become their
privileges* their vows, their hopes; God, in covenant, is theirs, and he has
all things that has him that made all things, all things are comprised in God;
if our lumber be changed into silver, our silver into Gold, our gold into one
rare Pearl, that is all the other virtually; if God has given us himself, his
Christ, his Spirit will not all this content us? It does not become our vows,
and the promises which thou m^d'st to God when thy terrors were upon thee;
then thou did say, Oh Lord let me have Jesus Christ, and I will be content,
though I should beg my bread, and be reduced to rags and extremity of want;
when thy heart was stung with sin, thus desireous were thou to reckon upon
Christ as thy all-sufficient portion; how grew the * consolations of God to be
small with thee, now God tries whether thou will stand to thy word, and thou
fallest a murmuring; it may be just with God to dipp his Arrows in venom and
vengeance, and shoot them into thy soul again: Once more, it is below your
hopes, you should have a spirit as high as Heaven, and will you storm at every
petty loss, as he said, Art thou the Kings son in law, and art so lean from day
to day? are you Heirs of glory, and stand so much upon triffles? it should not
be.

Having given you some general Considerations against murmuring, I now come to
particular Cases.

1. Do thou lie under deep presting wants? diverse have been put to great
streights, that have done God more glory: Musculas a great Divine, yet forced
to serve a Weaver for his subsistence: Paul made Tents that he might not be
burdensome, and so prejudice men against the Gospel; the more destitute, the
more sensible of the care of providence; God bears the Purse for us, when we
have but from hand to mouth, we are still supplied; the more immediately you
live upon God, the more you begin the life of Heaven, where God is all in all:
Deep poverty is is the sauce of the present life; Austin saw a beggar frisking
after his belly was filled, he could find no such delight after the use of the
creatures, being daily and abundantly supplied; the spectacle much wrought upon
him.

2. Have thou sustained great losses? If God has lent us blessings, and taken
them again, shall we grudge them to the right owner, he took part that gave all.

3. Do thou endure great pains? there is a gradation in miseries, those that
lite upon the estate, do not sit so close as those that lite upon the body, and
those that lite upon the body are not so terrible as those that lite upon the
soul; a wounded spirit who can beat? bodily pains is the case we now speak too,
you are full of pains, but Christ on the Cross suffered more; but he was
God-man; the Martyrs suffered more, Heb. 11. 35. they were tortured, (...),
they were stretched out like a Drum; but those were rare instances, and had a
singular assistance, Paul's was an ordinary case, his thorn in the flesh, 2 Cor.
12. was some great bodily pain; but Paul was a choice spirit, heathens have
born it stoutly; Epicurus was full of solace in a fit of the Cholick, ob
memoriam inventorum, by calling to mind his inventions in Philosophy; and Tully
speaks of Possidoni^s the Philosopher, that whilst he was under a great fit
of the stone, could discourse freely that nothing was good but virtue, nothing
evil but vice, and when his pain twinged him, would say, Nihil agis dolor
quamvis sis molestus nunquam confitebor te esse malum; Pain thou do nothing
alter my opinion, though thou art troublesome yet thou art not evil; but these
were men that obstinately maintained an insensibleness; little children have
endured great pains, and will thou startle at that which poor little children
have suffered? Besides all this, it is Gods design to try you; Virtus etiam
lecto exhibetur.
there is a great deal of valor to be showed in the sick bed, either the end
of it will be life or death, if death, it is the last brunt, bear it patiently,
Exodus 14. 13.
those enemies which ye now see ye shall them see no more, Heaven will make
amends for all: If life, you will be ashamed when well, that you had no more
patience whilst sick; passive valor is the glory of a Christian, active volour
that is fomented with plenty of blood and spirits, is a poor thing to it, great
Soldiers that will venture upon the mouth of a Canon, yet tremble at a
disease, and lingering death, when they are sick they are under gods arrest, etc,

That I have given you remedies against murmuring by way of consideration: Now
by way of practice.

1. Divert the stream another way, as to the disposition of heart, take this
rule; Be still examining thy self, rather then judging God, Psalm. 4. 4. If God
seems to neglect me, have not I neglected him, etc. as to the outward
expression of murmuring, turn the streams again; express thy sorrows often in a
way of prayer, thy rejoycings in a way of praise: prayer cures murmuring, for
that is a duty wherein we profess subjection and dependence; and besides,
utterance gives ease to the soul, an Oven stopped is the more hot within,
complain more to God, and we shall not complain of God: Praise cures
murmuring, Job 1 23. as long as we can give thanks, we will not be querulous;
but when we are disdainful of blessings, and we say, what no more? Mal. 1. 2.
the distemper is getting ground upon the soul.

2. Affect rather to be good then great, none murmur because of the smallness
of grace, that is not their complaint; but because of the lowness of their
condition in the world* a man that looks after the increase of grace, he can
bless God for his outward decays, 2 Cor. 4. 16. and look upon murmurings as
worse then pains or losses, those are afflictions, these are sins: So much for
the first crime charged.

The next part of their Character is [ walking after their own lusts,] This is
fitly subjoined to the former; for lusts make men froward and hard to be
pleased; and the persons here described were exact Libertines, making their
lusts their rule and their law; yea, the most brutish of all lusts, the lusts
of the flesh; and therefore in Peter it is 2 Pet. 2. 10. That walk after the
flesh in the lust of uncleanness; how portentous they were for impurities in
this kind, we told you before; their [ walking after their lusts] implies
their giving up themselves to such a course, contrary to all fear of God, care
of Laws, or restraint of nature.

The Point is, That it is an Argument of ungodliness when men walk after their
own lusts: The Apostle appling the Prophecy of Enoch against ungodly men,
brings this as a part of the charge, that they walk after their own lusts: I
shall enquire

1. What lusts are. 2. What it is to walk after their own lusts. 3. Prove it to
be a note of ungodliness.
1. What lusts are? This I have Answered elsewhere; see my Comentary on James
1. 14. page 105. and 106. for the present let it suffice to note, that lust is
either original, or actual.

1. It signifies our original pronnness to all that is evil, James 1. 14.

2. Actual lust, so it signifies any evil motion of the heart that swerveth
from the Law of God, more especially our inordinate desires and inclinations to
pleasures, honors or profit; sometimes they are called fleshly lusts, 1 Pet.
2. 11. as carrying us out to the satisfaction of our bodily and brutish
appetites; sometimes worldly lusts, Tit 2. 12. because they are stirred by
worldly objects; lusts are the fever of the soul, unnatural heats,
transgressing the Laws of reason, and bounds of Religion.

2. What does this walking imply; it is elsewhere expressed by serving diverse
lusts and pleasures, Tit. 3. 3. and by fulfilling the desires of the flesh and
the mind, Ephesians. 2. 3. It notes,

First, a willing subjection to lust, as a law or as a Master, the one is
employed in walking after our lusts, the other in serving our lusts; when men do
as they please, and let their sensual heart give Law to the whole man: a child
of God may be overcome by his lusts, but he does not walk after them, or serve
them, he may be foiled, hut he does not give over the combat, and is still
resisting, striving, praying, calling in the help of the spirit, his soul
suffers a rape by lust, there is not a plenary consent on his part.

2. Customary practice and observance, walking is a progressive motion, and so
implies men's course, and the tenor of their lives: a child of God, his
walking is in the spirit, Gal. 5. 16. and does not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh; but it is a wicked man's work and employment.

3. A fond indulgence; they are so far from thwarting lusts that they provide,
contrive for them, Romans 13. 14. Make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the
lusts thereof, they nourish their hearts, fondle lust, and make a wanton of it,
they do not crucify it, and set up a course of mortification against it.

Thirdly, This is a note of unregeneracy, or a state of ungodliness; the
Apostle describes the natural state by this serving, Tit. 3. 3. and this
fulfilling, Ephesians. 2. 3. and when the Holy Ghost does derive the pride and folly
of young Job. 15. 11. ^
men in giving themselves up to a course of lust and vanity; he says, go walk
in the way of thine own heart, Eccles. 11. 9. and the negative or privative
work of regeneration is called a putting off the old man with his deceitful
lusts, Ephesians. 4. 22 and it stands with good reason.

1. Because they that walk after their lusts seek to cherish that which Christ
came to destroy, and so go about to defeat the Redeemer, and to hinder him from
obtaining his purpose in their hearts; Christ came to destroy the works of the
Devil, 1 John 3. 8 (...), to unty and loosen those cords of vanity wherewith
Satan has bonnd us; the works of the Devil are lies which are of his inspiring
and cherishing, John 8. 44. Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of
your father ye will do: Now when Christ comes to lose these cords, carnal men
tie them the faster, and therefore certainly are to be reckoned to the devil,
and not unto God; every degree of service done to Satan, is an act of treason
and disloyalty to Christ, therefore when men make it their work to fulfill their
lust, they renounce all allegiance to Christ.

2. They that walk after their lusts have not taken the rule of the new
creature upon them; the new man has another Master and another rule, the
renewed soul is not governed by lust, but by the Law of God, Gal 6. 16. it we
have not changed our rule, it is a sign we have not changed our Master.

3. They that walk after their lusts, never felt the power of grace for the
grace of God teaches us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts Tit. 2. 11,
12. how does it teach us? I Answer, partly by diversion, by acquainting us with
better things in Christ, Romans 13. 14 Put ye on the Lord Jesus, and make not
provision for the lusts of the flesh; love cannot lie idle in the soul, the
mind of man must have some oblectation and delight, either love runs out in
lust, or in respects to God; either to heavenly or worldly things: when we only
savor the things of the flesh, it is a sign we never tasted how sweet God is in
Christ.

2. Partly by way of help and supply; it planteth opposite principles and makes
use of an opposite power, it plants opposite principles, a new nature that has
new desires and delights, 2 Pet. 1. 4. and makes use of an opposite power,
which is the spirit of God, Romans 8. 13.

3. Partly by way of argument; grace out* pleads, lust it urges the
unsuitableness of it to our condition, see Romans 13. 13. 1 Pet. 4. 3. and 1 Pet.
1. 14. Romans 6. 2. to our vows; Baptism implies a renunciation of sins, 1 Pet
3. 21. it is an answer to Gods demands, Credis? Credo, ab renuncias? Ab
renuncio, spondes? spondeo. Therefore he that lives under the full power of
lust, has forgotten his Baptismal vows, 2 Pet. 1. 8. forgotten that he was
purged from his old sins: it pleads also the unsuitableness of it to our
hopes, 1 Pet 2. 11. we are passing on to another Country, where we shall enjoy
a price, and sinless estate.

Let us now apply the point.

It disswadeth us from walking after our own lusts: you Use 1.
that are Christians should deny them, and not gratify them, otherwise you
renounce your allegiance to God; Lust sets up another Lord, and makes us stand
in defiance with the God that made us; his Laws call for one thing, and your
lusts crave another: God says, put off the old man with his deceitful lusts,
and you say, we will keep them: Can they be good subjects that live in defiance
of their Sovereigns Laws? If a Prince should send a message to a City not to
harbor such and such Traitors, but to search them out, and bring them to
condign punishment, if they never look after them, yea are angry with those
that discover them, it argues they do inhaunt with Traitors, and are enemies
to their Prince: We are often warned in Gods name to look to our sinful lusts,
to put them away, and we go home, and never regard it, nay are angry with those
that grate upon the Conscience: Herod would not have his Herodias touched; we
take it hainously when the

Word bears hard upon our hearts, what do we but show our selves Traitors to
the Crown of heaven?

2. Otherwise you ren^unee your interest in Christ, Gal. 5. 24. They that are
Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affestions and lusts thereof: He
does not say, they are Christ's that take up this opinion and naked belief, that
he was crucified, or died for sinners, but they are Christ's, that feel that he
was crucified, that by the virtue of his Cross do crucify their own lusts and
sinful affections; What? a Christian, and yet worldly! A Christian, and yet
sensual! A Christian, and yet proud! You that are given to pleasures, do you
believe in Christ that was a man of sorrows? You that are carried after the
pomp and vanity of the world, do you believe in Christ, whose kingdom was not
of this world? You that are proud and lofty, do you prosess an interest in
Christ, who said, Learn of me, for I am humble and lowly? It Is in vain for you
to talk of his dying for sinners, and boasting of his Cross, when you never
felt the virtue of it, Gal 6. 14 What experience have you, that his Cross was
the Cross of the Son of God, when your hearts linger as inordinately after
carnal things as ever? Have you gotten any thing by it? Do you feel any
weakening of lusts? Any decay of sin? Are you planted into the efficacy of his
death? Romans 6 5. If not how can you glory in the Cross of Christ?

3. Otherwise you are not acquainted with the spirit, his work is to mortify
lusts, Romans 8. 13. and they that are after the flesh, do savor of the things
of the flesh; and they that are after the spirit, the things of the spirit;
Romans 8. 5. After whom do ye walk? After your own lusts? Or after the Spirit of
God?

4. God does not only require you in point of Sovereignty, to put away your
lusts, but also pleads with you upon terms of grace, Titus 2. 14. The grace
of God that bring the salvation, teaches you to deny worldly lusts: Grace has
denied us nothing, it has given us Christ, and all things with him; and shall
we stick at our lusts, that are not worth the keeping? Nature is much addicted
to these lusts, but surely God loves Christ much more then we love the world;
his love is infinite and unlimitted, like his essence, yet God gave up the Son
of his love; Grace counts nothing too dear for us, not the blood of Christ
the joys of Heaven, and shall we count any thing too dear to part with for
Graces sake? God forbid. A Mat. 5. 19.
right eye, and a right hand, cannot be so dear to us* a* Christ was to God: At
what cost has Grace been at to redeem us, and save us! And shall Grace be at
all this cost for nothing? If God had commanded us a greater thing, ought we
not to have done it? If to give the body to be burnt, to offer the first born
for the sin of thy soul? considering his absolute right over the cre^ture, he
might have require^ thy life, and thy childrens life, but he only requires thy
lusts, things not worth the keeping, the bane of the soul, a bad inmate; which
if we know its pestilent influence, we needed no more arguments to turn it out
of doors; thy lusts God requires, things we are bound to part with, to
preserve the integrity and perfection of our natures, if God had never dealt
with us in a way of grace; but now shall grace plead in vain, when it presses
to deny lusts, will be the shame and horror of the damned to all eternity,
that they have stood with God for a trifle, that they would not part with d^ng
for gold, with a little brutish contentment, for the consolations of the
Spirit, especially when grace which has so deeply p^e-engaged us, pleads for
it.

5. Consider what lust is; it is the disease of the soul: Natural desire is like
the Calor vitalis, the vi^^l heat but lust is like a feverish heat, that
oppresses nature, we should get rid of it, as we would of a disease, the
satisfaction of it is sweet to carnal nature, so is drink to a man in a fever;
who would desire a Feven to relish his drink? Better be without the disease,
then enjoy the pleasure of the satisfaction, better mortify lust, then
satisfy it, in the issue 'twill be sweeter; I am sure the pains of
mortification will not be so bitter as the h^rrours of everlasting darkness:
lust let alone begins our hell, it is a burning heat, that at length breaks
out into everlasting flames: Again, lust is the disorder of nature, as it is
monstrous in the body, if the head be there where the feet should be, and the
feet there where the head should be; such a deordination is there in the soul
when the affections carry it, and when Reason should be in dominion, we suffer
lust to take the throne; man rightly constituted, his actions are governed in
this manner, the understanding and conscience prescribe to the Will, the Will
according to right reason and conscience moves the affections, the affections
according to the command and counsel of the will, move the bodily spirits and
members of the body, but by corruption there is a manifest inversion and
change, pleasures affect the senses, the senses corrupt the fantasy, the
fantasy moves the bodily spirits, they the affections, and by their violence
and inclination the Will is enslaved, and the mind blinded, and so man is
carried headlong to his own destruction; now shall we cherish these lusts and
brutish appetitions? The Lord forbid.

6. It Is lusts that hinder the peace of the world, our own peace: how quietly
and happily would men live, if they were more mortified? Men desire more then
they have, and so are made poor, not by want, so much as desire; he that
expects little, is soon satisfied: it is our own passions that raise a storm in
the soul: a man that is vile and little in his own eyes, when others contemn
and slight him, they do but ratify his private opinion of himself, and who can
be angry with others, because they are of the same judgment with our selves?
Take away the lust, and the trouble cease: What need Haman be troubled that
Mordecai did not bow the knee, but that he looked for it? Nay, Lusts trouble
our p^ace of Conscience: Lusts let alone, end in gross sins, and gross sins in
desperation: love of pleasures, if uncontolled will end in drunkenness, or
adultery and envy in murder and violence: sins unchecked, grow lic^ntio^s and
unruly: Judas allowed his covetousness and it brought him to betray his Master,
and that Brought him to the halter: Gehazi was first blasted with covetousness,
and then with leprosy. and so became a burden to himself: Ananias and Sap^ira
taken off by a sudden judgeme^t: The devil loves by l^st to bring us to sin,
and by sin to shame, and by shame to horror and despair; so that if we walk
after our lusts, it proves a sad walk in the issue: Again it disturbeth ou^
peace with others, these Libertines were yokeless, and could not endure
restraints, because wedded to their own lusts, it is not opinions divide the
world, so much as lusts and interests.

7. The more you walk after your lusts, the more you may: they are not quenohed
when they are satisfied, but increased rather, as the fire is, by laying on of
new fuel, the distemper grows every day, till you are quite enslaved: Titus
1. 7. Titus 2. 3.
given to much wine, it is (...), enslaved to wine in the Greek: In this sense
we are said to be brought under the power of the creature, 1 Cor. 6. 12. so
that what ever shame or loss ensues, you cannot leave your lusts. Jer. 18. 12.
There is no hope, etc. they see it is bad, and cannot see how it should be
otherwise.

8. What can we get by sin but a little pleasure? Tit. 3. 3. serving diverse
lusts and pleasures, this is the great Sorceress that inchants the whole world,
the root of all sin, they loved pleasures more then God, 2 Timothy 3. 4. it is not
imaginable that an intelligent creature should rest in his own action, we aim
at somewhat in walking after our own lusts, if we balk that which is honest, it
must be profit or pleasure: now that a man should enslave himself forever, and
that for a little pleasure, which is base in it self, and lost as soon as
enjoyed, is monstrous and absurd: Breve est quod delectat, ^ternum quod
cruciat; the pleasure is but short, vanishing, but the pain is for ever? and
will you for a thing of naught break with God, and forfeit your immortal souls?
Oh let it not be.

Let all this now persuade you to deny your lusts, rather then to feed or
cherish them, to renounce them, and not to walk after them: There are three
degrees of this denial: 1. They must be prevented, and kept from rising. 2.
Suppressed, and kept from growth. 3. We must not accomplish them, and if they
gain consent, keep them from execution: Suitable to which three degrees, there
are three duties, 1. Mortification, that we may prevent them. 2. Watchfulness,
that we may suppress them. 3. Resolution, that we may not accomplish them.

1. To begin with the top and highest degree is to prevent the lust, 1 Pet. 2.
11. Abstain from fleshly lusts, it is not enough to abstain from acts of sin,
but we must abstain from lusts, yea the root must be deadned, Gal. 5. 24.
Crucify the flesh, she is chaste that checketh an unclean solicitation, but
she is more worthy praise whose grave carriage forbids all assaults and
attempts in that kind, so should we be so mortified as to prevent a temptation,
not to have a lust stirring: but because this cannot always be, 2. The next
degree is, timely to suppress them, laus est aliqus in secundis stare, to
conquer lust when we cannot curb it, and wholly keep it under: Dash Babylons
brats against the stone, and take the little foxes, smother it in the
conception, Jam. 1. 15. it is a great sin to quench the spirits motions, so it is
a great neglect not to take notice of the first thoughts and risings of sin;
the little sticks kindle first, and set the great ones on fire, crush the
Cockatrice in the egg, the flesh rises up in arms against every gracious
motion, so should the spirit, the better part, against every sinful motion,
Gal. 5. 17. chide away your carnal thoughts, and let them not find harbor; if
the envious man throw weeds over the Garden wall, the gardner will not let them
root there; if Satan cast in thoughts, cast them out again with indignation.

3. Let not worldly lusts be put in execution. If thou have neglected the
mortifica ion and deadning of the affections, if sin has got the star^ of thee
and gained a consent, yetat least restrain the practice, Jam. 1. 15. L^st when
it has conceived, brings forth sin, that is, an external sinful action,
there are works of the flesh, that follow the l^sts of the flesh Gal. 5. 19.
it is good ^o stop at lust, though the lust grieveth the spirit of God, yet the
work, beside the grief b^ingeth dishonor to God, gives an ill example,
brings scandal to Religion, makes way for an habit and further proness to
sin; therefore if thou have not prevented the lust, act not the sin, Micah 2.
1, 2. Woe be to them that devise evil upon their beds, and when the morning is
light, they practice it: it is naught to harbor the motion, to plot and muse
upon sin, but it is worse to practice it, for every act strengthens the
inclination, as a brand that has been once in the fire, is more ready to burn
again, if the devil have kindled a fire in thy bosom, let not the sparks fly
abroad, but keep the temptation within doors, left thou more betray thy self
into Satan's hands.

The third clause in this Application of Enochs prophecy is, that [ their
mouth speaks great swelling words.] In Enochs prophecy not only ungodly
deeds are noted, but hard speeches; these Gnostics were faulty both ways, both
in word and deed: that which is charged here, is a fault in their speech. It Is
said Dan. 11. 36. The King shall speak mavelous things against the God of
gods. In the Septuagint the same phrase is used that is here, (...) and so
possibly it may imply their blasphemies against God, a crime of which these
wretches were guilty in exalting Simon Magus* above the true God: or else these
swelling words may relate to their boasting of their own knowledge, from whence
they were called Gnostics, and Tertullian says of them, omnes tument, omnes
scientiam pollicentur ipsae mulieres haereticae quam sunt procaces! They all
swell with pride, and make ostentation of deeper knowledge, their very women*
how conceited are they! Or else it may signify their proud censures of others,
their scorning of the Guides of the Church, as it is said of some, Psalm. 73. 9.
They speak loftily, they set their mouth against the heavens, their tongue
walks through the earth, they took a liberty to speak of all things and
persons at pleasure, without any restraint, which was and is the very genius of
these and other Seducers: rather I suppose, though not excluding the other
senses, these swelling words relate to their phras^ologie and unsavory
gibberish which they used in representing their opinions, Peter calls them,
swelling words of vanity, 2 Pet. 2. 18. The Note hence is this.

That the pride and vanity of Seducers, is usually bewrayed Observat. 3.
in the fondness and affectedness of their expressions. The affected language
of the Gnostics and Valentinians, may be seen in Iraeneus; and how much this
pattern has been improved by men of a fanatical spirit, may be found in those
that have written of the Heresies of succeeding Ages? Jerome taxes Jovinian
with Discripsit Apostolus Jovini^num loquentem buccis tumentibus and inflata
verba trutinantem. Hieron. lib. 1. adversus Jovin.
his swelling* words: In times more modern, Swinkfield was observed to be
always talking of Illumination, Deification etc. and the Famulists cant is not
unknown, of being godded with God, and christed with Christ; so Jacob Behmens*
greening of the inward root, etc. and Calvin says of the Libertines of his
time, communi sermon spreto, exoticum nescio quid idioma sibi fingunt, interea
nihil spirituale afferunt; they pretend to matter more spiritual, and when all
comes to all, it is but noisome errors disguised, or common things represented
in uncouth forms of speech which the Scriptures own not, rational and truly
spiritual men understand not; the same unsavory and unintellegible forms of
speech may be observed in a wicked Book, lately put forth by a Knight of this
Country, called The retired man's meditations, wherein the highest principles of
our most holy faith are endeavored to be undermined by this Artifice of covert
and affected speech, but that by the providence of God the Book fell under
neglect and scorn, presently upon the publication; Now the reason of this
affectation is (I suppose) to amuze the Reader with the pretense of mystery and
depths, Rev. 2. 24. that despising the simplicity of the world, and the common
and avowed principles, he may be the more pliable to their carnal fancies,
which if naked y exposed at first, would have nothing of allurement and
temptation in them to any well disposed minds: well then, be not wrapped into
admiration with novel and conceited expressions, nor troubled with oppositions
of science falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6. 20. This is the Devils device, first to
maze people, (as brids are with a light and a bell in the night) and then to
drive them into the net: if you would keep to wholesome Doctrine, keep to a form
of wholesome words; and do not place Religion in conceited speaking; an holy
dialect I know becomes Saints; but an affected p'raseology is one of Satan's
lures, and a means to corrupt many.

The fourth Clause is [ Having men's person in admiration because of advantage.]
Junius applies this to those that set up Angels and unknown names, and persons
in the Church instead of Christ, but I think it is rather to be applied to men;
person is therefore put for the outward state and appearance, in which sense
it is said, Thou shall have no respect of persons in judgment, that is, of their
outward condition and estate; As Ge. 19. 21. Nashati panecha, the word
signifies I have accepted thy face, or lifted up thy face the Sept. render
(...). We, I have accepted thee concerning this thing.
accepting of persons is rendered by the Septuagint by (...), wondering at a man's
face or outside, as being overcome and dazzled at the splendour of it,
accordingly our Apostle says here* Having men's person in admiration; now this
they did for advantage, that is, either to gain men to their party, by crying
them up as holy and knowing, to the contempt of others who were more valuable
for the sincerity of Religion; or else for worldly profits sake, those whom
they feared, or from whom they expected any worldly profit, as the rich and
powerful, upon these would they fawn, and with these in a servile manner
insinnuate themselves, commending their actions, and magnifying their persons.

Having been so long in the former part of the Verse, I shall but mention the
Notes here.

1. None so fawning and base spirited as the proud for their Observat. 4:
advantage; these spoke swelling words, and yet basely crouching for profits
sake. Ambrose notes it of a spirit of ambition; ut dominetur aliis prius
servit curvatur obsequio ut honor donetur; none stoop so as they that have a
mind to rise, Dr. Jackson in his Treatise of faith.
one observed of our late Prelates, That they were willing to take Chams curse
upon them to domineer in the Tents of them, that is, would be servants o^
servants slaves to great men's servants, that they might lord it over Gods
Heritage; men of proud insulting spirits, how low for their own ends? as
Absalom courteth the people to justle his father out of the Throne, 2 Samuel 15.
2, 3, 4, 5. and Tacitus observes the like of Oath, that he did proiicere
oscula, adorare vulgus and omnia serviliter pro imperio: adore the people, kiss
the meanest, basely dispense his courtesy to the vilest, all to further his
designs upon the Empire; so Ammianus Marcelliuus, lib. 25. observes the same
of Julian, that out of affectation of popularity he delighted to converse with
the meanest of the people; certainly a proud spirit is no great spirit, no more
then a swollen arm can be accounted big.

2. Having men's persons in admiration for advantage, is a Observat. 5.
sin: we may admire the gifts of God in others, so as to praise the giver; but
not so as to be guilty of anthropolatry, or man worship, 1 Cor, 3. 21. not so
as to despise others, who have their usefulness, and it may be as excellent a
gift in another kind, 1 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. not so as to promote our
interests thereby; this is servile flattery condemned in the Text; and Hosea 7.
8. not so as to be afraid to tell them their own, or for their fear or favor
to wrest the truth of God* Mat. 22. 16. Thou teach the way of God in truth
neither carest thou for any man, for thou regardest not the person of men; let
all regard this, especially the Ministers of Christ.

3. That seducers are apt to insinnuate with great persons, Observat. 6.
and men of power and interest, that having their ear and countenance, they may
engage them against the truth: having not truth of their side, they use the
more craft: as the Ivy not being able to support it self, twineth about the Oak
till it sucketh out its heart; Gods Messengers carry it more openly, and with a
single plainness, see 2 Cor. 1. 12. creepers and fawning parasites do but draw
a suspicion upon themselves; surely Gods cause is able to stand upon its own
legs, and needs not the support of so base an Artifice.

But is it not lawful to use some prudence in this kind, and to insinnuate with
great men for the advantage of a good cause?

I Answer, To be over solicitous in this kind, argues distrust of Gods
providence, and draws suspicion upon the way which we would need maintain;
that matter is not very cumbustible where men blow so hard: what favor comes
in the fai^ way of Gods providence we may accept; All men seek the Rulers face,
but every man's judgment is of the Lord; and what may be gotten by honest; open,
and lawful means, as by humble addresses, and the magnetic virtue of truth its
self, and the holiness of them that maintain it may be sought after; thus the
Apostles dealt with the Rulers and great ones, to gain their respect to
Christianity, that they might with less prejudice insinnuate the truth to the
people, Acts 18. 8. and Acts 19. 31. Some of the chief of Asia were friends to
Paul: but now when this respect is to be gotten by clamular and dishonest arts,
and cannot be kept without flattering them in their sins, or compliance with
their lusts and carnal designs, and men stretch their consciences, and make it
their business to humor those that they may advance them; and trample upon all
that may be called right and honesty, to accomplish their ends, and magnify
those whom they would have scorned, if their station had not been so high; This
is to have men's persons in admiration for advantage.

4. Usually men of a false way in Religion admire those of Observat: 7.
their own party above others of known worth and integrity; this is one part of
the sense; all of their own way they accounted Gnostics, that is knowing
persons, as if others, how much soever owned by God, as having the stamp and
impress of gifts and graces upon them, were not to be compared with them; this
is the genius of all Sectaries, illi^ ipsum esse est promereri, says
Tertullian, it is religion enough to be one of them.

Verse 17. But Beloved remember ye the words which were spoken before of the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ.
HAving described these Seducers, he exhorts those to whom he wrote, to
beware of them, aliedging the warning of the Apostles, to show that not only
Enoch, who might be supposed to speak of the wicked men of his own time; but
the Apostles, who expressly spoke of the present age, foretold that scoffers and
sons of Belial should arise in the Church.

There is nothing difficult in this Verse, only a doubt is to be discussed;
does not this passage yield an Argument against the Authority of this Epistle?
he speaks of Apostles, and (...).
of of words spoken before by them, as if he were of an inferior orb, and
writing long after their publication of the word. I Answer no.

1. Peter makes mention of the Epistles of Paul, yet it does not weaken his
Authority, 2 Pet. 3 15, 16.

2. In the place exactly parallel to this, 2 Pet. 3. 2, 3. that Apostle cites
other writings, yet avoweth his Apostolical Authority; Be mindful of the words
spoken before by the holy Prophets, and the commandment of us the Apostles of
Jesus Christ.

3. This term [ before spoken of] only shows that he wrote late, when either
the Apostles were dead, or their writings were common in the Church:

But why does he quote the words of the Apostles, neither urging his own
Authority, nor including himself as Peter does: I Answer, partly out of modesty
to point at the place whence he had taken these things, and to show that he was
not ashamed to use and allege the writings of his fellow Apostles.

2. To declare their mutual consent: In the mouth of two or three witnesses
shall every word be established.

3. His own Authority is employed in vouching theirs, and before expressed, when
he calls himself [ The Brother of James.]

Notes from this Verse are these.

From that [ Beloved] which compellation is used to note his affection in this
writing, the like is used by Peter, 2 Pet. 3. 1. Beloved I thought meet, etc.
When we declaim against errors, we should do it out of love, and a tender
respect to the good of souls: In all conquests we had need watch our own
hearts; people suspect us to act out of peevishness and sininister affections,
to serve a sect and party, and our engagement to be faction, not zeal,
therefore be the more careful that the flame be pure, incense must not be
kindled with strange fire, nor zealous engagements arise from a carnal impulse.

Again, we may be earnest against error, when corrupt men are gotten into
esteem; but it is in love to you, if we express our selves with some warmth and
affection, it is for God, and your souls are concerned: it is observable John,
the Disciple of love, is most earnest against deceivers; bid them not good
speed says he, 2 Ep. John 7. 10. and every where in his Epistles, My little
children believe not every spirit, etc. there are many Anti. Christ's, men that
lie and have not the truth; it is sad your Ministers should be looked upon as
enemies, because they love you, and warm you; But you will say it is out of
perverseness, to serve their faction, and to cast an odium upon parties
opposite to themselves: I Answer, Charity thinks no evil, we should not
interpret the worst; those that storm at a warning, give a shrewd presumption
of their own guilt: usually persons that object thus, are such as would have us
tamely to suffer the honor and interest of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ,
to be trampled under foot; but it is our hearts desire that tender consciences
may know, that it is not the shame of others, but their good, which we aim at.

From that [ Remember,] Seasonable remembrance of truths is a great help and
relief to the soul; John 2. 22. When he was risen from the dead, the Desciples
remembered, etc. in events it is good to remember Prophesies, they confirm the
soul, and support it against the present distress and temptation, both sins and
discomforts arise from forgetfulness mostly, and want of actual remembrance;
Have ye forgotten, Heb. 12. 5. but now when the spirit is ready with the
remedy, as the flesh is with the temptations, it is a mighty support; in the
debates between the carnal and spiritual part, seasonable thoughts carry it, I
do not say bare thoughts do it, unless God be in them; there may be gracious
dissallowing thoughts, and yet the flesh go away with the victory for all that;
but this is the way by which the spirit of God works by fresh and seasonable
thoughts, he poyseth the heart, and inclines it to the better side: Well then,
let your memories be as an Ark or Chest, in which the Tables ore kept; lay up a
good stock of knowledge, that you may have truths always fresh and present with
you, will be an help to prayer, Ephesians. 6. 17, 18 Take the sword of the spirit
which is the word of God, praying always, etc. a check to temptations to sin,
Psalm. 119. 9. I have hid thy word in my heart, that I might not sin against
thee; a support in afflictions, Heb. 12. 5. a remedy against error, John 14,
26.

The next Clause is [ the words spoken before] The Prophesies Observat. 3.
of Scripture evince the truth of it; things are there spoken long before they
fall out, not only before the event, but before the causes, or remorse
tendencies to such an event; wise men may guess when they see probabilities,
and foretell that which depends on natural causes; the Devil can many times
shrewdly interpret the predictions of the word, but a certain precience of what
is future, and merely in it self contingent, is the prerogative of God, Isa.
41. 22. Let them foretell things to come, etc. this is done in the Scripture,
Cyrus is mentioned by name an hundred years before he was born, Isai. 25. 1.
The birth of Josiah 300. years before it came to pass, 1 King. 13. 2. The
building of Jericho 500. years before it was re-edified, Josh 7. 26. with 1
King 16. 34. The great promise of Christ in Paradise, accomplished a thousands
of years afterward; the people of the Jews were ever warned by Prophecy of the
good or bad that befell them; Scripture was to them not only an Authentic
Register, but an infallible prognostication; these two signal providence of
the reje^ion of the Jews, and the calling of the Gentiles, were they not
abundantly foretold, and accordingly came to pass? Can there be any compact
here? When the Jews were the keepers of the Oracles of God, would they foyst in
Prophesies against themselves? Well then, venture upon the truth of the word
more than you have done; God has ever hitherto stood to his word rather then
he would go back from it, he would not only cast off his ancient people, but
send his own Son, to suffer a shameful and an accursed death; he that has been
faithful hither to, is he like to fail at last?

I go on in the Text, [ of the Apostle of our Lord Jesus,] Observat. 4.
That the words of the Apostles are the Rule of faith; these were legati a
latere, sent from the side of Christ; they had an extraordinary mission and
call immediately from Christ, as Christ from the Father, John 17. 18, and John
20. 21. they had extraordinary gifts, as infallibility, quod hoc, as to the
work of an Apostle, the power of working miracles, etc. and ordinary gifts in
an extraordinary manner, as tongues, etc. they were to write Scripture, and to
consign a Rule to the use of the Church in all ages: This word of the Kingdom
must be Preached till the end come, Mat. 24. 14. and Christ prayed for no more
then do believe through their word, John 17. 20. and to them he said, Matthew 28.
I am with you to the end of the world, no other doctrine can we expect till we
come to study Divinity in the Lambs face.

Once more, these Apostles of the Lord, were Paul and Peter, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3,
4 Peter, 2 Pet. 3. 2, 3. From Observat. 5.
whence Jude takes many passages.

It Is not unlawful to make use of the writings of other men. Compare the
fifteenth and sixteenth Chapters of Isaiah with the 48 of Jeremiah, especially
Isa. 16. 8, 9, 10, 11, verses, with Jer. 48. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. and you shall
see how they agree almost word for word; the gifts and labors of others are
for our use, not to ^eed laziness, but to exercise industry, in some cases if
we speak, iisdem paene literis and syllabis* (as Melanchthon wished Divines
would) in the same words, it is not a fault in controversies and positive
truths, better make use of old words, then coin n^w matter: many now scoff at
common truths, as if Preachers did but talk like clocks, one after another;
Doctrine cannot be varied; a good scribe indeed must bring forth out of his
Treasury things both new and old, represent common things in a fresh savory
way; yet it is not altogether unlawful to make use of the words of others, where
they are poinaunt and emphatical, not lazily to go on in the tract, but as
improving their conceptions.

Yet again, Jude an Apostle* quoteth Apostles; Daniel a Observat. 6.
Prophet read in the Prophesies of Jeremiah, Dan. 9. 2. Peter was conversant in
the Epistles of Paul, 2 Pet. 3. 16. Paul himself had a care of the Parchments,
that is (as some suppose) the Volumes and Books of Scripture, 1 Timothy 4. 13.
Certainly the Scripture is not only for novices and young beginners, but for
the highest, a study becoming the most eminently gifted; there is a passage,
Psalm. 119. 75. Let those that fear thy name turn unto me, and those that have
known thy testimonies; that turning to him, some understand of joining with him
in friendship and familiarity, as certainly godly men by a secret inclination,
are moved to join one with another; others make the end of turning to him to
behold in him a pattern and example of the Lords grace; but the Chaldee
paraphrase thus, turns to my Doctrine* those that know let them come to know
more. Well then, do not rest in the light you have, and think that you are
above these helps, you may be further instructed and established, if you had
all knowledge there are affections to be wrought upon; you may be quickened if
not learn; Ministers and those that abound in knowledge may be stirred up by the
admonitions and exhortations of others.

Verse 18. How that they told you that there should be Mockers in the last
time, walking after their own ungodly lusts.
HOw that they told you] he means not in word but in writings; they told the
Church in general, but the Apostle applies it to them, places are every where,
1 Timothy 4. 1. 2 Timothy 3. 1. Acts 20. 29, 30. [in the last time.] The days when the
Gospel was first Preached are so called in a double sense, either with respect
to the approaching judgments on the Jews, 1 John 2. 18. Little children now it
is the last time, the lease of our mercies was running out a pace; so James
tells the carnal Jews, James 5. 3. Ye have heaped up treasure for the last
days, when God was pulling down and plucking up, they were scr^ping and
hoarding up wealth, and so became a greater prey to the destroyer. 2. Or
because then the last dispensation began, which God would continue without
change unto the worlds end, Heb. 1. 2. He has in these last days spoken to us
by his Son; the Lord has now fully revealed his mind, and the Doctrine of
salvation is put into a settled course, never more to be altered.

But why do the Scriptures speak so much of Scoffers in the last time?

I Answer, 1. Either by way of aggravation, that there should be scoffers then,
when God had sealed Doctrine by the coming of his Son, beyond which godly men
did not desire a greater confirmation.

2. Or (...), by way of distinction, more Mockers in the last time rather than
another; partly because the world was still continued, notwithstanding the
threatenings of its destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 4. partly because the holy people
were then divided, Jews and Christians, and times of division prove times of
Atheism and scoffing: partly because carnal hopes of a ten poral Messiah were
dissappointed, and by that means their assent was much weakened as to principles
of faith.

[ mockers] some think it imlyeth Seducers, who by deluding, do as it were,
make a mock of men; but I suppose it is rather taken properly, for such as in
the old Testament are termed scorners, Prove. 9. or scoffers; when men slight
that of which themselves or others have had an high esteem they usually do it
by scorning and scoffing, thereby the more to deface all feelings of
conscience: if you enquire what they mocked at? I Answer in general, it seems
to be the Lordship of Christ; in particular, the glorious exercise of it at the
day of judgment; Where is the promise of his coming? 2 Pet. 3. 4. and
therefore is Enochs Prophecy produced, which foretells the Lords coming with
ten thousands of his Saints, and Hieron in Isa* lib. 14. cap. 51. tells us of
a discourse between Peter and Simon magus, (against whose School and Sect our
Apostle is supposed to write) concerning the destruction of the world: If God
be good (says Simon) why will he destroy that which is good; if the world be
bad, how is God good that made it etc.

These Scorners are said [ to walk after their own ungodly lusts] walking
implies their settled course and daily custom of life, and their lusts are
called ungodly lusts; partly to note the profane temper of their spirits, and
partly to distinguish them from the motions and lustings of the new nature.

The Notes are these.

1. What is told to the Church in general, we must apprehend Observat. 1.
it as told to us. Paul tells Timothy, and Peter tells the distressed
strangers, and Jude says they told you: So Heb. 12. 5. the exhortation
speaks to you, etc. As if the Hebrews were the persons to whom the Proverbs
were directly written: the Scriptures speak to every age, every Church, every
person, no less than to those to whom they were first directed; well then, it
shows us how we should be affected in reading the word, we should read it as
a letter written by the hand of God from Heaven to us by name, if an Angel
should bring us a letter from Heaven* certainly we would regard it; the Bible
is a Message sen from Heaven to acquaint us with the mind of God, if we own the
divine authority of it, why do we regard it no more?

2. We should not be troubled at what is foretold, monsters Observat. 2.
expected are not wondered at, expectation as it deflowreth any good thing that
we expect, so it fore armeth the mind against evil, John 16. 4. these things I
have told you, that when the time shall come ye may remember. I have told you,
why? what good will that do? Ans. we are the better prepared to entertain evils
when we expect them before they come, and the evil to which the mind is
accustomed seems the less; again, we have an experience of Gods truth in the
prediction, which will help us to believe and depend upon other promises:
finally it assures us that the Lord has a hand and a Counsel in all our
troubles, for he told us of them before.

3. That the Scriptures speak much of the evil of the latter Observat. 3.
times, there is more knowledge and yet more sin and error; knowledge where it is
not sanctified, puffs up and makes men curious, and so they have an itch
after novelties, or else it makes men wicked, exasperating our evil
affections, and so none so bad as they that sin against light; thence much of
the error and profaneness in the latter days: Again the latter days are as
the bottom and sink that receives the dregs of foregoing ages, and Mundus
senescens ^patitur phantasias. Gerson.
as the world grows old it is much given to dreams and dotage: Once more much
division there will be, and be^ting their fellow servants, Matthew. 24. 29 much
Libertinism instead of casting off ceremonies, they will cast off O dinances,
and desire to be freed not only from the Popes Laws, but the very Law of Christ.

Among other sins that are found in the latter times, there Observat. 4*
will be many Scoffers. Partly because in times of controversy men will lose
all awe, when truths are made questionable assent is weakened; partly because
in times of liberty men will g^ve vent to their thoughts; partly because the
scandals of professing Christians will make many turn Atheists* partly because
fabulous conceits concerning the coming and temporal Kingdom of Christ will
make men question the whole doctrine of his coming: Well then, wonder not if
you find many scoffing at the authority of the Scriptures, Godhead of Christ,
Day of Judgment, the Ordinances, Fasting and Prayer. The latter age will yield
such kind of men, and it is one of the arts of Satan, by his Instruments to
make things of the saddest and most serious concernment to seem ridiculous,
that when once the awe of these blessed truths is weakened, men may be more
easily induced to cast off both the concernment and profession of them.

Mockers and Scoffers are usually the worst of sinners. In Observat. 5.
the first Psalm there are three degrees of sinners mentioned, and the highest
rank are those that sit in the seat of sinners, Psalm. 1. 1. the Sept. render
there (...), the chair of pestilence, these are the pests of mankind, scorning
comes from custom in sinning, and makes way for freedom in sinning; when
Conscience is seared and men have lost not only restraints of grace but natural
modesty, then they they fall a scoffing; and when once they are turned scoffers
nothing will reclaim them, reproofs inrage them, rebuke a Scorner and he will
hate thee, Prove. 9 8. yea, none do the Devil so much service in preventing
others as they; if your feet have been taken in this snare of death, extricate
your selves betimes, beg earnestly for the more grace, there is some hope, God
inviteth Scorners, Pro. 1. 22.

Again observe, Those that cast off the awe of the Lords Observat. 6.
coming will certainly give up themselves to brutish lusts: Those mockers that
said where is the promise of his coming, are said here to walk after their own
lusts, N^gantes enim paenam n^gant, and disciplinam, says Tertullian, de
resurrect. cap. 11. denying the Resurrection of the flesh, they must needs be
fleshly; for therefore they denied the day of his coming to avoid the fear of
his judgment.

It a^gueth a state of wickedness to walk after our own lusts. Observat. 7.
That is, when sin and lust is our constant practice, a godly person may too
often do according to his lusts, but he does not walk therein, it is not his
constant road and path, page* 68. 21. he will wound the head of his enemies and
the hairy scalp of such an one as goes on still in his trespasses, such as go
on still are there accounted enemies to God, but what is to walk in sin? Ans.
to make lust our principle, our course, our end. Our principle, what ever a
wicked man goes about, he does it out of some carnal impulse, his good duties
are either to hide a lust or feed a lust, if he abstain from one sin it is to
feed another; again, when it is our way and course carnal men follow earthly
things with greatest earnestness and delight, but heavenly things in a slight
and overly manner, the world and the flesh is their (...), their business, all
their care and comfort is it; and this is their end to please themselves, and
to satisfy their lusts: Well then, walk in the spirit that you may not fulfill
the lusts of the flesh. See verse 16.

Verse 19. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the
Spirit.
HEre the Apostle comes to inform them who these Mockers were of whom the
Apostles of the Lord spoke, he describes them by three notes.

1. They separate themselves, 2. Sensual. 3. Not having the Spirit.

1. [ These be they who separate themselves] (...), the old English Translation
had it thus, these are the Makers of Sects, the word signifies those which
disterminate and pluck up the bounds which God has set The Apostle means
those that without any necessity and warrant from God, cut off themselves from
the communion of the Church.

2 Sensual, (...), animal or Soul-men, men that have nothing but a reasonable
Soul which being corrupted, minds only the things of the flesh, and so notes
fleshly corrupt men Tertullian when leavened with Montanism, called the
Orthodox psychicos because of they did not with Montanus, condemn second
marriages; the word is notable, it will be some advantage to us to consider it
a little more fully: It Is three times used in Scripture, as in 1 Cor. 2. 14.
the natural man (...), who is opposed to (...) the spiritual men. So in James
3. 15, the wisdom that is from above is earthly, sensual, [(...)] divelish* and
then in this place, the word (as I said before) properly signisieth those that
have a Soul, and (...) is elsewhere used for the sensitive Soul, as where the
Apostle distinguishes of body, Soul, and Spirit, 1 These. 5. 23 (...), where by
(...) spirit, he understands the intellectual or rational part, by (...)
Soul, the mere animal or sensitive part, or that sensual appetite which we have
in common with the beasts, by (...) body, that which is commonly understood by
it, the body as it is the Organ and Instrument of the Soul, and this is one
reason why (...) comes to signify sensual* the other is because man being
left to himself to mere Soul-light or Soul-inclinations, can bring forth no
other fruits then such as are carnal; for whilst men are destitute of
sanctifying grace, sense and the flesh do reign in their full liberty and
power: Well then, these seducers* were sensual* given up to brutish lusts and
practices; they taxed others as carnal, and now none so libidinous, impure and
carnal, at they.

3. Not having the spirit; this is added, not only to show that they were
destitute of true grace and regeneration: partly to rebuke their vain
pretenses; the Gnostics and other filthy seducers of that time, did arrogate
to them* selves a singularity and peculiarity of the spirit, as if all others
were carnal, they only had the spirit, whereas indeed the contrary was true,
they giving up themselves to such filthy practices, showed that they had
nothing of the spirit in them; see Iraeneus, lib. 1. cap. 9. sect. 6, 7. Partly
to show the incompatibleness of the spirit with a fleshly and carnal life.

Notes from hence are these.

That separation or dividing our selves from the fellowship of Gods Church is
sinful, or a work of the flesh: The Apostle describes carnal persons, and of
them he says, They separate themselves, and accordingly the Apostle reckons
(...), seditious heresies. or sectmakings in the Church among the works of the
flesh, Gal. 5. 20. and with good reason, to leave the Church is to leave God;
Cain was the first separatist we read of, Genesis 4. 19. He went out from the
presence of the Lord, God is every where, how, from his presence? the meading
is, from the Church, where is the presence of his grace; why should we run from
the Shepherds Tents where Christ feeds at noon? Cant. 1. 9. 10. And as it is
contrary to our love to God, so to our love to the Saints, to which we are so
solemnly engaged; the question of separation lies much in the dark, but
obligations to love are clear and open, see Ephesians. 4. 4. 5, 6. It Is sad that many
that pretend much to Religion make no conscience of Schism, and offending the
brethren, by withdrawing from them, as if Christ's precepts of love were not to
be stood upon, as certainly they are not by them who draw their liberty to the
highest, and in indifferent matters rather take that course which will offend.

Once more, it is little for the honor of Christ, that his body is crumbled
into small bits and portionets; he prayed, Let them be one that the world may
know that thou have sent me, implying that our divisions and breaking into
sects, would breed suspicion of the Gospel in the hearts of men, as if that
great mystery of redemption by him, were but a well devised fable: Yet again,
this running into parties and sects, is our great hindrance and disadvantage:
partly in spiritual things, for all duties of spiritual commerce and communion
are fore-born; it is said here, These separate themselves, but beloved, do ye
edify one another in your holy faith, implying that though others withdraw and
omit all duty in this kind, those that continue in the body will contribute
their mutual help and care to confirm and build up one another; a draught of
wine is best preserved in the hogshead, and Christians in their societies;
coals lying together, keep in the heat, Apostasy began in forsaking the
assemblies, Heb. 10. 23, and 25. and 1 John 2. 19. Partly as to our outward
peace and welfare; separation sets others against us, and us against them, it
exulcerateth men's minds against you, when you give out as if you were more pure
and holy then others, Isai. 65. 5. Stand by thy self, come not near me, for I
am holyer then thou: Gracious singularity is many times envyed and hated, but
certainly peevish singularity draws a just scorn upon its self; and it
sets you against others, men seldom separate, but their hearts are much
estranged from those from whom they separate, for Religious ties being once
broken are hardly made up again; civil ruptures are not carried on with such
vehemence, and are sooner closed again; but Religion being the highest bond and
ligament, when it is once violated, the breach is the more irreconcilable.

Thus you see the evils of Schism or separation; but because this is many times
perversely charged, we must look a little more into the nature of it; the
Spouse had her Vail rent, and Gods own people have been burdened with the
imputation of Schism and Faction; it will concern us to state what separa^ion
is sinful: In general, such as dissolveth that union and love which should be
among Christians, or an unnecessary, unjust or rash departure from fellowship,
and communion with one another in the Ordinances of Christ.

This separation 1. Supposes that there was Once an union; we cannot be said
to separate from the world of infidels, as Pagans, Turks, Jews, with whom we
were never united, as water when the Ice is dissolved cannot be said to be
separated (in the sense we now take it.) from bodies Heterogeneal, as stars,
wood, etc. because never united with them but by accident, agregation there is,
but not properly a separation; separation is a dissolution of union, as when
one Church separateth from another, who are united in the same body, as parts
of the Church universal, or one or more persons from the same particular
Congregation of which they are members: I only add to this proposition, That
this union is to be understood not only of what it is de facto, but what ought
to be, de jure; thus persons that ought to join themselves but out of
schismatical principles do not, nor never did, join themselves to the Churches
of Christ, may be guilty of this sinful separation, because there is an union
required.

2 The fault and crime of the Schism is not always in those that do actually
separate and withdraw, but in those that cause it; a man threatens death to
his wife, hereupon she separateth, not she, but he makes the separation; Rome
obstinately continuing her corruptions, and threatening death to those that warn
her, the cause of separation is in Rome, not in us; strings in tune must not be
brought down to strings out of tune, but the other set up to them; Go not thou
to them (says God to the Prophet) but let them return to thee.

3. Though th^se that separate be the fewer yet that nothing varyeth the case;
Noah and eight persons went into the Ark, and left the world in infidelity; Lot
got out of Sodom with one family; Elijah was left alone to contest with Baals
Priests, not the greater, but the better part is to be regarded; Jacobs family
was fewer then the Cananites, and Israel less then the rest of the world; Gods
witnesses at the first may be but a very handful.

4. A separation from corruptions, and a separation from those that are
corrupt, are two distinct things; a separation from corruptions is always
enjoined, but not always from those that are corrupted, those Scriptures, Isa.
52. 11. and 2 Cor. 6. 17. speak of a fellowship with men in evil works; but now
a separation from men that are corrupt, is sometimes lawful, Rev. 18. 4. Come
out of her my people, etc. and Jer. 51. 9. She would not be healed, etc. we may
separate from such as separate from Christ, and continue obstinate in their
corruptions; and sometimes it is not lawful, as when a Church is is reforming,
and purging out these corruptions, or they are not of such moment as that such
a desparate remedy should be used; a limb is not to be cut off as soon as it
akerh, but when it is rotten and likely to endanger the whole body, when evils
are incurable, deadly and contagious; and we can no longer maintain communion
without sin, at first it is good to try all things.

5. There are several sorts of separation, as these distinctions will manifest.
Separation is either 1. Partial. 2 Total.
1. Negative. 2. Positive.
1. Universal. 2. Particular.


For the first distinction, there is a partial separation when we withdraw from
the communion of the Church in some Ordinances and not in other, as in the
Supper, but not in praving and hearing of the word.

The second distinction bears thus: There is a negative separation, as when
men do not hold communion with some Church, but yet do not join elsewhere, but
continue waiting for the amendment of that Church: Positive separation is when
they embody in another Church way, setting up Altar against Altar, and
threshold against threshold.

The third distinction is to be understood thus. 1. There is a particular
separation whereby men renounce communion with the Churches of such a kind and
constitution, catholic or universal separation by which men disclaim all
Churches extant in the world, as seekers, and many loose and vagrant persons,
that are as yet to choose Religion, or look for new messengers from Heaven, to
resolve the questions that are now on foot.

Now the more unjust the ground is, the more aggravated is the sin by the
degrees of it; if our separation be total and positive, and to deny all
Churches, of what constitution soever, argues an high degree of pride and
Schism.

6. Faulty separation is that which is rash, sinful and unjust, rash without
any real^cause, merely for our better accommodation, or when we require that of
the Church which the Scripture does not require; unjust without any sufficient
cause, occasioning so many scandals and contentions for a trifle, and
aggravating every discontent and dissatisfaction to the highest; sinful (I call
it) when the grounds are as carnal as the practice, as revenge, personal
discontent: as many in the primitive times went over to the Sect^ in stomach
and discontent; so Tertullian (is reported by some to do) to the Montanists: Or
else corrupt aims to be in the head of a train or troop, Acts 20. 28. it is
easy to abuse the innocent credulity of the people, and therefore some wicked
spirits make it their work to draw Disciples after them: Or it may be carnal
fear of the severity of discipline or the censures of the Church, or out of
love of gain, 2 Timothy 4. 10. or affectation of novelty, or an higher way than
ordinary Christians, or out of faction, in Corinth some of Paul. some of
Apollos, some of Cephas, 1 Cor. 11. 21.

7. The only lawful grounds of Preparation are three.

1. Intolerable persecution. 2. Damnable Heresy. 3. Gross Idolatry.

1. Intolerable persecution, Under this head is comprised sinsul
excommunication. See Joh. 9. 34. and Joh. 16. 2.
when we are thrust out Christ bids us flee into another City. 2. Damnable
Heresy, we cannot bidd them God-speed, l st we be partakers of their evil
deeds, John 2. ep. verse 11. 3. Gross Idolatry, when we cannot communicate in
their worship without sin.

8. The scandals of Professors are ground of mourning, but not ground of
separation. 1 Cor. 5. 2. Church Guides must do their Office, discern between
the precious and the vile, that the hearts of the righteous be not made sad,
yet if not, you have no ground to separate, because God may own them for a
Church though they have many scandals among them, as in Corinth there was
inc^st, heresy, profaneness, many that never had repented, 2 Cor. 12. 21. yet
to the Saints at Corinth: we may communicate with a Church without sin, when we
have done our duty, that is, informed, warned, mourned, if the* word and
Ordinances be kept pure for substance though the persons be corrupt, you may
communicate without sin, the Pharisees held the degree of Doctors and
Expositors of the Law, and so far were to be owned though guilty of much
personal wickedness, Matthew. 23. 2, 3. The Prophets lived in corrupt times yet
did they not separate from the Assemblies of the Church; usually laziness is
the ground of separation, they are loath to discharge their duty, to take pains,
to convince, exhort, and warn their fellow members, or to call upon their
Pastors to take heed to their Ministry, and some Pastors are loath to be at the
labor to gain a rugged people to the obedience of the Gospel, to use that
frequent admonition, and those serious addresses which are necessary for such a
purpose, and to expose themselves to encounter those exasperations which the
discharge of their duty will necessarily draw upon them, and therefore rnn into
separate assemblies where all things may be carried on more easily.

9. Lawful separation must not be sudden, till all due courses be tried, 1.
Cor. 13. 7. Love bears all things, endures all things, hops all things.
Certainly we should do much, endure much, ere we go off from the communion of
any Church; it must be with grief when Physicians cut off an arm or leg, they
do not de^ight in it, but are driven to it of necessity: So when a Judge
condemns a Malefactor, he delights not in the punishment, in a civil war
though the cause be just, yet to delight in the executions that are done upon
the enemy is not without sin, 1 Cor. 13. 5. Charity rejoices not in evil but
rejoices in the truth. Ab Ecclesia Romana non alio ^is^^ssimu^ animo quam ut
si correcta ad priorem Ecclesiae jormam redeat, nos qu^que a^ill^n revertamur,
etc. See my Comment on James page 405.
Again it must be with a mind to return when the evil is taken away.

10. For the degrees of separation take these rules: If a afew separated for a
weighty cause they should only withdraw, tarrying for the Reformation of the
Church, but numerous bodies may go on to positive Separation; for they ought
not to be without Ordinances, but boldly to profe^ the right way. Again as long
as a lower degree of separation will serve the turn, we should not go to a
higher; it is a great weakening to the Interest of Christ when we presently draw
things to an extremity: In smaller differences we must observe the Apostles
rule, Phil. 3. 16. but enough of this matter,

The next Point is taken from the seond sin mentioned Observat. 2.
in this verse [ sensual] he charge it upon those that separate themselves.
Those that separate from the assemblies of the faithful, are usually sensual,
Discipline is too straight for them that would live according to their own
lusts; the Raven that was s^nt out of the Ark, finding carrion floating abroad,
had no mind to be cooped up there, and therefore returned not, so these finding
more liberty abroad, than in the Congregations of the faithful* separate and
inhaunt with such among whom they may have room for their lusts: Moreover they
lose the benefit of those that should watch over them, Church communion is a
good preservative against lusts: Woe to him, that is alone Eccles 4. 11.
Straglers are more easily surprised; they were s^a^tered and became meat to the
beasts of the field, Ezekiel 34. 6. they that separate are the more easily
perverted both in Judgment and practice, they tu^n Famulists, now Famulism is
but painted Atheism, or Antimonists and Antimonism is but sin licensed and
privileged. Again, it is just with God to punish that pride wherewith
separation is accompanied with brutish lusts, usually unsanctis^ed knowledge
runs into pride, and then the affections are not governed; well then,
observe the providence of God in setting a mark upon those that separate, they
are men of unbridled affections, and without yoke, and are usually given up to
carnal pleasures; and wonder not if sensual persons cast off communion with the
Church, when they cast off communion with God himself, those that spent their
days in mirth said unto God dep^rt from us, Job 21. 14. Many now that are come
to the height of pride and sin, pretend to live to the height of the creature.

The next Note is, That sensual persons are evil persons, Observat. 3.
there are three ranks of sinners, those that are given to to fleshly lusts,
and they are the sensual, those that are given to the lust of the eyes, and
they are the worldly; those that are given to pride of life, and those are the
proud, the great spirits of the world, see 1 John 2. 16. and Jam; 3. 15. with
my comment there: our work now lies with the ^ensual, who seem to be the worst
sort of sinners, and altogether unfit for any worthy action and exploit: To
find them out let us consider what sensuality is; it is an inordinate desire and
delight in soft and delicate living, there is a due care of the body to keep it
serviceable, and an allowed delight in the creature; he that created water,
created wine, creatures for our delight as well as our necessity; and false
Teachers have often set off themselves with the show of a severer abstinence;
Col. 2. 19. 'tic possible that by an undue rigor the body may be used a little
too hardly and disabled for better services; but yet we are more usually guilty
of the excess, then of the defect, pleasure is born and bred with us, and
therefore has a mighty force and enchantment upon the soul; the first years of
humane life are merely governed by sense, and for a great while all our
business is to live and grow, and therefore most men miscarry by appetite, and
an undue liberty in meats, drinks, and sports; now to state the due bounds, and
limits which reason and Religion has set, is very hard, different tempers and
constitutions of body make rules uncertain: in the general, it is good to watch,
least pleasure become a master, and reason a slave: The two general limits are,
1. The health of the body, 2. The welfare of the soul.

1. The health of the body must be regarded; too much care for the body
destroys it, as too much oyl^pu^s ou^ the Lamp, wine and women take away the
heart, Hos. 4. 11. that is, the generousness and sprighrliness of a man, the
vigor of nature is abated, gallant and active spirits effeminated, and brave
hopes drowned and quenched in the puddle of ex^ess, and masculine agilioy and
vivacity melted away in ease and pleasure: The Romans were wont to have their
sunerals at the gates of Venus Temple.

2. The souls welfare is of chief consideration; we must take ^eed that the
soul be not either disfited* for duty or disposed for sin.

1. Dis fitted for duty, when the soul cannot lift up it self to God and divine
things, and finds less aptitude for his service, you are inordinate: Luke 21.
36. Let not your hearts be over charged with surfeitting and drunkenness, etc.
the heart may be overcharged when the stomach is not; when we are warned of
surfeitting and drunkenness, we think of vomiting, staggering, reeling,
fauliring in speech, or gate; Oh Christians! you are guilty of it when the
heart is overcharged, and drives on heavily in holy things: when we are
warned of adultery we think only of defiling other men's wives, or scattering
our lusts promis^uo^sly as the beasts do; but alas we are guilty of it when
the inordinate use of a lawful wife does quench our vigor and alacrity in our
heavenly calling; si vinum ^x ^ potheca tua, etc. a man may drink too freely of
his hogshead.

2. We must take care that the soul be not more disposed to sin; diver; lusts
and pleasures are fitly joined by the Apostle, Tit. 3. 3. if we do not watch
over pleasures, the heart grows more wanton and libidinous, the restraints of
grace are weaker, and carnal motions more urgent and violent, the heart is
nourished* etc, Jam. 5. 5. the enemy put in strength and heart, 1 Pet. 2. 11.

Well then, let us beware of sensuality, other things defile a part, as
ceveto^sness the soul, but sensual lusts defile the soul and body to* they
leave guilt upon the soul, and dishonor upon the body, while it is made a
streiner for meats and drinks, and a channel for lusts to run in; other lusts
seem to gratify the ambition of man, and to exalt him, but these debase him,
and turn him out among the beasts: to renounce pleasures is the first thing you
must do if you mean to do any thing in Religion, otherwise you lie open to
every temptation, Pro 25. 18. The water of the Sanctuary could not heal the
mirery places, Ezekiel. 47. 11 which is usually appled to sensual hearts;
preasures bring a brawn, and a deadness upon the conscience, and a cloud upon
the understanding: Daniel that had the high visions of God, lived by pulse:
John Baptist that had the most eminent Gospel dispensation, Mat. 11. fed upon
locusts and wild honey; among the Heathens he was counted the most
accomplished man Ebrietas long est a me Domine crapula autem nonunquam
surrepit servo tuo. Aug Confess.
that spent more oil in the Lamp (...)
then wine in the bottle: certainly, the baser a man is, the more he affects
carnal delights, Eccles. 7. 4. The heart of a so^l is in the house of mirth,
that which wise men prefer, is better then that which fools make choice of;
pleasures are the choice of fools, wise men know them to be baits and snares;
that if they be not watched they soon put us out of frame, and unfit us for
communion with God, Eccles. 2. 2. Once more, this sort of sins enslaveth, and
by custom, gains upon the heart more then others do, and brings us under a
power which we cannot easily break, 1 Cor. 6. 12 Therefore use pleasures with
care and caution, that when we take them, they may not take us: Gods people (I
suppose) are not so easily tempted to adultery and drunkenness, but beware of
gluttony, the throat is a sl^pery place, and instead of supplying nature, we
feed lust; be not too much in the use of carnal delights, least you suffer this
distemper of spirit to take root; Dives fared deliciously every day, there are
times of abstinence, as well as liberal rejoicing in the creature; when our
lives are but a diversion from one pleasure to another, nature grows wanton
and unsatisfied, and men live as if they were born to eat, drink, play, sport
and sleep, Luke 17. 27. Lastly, take heed of soliciting lusts when you should
quench them, Romans 13. 14. Observat. 4.


The next thing that we may observe, is, That sensual persons have not the
spirit; these two are contrary flesh and spirit, Gal. 5. 17. and they that
cherish the one, do necessarily banish the other, and as they enlarge the one,
they streighten the other; the spirit is a free spirit, and sensual persons are
very slaves; the spirit is a pure spirit, and they are unclean; the spirit is
active, and they are gross and muddy, of a dull and stupid nature; the spirit
works intellectual and chaste delights, and they are altogether for base and
dreggy pleasures, such a perfect contrariety is there between them: more
distinctly take it thus.

1. Sensual men have little of the inlightning of the spirit, their palate is
better then their understanding, Ephesians. 5. 16. Be not drunken with wine, wherein
is excess, but be filled with the spirit; where the fumes of wine, and the
motions of the spirit are composed as things incompatible, in marish countries
we do not expect a clear air; so sensual persons have seldom any clear and
raised thoughts of God; men given to pleasures can taste meats and drinks, but
not Doctrines.

2. Sensual men have little of the quickenings and efficacy of the spirit; the
more they dissolve and melt away their precious hours and spirits in pleasures,
the more do they grow sapless, dead* and careless* and loose all tenderness of
conscience, and livelyness of affection; they quench the vigor of nature, much
more do they quench the spirit; Voluptuaries are said to be past feeling, Ephesians.
9. 19.

3. They have little of the comforts of the Spirit; the comforts of the spirit
arise from meditating on the works of God, Psalm. 104* 34. or tasting his love,
1 Pet. 2. 3. or contemplating our great hopes, 2 Cor. 4. 18. Now carnal men can
relish none of this, they cannot exercise love or faith, or hope, that they may
delight themselves in God, and have some lively tastes of eternal life; when the
soul lies under the dominion of carnal and dreggy pleasures, it is incapable of
thinking upon God, and his works, or relishing inward consolation, love is
pre-occupied.

Well then, we should the more take heed that we be not sensual; never had any
sensual person any great measure and portion of the holy Ghost in gifts or
graces; the Devil easily enters into swine, but the holy spirit of God will
not dwell there; a man is put to his choice which he will have pleasures or the
spirit; 'twil be sad for you, if you love pleasures more then God, 2 Timothy 3. 4.
and prefer these dreggy delights before those masculine joys* which will ac^rue
to you by communion with God; if we were altogether to renounce delight,
'twould be more ^^ some; no, you are only called to excharge it; which will you
cause then, to live at large, and wallow in carnal contentments or be employed
in the serious and grave exercises of Religion? surely, one moment* communion
with God is better then all the mirth we can get by the pastime of an age.

Verse 20. But ye beloved build up your selves in your most holy Faith, praying
in the Holy Ghost.
HEre the Apostle comes to exhort, as all along, with the description of
Seducers he intermingleth exhortation, the sum of the exhortation is to
quicken them to the use of the means of perseverance and constancy. [Build up
your selves, (...)] the word signifies the going on with a building already
begun, and fitly notes that care they should take for the growth of their
spiritual estate [ your selves, (...)] Some transl^t^ i^vicem, build up one
another, that I confess is the Apostles* ^nte^^, but first to press them to a
care of their own Salvation, and then mutually to care for one another* See 1
These. 5. 11. Comfort your selves together and edify one another, as ye also
do, and possibly this is spoken here by way of opposition to those that
separate themselves [ in your most holy Faith] By faith may be meant either the
grate of says of the doctrine of faith. I rather suppose the latter, that true
and pure Religion which they had learned from the Apostles, which was the
foundation already laid* unto which they should keep close: If it be meant of
^aith the grace, the^ he persuades them to progress and to lay hold on the
superstructure of good works and final perseverance. Matthew. 7. 24. This faith
is called [ most holy] in opposition to the profane mysteries of the Gnostics
and Valentinians* it is an holy rule, and makes us holy, John 17. 17. Sanctify
them by thy truth, thy word ^^ truth. [praying in the Holy Ghost] (...) may be
^^nder^d, ^^, with, or by the Holy Ghost, that is, by hi^ motion and
inspiration* and gifts and graces received from him; elsewhere the Holy Ghost
is said to pray in us. Rom 8. 26. and here we pray in the Holy Ghost, he
prays in us so as we pray in him, he prays in us to note the excitations of
his grace, we pray in him to imply the concurrence of our faculties, which is
to be noted against the Famulists who make the Spirit to be the immediate
formal cause of all our actions, as if in the productions of grace the Spirit
did only make use of us as Bilhah did of Rachel, to bring forth upon her knees,
Genesis 30. 3. and the action were wholly his own.

The Notes are these.

1. It Is not sufficient to be established or grounded in the Observat. 1.
faith, but we must daily increase and grow more and more therein; when the
foundation is laid the building must go on piece by piece, they that are
contented with a little faith have no faith, graces though imperfect are
always growing, Luke 17. 5. it is the holy ambition of Christians to be more
like God every day, certainly their temper is contrary to the temper of Gods
people, that think they have learned enough, know enough, are holy enough, none
are so knowing but they may know more, so established but they may be more;
here we are in a state of progress not of rest and perfection, the Corn in the
field grows though in the Barn it does not, Ephesians. 21. 12. 13. Phil. 3. 13. A
Christian is always reaching forth and pressing onward, and the nearer he
comes to Heaven, his motions and tendencies arethe more earnest, as a stone
moves faster the nearer it comes to the Center; the more he enjoys still he
has new motives to seek more, Pro. 1. 5. A wise man will hear and will
increase learning; a good man would go to Heaven as fast as he can, not make an
hard shift but enter abundantly, 2 Pet. 1. 11.

2. To grow in faith is a means to persevere in faith, man Observat. 2.
is of an active nature, either he grows better or worse, we shall not keep
what we have received if we do not labor to increase in it, as an house begun
to be built goes to decay, and droppeth down more and more if we do not go on
to finish it; do we grow then or decline? Did we observe our first coolings,
the mischief would not be so great, but we like the Hen, as long as there is
one egg in the nest observe not how many are taken away, as long as we have any
tolerable affections to the things of God, or somewhat to keep us alive we do
not consider how many degrees of grace we have lost.

Faith (take it for the grace) is the proper foundation of holiness and good
works. Works without faith are but a roof without a foundation, and faith
without works is a foundation without a building, good fruit supposes a good
tree, Math. 7.

The faith of Christians is a most holy faith, no doctrine has such pure
precepts, such high examples, such raised motives, such misterious
inforcements, such blessed rewards, and all to encourage holiness; if ever any
thing were exactly fitted to its purpose, surely the word is fitted to promote
holiness, the percepts of the Law require it, the doctrine of the Gospel
shows where virtue and power is to be had to perform it, the promises
encourage it, the examples of God and Christ show the height and exactness of
it, the examples of the Saints show it is possible, the word and ordinances work
it, as being instituted by God for such a purpose, and accompanied with the
power of his grace. Ephesians. 5. 26. God has reserved this honor of sanctifying
the heart to the doctrine of the Scriptures, to evidence their divine original,
James 1. 18. He has begotten us to himself by the word of truth, this great
change which is wrought in the heart of man, is by the word, a moral Lecture
may a little fashion the outward man, and reduce him to a civil course, as
Xenocrates his moral Lecture made Polamo leave his vicious and sensual course
of life, but regeneration is only found in the School of Christ: Well then, it
you will know the best Religion observe where is there most holiness discovered
and wrought, Psalm. 19. 7, 8* 9. John 17. 17. In the word of God you have the
copy of his holiness, there is somewhat of good life and moral behavior among
Heathens, but nothing of regeneration and genuine holiness. Once more, an
impure life will not suite with an holy faith, you dishonor God and disparage
your religion when you walk as Heathens: This holy faith is best kept in a pure
conscience, 2 Timothy 3. 9.

From that [ building up your selves] In building up that Observat. 5.
is in growth and persevereance, there is a concurrence of our own endeavors;
we are living stones, 1 Pet. 2* 4. after we are converted, and are not
altogether dead and passive, as in conversion; after we have received Christ we
may walk with him, Col. 2. 6* motion and opperation follows life, he that
made thee without thee will not save thee without thee.

From the other interpretation of the word [ your selves] Observat. 6.
that is, one another; Observe that Mutual conference is a means of
perseverance, Solomon says, Eccles. 4. 10. When two lie together they have
heat; surely good company preserves and keeps up our warmth and vigor* as a
remedy against Apostasy* spiritual communion and conference is often pressed,
see Hebr. 3. 13. and Hebr. 10. 24, 25. When Gods people did oftener meet and
confer together, there was more life in them.

Next to conference, prayer is required; note thence, Observat. 7.
That prayer is a means of establishment; We are kept by Gods Power, and Gods
Power is set a work by prayer, this is the breath that keeps in the fire; men
that neglect prayer, find sensible decays, when they suspected some distemper
upon Jobs spirit, they charge him with the neglect of prayer, Job 15. 4. surely
thou restrainest prayer, no wonder if men grow unsavory, worldly, voluptuous,
when they let days go, and weeks go, and God never hears from them.

8. Then we pray aright, when we pray in the holy Observat. 8.
Ghost; this concurrence is, necessary both with respect to acceptance and
assistance.

1. With respect to acceptance, God will own nothing in prayer, but what comes
from his spirit, any other voice is strange and barbarous to him, Romans 8. 27.
He knows the mind of the spirit, because he makes intercession for the
Saints according to the will of God, the Lord delights no^ in the flaunting
of pates, and the unsavory belch^^ and eructations of an humane Spirit, the
tun^able cadency of words is bu^an empty ring in Gods ears, the Psalmist says,
Psalm. 19* 2. Let my pray^r be set forth before thee as ^ncense: Now the Censers
were to be kindled with holy fire before the smoke went up, the coal wherewith
we are kindled must be taken from the Altar not from a common hearth, and then
our prayer goes up as incense: Gods course is to prepare the heart, and then
to grant the request, Psalm. 10. 17. Thou w^lt prepare their hearts and cause
thine ear to hear, surely Gods ear will be opened if our hearts be opened, when
he himself sets us a work we need not doubt of audience; fire from Heaven to
consume the sacrifice was the solemn token of acceptance heretofore, fire from
Heaven is the token still, even an holy ardor wrought in us by the Spirit.

2. In point of assistance prayer is a work too hard for us, we can ^abble of
our selves, but we cannot pray without the Holy Ghost, we can put words into
prayer, but it is he Spirit puts affections, without which it is but a little
cold prattle and spiritless talk, our necessities may sharpen our prayers, but
they cannot enliven our prayers, a carhal man may feel the impulsions of a
natural fervency, and so cry unto God as the young Ravens cry unto him, and in
all creatures there is a desire of relief, the ^ude Mariners in the tempest
were very earnest, Jonah 1. 6. but now gracious affection is quite another
thing than this natural fervency; there may be cold and raw wishes after grace,
but not serious volitions and spiritual desires, these we must have from the
Holy Ghost* surely if we did consider what prayer is, we should see the need of
this assistance, it is a work which will cost us travel of heart, Acts 1. 14.
(...) and James 5. 16. (...), it is expressed by striving, Romans 15. 30. Strive
with me in prayers, and Col. 4. 12. Laboring for you ^ervently in prayers,
etc. (...), it is a striving with God himself, and then there is no setting upon
God but by his own strength, this was figured in Jacobs wrestling, Genesis 32. 25.
to the end, which is explained, Hosea 12. 4. Yea, he had power over the Angel
and prevailed, yea, he wept and made supplication, the party that Jacob
wrestled with is called a man, an Angel, and God; a man for the shape and form
assumed, an Angel to note the second person who is the Messenger of the
Covenant, and God, Genesis 32. 30. 'Twas such an Angel as blessed him, which is
proper to God, now in the assumed body Jacob wrestled with him, which was
symbolical; the Prophet refers it to his Prayers, but how is it said he
could not prevail against Jacob? With a blast of his mouth he might have
confounded him, and it had been as easy for him to maim and destroy every
joint, as to make him halt and same of one thigh. I answer, he could not
because he would not, he gave out but such a measure of strength to the body
assumed, and the Lord did wrestle both in and against Jacob, in Jacobo Deus est
seipso fortior, he wrestleth against us with his left hand, and strengthens
us with his right, so that Gods power prevails over himself; all this is
spoken to show what need we have of a divine power; when we strive with God.

But now what is it to pray in the Holy Ghost? I shall answer it in a word, the
Spirit helps us in prayer in a way of gifts or graces, in a way of gifts,
that the heart may not be bound up, and that we may have necessary words to
give vent to affections: Adam maimed us both as to gifts as well as graces, and
therefore that our supplies in Christ may be answerable, the Spirit bestows
upon us the gift of prayer, that we may enlarge our selves to God on all
oncasions, this gift was either extraordinary and proper to the first times of
the Gospel, when they were able of a sudden to dictate a prayer in a strange
Language which they had never learned; so it is said 1 Cor. 14. 15. I will pray
with the Spirit, and with understanding also: Many did pray with the Spirit,
that is, made use of this gift, but to the neglect of edifying, they did not
pray so as they might be understood by the Hearers: Now says the Apostle I
would use the gift, but to edification, so as the understanding of the Auditory
may go along with me.

2. The ordinary gift of the Spirit, is that special dexterity whereby men are
able to put their meaning into apt words; it is not of such a miraculous
infusion and so wonderful in its self as the former, because it depends much
upon the temper and suitable constitution of the body; and is much bettered by
industry, hearing, reading, meditation, conference, etc. As all other ordinary
habits are, but such a gift there is in the Church as we find by plain
experience, many men's tongues being as the pen of a ready Writer, Psalm. 45. 1.
All miraculous gifts are now turned into ordinary gifts somewhat like them, as
discerning of Spirits into a sagacity and ca^telous prudence, gifts of tongues
into a special dexterity that way, and gifts of healing into skill in physick^
so straying with the spirit into readiness of utterance and freedom of speech:
Now though we we are to covet the best gifts and strive after them, yet we must
be contented with our measures: Sometimes this gift is given to carnal men,
because of their* service in the Church, gifts are for the body, they may have
great abilities to pray and preach, and may be carried on with full gales of
outward assistance: Usually it is given unto men according to their constitution
and natural receptivity, all cannot expect a like quickness and enlargement of
speech, in the Penmen of Scripture you may observe a difference of character
and style according to their temper and education, though there assistance as
to words was also infallible, Is^y writes in a courtly style, and Jeremiah in
a priestly. and Amos his manner of speech relisheth of his calling; in the new
Testament John is Seraphical, Paul argumentative, and Peter writes in a milky,
sweet, middle-way etc.

2. There is the gracious assistance of the holy Ghost; now this is either
Habitual or Actual.

1. Habitual grace is necessary to prayer, Zech. 12. 10. I will pour upon them
a spirit of grace and supplications; where there is grace there will be
supplications, as soon as we are new born we fall a crying: Behold he prays,
Acts. 9. 11. is the first news we hear of Paul after his conversion; prayer is
a kindly duty to the new creature, things of ^n airy and fiery nature, a little
thing will carry them upward; (...) their natural motion and tendency; the
regenerate are easily drawn into Gods presence, it is the vent and utterance by
which we discover the impression that is upon us; the Priests were to wash in
the great l^vour, before they went to the Altar; Tit. 3. 5.
we are w^shed in the lavor of regeneration, and renewed by the holy Ghost, and
so made fit to offer spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

2. There is actual help and assistance which we have from the spirit; though a
man be regenerate, yet he cannot pray as he ought unless we be still moved and
assisted by the holy Ghost; this is continual, for we soon work out the
strength which we have received: Now these actual motions do either concern the
time of prayer, or the matter and the manner of it. 1. The time of p^ayer, the
spirit suggesteth the fittest seasons, he that searches out the deep things of
God, knows the acceptable times, Psalm. 32. 6. and accordingly gives notice
to the heart, by setting it a work in serious addresses to God, Psalm. 27. 8.
Thou said seek ye my face, and my heart said, thy face Lord will I seek; god
speaks to us by holy motions, and the impulsions of his grace, and we answer
God by a ready obedience; it is the worst scorn we can put upon one whom we
hate, when we deny to speak with him when he sends for us; by these motions
we are invited to come and confer with God, do not say I am not at leisure; I
would not have this interpreted, as if every motion to prayer were from the
spirit; it is possible Satan may oppress an anxious soul with the tyranny of
unreasonable impulsions to duty, I only understand such motions as are regular
and according to the word; neither would I again be so understood as if God
were never to be called upon, or we were never to pray but when the spirit
moves us, that is one of the carnal fancies of many wretches now; no, no, God
must have his daily acknowledgment, give us this day our daily bread; but my
meaning is, that such a season when we are so strongly moved by the spirit of
God, should not be neglected.

2. Thy matter of prayer is suggested by the holy Ghost, let a man alone and he
will soon run into a temptation, and cry for that which it were cruelty in God
to give him; therefore the direction of the holy Ghost is necessary that we may
not ask a scorpion instead of a fish, and a stone instead of bread, Romans 8. 27*
He makes intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God. We take
counsel of our lusts and interests when we are left to our own private spirit,
and so would have God to be a Minister of our carnal desires, and would engage
him in our quarrels and private revenges: or else ask meat for our lusts; now
the holy Ghost teaches us to ask not only what is lawful, but what is
expedient for us, that so the will of God may take place before our
inclinations.

3. For the manner in every moral action; the manner of working is a chief
circumstance, a man may sin in doing good, but not in doing well: now in prayer
where we have immediately to do with God, we should take great heed in what
manner we come to him; the right manner is when we come with affection, with
confidence, with reverence.

1. With affection, it is the holy Ghost set us a groaning, Romans 8. 26. He
makes intercession for the Saints with such sighs and groans as cannot be
uttered; words are but the outside of prayer, sighs and groans are the language
which God will understand, and these are the prayers which the holy Ghost
makes for us, and in us; we learn to mourn from the Turtle, from him that
descended in the form of a Dove, he draws sighs from the heart and tears from
the eyes; parts may furnish us with eloquence, but the spirit gives affection,
that earnest reaching forth of soul, that holy importunity, that spiritual
violence, it is all of his working, many a prayer is neatly ordered, and tunably
delivered, but this artifice of words smells of the man, then it savoreth of
the holy Ghost, when there is life and power in it, and the poor supplicant
sets himself to wrestle with God, as if he would overcome him by his own
strength.

2. With confidence, when we come in a child-like manner and call God father,
Romans 8. 16. We have received the Spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba Father:
Usually we do not mind this part of the Spirits help in Prayer, we look to
gifts and inlargements, but not to this child-like confidence, that we maybe
able to call God father without blasphemy and reproach, it is an easy matter to
language it with our mouths, but to have the sense of our adoption in our
hearts is a difficult thing, sometimes the Spirit witnesses it more explicetly
by expressions, as if it were said when we go to prayer, Be of good cheer, thy
sins are pardoned, God is thy God at other times by impressions or more secret
instincts, if not by working child like confidence yet child like affection,
optando si non affirmando, that we may call God Father by option and choice, if
not by direct affirmation or a clear sense of our adoption.

2. With reverence, that we may be serious and awful, God is best seen in the
light of his own Spirit; the Heathens could say non loquendum de Deo sine
lumine, we need light from God when we come to speak of or to God. That sense
of the Lords greatness and those fresh and awful thoughts that we have of his
Majesty in prayer they are stirred up in us by the Holy Ghost, he uniteth and
gathers our hearts together, that they may not be ravelled and flittered
abroad by impertinent and vain thoughts, Psalm. 86. 11. Leave men to themselves
and they will do as foolishly as a man that is to gather a posie for his friend
and fills it fuller of stinking weeds than flowers, we shall mingle many
unfavoury worldly thoughts, or deal as basely and affrontingly with God, as if
a man under the Law should mingle Sulphur and Brimstone with the sweet
perfumes that were in the Censer, lust will be interposing in prayer, and
out-talking grace; therefore that we may be reverend and heedful, we must use
the help of the Spirit, praying in the Spirit and watching thereunto with all
perseverance, Ephesians. 6. 18.

Well then, when thou go to prayer look upon the Holy Ghost as appointed by
the Father and purchased by the Son to help thee in this sweet and comfortable
service, Romans 8. 26. the Spirit helps our infirmities, (...), goes to the
other end of the staff and bears a part of the burden, we are tugging and
wrestling at it and can make no work of it, but the Spirit comes and puts
under his shoulder, and then it comes off kindly.

2. It informs us how much they sin that are so far from praying with the
Holy Ghost, that they do not pray with their own spirit, alas this is but
babbling when the heart does not go along with the lips.

3. It informs us of the privileges of the Saints. God is their Father,
willing to hear prayers, Christ is their advocate willing to present their
requests in Court and the Spirit a Notary to indite and draw up their requests
for them, oh what encouragement have we to go to the throne of Grace! Surely we
do not improve our privileges or else we might have more comfortable access to
the Father through Christ by the Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 18.

Verse 21. Keep your selves in the Love of God, looking for the mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.
THe Apostle goes on directing to the means of perseverance, as before he
mentioned two duties, Conference and Prayer, so here two graces, love and Hope.

[ Keep your selves] that is, use the means we are kept by the power of God
unto Salvation, but because of the concurrence of ou^ endeavors it is ascribed
to us [ your selves] Some interpret it as before, alii alios keep one another,
[ In the Love of God] it may be taken for that love which God bears to us, or
else for the Love wherewith we love God, which is fitly called the Love of God;
partly because God is the object of it, partly because the Author of it be
commands, or begets it, increases it, perfecteth it in the Soul, in this
second sense I take the Love of God here, namely for that grace wrought in us,
and the great work committed to our care is to keep it, increase it, and
discover it in all the operations of it [ looking] the formal act of hope, [
for the m^rcy] the cause is put for the effect, for all that good which we
shall receive at Christ's coming, it is called mercy because his proceeding with
the Elect at the last day will be upon terms of grace [ of our Lord Jesus
Christ] It Is so called because it is purchased by Christ and disp^nsed by him
John 17 2 he h^th power to give eternal lif^, and at his coming he introduces
his people into their happy estate, John 14 3 [ unto everlasting lif^] our
happiness in Heaven is sometimes called everlasting life, at other times,
everlasting glory.

Observe hence, 1. In perseverance there is a concurrence Observat. 1.
of our care and diligence, Ph^l. 2. 12, 13 Work out your own Salvation with
fear and trembling for, etc. The main work is Gods, he that has begun a good
work must perfect it, Phil. 1. 6. and the same Jesus that i^ author is also
finisher, Heb. 12. 2. the deeper radication of the habit the defense of it, the
growth and perfection of it, the ability to act is all from God, 1 Pet. 5. 10.
The God of all grace make you perfect, stablish, strengthen and settle you; but
yet a concurrence there is of our care and endeavors, a child in the womb is
nourished by the mother, lives by the life of the mother, feeds by the food
of the mother, but a child born lives a more distinct and separate life of its
own though it still be under the mothers care and provision; so it is with us
after grace received, we have a power to act and do what is necessary for the
preservation of the spiritual life: Well then, let us not neglect the means,
you must not lie upon the bed of ease and think that God must do all, he does
all indeed, but in us and by us. Idle wishes will do us no good as long as our
hands refuse to labor.

Again, Men that have grace had need look to the keeping Observat. 2.
of it. Why? first we our selves are prone to revolt Jer. 14. 10.
this people loves to wander, and Psalm. 95. 10.
they err in their hearts though under the immediate conduct of God: It Is
noteable in Scripture that we read of a decay both of faith, love, and
obedience; which are the three main graces; some that left their first faith, 1 Timothy 5. 12. Others that left their first love, Rev. 2. 4. and as to obedience
we read of the first ways of David, a^ distinguished from his latter, 2 C^ron.
17. 3. he walked in the first ways of his father David, David in his latter
time fell into scandalous crimes.

2. We are assaulted with continual temptations; an importunate suitor by
perseverance in his suit may at length prevail, Satan will lose nothing for
want of asking, those that refused at first may yield afterward: Long
conversing with the world may taine the Spirit, a deformed object when we are
used to it seems less deformed, in dwelling lust though long restrained
breaks out afterward with the more violence: Rose trees s^ipt in June, bear
in the winter, many that in youth have held an hard hand over sin, in their
very old age have found their lusts more violent.

3. A man of long standing is apt to grow secure and negligent, as if he were
now past danger, when his condition was doubtful he seemed to be more diligent
and serious; but when the labors and difficulties of our first entering into
favor with God are well over, and a man has gotten some freedom from the
terrors of the Law and some peace and confidence, he is in danger of security,
by which all runs to waste in the Soul, see Rev. 3. 17, 18, 19. Well then,
this life is never exempted from care, either to get grace or to keep it, we
need to be watchful and diligent to the very last; man is a changeable creature
and Satan is restless, either he continues the old suite or alters the
course of temptations, it is his subtilety in that he does not always play the
same game, a man may stand one brunt and fail in another: Joab turned after
Adonijah though not after Absolon, 1 Kings 2. 28. every new condition brings
new snares, Ephraim is a cake not turned, Hosea 7. 8. A man may be well baked
of one side and yet quite dough of another, the children of God prosperous,
differ from the children of God afflicted, Phil. 4. 12. we had need to learn
how to walk up hill and down hill, that we may keep with God upon all grounds:
again, corruptions may be disguised, a man may withstand open enemies and yet
fail by the insinuations of those that have a show of goodness; the young
Prophet withstood the King stoutly, but yet was perverted by the insinuations
of the old Prophet, 1 Kings 13. 4. with nineteenth verse.

Meletius a Sufferer under Pagans but went over to the Arrians.

Again where there seems to be least danger there is most cause of fear. Lot
that was chaste in Sodom miscarried in the mountains, where there were none but
his own family: Conscience that is now tender may be strangely deaded and laid
by for a time. Who would have thought that he whose heart smote him, for
cutting off the lap of Saul's garment, should afterward fall into uncleanness
and blood, and lie asleep in it for a long time: Confidence is sure to be
dismounted, Peter is a sad instance, he told his Master if all men deny thee
yet not I, and he meant as he spoke* he ventureth on a band of men with a rusty
blade, follows Christ into the high Priests Hall, who more secure than Peter?
but all this confidence failed though it met but with a weak trial, the soft
words of a Damsels question; such feathers are we when the b^ast of a
temptation is let loose upon us. Upon all these considerations now let us make
it our care to keep what graces we have gotten, which will never be done
without watchfulness and diligence: to quicken you further to it.

1. Unless you keep it all is in vain if so be it be in vain: Gal. 3. 4. it is
in vain as to the final reward, it is not in vain as to the increase of
punishment; you will lose all your cost you have been at for Christ, Ezekiel* 18.
24. John 2. ^p 8. your watchings, strivings* prayings, sufferings come to
nothing, the Nazarite was to begin all anew if the days of his separation were
defiled, Numb. 6. 12. nay it is not in vain as to punishment, 2 Pet. 2. 20. 21,
22.

2. To lose any degrees of grace is a great loss, it is the most precious gift,
2 Pet. 1. 1. conduces to the highest ends, eternal happiness, fitteth us for
communion with God, all the world cannot repair this loss, or purchase a supply
for us; we are to be accountable for degrees as well as for the grace it self,
they that had five talents reckoned for five, a Factor that gives an account
only for a part of the estate received, is not accounted faithful: we may not
be entrusted with so much again: a man that has fallen may recover his peace and
joy but in a lower degree; a Prodigal that has once broken is not trusted with
a like stock again, and a man after a great disease may never come to the same
degree and pitch of health; so Christians may not recover that largeness of
Spirit after their foul falls and fullness of inward strength and comfort.

3. Those that have made profession of Love to God, and yet afterward break
with him, bring an ill report upon the Lord, as if he were an ill Master: I am
persuaded that the Devil in policy lets many men alone for a while to make a
strict profession, and seem to be full of zeal and holiness, that they may
afterward do Religion a mischief, whilst they act for God though they do some
things excellently, Satan never troubles them, he is at truce with them, till
they have gotten a name for the profession of Godliness and strictness of
conversation, and when once they have gotten a name, their fall will be more
scandalous, more ignominious to themselves, and disgraceful to Religion, verily
this is a common experience, we see many forward; hot and carried out with
great impulsions of zeal, and all this while Satan lets them alone, he knows
how mutable men are, and how soon they begin to tire in the ways of God,
therefore lets them alone till they have run themselves out of breath, that
afterward by a more notable defection they may shame themselves and harden
others: If Judas will be a Disciple he lets him alone, if Simon Magus will be
baptized and Nicholas bear Office in the Church he lets them alone, he knows
the best are mutable, that many take up their Religion out of interest, that
men are soon weary of their own scrupulousness and rigid observances, that they
first make Conscience of all things and then of nothing, and therefore he lets
them go on without any notable defect or failing, to fly some youthful lusts,
to renounce some interests, till they have gotten credit enough to discredit
Religion* see 2 Timothy 2. 18. Oh Christians, if you are not moved with respect to
God, yet for your own cause, after a blaze will you go one in a stench? an
house begun and not finished is an habitation for screech Owls; but on the
contrary, what an honor is it to hold out to the last to be like MNason an old
Disciple?

4. The worst is past, we have but a few years service more, and we shall be
happy for ever; Your salvation is nearer then it was when you first believed,
Romans 13. 11. a little more and you will land safe at the expected Haven; if we
have a rough passage, it is a short one; What will you not watch with me one
hour, says Christ to his Apostles, the longest life is no more in comparison
of eternity. Enoch lived longer then most men do, he lived 365. years* Genesis 5.
22. but all that while he walked with God, and is it so tedious to us co tell
over a few summers and winters before we come to Heaven.

The next Point is more particular and express: That of Observat. 3.
all graces, Love needs keeping: Why? 1. Because of all graces it is most
decaying. Mat. 24. 12. Rev. 2. 4. Flame is soon spent, graces that act most
strongly, require most influence, as being most subject to abatemen^; we sooner
loose our affections then any thing else. 2. Because love is a grace that we
can ill spare* it is the spring and rise of all duties to God and Man. 1. To
God, love is the first affection corrupted and renewed; the Schoolmen dispute
whether there be any thing a man does, that had not its first rise from love;
it is love makes us angry, and it is love makes us Psalm. 97. 10.
hate, and Joh. 11. 35, 36.
love makes us grieve, much more is it love that makes us hope and desire,
and delight, so it is gracious Luke 7. 47.
love that sets us a mourning for sin, puts us upon hatred of evil, delighting
in God and in his Laws, see 2 Cor. 4* 14. 1 Ioh. 5. 3. Gal. 5. 6. faith works
by love, faith receives grace and love, exercises it; if we would do any
thing in the resistance of sin, in keeping the Commandments, we cannot spare
our love. 2. As to man, love is a grace that will make us industrious for the
good of others, and therefore we read of the labor of love, 1 These. 1 3. it is
gluten animarum, the glue of the souls, the cement, and soder of the Church;
the jointing that runs throughout all the living and squared stones, Col 3.
14. by this souls are mingled* and all mutual offices done cheerfully: want of
love to the Saints is the cause of Apostasy, for the less we love them, the
more we associate to the wicked, and then zea^ is damnifi^d and abated.

Well then, watch the more earnestly against the decays and abatements of love;
leaving our first love is a disease not only incident to Hypocri^es, but
sometimes to Gods own children* Christians go backward in the heat and light of
their graces ten degrees, either through the badness of the times, Mat. 24. 12.
or through a cursed ^a^i^ty that is apt to creep upon us, affections are
deadned to things to which we are ac^ustomed; the Israelites cried out nothing
but this Manna, our desires are not so fresh and lively* after long
acquaintance: Sometimes it comes from neglig^nce, or a sluggish carelessness,
we do not take pains to keep graces alive, nor (...), stir up the gift that is
in us, 2 Timothy 1. 6. as the Prie^^s in the Temple were to keep in the holy fire,
so are we by prayers, and meditation, and constant wo^k, to keep our love
al^ve; but when these exercises are neglected, it decreaseth: Sometimes it
falls out through freeness in sinning; neglect is like not blowing up the
coals, sinning is like pouring on waters, a very quenching of the s^irit, 1
These* 5. 13. Again, through secure dalliance with the pleasures of sin, or
cumbring the soul with the cares of the world* when the heart runs out too
much upon the creature God is neglected; Thus it may fall out.

But now the decay of love is seen in two things. 1. The remission of the
degrees of love. 2. The intermission of the acts of love.

1. A remission of the degrees when the heart grows cold, listless, and
loose; when there is not such a strong tendency and bent of soul toward God as
formerly, not such a sense of unkindness, such an awful respect to God, a care
to please him, and desire to enjoy him; nor such complacency and delight in the
thoughts of God; but now every loss or abatement of degree does not mount to a
leaving of our first love, there are certain ravishments and transports of
soul, which we feel upon the first evidence of our being reconciled to God, or
are stirred up upon there special occasions; these are accidental overflowings,
which may come and go, we cannot always bear up under them, new things
strangely affect us, love is afterward more settled and d^ffused in the
channels of obedience, and therefore no wonder if it do not run with so full
a^yd^ and current; this remission of degrees then must be understood with
respect to these constant dispositions of love, as care to please, fear to
offend, desire of, and delight in God, when these fail as to any degree, love
is a chilling or growing cold.

2. An intermission of the acts and exercise of love, when God is forg^tten,
duty neglected, sin unmo^tified, no ca^e of; or frequency in private communi^n
with God, no sweet thoughts of him, Psalm. 63. 6. Psalm: 104. 34. where we love
there will be musing on the object beloved, there will be familiarity and
intimateness of converse, there is not a day can pass but love will find some
errand and occasion to confer with God, either to implore his help or ask his
counsel; but now when men can pass over whole days and weeks, and never give
God a visit, such strangeness argues little love: Again, when there is no care
of glorifying God, no plo^tings and contrivings how we may be most useful for
him; when we do not mourn over sin as we were wont to do, are not so sensible
of offenses, have not these meltings of heart, are not so careful to avoid all
occasions of offending God, are not so watchful, so zealous, as we were wont to
be, do not rise up in arms against temptations and carnal thoughts, love is
decayed certainly, when the sense of our obligations to Christ is warm upon the
heart, sin does not escape so freely, love will not endure it to live and act in
the ^ear, Tit. 2 11. 12. Genesis 39, 9. but now as this is worn off, the heart is
not watched; the tongue is not bridled, speeches are idle, yea rotten and
profane, wrath and envy tyrannize over the Soul, all runs to riot in the
poor neglected heart; yea further, Gods public worship is performed
perfunctorily, and in a careless stupid manner, sin confessed without remorse
and sense of the wrong done to God, prayer made for spiritual blessings without
desire of obtaining, wrath deprecated without any fear of the danger,
intercession for others without any sympathy or brotherly Love, thanks given
without any esteem of the benefits or affection to God in the remembrance of
them, conference of holy things is either none at all, or very slight and
careless, hearing without attention, reading without a desire of profit,
singing without any delight or melody of heart. All this is but the just
account of an heart declining in the love of God.

Now as you love your own Souls beware of this great evil, to this end. 1. Be
rooted and grounded in love, Ephesians. 3. 17. Do not content your selves with
flashes and good moods and meltings at a Sermon, but get solid grace and through
experiences, glances and sudden affections will come to nothing, Matthew. 13. 4.
5. with 20. 21. A tree that has taken root is in less danger of withering.

2. Increase and grow in love, 1 Thessa. 4. 10. Nothing conduces to a decay
more than contentment with what we have received, every day you should love sin
less, self less, world less, but Christ more and more.

3. Observe the first declinings, for these are cause of all the rest, evil is
best stopped in the beginning; if when we first began to grow careless, we had
taken heed, then it would never have come to this, an heavy body moving
downward, vires a^quirit ^undo, it gathers strength by running, and still
moves faster and faster, look then to your first breaking off from God, and
remitting your watch and spiritual fervor; it is easier to crush the egg than
to kill the serpent: He that keeps an house in constant repair, prevents the
ruin and fall of it, stop every hole and chinck before the mischief spread
further.

4. Plead with thy heart, the highest degree of love does not answer the
dignity of Christ nor the duty that we owe to him; he is to be loved with all
the Soul, and all the heart, and all the might; it is a disgrace to him to give
him less, surely he looks to be much loved again who has loved us so
entirely, and translated us out of darkness into marvelous light.

5. In case of decay take the advice which the holy Ghost has given you, Rev.
2. 5. where three things are required, 1. Consideration. 2. Humiliation. 3.
Reformation.

1. Consideration, Remember whence thou art fallen, ponder the case; in
examination we compare our selves and the Law together, but in this
recollection, our selves and our selves together; sadly consider then what a
difference there is between thee and thy self, recall former experiences and
say as Job 29. 2. 3. Oh that I were as in months past, in the days when God
preserved me, when his candle shined on my head, or as the Churce, Hosea* 2. 7.
It was better with me than now, in our serious sequestration and retirements we
should have such thoughts as these are, I was wont to spend some time every day
with God, I remember when 'twas a delight to me to think of him, now I have no
heart to pray or meditate, no relish of communion with his blessed majesty;
'twas the joy of my Soul to be at an Ordinance, the returns of the Sabbath were
welcome to me, but now what a weariness is it! time was when I had sweet
experiences, and the graces of Gods Spirit were more lively in me, but now all
is dead and inefficacious; time was when a vain thought was burdensome unto me,
but now I can away with sinful actions; time was when the mispence of ordinary
time was a grief unto my Soul, now I can spend the Sabbath unprofitably and
never be troubled, etc. Thus should you consider your estate.

2. Humiliation intimated in the word repent; it is not enough to know your
selves fallen, many are convinced of their collapsed and decayed estate, but do
not judge themselves for it in Gods presence, go bewail it to God, smite upon
the thigh, praying for pardon; that's the notion of the word [ repent] here,
it is not enough to repent of gross whoredom, theft, drunkenness, we must repent
also of the decays of love, the blind world thinks we are to repent of
nothing but what is publicly odious: In friendship coldness is taken for a
great injury, go arraign thy self before God for growing cold in his Love and
Service.

3. Reformation, do thy first works, we must not spend the time in idle
complaints; many are sensible that do not repent, some may repent that do not
reform, you must not be quiet till you recover your former station; Christ puts
Peter upon a trebble profession because of his trebble denial, John 21. 17.

The next note is from the coupling of these two, the love Observat. 4.
of God, and looking for the mercy of Christ unto eternal life. Thence observe,
That love to God will put us upon looking for Christ's second coming when this
mercy is to be dispensed to us. See the like connection elsewhere; 2 These. 3,
5. the Lord direct your hearts to the Love of God, and the patient waiting for
Christ. Two reasons may be given of it.

1. Love allayeth fear, 1 John 4. 17. 18. of whom should a Christian be afraid
at that day? of the Devil? he is held in chains of darkness, and judged by the
Saints together with Christ; of Christ? Shall the members be afraid of their
head? the ransomed of their Redeemer? the beloved of of their Savior? Oh but
then he comes as a Judge, but it is to plead their cause, to right their wrongs,
to revenge their enemies, to reward their services; if he be then your Judge he
has ever been your Advocate hitherto, and surely he that has interceded for
you, will not cond^mn you.

2. Love quickens desire, 2. Pet. 3. 12, Looking for and hastening the coming
of the Lord. see Cant. 8, 14. Rev. 22. 20 An Harlot would have her husband
defer his coming, but a chaste spouse thinks he can never come soon enough,
they that go an whoring after the world, neither desire Christ's coming nor love
his appearing; but the Spirit of the Bride says come, they that love God look
for it, Phil. 3. 20. long for it, 2 Timothy 4. 8. they love his appearing, corrupt
nature says depart, Job 22. 14. but grace says come; the children of God
would fain see him of whom they have heard so often, and so much, and of whose
sweetness they have tasted; they know him by hearsay and by spiritual
experience, but they would fain see his person. 1. Use


This now informs us what a difference there is between a child of God and
wicked men, they wish this day would never come, and would be glad in their
hearts to hear such news, the thought of Christ's coming is their burden and
torment, they have the spirit of the Devil in them, art thou come to torment us
before our time, Matthew. 8. 31. They cannot endure to hear or think of it; if it
might go by voices whether Christ should come or no, would they give their
voice this way, and say Come Lord Jesus, yea, come quickly? If Thiefs and
Malefactors should have the liberty to choose whither the Assizes should be kept
or no, would they ever fix it? and look for and long for the time of its
approach? No no, but a child of God is waiting and looking for this happy time.

But now here is an Objection, are Christians always in Object.
this frame? What shall we say then to those weak ones that tremble at the
thought of it, for want of the assurance of Gods Love, and the best Saints that
do not always feel such an actual inclination and strength of desire?

I answer, the meanest Saint has some inclination this Sol.
way, can a man desire that Christ should come into his heart and not come to
Judgment? Since comfort and reward is more naturally embraced than duty, the
first work of grace is to raise us up to this hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. but yet
sometimes there may be a drowsiness and indisposition, and then, their lamps
may not be kept burning, Luc. 12. 35, 36. The wise Virgins stepped as well as the
foolish, Matthew. 25. oftentimes they find themselves indisposed for his coming
by careless carriage, remission of their watch, and scattering their Love to
the Creature; yea, much of their old b^ndage may remain through the
imperfection of their Love; for his perfect love casts out fear: A wife
desires her husbands coming home, but it may be all things are not ready, and
in so good order as they should be, all Christians desire the coming of Christ,
but sometimes they are not so exact and watchful, and therefore their
affections are not so lively.

Here is a note of trial whether we love God or Christ, Use. 2.
how do we stand affected toward his appearing; the world cannot satisfy
Christians, they look beyond it; in things to come we are apt to feign, and
because we have not a sufficient sense of them, we think we have an affection
to them, when we have them not, if there be looking, there will be preparing;
when you expect a great estate for your children, you breed them accordingly;
or rather thus, a man that expects the coming of a King to his house will
make all things ready, surely you look for no body when you are not fitting and
preparing your selves; what have you done against this great day? do you judge
your selves? 1 Cor. 11. 31. do you get into Christ? Rom 8. 1. that you may be
interested in Christ's Righteousness against you come to undergo Christ's
judgment? what purging of heart and life? 2 Pet. 3. 11. art thou in such a
case wherein thou would be found of Christ?

To exhort those that love God to look earnestly for the coming of Christ; to
this end 1. Consider our relations to him, he is our Master, we are his
servants, and good servants will wait for their Masters coming, Mat. 24. 45.
here we have our meals, but then our wages; it is but present maintenance which
we have now, but behold I come and my reward is with me, Christ will not come
empty handed: Again, he is our Husband, we his Spouse, the Bride says come,
Rev. 22. 17. we are now but contracted to Christ, then is the day of solemn
Espousals: The Judge is the wicked men's enemy, but your Redeemer. 2. Consider
the privileges we shall then enjoy; the day of Christ's coming is

1. A day of manifestation, Rom* 8 19. all is now hidden, Christ is hidden, the
Saints are hidden, their life is hidden, Col. 3. 3. their glory is hidden, 1
John 3. 2. but then Christ shall appear, and we shall appear with him in glory,
as Moses told the Rebels, Numb. 16. To morrow the Lord will show who are his;
Christ as the natural son shall then appear in all his Royalty and Glory, as
the great God and Savior of the world; so shall the Saints put on their best
robes; in winter the tree appears not what it is, the sap and life is hidden
in the root, but when summer comes, all is discovered.

2. It Is a day of perfection, every thing tends to its perfect estate; the
little seed that is sown in the ground, breaks through the clods that it may
be in flower and perfection, so a Christian is working through, that he may
come to an estate of perfect holiness, and perfect freedom; here we are very
weak, yea even to glorified spirits he is but a Savior in part, there is some
fruit of sin continued upon the body, but then body and soul are united and
perfectly glorified to praise God in Heaven, Christ comes to make an end of
what he has begun he came first to redeem our souls from sin, but then our
bodies from corruption; then all privileges are perfect regeneration, Mat. 19.
27. when Heaven's new, earth new, bodies new, souls new, that is a regeneration
indeed; so adoption, we are sons* but handled as servants, looking for the
adoption, Romans 8. 23. so justification, our pardon shall be proclaimed at the
market cross, published before all the world, Acts* 3. 19. so for Redemption,
Luke 21. 28. the body is a captive, when the soul is set at liberty, the body
is held under death till that day.

3. It Is a day of Congregation, or gathering together; the Saints are now
scattered, they live in diverse Countries, and in diverse ages, but then all meet
in one Assembly and Congregation Psalm. 1. 6. but of these things more largely,
verse 16. on these words [ the great day.]

From that [ looking for the mercy, etc.] Observe, That Observat. 5.
looking earnestly for eteanal life, is a good means of perseverance; for to
that end is it urged by the Apostle here; I shall enquire 1. What this looking
is. 2. What influence it has upon our perseverance.

1. What this looking is, it implies patience, but chiefly hope.

1. Patience, in waiting Gods leisure in the midst of present difficulties,
Heb. 10. 36. Luke. 8. 15. 1 These. 1. 3. Romans 8. 25.

2. Hope* now because there is a blind hope, and a good hope, a bastard hope,
and a genuine hope, good hope through grace, says the Apostle, 2 These. 2. 16.
Let me tell you that this looking or expectation is not that blind hope that is
found in men ignorant and presumptuous, that regard not what they do,
presumption is a child of darkness, the fruit of ignorance and inconsideration,
when men are once serious they find it an hard matter to fix an advised hope on
things to come; for guilty nature is more inclinable to fear than to hope; this
blind hope will certainly fail us, it is compared, to a Spiders web, Job 8. 12,
13. The Spider spinneth a web out of his own bowels, which is swept away as
soon as the besom comes, so do carnal men conceive a few rash and ungrounded
hopes, but when death comes or a little trouble of Conscience, these vain
conceits are swept away; this hope which I press you to is a serious act
arising from grace aiming at its own perfection: again this looking is not some
glances upon Heaven, such as are sound in worldly and sensual persons, who now
and then have their lucida intervalla, their good moods and sober thoughts, as
Balaam, Numb. 23. 10. a taste they may have, Heb. 6. 4. a smatch of the
sweetness of Heaven and spiritual comforts; the most wretched worldlings have
their wishes and sudden rap^s of Soul, but alas these sudden motions are no^
operative, they come but seldom and leave no warmth upon the Soul, as fruit is
not ripened that ^ath but a g^a^ce of the Sun, and a sudden light rather
blinds a man than shows him the way. So these sudden indeliberate thoughts
vanish and leave men never the better: again it is not a loose hope or a
probable conjecture; this has no efficacy upon the Soul; men that are under an
anxious doubtful posture of Spirit will be very uneven in their walkings, James
1. 8. when men are discouraged in a race they begin to slacken their pace; to
which the Apostle alludeth when he says, I run not as once, that is uncertain*
1 Cor. 9, 26. but when they begin sensibly to get ground, they hold on their
course the more cheerfully.

Thus negatively I have showed you what it is not, but now positively, it is an
earnest well grounded expectation of blessedness to come, it bewrays it self,
1. by frequent and serious thoughts, thoughts are the spies and messengers of
hope, it sends them into the promised land to bring the soul tidings from
thence; it is impossible a man can hope for a thing, but he will be thinking of
it, by this means we prae-occupy and forestall the contentment of what we
expect, and feast the soul with images and suppositions of what is to come, as
if it were already present; if a beggar were adopted into the succession of a
Crown, he would please himself in imagining the happiness and honor, and
pleasure of the Kingly State, so certainly if we did look upon our selves as
Hoirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, and coheirs with Christ, we would think of that
happy state more then we do, and by a serious contemplation, our hearts would
carry us above the clouds, and set us in the midst of the glory of the world to
come, as if we did see Christ upon his Throne, and Paul with his Crown of
righteousness upon his head, and all the blessed leaning in Abraham's bosom: a
carnal expectation fills men with carnal, musings and projects, as Luk 12.
18. (...), he was dialoguing and discoursing with himself of pulling down
Barns, and building greater, of bestowing his fruits and goods, see the like.
James 4. 13. it is usual with men to forestall the pleasure of their hopes, as
young riotous heirs spend upon their estates before they come in hand; now so
it is also in Heavenly things, men that expect them will be entertaining their
spirits with the thoughts of them.

2. By hearty groans, and sighs, and longings, Romans 8. 23. We groan in our
selves, waiting for the adoption, the redemption of our bodies, they have had a
taste of the clusters of Canaan, and therefore long for more, they can never be
soon enough with Christ, when shall it once be, the nearer enjoyment the more
impatient of the want of his company; as the decays of nature do put them in
mind of another world, they begin to lift up the head and look out, Romans 8. 19.
(...), the earnest expectation of the creature* the word signifies the puffing
out of the head to see if it can spy a thing a great way of, and notes the
extension of the soul toward the fruition of things hoped for, they would have
a fuller draught of the consolations of the spirit, more freedom from sin, more
perfection of grace, etc.

3. By lively tastes and feelings, John ^.
a believer has eternal life, he begins it here; hope is called a lively
hope, not only living, but lively, 1 Pet. 1. 3. because it quickens the
heart, and makes us cheerful and sprightly, Romans 5. 2. We rejoice under the
hope of the glory of God; joy is for enjoyment and possession; but yet that
pre-possession which hope gets, causes all joy, see 1 Pet. 1. 8. I confess
all feel it not in a like degree, because it depends upon a sense of grace,
which believers always have not, yet all find a sweetness and some comfort,
when they think of what they look for: worldly hope is but the dream of a
shadow, there is pain and trouble in the expectation, and no satisfaction in
the fruition.

2. Let me show you the influence it has upon perseverance. 1. It sets us a
work to purge out sin, 1 John 3. 3. Every one that has this hope purifi^th
himself as Christ is pure; the things that we look for are holy, it is a great
part of our portion in Heaven, to be free from sin, and to be Consorts of the
immaculate Lamb; can we hope for these things and cherish wotldly lusts? if we
did we look for a sensual Paradise, then we might indulge our lusts without any
defyance of our hopes: but we look for a pure and holy as well as a glorious
and blessed estate, and therefore we should begin to purify our selves.

2. It withdraws our hearts from present things, Phil. 2. 20. Our
conversation is in Heaven, from wh^nce we look for a Savior; a man that has
been looking upon the sun, finds his eyes dazzled that he cannot behold an
object less glorious, the oftener we look within this vail, the more is the
glory of the world obscured; Abraham lived as a stranger in the promised land,
why? because he looked for a City etc. H^b. 11. 9, 10 deny deadly lusts (says
the Apostle) looking for the blessed hope, Tit. 2. 12, 13. a man who is much in
Heaven, his affections are pre-ingaged and therefore the world does him little
hurt; birds are seldom taken in their flight, the more we are upon the wing of
heavenly thoughts, the more we escape snares, hope sets the wheels a going,
Phil. 3. 13. I press onward because of the high price of our calling; the
thought of the end quickens to the use of means, we faint because we do not
consider it more, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Heaven will pay for all.

4. It makes us upright and sincere, looking a squint on secular rewards is
the cause of all our declinings, Mat. 6. 2. See the larger annotations.
(...), they have their reward, hired Servants do not look for the inheritance,
and therefore must have pay in hand, if they may have the world and live in
honor and pleasure, they will discharge God from all other promises; a sincere
man makes God his Pay master, and that chiefly in the other world, Col. 3. 24.
we have a Master good enough in him, we need not look for pay elsewhere.

5. It supporteth us under those difficulties and afflictions which are wont to
befall us in a course of godliness, we can counterballance what we feel with
what we expect, we feel nothing but trouble and that which we expect is life
and glory, Romans 8. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. in this respect hope is called an
Anchor, Heb 6. 19. in the stormy gusts of temptation it stays the Soul, which
hope we have as anchor of the Soul both sure and stedf^st, and enters into
that which is within the vail, it is a weighty anchor that will not bow or
break, and the ground is good, it enters into that within the vail, and
therefore though tempests arise it will keep us from floating and dashing
against the rocks: again it is called a Helmet, Ephesians. 6. 17. the Helmet of
Salvation, so 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. the Helmet is for the Head, in conflict^, as long
as we can lift up our heads and look to Heaven we are safe.

6. It helps us to resist temptations, sin makes many promises, and
prevails by carnal hope, Balaam was enlivened by promises to curse Gods
people, Babylons fornications are presented in a golden cup, men are corrupted
with promises of preferment, and greatness, and present accomodations; now hope
sets promise against promise, Heaven against earth, pleasures at Gods right
hand against carnal delights and taking our f^ll of loves, as one hall drives
out another, so does hope defeat the promises of the world by propounding the
promises of God.

Let us now apply this.

1. It informs us, that we may look for the reward without sin. Those men
would be wiser than God that deny Use 1.
us a liberty to make use of the Spirits motives, they begrudg Gods bounty, to
what end should the Lord propound rewards but that we should close with them by
faith, graces may be exercised about their proper objects without sin, it
requires some faith to aim at things not seen, the world is drowned in sense
and present satisfactions; they are Mercenaries that must have pay in hand,
their Souls droop and languish if they do not meet with credit, applause, and
profit, they make man their pay master, they have the spirit of a servant that
prefer present wages before the inheritance; but to do all upon the
encouragements of the mercy of Jesus Christ unto eternal life argues grace:
'Twas a relief to the Soul of Christ to think of the reward, Heb. 12. 2.
Christ, as man, was to have rational comforts and humane encouragements; that
is, sinful indeed when we would have the reward but neglect the work, when we
would be Mercenarii but not Operarii, we sever the reward from the duty, and
like Ephraim are willing to ^^ead the corn but not break the clods, Hos. 10.
11. Again, we look amiss upon the reward when we have a carnal notion of
heaven, as some Jews looked for a carnal Messiah, so do some Christians for a
carnal Heaven, for base pleasure and fleshly delights, for a Turkish Paradis^,
such kind of hopes debase the heart, or else when we look for it as merited by
us, as if we could challenge it by our works, then we are Mercinaries indeed,
it is here looking for the mercy of Jesus Christ, etc.

Again, our own happiness must not be our last end, there is a personal
happiness that results to us from the enjoyment of God, now the glory of God
must be preferred before it.

2. If you would persevere in the love of God and a good frame of heart, revive
your hopes, and set the Soul a looking Use 2.
and a longing for eternal life, if we keep the rejoicing of our hope firm to
the end then we are safe, Heb. 3. 6. Courtiers are more polite in their manners
than ordinary subjects, because they are more in their Princes eye and company;
the oftener we are in Gods Court the more holy: Well, then be as much as you can
in actual expectation of this blessedness.

To this end, 1. Believe it, there is a mist upon eternity to a carnal heart,
they are led by sense and reason, and believe no more than is evident to a
natural principle, but now faith is the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.
1. fancy and nature cannot ou^-see time and look beyond death, faith holds
the candle to hope, and then we have a prospect into the other world, and can
see an happy estate to come.

2. Apply it, it is a poor, comfortless meditation to think of a blessed hope
and the certainty of it, unless we have an interest in these things, an hungry
man takes little pleasure in gazing upon a feast when he tastes not of it; the
reprobate hereafter are lookers on, and David speaks of a table spread for
him in the sight of his enemies; hope has never a more lively influence than
when we can make out our own propriety and interest, 1. Job 19. 26. I know that
my Redeemer lives. 2 Cor 5. 1. We know that if this earthly Tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. 2 Timothy 4. 8. Hence forth there is laid up for me: etc, they do not only believe
there is an Heaven, but apply it for me. You will say is hope only the fruit
assurance. I answer it is the fruit of faith as well as of assurance or
experience, but the sense of our interest is very comfortable, and in some sort
necessary, before we can hope any thing for our selves, our qualification is to
be supposed; in a matter of such moment a man should not be at an uncertainty,
can thou be quiet and not sure of Heaven? not to look after it is a bad sign,
a godly man may want it but a godly man cannot slight it: It Is possible a man
may make an hard ^hift to creep to Heaven through doubts and fears, and may be
2 Pet. 4. 17.
scarcely saved, whilst others have an abundant entrance, but then you lose
your Heaven upon earth, which consists in peace and joy in the Holy Ghost,
and lose much of the efficacy of hope; for uncertain wavering thoughts work
little, therefore assurance cannot be slighted: further I add by showing what
application there must be if we cannot attain to assurance, there are three
deg^ees of application beneath assurance, there is acceptance, adherence, and
affiance.

1. Acceptance of Gods offer upon Gods terms, Job 5. 27. Know thou it for thy
good, put in for these hopes and take God to his word upon this confidence,
make good thy part of the stipation in the Covenant, and he will not fail thee,
this application there must be in all, an answer to the demands of the
Covenant, 1 Pet. 3. 21. Exodus 24. 6, 7, 8.

2. Adherence, Stick close to this hope in a course of obedience, if we do Gods
work we shall not fail of wages, 1 Car. 9. 26. I run not as one that is
uncertain.

3. Affiance, resting, waiting upon God for the accomplishment of this
blessedness, though not without some doubts and fears as to our own interest,
though you cannot say it is yours, yet you will cast your self upon the mercy of
God in Christ as it is in the Text. Looking for the mercy of Christ, you dare
venture your Soul in that bottom, this is that committing your selves to him as
unto a merciful and faithful Creator, which the Apostle speaks of, 1 Pet. 4.
18. You will go on with your work and put your selves in Gods hand for your
eternal happiness, because he is merciful, faithful: See also Romans 2. 7.

3. Meditate on it often, med ta^ion is a temperate ecstasy, a survey of the
Land of promise, God bids Abraham take a view of Canaan, Genesis 13. 14, 15.
Surely the more we lift up our thoughts in the contemplation of this blessed
estate, the more lively will our hopes be, if every morning we spent a thought
this way, it would season the heart against the love of present things, the
morning is an emblem of the Resurrection, when we awake out of the sleep of
death, and the day comes which will never have night more, Psalm. 17. 15. So in
time of troubles we should be reckoning upon a better estate, Romans 8. 18, so
when you are by bodily sickness summoned to the grave, and you are going down
to converse with worms and skulls, then think of a blessed eternity, Job 19. 26.

The next Point is from that elause [ the mercy] The Observat. 6.
ground of our waiting and looking for eternal life is Gods mercy, not for any
works and merits of ours, we cannot challenge it as a debt: sin and death are
as work and wages, but eternal life is a donative, Romans 6. 23. eternal life is
not the wages of obedience, as damnation is the wageso^ sin; why: wherein lies
the difference? I answer, wicked men stand upon their own bottom, but Christ
has obtained this privilege for us: Wicked works are ours, and they are
merely evil, the good that we do is imp^rfect, and Gods grace has the main
stroke, so that we are rewarded, rather according to what we have received,
then what we have done; a servant is under a covenant of obed ence, and ^radeth
with his masters estate, he does but his duty, he deserves something: we are
bound to do good, and forbidden to sin; when we do what is forbidden, we
deserve punishment; but when we do what is commanded, we do not deserve the
reward, because we are bound, and because we have all from Gods grace: as you
must pray for eternal life, so must you look for eternal life; if you should
say give me Heaven for I deserve it; natural conscience would blush at the
immodesty of such a request; it is as great an absurdity when you make your own
works the ground of your hope, for in prayer our desires and hopes are put into
language, and made more explicit; so that which is our plea in prayer, must be
the ground of our claim in point of confidence, unless we mean to complement
with God.

Well then, 1. Let this encourage us to wait with hope, notwithstanding
infirmities as well as affictions; what a good master do we serve? he has
provided comforts not only against our misery, but against our unworthiness,
not only glory as a reward, but mercy as the cause of it, that we may take
glory out of the ^ands of mercy; he looked upon us not only as liable to
suffering but sinning, and therefore as he has provided life and safety for
us, so upon terms of grace.

2. It shows us how we should ascribe all to mercy, from the beginning to the
end of our salvation: we were taken into a state of grace at first out of mere
mercy, 1 Timothy 1. 13. (...), I was all to be mercy'd, Tit. 3. 5. Not by works of
righteousness that we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us: he
does not barely say, not for our works, but not for our works, (...), not for
our best works, those works of righteousness which might be supposed to be
foreseen as done by us: so also when we are taken into a state of glory, it is
still mercy, we can merit no more after grace then before, 2 Timothy 1. 18, The
Lord grant him that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day.

Once more this mercy is called [ the mercy of our Lord Jesus Observat. 7.
Christ.] Thence observe, That this mercy which we look for is dispensed by
Jesus Christ; he purchased it, and he has the managing of it in the whole
economy of grace: he shall take of mine, says he, concerning the holy Ghost,
and in the last day he distributeth to some judgment without mercy, to others
mercy, they are judged upon Gospel terms.

Well then, 1. Get an interest in Christ, otherwise we cannot look for mercy in
that great day, 1 John 2. 28. If we abide in him then shall we have boldness;
they that slight Christ in the offers of the Gospel have no reason to look for
benefit by him, you will howl and tremble then, and call upon the mountains to
hide you from the wrath of him that sits upon the throne; they that prize
the mercy of Christ now, they find it to be the very last, mercy that planted
grace in their hearts, will then put the crown upon their heads; here 'twas
their care to glorify Christ, and to honor him though with the loss of all,
there will Christ glorify them in the presence of all the world.

2. It makes for the cemfort of Christ's people and members; our blessed hopes
are founded upon the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in his hands to
dispense them: from thence you may collect,

1. The fullness of this bl^ssedness, and infinite merit, purchased it, an
infinite mercy bestows it: surely the building will be answerable to the
foundation; it is no small thing that we may expect from infinite mercy and
infinite merit; would an Emperor give brass farthings? do men that understand
themselves give vast sums for trifles?

2. The certainty of this blessedness, Christ has the managing of it; he never
discovered any backwardness to thy good, nor inclination to thy ruin; he dyed
for thee before thou were born, he called thee when thou were unworthy, warned
thee of dangers which thou never fearedst, instead of deserved wrath showed
thee undeserved mercy, interceedeth for thee when thou little think of it,
has been tender of thee in the whole conduct of his providence, visited thee
in Ordinances, is mindful of thee at every turn, and will he be harsh to thee
at last?

The last Note is from that clause [ unto eternal life] The great binefit which
we have by Christ is eternal life.

1. There is life, all that you labor for is for life, that which you prize
above other things is life; Skin for skin, all that a man has will he give for
his life; That is, he will part with all things, even to his very skin to save
his life.

2. Called therefore a Crown of life, Romans ^. 10.
It Is an excellent life, the life of sense, which is the beasts, is better then
that vegetative life which is in the plants, and the rational life which is in
men, is better then thee sensitive, and the spiritual exceeds the rational,
and the glorious life the spiritual. Vegetative life is the vigor of the sap,
sensitive life is the vigor of the blood, rational life is the union of the
soul with the body, spiritual life is the union of the soul with Christ, and
the life of glory exceeds that in degree, for it stands in the immediate
fruition of God.

3. It Is an happy life, not subjected to the necessities of meat and drink, we
have then spiritual bodies, 1 Cor. 15. 45. It Is not encumbered with miseries,
as the present life is Genesis 47. 9 it is a life which we are never weary of; in
deep distresses life it self may become a burden, Elijah said, Take away my
li^e, 1 Kings 19. 4. but this life cannot be a burden.

4. It Is eternal life, this life is but a flower that is soon withered, a
vapor that is soon blown over; but this is for ever and ever, as eternity
increases the torment of the wicked, so the blessedness of the godly: Well
then, let this press you to keep your selves in the love of God, till this
happy estate come about.

Verse 22. And of some have compassion, making a difference. Verse 23. And
others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire, hating even the garment
spotted by the flesh.
HEre is the second part of the Exhortation, explaining their duty toward
others, or teaching them how to behave themselves to them that were gone astray.

[ Of some have compassion] the vulgar reads quite to to another sense, and
some being reproved: Beza says, that in some Greek Copies he found it (...);
but the reading which we follow is to be preferred; the other is but in few
Copies, is harsh in construction, and mangleth the whole context: (...) on
these have mercy; it is a word that comes from another word that signifies
bowels, and so notes not only the gentleness of the censure, but the inward
affection, or as we render it, the compassion which we should have over them: [
putting a difference] (...), the word has many signification^, judging,
discerning, we most fitly render it according to its usual sense, and the
Apostles scope.

From the 22. verse observe.

1. That reproofs must be managed with compassion and holy Observat. 1.
grief; ou^ words must have bowels in them; this is like God; He does not
afflict willingly, nor g^ieve the children of men, Lam. 3. 33. there are tears
in his eyes when he has a rod in his hand; it is like Christ, He wept when he
drew near the City Luke 19 41. the Jews were his enemies, and that was the day
of his solemn triumph, yet he wept, Oh that thou ha^s^ known the things of thy
peace; it is suitable to the disposition of Gods servants in all ages: Samuel
left Saul, but wept for him, 1 Samuel 25. 35. Paul speaks of very wretches that
made a design of the Gospel, to gratify their belly concernments: I tell you
weeping, says he, Phil. 3. 18, 19, There are three grounds of this holy grief.

1. The dishonor done to God, Psalm. 1^9. 136. love will be affected with the
wrong of the party loved; if we see a man kill a friend or child whom we love,
the sword would pass through our own hearts, Luke 2. 35. Shall we see them
strike at God and not be troubled?

2. The harm and destruction men bring upon themselves, that they have no care
of their own souls, Jer. 13. 17.

3. The proneness that is in our nature to the same sin, Gal. 6. 1. Bernards
good man would weep ille hodie and ergo cras, he to day and I to morrow; there
is no sin in their lives, but was in your nature. Well then, it checketh them
that speak of others sins by way of reproof or censure; but with delight or
petulancy of spirit, many reproofs are lost, because there is more of passion
then of compassion in them; it is spiritual cruelty when you can turn a finger
in your brothers wound without grief; reproofs are delightful sometimes out of
the sweetness of revenge, or hatred, and ill will to the persons of men,
sometimes out of pride, or a desire to vaunt it, and insult over others;
sometimes from self. conceit, and non consideration of our own faultiness: Oh
consider this is not Christian dealing, Paul says, I am afraid least when I
come among you, my God will humble me, and that I shall bewail many, etc. 2
Cor. 12. 21. Many a proud Pharisee would have blustred, and threatened them with
the severity of discipline; but Paul was afraid he should have a heavy load
upon his own soul.

Again, and more expressly observe, That in reproving Observat. 2.
some must be handled gently: But who are those that must be handled gently? 1.
With the most notorious it is good to begin mildly, that they may see our good
will and desire of their Salvation, 2 Timothy 2. 25. hasty Spirits cannot brook
the least opposition, and therefore are all a fire presently, how did God deal
with us in our natural condition? with what lenity and mildness? and spoke
comfortatably to us, to allure us out of the Devils sna^e, Hosea 2 15.

2. The persons whom we should treat with much compassion are these.

1. The ignorant and seduced, some are of a simple and weak heart; the young
men that went with Absalon went in the simplicity of their hearts, and knew not
any thing, 2 S^m. 15. 11. though swine or dogs be driven with violence, yet
poor stray Lambs must be brought home, as the Shepherd brought home his two
lost sheep upon his shoulders rejoicing, Luc. 15. Many well meaning men may
err, be not too severe with them, le^t prejudice make them obstinate, and so
from Errare possum Hereticus esse nolo.
erring brethren they become heretical.

2. Those that slip of infirmity, members must be set in joint tenderly, Gal.
6. 1. the carnal world reflects with most sharpness upon the infirmities of
Gods people, the late Bishops Courts were chiefly bent against the godly, a
Drunkard and an Adulteror found more favor than a godly Inconformist; let us
learn to distinguish betwixt an evil course and inconsiderate slips, and as
long as there is any thing of Christ be not too severe, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 15.

3. The afflicted in Conscience, we must not speak to the grief of those whom
God has wounded, the Apostle would have the incestuous person comforted lest
he should be swallowed up of too much grief, 2 Cor. 2. 17. When Adam was
troubled though God reproved him yet he made him a coat of skins to cover his
nakedness, when Peter was weeping Christ sends a comfortable message to him,
Go tell my disciples and Peter, etc. Mark 16. 7.

4. If they err in smaller matters, we must not deal with motes as with beams,
and put the wicked and the scrupulous in the same rank, nor the gross Heretic,
and those that mistake in point of Church order, while the judgment is sound
in Fundamentals, and the practice is reformed, we should use meekness till God
reveal the same thing, Phil. 3. 15, 16. God has given them light in most
things and those which are most necessary and no time will discover those
truths to them whereof they are yet ignorant.

5. The tractable, and those of whom we have any hopes, Rehoboam would deal
roughly, and so lost ten tribes. Tertullian was even forced into the tents of
the Montanists, by the indiscreet zeal of some who were too forward with
censures, and still men are lost that otherwise would be reclaimed; differences
are made irreconcilable by the imperious sowreness and bitterness of those
that manage them, dashing storms wash away the seed, whereas gentle showers
refresh the earth, men left without hope grow desperate.

From that [ putting a difference] In all censures and punishments there must
be choice used and discretion. Prudence is the Queen of graces, different
tempers require different remedies; Isa. 8. 27.
the Prophet says, in Husbandry the fitches are not treshed with a threshing
instrument, neither is a cart wheel turned about upon the Cummin, but the
fitches are beaten out with a staff, and the Cummin with a rod; so all tempers
do not need a like dispensation, God himself puts a difference, some are
brought in with violence, others gently, grace forces open the door of the
heart sometimes, and comes in like a mighty rushing wind at other times, it
breaths upon the Soul with a gentler blast, some are caught with guil, 2 Cor.
12. 16. Others directly knocked down, this shows,

1. That Ministers had need be wise to know how to suite their doctrine, to
distinguish between persons, actions, circumstances; deep learning, much
godliness, and great prudence make an accomplished Minister; 'twas said of
Chrysostom, that he was (...), too easy, and so did not many times manage
things so wisely, and so of Epiphanius, (...), it is good to be well read in
persons, to note circumstances, and times; Paul strikes in with Felix,
treats of an apt lesson before him and Drusilla. Acts 25. 25. Tacitus says
that he did servili animo exercere imperiumper libidinem and sevitiam.
Felix was a very incontinent person and very unjust, Paul, to give him his
due, treats of righteousness and temperance, and judgment to come.

2. That Ministers should give every one their portion, Zuinglius when he had
flashed terrors in the face of the hardened sinner, would add Bone Christian
haec nihil ad te, tender Conscience this is not for thee: We must rightly
divide the word of truth, that is not by crumbling and mincing Tim. 2. 15.
a Text of Scripture, but giving every one their portion, terror to whom terror
belongs, and comfort to whom comfort

3. It shows what care we should take to know the state of our flock, that we
may know how to apply our selves to Pro. 27. 23
them, Col. 4. 8. Tychichus was sent to the Colossians to know their state, it
also obliges private Christians to consider each others temper, gifts, frame
of heart that we may the better suite our selves to do and receive good. See
Heb. 10. 24, 25.

In the twenty third verse is the other part of that duty which they owed to
straying Brethren. [ And others] those that are of another strain and temper [
save] that is, do your endeavor to be instruments of their Salvation, See 1 Timothy 4. 16. Thou shall save thy self, and them that hear thee [with fear] that
is, by some more severe course either making the admonition more sharp, or
denouncing judgment against them, or by the reverend use of Church censures,
which were then dreadful, as being solemnly managed and accompanied with some
sensible marks of Gods vengeance, 1 Cor. 5, 5. anguish of Spirit or possibly
torments of body. [pulling them out of the fire] some make it an allusion to
the several ways of purgation by water or by fire* these latter like the harder
metals are to be pulled out of the fire, but this seems to be forced: Rather
it is an allusion to the snatching of a man whom we would save, out the fire
where he is likely to be burned; we then not only nicely reach out the hand,
but pluck them out with violence, or it may be an alusion to Lots being plucked
out of Sodom by Angels, Genesis 19. 16. [ hating the garment spotted by the flesh]
it is a figurative speech, some apply it to the avoiding of the appearance of
evil; there is a story of Valentinian in Theod. lib. 3 15.
Theodoret, who accompanying Julian the Apostate to the Temple of Fortune, and
those that had charge of the house sprinkled their holy water upon the
Emperor, a drop falling upon his garment, he beat the Officer, (...), saying,
that he was polluted, not purged, and tore off the piece of his garment upon
which the drop lighted, hating (says the Historian) the garment spotted by the
flesh: But rather the expression alludeth to the old Law concerning legal
uncleanness, Lev. 15. 4. The bed whereon he lies is unclean, and Verse 17.
every garment is unclean, and therefore I suppose it notes their avoiding the
society of such evil persons as in the greater excommunication they were wont
to do, which separation was a solemn profession how much the Church did detest
the wickedness.

Observation 1. There is a time when we may use severity; others save with
fear, weak Physic does but stir bad humors, not purge them out; nettles if
gentle touched, sting the more; fair, plausible lectures do hurt to seared
Hypocrites, there is a time for the Trumpet as well as the Pipe; when we pipe
to men in the alluring strains of grace, and they dance not, Then cry aloud,
spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, Isa. 58. 1, but who are these
others, who must be dealt with roughly? I Anser,

1. The Seducers themselves, these must be laid forth in their colors, though
the seduced must be pitied, see Titus 1. 11. with 13. They subvert whole
houses, teach things which they ought not, them rebuke sharply; the Prophet
flouteth at Baals Priests, 1 Kings 18. 27. and Christ every where gives the
Pharisees their due load, Oh ye generation of Vipers, and Scribes and
Pharisees, and Hypocrites.

2. Those that are hardened, and grown perverse and stubborn; when the iron is
blunt we put to the more strength, softer strains would but harden these more.

3. Those that are secure Libertines, wallowing in sin and pleasure, we had
need put them in fear, though it be distastful to the flesh, it is healthful for
the soul; none hate you worse then those that suffer sin upon you, if physic
gripe the bowels it is for your good; if the Ch^rurgeon lance and cut you, yet
he does not hate you.

2. Observe this severity must arise from zeal, a desire of Gods glory, and
their salvation; save them with fear, (says the Apostle) plucking them out of
the fire, see a Cor. 10. 8. The Lord has given us an Authority for your
edification, not destruction, so that either God will have us use gentle means,
or violent to a gentle purpose, Tit. 1. 13. Rebuke them sharply, that they may
be sound in the faith. Well then* 1. Take Admonitions in good part, it is a
sharpness needful and profitable and needful, he is not a friend that deals
mannerly with you when you are in the fire.

2. It reproves the undue use of Church censures; weighty Ordinances are not
to ^^cquy upon trifles, nor to be prostituted to carnal ends; the power of the
keys is a great trust, and is to be faith^ully managed; we read of abuses of
this power in Scripture, John 9. 34. and 16. 2. 2 Ep. Ioh. 10. The watch men
may take away the Spouses, Cant. 5.

Again observe, That fear is a way to reclaim obstinate sinners, it is sweet to
use arguments of love, but sometimes we must lay before men the terrors of the
Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 11: Paul an elect vessel made use of threatenings, 1 Cor, 9. 27.
Surely men have a mind to sleep in sin, when they would always have us come in
the still voice. Dives was more charitable than they would have us to be, he
would fain dismiss a flamy Messenger to his Brethren, Luc. 16. 27, 28. Sluggish
Creatures need the go^d; in innocence God saw it meet to propound a threatening,
and fenced the forbidden fruit with a curse, Genesis 2. 17. if a boistrous lust
bear down all milder motives, it is good to scare the soul with threatenings of
the Law; fear is good, but the servility or slavishness of it is sinful; fear
it self, or a tender sense of Gods wrath and displeasure against sin, is so far
from being a sin, that it is a grace rightly conversant with its object: Gods
wrath and vindicative justice, is the proper object of fear, and so it must be
looked upon by the converted and unconverted. 1. For the unconverted, it is the
great fault and security that they do not consider what a dreadful thing it is
to lie under the wrath and displeasure of God, Psalm. 90. 11. there is but a
step between them and Hell, and they mind it not; tell them of their danger,
and they scorn it. 2. The converted are to fear Gods wrath, Mat. 10. 28. it is a
duty Christ injoyneth to his own Disciples; the words do not only contain a
description of the person who ought to be feared, but of the ground and reason
why he ought to be feared; Fear him who is able to cast body and soul into hell
fire, is as much as because he is able to cast body and soul into hell fire, as
appears by the Antithesis, Fear not them that kill the body, that is, because
they are able to kill the body, see also, Heb. 12 28, 29. Though we are to fear
Hell as an evil likely to fall upon us (when we are assured from Gods favor)
yet we must fear it, as an evil which God has power to inflict, and will
certainly upon those that disobey him; we are to fear it, so as to eschew it
with a fear of flight and aversation, not with a perplexing and doubting fear.

Well then, so far it is good, but now the servility that is sinful; the
servility is seen partly in the dis^ingenuity of it, when our own smart and
torture is more feared then the displeasing of God, as a slave cares not how
his masters goods go to wrack, so he may avoid stripes: Partly because it is
accompanied with an enmity against God* slavish fear hates God for his
holiness, and fears him for his wrath; they wish his destruction, that there
were no God: Partly because it causes but an incomplete reformation, it makes
a man fotbear sin, but not hate sin; a wolf may be scared from the prey, that
yet keeps his preying and devouring nature: Partly because there is torment
and p^rplexity in it, 1 John 4. 18. a tend^r conscience is a blessing, but a
stormy conscience is a judgment slaves are exercised with the torture and rack
of perplexing fears.

Again from that [ pulling them out of the fire] A poor Observat. 4.
guilty secure sinner is like a drunken man that is fallen into the fire: he is
so in three respects.

1. In point of security, a drunkard is ready to be burned, but he feels it
not, so they are upon the brink of hell, but are not sensible of it, Ephesians. 4.
19. past seeling.

2. In point of danger, sinners are often compared to a brand in the burning,
Zech. 3. 2. Amos 4. 11. they are already under the wrath of God, as a believer
has eternal life, whilst he is here in the world; they are in the suburbs of
hell, the fire is already kindled.

3. In point of impotency, and inability to help themselves; a sottish drunkard
that is ouer-poysed by his own excess, lies where he falls, and except some
friendly hand lift him up, there he perish; and just so it is with sinners, they
are pleased with their condition, and if they be not soundly rowsed up, and
awakened; they lie and dye, and fry in their sins: Oh then pluck them out of
the fire, warn them to flee from wrath to come. Mat. 3. 7. Minister art thou
sensible of the danger of souls? are thy words as burning coals? do they fret
through the heart of a sinner? Christian, art thou sensible of the danger of
thy carnal neighbors? they are burning in their beds, and thou will not cry
fire fire! they are besotted with lust and error, and will thou let them alone?
Oh unkind!

The next Point is from the last clause, [ hating the garment Observat. 5.
spotted by the flesh,] Some sinners are so unclean, that we cannot keep
company with them without defilement; see 1 Cor. 5. 9, 10, 11. so 2 These. 3.
14. and 2 Timothy 3. 5. From such turn away: now the reason is partly for our own
caution; evils made familiar by a customary converse, seem less odious: Partly
These are spots in your love feasts, verse 12.
to vindicate the honor of Christ, and the soscieties of his people; the
blemishes of their miscarriages redounds to the whole Church, Heb. 12. 15. till
they be disclaimed: Partly to punish the offenders, that it may be a means to
reduce them, 2 These. 3. 14. it is a sad thing to live an outcast from Gods
people; let obstinate and scandalous sinners think of it; and let others learn
to bear reverence to Church Censures.

Verse 94. Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present
you faultless before the presence of his glory, with exceeding joy.
THe Apostle having persuaded them to duty, now commends them to the divine
grace, as it is usual with the Apostles to shut up their Exhortations with
prayer, to intimate that the fruit of all must be expected from God, without
whose blessing Exhortations or Endeavors would be nothing.

[ To him that is able to keep you] it may be referred either to God or to
Christ, as Mediator: [ from falling, (...) that is, from total Apostasy, God
is able to keep us altogether from sin, if we speak of his absolute power; but
he speaks here of such a power as is engaged by promise and office: Christ
who is the Guardian of believers, has received a charge concerning them, and
is to preserve them from total destruction. [And to present you faultless.]
This Clause shows more clearly that Christ is intended in these expressions,
for it is his office to keep the Church till it be presented to the Father, and
at length will present them [ faultless,] it is Ephesians. 5. 27. Without spot and
blemish: [before the presence of his glory,] that is, at his glorious
appearance, Col. 3. 4. when he shall come to judge the world: [ with exceeding
joy] is meant rather passively on our part, then on Christ's, though it will be
a sweet interview between Christ and Believers, and he will rejoice to see us,
as we to see him.

The Observations are these.

1. All means without the Lords grace will not keep us from Observat. 1.
falling: The Apostle requires duty of the faithful, but asks grace of God;
he had before said, keep your selves in the love of God, and now to him that is
able to keep from falling, etc. we fall not because God does not let go his
hold; our necessities and difficulties are so great, that nothing less then a
divine power can support us, 1 Pet. 1. 5. Ye are kept by the power of God
through faith unto salvation: This power of God is set a work to encourage
hope, not to check industry, use means, but look for his blessing: We cannot
stand a moment longer then God upholdeth us, we are as a staff in the hand of a
man, take away the hand and the staff falls to the ground, or rather as a
little infant in the Nurses hand, Hosea 11. 3. if we are left to our own feet,
we shall soon fall and get a knock; created grace will never hold out against
so many difficulties: One of the Fathers brings in the flesh, saying, ego
deficiam, I shall fail; the world, ego dicipian, I will deceive them; the
Devil, ego eripiam, I will take them away; but (...) says, ego custodium, I
will keep them, never fail them, nor forsake them, and there lies our safety;
the world is full of snares, we are carnal, and there are carnal persons about
us, and the Devil is a restless enemy, watching all advantages; and surely
having so much pride in us, and love of pleasures, and so many worldly desires,
we give them him but too too often, therefore unless God keep us, we shall be
tossed too and fro like feathers, with the wind of every temptation.

2. Observe, That it is a great releif to faith, to consider that God is able to
keep us, accordingly you find it urged in Observat. 2.
Scripture, see John 10. 28, 29. 1 Pet. 1. 5. Romans 14. 4. He shall be holden
up, for God is able to make him stand; the two Pillars of the Temple were Boez
and Jachin, strength, and he will establish; the power of God, and mercy of
God, are the two Pillars upon which our confidence stands: the power of God
is a r^liefe upon a threefold acount.

1. Because the great trouble of the soul arises from a dis-belief of Gods
power; we stumble at his can, rather then at his will; one said, Mat. 8. 2.
Lord if thou will thou can, but another said, Mark 9. 22. If thou can do
any thing help us; when we consider our own infirmities, and corrupt
inclinations, and the sundry temptations and allurements that we meet with in
the world; the many lets and discouragements which befall us in our heavenly
course, we think we shall never hold out to the end, so that want of power is
our greatest trouble, but when we stay our selves upon the name of God, and
consider how almighty his power is to bear down all created opposition, it is a
great relief to the Soul.

2. Because the power of God is engaged to help us, it does not simply follow
that because God can keep us, that therefore he will keep us, but God has
promised to keep us, Jer. 32. 40. and he has power enough to make good his
word, and therefore we cannot miscarry.

2. There is a charge laid upon Christ, we are put into his hands, John 10. 28.
he has not only leave to save the Elect, but a charge to save the Elect, see
John 6. 37, 38. 40. they are under his care, (...) he will employ the whole
power of the Godhead rather than be unfaithful, he is to be answerable for
those that are given to him at the last day.

3. The invincible power of God is set a work by his unchangeable love, so that
we may be confident that he, what he is able to do, he will do for us; the
power and authority of a relation or friend of ours in Court, is an
encouragement, whilst the friendship and relation lasts.

3. The last reason is, because the power of God is many ways exercised for our
preservation, partly by way of internal influence, swaying the heart, and
inclining it to his fear, if the will of man were exempt from the dominion of
God, then God had made a creature too hard for himself; partly in overruling
and disposing the temptation that it shall not be too great for us, 1 Cor. 10.
13. Faithful is God who will not suffer you to be tempted ab^^^ what you are
able to bear; partly, in removing the temptation, rebuking Satan and his
Instruments, etc. Well then, commit your Souls to Christ with the more
confidence, 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know whom I have believed, and that he is able to
keep that which I have committed unto him unto that day; when the difficulties
of Salvation are sufficiently understood, there will need explicit thoughts of
the divine power before we can with any confidence trust our selves with
Christ, and go on with encouragement in well doing.

3. Observe, Jesus Christ will one day make a solemn preservation Observat. 3.
of his people to God, the Apostle says here he will present you: There is a
threefold presentation spoken of in Scripture. 1. One made by believers
themselves, Romans 12 1. I beseech you by the mercies of God that ye present your
bodies a living sacrifice* and Romans 6. 13. yield your selves unto God, (...).
When we consent to set apart our selves for Gods use, to be his in all estates,
to act for him in all his businesses, then we are said to yield up or present
our selves to God.

2. By Christ's Messengers, they have a charge, and when they have done their
work they present u* to God, 2 Cor. 11. 3. that I may present you a chaste
Virgin to Christ, it is sweet when Ministers can say here are the fruits of my
labors, the pledges of my faithfulness.

3. This presentation is applied to Christ himself, now two ways is Christ said
to present us.

1. To himself. 2. To God.
1. To himself, Ephesians. 5. 27. that he might present it to himself a glorious
Church, in that place our interest in Christ and his interest in us is
represented by marriage, in the world we are contracted, but there presented,
actually brought to him when fitted for his use; as Esther when she was chosen
out from among the Virgins to be wife to the King, she was first purified and
supplied with garments, odours, and sweet* ointments out of the Kings house,
and then when the Months of her purification were accomplished, was presented
to him, Esther 2. from 9. to 12. verse, so we are chosen, elected to grace, and
then purified and prepared, but at the Kings cost, we have garments of
Salvation out of Christ's Wardrobe, and odours and sweet ointments out of his
Storehouse, and then when spot and wrinckle is done away, we are presented to
him, he is said to do it, because he has the main stroke in this work.

2* To God, so it is said Col. 1, 22. that he may present you in his sight; that
is, in the sight of God the Father; for the antecedent you find in verse 19. It
pleased the Father, etc. Thus Christ is said to give up the Kingdom to the
Father, 1 Cor. 15. 24. to 28. that is, the Church, the Kingdom is put for the
subjects governed: Now Christ's presenting us to God may be looked upon either
^^ as an account of his charge in effect he says, I have done the work for
which thou have sent me. Christ is under an office and obligation of
faithfulness, he has a trust of which he must give an account, he is to take
care of the persons of the Elect to justify, sanctify, and glorify them in
his own day, now that it may appear that he is not unfaithful in his trust, he
does present them to God as having fully done his work, so that no doubt of his
unwillingness to pardon or sanctify, or glorify, is in effect to charge
unfaithfulness and disobedience upon him; for Christ as Mediator is
subordinate, he is Gods, 1 Cor. 3. 18* and 1 Cor. 11. 3. The head of Christ is
God, namely with respect to this office and charge, so he is under God and to
give an account to him; he has undertaken to make up all breaches between God
and us; as to the merit and satisfaction he gave an account a little before his
going to Heaven, John 17. 4. but as to the application, to every party
concerned he will give an account in the last day, when he will present himself
and all his flook, saying, Behold I and all the little ones which thou have
given me, Heb. 2. 13* when all the Elect are gathered into one troop and
company, and not one wanting.

2. As an act of delight and rejoicing in his own success, that all that were
given to him are now fit to be settled in their blessed and glorious estate,
Christ takes a great deal of delight to see the proof and virtue of his death,
and that his blood is not shed in vain, as a Minister takes delight in those
whom he has gained to God, what is our hope, our joy, our crown of rejoicing,
are not ye in the day of the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 19. if we rejoice thus in the
fruit of our Ministerial labors, surely Christ much more, we have not such an
interest in them as Christ has, and the main virtue came from his death and
spirit; it is said Isa. 53. 11. He shall see of the travel of his Soul, and be
satisfied, that may be understood either of his foreseeing from all eternity,
or of his actual seeing when the whole is accomplished, if you understand it of
his foreseeing, the expression is not altogether alien from the point in hand;
when Christ foresaw the good success of the Gospel, and what a company he
should gain to himself in all ages, he rejoiced at the thought ofit; well,
says he, I will go down and suffer for poor creatures upon these terms; but
rather I understand it of his sight of the thing when it is accomplished; when
he shall see his whole family together, met in one Congregation: now (says he)
I count my blood well bestowed, my bitter agony well recompensed, these are my
Crown and my rejoicing: Look as the first person delighted in the fruits of his
personal operation, for so it is said, Exodus 31. 17. In six days God made
Heaven, and on the seventh day he rested and was refreshed; he was refreshed,
not in point of weariness, but delectation; he rejoiced in the product of his
wisdom, power, and goodness; so Christ in the work of redemption, when his
death turns to a good account, he will delightfully present you to God as the
proof of it: These are those whom I have redeemed, sanctified and kept, etc.

3. It Is an Act of his love, and recompense to the* faithful, they have owned
him in the world, and Christ will own them before God, men, and Angels, there is
no Saint so mean but Christ will own him, Luke 12. 8. The Son of man shall
confess him, etc. Father this is one of mine; as for his enemies Christ will
see execution done upon them; slay them before my face, Luke 14. 27. to his
friends he will own them publicly, and that (...) be honored before the
presence of his glory.

Well then, see that you be of the number of those whom Christ will present to
God, if he has purified you to himself, Tit. 2. 14* he will present you to
himself, if you be set a part for God, Psalm. 4. 3* you shall be brought to God,
the work is begun here; privately it is done at our deaths; when the foul as
soon as it is out of the body, is conveyed by Angels to Christ, and by Christ to
God, and publicly and solemnly at the day of his coming, then he presents the
Elect as a prey snatched out of the teeth of Lions, but spiritually the
foundation is laid, when you dedicate your selves to God, Romans 12. 1. and walk
so as Christ may own you with honor and credit in that great day; if you be
the scandal of his Ordinances, the reproach of your profession, can Christ
glory in you then as a sample of the virtue of his death? Surely no.

Again observe, That when Christ presents the Elect, he Observat. 4.
will present them faultless, that is, both in respect of justification and
sanctification; this was intended before the world was, Ephesians. 1. 4. he has
chosen us before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and
without blame before him in Love, but is not accomplished till then, now we are
humbled with many infirmities and sins, but then presented holy, unblameable.
and unreproveable in his sight, Col. 1. 22. the work is undertaken by Christ,
and he will carry it on till it be complete; here the wedding garments are a
making, but then put on.

1. The work must be begun, here the foundation is laid as soon as we are
converted unto God, 1 Cor 6. 11.

2. This work increases daily more and more, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. 24. we are not
faultless, but Christ will not rest till we be faultless, he is sanctifying
further and further, that we may be blameless at his coming, he will pursue the
work close till it be done.

3. It Is so carried on for the present, that our justification and
sanctification may help one another, the benefit of justification would be much
lessened if our sanctification were complete, and our sanctification is carried
on the more kindly because the benefit of justification needs so often to be
renewed and applied to us; (...) inherent righteousness were more perfect,
imputed righteousness would be less set by, in this great imperfection under
which we now are, we are too apt to fetch all our peace and comfort from our
own works, to the great neglect of Christ and his righteousness, therefore does
the Lord by little and little carry on the work of grace, that by the continual
sense of our defects, and the often making use of Justification we may have the
higher apprehensions of Gods Love in accepting us in Christ, the relics of
sin trouble us as long as we are in the world, and so the benefit is made new
to us, which otherwise would wax old and out of date, and the benefit being
made new, increases our love to God, Luc. 7. 47. and puts us upon the study
of holiness.

4. At the last day all is fully accomplished, 1 Col. 22. Well then, let us
wait upon God with encouragement, and press on to perfection upon these hopes,
surely we shall be faultless, Christ would never have given us 2 Cor. 1. 22.
earnest if he meant not to stand to his bargain.

The next clause is [ before the presence of his glory*] note Observat. 5.
thence, that Christ's presence at the day of Judgment will be exceeding
glorious; for he will then appear not only as the Son of man but as the Son of
God, Matthew. 16 27. he will then appear not only as the Savior but as the Judge
of the world, both for the terror of the wicked, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. and as a
pattern of that glory which shall be put upon the godly, Col. 3. 4. and Phil.
3. 21. Well then, let us not despise Christ, now he lies hid under the vail of
the Gospel, but with comfort let us expect his coming; for when he is glorious
we shall share with him, and appear also in glory: And let us not think shame
of his service, what ever disireputation the world shall put upon it.

The last particle in the words, is that [ with exceeding Observat. 6.
joy] from thence note, The day of Christ to the godly is a joyful day; when
others howl, you shall triumph, when others are dejected, and call upon the
Mountains to cover them, Rev. 6. 16. you shall lift up the head for your
redemption draws nigh, Luc. 21. 28. Christ will be glad to see you, whom he
has carried in his heart from all eternity, for whose sake he came into the
world and dyed, and for whom he went back again into Heaven, that he might
negotiate with God in your behalf, and whom he now comes to receive unto
himself, that you may be for ever there where he is; and surely you that have
received Christ into your hearts, and loved him though unseen, and served him
though with the loss and hazard of all, will be glad to see him in all his
glory and royalty, especially when you shall hear him calling upon you, Come,
ye blessed of my Father, enter into the Kingdom prepared for you. Oh that we
could act over this joy aforehand! faith is a bird that can sing in winter;
before Christ came in the flesh the Patriarchs got a sight of him by the
Eagle-eye of faith, and rejoiced at the thought of it, John 8. 56. Your Father
Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it and was glad. Oh surely our
hearts should be warmed with the thought of that blessed day, when we shall be
able to say, Yonder, even there is our great Lord!

Verse 25. To the only wise God, our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion
and power, now and ever, Amen.
THe Apostle in this verse goes on with that doxology which he had begun in
the former, here you may take notice of the description of the person to whom
the praise is given, he is discribed 1. By his excellency, the only wise God.
2. By our interest and the benefit we receive by him, and our Savior.

2. The ascription of praise, Be glory, etc. there is 1. what is ascribed,
glory majesty, dominion, and power.

2. The duration, how long he would have this ascribed, now and ever.

3. Manner, in what fashion it is ascribed, in the particle, Amen, with which
all is sealed and closed up, this particle implies, 1. Our confidence, that it
shall be so, 2. our hearty affection that it might be so, love says let it be,
and faith it shall be; for faith is a prophetic grace, in prayer it answers
its self.

But let us go over these particulars more fully and distinctly, from the
description of the person [ to the only wise God our Saviour] that Christ is
God, we proved before on verse 4. see page 222. and 230, 231, 232, 233, 234*
and that Christ is a Savior, and how, on the same verse, page 227, 228, 229, I
shall only now observe.

1. That God is wise. 2. That God is only wise. 3. That Observat. 1.
Jesus Christ as Mediator has a right to this attribute.

I begin with the first, That wisdom is ascribed to God, Gods wisdom is a
distinct notion from his knowledge he does not only know all things, but has
ordered and disposed them with much counsel, the wisdom of God is asserted in
the word, Job 9. 4. and Job 12, 13* and proved there by what he has bestowed
upon man, he that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know? Psalm. 94. 10. what
ever man has from God, God has it in himself in a more eminent degree: and
it is also evidenced by the works of God, as in the works of creation,
providence* and the methods of his graces.

1. Much of his Psalm. 104. 24 1 Cor. 1. 21.
wisdom is seen in creation, there his wisdom is discovered in the excellent
order of all his works, their mutual correspondence and fitness for the several
ends and services for which they were appointed; the order of the world shows
the wisdom of God, the order of placing the creatures, see Pro. 3. 19, 20. the
Lord by wisdom has founded the earth, by understanding has he established the
Heavens, by his knowledge the depths are broken up and the clouds drop down the
dew; the earth is set lowermost as the foundation of all the rest, the Sea pent
up within its channels, the air above them both, and the Heavens higher than
all* the Stars and Planets placed in the Firmament, and the fishes in the Sea;
the order of making, God proceeding from things imperfect to perfect, first the
rude mass, then the Heavens and the vast earth, and glorious creatures, but
without life, then the herbs and plants that have life but not sense and
motion, then the brute creatures, that have sense and motion but not reason,
then man with a reasonable Soul, after his own image; in this order you may
observe, first the dwelling place is appointed, then the food, then the
creature that feeds upon it, the beasts upon the herbs, and man upon the
beasts: The Queen of Sheba was astonished at Solomon's wisdom, when she
perceived the well ordering of his family, certainly if we did observe the
order of nature, we would stand wondering more at the wisdom of God: Next
observe the correspondence that is between all the parts of the world, compared
sometimes to a building, wherefore God is called (...), an artificial Builder,
Heb. 11. 10. In this great house every part conspireth to the beauty, service,
and dece^cy of the whole, the roof is Heaven, and therefore the Spheres are
called chambers and stories in the Heavens, Amos 9. 6. The foundation is earth,
Job 38. 5, 6. The Stars and glorious Luminaries are the windows, the Sea the
water course, etc. Sometimes it is compared to the frame and structure of man's
body, Heb. 11. 3. The worlds were framed, it is in the original, (...), set in
joint, as all the members of the body are tied together by several ligaments,
etc. Sometimes to an Army, Genesis 2. 1. The Heavens were finished and all the
host of them. Order is necessary every where but especially in an host, there
every one must keep in his rank and station, thus the Stars have their courses,
Judges 5. 20. and the clouds their courses, Job 37. 12. yea, the Grasshoppers
march as an army, Joel 2. 15. The next thing that shows the wisdom of God, is
their fitness for use and service, the work man's skill is as much commended in
the use of an instrument as in the making and framing of it; the upper Heaven'^
fitted to be the everlasting mansion of the Saints, the middle Heaven to give
us light, and heat and influence, the air, or lower Heaven, for breath, the
earth for habitation, the Seas for navigation, the herbs and plants for food
and medicine, etc. Look upon the bodies of living creatures and tell me if
there be not a wise God; Galen says there are 600 muscles in the body of man,
and every one fitted for ten uses; so for bones, nerves, arteries and veins,
whosoever observes their use, situation, and correspondence of them, cannot
but fall into admiration of the wisdom of the Maker, who has thus exactly*
framed all things at first out of nothing, and still out of the froth of the
blood: The wisdom of men and Angels cannot mend the least thing in a fly; the
figure, color, quality, quantity, of every worm, and every flower, with what
exactness is it ordered? as if God had nothing else to do but to bring forth
such a creature into the world as the product of his infinite Wisdom.

2. Providence, Gods wisdom is much seen in the sustentation and governing of
all things, Ephesians. 1. 11. He works all things according to the Council of his
will; do but observe a little now all things are put into a subserviency to
Gods purpose, sometimes the smallest things occasion events of the highest
concernment; the occasion of Joseph's greatness in Egypt was a dream* a lie cast
him into prison, and a dream fetched him out: sometimes the most casual things
to us are the most necessary means to accomplish that which God aims at; A
certain man drew a bow at peradventure, and slew the King of Israel between the
joints of the harness, 1 King. 22. 24. Contingencies to us are infallihle
events as to the purposes of God: voluntary things that depend upon the will of
man, fall under the ordination of the will of God; there is more wisdom shown
in ruling a skittish horse, then in rolling a stone or dead thing; God shows
his wisdom in guiding the courses of the stars, but much more in disposing the
heart of man, Prove. 21. 1. there is nothing so confused, but if you look upon
it in its result and final tendency, there is beauty and order in it, the
tumults of the world, the prosperity of the wicked, carnal men think them the
disgrace and blemish of providence, whereas they are the ornament of it, Psalm.
92. 5. Lord how glorious are thy works? thy thoughts are very deep! man is
discontented because he cannot fathom the deep thoughts of providence: nothing
so opposite, so bad, but God can bring good out of it; the sins of men set
forth the beauty of providence, as shadows and black lines in a Picture set it
off the more, see Acts 4. 28, and Job 5. 12, 13. Christ has been beholding to
his enemies as much as to his friends, their potent opposition has occasioned
the further increase of his Kingdom.

3. In the methods of his grace, so I call all the transactions of God about
the salvation of sinners from first to last; the rejection of the Jews, and
calling of the Gentiles. Romans 11. 33. Oh the depth of the riches of the wisdom
and knowledge of God: the various dispensations used in the Church before the
Law, under the Law, and time of the Gospel, these are called (...), the
manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3. 10. Redemption by Christ, the great plots of
Heaven, called the hidden wisdom of God in a mystery, and without controversy
a great mystery, 1 Timothy 3. 16. that which Angels desire to pry into; Gods
Master piece, wherein all things by a rare contrivance, are ordered for Gods
glory, and man's good, the wonder of it will take up our hearts to all eternity;
to see the ruins of the fall so exactly repaired, the glory of God salved, the
comfort of man provided for, (...), Oh the depth of this glorious mystery!

Again* The various acts of love, whereby God subdueth sinners to himself; this
taking sinners in their month, and disposing of unthought of circumstances and
passages of providence in order to their conversion: Once more, the overruling
of all events to further the eternal blessedness of the Saints, Romans 8. 28. In
all these I have forborne particular illustrations, that the discourse may not
swell up into too great a bulk.

Now whosoever shall seriously consider these things, will certainly conclude
God is wise; but further, consider the usual concomitants of Gods* wisdom, and
then we may come to make some use of this meditation.

Wisdom in God is accompanied with immaculate holiness, and infinite power; in
the Devils there is great cunning great power, and much wickedness; in man
there is much shame, little power, and less wisdom; Gods power and wisdom are
often counted in the expressions of Scripture, Job 9, 4. He is wise in heart,
and mighty in power, so Job 3^ 5. He is mighty in strength and wisdom the two
for midable properties Dolus an virtus quis in host requirit?
in an adversary, and the desire able properties in a friend, so see 1 Cor. 1.
25. Again, it is joined with holiness he is most wise, and most holy, glorious
in holiness, and rich in wisdom.

Well then, let us often admire the Wisdom of God; Use 1.
look up to the Heavens, and what do you find there? The work of a wise God.
Jer. 10. 12. Look to the structure of all things round about you, and what
offers its self to your thoughts? by his wisdom he has established the
world. Jer. 10. 12. Look within you and you cannot choose but say, Oh God I will
praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made, Psalm. 139. 14. Look into
the Scriptures and consider the stupendous mysteries that are revealed there;
of the Trinity in unity, God manifested in our flesh, a Virgin conceiving,
Christ dying, and can you hold from crying out, Oh the depth of the riches,
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God? Romans 11. 33. view these things again
and again; we cannot take up all of God, in one, or many, or all our
meditations.

2. Let not it be a bare speculation, but improve it, 1. To Use 2.
quicken you to prayer, where should we go for wisdom when we need it, but to
the wise God? see Job 28. 12. James 1. 5. Job 329. Solomon asked wisdom and had
it 2. Improve it to thanks; when you are able to discern your way and your
work, P. ov. 2. 6. 3* Improve it to waiting, Isa 30 8 He is a God of judgment,
blessed are all they that wait for him; when things grow cross, let the wise
God alone till you see the end of his work; will you be his Councellor, and
teach him how to manage his affairs? he knows how to deliver the godly, etc.
2 Pet. 2. 9. 4. Improve it to patience and contentation; the wise God knows
how to make use of thee in every condition, where ever thou art say, I am there
where God has set me, God knows what is better for me, then I do my self, he
that has put all things in their places, has put me in this peace, and here I
will glorify him, 1 Cor. 7. 22. every cross is chosen and elected, as well as
your persons, there are secrets of wisdom in providence that are not always to
be found in the surface and out side of it, Job 11. 6. though it appear in a
way of rigor, yet God may have a design in it of mercy to me, and glory to
himself.

The nex Point is, That God is only wise, see the same Observat. 2.
expression, 1 Timothy 7. 17. and Romans 16. 27. why you will say this is a
communicable Attribute, God has endowed man with a spirit of wisdom, and
humane prudence is an emblem and resemblance of divine providence, how then is
God only wise? I Answer, wisdom in God is in such an infiniteness and excess
that wisdom in man is but folly in comparison of it, there is none as he, there
is none wise but from him; in short, God in three respects is only wise.

1. Originally, and independently wise, not by communication from another, but
of himself; our wisdom is but array communicated from the father of lights,
James 1. 17. a drop from the Ocean, a beam from the Sun, the whole knowledge of
the Angels is but a spark of this light.

2. God is essentially wise, and so only wise: do not understand God to be wise
as if wisdom had made him wise, as it happens among the creatures, in them
wisdom is a separable quality, distinct from their Essence: now Gods Wisdom is
Himself, and Himself is his Wisdom, the perfections of the creature, are like
the gilding which may be laid on upon vessels of wood or stone, the matter is
one thing, and the varnish or ornament is another; but the perfections of God
are like a vessel made of pure beaten gold, where the matter and the splendour,
or adorning, is the same.

3. God is infinitely wise, and so only wise, as the Candle gives no light
when the sun shines, our wisdom is bounded within narrow limits, and extends
but to a few things, but Gods to all things; we count them fools that can only
manage petty matters, buy and sell, and keep out of harms way; such fools are
all creatures to God, whose wisdom is unlimitted and incomprehensible; they
that can manage a small Commonwealth with Advice* and Council, are cried up
sor wise men; but now God mannageth the affairs of the whole world, both
visible and invisible; he cares for all things, from the Ant to the Angels,
nothing so small as to escape his knowledge, nothing so great as to burden his
mind, the sun does with the same easiness shine upon the whole world, as upon
one field: so does God manage the government of the whole world as of one
person or creature: our wisdom is gotten by learning, but who has directed the
spirit of the Lord, Isa* 40. 17. our wisdom is bettered by experience,
therefore old men are most prudent; but Gods wisdom is incapable of increase,
as being in an infinite fullness; we are often deceived; men of the greatest
segacity and cunning, fail in their plots and enterprises, and so their wisdom
is turned into folly; but it is not so with God, His Council shall stand, Psalm.
33. 11. there can no difficulty occur, but what is foreseen: he goes not upon
probability and conjecture, but certain foreknowledg: Man can attend but upon
one care at once, various thoughts scatter the mind, and weaken it, but God in
one moment of under standing sees all things, and wisely disposes of all
things; Gods wisdom does not deliberate with hesitancy, or consult with doubt,
his thoughts are simple, and not successive, and in their way of discourse.
Thus you see what good reason there is why God should be said to be only wise.

Well then, let not the creature seem wiser then God, and cavil at what he has
revealed, because we understand it not; we cannot know the nature of an Ant, we
are puzzled in the least creature, no wonder then if humane reason grow giddy,
when it pryeth into the deeps of God; there should be (...), the obedience of
faith to all that is revealed; and divine truth, like Pills, must be swallowed
rather then chewed, received upon Gods single Authority, when we see no reason
for them, for God is only wise: Again, when you think of the perfections of God
you must raise your thoughts above the Law, and all manner of all created
beings.

The next Point is, That Christ Jesus our Savior is worthy Observat. 3.
to be accounted the only wise God: Christ is wise as he is God, and as he is
Man.

1. As he is God, so he is called the wisdom of the Father, 1 Cor. 1. 24. and
represented to the ancient Church under this title, as Prove. 1. 20. and Prove.
8. per totum, wisdom is there spoken of as a person, and the discriptions there
used are proper to Jesus Christ; some suppose the Heathens had some traditional
knowledge of this mystery and appellation; for as Christ the wisdom of the
Father was eternally and ineffectably begotten in the divine Essence, so they
worshipped a Goddess whom they called the Goddess of* wisdom, and fained that
she was begotten by Jupiter of his own brain, and they called her (...)* which
word is much like in sound with the Hebrew word, Adonai Lord.

2. As he is man, he received the habits of all created knowledge and wisdom, as
all other graces without measure, John 3. and so it is said, Col. 2. 3. In him
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Well then, since Christ has
brought down wisdom to us in our own nature, let us be more studious to get it
into our hearts: As Mediator, he is fitted to make us wise to Salvation, and
appointed by God to be wisdom to us, 1 Cor. 1. 30.

Once note more from the other title, that is here given Observat. 4.
to Christ [ our Saviour] Those that have had any benefit by Christ will be
very much affected with his praise; there is a double ground of exalting
Christ, a sight of his excellency, and a sense of his benefits; and there is a
double notion by which our honoring of Christ is set forth, praise and
blessing; praise has respect to his excellency* and blessing to his benefits,
Ephesians 1. 3. We may praise a man for his worth, though we have no benefit by him,
and so we are bound to praise God for the excellency of his nature, though he
had never done us good; but now when he is our God and our Savior, and has
showed us so much of his goodness and mercy in Christ, we should be ever
praising him, Phil. 4. 20. Now unto God and our Father be glory for ever and
ever, Amen; Glory is due to him as God, much more as our Father, his worth and
excellency, though he were a stranger to us does deserve an acknowledgment, but
when we consider what he is to us* and what he has done for us, then we can
hold no longer, the heart being affected with a sense of his kindness, breaks
out, to our Father, to our Savior, be glory for ever and ever. Well then
consider the Lords excellencies more, and observe his benefits, and work them
upon the heart till you be filled with a deep sense of his love, and find such
an impulsion in your Spirits as you cannot hold from breaking out into his
praise.

I come now from the description to the ascription* to him Observat. 5.
be glory, etc. Can we bestow any thing upon God? or wish any real worth and
excellency to be super-added to him? I answer no, the meaning is, that those
which are in God already may be first more sensibly manifested. Isa. 64. 2.
Make thy name known among the nations. It Is a great satisfaction to Gods
people, when any thing of God is discovered, they value it above their own
benefit and safety, see Psalm. 115. 1. they prefer the glory of mercy and
truth before their deliverance.

2. More seriously and frequently acknowledged, it is a great pleasure to the
Saints to see others praise God, Psalm. 107. 8. Oh that men would praise the
Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men.

3. More deeply esteemed, that God may be more in request, more in the hearts
of men and Angels, Gods children no not count it enough that God is glorified
by themselves, but they desire also that God may be glorified by others; as
fire turns all things near it into its own nature, so is grace diffusive;
good men are loath to go to Heaven alone, they would travel thither by troops
and in company.

But let us more particularly take a view of this ascription, and so first what
is ascribed, glory, majesty, dominion, and power. Let us open these words.
Glory is clara cum laud notitia, excellency discovered with praise and
approbation* and notech that high honor and esteem that is due to Christ.
Majesty is the next word, which implies such greatness and excellency as
makes one honored and preferred above all, therefore a style usually given to
Kings, but none so due as unto Christ, who is King of Kings and Lord of our
Lords. The third term is dominion, which implies the foveraignty of Christ
over all things, especially over the people whom he has purchased with his
blood. The last word is, power, which signifies that all sufficiency in God,
whereby he is able to do all things according to the good pleasure of his will.

From hence observe,

1. A gracious heart has such a sense of Gods worth and Observat. 6.
perfection, that it would have all things that are honorable and glorious,
ascribed to him, therefore are diverse words here used* When we have done our
utmost we come short; for Gods name is exalted above all blessing, and above
all praise, Nehem. 9. 5. Yet it is good to do as much as we can: Love to God
will not be satisfied with a little praise, I will praise him yet more and
more, love inlargeth the heart toward God, if there be any thing more
excellent he shall have it; well then it is a sign of a dead heart to be a
niggard in praises, to be sparing, careless, or cold this way.

2. When we think of God, it is a relief to the Soul to consider Observat. 7.
of his glory* majesty, dominion and power; for this is that which the Apostle
would have to be manifested, acknowledged, and esteemed in God, as the ground
of our respect to him; it incourageth us in our service, we need not think
shame of his service to whom glory, and power and majesty and dominion
belongs: It hearteneth us against dangers; surely the great and glorious God
will bear us out in his work; it increases our awe and reverence, shall we
serve God in such slight fashion as we would not serve the Governor? Mal. 1.
8. it is a lessening of Gods majesty, you do not treat him as a great and
glorious Potentate, Mal. 1. 14. It inviteth our Prayers, to whom should we go
in our necessities but to him that has Dominion over all things, and power to
dispose of them for the glory of his majesty: It increases our Dependence, God
is glorious, and will maintain the honor of his name and truth of his
promises: When we are daunted by earthly Potentates it is a relief to think of
the majesty of God, in comparison of which all earthly Grandeur is but the
dream of a shadow: Again, God that has a sovereignty* over all things, and
such an almighty power to back it, will not be wanting to do that which shall
make for his glory.

2. The next consideration in this Ascription, is the duration, Observat. 8.
now and ever: Thence note, The Saints have such large desires for Gods glory,
that they would have him glorified everlastingly, and without ceasing, they
desire the pre, sent age may not only glorify God, but the future, when they
are dead and gone the Lord remains, and they would not have him remain
without honor; they do not take death so bitterly, if there be any hopes that
God will have a people to praise him: and their great comfort now is the
expectation of a great Congregation, gathered from the four winds, united to
Christ, presented to God, that they may remain with him, and glorify him for
evermore; it is the comfort of their hearts to see this Congregation a making up
every day, that there are Saints and Angels to praise God, whilst others
grieve and dishonor him; they prize their own salvation, upon this ground that
they shall live for ever, to glorify God for ever, see Ephesians. 3. 21. Ps. 41. 13
Psalm. 106, 48. Now this they do, partly from their love to Gods glory, which
they prize above their own salvation, Romans 9. 3. Partly in thankfulness to God
for his everlasting love to them; God is from everlasting to everlasting, and
his love is from everlasting to everlasting, Psalm. 10^. 17. he was their God,
and will be their God for ever and ever, and therefore they purpose to be his
people, and to praise him for ever and ever. Well then, get these large desires
for Gods glory, that he may be honored in all ages, and in all places, Psalm.
113. 2, 3. What have ye done in a tendency here unto, that prosperity may
praise God? do you labor to promote the knowledge of Christ, and the
succession of Churches, all the ways that you can? zeal in your place is a good
argument that you are well* affected in this kind; as a Master of a family have
thou taken care to keep Religion alive among thy children when thou art dead
and gone? Genesis 18. 19. as a Merchant have thou promoted Religion with thy*
Traffic? Deuteronomy. 33. 18, 19. as a Magistrate do thou take care to secure the
interest of Christ to posterity that the succession of Churches may not be cut
off; Ministers, have you been witnesses for God to the present age? and behaved
your selves as Trustees for the next Age? Have you taken care that God may be
honored then? that we do not transmit prejudices against the ways of God, and
corruptions in Doctrine and worship to posterity? Oh where is this affection,
this wishing, To him be glory now and ever?

The last thing in this Inscription, is the Particle Amen, which is signaculum
fidei and votum desiderii nostri, it signifies an hearty consent to Gods
promise, and a steady belief that it will continue to all generations: this
word is often put at the end of Prayers and Doxologies in Scripture, see Rev.
5. 13, 14. Romans 16. 27. Phil. 4. 20. etc. and sometimes it is doubled for the
greater vehemence, Psalm. 51. 13. Ps. 72. 19. Psalm. 89. 52. and it seems by
that passage often he Apostle that anciently it was audibly pronounced by the
people in public Assemblies, at the conclusion of prayers, 1 Cor. 14. 16. and
since that Hierom tells us that Amen ecclesiae instar t^ni^ru^reboabat, that
the Amen was so heartily sounded Observat. 9.
out by the Church, that it seemed like a crack of thunder: Certainly it is good
to conclude holy exercises with some vigor and warmth; natural motion is
swifter in the end and close, so should our spiritual affctions be more
vehement, as we draw to a conclusion, and when the Prayer is done, put out the
efficacy of our faith and holy desires in a strong Amen, that it may be to you
according to the requests of your hearts, and you may come away from the Throne
of grace as those that have had some feeling of Gods love in your Consciences,
and are persuaded that he will accept you, and do you good in Jesus Christ.

Again observe, There should be an Amen to our praises, as Observat. 10
well as to our prayers, that we may express our zeal and affection to Gods
glory, as well as to our own profit; many with the Leapers will say Amen, to
Jesus, Master have mercy on us, but we are not as ready to say Amen, to this to
whom be glory, etc. our Hallelujahs should sound as loud as our Supplications,
and we should as heartily consent to Gods praises, as to our own requests.

Lastly, In desiring the glory of God to all ages, we should Observat. 11
express both our faith and love, faith in determining that it shall be, and
love in desiring that it may be so with all our hearts, both are employed to the
word Amen; it will be so what ever changes happen in the world, God will be
glorious; the Scene is often shifted, and furnished with new Actors* but still
God has those that praise him, and will have to all eternity. Well then, let
your faith subscribe, and put it to its seal to the glory of God in Christ: and
let earnest love interpose: Lord let it be so, yea Lord let it be so; heartily
desire it, and with the whole strength of your souls; set to your seals without
fear, it is a request that cannot miscarry, and follow it with your hearty
acclamations; the world shall continue no longer, when God shall have no more
glory by it; here you may be sure you pray according to Gods Will, and
therefore may take it for granted* only follow it earnestly, say, Lord what
ever become of us, and our matters, yet let thy Name be glorified: Amen, Lord
let it be even so. Now

Blessed be his glorious Name for ever, and let the whole earth be filled with
his glory: Amen, and Amen, Psalm. 72. 19.
FINIS.
An Alphabetical Table.
A
ABuse of the Gospel, p. 206, 207, 208, 209. see Grace. Adultery how
displeasing to God, 327, 328, 329, 330. How defiling to man, 345, 346. Ambition
breeds faction, 405. engages men against Magistracy and Ministry, 405, 406
Angels, the bad, their sin, 275, 276, 277, 278, 279, 280. Uses of it, 280, 281,
282, 283, 284. Their* punishment of loss, 284, 285, 286, 287, 288. Uses of it,
288, 289, 290, 291, 292. of Sense, 292, 293, 294, 295. Uses of it, 296, 297,
298, 299 Their punishment further amplified, by darkness, 299, 300, 301, 302.
Uses of it, 303, 304, 305. Their punishment will be greater at the day of
Judgment, 306, 307, 308 Angels the good, how ready they are to defend a good
cause, 363, 364, 365. Their Ministry about the Saints, 365, 366, 367, 368, 369,
370. Uses of it, 370, 371, 372. There is an Order among the Angels, 372, 373.
Their holiness, 380, 381, 382. The Uses of it, 382 383, 384* Apostasy
dangerous, 421 422. Apostles, their Office and Privileges, 484. Application,
how many degrees of it there are beneath assurance 533. Assurance, whether Gods
children always have it, 16, 17, 18, 19. How far necessary to our hope and
comfort, 532, 533.
B
IN what respect a wicked man is as a Beast, 388, 589. Spiritual Blessings* the
best blessings 68, 69.
C
EFfectual Calling the nature and uses of it, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. An
evidence of our Election 15, 16. How it may be known 18, 19, 20. Notes of it,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. Carnal men ill skilled in consequences, 207, 208
Church admissions into it should not be too easy, 170, 171. The respect due to
Church Officers, 339, 340, 355, 356. Christ, eternal life is of his bestowing,
535. Comforts thence, 536. Christ will be glorious at the day of Judgment,
553. He is a Savior, and how, 227, 228. His threefold Office, 229, 230. His
Godhead proved, 221, 222, 223, 230, 231, 232, 233. How he may be denied both
in Opinion and Practice, 234, 235, 236 237, 238, 240. He is Lord and Master,
224. Lord and Jesus, 224 225, 226. Civility distinct from holiness, 40, 41, 42.
Communion with God is the ready way to know his mind 436. Communion with God is
the ready way to know his mind, 436. Conference an help to perseverance, 506.
Covetousness the root of Sect-making, 404. It Is a violent headstrong lust,
404, 405.
D
DReams of Carnal men, especially* Opinionists, 341, 342, 343, 344.
E
ERror disposes to uncleaness, and impurity of life, 344, 345. 417, 418, 419.
Makes men unruly, and anti* Magistratical, 346, 347, 348 349, 350. Erroneous
persons usually sensual, 397. Errors end in shame, 426, 427. Erroneous persons,
and Libertines are usually bloody, 402, 403. See Seducers. Error in judgment,
whether punishable by the Magistrate, See Magistrate. Reproofs of Error should
be seasoned with love, 482. Errors fall not out by chance, but according to the
certain pre ordination and fore* knowledge of God, 175, 176, 178, 179.
F
FAction brings men to ruin, 406. Faith to be contended for, that duty
opened and pressed, with the causes incident discussed, 158, 159, 160, 161,
162, 163 164, 165, 166, 167, 168. Faith of Christians an holy faith, 505, 506.
Fear of Gods wrath, its use, 543 When it is slavish, and when not, 544 Feasts
should be seasoned with grace, 411. Feeding, what fear and caution to be used
therein, 412, 413, 414. Formality what, and how known, 42, 43, 44. Evils
foretold are more comportable, 488.
G
GRace restraining, 44. Grace common, how differenced from saving 44. 45, 46.
Grace of God, how it may be abused, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209. Reasons of
this abuse, 210, 211. Kinds of it, 211, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216. Disswasives
from it, 216, 217. Signs of it, 218, 219, 220. Growth in Grace, reasons
persuading to it, 118, 119, 120, 121. Observations about it, 122, 123, 124,
125, 126, Uses, 127. Necessity of it, 504, 505.
H
HEll described, 331, 332. and 429, 430, 431. Hope, the nature of it, 526, 527,
528, 529. the influence it has on our perseverance in a state of grace, 529,
530 531. Uses of it, 531, 532. Means to get it, 532, 533.
I
THe Devil loves Idolatry, 573, 574, 575, 576. Dead bodies of the Saints abused
to Idolatry, 376 377, 378. Judgments ancient are our warnings, 241, 242 243.
and 406, 407. The impartiality of Divine Judgments, 243, 244. They come on
places for the peoples sake, 324, 325, 326. Fellowship in evil, brings on
fellowship in Judgments, 326, 327. The day of Judgment is a great day, 308,
309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 321. The doctrine
of it ancient, 435, 436. We should be mindful of it, 436, 437. The Process of
that day described, as to the conviction of sinners, 441, 442, 443. The coming
of Christ to Judgment must be looked for, 525, 526, It Is a joyful day to the
godly, 553, 554. Saints Judge the world together with Christ, 437, 438.
Infirmities and Iniquities differenced, 444.
K
KEeping that grace we have received, is our duty, 514. What need there is of
care and caution therein, 515, 516, 517, 518, etc.
L
LAtter times evil, 488 A Levelling humor no new thing, 406, Life eternal,
536, 537. Love to God, the nature of it, 96, 97, 98. Reasons persuading to it,
98, 99 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113,
114. Evidences of it, 115, 116, 117. Decay of Love to God, how easy, and yet
how dangerous, 418, 419. Whence it proceeds, what is decay of love to God,
519, 520, 521. Preservatives against it, 521, 522, 523. They that Love Christ,
look for his coming, 523, 524. Whether they always be in this frame, 524, 525.
Love from Christians one to another, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133. Lusts, what they
are, 467, 468. What it is to walk after them, 468, 469. 489, 490. This a note of
unregeneracy, 469, 470. Disswasives from them, 470, 471, 472, 473, 474.
Directions about the suppression of them, 474, 475, 476.
M
WHether the Magistrate may interpose in the case of Error and how far, 350,
351, 352, 353, 354. Magistracy and Magistrates not to be despised 354, 355.
Magistrates duty about the truth, 167, 168. Mercy of God to sinners set forth,
72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82. Uses of ^^, 82, 83, 84, 85. How we
may wrong Mercy, 86, 87, 88. Great Mereies abused, bring great Judgments, 251,
252. Ministers should be temperate, 410, 411. Stars, but not wandering stars,
427, 429, 429. They are Remembrancers, 245, 246, 247. Their Office ancient,
434, 435, etc. Murmuring, what it is, 447, 448. The kinds of it, 448, 449, 450,
451, 452. The causes of it, 453, 454. The evil of it, 454, 455, 456. Murmuring
at the times taxed, and stated, with remedies against it, 457, 458, 459, 460
461, 462. Murmuring in a private case, with remedies against it, 463, 464, 465.
Particular remedies for particular cases 465, 466, 467.
N
NAtural men left to themselves, grow to be more corrupt, 397.
P
PEace of God, what i^ is, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93. Uses of it, 93, 94, 95, 96.
Of the Doctrine of Perseverance, how Christ is concerned in it, 52. Nature of
it, 53, 54, 55, 56. The grounds of it, 57, 58, 59. Uses of it, 60, 61, 62, 63,
64, 65. When to apply the comfort of it, 65, 66, 67. Power of God, to keep us a
relief to the soul, and how, 547, 548, 549. Praying in the holy Ghost opened at
large, with Reasons and Uses, 506, 507, 508, 509, 510. Pride in them of low
degree is less tolerable, 361, 362, 363. Proud men for advantage most fawning,
478 479. Presentation of the Elect by Christ at the last day 549, 550, 551,
552, Who are then faultless, 552, 553.
R
RAiling and Reproaches, especially in controversies about Religion, most
culpable, 384, 385, 386, 387, 388, 389. Cautions about it, 390, 391, 302.
Reproofs managed with compassion, 537, 538. The difference to be observed in
the dispencing Reproofs, 538, 539, 540, 541. When severi^y is to be used in
them, 542, 543. Reprobation, the dostrine of it asserted, vindicated, and
applied, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188. Repetition
necessary, 249, 250. Remembrance of truths, if seasonable, a great help, 482,
483. Respect to persons a sin, 479. Reward, we may look to it, 531.
Retaliation, Gods way of punishing, 432.
S
SAints fittest to preserve, propagate, and defend the truth, 155, 156, 157,
158. Sanctification, the nature of it, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. Reasons
why it should be looked after, 35, 36, 37, 38. The bad estate of the enemies of
it, 39, 40. How God the Father is Interested in it, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52.
Salvation, how common, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141. Seducers, their pretenses, 171,
172, 173. are like clouds without rain, 415, 416. Boaster, 423, 424 Unsettled
and uncertain in their opinions, 424, 425. Restless 425. Turbulent, 425, 426.
They bewray themselves by their affected expressions, and uncouth expressions,
477. Are apt to insinuate with great persons, and men of power and interest,
479, 480. Admire them of their own party, 680. Scriptures, Providence of God
about them in writing, and preserving them from age to age, 147, 148, 149, 150,
151. Use of it, 152. The office of the Church about the Scriptures, 152, 153,
154. The Scriptures a perpetual settled Rule, our duty to be acquainted with the
Scriptures, 247, 248. Truth of Scripture evidenced by accomplishment of
prophesies, 408, 409. Scoffing a common sin in the latter times, 488, 489. a
great sin, 489. Sensuality tends to death and corruption, 399, 400. Sensual
persons the spots and stain of Christianity, 408, 409. Sensuality makes men
secure, 412, and impudent 413. Sensual persons have little of the Spirit, 501,
502, 503. Sensuality, what it is, 499 500. Evil of it, 500, 501, 502.
Separation, the sinfulness of it when unjust, 492, 493, 494. When it is unjust,
493, 494, 495, 496, 497, 498. Separatists are often Sensualists, 498. Service
of Christ, 2, 3. The honor of it, 4. Nature of it, 5, 6, 7, 8. Sins of Great
Ones easily imitated, 328. Sin is never at a stay, 330, 331, 421. A defilement
345. It Is a bold contest or daring of God, 378, 379, 380. It turns a man into
a Beast, 398, 399. Men sin with earnestness, 404. Dangerous condition of a
secure sinner, 544, 545 Sodoms destruction is the Worlds example, 332, 333,
334, 335, 336, 337.
T
TErrors of the Law, how differently dispensed, 17, 18. Truth usually slandered
out of Ignorance, 395, 396.
V
UNbelief, the hainousness of it, 253, 254, 255, 256. Discovertes of it, 255,
256, 257, 258, 259. Particular aggravations of it, 259, 260, 261, 262. The
kinds of it, 263, 264, 265. Reigning Unbelief, with its notes 264, 265, 266,
267. The relics of it in the godly, with notes of it, 267, 268, 269. The Cure
of it, 269, 270, 271, 272. Unfruitfulness an ill sign, 419. How to avoid it,
420. Ungodliness what, in all the branches of it, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194,
195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201. Remedies against it, 201, 202, 203, 204. A
chief thing taken notice of in the day of Judgment, 443, 444.
W
Wisdom of God what it is, 555. Proofs of it, 555, 556, 557. Uses of it, 558,
559. How God is only Wise, 559, 560, 561, 562. Treasures of Wisdom in Christ,
562, 563. Words brought into judgment, 445, 446. Word of God like rain, 414,
415. Generals, there should be applied, 434, 487. Wicked men in all ages are
still the same, 401, 402. Writing an help to the Church, 134, 135, 136, 137.
Writings of others, how they should be made use of, 484, 485.
Z
ZEal for God, quickened by Interest in God, 220, 221.
The names of such places of Scripture, as are occasionally explained and
opened in this Treatise.
Genesis.
Chap. Verse Page 4. 19. 492 32 25 507, 508 48 16 367

Exodus.
Chap. Verse Page 15 11 36 32 7 244 34 5, 6 73 7 79, 80

Leviticus.
Chap. Verse Page 25 23 65

Job.
Chap. Verse Page 11 12 348 31 34 193

Psalms.
Chap. Verse Page 1 5 201 6 312 2 10, 11 168 27 8 19, 20 78 38 82 103 21 369
119 57 25 75 485 93 22 176 60, 61 141 2 507

Proverbs
Chap. Verse Page 1 25, 26 13 16 9 312 26 4, 5 388, 389

Ecclesiast.
Chap. Verse Page 7 10 457, 458 459 16 120 12 1 105

Canticles.
Chap. Verse Page 5 6 21, 22

Isaiah.
Chap. Verse Page 28 21 73 45 22, 23 225, 309 550, 551 53 11 109 57 17 201

Jeremiah.
Chap. Verse Page 4 10 217 23 33 446 447 31 9 23, 24 32 40 56, 57

Hosea.
Chap. Verse Page 4 11 329 7 14 33

Jonah.
Chap. Verse Page 4 2 74

Zephan.
Chap. Verse Page 1 11 370

Malachi.
Chap. Verse Page 1 14 199 2 15 213

Matthew.
Chap. Verse Page 5 22 585, 586, 587 6 2 33 33 68 46 131 7 16 417 10 25 278 28
544 16 18 426 22 109 19 27, 28 309 20 16 10 23 36 98, 99 24 35 244 24 70 30 311
31 310 26 53 368 9 44 331

Luke.
Chap. Verse Page 2 14 72, 89 40 121 11 8 with 84, 85 18 5 with 84, 85 19 16 87

John
Chap. Verse Page 6 39 59 10 3 14 28 54 12 44 49 13 10 29 34 131 14 1 49 14 17
131 16 8 20

Acts.
Chap. Verse Page 12 15 67

Romans.
Chap. Verse Page 2 14 34 5 9 189, 190 8 16 84 26 504, 511, 513 10 3 14 11 29
57 35 83 18 19 313

1 Corinthians.
Chap. Verse Page 3 3 26 13 426 6 18 328, 345 11 12 55 12 31 63 13 1 275 15
from 24 to 28 316

2 Corinthians.
Chap. Verse Page 1 3 72 1 3 73 22 59 5 19 90, 91

Galatheans.
Chap. Verse Page 3 4 516 5 17 445 24 471

Ephesians.
Chap. Verse Page 4 1 25, 26 4, 5, 6 129, 130 5 3 19^ 16 458 18 502 26 29, 36
27 36

Philippians.
Chap. Verse Page 3 7 41

1 Thessalonians.
Chap. Verse Page 4 7 12 16 310 5 23 30, 491

2 Thessalonians.
Chap. Verse Page 2 2 163, 437

1 Timothy.
Chap. Verse Page 3 6 277 6 18 63

2 Timothy.
Chap. Verse Page 2 16 541 3 from 1 to 5 403

Titus.
Chap. Verse Page 2 11, 12, 469, 470 471, 472 3 5 535

Hebrews.
Chap. Verse Page 1 14 91 6 4, 5 45, 46 19 530 7 25 58 9 12 ibid. 10 14 ibid.
12 14 38

1 Peter.
Chap. Verse Page 2 9 44 3 21 470

2 Peter.
Chap. Verse Page 1 3 103 11 119 3 11 444 3 Chap. tot. 316, 317

1 John.
Chap. Verse Page 3 3 38 8 39, 469 9 62 23 131 4. 10 108 5 10 253

Revelations.
Chap. Verse Page 2 5 522 20 12 271, 441

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 31. line 33. for halting read Hastening. p. 6^. l. 32. for surrection r.
surreption. p. 84 l. 2. for ^hy r. thy for and also r. and so. p. 92. l. 4. add
may be. p. 95. l. 16. for suiteth not r. smites not and s. 23. for up r. upon
p. 104. l. 33. ^ for benefit r. bonefire p. 105 l. 36. for awe r. aca p. 115.
l. 21. for Hulking r. hucking p. 126. l. 4. far last of all r. lust of all p.
128. l. 26. r. one with us in Christ p. 133. l. 2. for wards r. cords p. 134.
l. last. before helps add must use p. 135. l. 11. for uniting r. writing p.
136. l. 17. for care r. calling ibid. for Jeremy r. Jerome p. 138. l. 19. for
righteous r. righteousness p. 140. l. 25. for Mollifica, r. Millificas p. 143.
l. 4. for not r. but p. 141. l. 25. for Gon^ r. Love p. 148. l. 37. for ancient
r. eminent p. 158. l. 25. add have p. 169. l. 3. for the help r. ^n help p.
178. l. 22. for men foollish r. men fool it p. 28^. l. ^7. for security r.
severity p. 189. l. 28. for his r. this p. 198. l. 30. r. not accept of it p.
199. l. 36. for though to r. thought that p. 200. l. 9. for righteous to the
last r. righteous from the East for store r. stone p. 204. l. 27. for when he
r. which is l. 22. for commit. r. comprise p. 208. l. 35. for world r. word p.
218. l. 13. blot out she is p. 221. l. 2. for meet r. near l. 7. for heart r.
harth p. 222. l. 17. for sex r. sects p. 224. l 20. for wave r. roar p. 231. l.
11. for mothers right r. another right p. 239. l. 33. for will r. swill p.
239. l. 37. for those r. chose p. 278. l. 2. for assected r. asserted p. 281.
l. 36. for approbation r. rep obation p. 283. l. 33. for an image r. his image
read O preclorum illium diem, cum ad illum animarum concilium, caetumque
proficiscar! p. 199, (...) p. 324. l. 11. for all r. aim p. 324. l. 11. for
Apostles r. Apostates p. 326. for delecit r. delexit p. 331. for praestutiun r.
praesentium p. 331. l. last for being r. bearing p. 332. l. 3. for witholdeth
r. upholdeth and l. 14. for used r. and p. 334. l. 22. for times r. sins p.
337. l. 30. before otherwise add says p. 339. l. 8. for cause r. clause p.
343. 1. for immoderating r. immoderations p. 346. for vinim r. vinum p. 347. l
30. for loses r. to see the p. 351. 2^ for propose r. proper p. 355. l. 18.
for may r. many p. 358. l. 12. for alteration r. altercation p. 359. l. 18. for
try r. urge p. 362. l. 19. for your comely plain r. their comely plainness p.
366. l. 35. for sad r. Lad p. 396. l. 35 for ways r. words p. 391. l. last for
purity r. party p 355. l. 11. for drive r. draw and l. 14. opposite r. appetite
p, 400. l. 26. for the providence of Gods last judgment r. the providence of
God and the last judgment p. 409. l. 1. read, therefore when such are
discovered they are to be cast out. and l. 28. for hos. r. nos p. 418. l. 31.
for pure r. sure p. 419. l. 7. for wrackness r. looseness p. 423. l. 22. for
edification r. deification p. 444. l. 3. for command r. order and l. 9. for
pecul^tive and prastical r. Atheists speculative and practical and l. 34. for
enlivened r. unfeigned p. 448. l. 33. for take r. rake p 499. l. 30. r. will
not p. 450. l. 25. r. David though asterwards p. 452. l. 26. for said r. fair
p. 453. l. 2. for goes r. gives p. 459. l. 19. before Roman Empire add the
Pagans said that the etc. p. 464. l. 4. for derive r. deride p. 469. l. 16. for
lies r. lusts p. 475. l. 32. for lust r. last p. 480. l. 9. r. clancular p.
482. l. 9. r. contests p. 483. l. 26. r. remote p. 484. l. 20. r. quo ad hoc p.
491. l. 29. before partly r. But p. 493. l. 33 for stars r. straws p. 496. l.
19. r. separation p. 509. l. 13. for strange r. praying p. 529. l. 35. for
deadly r. worldly p. 530. l. 33. for enlivened r. entised 539. l. 16. dele two
p. 540. l. 6. r. in time p. 549. l. 4. r. presentation p. 550. l. 14. r. to
doubt.


