Die Mercurii, 26. Januar. 1647.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That Sir William Massam do
from this House give Thanks unto Mr. Marshall, for the great pains he took in
his Sermon, Preached on this day at Margarets Westminster, before the House of
Commons (it being a day of Public Humiliation) and that he be desired to
Print his Sermon, wherein he is to have the like privilege in Printing of it,
as others in the like kind usually have had.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

A SERMON PREACHED TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT:
At their late solemn Fast, Januar. 26. 1647.

At Margarets WESTMINSTER.

By Steven Marshall, B. D.

London Printed by Richard Cotes, for Steven Bowtell, at the sign of the Bible
in Pope's Head Alley. 1647.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THE Lord has cast us into times, in which the four Winds Dan 7. 2.
strive upon the great Sea; a great part of the World has little leisure for
any thing, but storming of Towns and strong holds, and taking in of Kingdoms
and Countries; in our Land of Peace, we also of late have cried out of War and
Violence; and although those Hab. 1. 2.
winds have (through Gods goodness) in a great measure ceased blustering, yet
the Sea has not left rolling; Animosities yet remain too great, Paroxysmes
very sharp, and pursuits of worldly interests, extreme eager: here like Jehu,
we drive 2 Kings 9. 20
furiously, magno conatu nugas, we throw feathers with the whole strength of
our arm: vain men! that lean too hard on a weak reed; unwise builders! who
lay too great a weight upon a slight foundation; make such trifles our
Master-peeces, that when we come to review our work, we must be enforced to
say, Materiamsuperavit opus, that we have overdone it, labored too hard for
that which satisfies not, and caused our eyes to fly upon that which is not,
and therefore that we had been more wise, if we had been Isa 55. 2. Prove 23.
5.
less earnest, and more happy, if we had not effusissimis habenis, let out
the strength of our desires and endeavors after those things, which prove
vanity and bitterness in the latter end. Odit Deus nimis vehementes impetus,
odere cives, gratior est moderatio. Because Moral virtue is circa res medias,
therefore the Philosopher rightly placed it in a Mediocrity: sure I am, the
Grace of Christ persuades to a moderation, Phil. 4. 5. Psalm. 131. 2.
a weanednesse, a remissness in suth things as these, in which we have not so
much need of the spur as of the Bridle. But if the metled horse be so upon his
speed, that he cannot be held in, it would be a piece of our best skill to
guide him in a safe way, and to turn the violent stream that cannot be stopped,
into a right channel; This was the design of my weak endeavors in this short
Sermon, to stay the man that runs so violently down the hill earth-ward and
hell-ward, and (if it might be,) to turn his face and heart, that if he cannot
with so much speed, yet with more contention and earnestness, he may get u
pthe hill heavenward. In which endeavor omne valde tuum, al thy might is too
weak, al speed tooslow, and Deuteronomy 6. 5.
greatest earnestness too faint. Against sin, all that carfulness,
indignation, fear, vehementest desire, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
and hottest zeal, yea and revenge that the Apostle speaks of, are not over
much, but only malo nodo malus cuneus, a sharper wedge for a knotty piece,
which will require our best strength to drive it in so as to pierce an hard
heart. For Gods truth, an earnest contending is not too impetuous. For the Jude
3.
Church of God, and the rearing up of Ierusalems walls, a Satagentia is not
enough; a Nehemiahs intense Nehem 4. 21, 22, 23. Luke 13 24. 2 Pet. 1. 5. 10,
10.
earnestnes is deservedly imitable. For Heaven, if by striving to enter in at
the strait gate, and by giving al diligence, at last we come to have an
abundant entrance, our labor will not exceed our reward. In this work of the
Lord, if you abound, your labor will not be in vain in the Lord: and may my
poor pains any whit herein quicken your endeavors, 1 Cor 15. 58.
to get to heaven your selves, and by your help to have others go along with
you; to enter your selves into that Kingdom, and by your authority with a
sweet violence to compel others to come in, as Luke 14 23
it is the prayer, so it will be the rejoicing of

Your humble Servant STEVEN MARSHALL.

A SERMON PREACHED To the Honorable the House of Commons at the Monthly Fast,
Januar. 27. 1647.
MATTHEW. 11. 12. And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom
of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.
THat you may the more clearly understand the scope of our blessed Savior in
these words, be pleased to observe that in the beginning The context opened.
of this Chapter, John the Baptist had sent two of his Disciples upon a message
to Christ; not for his own information, but for the confirmation of his
Disciples, who were too much addicted to himself, that they might be satisfied
in receiving Christ to be (as he was) the promised Messiah, by seeing and
hearing what he did and taught; as soon as these Disciples of John were gone,
Christ turns to the multitude, that were about him, and from the 7. verse of
this Chapter, to the 16. verse, does make a notable discourse wholly concerning
John the Baptist; and there are two parts of Christ's speech concerning John;
First,

A blaming of the levity, and inconstancy of the people, in their respect
toward John, for they had magnified him so (not long before) that they were
ready to have received him as their Messiah; but now John was grown no body
with them; this our Savior does bitterly tax. And the argument whereby he
reproves them lies in such a distribution as this is, Either you were very
foolish in magnifying John, when there was no such worth in him, or you are
extreme vain and light in withdrawing your hearts from him, that was so
worthy at first to be received: the first is not to be granted, therefore the
second must needs be true; what went you out into the Wilderness to see? was
it a Reed shaken with the wind? did you go as children do, to see rattles and
toys? no, but we went to see and hear John the Baptist; and what in him? a
man clothed in white raiment, alas, John was no Courtier; no, we went to him
as to a Prophet; I, so he was (says Christ) and more then a Prophet, the
greatest Prophet that ever the world saw, and the greater is your fault in
slighting of him.

In this as in a glass you may see the levity and inconstancy of people who
contemn him to day whom they admired yesterday, and that doctrine which this
day they esteem as a treasure they by and by abominate, because indeed
Athenian-like they embrace it not because true, but because new: thus it has
been of old, and thus it is to this day, he who to day is lifted up is to
morrow trodden down, who is now accounted cloquent is presently esteemed a
babe, rude or barbarous, and all from their sicklenesse, the Word and Ministers
are the same, but the people are changed, like sick peoples palate, who long
for that meat one day which they nauseate the next day, or as children who
delight in those toys one day which the next they throw out of the doors.

John is,

A high commendation of John, and of his Ministry, from three notable
arguments: First,

John was the Prophet, that was foretold long before by two emminent Prophets,
Isaiah, and Malachi, both of Verse 10. 14.
them showing that the Lord would send his messenger before his face, and
(says Christ) if you will believe it, this is he. John's work, he did immediately
go before Jesus Christ, as a Noble Verse 11.
man that should lead the Prince by the hand, and show him to every one, This
is he; he did not as the other Prophets hold him out in types and shadows, and
spoke of a Messiah that was to come a long time after, but as another
Christopher did carry Christ upon his shoulders, and held him out in his arms,
that every one that came near John might see him pointed out to the Lamb of
God, that took away the sins of the world; and the clearer any Ministry is
in the discovery of Christ, the more excellent it is; but yet that Christ might
set the true bounds to the honor of John's Ministry, he adds that though of
all the Prophets that ever were before him, there was none like him, yet the
least Minister after Christ should have done his work, the meanest Minister of
the Gospel had a more excellent Ministry then John the Baptist, because the
excellency of a Ministry is in the light that it carries: Now John's light did
far go beyond all that went before him; but the least Minister of the
Kingdom of Heaven, after Christ's work was done on earth, should be able so
clearly to show forth the life, death, passion, resurrection, ascension,
intercession of Christ, sending of the holy Ghost, and all those glorious
mysteries, that children might be able to understand them; and this goes far
beyond the Ministry of John the Baptist: This is the second Argument whereby
Christ magnifies the Ministry of John; the third is, that that I have chosen
for my Text.

from the days of John the Baptist the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence,
and the violent take it by force: the sum whereof is, that from John's time
there was raised up in all who truly embraced the Gospel, a servent spirit to
pursue and advance the Kingdom of Heaven with all eagerness; no Soldiers are
more violent in assaulting and taking astrong hold then John's Disciples were in
prosecuting the Kingdom of Heaven with all their might, when once it was
discovered to them.

Now all these arguments whereby Christ does extol the Ministry of John, are
intended not only as so many testimonies of honor to John, but are also so
many Arguments to prove Jesus Christ to be the true Messiah; for whatever
proves John to be the Elias, that should make his way ready for him, the same
proves Jesus Christ to be the Savior that should come unto Gods people; and
this of my Text as strong and clear as any other, because it was foretold of
him that the people should be willing in the day of his power, should come in
as plentifully as the dew out of the womb of the morning, should fly after
Psalm. 110. Esaias 60. 8.
him as the Doves to their windows. This is the commendation of John; if you
would know the fruit of all this, what this high encomium of John did work upon
the hearers, you may read in the 7. of Luke, where Verse. 29. 30. Luke 27. 30.
this same story is recorded, and the effect of it is there added, which our
Evangelist does omit, viz. that when Christ had said these things of John, the
Publicans and the rest of the people, who had before been baptized by John
Baptist, glorified God, were awakened, and brought to sorrow for their neglect
of John, and so encouraged to embrace Jesus Christ, whom John pointed out; but
the Scribes and Pharisees, the learned Doctors, and others, that had despised
the Ministry of John, did no whit regard the honor that Christ did give to
John's Ministry, and so neither accepted John the forerunner, nor Christ the
Savior, The parts and meaning of the Text.
but rejected the counsel of God against themselves; This is the sum of the
whole context, Our general observation from this commendation which our
Savior gives to John, is, that the Lord Jesus is most ready to honor Consider
this violence of the people toward the Kingdom of Heaven, First, as an honor
to John. Secondly, as a description of true Converts.
them who abase themselves for his sake. John had exceedingly abased himself,
declaring himself to be but the voice of a crier, unworthy to unloose the
latchet of Christ's shoe, making himself a footstool to exalt Christ, willing
to decrease that Christ might increase, and now Christ heaps honor upon John
abundantly, so that we may see that such as honor Christ shall be honored of
him; and that although honor fly from them who vainly seek it, yet it
follows them who fly from it. But I come to my Text, which as you have heard
is one branch of that honorable testimony which our Savior gave to John the
Baptist, which I shall desire you with me to look upon under a twofold
consideration. First,

As they are intended to be a Crown and an honor to John the Baptist; From
the days of John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence; Secondly, and principally,

We will consider these words, as they do contain a description of men, who
are rightly affected with the kingdom of heaven; The Kingdom of Heaven
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. John Baptists Ministry did
hold out; never any discovered As an honor to John, as being,
the kingdom of heaven so clearly as John did, and therefore never was there
such zeal to press into the Kingdom of heaven, as was in John's time. John's
Spirit; John came in the power and Spirit of Elias, a man of mettle and zeal,
that did the work of the Lord with all his might, and therefore the people whom
his Ministry wrought upon, were molded into John's Spirit, they were made like
unto their Teacher, and both these are by our Lord intended as a Crown to
John; From the days of John the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence. A word or
two of each of these; Take the First, a fruit of the clear light, his Ministry
held out. Whence learn,
zeal and eagerness of the people after heaven, as a fruit of that clear
discovery of the Kingdom of heaven by John's Ministry, and it affords us this
excellent lesson,

Doctrine. The clearer light any people have from Heaven, the more violent they
will be after Heaven.
That the clearer light any people do receive from Heaven, the more will their
zeal be enflamed toward heaven; never any preached heaven so clearly as John,
never any so violent in the pursuit of it, as those that received John's
Ministry; it was prophesied of John in the 1 of Luke Ver. 15, 16, 17. that he
should be filled with the Holy Ghost, and should go before the Lord to prepare
his way, and (says the Text) he shall thereby turn the hearts of the Fathers
to the Children, the hearts of the children to their Fathers, and the
disobedient to the wisdom of the wise: the meaning is this, John's Ministry
should effect this, that if Parents heretofore were ignorant of the ways of
God, and so slighted their children, for their childrens godliness sake, now
the Parents should turn to the wisdom of their children; If children
heretofore had slighted their Parents, for their wisdom and godliness, now
the children should turn to the wisdom of their Parents; the disobedient
should turn to the wisdom of the wise, whether this wisdom were found in the
Fathers, or in the children, in whomsoever wisdom should be found, the
disobedient would turn to them when Jesus Christ should be clearly discovered
to them; the Apostle in the 2 of Cor. 3. 13. lays this down most clearly and
fully, when he speaks how gloriously Jesus Christ is revealed in the Ministry
of the Gospel, he expresses the fruit of it thus; We all with open face
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image
from glory to glory; whoever does clearly see the glory of Christ in the
Gospel, according to the measure of his light, so is the measure of the
transforming of his heart into the image of the Gospel; And the reason is,
because this light does not only discover a supereminent excellency in Christ
and his ways, but also heales the will and affections, and satisfies the whole
soul with such a suitable goodness, that it can do no other but fly to it as
the Eagle to the carcass.

Application. Hereby we may learn how to judge of pretended light.
This Lesson which is of singular use for many things, I note it only to be a
direction to us, how we may try both our own and the pretended light of
others, concerning the Kingdom of heaven in our days, especially in these
late years, we have more discourse then ever of New Lights, and new Gospel
discoveries, and all our old Preachers and professors are by a great many
accounted to be legal men, Moral men, who do not see into the mysteries of
heaven, and Jesus Christ, as some of late, think themselves have attained
unto, this you know is spoke of very much amongst many people: Now I do
willingly acknowledge, that day unto day utters knowledge, and night unto night
discovers wisdom, every new day, and every new year, the nearer we come to
Christ's last appearing, will certainly discover Gospel Truths more clearly
then they have been understood before; yea, and I as willingly and readily
acknowledge every one to have received more light then formerly, or more light
then his brethren, when I see any man's heart enflamed with more zeal,
transformed into more holiness, and humility, and gratiousnesse of spirit,
then others do attain to; this is clear in my Text; A clear light did
kindle a great deal of zeal: but when you meet with any that speak of
discoveries, of glimpses of glory, and new light, and in the mean time, with
all their light and knowledge do walk licenciously, and reject the ordinances
of God, and walk in ways that are contrary to the clear dispensation, and
counsel of the Gospel, I will never fear to say, that that light what ever it
be, proceeds from the Prince of darkness, from which the Lord deliver all his
people. Secondly, as this violence of their spirit was conformity to Secondly,
a conformity to his spirit. I earn here, that the Teachers ofttimes appear in
their Disciples.
John's spirit, who walked in the power and spirit of Elias, a man of zeal, we
may learn, That the Image of the spirit of Teachers frequently appears in
their Disciples. If you search the Scriptures, you will find nothing more usual
then the people molded into the spirit of their Teachers and Rulers: It Is
worth your observation that all the Epistles written to the seven Churches,
wherein some of them are condemned to be dead, and some to be cold, and some
for loosing their first love, and some commended for their purity and
sincerity, and watchfulness, etc. all this is spoke to the Angel, that is, to
the College of Ministers to them that were their leaders; yet therein the holy
Ghost intends that Character of the whole Church, although he names only the
Angel, because of old it has been a Proverb, as is the Priest, so are the
people; like Minister, like Hosea 4. 9.
people; like Magistrate, like flock; and although no man can communicate his
own spirit unto his Scholars, but only our Lord Jesus, who can power out his
spirit at his pleasure; yet all experience shows us, that the frame of spirit
that is in superiors, whether Magistrates or Ministers, has a wonderful
influence upon the molding of those that are under them; Magistrates and
Ministers in this sense may be truly said to be set for the rising and fall of
others, their virtues and vices are imitated by them who are under them, if
they fall they draw many down with them, as the Dragon drew the third part of
the stars, and great Cedars crush many lower Trees and make them fall with
them; if Peter temporise with the Jews, his example compels others to do the
like; so also is their zeal for Gal. 2. 14.
God a great provocation to their Scholars and others who are under them; but
I intended only to point at these two things. Thirdly, in both these as a
crown of glory to John. Learn hence, The greatest glory which God puts upon
any man is to make them isntrumental in building the Kingdom of Heaven. Doct.
The third which I chiefly aim at in this first consideration of the words,
is, That this excellent spirit that was found in the people, is here set upon
the head of John the Baptist as his Crown, this is made John's glory, that the
Epoche of a new world, or a newface of a Church did take the date from the
Ministry of John; From the days of John the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence; and the Lesson that I observe from it is,

That the greatest glory that ever the Lord sets upon any whom he uses is,
that the Kingdom of Heaven is advanced by their Ministry or service. This I
think you see plain in the Text, and this I shall endeavor a little to open
and apply unto you: it is true, that when the servants of God are faithful,
they are accepted with God, and shall be glorious with him, though there be no
success of their labors; the Prophet Isaiah says, though Israel be not
converted, and Judah not gathered, yet I shall be glorious with my God; and
Paul says, We (that is, we faithful Esav. 49. 5. 2 Cor. 2. 15.
Ministers) are a sweet savor unto God, in them that perish, as well as in
them that are saved: the servants of God lose not their labor with God, when
they are unprofitable toward man; but if the Lord do please to use any as
means to advance the Kingdom of Heaven, he never conferres a greater glory
upon any of his creatures: Daniel faith in the 12. of Daniel, whether they be
Magistrates or Ministers, or private men, They that turn many to
righteousness, Dan. 12. 3.
shall shine like the Stars; you know the Stars are the brightest part of the
whole Creation; they that are means to win people to righteousness, shall
shine like Stars. Observe also what an honorable name the Lord gives to such in
the 58. of the Prophecy of Isaiah: Thou shall be called the repairer of the
breach, the restorer of paths to walk in, the Esaias 58. 12.
raiser up of the foundations for many Generations: intimating that a greater
name of glory cannot be given them. There is an excellent story in the sixth
Chapter of the Prophecy of Zechariah, the Lord appointed that Joshua the high
Priest, (who was a type of Christ, and was then building the Temple, and
setting up the worship of God) should have crowns of Gold and Silver set upon
his head, typifying thereby the glory that shall be set upon the head of the
Lord Jesus, that is the great builder of his (...). ^. 10. 14 opened.
Church: but in the same Chapter the Lord commanded the Prophet to take of them
that are of the captivitic, and names Helem, and Tobijah, and Hen, and some
others, who (as some Interpreters) think were Ambassadors sent by the rest of
the scattered Jews to bring their oblations; active men that came to help
forward the work of God: others think they came as private men enflamed with
zeal to set a good example unto others, and brought their Silver and Gold that
they might further the work that was in hand; implying thus much, that these
excellent men to whom God had given a spirit to help forward that work, and
had brought their Silver and Gold, and other gifts, the Lord would have their
gifts turned into Crowns, and have their names written upon their Crowns, and
these should be hung up in the Temple of God, as an everlasting memorial of
the glory that God put upon these forward men. Truly thus does the Lord deal
with all his servants, if he give the talents of authority, of Magistracy, of
Ministry, of wisdom, of wealth, or whatever may be useful, to any, and they
obtain a heart to employ these to advance the Kingdom of Christ, the Lord
turns their talents into crowns, and engraves their names upon their crowns,
and hangs them up as a memorial before the Lord: and this I could show you out
of 100. examples in the Scripture, especially of those two sorts of great
instruments, Magistrates and Ministers, that it has been the greatest glory
that ever God put upon any of them, that they have bent themselves to advance
the Kingdom of Heaven; What is the great glory of Moses? but that he brought
Israel out of bondage, and brought them into a covenant with God, and gave them
statutes, and oracles, and ordinances; What is the glory of Joshua? but that
he did plant Israel in their own possession, and brought them into a
covenant, and there set them into a way that they served God all his days:
What was the glory of David? but that being raised (from being a Shepherds
boy) to be a King, he did do good unto Gods people, and provided beyond all
measure, whatsoever might build a Temple for God, and set the orders to the
Priests, and enabled the servants of God to serve him with liberty and
cheerfulness: And what was Solomon's, but the building Gods house, etc? And so
I might go on with Asa, and Iehosaphat, and Josiah, and Ezrah, and Nehemiah,
all these great Worthies, their glory has been that the Kingdom of God was
advanced by them: the like of Ministers, Iehojada the Priest, buried among the
Kings, because he had done good to Israel, and honored God and his house, he
had helped Religion wonderfully forward; and John the Bap is it here in my Text,
it was prophesied of him by the Angel, He shall be great in the sight of God,
John shall be a very great man; Alas, what was John's greatness? he was a
Priests son, lived in a kind of Hermits life, and went in a leather girdle,
and eat country fare, and went in course apparel: wherein was his
greatness? It was this, many of the hearts of the childen of Israel shall he
turn unto the Lord his God; and so Samaria it is Philips crown, and all the
countries and cities that Paul won to Jesus Christ are so many crowns to
him: and you shall read of the Church, the woman in the twelfth of the
Revelations when she was clothed with the Sun, that is, Christ Jesus her
Lord, his rightcousnesse was her glorious raiment, yet she had a crown of 12.
Stars upon her head, that is, the 12. Apostles of Christ, that had labored to
bring her to that light and grace: these were set upon the Churches head, and
she wore them as a crown: Many more instances might be given, but to clear
it a little further, consider but these two grounds for it: First,

R. 1.
Who ever are isntrumental in advancing, and building up, and furthering the
Kingdom of Heaven, the Lord gives them to partake with himself, in that which
is his own greatest glory, and the greatest glory of his Son, the Lord Jesus
Christ, when Satan had ruined mankind, and himself become the God upon earth,
and drawn all men off from God to worship Devils, the great design of God was
to set up another Kingdom, that should be called the Kingdom of God the
Kingdom of his Christ, the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, the Kingdom of Heaven;
and for the erecting of this, Christ did all his work, came from Heaven, became
a man, died, rose again, sent out his Spirit, it is the great design of
Heaven, that this Kingdom should be erected and advanced; Now when any are
found to help forward this, they are associated with the Lord Jesus, in this
great Work; and therefore you shall read in the Prophecy of Obadiah, the last
verse of it, where the Lord speaks of winning both the Jews and other Nations
home to Christ, Saviors shall come upon Mount Zion, Saviors shall be there;
Who are they? the Jewish Interpreters say, that the Saviors there meant are,
Rex Messiah, and ejus socii; these Saviors are, King Messiah R. D. Kim^.
and his Companions that should work with him; and most interpreters do agree,
that the Saviors are the Apostles, and the Apostolical men, and others, that
should bring 2 Cor. 6. 1. 1 Cor. 1. 6. Philip. 2. 30.
the people homeagain to God, and help to convert the Nations, the Lord calls
them by the name of Saviors, and many are said to be fellow-workers with
Christ, and the Apostle says of Timothy, See that Timoty be without any
molestation with you, (in the ^. of the Cor. 16) for he works the Work of God,
as I do; and of Epaphroditus, it is said of him, that for the Work of Jesus
Christ, he was sick unto death; the work then that they are employed in, to
build up the Kingdom of Heaven, is the same work that God and the Lord Jesus
Christ work: and can there be a greater glory communicated unto any creature,
then to be took into association with God, in a service that is for his
highest glory? Secondly, as they are associated with God, so

Reas. 2.
They make the people to whom they are isntrumental, beholding to them, for
the greatest benefits that people are capable of receiving; Seneca says, Nihil
in rebus humanis praeclarius quam de republica been mereri, There is nothing in
all the affairs of mankind more honorable then to deserve well of the
Commonwealth, to be isntrumental of good to others, it is the glory of man in
all humane societies; and you shall find that Tubal-Cain, and others that did
invent instruments of Brass, and Music, Genesis 4.
are numbered among those that have done good to the world: and Hezekiah has a
Crown of praise, that he ^ Kings 20.
did build a poole, and brought water to the City of Jerusalem: But for a man
to be isntrumental to help forward the Kingdom of Heaven, to advance it, to
draw people out of the snares of Satan unto God, to help them with the pardon
of sin, and right to everlasting life, these are mercies with a witness, no
wonder though the Galatians could have pulled out their eyes, and have given
them to Paul, when he had been a means to help them to the knowledge of Christ,
and so to Heaven: so that whether you regard the glory of being associated with
God, or the good that they convey unto others, there can be no such honor, as
to be isntrumental in helping forward the Kingdom of Heaven. Appli.


To the Parliament to intend this work above all other.
This Lesson is of excellent use, especially to two sorts of men, that are or
may be publicly isntrumental in it, I mean Magistrates and Ministers, I am
called at the present to speak only to the first, therefore I Will say nothing
of the latter, but for you Honorable and beloved, that are the Patriots of the
Kingdom, is it not in your heart, to do all the good that is possible to poor
England? I dare say you are deeply affected with the distresses of it, and
would not count your lives dear, so you might but promote the good of it;
shall I tell you what that thing is, which above all things in the world, will
be advantageous to England, and glorious to your selves, lay the cause of the
Kingdom of Heaven to your hearts, more then ever you have done, endeavor to
be isntrumental to make Religion thrive and prosper, that the Kingdom of
Heaven may suffer violence under your service; so shall your names be engraven
with the name of God, and numbered among the Saviors of this Land: Let me speak
freely to you, you have contended long and vehemently for rescuing the Kingdom
of England from the bondage and pressures that it lay under, and that England
might be a free people, herein you have wrought in the fire, and because the
cure has been hard and costly woe and alas (I must speak it) the Patients are
weary of it, and could rather wish to be under their old Soars, then under
such Physicians, and are ready to say with the murmuring Israelites, Let us
make us a Captain and return again unto Egypt, would be again at their flesh
pots and onyons though under bondage: your selves do know how much ingratitude
is showed, and all because there is not that event and success that has been
hoped for, but would the Lord make you isntrumental to advance the Kingdom of
Heaven really, there should never be found one among those that should partake
the benefit of it, that would be weary of you, but would for ever bless the
Lord for you. If the generations to come, and future Chronicles may but be able
to say, From the days of such a Parliament, the hearts of the people of
England were turned to God, from the days of such a Parliament the Ministry
was reformed, settled, encouraged, with countenance, with maintenance;
Universities were reformed, heresies, blasphemies, every thing contrary to
Christ's truth, was discountenanced, suppressed, beaten down, and the glory of
the Lord Christ was laid to heart; might but this be said of you, after all
your toil and blood, and after all your being cast down; and laden with
reproach and scorn, your names should revive, your glory should be eternal,
this and the everlasting world would number you among the repairers of the
breaches of Gods people, and you shall be called Saviors of the Kingdom of
England, if the Lord do but direct you to do this work; but in the mean
time, should the Lord leave you that it should be otherwise, that the affairs
of Christ should prove retroomnia, that the Kingdom being overspread with
blasphemies and heresies, and the poisoning of the souls of people, etc.
should be concurrent with your work, and you not endeavor to administer the
best helping hand you can to it, it would be said of you, as Ecclesiastical
writers do of one age since Christ that was overspread with heresies, and
destitute of worthy men to oppose them, it was called Infoelix seculum, an
unhappy age: so would you be accounted Infoelix Parliamentum, an unhappy
Parliament: if this should happen under you, and you not endeavor to the utmost
to redress it. I pray the Lord, and it is my prayer when ever I can pray, that
God would give that glory to you, and set that crown upon your heads, that
with Joshua and Zerubbabel, and and the rest of those whom God has counted fit
to be numbered among his Worthies, you might make this the great design, that
from the days of this Parliament, the Kingdom Heaven might be set up, and
flourish in England: and so I have done with the words in the first
consideration of them, as they are a crown set upon the head of John the
Baptist: From the days of John the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence.

I now proceed to the words as they contain a description of a people really
converted and brought home to Christ, The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence,
and the violent take it by force; take but the Rhetoric off from these words,
they signify no more then that which is said in the 1 of Luke 16. Many of the
children of Israel he shall turn to the Lord their God: ^ Consider the ^ext as
a desciption of true Converts.
many shall be converted by him, but the holy Ghost expresses it in these
Metaphorical terms, because they do fully set out the true Genius of every
soul who is aright instructed of the Kingdom of Heaven. In the words there
are two things:

John's Ministry, in these words, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence.
Secondly,

the violent take it by force. For the first, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence, wherein there are two things to be interpreted.

What is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven.

What by the Kingdom of Heavens suffering violence.

What is meant by Kingdom of Heaven.
and at least in 100. other places of the New Testament, is meant the
administration of the Covenant of grace, after Jesus Christ was exhibited in
the flesh; the last and best administration of the covenant of Grace; The
Kingdom of Heaven is come to you; The Kingdom of Heaven is like a Merchant
man; The Kingdom of Heaven shall be taken from you, etc. all these expressions
are nothing but the administration of the Covenant of Grace under Messiah; and
this is called the Kingdom of Heaven, not only in opposition to the kingdoms
of the world, other politic Commonwealths, but principally (I think) in
opposition to the spiritual kingdom of the Devil, which is the kingdom of
darkness, and leads people to destruction, and this administration is called
the Kingdom of Heaven, partly, because the Prince and Sovereign Lord of it,
is the Lord from Heaven, and has his throne in Heaven, and partly because all
the subjects of it, are made Heavenly in their conversations; Phil. 3. 2^.
partly, because all the good things communicated to them do come from Heaven;
and principally, because the Kingdom of glory, that is to be enjoyed in
Heaven, and the administration of the Covenant of Grace here upon earth, are
all but one and the same thing, only that is the upper Region, this the
inferior, there is the Metropoliticall City, and these are (as it were) the
Suburbs, and the Country Villages, but all is one Kingdom; there is nothing
there, but what is enjoyed here, only with these two differences, that here the
Kingdom of Heaven is mixed and imperfect; mixed with corruption, mixed with
affliction, and the graces of it not perfectly communicated; and there it is
simple, and pure, and entire, without any defect or mixture; and here it is
administered in ordinances, and received by faith, there it is administered
immediately, and enjoyed by sight; but otherwise I know no difference, Heaven
there, and Heaven here to the Saints is all but one Kingdom; therefore it is
called the Kingdom of Heaven.

2. What is meant by the Kingdom of heaven suffering violence.
Secondly, and what is meant by the Kingdom of heaven suffering violence; I
confess some Interpreters say that Heaven suffers violence, that is, suffers
persecution; adversaries do rush upon it: but so it cannot be said, that the
violent take it, for these violent men do not take but lose the Kingdom of
Heaven, who persecute it: but my Text speaks of such violent men as take and
enjoy it. The Arminans say, that by the suffering violence is meant, the
persecuting of it to the taking of it away, not the taking of it to themselves,
but the taking of it away from others, and will not let people lay hold upon
it: nor enter into it, but our Lord himself interprets the meaning in the 16.
of Luke 16. Luke 16. 16.
where that of this story is related: There Christ says, and from the days of
John the Kingdom of God is preached, and every one presses into it: So that
the suffering of violence here, is, that the Kingdom of Heaven is assaulted by
violence of those that will have it, what ever it cost them: all who are
rightly informed and instructed in the Kingdom of Heaven, do with contention
and earnestness of spirit, break through all difficulties, use all diligence,
that they may enjoy the Kingdom of Heaven as their portion, what ever it cost
them. In a word, what Paul says of his own practice, Philip. 3. is a clear
interpretation of this Text, I do Phil. 3. 8, etc.
count all dross and dung, that I might gain Christ, I make shipwreck of all,
I look at nothing that I have already got, but I still look for that which is
before me, I press forward, if by any means I may attain to the resurrection
of the dead. Now you have the meaning, since John has clearly discovered the
Kingdom of Heaven, the spirits of men are so fired, that there is no taking of
them off, but with all the violence possible they all labor and endeavor to
advance it, and to get into it; and from this there are two excellent lessons
to be handled, I Will only name one of them, and handle the other. The first is,

That the administration of the Covenant of grace in the Doct. 1.
Gospel of Christ, is no other thing then the very Kingdom of Heaven: nothing
less then the very Kingdom of Heaven: let the men of the world slight it,
esteem it a bondage, a drudgery, yet it is no less then a Kingdom, yea a
Kingdom of Heaven, which does transcend all the Kingdoms of this world as far
as Heaven is above the earth: that is one; I dare say nothing of that, lest I
be prevented: the other is,

Doct. 2.
That all who are rightly affected to the Kingdom of Heaven, offer violence to
it. Violence it is a motion above the mean, beyond mediocrity, it is a motion
with greatest intention and endeavor, this is the lesson I would Preach to
you, that whoever are rightly affected to the Kingdom of Heaven do use their
utmost endeavor, and offer violence to it: let me first make it clear to you
that it is so: and then I Will hasten to the Application; That it is so, if you
please but to weigh these three or four things, it will be beyond all
question.

That every where in the Book of God, where the endeavors of men are
described who look after Heaven; 1.
these endeavors (I say) are expressed, by all the indefatigable pains that
are laid out about any thing in the world, the most laborious trade of a
Husbandman, of a Traveller, of a Warfaring man, of a Merchant are usually
brought to express the labors of men that look after heaven, yea such
exercises which are too violent for any to make a trade or ordinary practice
of, are used to set out the violence of their labor who strive for the
Kingdom of heaven as running a race, striving for masteries or victories in
the Olympic games, 1 Cor. 9. 24. etc. Know ye not that they who 1 Cor. 9. 24.
run in a race ran all, but one receives the Garland: so run that ye may
obtain, etc.

Christ says in the 14. of Luke; If any man will be Luke 14 17.
my disciple, and hate not father, and mother, and wife, and children, and
life, and all that he has, and himself also, he cannot be my Disciple. Now
certainly the Lord does not mean positively, the Gospel does not teach any man
to hate his father or his mother, or his wife or children, it is against
nature, and against the Gospel; but the Lord means comparatively, that take
all the love that they bear to their own lives, or to what ever is dear to
them, as Jacobs love to Leah was hatred, when compared with his affection to
Rachel, so all their love to these things is hatred if compared with the love
that they bear to the Kingdom of Heaven; and this Chrysostom expresses very
elegantly when he says, in his pursuit of banishment or martyrdom for Christ,
if his father should meet him and stand in his way, he would throw his father
upon the ground; if his mother lay in his way, he would tread upon his mothers
belly: meaning whatever it was, that should be an obstacle to him, they should
be all scorned and hated by him, if their interest in him should offer to stand
in competition with the affection he bore to the Kingdom of Heaven.

It is ordinary with Christ to express it thus, that whoever Luke 14 33.
Matthew. 13. ^4. 45.
minds the Kingdom of Heaven, and embraces it aright, will forsake all for
it, they sell all for it; in the 13. of Matthew, the man that found the
Treasure, sold all with joy, the man that found the pearl of great price, sold
all, and the Disciples were able to speak it, Master we have forsaken Matthew.
19. 29.
all to follow thee: How is that? how do they sell all? the meaning is, they
forsake all, First,

In their judgments, and estimation of all other things, they Phil 38.
are nothing in their thoughts, when compared with this: I account all loss
and dung for Christ. Secondly, fell and forsake all.



In their resolution and purpose of their spirit; they being prepared to part
with all, either by degrees; or all at a clap, according as their interest in
the Kingdom of Heaven does call for any of them: And as the Scripture is
plain, that it must be so, so if you look but into the examples of all that
have embraced it, you shall see de facto that it has been so; look upon the
examples, read those Holy men of God, of old, that saw not the Kingdom of
Heaven so clearly, as now it is discovered: Abraham as soon as ever this City
and Kingdom was discovered to him, left Mesopotamia, left his Father, his
kindred, the Land of his Nativity, his estate, went he knew not whither, only
to follow a word that directed him to this Kingdom: Moses whose Heb. 11. 24.
practice is epitomized in the 11. of the Heb. 24. that he did count the honor
of being Pharaohs daughters Son, he counted the pleasures of the Court of
Egypt, he esteemed the wealth of Egypt, the treasures of it, he counted them
all as nothing in comparison of this; there is the Worlds Trinity, honor,
pleasure, wealth, trodden under foot, by a man, that had but set his heart to
the Kingdom of Heaven. The time would fail me to relate unto you what all the
Worthies have done: But look a little into Christ's time, that which my Text does
more immediately intimate, what violence they used, how the people trod one
upon another, to attend upon the Ordinances: how they would tarry sometimes 3.
days together, without eating a bit of bread or drinking any thing but a cup
of water, only that they might get some acquaintance with Christ, and the way
to life; how his Disciples for sook their Callings and Nets to follow Christ,
and do what he would have them do; how Paul made shipwreck of whatsoever
was dear unto him, and pressed forward, only that this might be made good to
their souls, that Heaven was theirs; how the Virgin company who follow Christ's
loved not their lives to the death: huge Rev. 12. 11.
clouds of witnesses there are whose examples prove clearly that who ever are
rightly affected to the Kingdom of Heaven, will do what ever they can in this
work, with all their hearts, and all their might, and all their strength.
Furthermore this violence and eagerness of affection toward the Kingdom of
Heaven, in all into whose hearts the knowledge of the Kingdom of Heaven does
come,

Expresses it self in two things: First,

laboring by all means possible to make it sure to their own souls, to work
out their salvation with sear and with trembling, to make their interest in
the Kingdom of God, the unum necessarium, the one thing that is necessary, to
part with all other things, that this may be their absolute portion; that is
one, and the other,

Mountains may be made plain, al obstacles removed, al furtherances added,
which may advance the Kingdom of Heaven, that other Flesh as well as their
selves, may see the Salvation of God. Read your Bibles, I affirm it
confidently, you shall find that all that have been eager for themselves, so
far as it has lien in their lot and way, have expressed at least the same
eagerness to advance it, and set it up for others; Abraham that all his
children might know the Lord: Moses though he minded his own interest in
Heaven far beyond all the world, (as I showed you) yet preferred the salvation of
Israel before it: Lord rather raze me out of the Book thou have written then
for sake thy people; he was more for Israel then for himself. And so all those
other Worthies, David never did that for himself, nor for all his children, in
providing for them, as he did for advancing Religion, the zeal of Gods house
eat him up: and so did Asa, Iehosophat, Hezekiah, Josiah, Ezra, Nehemiah, and
many others of the old; and those of the New Testament, with what violence did
the Disciples of Jesus Christ, all of them go up and down, that they might
gain others to the Lord Christ to win them to him? how did they go about
preaching, and doing good every where: being contented to be thought vile, to
be in their wits, or out of their wits, to be made a gazing stock to men and
Angels, to be made the refuse and offscowring of the world, to be anything, so
they might promote and advance the Kingdom of Heaven? I know you are able to
prove these things yourselves, and therefore I do not insist upon them, the
ground of all this, is,

Reason. From the necessity and excellency and benefit of the Kingdom of
Heaven.
Because the Kingdom of Heaven, to all who are rightly informed in it, does
appear not only to be a matter of absolute necessity, but so absolute good,
such superlative excellency in such ravishing sweetness, such in expressible
consolation that the soul that has but once discovered it, cannot forbear,
but fly upon it, as the Eagle flies to the prey; and if with Sampson they find
this Honey comb, they must eat themselves, and give to their Father, or their
Mother, or their children, and all that are about them. If you would know what
they are, truly a little time will not so much as name them; but they are such
as these, to be delivered out of the power of darkness, and dominion of the
Devil, to be reconciled to God, to have the pardon of their sins, and the
imputation of Christ's righteousness, to be made Gods adopted sons and
daughters, to have peace with God, and peace with our conscience, and peace
with the creatures, and joy in the holy Ghost, to have all things in this world
turned to their good, and in the end to be delivered from death and hell, and
to reign with God and our Lord Jesus Christ in heaven for evermore; such
things as these, the Kingdom of Heaven does bring with it; now would you
wonder that any man should be sick of love, (as the Church said she was) that
does but see this face? we use to say that for the summum bonum, for the chief
good, excess of affection, can have no excess, the highest affection that any
living man can express, cannot be supposed to have an excess in it, when it
is for that is the superlative good of all others; I have but one Question or
two briefly to clear, and then my way is plain to the Application. It may be
demanded, First,

Quest. 1.
What use is there of a violent spirit in the pursuit of the Kingdom of
Heaven? Can we by searching find out the Almighty? is this Race to the swift?
or this Battle to the strong? does any man's eagerness and violence of spirit
purchase this at Gods hand? is it in our power, by our labor to carry it? is
not all in this work of Gods free Grace, who shows mercy to whom he will show
mercy? and to what purpose then is that violence of the spirit?

Reason.
To that I answer, it is certainly true, that no wisdom of man can search the
Kingdom of heaven out; the Vultures eye never saw it, it is a path that the
Lion never walked in, and the ways of it are hid from all flesh; it is as high
as heaven; we can do nothing, the search of it is deeper then the Center of
the earth, we cannot know it, Man knows not the price of it, neither is it
found in the land of the living; the depth says, It is not in me, and the Job
11. 7, 8: Job 28. pertorum.
Sea says, It is not in me, it cannot be gotten for gold, neither shall silver
be weighed for the price of it, it is hid from the eyes of all living; God
only understands the ways thereof, and gives it to whom he pleases, and
if any man should think that his eagerness, or violence of spirit could
purchase it, he and his labors must perish together: this is certain; but
though this be true, yet the Lord who is the free giver of it, has ordered
that it shall be sought after this manner partly as a sign and token, that
we esteem it in its due place, and partly as the means that he pleases to
bless, and his promise is, that they who seek it as silver and search for it
as for hid treasure, shall find Prove. 245.
understanding and the fear of the Lord; and besides all this, there is that
reason in nature for it, that whatever the heart does once place the greatest
felicity in, it can do no other, but it must follow it with all its might.
But it may be once again demanded.

Qu. 2.
Does not the Scripture say, it is easy? and if it be so, quors^m haec? to
what purpose should violence be ufed, to take a Fort, that will be taken
without violence? Christ says, my yoke is easy and my burden light, a slight
labor may serve for an easy yoke, a weak shoulder is enough for a light
burden: To which I answer.

Reas.
Never did yet any man read in Gods book, that the obtaining of the Kingdom of
Heaven was an easy matter; Christ-saith, it is hard to be saved, that straight
is the way, and narrow is the gate, and we must labor at it, and many will
cry, Lord, Lord, that shall not find it; many shall seek Matthew. ^^, 29. 30.
but not enter, because they strive not to enter; but neverisaith it is easy.
Indeed when once the soul has learned to conform to Christ, when they have
learned of him to be humble and meek, then Christ's yoke is easy, and so it is
in other things, if a man have given his heart to do the Devils drudgery, it
is an easy thing for him to swear, and whore, and drink, and drab, and dice,
and commit villainies, this abominable drudgery is easy to a man's spirit, that
delights in it; and to travel from country to country, to fight, and be
wounded, and all these things are easy to spirits that suit them; it was easy
for Jacob 14. years together to watch and toil, when it was for his beloved
Rachel. In all things finis dat medi is amabilitatem and facilitatem, the
pleasing end propounded and aimed at makes the means sweet and easy, though
difficult and hard in themselves: So when the love of heaven is got into the
heart of man, then it is easy with him, it is pleasing to his nature, suitable
to his spirit, to spend, and be spent, to be any thing, to do any thing, that
he might get it: but otherwise the things themselves are hard to be got: I have
nothing behind, but the Application of it, and that shall be in these two
Uses. First,

Use 1. For humiliation.
This Lesson does afford us very much matter of humiliation and mourning upon
this day of our soul affliction; and secondly, it is a Lesson that affords us
excellent direction for discharge of our necessary duty for time to come.

First, for mourning: Do all that are rightly affected with the Kingdom of
Heaven, offer violence to it, in this way that I have discovered to you? how
sad then is the condition of most in England this day? we all profess our
selves to be the children of the Kingdom, we are by a certain general
profession of Christianity, numbered among them that call our selves the
servants and followers of this Kingdom, but are we true borne, or are we
Bastards? This lesson will determine it. First,

1. How many use violence against the Kingdom of Heaven.
How many are there to be found in England, who in stead of offering violence
to get the Kingdom of heaven, do offer violence against the Kingdom of
heaven, and do all they can to rush upon the kingdom of heaven, to destroy it,
and beat it down; who do not only with the Gadarens entreat Christ to be gone
from them, but with those disobedient subjects, send him word he shall not
paign over them, and with them of Nazareth, seek to tumble him down the brow
of the hill, upon which their City was built: willing to use all labors, and
travel, yea all violence, that the Gospel and Ordinances, wherein this
Kingdom is administered, might be disgraced, crushed, banished, beaten down?
Of these men I can say no more, but this, their damnation sleeps not, they
may in words profess Christ, but certainly in their works they absolutely
deny him, and ruin will be their end; Secondly,.

2. How many are flight and lukewarm in seeking it for their own soul.
How sadly does this speak against the generality of people? yea I fear against
the greatest part of our selves, who are here before the Lord this day, and God
in mercy open al our eyes to see it, and power so much grace into our hearts,
that we may aright apprehend and be sensible what our estate is; you hear
that all who are rightly affected to Heaven, do offer violence to it in all
the ways I have opened; Brethren, do you so? say every one for your own
souls, does your conscience witness, that you offer violence to the Kingdom
of Heaven? Compare a little what violence you use for other things, and what
you use to obtain a part in the Kingdom of Heaven: Can you not watch, and
work, and toil, and spend and be spent for some earthly thing or other? For
your wealth, or your pleasure, or your honor? Do you not drive like Iehu,
furiously, as if you would break your Chariot wheels into pieces? do you not
thus for the world? And do you thus also for your immortast souls? Are you
not like David in his old age, when no cloths could make him warm? are you not
like the Egyptians when their Chariet wheels were taken off, when they drove
slowly and heavily? are you not like Snailes in the pursuit of the things of
Gods Kingdom? my heart could bleed in the serious thoughts of these things, O
wretched creatures that we are, that we should thus deceive our selves! There
is a notable story of a poor wretched woman, whose house was on a fire, and
she seeing her house would be burned down, bestir'd herself, to the utmost,
to save what she could, gets out her linen, gets out her pewter, and what
ever else she was able, and all this while this poor creature had a Babe
lying in a Cradle, which she never thought of, (indeed some others did see it,
and carry it out,) but when all was consumed, it came into the woman's mind, O
Lord (says she) I have forgot my child, I have saved my brass, and my
pewter, and my child is burnt, and fell mad immediately, at the apprehension of
her desperate neglect of her Babe; O beloved, we are (the Lord knows) no less
mad, here is a poor Tabernacle of ours, it is of a light fire, here is a World
on a fire, and a Kingdom on a fire, and we have somewhat that we would all
save, and one man says, I must have this Money, and the other, I must save so
much Land; and another, I must save such an Office; and says another, I must
get such a preferment, and in the mean time there is a poor immortal Soul,
like a Babe in a Cradle, and a Kingdom of Heaven, that is only a suitable
portion to it, this we wholly neglect, we do nothing for it; it may be, come
to Church, and hear Sermons, and join in Prayer, and attend upon Duties, but
with such dull spirits, that if a man would ask his soul the question, his
Conscience would say, this is not to strive as for masterie, this is not to run
in a race, this is not to strive as if a man would obtain: Miserable that we
are, the Kingdoms of the Earth suffer violence, our Farms suffer violence,
our Trade suffers violence, but Heaven suffers no violence; the Lord forgive
us, and help us to lay these things to our hearts, and to be humbled for them
this day: and Thirdly, yet one thing more,

3. How little zeal is found for the advancing of the Kingdom of Heaven for
the good of others.
What great cause have we to be humbled, when we look upon that other branch
of it, the little vigor and fervency of Spirit, that men have to advance the
Kingdom of Heaven, in reference to the good of others? in other things, every
good Common-wealths-man is diligent, some would advance Trade to the utmost,
and others would advance Liberty to the utmost; indeed all other things men
seek to improve them to the utmost, but O the little care is found among men to
advance the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the utmost: Many opposing it
as a dangerous thing, they say of it as Haman, of the Jews, It is not for the
Kings profit to suffer it; and others as Herod, seek to strangle it in the
Cradle; others who will not appear enemies to it, yet O how little will they
now do for it? Is it nothing to them that pass by the way to see godliness
trod under foot, to see Ministers trod down, to see Heresies and Blasphemies
spread, to see all go backward in the things of Heaven? it takes not the
hearts of a great many; God grant that many of your selves, who are our
Reformers, have not great cause to put your mouths in the dust for these things
this day, when you are before the Lord our God; you know how zealous you have
been in your own work, if you have had the like affections in advancing the
Kingdom of Christ, lift up your heads and take the comfort of it this day: but
if you like that cold Worshipper of Baal, Gideons Father, who had an Altar for
Baal, yet when one had it broken down, and he persuaded to punish him that had
done that deed, answered, Let Baal plead for himself, let him revenge his own
quarrel: so if you deal for the Kingdom of Christ, let it shift for it self.

If any of you have such a cold heart for Religion, and let it go at six and
sevens, be permitted to lie in the dust, and be deeply humbled; if not, I must
tell you from the Lord, that lie will not only not delight to use you, but he
will spew you out of his mouth, for he had as willingly have a dead Ass
offered in a Sacrifice to him, as a dull Spirit to set upon his work: for these
things let our souls be humbled this day; and that is the first use; the
second is a use of exhortation in two branches: Use 2. Exhortation in two
branches.


Is the Kingdom of Heaven a business of that nature, that all who are rightly
informed about it, will seek it violently, eagerly, with all their strength? 1.
Each to contend violently to get it.
O that the Lord would leave that impression upon every one of our souls this
day, I desire that for the time to come we might make it our only work for
our selves, to work out our salvation with fear and trembling; Would I knew
what to say, to inflame your hearts about it, would the Lord did please to open
your eyes, and show you how little the World is worth, and how little good is
to be found in it, and how far below your souls, and how much your immorall
souls are worth, and how excellent a thing the Kingdom of Heaven is, that you
might be contented with Paul for time to come, to make it your work to pursue
after it, to account all loss to win Jesus Christ, do any thing, or be any
thing, so it be in the pursuit of the Kingdom of Heaven; Much I might say, to
stir you up, but I am afraid I should be burdensome to you, and would not be
straightned in the last branch of all; and therefore I come to

An exhortation to this honorable Assembly, by whom I am called to be helpefull
to this day, that in that part of their work which concerns the Kingdom of
Heaven, they would do it with all their might, laboring to advance it, as all
those Worthies have done whom God has thought fit to register in his Book, as
men accepted with him: Beloved, if you please to open your eyes, and look
abroad into the Kingdom, into every corner of it, you will see lamentable objects
every where, afflicted creatures of all kinds, crying to you, that you would
reach out a helping and healing hand to them, but in nothing so much is the
Kingdom desolate this day, as in the things that do properly belong to the
Kingdom of Heaven, the Faith of Gods people, I mean the doctrinall part, is
woefully overthrown, in many places by blasphemous and heretical doctrines
which are got in, and sown through the cunning craftiness of them that have
lien in wait to beguil unstable s^^les the Worship of God is woefully neglected
and trodden under foot; Fast Days, and Sabbath Days, in most places not one
whit regarded, the Ministry not more contemned, nor so much under reproach in
the hottest persecutions that they have lien under heretofore, the Glory of the
Lord marvellously abused in point of Religion: England is this day an amazement
to the Nations round about it, to the insulting and rejoicing of all the
enemies of it, and the mourning and sadding of heart unto all that love it.
Could you but (as in a glass) behold the unsettled case of the Kingdom of
Heaven in this Land, you would quickly grant there is a great deal of work to
be done, by those that have any vigorous spirits, any bowels in them to roll
toward the helping forward of this great work. Now that you may administer a
healing hand, I shall endeavor to say somewhat that may quicken you up, and I
beseech you give me leave to lay before you, these following considerations:
Motives to provoke to this work.
eight things I would have you all seriously to think upon, to provoke you to
be vigorous, and violent in advancing the Kingdom of Christ: First,

zeal for God, but it is a grace of absolute necessity in all the services of
God, and so lovely, that it is the luster, and the varnish, the glosle, and
beauty of all performances unto God, that which sets them off with glory in the
eyes of God and man. Gods work requires it; every cause which concerns the
Kingdom of Heaven, must either be done with zeal, or meddle not at al with it,
a lukewarm spirit in the service of God, is worse to God, then a spirit that
will do nothing, he will spue it out of his Mouth, as abominable meat; Now
then, because Religion is a work for God, the proper cause of God, the cause
wherein his glory is most interessed, associated with God, you must needs do
it with zeal, with all vigor, and best intention of your spirit; Secondly,

lifted up your hands to the most high God, and that in the day of your
distresle, you have bound your selves by an Oath of God, and you have brought
the Kingdom into an Oath of God with you, you have sworn that you will
willingly, cheerfully, constantly, to the utmost of your power, within your
callings, beat down what is contrary to Religion, that you will study the
advancement of Reformation, according to the Word of God, and the pattern of
the best reformed Churches: this in the day of your distress, you have sworn:
you have since told the Kingdom you forget it not, you have ordered the
Ministers oftentimes to read it upon the Fast days, that it might be in the
eyes of all* Now I beseech you know, that the keeping Covenant with God is a
matter of a high concernment; and the breaking of your Covenant with man, uses
not to go unrevenged, but the breaking Covenant with God, is a thing will
never escape the wrath of God. Thirdly,

you; I told you before, you have sworn to do it, within the compass of your
calling, now it is a work within the compass of your calling, it belongs to
you; the Lord has not trusted you only with Civil liberties, and to beat
down oppression and injustice, and outward wickedness against the second
Table, (in which the Lord make you more zealous) but besides this, the things
of Gods Kingdom are committed to you. You shall read, if you look into Gods
Book, all the Worrhies whom God has taken notice of, their Crown and glory
has been, that they did beat down Idolatry, opposed and suppressed what ever
was contrary to Religion, built up Gods house, set up his Ordinances,
encouraged his Ministers, and for the doing of these things, they were
approved, commended, rewarded, and such as neglected them were by God blamed,
branded, punished: so many examples are extant in the Scripture of the Old
Testament, that I need not name them, and the same is prophesied to be done by
Magistrates under the New Testament, Kings shall be Nursing Fathers Esa. 19. 29.
to it, and Queens shall be Nursing Mothers to the Church; they shall give it
bread and milk, and provide for it, and nourish zach. 13. 3.
it: and for punishing the oppressors of it, there is a Gospel Prophecy, in
the 13. of Zechariah, When any shall prophecy falsely, his Father and Mother
that begat him, shall thrust him through, and say, Thou shall not live, for
thou speak lies in the name of God; Now then since this belongs to your
place, and work, I beseech you for the Lords sake, be zealous in it: and
Fourthly, consider,

his Kingdom, so Jesus Christ has very well deserved at your hands, to have
you vigorous in his cause, he has earned it; he is before hand with every
soul of you; look upon the zeal he showed, when he came to do your work for
you, how did he bow the heavens and come down upon the earth? and from the
throne of glory came, and lay first in the womb of a Virgin, and then in
swaddling bands in a Manger, and afterward lived a poor life, and then prayed,
and preached, and wrought Miracles, with indefatigable pains, with burning
zeal, yea, gave his life a ransom, he gave his soul to the death, that he
might be a ransom for you, and thereby Titus 2. 14.
purchase you to be a people to himself, zealous of good warkes, has he not
deserved it? I, and he has deserved it at your hands in this great work he
has set you about, in this great concussion and earth quake of the Kingdom,
wherein you have been so far employed; What mischiefs has he discovered,
which have been contrived against you? What seasonable Mercies has he sent
you? What unexpected victories has he given you? How has the Lord made
Mountains plain before you, and brought you into the condition wherein you are,
and made you enjoy that, which many times (I dare say) you were past all hope
of seeing? the Lord then deserves his cause should be thought upon by you.
Fifthly, consider,

setting up of the Kingdom of Heaven, the advancing of it, is a matter of the
greatest concernment unto the whole Kingdom, of any thing that ever you can be
employed in; when you have thought all that lies within your compass, there is
nothing of that concernment to the Kingdom, as the Kingdom of Heaven is; for
why? you know the greatest part of our well being here upon earth, lies in the
things of Gods Kingdom, and the whole sum of our everlasting well being in
Heaven to eternity, is wholly to be taken from the Kingdom of Heaven, not from
any outward things that you can help us with; and as the things concern us
for our well being, so these are the things will bring other things with them;
set up the Kingdom of Heaven thoroughly in the Kingdom of England, and you
shall say of it, as Nabals servants said of David's men, 1 Samuel 24. 16.
when they lay with them, all the while the men were with us, they were a wall
about us, that we lost nothing, none could hurt us, nay it will be a wall of fire
to England; Salvation will God provide for walls and Bulwarks to you; I fear not
to speak Zach 2. 5. Esa. 26. ^.
it to wise men, that the four Seas of England, and if to them were added walls
of brass of 20. cubits high and thick about England, and all your Soldiers as
the sons of Anak, they could not give that security to the Land which the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ would be to it: Let the Gospel flourish, let Religion
prosper, let that go on, and salva omnia, that will secure all other things to
you; the very Heathens saw this by the light of nature, you cannot read of one
Lawgiver amongst them, but ever counted the matters of the worship of their
Gods, and of Religion to be of greatest advantage to their states, and
therefore counted Religionso sacred a thing, that they made their Kings and
Princes always their chief Priests, that the care of the Gods might not be
neglected: it is true, these poor blind wretches knew not God, and worshipped
Devils, and therefore miscarried, but yet thus much we may learn from them,
that even in their judgments, nothing so secures a Nation as Religion; Now when
we have the clear light of the Gospel, and so many examples before us, and so
many promises from Heaven, can we expect the like succor and help from any
thing else, as from the advancement of that: Sixthly,

Know ye for certain, you never shall be able to break through your
difficulties, and to settle this poor Land in Peace, unless your whole heart
be sincerely set to advance the Kingdom of Heaven; you shall not prosper in
other work; I know it grieves your hearts, and it grieves those that love
England, to see how you labor in the fire, and what pains you take, and still
the end of one trouble, is the beginning of another, our clouds return after
the rain, and when we think we are going to moore our ship, we are instantly
ready to dash against new rocks, up and down we are, and England appears to
our eyes, as a dying fading plant; certainly the Lords anger is not yet turned
away from England, there is somewhat provokes him, God grant that we may search
whether it be not somewhat like that in the 1. of Haggai, that the house of God
was not regarded, as it should be: I do acknowledge here before you, my heart
is overwhelmed with grief oftentimes, when I look upon our unsettled condition,
but could I once see, and might it appear, that the Lord had let it so really
into the hearts of our Parliament, that they could with all their might, buckle
to the work of God sincerely and faithfully, to enquire what God would have
them do in the cause of Religion, and do it to the utmost, I think all my
fears would vanish; I should say we went forward, when we seemed to go
backward; we prospered, when we seemed to be overthrown; I could say to my own
melancholy spirit, as Luther said to Melancthon, Ego miserrimas istas curas
quibus te consumi scribis vehementer odi, etc. I do extreemly hate (says he)
those cares that thou say do consume and tear thee; it is not the
greatness of our danger, but the greatness of thy infidelity, that is the
cause of it, it is the cause of God that we are engaged in, So me thinks, I
could resolve that the enemies of England and of the Church of God, would
quickly be where they should be, that is, made the Lords footstool, and we
should triumph over them, and break through all, if the Lord would but incline
the hearts of those he has called to it, to go through-stitch with the
things of the Kingdom of Heaven; and therefore I most humbly beseech you fall
to it, and in it do as Baruch did, of whom you may read in the 3. of Nehem.
20. that he did build the Nehem. 3. 20.
wall earnestly, and Tremelius reads it, accendit se he sets himself a fire to
it, he stirred up himself, he did not stay till others stirred him up, but he
provoked himselself to it; do it with all your might, and do it thoroughly
too, do not make Icr. 6. 14.
a patched business of it; the Lord made that once a curse to the Ministers of
Israel, that they healed the wounds of the people slightly; therefore that I
may speak plain English, search Gods Word, and find, not what may be agreeable
to humane policy, but search what God would have you own, and set up, what he
would have you oppose, and what he would have you beat down, what he would
have you indulge, how far he would have you indulge it, by what rules it
should be done, get a clear light in these things, for the Scripture is able to
make every man of God perfect in all his works, get this, and fall to it
thoroughly, and God Almighty will be with you; the Lord will yet blow over the
clouds you are afraid of, and will prosper your work in your hand, but truly,
if you do neglect it, and shall not be faithful to the Lord in it, believe
it, though our misery and ruin may be protracted and beaten off, and kept off
for a time, it will return upon us, and come in like the huge breaking in of
waters, and like a great breach in a high wall, whose mine comes suddenly;
therefore because you cannot do the rest of your work without it, let this be
the main. Seventhly, I Will but name the two other, and lay this to heart
likewise,

England, have broke out since the cure of it was committed to your hands: I
do not say through your fault, the root of these humors was in the sick body
before; and in such confused times, (as has appeared in Germany and other
places) abundance of disorders do come in, especially in times of War; but
because God has blessed you, and enabled you to afford a healing hand in many
things, to take off the bridle of bondage, which lay upon our necks, and to
pull down huge Mountains, and that Gods people enjoy a great deal of liberty in
many things, more then they did heretofore, be provoked to help in this also: A
merciful good Physician, who has begun a cure, if any new disease break out,
while the Patient is under his cure, he would be very loath any thing should
fall out to be the Patients ruin, while under his hand, and therefore let this
also provoke you earnestly to carry this work on: and Lastly,

Husbandman will sleep, the envious man sleeps not; Gebal and Ammon, and the
children of Lot, and Ashur, and Tire, and all that are enemies to the Kingdom
of Christ, bestir themselves against it: Cataline watches, ut perdat
rempubliam, omits no endeavor to destroy Religion, Sanballat and Tobiah, do
all that ever they can to hinder the building of the wall; shall not Nehemiah,
shall not Ezra, shall not the rest of Gods people, put to their hand too? Vt
jugulent homines surgunt de nocte latrones, If thieves watch by night to kill
men, shall not honest men watch to preserve their own lives? When there is such
a mavelous endeavor to corrrupt our Faith, to take away Government, to take
away Worship, to take out the power of godliness, to discourage all that fear
God, to do any thing against them, shall not they that are the servants of the
Lord do the utmost that they can to encourage them? For the Lords sake,
consider of these things, and God Almighty give you a right understanding in
them; this is the first thing, what they did, they offered violence to the
Kingdom of Heaven, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence.

The second part you have in the next words, the success of their violence,
they take it by force, Rapiunt; It is a Metaphor taken from a Castle taken by
storm, by the violence of those that will it take or loose their blood, so the
violent do take the Kingdom of Heaven; and these words are both Restrictive,
and they are Promissive; they are restrictive, they are the violent men and no
other, that get it; if of any work in the world it be true, that the sluggard
is clothed with rags, it is true here; he that only cries, Lord, Lord, shall
never come into the Kingdom of Heaven; this is a peculiar mercy in store for
these violent spirits, that the violent, and no other shall get into Heaven:
and then as it is restrictive, so it is promissive, though careless endeavors
and slight labors may prove abortive, vigorous prosecution of it shall not
miscarry; they that seek shall find, to them that knock it shall be opened, to
them that ask it shall be granted, they that seek wisdom, as men seek Silver
and Gold, the Lord will give it them; he has laid it up in store, Prove. 2. 34.
let them that have violent hearts, offer violence to it, and the Lord has
promised they shall not miss of it: but this (the time being gone) I dare not
handle.

FINIS.

