A COMPLETE SCHOOL OF WAR: OR, A direct way for the Ordering and Exercising
of a Foot Company: Whereby may be attained with ease, the perfection both of
Musket and Pyke in short time. Now, as most necessary, thought fit to be set
forth for a general good.

By an expert Commander, R. M.



Printed at London for Richard Harper at the Bible and Harp in Smithfield. 1642.

The Order for exercising of a Foot COMPANY.
STand right in your Files. Stand right in your Ranks. Silence. To the right
Hand. As you were.
Note, when you are commanded to be as you were, you are ever to turn to the
contrary hand from whence you came.

To the left hand. As you were, As you were. Ranks to the left hand double. To
the right hand about. As you were. As you were. Files to the right hand double.
To the left hand about. As you were. As you were. Files to the left hand
double. Ranks to the right hand double. As you were. Half Files to the right
hand, double your Front. As you were. Half Files to the left hand, double your
Front. As you were. Ranks to the right hand Countermarch.
When you will Countermarch to the right hand, the first Rank of Leaders only
must advance one step forward with the right leg, and then turn; and all the
other Ranks must march first up to the place from whence the first Rank did
countermarch before they turned.

Ranks to the left hand countermarch.

Observe that if you will now countermarch to the left hand, the first rank
must step forward one step with the left leg, and then turn; and all the other
ranks behind, must come up to that place before they turn, where the Sergeant
stands.

Observations before you wheel.
If you will wheel to the right hand, you must double your ranks to the left;
and if you wheel to the left, you must double to the right.

Ranks to the right hand double. Files close to the right hand, to your close
order. Ranks close up to your swords point.
Note, that when you will wheel to the right hand, that the Leader of the
right hand File must keep his Musket Rest fixed to the ground, and must only
turn his body without losing of any ground, and also the left hand Leader, if
you wheel to the left.

To the right hand wheel. Or to the left hand wheel.

Having wheeled to bring them in their former order, you must use these wor^s
of Command:

First to the ranks that were closed to the swords point. Ranks backward to
your double distance of twelve foot. Open your Files to the left hand to your
order of three foot. And then speaking to the Ranks that were first doubled
Ranks as you were.
Having performed the former motions, you may afterward exercise your Company
of Pikes and Musketeers together, or each a part.

To begin with the Pikes, you may command them to do these motions standing,
viz.

Advance your Pikes. Order your Pikes. Shoulder your Pikes, Charge your Pikes.
Order your Pikes. Traile your Pikes. Cheek your Pikes.
But these motions are to be performed both standing and marching, vi^.

Charge your Pikes. Shoulder your Pikes. To the right hand charge. Shoulder
your Pikes. To the left hand charge. Shoulder your Pikes. To the Reere charge.
Shoulder your Pikes. Comport your Pikes. Charge your Pikes. Shoulder your
Pikes. Stand. Charge under hand. Charge your Pikes at the foo^ Shoulder your
Pikes. Order your Pikes.
1. First, note that in charging, half the Ranks only must charge their
Pikes, the other hindmost half of the Ranks do but port their Pikes, that
is, they carry them so couched over the heads of the foremost, as any give them
no offense in charging or retiring. Besides, this way the Pikes are not so
subject to broken by the shot of the enemy, as when they are advanced.

2. They must likewise observe when they charge, standing to fall back with
the right leg and marching to step forward with the rest.

3. The exercising of your Musketeers is likewise performed either standing or
marching; that is, either by Ranks or Files, after three, manner of ways,
always blowing your Match, moving your right leg foremost when you are ready
to present.

1. Having an enemy in your front. 2. In your Reere. 3. Upon your right or left
hand Flank.
Note also, that the first Rank falling back with their right legs, lies
on, gives fire, and the first Rank falling away, the second in Rank
presenting, having their pans guarded, blows their matches, open their pan,
and step forward with their right legs into the place of the first rank,
lies on, gives fire, and fall away, whiles the rest of the body of Musketeers
move up to their places, and so two ranks at a time making ready, you may give
fire so often as you list.

Observe that in charging of an enemy, that the right hand wing fall off the
right hand, and the left hand wing to the left, and the officers are to give
the same word of command.

The Musketeers are to have a singular care to carry the mouths of their
Muskets aloft, as well when they are shouldred as in priming, as also when they
keep their pans guarded, and come up to give fire.

Moreover, if an enemy should appear on either your right or left Flank, and
that you resolve to maintain your ground, and would gall him from either
Flank, it is performed by giving first this word of command, To the Right or
left hand, which you please; and then making an intervall of six foot distance
between the middlemost Leaders of the half Files, for the half Rank on the
left hand do fall away between the Files to the Reere before the Pikes, and
the half Rank on the right hand, on the right Flank; likewise you may give
fire from either or both flanks, so often as you list.

Again, if an enemy should show himself in your Reere, the like is done by
this term of direction:

To the right hand about.

And having given fire upon them, fall away to the place where the Front stood,
even in the same manner as you did before.

In advancing toward an enemy, two Ranks must always make ready together,
and advance ten paces forwards before the bodies: at which distance a Sergeant,
or when the body is great, some, other Officer, must stand, to whom the
Musketeers must come, before they present and give fire* fir^^ ^he first
Rank, and while the first Rank gives fire, the second keep their Muskets
close to their rests, and their pans guarded; and as soon as the first are
fallen away, the second presently presents, gives fire, and fall after them.
Now as soon as the first Ranks do move from their places in the fro^^ the
two Ranks next it, must undershoulder their Muskets, and make ready, so as
they may advance forward ten paces, as before, as soon as ever the two first
ranks are fallen away, and are to do in all points as the former; so all the
other Ranks through the whole Company or Division, must do the same by twooes
one after another.

A way how to give fire retreating from an enemy.
As the troop marches, the hind most rank of all keeping still with the
troop, makes ready; and being ready, the soldiers in that rank turn all
together to the right hand, and give fire, marching presently away a good round
pace to the front, and there place themselves in ranks together, just before
the front: as soon as the first rank turn to give fire, the rank next it make
ready, and does as the former, and so all the rest:

Last of all^ the troop or wing of Musketeers make ready all together
standing, and the first without advancing gives fire in the place it stands in,
and speedily as may be, yet orderly, falls away, all the ranks doing the same
successively one after another.

A manner how to give fire either from the right or left hand flank.
The company or division marching, the outmost File next the enemy, are
commanded to make ready, keeping still along with the body, till such time as
they be ready, and then they turn all to the right or left hand, according to
the sight of their enemy, either upon the right or left flank, and give fire
all together; when they have discharged they stir not, but keep their ground,
and charge their pieces again in the same place they stand.

Now as soon as the aforesaid File does turn to give fire, the outmost next it
makes ready, always keeping along with the troop, till the bringers up be
past a little beyond the Leader of that File that gave fire last, and then the
whole File must turn and give fire, and do in all points as the first did,
and so all the rest one after another.

A Sergeant (or if the troop be great) some better qualified Officer) must
stand at the head of the first File, and as soon as the second File has given
fire and has charged, he is to lead forwards the first file up to the second
file, and so to the rest one after another, till he has gathered up again the
whole wing, and then he is to joyn^ them again in equal front with the Pikes.

The manner of ordering a Regiment.
If there be ten Companies in a Regiment, consisting of 1000. or 1200. men,
they must be drawn into two Divisions, five Companies in one Division: and
because it is not sit that the eldest Captains should be all in one division,
they are thus divided, viz.

Colonel. Leivtenant Colonel. 1. 4. 5. 7. 3. 6. Sergeant Major. ^.

The first Captains company next to the Colonels company.

2. The second Captains company the left hand of the second division.

3. The third next the Sergeant Major in the first division.

4. The fourth next the Lieutenant Colonel in the second division.

5. The fifth in the middle of the first division.

6. The sixth next the second Captain in the second division.

7. The seventh next the fourth in the second division.

The Sergeants are to march upon the flank of the divisions, as near as they
can to their own men, to keep them in their rank, and from straggling.

The Drummers betwixt the third and fourth ranks. But if the Regiment march in
battle, then in the flanks of the Regiment, as equal with the third rank in
the Front, and also to the third rank to the Reere; and so likewise in the
flanks of the Pikes.

The demonstration of Places in a Regiment.
The first Captain leads the Van of the Pikes.

The second the Reere of the Pikes.

The third the first division of Musketeers.

The Colonels Captain shall lead in the Vangard of the Musketeers, in the
right wing upon the left hand of the third Captain.

The first Lieutenant to lead the second division of Musketeers.

The second to bring up the Reere of all.

The third to lead up the second division of Pikes.

The fourth to bring up the right wing of Musketeers.

But because the absence of Captains may be such, as the Regiment may want the
principal places of leading, it is in the Colonels will to dispose of the
places of leading as he shall find fitting.

The Sergeant Major of every Regiment to have a special care before the
Regiment moves out of the quarter, to call upon the Captains for their old men
of every company to make files of them; and for the overplus, which cannot be
above 7. in number, shall march in the Reere of the Regiment before the Officer
that brings up the Regiment, not disbanding themselves.

Upon the very motion that the Drums begin to beat a march, the hindmost
ranks shall march forward together as well as the first ranks, that the
hindmost ranks need not run or march away faster then the foremost.

The distance between the ranks in marching, shall be six foot distance one
from the other so that the but ends of the Pikes shall almost touch the heels
of them that march before them.

The files shall be no more then three foot distance one from the other.

When a Regiment marches in division, then the half of the Musketeers shall
march before the pikes, and the pikes in the midst, and the other half of the
Musketeers to be in the Reere of the pikes.

Observing well that they must march ten in front at the least, if the way be
sit thereunto, keeping always their distances both in rank and file, as
aforesaid.

The Officer that shall lead any part of the Regiment, shall take up no more
place then the space of a rank, which is 6. foot, to the end they may follow
one another the better, and so neither lose time nor place.

As for the officer that shall march after any part of the regiment or division,
he shall follow the last rank of them that march before him, observing likewise
the distance of six foot, to the end that betwixt him and the officer that
shall lead any part or division of the regiment following, there may be
likewise six foot, and so between the first and second division there must be
18. foot distance.

If the regiment be divided, and led in two troops, the second division of the
regiment shall follow the first about the distance of ten or twelve paces, and
no larger.

The distances between the regiments that march one after another, shall be 18.
or 20. paces, to wit, 6. foot for the officer that marches in the Reere of the
regiment, and six foot for the officer that leads in the front of the next
regiment, and the rest of the places between both the officers aforesaid.

And where there is room enough, the regiment shall march close and in one
body, observing evermore the distance of ranks and files aforesaid.

Between every 5. files at be most, and between every 3. files at the least, of
Musketeers, they shall leave a space of six foot broad, keeping as much as
possibly may be, the Musketeers of one company together, not marching but in
fight.

When the regiment stands in battle, and that the regiment consists of two
divisions, each division shall be 50. foot distant one from another.

And the Musketeers of a regiment being more in number then the pikes, and
consequently falling out broader then the front or division of pikes, they
shall close inward toward both the Troops of the pikes which stand before them.

But if so the number of Musketeers be too great, and that by reason of the
intervals or the spaces of six foot that are to be made between them for
their number, having no place to fall or close inward, without touching one
another, then the two Troops of Musketeers on both sides of the Pikes, after
whom they stand, shall fall outward.

The Ensigns of every regiment are to march with their Colors in the front 6
foot before the pikes when they move in a body, and in this parodo to be
always ready to veil their Colors when the General passes by: but when
they march in battle, as command shall be given, all the Ensigns of each
Division are to go down before the fourth and fifth Rank, but the Colonels
own Colors to fly in the second Rank; the same to be done in the second
Division: If you come to charge with an enemy, then for good reasons let the
Colonels Colors fall back to the rest: If the Lord General passes by, make
the body move their faces either in Flank or Reere, which way he passes.

That no Wagons shall be suffered to pass between the Regiments or Division,
only each Colonel one, which is to march in the front of his Regiment, and the
Commander of every Tertia to have two in the head of every Tertia, besides one
of their own wagons in the head of their own Regiment; and if their own
Regiment have the Vangurd of the Tertia, then they are to have three wagons.

And for the wagons of the Captains to march in the Reere of the Army in their
Signiority, according as their Colonels march that day, and are to be so
ordered by the Garriage Master.

And when the whole Army is thus marched, and at any time shall come to make a
stand, either at noon tide to eat and repo^^, or at even tide to rest till the
Quarter be made, then the Tertia shall be led up to the places all three in
front, each Regiment in division one after another at fifty foot, and each
Regiment at an hundred foot, and each Tertia distant in flank from other about
150 foot sometime, if the ground would give in, then the two divisions of each
Regiment shall stand in front, and so the Regiments following in that order;
and also in this order conformable all the three Tertias side by side, and so
shall all the Cannons and Wagons front up in this wise in breadth, that train
may be shortened in a near compass, which is done to keep the Army close, and
in far distance in the Reere.

This order is to be observed especially as the General shall find fitting to
give command for it, or otherwise not,

FINIS.

