A PERFECT RELATJON OF THE Horrible Plot, and bloody Conspiracy, OF The
Malignant party at EDMONDBURY in SUFFOLK, for the Murdering of Mr. LANCETER*
and diverse other eminent and well-affected Persons, for opening of their Shops
upon Christmas-d^y.

ALSO, The number of the Conspirators, and the manner how they were appeased.
with the loss on both sides. Together with a Proclamation thereupon, and the
apprehending of the chief Ringleaders, and how they are to be tried the next
SESSIONS.

JANUARY, 4. 1647* Printed and Published, and to be presented to the
Wel-affested Party, throughout each respective County within the Kingdom of
England.

LONDON, Printed for I. Johnson, 1647.

AN EXACT RELATION OF The great and bloody Design of the Malignant Party at
Edmondsby in Suffolk.
SJR,
THE opportunity which I have here embraced, and the good Tidings which I have
to accompany it, has moved me to set Pen to Paper, and to acquaint you with
the horrid Conspiracy and malicious Design of the Malignant Party at Edmondsby
in Suffolk, against the People of God, and the Members of Jesus Christ, who for
their faithfulness and zeal to the Gospel of Christ, by endeavoring to
maintain the purity of Religion, with the loss and hazard both of lives and
fortunes, the inveterate malice and mischievous intentions of these ravening
and devouring Spirits began to grow to some maturity, and to appear in a most
vild and bloody shape; for these wicked Members of Satan, and Enemies to God
and Religion, had so conspired together, against the people of God, that they
were resolved to prosecute their Design, in case that any of them should
presume to open their shops on Christmas day, and to that end had prepared
diverse weapons for the executing of the same, the particulars, together with
the manner of this Conspiracy, I shall here present to the view of all good
Christians, as shall manifestly appear by these ensuing lines, viz.

In Edmondsbury in Suffolk God has delivered his people from a great and evil
Design, complotted by the Malignant Party in the Town, the manner thus:

The Prentices, and diverse rude deboyst Fell,loweso the number of a hundred and
fifty, or thereabouts, had listed themselves together, and had gotten three
Captains.

And this was their Design, to get together at the Cross (being the place
appointed for to meet) on the 25 of this instant Month of December (commonly
called Christmas day. And their resolutions and determinations were, that
whosoever should set open their Shops on the said day, they were resolved to
pluck out the owners, and fire their houses, and kill them if they resisted,
and pull out their goods, and lay wast and desolate those stately Buildings and
dwelling Houses, which are the grace and ornament of the Town.

And the better to accomplish their Design, the Conspirators had provided great
Clubs with great nails cross the end of each Club, every Nail weighing a
pound.

But their mischievous Design were discovered beforehand, by some Prentices,
to whom the Mutiniers came for their hands. And on the Wednesday some stirred
about it, for prevention of mischief, and went to the Magistrates, and
informed them thereof. Whereupon to prevent the gaeat danger that might thereby
arise Diverse of them having skill in the Law, found it would be upon themselves
if they suffered such a thing to be therefore they sent for diverse the day
following of the conspirators, and laid the Law to them, and bound them over to
the Seassions.

And on Christmas day, most of the chief Magistrates, and many constables, and
other Officers assembled together.

Afterward there were about thirty or forty about Mr. Lanseters door (in the
place called the Cook-row, his shop bring open.

And there Proclamation was made, and in several places more, that those which
were not in their own houses with in half an hour, should be imprisoned: And
some were laid hold on, and frighted; so that there was only a little hurt
done, two men being wounded beyond the horse-market toward the end of the
Town; for when the well-affected Party began to assemble themselves together, for
the appeasing of these tumultuous Villians, some of them made at them with
their clubs, and wounded these two, but its hoped not mortal, though indeed (as
yet) they seem very dangerous, by reason of the deepnesse of the wounds, and
the festering of them.

But after a short time, these Viperous Rascals were apeased, and the streets
cleansed on these Vermin; so that their-bloudy Designs were frustrated, and
mischievous and machavilian Plot discovered:

For the Great God of Heaven would not suffer his People to be left as a prey
unto the merciless Malignants teeth.

And it is to be minded, that above all, they aimed at Mr. Lanceter, who was
not possessed with fear of them, but quietly waited upon the Lord, with
expectation of Deliverance from the hands of God, which he had, and was
preserved; though he used no outward means to attain it himself.

But this the Lord did to give his People more experience of his goodness; and
he is able to do much more, for his hand is never shortened.

And therefore let all the Godly Saints, and praying People, according to the
Direction of the Spirit of Christ, from the consideration and experience of
Gods former loving kindnesses, and preservations, rest upon him for future
times.

Thus having given you a brief and exact Relation of the great and bloody
conspiracy complotted by the Malignant Party at Edmonby in Suffolk, I shall
humbly take my leave, and remain

Your affectionate Servant, L. M.
Edmondsbury Ian. 1. 1647. This Relation is confirmed by very good Hands, and
at the request of many eminent, and well-affected Persons printed, and presented
to the public view of all the Freeborn Subjects of England.



FINIS.

