THE SIN OF Hardness of Heart: THE Nature, Danger, and Remedy of it.

Opened in a SERMON, PREACHED TO The Honorable House of Commons, July 2^. 1648.
being the day of their Solemn Monthly Fast.

By STEPHEN MARSHALL, B. D. Minister of Gods Word at Finchingfield in Essex.

Published by order of that House.

Psalm 95. 7, 8. To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts,
etc.

Prove. 29. 1. He that being often reproved hardneth his neck, shall suddenly
be destroyed, and that without remedy.

London Printed by R. Cotes, for Stephen Bowtell, at the Sign of the Bible in
Pope's Head Alley, 1648.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL The Lady Trevor, Wife to my most worthy and approved
Friend, Sir John Trevor.
Madam,
YOu have been long taught of God, and therefore are not ignorant that
spiritual sicknesses differ many ways from bodily, this one is notable, The
more any spiritual disease increases, the less it is felt, and the more any
soul is sensible of it, the less power it has over him; This is found most
true of the greatest of spiritual plagues, the sin of hardness of heart,
none more confident of the goodness of their heart, then the most obstinate
and rebellious sinner, where as the most tenderhearted Christian complains
most of hardness, the spirit that is most flexible to God, most laments its
obstinacy; Madam, I may apply this to your self, all such servants of God who
know and converse with you can discern that God has in great measure taken
out of you the heart of stone and given you a heart of flesh, upon the ta^les
whereof he has written his holy Law, and that it is your delight to walk with
him, to live to him and please him in all things; yet did I never hear you
bestow one good word upon your heart, but rather upon every occasion you are
declaming against it, and complaining of its hardness and obstinacy. But Madam
to feel hardness of heart is softness of heart, and did you but clearly
understand how much the Lord delights in such a frame of spirit as he has
given you, you would cease to be so suspicious as you are of your own
spiritual condition, and would spend the rest of your days rejoicing in your
portion and serving him without fear: I hope this plain Sermon may through
Gods blessing be some help to make you judge more rightly of that grace which
God has so plentifully bestowed on you, and to bless his Name who has in
great measure delivered you from this destroyer, even this plague of a hard
heart; I humbly present it unto you, as a pledge of my thankfulness, for all
the many and great refreshings I have found in your family, where I have
constantly found your respect and tenderness toward me more like that of a
mother then a stranger: The good Lord pardon my unfruitfulnesse among you, and
requite you and your good husbands love toward me a thousand fold into your
bosoms, and multiply his favors upon your whole family, and continue to guide
you by his counsel till you come to his glory.

Your La. most obliged, STEPHEN MARSHALL.

A SERMON PREACHED TO THE HONORABLE House of COMMONS upon their solemn
Monthly Fast.
BEloved in the Lord, some mistake concerning one of the Preachers that should
have supplied the work of this day, is the occasion of my standing here at
this time, at shorter warning, then is fit for such a service, but I have
learned to receive encouragement from a call; and therefore without any further
Apology, I beseech you attend to the Word of God, which you shall find written
in the

7. of ZACHARIAH Verse. 12. Yea they made their hearts as an Adamant stone, lest
they should hear the Law, and the words which the Lord of host has sent in
his spirit, by the former Prophets, therefore came a great wrath from the Lord
of hosts.
MY Text is part of an answer to a case of conscience, The Text opened, the
occasion, coherence and parts of it.
propounded in the beginning of this Chapter, from the fourth Verse. of this
Chapter to the end of the next Chapter is contained the full answer to that
case of conscience; the case of conscience was this; They sent unto the house
of God, Sherezer, and Regem-melech, and their men, to speak to the Priest, and
to know of him, and of the Prophets whether they should weep in the fifth
month, as they had done these 70. years; this was the case propounded; now
because my subject matter this day must very much relate unto this case, give
me leave a little to open it to you; The Jews after it had pleased God to
bring upon them the Babylonian captivity, did set apart four days every
year, which they kept as solemn days of humiliation, one of them was in the
fifth month, another was in the seventh month, another was in the tenth
month, and another was in the fourth month, upon these occasions: In the
tenth month did Nebuchadnezzars Army, first beleaguer Jerusalem, as you will
find it in the 25. Chapter of the second book of the Kings, that day that
Nebuchadnezzars Army first sat down before the City, did they keep 2 Kings
25. 1.
a fasting day all those 70. years: In the fourth month of the year
following, they broke into the City and took 2 Kings 25. 3. Verse. 8. Verse. 25.
it, the day that the City was taken, did they keep as a solemn fasting day;
In the fifth month Nebuzaradan came and burnt the Temple; the day that the
Temple was burnt, did they also keep as a fasting day; In the seventh month
Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, was killed, murdered by Ishmael, and all the
rest that were left, were scattered into Egypt, and that day likewise did they
keep as a fasting day; and these four days they kept threescore and ten
years; Now the Temple being built again, at least in a good forwardness, they
send to know whether the fast of the fifth month should continue; concerning
the other fasts they make no mention of them, probably conceiving that the
occasion of those fasts did continue still; but they would know whether the
Lord would not have them lay aside the fast of the fifth month, which was kept
in reference to the Temple, because the Temple was now built, or in a great
forwardness; this case of conscience was sent, some think, by the Jews that
remained still in Babylon, that they sent Sherezer and Regemmelech, and the
rest of them, as their Ambassadors; others think they were sent from all the
Jews, that were returned from their Captivity, but by whom soever the message
was sent, this was the case that I have read to you; Now the Prophet comes to
answer this case, and in the answer he takes notice of all the four days of
fasting, though they mention but one of them, because they all hung upon one
hinge, and the answer of the Prophet to this case, so much of it as is
contained in this Chapter is a mere slighting of the case propounded; and
there are two things wherein the Prophet expresses the Lords contempt of their
Embassage, one,

That the Lord took no notice of any such thing; Did you fast to me? (says
he) you speak of days of fasting, 1.
that you have kept 70. years, did you fast to me? Did I either appoint them?
or do I accept them? or have you carried them as you should do? the meaning
is, you play the hypocrites with me, you would make a great deal ado about a
solemn Embassage, to have a case of conscience determined, which is first, but
a ceremony at the best, and besides it is a ceremony of your own inventing, and
in it you have howled and mourned for your afflictions, but never took notice
of your sins, that have caused those judgments to come upon you; you fasted
sometimes, and feasted sometimes, but when you have fasted, you fasted not to
me, and when you did eat and drink, you did eat and drink to your selves,
and not to me; that is the first, a slighting of it, as a keeping a coile
about a trifle, when there were greater matters concerned them which they
regarded not.

The second branch of the Prophets answer contains 2.
the true reason why all this fasting of theirs was thus slighted by God that
is laid down, First,

More generally in the 6. Verse, wherein the Prophet 1.
gives them a sound and a sharp reproof, you have wept and mourned, but should
not you rather have took notice of the words, which the Lord did send by the
Prophets? should ye not hear the words that the Prophets cried in former
times, when Jerusalem was inhabited, and the Cities thereof round about her?
there you might have learned the true way, but that you have no whit regarded;
you cry for your afflictions, but you are not one whit sensible of those sins
that have caused these judgments upon you: That is the general, then secondly,

He proceeds more particularly to open this Ulcer of 2.
their hypocrisy, and three things there are which he remembers them of, First,

The Lord remembers them of the counsel that had been given them and their
Fathers, how to remove the 1.
plagues that lay upon them, (says he) Thus speaks the Lord of hosts (in the
9. Verse) execute true judgment, and justice, show mercy and compassion every
man to his brother, oppress not the widow, the fatherless, nor the stranger,
let none of you imagine evil against his brother in his heart: this was the
counsel which of old was given, how the ruin of Jerusalem might have been
prevented; the exercise of justice, and the exercise of mercy; indeed the
Prophet there instances only in two Table duties, but I think the reason is,
because the Jews were always very exact in matters of Gods worship, save
only when they fell into Idolatry, and they bore themselves much upon the
duties of the first Table; and it is Gods ordinary practice when he would
discover the hypocrisy of men, that are much in holy duties, to fall upon the
duties of the second Table, wherein they ordinarily are careless, so the
Prophet tells them, that had they walked after this manner, this wrath had
never come upon them; but now, which is the second,

See what disobedience they showed to this, and this disobedience 2.
is laid down in the 11. and 12. Verses: and aggravated from the worst
quality that disobedience can be accompanied with, that is, wilfulness and
obstinacy; and this wilful and obstinate disobedience of theirs, is laid down
in four Metaphors, but all of them signifying one and the same thing, only
the three first do most immediately signify the outward expressions of their
disobedience; and the fourth which is the root of all, discovers the very
fountain whence all their disobedience did spring; First says he,

They refused to hearken, they were like to a man, that when you would do an
errand to him, flings away from you, and says plainly, he will not hear what
you say; Secondly,

They pull away their shoulder, alluding unto a Beast, a Bullock, that when you
would put the yoke upon it, it snatches the shoulder away, and refuses to be
yoked by you, nay, says he,

They stopped their ears; alluding to Adder, that (they say of it, it) lays
one ear against the ground, and stops the other ear with the tail, that it
may not be charmed, or like unto those, that when they would plainly let you
see, how much they slight what you say to them, put their finger in their
ears, that all may take notice, they will not regard you; But then fourthly,
(which is the theme that I purpose to handle by the Lords assistance;)

Here is the cause of all, that is, they made their hearts like an Adamant
stone, yea (says he) they made their hearts like an Adamant stone, that they
might not hear the Word that God has spoken; then follows the third branch,
the fruit of their disobedience, therefore all this wrath is come upon them. In
these words, here are two things to be handled; First,

The sin that this people were guilty of; in these 1.
words, they made their hearts like an Adamant stone, that they might not hear
the word: Secondly,

The judgment that this sin brought upon them: Therefore says the Lord, it
is come to pass, that as they 2.
would not hear me, I would not hear them; but a great wrath is come upon
them, and I have scattered them among all the Nations, and laid their land
desolate. In their sin, (which is the only theme I shall insist upon) you
have two things: First,

What their sin was, what the wicked frame of their 1.
heart was, their heart was like an Adamant stone; Secondly,

How it came to be so: they made their heart so themselves; 2.
they made their heart as an Adamant stone: next open the meaning of this, what
is here meant by an Adamant stone? the Hebrew word is variously interpreted,
some do render it a flint, some a stone that will not waste, many with our new
translation render it an Adamant, but generally, Critics do agree, that it is
a stone of the hardest nature, that will not by any tool be graven or
fashioned to any desirable mould: so to make their heart as an Adamant stone,
does plainly mean, they did extremely harden their heart, that is the English
of it, they would not hear, they stopped their ear, they pulled away their
shoulder, yea, they did extremely harden their hearts: Here are two things
further to be interpreted: First,

What is meant by the heart that is here hardened? And 1.
secondly,

What this hardening the heart signifies. 2.


By heart you know is naturally meant that piece of 1.
flesh that is in the body, which they say, it is primum vivens, and ultimum
moriens: but morally and spiritually by the heart is meant the soul, and
usually, the will and the affections are ordinarily in Scripture meant by the
heart; so it is here.

What by hardness, or hardening; Hardening in the natural 2.
signification of it, is nothing but the withdrawing of moisture form any
substance, whereby the parts come to be condensed and made stiff, so as not
to yield to the touch; Durum est quod non cedit tactui, that that will not
receive any impression that is hard: this in a natural sense; but in a moral
and spiritual sense, to harden the heart is nothing but to have the will
resolutely and unchangeably set upon any purpose, not to be taken off from
their enterprise by any means that can be used to change them, that is to
harden the heart; and in the Scripture it is sometimes taken in a good sense, a
man's heart may be hardened in a very gracious manner, so Ezekiels Ezekiel 3. 8.
was, when the Lord told him, the house of Israel will not hearken to thee, for
they are impudent and hard hearted, but (says God) I have made thy face strong
against their faces, and thy forehead strong against their foreheads, thou
shall be as impudent as they, as an Adamant, harder then flint, etc. thou
shall be as much hardened in good as they in evil, I have given thee that
grace; that shall make thee resolute as they: Paul was, when they came, and
wept, and prayed him he would not go to Jerusalem, (says he) you weep in
vain I Will go though I die for it; his heart was hardened: and so Luther; when
his friends would have persuaded him not to have gone to Worms; to the
disputation there, If all the tiles of the houses in Worms were Devils, I
would go; that is to have a heart hardened in a good cause; but ordinarily in
the Scripture, to harden the heart, or to have hardness of heart, is
ordinarily meant in an evil sense; hardening in sin, hardening against God: and
so my Text has it plainly, they made their heart as an Adamant stone, that
they might not hear the word that God had sent to them: their heart was
resolutely, and unchangeably bent to go on in their ways, say or do what God
would, or could to the contrary; that is the sin that is here mentioned; now
from hence I shall take up this Lesson; and it is the only Lesson, which I
shall by the Lords assistance handle this day; and in it take in both the
sin, and the judgment together.

That the sin of hardening the heart against God, is a certain Doct.
forerunner of utter destruction;

They made their heart as hard as an Adament stone, therefore came there a
great wrath from God; and therefore Hardening the heart, a certain forerunner
of destruction.
as I called, and they would not answer, when they cried I would not answer,
but I have scattered them: so the Lesson is plain; but before I come to prove
it, that Five distinctions about hardness of heart, premised forth: clearing
of this Doctrine.
it may be rightly stated, I shall premise five distinctions about this sin
of hardness of heart; whereby you will more plainly understand the Doctrine
that I am to make good out of the Scripture; First,

That there is a natural hardness of heart, which is the 1.
case of all men in the world; Secondly, there is an acquired There is a
natural hardness of heart, and there is an acquired hardness.
hardness of heart, or a hardness that man brings upon himself; There is a
natural hardness of heart, the Scripture is plain in it, that all men in the
world, the original frame of their hearts; is in the Scripture set down by
the expression of a heart of stone, in Ezekiel. 11. Ezekiel. 11. 19.
when God promises conversion, (says he). I will take away the heart of
stone, that is in them, and give them a heart of flesh; every man and woman in
the world, brings the stone of the heart into the world with them; but then
Secondly,

There is an acquired hardness of heart, or a hardness that men bring upon
themselves; so my Text says, they made their hearts hard, and so it is said of
Zedekiah, in the 36. of the 2 Chronicles. he hardened his heart against God: that is
one; Secondly,

Know that there is a graduall or partial hardness of 2.
heart; when the heart is hardened but in some measure, There is a graduall or
partial hardness, and there is a to as hardness.
there is some hardness in them, and some softness in them, and there is a
total hardening of the heart when the whole fram^ of the heart is given up to
hardness.

That there is a graduall, and partial hardness of heart, you may see it in
Christ's own Disciples, who being new Creatures had a heart of flesh in them,
and yet it is said of them, in Mark. 6. 52. They considered not the miracle
Mark 6. 52. Mark. 8. 17.
of the loaves, because their heart was hardened: and in Mark. 8. Christ says
to them, Have ye your hearts yet hardened? Christ's own Disciples had some
degrees of hardness of heart, but then

There is a hardness, that is a Total hardness; of Jer. 5. 3. Jer. 6. 28.
which the Scripture says, they are all brass and iron; Thirdly,

There is a hardness of heart, that is felt; felt by them 3.
that are under it; and there is a hardness of heart that is There is a
hardness felt and a hardness unfelt.
unfelt.

There is a hardness that is felt: so the Church says in Isaiah 63. ver. 1.
Ah Lord, why have thou hardened our hearts from thy fear? But Isa 63. 17.


There is likewise a hardness of heart, that though it lie upon the soul, yet
they feel it not; that they are as dead men under it, like Nabals heart, that
was like a stone, and he took no notice of it: and this unfelt hardness of
heart, it proceeds sometimes from ignorance, and sometimes from malice;
Fourthly, 4.


Know that there is a hardness of heart, that is unwilling, There is an
unwilling hardness a hardness bemoaned for and striven against; and there is a
willing hardness, a hardness reigning and delighted in. Ier. 31. 18.
bemoaned, lamented, groaned under, looked upon as a judgment, as a misery; and
there is a hardness of heart that is willing, a willing hardness, a pleasing
hardness, a reigning hardness, a hardness chosen and delighted in.

That there is an unwilling, bemoaned hardness, is plain, in Ephraims case in
Ier. 31. who makes this his sorrowful complaint before God, that his heart was
like a Heyfer, like a Bullock that would not carry Gods yoke, it made him
weep bitterly for it; and so the Church in the forementioned place, of Isaiah
63. O Lord, why are our hearts hardened from thy fear? she Isai. 63.
looked upon it as a marvailous great evil, that lay upon them. But then,

There is likewise a hardness, that is a pleasing hardness; a hardness
delighted in, a hardness reigning, a hardness gloried in; that is the
hardness that my Text mentions: Lastly,

Know that there is a hardness of heart, that is Man's work, and there is a
hardness of heart that is Gods work; 5.
There is a hardness which is man's work, and there is a judiciary hardness
which is Gods work.


The hardness of heart that is Man's work, are all those several hardnesses,
that I have spoke of hitherto, whether natural, graduall, felt or unfelt,
bemoaned, or gloried in, they are all our own hardnesses; But then

There is also a hardness which is Gods work; which is a Judiciary hardness,
a judgment inflicted by God righteously upon men; who when they will harden
themselves, God consents that they shall be hardened, and concurs to their
hardening; so he is frequently said in Scripture, to harden Pharaohs heart,
and to harden whom he will: but this same Judiciary hardness of heart which
is Gods work, you must know it is not by Gods infusing obstinacy and and
malice into them, that God does to none: but it stands in these three things,
sometimes,

By taking away from them, or denying them those means that might make their
heart pliable to God: or 1.
Secondly,

In case they do enjoy the means, yet God withholding his blessing from the
means: and Thirdly, 2.


Permitting them, or so far withdrawing the bridle of 3.
his restraining grace from them, as to permit them to abuse the means that
they do enjoy, to their own ruin and further hardening; and thus was Pharaoh
and his people hardened by the Ministry of Moses and Aaron; and thus were the
Israelites hardened by Isaiahs Ministry, as you will find it in Isaiah 6. the
Lord said to him, Go Isai. 6. 8, 9.
to this people, and make their hearts hard; how was that? He should preach to
them, but they should be given up to a fat heart, that is, a senseless, and a
heavy ear, that is, a heedlesse ear; God would give them up to a
senslesnesse, and heedlesnesse, that the more means they enjoyed, the more
desperate and vile their hearts should grow: now then to draw up all this to my
purpose, the Doctrine that I am to handle, wherein I am to show you, that
hardening the heart against God, is a certain forerunner of destruction; I do
not mean it of that natural hardness, that we all bring into the world, nor
of that acquired hardness, that is found in every man, who has but lived a
while upon earth, nor of that partial or graduall hardness, that is in the
best of Gods people, much less of that felt, bewailed, bemoaned hardness,
that is looked upon as a heavy judgment, by them that lie under it; though all
these are sins, yet these are not the sins of my Text; but my Text means
it of the chosen, voluntary, elected hardness, the Total hardness, the
Reigning hardness, when men do obstinately, and willingly strengthen, and
make firm their hearts in their sinful ways against God, and then God in his
righteous judgment concurres, and says be it so: when men do thus harden
their hearts against God, be it a Family, be it a Kingdom, be it one, or be
they many, this hardening the heart against God, is a certain forerunner of
utter destruction; Now you understand what the Lesson is, that The Doctrine
proved.
I am to handle, and First, I shall make it good, and plainly demonstrate the
truth of it, out of the Scripture; and for the proof turn to three or four
Texts, the one is that known signal Text in Prove. 29. 1. read it carefully;
He that being often admonished, or reproved, hardens his neck; there is my
very Doctrine, that after admonitions hardens his neck; what of him? Shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy; weigh all those words; First,

What it is that is threatened against him, he that being often reproved,
hardens his neck, what of him? He Prove. 29. 1.
does not say, he shall smart for it, he shall be afflicted, but he shall be
destroyed; destruction is prepared for him; Secondly,

He does not say he is in danger of it, but he shall be destroyed; it is
decreed in heaven, it is set down for him, he shall perish; and, Thirdly,

That suddenly, he shall suddenly be destroyed; the Vision of his destruction
is not for a long time to come, but his damnation sleeps not, he shall
suddenly be destroyed:

Yea and that with out remedy; no power shall rescue him, no mercy shall pardon
him, no Mediator shall intercede for him, there is no remedy, all the world
cannot help it, the man that after many reproves hardens his heart, shall be
destroyed without any remedy; there is a place like it in the 28. of Proverbs,
the very Chapter Prove. 28. 14.
before it, and the 14. verse; He is a blessed man that fears always, that is
the beginning of the Verse, he is a blessed man, he lives in a blessed state,
whose heart suspects it self; O I shall sin, I shall offend God, I shall
yield to my Corruption; he is a blessed man that fears always, but he that
hardens his heart, he that dares venture upon ungodly enterprises, what of
him? He shall fall into mischief; some render it in malum inprovisum, into
unthought of mischief; hazardous men, hard hearted men, are suddenly before
ever they think of it, caught: and in 2 Romans 2. 5. the Apostle there Romans 2. 5.
speaks to such a hard hearted wretch as my Text means: Thou (says he)
after thy hardness of heart that cannot repent, treasurest up unto thy self,
wrath against the day of wrath; mark ye, the hard heart it is Satan's treasury
for sin, but it is Gods treasury for wrath; Satan does not lay up more
wickedness in a hard heart, then God lays up vengeance in the Cellars of it,
treasurest up to thy self wrath against the day of wrath: and were it needful
I could give you abundance of examples out of Gods Word; Pharaoh and the
Egyptians are a famous one; 600000. Israelites in the Wilderness are another
famous example of hardening hearts to ruin, when the hardness of their hearts
made them all fall in the Wilderness; as you have it Epitomized in Psalm. 95.
and the latter end of it: and so many more in the Old and New Testament, that
the time will not allow me to mention, Job has a passage may serve for all,
in Job 9. 4. says he, Who over hardened himself against God, and prosper'd? As
if he should have said, I challenge all the World to bring an example of any
one man that ever hardened his heart against God, and was not ruined by it;
that expression, and prospered, is but an Affirmative for a Negative; bring me
an example of one that carried away the victory, that was not lost in the War;
but to make it yet more plain to you, be pleased to observe there are two
things meet in this sin of hardness of heart, besides many Two things meet in
this sin, which evidently prove that ruin attends it.
other that might be said; but I say there are two things that will demonstrate
to all the world, that it is a sin that must bring forth certain judgment: The
one is,

In the Nature of it, it is rebellion against God, it is 1.
the trying of it out with God, whose will shall stand; It is made up of
rebellion and not yielding*
for God says plainly to the hardened sinner, I will have such a thing done,
no (says the the other) I will have such a thing done; but says God, if I be
God, I Will have it done; says the the other, I am resolved it shall be thus, and
he tries it out: The sin of hardness of heart is made up of Rebellion and not
yielding, he takes up the bucklers against God here, I will try, and when he
has done refuses to lay them down upon a Summons, but will stand it out to the
utmost; Now (Brethren) it is not imaginable, that any thing but ruin should
attend such an one; Gamaliels speech in Acts 5. Beware (says he) Act 5. 39.
left ye be fighters against God; The hardened sinner enters into the lists
to contend with God, and then says Jer. 44 28.
God, if it be come to that it shall be tried, whose word shall stand, mine or
theirs; God speaks to the very case of some hardened sinners, that said to the
Prophet Jeremiah they would do what is good in their eyes: well says God, you
have spoken the word, and we will try it out, whether you or I shall carry it;
if poor worms dare enter the lifts and bid defiance to God and refuse to
submit, they must perish: Secondly, there is this in this sin of hardness of
heart, that,

In the nature of it, it frustrates all the means that It frustrates all
means of salvation.
should possibly serve to save the soul from ruin; I say the sin of hardness
of heart, in the nature of it, frustrates all those means which should tend to
save the soul from ruin; Psalm. 95. 7, 8. Heb. 3. 8.
and therefore you will find it ordinarily; If you will hear Gods voice harden not
your heart, in the 95. Psalm; so in Hebrews 3. 15. To day if you will hear
my voice, harden not your heart, as they did in the Wilderness; and my Text
has it again, they made their heart like an Adamant stone, that they might
not hear the words that God had said to them; so that this is a sin that
prevents all those Ordinances and means, which the Lord has sanctified and
appointed for reducing a soul from the ways of death; and this is noted of
the Israelites in the Wilderness, that though they had innumerable miracles
and administrations of all sorts, they ate miracles, and drank miracles, and
wore miracles, they had whatsoever might possibly do a people good, all these
were lost to that people, how? only because of the hardness of their hearts;
and so the Prophet Isaiah expresses it, in the sixth of Isaiah, the Lord does
by the Prophet, (says he) John 12. 40. Acts 19. 9. Prove. 2. 19.
harden their heart that they may never turn and be healed: Christ says the
same in John 12. 40. that this was the reason, why all the miracles that he had
wrought among them, and all the Sermons that he had preached among them, did
them no good, because their hearts were hardened: it is like a piece of stone,
put into a bottles mouth, though you put it into the bottom of a well, no
water gets into it, the stopple keeps all out; the sin of hardness of heart
keeps the soul from receiving any good, it is like unto the harlot that
Solomon speaks of, or rather like them that go in to the harlot, that none of
them ever turn to take hold of the ways of life; so that because it is a
sin, that is open Rebellion against God, and it is a sin that in the nature
of it, rejects all the means that might make reconciliation with God, what
can be expected; but the heart that goes on to harden it self must needs run
into utter ruin.

I have one thing more before I come to the Application, and that is to
discover how this sin of hardness of heart may be known, the properties of
it, that every soul may be able, when it comes to the Application, to give a
right judgment of its own condition; and here I beseech you remember, that I
do not come to enquire after hardness of heart in general, there is no
living man upon earth, but his heart is hardened; there is no child of God
living, but his heart is hardened, all the sinful motions and inclinations
that are found in us, they are all the fruits of hardness of heart; all that
rebellion that Paul speaks of in the seventh to the Romans, a law in the
members rebelling against the law of the mind, and leading of him captive, it
is all the fruit of hardness of heart but all hardness is not the hardness
of my Text; all How this destructive hardness may be found.
hardness of heart is not destructive hardness, is not ruining hardness;
hardness felt, hardness bemoaned, hardness lamented and striven against is
softness in Gods esteem; and is so far from being a forerunner of ruin,
that it is an evidence of salvation; but it is this destroying damning
hardness of heart, that I would enquire the properties of, and set them before
you out of the word of God: and there are six things that I have thought upon,
whereby this destroying damning hardness of heart does manifest it self,
First,

Take that which is most usual in the Scripture, the 1.
Lord ordinarily expresses this devilish hardness of heart, Such an hardened
heart is frequently compared to an untamed Bullock. Deuteronomy. 9. 19. 32. 15. Jer.
31. 18. 2 Chronicles. 36. 13. Nehem. 9. 29. Psalm. 75. 5. Jer. 7. 26. 17. 23. Exodus
32. 9. 33. 35. Which comparison affords two evidences. If it can possible it
will not be yoked.
by the comparison of an untamed heifer, of a bullock that refuses to carry the
yoke, to draw, or to plow; very often in the book of God does the Lord
describe this hardened sinner by the comparison of an untamed heifer, in
reference to the yoke: Now in an untamed heifer, there are these two things
remarkable to my purpose: the one is,

That if it be possible, it will throw off the yoke that you would put upon it,
turning away the neck, rinching the shoulder, using its strength, and all that
it has, to keep the yoke that it may not come upon the neck of it: or
secondly,

If you do get the yoke over the neck, and compel it to be under the yoke,
then it pines away, frets and fumes, and bellows, and takes on, but work it
will not; just thus is this hardened heart, God has two yokes; The one is, 2
If by force the yoke be put upon it, it will fret and pine away but not work.


The yoke of his Commandments, which he commands every soul to take upon its
self, this yoke, this hardened wretch throws away with indignation, that you
may say of a hardened heart in reference to the yoke of obedience, as Job
speaks of the Unicorn, in the 39. of Job, Can thou entreat him to carry thy
yoke and to plow thy ground? can thy fair words persuade him to do it? (says
he) so do you think any allurements for God, shall make this wretched man
carry the yoke of Gods Commandments? no, he throws them off, what God would
have him do he will not do, but then God has another yoke, that this
creature cannot keep off: and that is,

The yoke of correction, the yoke of judgment, and when the Lord puts that
yoke upon him, then he pines away, frets, swelters himself, and as the
Prophet Ezekiel expresses it, in the 24. of Ezekiel, You shall not weep, that
is, you shall not weep with any godly sorrow, but ye shall Ezekiel. 24. 23.
pine away in your iniquities: and the Lord expresses it in the 51. of Isaiah:
Thy sons do faint (in the 20. verse) they are like a Bull caught in a net,
full of the fury of the Lord, there thy sons are fallen, I have yoked them,
they would not carry my yoke of obedience, but I have yoked them with
judgment; and how are they under it? there they lie like a Bull in a net, full
of the fury of the Lord, yelling and roaring: thus the hardened heart is like
an untamed heifer, the yoke of Gods commandments it will not carry, and the
yoke of judgments though it must carry, yet it does not profit by them, but
only pines away by discontent under them; This first note of a hardened heart
I give only for your memories sake, because the matter of it will come in the
things that follow. And secondly, another property of this hardened heart that
my Text speaks of, is,

That it is an insensible heart; Nabals heart is said to be 2.
like a stone, sensible of nothing, though all belonging to A hard heart is an
unsensible heart.
him was like to come to ruin; Nabals heart had no sense of any thing, so is
this wretch, this wretched creature I am speaking of, let Gods wrath be
threatened to him, though he lie under it, he feels it not; let his own
unkindness be opened, he is not sensible of it, let heaven shake over him, let
the earth shake under him, let his estate shake, let his house quake, nothing
moves him, let death be ready to shake him, hell ready to devour him, he
apprehends nothing, he is like the drunkard that Solomon speaks of in the 23.
of Proverbs, that lies asleep Prove. 23. 34, 35.
upon the top of a mast, they have beaten me, (says he) but I did not feel
it, they have wounded me, but I did not know it; nothing that the Lord does to
them, or that his word says to them, makes them sensible of any thing, a
hardened heart is an insensible heart; that is another property of it: Thirdly,
this hardened heart of my Text,

Is an impenitent heart indeed, the hardness of heart is 3.
but an aggravation of impenitence, but he is resolutely A hard heart is an
impenitent heart.
an impenitent person, he is one that goes on in the ways of sin, and will
not be took off from the ways of sin; A hardened heart, you may truly say
of it, it is a Rock to God, but it is wax to the Devil; it is inexorable to
the requests of God, but it is most yielding to the allurements of the Devil;
Gods seed will not grow in this rock, but the Devils seed grows best of all
there; they obey not the truth but willingly obey unrighteousness, they are
stones to God, but wax to the Devil; indeed to harden the heart, and to go on
resolutely in a way of sinning against God, is al one, take it as the Apostle
expresses it in the second of the Romans, thus, (says he) Romans 2. 5.
after thy hardness and heart that cannot repent: a resolute hearted man is like
a Blackmore, that cannot change his skin; like a Leopard that cannot change her
spots: it is set and bent to go on in the ways of sin; that is another
property: Fourthly,

This hardened heart does not only go^ on in the ways of sin, but goes on
in them against 4.
all admonition, and all helps against, and means to the A hard heart goes
on, notwithstanding all means to the contrary.
contrary, whatsoever dispensation there is from heaven appearing to take him
off from his sins, the hardened heart has a non abstante, though preached
against, though threatened, though allured by promises, though terrified by
judgments, the hardened heart is Sermon-proof, is judgement-proofe; Elies
sons they were not only wicked, but they hearkened not to the voice of their
Father when he made them a good Sermon from God, yet because God meant to
destroy them, he had given them up to hardness of heart, the counsel of
their Father wrought not one whit upon them; so Solomon says of him in
Proverbs 29. he that having been often reproved, hardens his heart; Jeremy
compares him to a wild Ier. 2. 24.
Ass, Ier. 2. all that seek to catch him labor in vain, Israel had loved
strangers, and after them he would go, if God in his Word mourn to them they
will not weep, if the Word pipe to them they will not dance, if he offer to
draw them with cords of love, they will not follow, if by his judgments he
stand in their way, as the Angel did against Balaam with a drawn Sword, yet on
they will, like the Smiths Dog, they can sleep when the sparks fly about
their ears; he is like a man in iron, an armed man, strike him with a staff,
cut him with a Sword, all is one, he has armor of proof, keeps out both, men
who thus go on are hardened to destruction: Fifthly,

Another property of this hardened wretch is, that they make but a mock and
scorn either of the sins that 5.
they walk in, or of any judgments, or plagues that may A hard heart slights
and scorns counsels or threatenings. Genesis 19. 14.
betide them for their sins; as it is said of Lots sons in law, their
father told them of their sins, and told them of the judgment, but (says
the Text) he seemed to his sons in law as one that mocked: they jeered him,
and they thought he jeered them, they are like the Matthew. 7. 4.
Swine that our Savior speaks of, throw a pearl before them, they will tread
it under their feet; they make a scorn of them, tell them of their offenses
against God, and of the ruin of their souls, they are like Leviathan that the
spirit of God speaks of, in the 41. of Job come Job 41. 24. 27.
upon him with spears and swords, they are but as stubble to him, and strawes,
he laughs at them, he says, Aha, like the horse in the middle of the battle,
neighes and laughs at the danger; so when a heart goes on in a hardened Deuteronomy.
29. 19.
way it makes a jest, and a scorn of all the evils you can threaten against
him, he says, Tush, I shall have peace though I add drunkenness to thirst,
these threatenings are nothing, this wind shakes not my corn; and I Will add but
one more, and that is,

When the heart goes on in this destructive way, it does 6.
oppose and set against all those as enemies who would A hard heart: opposes
and sets against them as enemies who would stop them in their wicked ways*
Exodus 10. 28.
stop them in their way; and when once the soul is come to that pass, then in
truth is Satan set upon his throne, then they are the Devils cushion, or his
pillow; and this the hardened heart ordinarily does, you may see it in Pharaoh;
when Moses still followed him from God, and he could not be rid of him, then
he gave him this answer, come no more to me, I Will hang you the next time you
come, see my face no more, if ever thou come to me again with these
messages, thou shall die for it; and so likewise Amaziah, you may read of him
in 2 Chronicles. 25. when he was fallen into the sin of Idolatry, God 2 Chronicles. 25.
16.
sent a Prophet to him to admonish him; Forbear (says the King to him) who
made you of the Kings Council? hold your tongue, else you will be smitten, then
says the Prophet, by this I know that God means to destroy thee; when they
are like unto them our Lord speaks of, in the seventh of Matthew, not only as
swine, that trample the pearl under their feet, but like Dogs worry them
Matthew. 7. 4, 5.
that offer to bestow the precious things upon them: in one word, David
describes them excellently in the 23. Chap. of the second of Samuel about the
sixth and seventh verses: 2 Samuel 23. 6.
The sons of Belial, that is the hard hearted men of my Text, for a child of
Belial is a child without a yoke, that will not carry Gods yoke, mark how he
describes them, the sons of Belial are like thorns; thorns that may not be
taken with hands, but the man that touches them, must be fenced with iron, and
the staff of a spear, there is no coming near them; when men are set upon
their ways, that they hate him that reproves in the gate, and declare
themselves opposite unto all those that would bring them in to God; there is
the hard heart that my Text mentions, to this pass was Israel and Judah come,
2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16.
2 Chronicles. 36. 15. They transgressed greatly, and the Lord sent to them by his
messengers rising early, because he had compassion on them. But they mocked
his messengers, despised his words, and misused his Prophets, then the wrath of
God broke out against them and there was no remedy: so that in a word, when men
are come to be stiff-necked against God, senseless, and remorselesse, boldly
going on in sin against all mercies and means, and make a scorn of sin
and judgment, and declare themselves enemies to those that would reduce them
into a better condition, these are the men that my text means, and that fall
under this Character, their damnation sleeps not; I come now to the
Application of it; and there are many excellent uses that we might make of it,
three or four I shall by the Lords help communicate at this time; First,

I earnestly entreat you to examine your own souls, Use 1. Terror to all who
harden themselves against God.
whether none of you fall under this Character; I am assured, there is not a
soul in this Assembly, but has hardness of heart in him; I shall be far
from threatening destruction to every soul that is hardhearted, but I desire
you to examine whether you are not one of these hardened sinners my text
speaks of, the Lord help you to look inwardly and say, Lord, is not this my
case? say once again, Art not thou resolved to go on in thy way, what ever
come of it? has not God enlightened thy conscience, that the ways that thou
walk in, are the ways that lead to death? art not thou set notwithstanding
to go on in that way, though God sometimes follow thee with judgments? do
thou not cast the judgments off, if it be possible, or lie and vex under
them, and yet go on? has not God oftentimes in the ministry of his word met
with thee, in thy wicked ways, and showed thee the evil and the danger of
them, and thou resolutely go on, that thou have made thy heart like a piece
of the nether Millstone, as God says of Leviathan's? art thou come to this
pass? hear a word or two from God, thou miserable wretched man, know thou
what thou have undertaken? do thou understand that thou have sent a
challenge to God? do thou understand that thou art in defiance with heaven?
do thou understand (I say) that the Lord God almighty is entered the lists
against thee? or will thou not understand it? or now when thou hear it, do
not thy joints tremble? art thou able to hold u^ the weapons, when he comes to
strike? know thou for certain, that it is the interest of God, to destroy all
those that will try it out with him, he would even hereby be known to be
Jehovah, in the 40. of Job, If thou be God (faith he) show thy self; Job
40. 11.
how? pluck down every proud man, abase them, lay them low, batter them; be
assured of it, thou art a lost man, thou art an unequal match for him, the
greatest Kings and Monarchs, the stoutest Champions, the strongest Giants have
met with their matches, but the Lord whom thou defyest never met with his
match, and I tell thee he is preparing for thee; God it may be has not struck
yet, but he is turning his grindstone, he is sharpening his tools, he is
preparing his arrows, he has them ready at the very face of thee, and thou
wretched man wilt be found to be but as stubble before Gods devouring fire,
thou art an undone man, who ever thou art, that have dared thus to exalt thy
self against the Lord, and if any of you that hear this Sermon do know any
who are thus resolutely set to go on in their wicked ways, any such insolent
worm which dares thus lift up it self against its Creator, I Will give you that
counsel that Moses did give to the Israelites concerning Korah, Dathan, Numb.
16. 26.
and Abiram, who were in the like rebellion, that these men are in, Get you all
of you up from the tents of these men, lest you perish with them, get you up
from them, have nothing to do with them; it is the terriblest thing in the
world to be found to fight against God: O that you would all examine your own
hearts upon it: Then secondly,

This lesson does to my apprehension speak wonderful 2.
sadly concerning our poor distressed England at this Lament the sad condition
of England, our obstinacy against God a sadder token of ruin then all other
judgments which lie upon us.
day; truly the dangers that this kingdom of England is in at this day, are
not to be expressed; It pleases God that we are compassed round about with
mischiefs, and one depth calls to another, and almost every day brings up a
new cloud, and for ought mortal man can see, the issue of blood, which we
hoped had been stanched, is like to be opened again in as dreadful a manner
as ever, yet it was Ships revolted on one side, others contrary to Leagues and
Covenants invading on the other side, tumults in every corner of the Kingdom,
that we are all at our wits ends, but (in Gods presence I speak it) I fear the
threatening of this doctrine more, then I do all the revolted Ships, then I do
Duke Hamiltons army, or all others who by Sea or Land are indeavoring to hurt
us. The kingdom, the body of the kingdom of England is brass and iron; let
us all, especially you that are the representative body of the kingdom, if we
have any bowels in us, let us join and bemoane it now we speak of it, God
has steeped England in the oil of mercies, we are not melted one whit, he
has ground us under terrible judgments, we are as hard as ever rock was; we
are broken like a flint stone into 100. pieces, and every piece as hard as the
whole stone was; go from one end of the Kingdom to the other (pardon me if I
use the received expressions) let men be Cavaliers or Roundheads, Royalists or
Parliamentiers, give them what style you will, all are brass and iron; the
generality of the Kingdom resolutely goes on rebelling against the Lord God;
but go into any town, go into the places of public resort, view the City,
view the Countries, see whether men be not every where set upon mischief and
madness, the Ministry of the word overborne, bulrushes as able to stop a
current as all the endeavors of that handful of men that stand for God, are
able to stop the inundation of peoples sins, lying, swearing, debawchednesse,
blasphemy, heresy, profaneness of every kind, almost all in rebellion
against God, and no man almost lays it to heart: indeed we have our monthly
Fasts kept up, but alas, they are brought to a mere formality; but so did
these Jews in the Text, threescore years and ten together, Fast after Fast,
but God loathed them, because they tended the ceremony, and neglected the
substance, piety and justice, and turning from wicked ways, and even so do
we in the mean time like the Anvile grow harder for all the strokes are upon
us; surely Gods wrath is great against us, Pharaohs hard heart was a worse
plague then all his other plagues put together, and the obstinacy and hardness
of heart throughout the land is the greatest plague we can lie under, and will
prove, if infinite mercy prevent it not, the sluice or floodgate to let in
destruction, let us sadly lay these things to heart, and mourn before him
because of them, and rather wonder at Gods patience then at our plagues; and
certainly, if God go on to lay our pleasant land desolate, and to scatter us
as with a whirlewind, though now we can lay the cause of our calamities at one
another doors, God will make us all know that it was our obstinacy of heart
against him that has brought ruin upon us; the Lord teach us to Iay it to
heart upon this day of our humiliation; Secondly,

Is the sin of hardness of heart so destroying a sin? Use 2. Therefore a
heart of flesh is an excellent grace* 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. Job. 23. 16.
what cause then have they to bless the Lord to whom God has given a tender,
soft heart, a heart of flesh, such an heart as Joshua had, 2 Chronicles. 34. thy
heart was tender, and thou did humble thy self; who can say with Job, God
has made my heart soft; if any soul in this Assembly has obtained a softened
heart, let him know that in that one gift God has given him the quintessence
of all the grace of the new Covenant; God made all the new Covenant good in
that one promise, I will give you a heart of flesh, to have the heart of stone
taken Ezck. 11. 19.
away, and to have a fleshy heart in the room of it, is an unvaluable mercy,
God delights to dwell in a house thus broken, where the floor is soft, where
the rain comes in, and you have infinite cause to praise God for it: but
because I would not be mistaken, I pray you know, that all tenderness and
brokennesse is not that heart of flesh that I mean; There is a natural
tenderness that some men have, a compassionating spirit, so that they can
hardly see another in misery, but will weep with him, and yet it may be their
hearts are as hard against God, as Leviathans is against a Spear; and there is
another tenderness, that is a legal brokennesse, when God it may be seizes
upon the heart with a spirit of trembling, that they are stabbed with the
apprehensions of wrath, and so are like unto Cain, that wheresoever he goes,
he was in the land of Nod, that is, in the land of trembling; this trembling
heart is a curse threatened, the Lord shall give thee a Deuteronomy. 28. 65. Levit. 26.
trembling heart, I will send a faintness into their hearts in the land of
their enemies, and the sound of a shaking leaf shall chase them; I mean
neither of these, but that Evangelicall broken heart, that is contrary to the
sin of my Text, is nothing but an heart willing to lay down the bucklers
before God, that says with Job, Lord I have How such a heart may be known.
done foolishly, I will do so no more; the heart that yields to God: and that
will appear by these four things, one is, that

To such a heart, the relics of the hardness of their hearts is a most
uncomfortable burden, the stone in their 1.
It Is a heart complaining of its hardness.
bladder, or the stone in their kidneys, though it afflict their sense more,
yet does not afflict their inward man, their heart, so much as the obstinacy,
and obdurateness, and wretchedness, that they find in their own soul
against God; O Lord, why have thou caused us to err from thy ways? and
hardened our hearts from thy fear? so also Ephraim mourned, I have been
chastised, but I am like an untamed heifer that will not carry Gods yoke; a
heart that mournes under his hardness is a tender heart; to feel and
complain of hardness is softness, it is an evident sign that there is
underneath a living and quick part upon which this hardness presses, else
there would be no complaining of it: Secondly,

It is a heart that the meditation of Gods kindness 2.
and its own unkindnesse makes relent; the thought It Is a heart wrought upon
by arguments of love, by Gospel arguments.
that God should spare them, pity them, does most affect them: thus the
hardened Jews in Zachary, those that had been most hard against God, yet when
they looked upon Christ whom they had pierced, who came to save them, they wept
like a child; this Lord we have pierced, we have crucified the Lord of life: If
any arguments work at all upon hardened sinners, they are such as these, Tophet
is prepared for you, you are going to a place of blackness and darkness, to a
lake burning with fire and brimstone, where you will wail and gnash your
teeth, but arguments taken from Gods love and bowels of mercy do most melt a
tender heart, when the Lord had turned and softened that harlots heart; Ezekiel.
16. this most affected her that he was reconciled to her whom she had broken
with her whorish heart, this Evangelicall, fleshly heart relents, and bleeds at
the thoughts of Gods kindness and its own unkindnesse; and then thirdly, it
appears in this,

A Gospel-softned heart is afraid of sin, a very coward 3.
to any evil, this heart has not courage enough A soft heart is afraid to
sin.
to try the power of Gods displeasure, How can I, how dare I do this
wickedness and sin against God? hard hearted Job. 31. 23.
men dare venture upon such bloody things, but a softened heart says with Job,
destruction from the Almighty is a terror to me, and by reason of his
highness, I cannot endure; David whose heart was as a Lion, feared not to
encounter Prove. 28. 14.
with Lions, Bears, Giants, yet his flesh trembled at any thing which might
offend his God; this sign of a gracious tender heart you find, Prove. 28. 14.
in the opposition between a fearful heart and a hard heart; Blessed is the
man that fears always, but he that hardneth his heart shall fall into
evil; the heart which fears always is the heart which out of the love of
God would not sin, yet out of the consideration of its own pronenesse to
evil suspects it self, and fears it shall be surprised, this frame of
spirit is thus opposed to a hard heart.

This same fleshly heart, is a heart upon which Gods seal leaves a print, Gods
counsel I mean, his Word, threatenings, exhortations, or whatsoever comes from
him, leaves a stamp upon him; It is a heart that is wax to God, willing to be
molded, resignes up it self to be to God what God would have it to be, as
well as it can; if this heart be at any time drawn into sin when God
appears displeased, it says, I have done foolishly, I will do so no more, it
lays down the Buckler and yields to God, Gods argument prevails with it, and
therefore is ordinarily expressed by having Gods Law written upon the fleshly
Tables of their heart, easily molded to Gods will as much as its frailty can
attain unto; it says, Lord I am full of Rebellion, full of distempers, but I
would not bear up arms against my God, I would yield to him, I would follow
him; if it be thus with thee, thou have got the grace of the new Covenant,
most opposite to the most damnable sin that can be found amongst men; oh
forget not to bless God daily for it: The last and prinpall use I intend is,
Use 3. Exhortation and direction against this great sin.


For exhortation; because this sin of a hard heart is such a destroying
sin, such a ruining sin, therefore I shall desire to give you some helps
how this great evil may be prevented, if we be not yet come up to it; how it
may be cured, if any of us lie under it; And

If the Lord have cured it, how we may be preserved, that we do not return
to it: But first take a few motives to provoke you to labor and strive against
this cursed Motives to strive against it.
evil of a hard heart: I pray you consider in the first place;

We are all hard by nature, not only a Pharaoh, a Senacherib 1.
or Julian are hard hearted, but we are all so naturally; We are all hard
hearted by nature.
and that man that has the stone by nature, if he be not wonderful
careful, it will grow upon him; our whole family are liable to the Stone says
one, therefore I must be wary, I must look to it; and the rather look to it,
because it is not an easy thing to get hardness out of a rock; thy heart is a
rock, and if thou do not look to it, thou will not get hardness out of it,
it will grow upon thee, and thou know not whither it may come in time;
Consider secondly,

That while thou art under the plague of a hard heart, 2.
thou art under all the curses of God, God hardens his While we are under it
our condition is miserable.
against thee, while thou hardnest thy heart against him, none of all thy
services are accepted, thy person is rejected; every thing is accursed, all
goes cross to the soul that is hardened before God: Consider thirdly, (for
I Will but point at things.)

All that God aims at, by all his dealings toward thee, 3.
is but to bring thee upon thy knees, that thou may not All Gods strokes tend
to soften thee.
harden thy self against him; why do thou think he brings thee to Church
to hear? why does he give thee leave to speak to him in prayer? why does he
visit thee with afflictions? why does he power upon thee so many mercies? what
does every stroke think thou speak? what does every dispensation speak?
nothing but this, remember the battle, do so no more, rebel not against thy
God, stand not up against him, when all that God aims at is, to give thee
quarter, terms, articles of safety, and honor to thee, do not stand out to
thy ruin; Again, consider this,

If thou stand out, it will certainly end ill; I confess 4.
the greatest Monarchs upon earth have sometimes met Thou will be ruined if
thou stand out.
with their match, but the Lord God never yet met with his match; never any
body that stood out against him, that ever made him raise his siege, if he has
once pitched down before them, it is in vain; some besieged have first eaten
Horse flesh, and afterward eat Dogs and Cats before they would yield, and
sometime succor has come, but when all is done, a breach will be made on
thee, and thou will be taken; Gideon told the Princes of Succoth who refused
his request; when he came back, he would tear them with Briars and Thorns
of the Wilderness, and he made his word good; believe it, God will tear thee
with Briars and Thorns, if thou yield not to him; yet know for certain;

If thou lay down thy weapons and refuse standing 5.
out obstinately against God, he will be cordially If thou yield the quarrel
is ended, and thou will be spared.
reconciled, all quarrels will be ended if once thou give over hardening thy
heart against him, his heart will be tender toward thee, the Lord expresses it
excellently in the 27. Chap. of Isaiah; who would set Briars and Thorns in
battle against me? what man Esaias 27. 4.
would be so mad, to set Briars and Thorns to fight with devouring fire? well,
if they will do it, if they make that choice, I shall go thorough them, and
burn them up, but (says he) rather let him lay hold upon my strength, that
he may make peace, and he shall make peace with me, fury is not in me; though
thou have hitherto hardened thy self against him, he is yet to be won,
mercy may yet be found, lay hold upon his strength, say unto him, Lord, here I
lay down my weapons, I have been a wretch, a rebel, I have sinned, I am
guilty, but I come with my halter about my neck, he will make peace, he will
grant thee very honorable quarter; Elihu sets forth this notably in Job 33.
after God has battered the strong holds of a sinner by preaching, by visions,
by dreams, by corrections and judgments to withdraw man from his sinful
purposes, yet if when he is ready to perish, when his soul draws nigh to
destruction, he will but yield and call for an interpreter, one of a thousand
to show him righteousness, Then will God be gracious to him and deliver him
from going down to the pit.

To prevent this killing sin, if as yet thou be not under Means how to
prevent this sin of hardness of heart.
the dominion of it: First,

Beware lest ye be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin; mark ye,
there is a deceitfulness in sin, 1.
that will harden men before they are aware; many a man Take heed of the
deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 3 12.
thinks thus, shall I hear arms against God? God forbid, I had rather be
struck dead from heaven with a thunderbolt, then ever harden my heart against
God; this is his thought, but sin cozens him into it, he is cheated into it,
as in our civil troubles, many a man is wrapped into an engagement, that if
he saw the bottom of it, he would die before ever he would yield to it; but
when he is once in, he knows not how to get out; so is it here, but beware
that sin do not cozen and harden you through its deceitfulness; though we
are all hard, yet this killing hardness comes on by degrees, and the first
thing that lets it in, is the pleasure that sin brings to the soul, the
bewitching pleasure of it, and then a man's thoughts are only to give himself
content, but means no hurt against God, little thinks that he begins to
fight against God, but the pleasure of his sin has bewitched him, and then
that pleasure brings him to repeat it again and again, and so to come to a
custom of it, and afterward to defend it, and then in the end to come to a
direct opposition of what ever would take him off from it, thus men are
entangled by the deceitfulness of it; watch therefore against all the alluring
baits of that sinful flesh that dwells in thee: This in general; but

More particularly there are three sins, that you must take marvelous heed
of, if you would not be hardened; More particularly beware
the one is,

The sin of unbeleefe, that which brought all the 1 Of unbeleef. Psalm. 9. 5.
Heb. 2. 12. 15. 16.
Israelites to their hardness in the Wilderness, you have it in the third of
the Hebrews, If ye will hear my voice harden not your hearts as your fathers
did in the Wilderness, but how came they to be hardened? the holy Ghost tells
you the spring of it in the 16. and 18. Verses, for some when they had heard
the word provoked him, even they that believed not, they would not believe God,
and so they grew hardened; therefore the Apostle exhorts in the same place to
take heed that there be not an evil heart of unbeleefe; when the Israelites
were in the Wilderness, God had made them many promises, but they did not see
them accomplished, he had made many threatenings and they did not always
presently light upon them, and because they saw not Gods word presently
fulfilled, therefore they believed not, and because they did not believe and
rest upon Gods word, therefore their hearts grew hard, senseless, careless
and bold in sin, and then,

Pride and high thoughts of our selves, are wonderful hardening evils; nothing
upon earth makes a man so desperate 2 Of pride.
in the ways of sin as self-conceitednesse; and therefore in the Scripture
very often, the Bullocks stiff neck, and a proud heart signify one and the
same thing, Lift not up your horns on high, speak not with a stiff neck:
Psalm. 75. 5. Ier. 43. 2.
you have a notable example in the 43. of Jeremiah of men who obstinately would
go into Egypt against the express word of God, and in the 44. Chapter they
said they would do that which was good in their own eyes; but who were they?
the Prophet tells us, they were all the proud men: And thirdly,

Hypoctiticall and formal attending upon ordinances 3.
without attaining the inward power, is one of the greatest Of hypocritical
and formal performances of Religious duties.
hardners in the world; you see it in these of my Text, what was it hardened
them all these threescore and ten years? nothing more then their monthly
Fasts, their frequent Fasts, and their daily prayings to God. The stubborn,
hardened and impudent harlot you read of Prove. 7. what was it made her so bold
in her filthiness that she will take her fill of love till the morning? why,
Prove. 7. 11, etc.
this secured her, I have had my peace offerings this day, and paid my vows, I
have had a day of Fast, or a day of thanksgiving, attended upon ordinances; so
when men do perform ordinary holy duties, and rest in the shell of them, they
lick themselves whole with them; though I live in such a sin, yet I pray, I
read so many Chapters every day, I keep the Fast as constantly as any man, I
go to Church, this hardens the heart in a way of sin; this is the first
direction, beware that you be not couzened into hardness by the deceit of
sin; secondly, another means to prevent hardness, is,

To beware of the abuse of Gods patience and bounty: The 2.
wretched heart of man being prone to be bold in sin by Abuse of Gods
patience of mercy. Eccless. 8. 11.
nature, is made more bold, when it observes God lets men alone to take liberty
to sin against him; Solomon expresses this clearly in the eighth of
Ecclesiastes, Verse. 11. Because (says he) sentence against an evil one is
not presently executed, God spares him, what then? Therefore the heart of the
sons of men is fully set in them to do evil; resolutely set to go on in a
way of sin, because they see that others escape well enough, as the Soldier
when he first goes into the battle, while he is a fresh water Soldier he
fears and trembles, and dares not be where he hears the bullets whizze about,
but he comes off safe, and it may be of 1000. men not 100. killed, then he
grows bold the next time, and in time dare go upon the Canons mouth; and so
Mariners at Sea, at first quake, but when they come off storm after storm,
they think they shall come off still; so the wretched heart of man, observing
Gods patience and indulgence toward sinful men, takes liberty to go on and
concludes with that wretched man, Deuteronomy. 29. who blesses himself and says, I
shall have Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
peace though I walk after the lusts of my own heart, adding drunkenness to
thirst, he blesses himself when God curses him, but for the Lords sake,
watch you against it, for that is a woeful hardening, when that that should
bring a man to repentance, hardens his heart, and of such God protests he will
not spare them, but the anger and jealousy of God shall smoke against him, and
all the curses written in the book of God shall light upon him: And thirdly,

Beware of the examples of others, the common multitude 3.
going on in any way of sin, especially when they Examples of others.
that do it are great men, and it may be some of them good men, this
imboldens men in their evil ways; it is a wonderful means to make them
hardened in sin, when they see the sin which they commit is common; and we are
prone to think there is no danger in that which many men, great men, good men
practice; the abominable sin of Sodom, the sin for which God destroyed
Sodom, they say there is no man almost in the Eastern Countries makes any
conscience of it, because it is a common sin, yet they make conscience of
murder, theft, drunkenness, etc. but because this is a common sin they
regard it not; these things I commend unto you to prevent this sin of
hardening your hearts: But suppose the soul be under it, what is then to be
done?

If thou be under the sin of hardness of heart, I 2.
mean if hardness reign in thee, if thou be come up to How to cure this
sin of hardness of heart.
the height of it, I have little hope to do thee good, yet many have very
resolutely gone on, and through Gods mercy have been cured; and there are two
ways to cure the stone in the heart as well as the stone in the bladder; the
one is,

To break it; the other is,

To dissolve it. I shall only point at them, they cannot be sufficiently
handled in a little piece of a Sermon. 1.


If thou would have the stone of thy heart broken, then How to break it.
attend upon these three things; the one is,

Study to be convinced that this is thy condition, 1.
search thoroughly and rest not until thou say feelingly, I, here lies a stone
indeed, I am this hardened wretch, when the Leper was so far convinced, that
he covers his lips, and goes out and cries, I am unclean, I am unclean, he
was in the way to a cure, so do thou, study to be convinced, Lord I am like
an untamed heifer, I am a hard hearted wretch, my heart is set in me to
mischief; till the Lord convince thee of it, there is no hope that any means
will ever do thee good: Secondly,

The ordinances of God, especially the preaching of his 2.
word, and in it the denunciations and threatenings of wrath and vengeance, they
are as a hammer to break this Rock; Is not my word a hammer? (says God) do
not I Jer. 23. 29.
break the rocks? would thou have the stone in thy heart broken? bring it
under the bout-hammer of Gods Word, sit thee under a plain and faithful
Ministry, and apply to ^hy soul the denunciations of wrath and judgment due
to thy sin, and pray God to set it home to thy soul; leave not till thy
heart sink under the stroke of the Word, as the Butcher follows the hard head
of the Bullock with blow after blow until it lie along upon the floor; follow
thy heart thus with blow upon blow, read over thy ways, and thy doings that
have not been good, and say not this will be a very hard task, thou had
better do this then perish, better turn then burn; and besides the Word,

Take the judgments or corrections of God, that are upon thee to break thee;
a good shower and a plough 3.
together helps notably to break the clods in the fields; Blessed is the man
whom God chastises, and teaches; when God follows thee with corrections,
consider of them, say thus, God visits me, my family, my wife, my state, my
soul, my children, etc. I am never from under the rod, what is the matter?
Lord what is it? Show me why thou contendest with me; Surely; for my iniquity
I am smitten, all this is come upon me for my rebellion, O my soul I shall
find it hard striving against the Lord, I do but kick against pricks in the
time of adversity: consider, these are means to break the stone; but

Above all I commend the sweet way of cure, by the dissolving of it; and that
is only by faith in the blood of How to dissolve it.
Jesus Christ, lay hold upon Christ by faith: I know not how true it is, but
some say, the blood of a Goat will in time dissolve an adamant, but certainly
there is a slain Goat, the Lord Jesus Christ, whose blood is able to dissolve
the heart that is like an Adamant; Christ's blood will turn a heart of stone
into a heart of flesh; you see it in the Jews, those hard hearted wretches,
that when they were put in choice, whether they would have Christ, or Barabbas,
spared Barabbas and crucified Jesus; yet these hard hearted sinners when they
come to hear from Acts 2.
Peter, that they had crucified the Lord of life who yet was willing to save
them, they cry out, Men and brethren, what shall we do? crucified the Lord of
life! Lord are we guilty of such a thing against a Savior, and in the 12. of
Zachariah, which place intends the conversion of Zach. 12 10.
the whole nation, They shall look upon him, whom they have pierced, and shall
weep, as one weepeth for the loss of an only child; if then thou would
have thy obdurate heart, thy hardened heart, if thou woul'dst have it in truth
yield to God, go and sit thee with Mary near Christ's Cross, and hear him say
behold thy Savior, as he spoke to Mary, behold thy Son, and to John, behold
thy Mother; so sit thou and think that thou did hear Jesus Christ calling
to thee, Behold thy Savior, see the Son of God dying, shedding his blood,
that thou may not die, and be damned; though thy sins have nailed me here,
this blood that flows from me shall wash thee, and shall keep thee that thou
shall not perish, look thus upon him, this will do the deed, this will melt
thy heart, this will dissolve it, so that thou can not choose but go alone
and say, Ah unkind wretch, that ever I shall bear arms against such a God!
This is the way to dissolve the stone, to melt thy heart; I have one thing
more; when God has cured it,

Beware that hardness grow not upon thee again; 3.
though thou drive it away once it will turn again: Know How to keep the
softened heart from growing hard again.
all ye people of God, that though a converted man cannot become a rock again,
yet he may become very hard, he may be frozen as hard as ice; though good
ground will never be a rock, yet good ground may be very hard Watch against
hardening, which steals upon us when
for want of plowing, and lose many a season, and it must be torn, and torn
again before ever it will be fit for seed again, thou may be so far
hardened, as to have cause to cry out with the Church, Lord, why is my heart
hardened from thy fear? therefore when God has made thy heart tender, and
softened thee, labor to keep it so, watch over thy self, that thou do not
depart from it, and to help you, remember these few brief directions;

Observe thy heart very diligently when it grows lazy 1.
as the Church did, who when her beloved came, and We grow lazy.
would have come to her, she had put off her coat, and she was loath to foul
her feet; when I say, thou find thy heart grow lazy, thou beginnest to
harden.

When thou find thy appetite gone, that thou do not relish the Ordinances
of God, and communion with 2.
Our appetite fails.
him, when thou can turn thy back upon those fellowships, and communions
with God, that heretofore have been more precious to thee then thy life; or

When thou find thy heart grown selfe-conceited, that thou art some body in
thy own eyes. 3.


When thou growest pettish, and wayward to them that Become selfe-conceited.
admonish thee, that thou growest choleric, and art impatient 4.
Or unwilling to be admonished.
to be plainly dealt with, then is thy heart hardened, and look to thy self
betimes, let it not grow upon thee; do as men will do in other diseases, I
find the stone growing upon me, I shall have another terrible fit of it, if I
prevent it not, I must take a little timely physic, use the means before
prescribed both to break it and dissolve it, yea before these things grow upon
thee, use these former prescriptions for preventing it, and be very much in
prayer to thy tender hearted Savior, to keep thy heart tender, he only can
do it, and he will do it, if thou seek to him, and rely strongly upon him to
do it, according to his Covenant of Grace, wherein he has bound himself to
take away the heart of stone, and to give his people a heart of flesh, use (I
say again) these means carefully, otherwise if thou harden thy heart against
God, God will harden his heart against thee, and he will make thy heart ache,
and thy bones quake before thy peace shall be made, the Lord give you to
consider of these things.

There is another Use of this Lesson to the whole kingdom how to prevent our
threatened desolation: O how glad would we all be to find some expedient to save
the kingdom! why, certainly this would do it, could we think of a way how this
Brass and Iron, this rock of England might relent before God, and lay down the
Bucklers, that would save England, and nothing else will do it; What might be
of use to England over and above what is already spoken, cannot now be
delivered, the time being more then spent, nor can my voice reach England, but
our prayers may reach Heaven where our tender Lord is; let us therefore turn
what might be spoken in a Sermon to England into a prayer for England.

FINIS.

