HEPTAMERON, OR THE HISTORY OF THE FORTUNATE LOVERS;

Written by the most Excellent and most Virtuous Princess, Margaret de Valoys,
Queen of NAVARRE;

Published in French by the Privilege and immediate Approbation of the KING;

Now made English by Robert Codrington, Master of Arts.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for Nath: Ekins, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Gun, by the West End of St. Paul's. 1654.

To the truly Honorable, the true Lover of all good Learning, Thomas Stanley
Esquire, etc.
SIR,
SInce I knew the World, I have constantly professed my self to be a stranger
to it, yet there is no place so remote from observation, that is not acquainted
with your Virtues, which, like the bright Beams of the Sun, do enter into, and
enlighten the obscurest angles.

The light of this knowledge is a happiness which is most suitable to retired
Spirits; for although the gaudy World does cry up Virtue, and Nobleness, and
does make pretenses outwardly to follow them, yet they will not pay homage to
them on their Account, or on the formality of their praises, but distinguishing
the noise from the effect, will make it their great business to trace them
through all Adventures, and having in their Contemplation enjoyed a full sight,
and sense of their perfections, will in their practice thankfully endeavor to
be worthy of them.

Sir, These Arts did lead me to the knowledge of you, and my thankfulness
shall lead you to the knowledge of my self, which presents unto your hand this
delightful History, written in the Original by an Incomparable Princess, and
acceptable to the greatest Potentates in Christendom, who with great applause
have entertained the Work.

If the Foundation does seem but light, and sandy, the height, the soundness,
and the Magnificence of the superstructure will be the more admired which has
already lasted so many Ages, and which (Translated now into the English air)
will undoubtedly continue longer, if the Honor of your Name, may be seen on the
portal thereof, to give life unto the Endeavors of him, who is,

Sir, Your most humble, and most devoted Servant, Robert Codrington.

The Translator to the Reader.
THose who undertake to render in another Tongue the Conceptions of great
Princesses, ought to be endued with the like Spirit. I will not be too vain to
commend, nor too vile to undervalue my self. For the Divinity by this great
Lady in many places here inserted, it is left to your Candor to interpret of
it; But for the Philosophy, you shall undoubtedly find, that most wisely she
has sorted her discourse, in fit persons, to the four Complexions of the
Natural Body. Besides, you shall every where read most excellent Precepts of
Moral Philosophy: The Canonists also, and the Casuists, will here have enough,
in many passages, on which with admiration to reflect. I am informed that the
Queen had fully finished the Tenth days work; but the Friars and Religious Men,
who have deprived us of the two last Journals, and of the greatest part of the
eighth, would have deprived us also of all the Rest, if possibly they could
have prevented it: And this is that of which Gruget does implicitly complain,
in his Epistle to the succeeding Queen of Navarre, which for your further
satisfaction I have here inserted. If any thing in the whole Work shall appear
too light, you must balance it with that which shall be found more solid, and
impute it to the simplicity of those times, and to the Condition of that Court,
where Mars and Venus were for a long time the two culminating Planets.

To the most Illustrious and most Virtuous Princess, Madam Jane De Foix Queen
of NAVARR.
Madam,
I Had not presumed to present unto you this Book of the Novels of the late
Queen your Mother, if the first Edition had not omitted or concealed her Name,
and so changed the whole form of it, that many did not know it; wherefore, to
make it worthy of its Author, whenever it was divulged, I gathered together all
the original and best written Copies that possibly I could procure, and
justifying them by my own, I have reduced the Book to the true order in which
she had dressed it. Since by the permission of the King, and your own consent,
it has been committed to the Press to be published in that primitive
integrity in which it ought to be, which does prompt me to call into my memory
what Count Balthazar, in the Preface of his Courtier does affirm of Boccace,
that his work of Recreation, meaning his Decameron, did bring him more honor
than all those more serious pieces which he did compose in the Latin or the
Italian tongue. In this same manner the Queen of Navarr, the true Ornament of
our Age (from whom you nothing do degenerate in the love and knowledge of good
Letters) exercising her witty mirth, and playing on the various Acts of human
life, has left such excellent instructions, that there is no Man but may be
taught thereby to improv his lif^ and understanding, and according to the
judgment of all, she has surpassed Boccace in the ^leg^^^^ discourses which
she has made on every one of her Accounts, for which she deserves to be
praised not only above all excellent Ladies, but also amongst the most learned
Men: For of the three styles of speaking described by Cicero, she has made
choice of the plain one, like unto that of Terence in Latin, which appears to
every one to be easy to imitate, but he who undertaketh it, shall find nothing
more difficult. True it is, that this present will not be new, and you will
acknowledge it as descended to you by Inheritance; Nevertheless I assure my
self, you will with a glad eye observe it in this second impression to be
restored to its first condition, for I understand that the first was distastful
to you, not that he was an unletterd Man Who took pains in it, and we may
easily believe that he would not disguise it without some occasion, but his
travel is not found to be acceptable. I therefore Madam do present it to you,
not for any pretenses of my own in it, but having only unmasked it, and rendord
it in its Native luster. It belongs to your Royal Greatness to favor it,
being derived from your Illustrious Family. It carries also that Mark in the
Forehead of it, which will be as a safe conduct to it through all the World,
and render it acceptable to all good Companies. For my self, acknowledging the
Honor you shall do me to receive from my hand this work digested into its
first order, I shall be perpetually obliged to do you most humble service.

Claudius Gruget.

The true and lively Pourtraicture of the most Illustrious and most Excellent
Princess Margaret of Valois, Daughter to Henry the II. Sister to Henry the III.
and Wife to Henry the IV. of France.
Excellently set forth by the inimitable pen of Peter du Ronsard, and by him
shadowed in the Person of Pasithea one of the Graces attending on the Deity of
Venus.
The Poem is called by the Author La Charity, and in his Works it is commonly
placed next to those Poems which he calls Les Mascarades.
THe little God and wild one, a Commander,
Who through the Earth, and through the Heavens does wander,
Viewing the Ladies of the Court one day,
Returned to Heaven, to whom did Venus say,
Tell me (my Son) as thou abroad do fly,
Without regard to Faith or Loyalty,
If thou on earth have any beauty known,
(Thy Eye sees all) which does surpass mine own.
Love made reply, Forsooth, be sure there are
On Earth no beauties can with yours compare,
Unless one Lady's, on whose cradle all
Indulgent Graces down from Heaven did fall.
She straight did blush (as Ladies blush for shame,
To have in Beauties an inferior name)
And to find out the truth of what he said,
Amongst all her Graces choice of one she made.
My Heart, my Love, my Soul, my Eyes, my Thought,
Of thee if ever I deserved have ought,
Go down to France, and let me truly know,
If any Beauty mine exceeds or no.
The young, and all divine Pasithea,
The Skies abandoned her commands to obey;
The Air gave place unto her, and the Wind
Through the wast Regions buoyed her up as kind;
She Stooped descending in a sudden flight,
Cleaving the Clouds, as in the silent night
Far off there in a shining track is spied
A falling Star between two Airs to glide.
Beauty and Vigor, Youth and Courtesy,
Attraction, Sport, Delight and Love did fly
Like Birds about her round, and for her sake,
Did there their chosen habitation make.
Natures Chief wonder her diviner head,
With waving treasures thick was covered
Of curled, ring'd, crisped, and of braided hair,
But of complexion rather brown than fair.
A table fair her Forehead seemed to be
Of Marble white, the seat of Majesty,
Smooth as the Sea, when we behold it may
Lie all becalmed in a fair Summers day.
The Ebon Arches of her Brow did prove
The Portaict of the Bow of the God of Love,
Or Heavens bright Crescent, it resembled, when,
She, three days old, begins her month again.
Two several forces in her Eyes there were,
The one was smiling, the other seemed severe,
Two Eyes, nay rather two twin-stars of the Skies,
That could both Love attract, and Love chastise;
In those black Eyes all Delicacies, Trains,
Hooks, Arrows, Prisons, Services, and Chains,
Whose Arguments even Reason self obeyed
Served as a Convoy for that Heavenly Maid.
In those black Eyes all beauties did abound,
Without them Love no other lodging found,
Near which in an exact ascent her Nose,
A little Hillock 'twixt two Valleys rose.
On her white tender, delicater Ear
A Precious Ruby hung, and sparkling there,
Played on her Cheek, and of her Face, before
Which shone a wonder, made the wonder more.
A pure Vermilion on her Cheeks did grow,
Which like a bed of blushing Pinks did show:
Or like the laughing Strawberries, when they
Strow'd on the top of all the Cream do play.
Not all the Flowers derived from Princes blood,
Narcissus, Ajax, such complexion showed,
As her Vermilion mixed with Brown, which struck
Men's Souls transported with so sweet a look.
Such is the beauty of the Evenings Air,
With some few blacks imbellishing her fair:
When the first Clouds but thin appear, and Day
Does by degrees begin to wast away.
Her Mouth a thousand roses did enclose,
As many Pinks, and Lillies, where two rows
Of Pearl for Teeth did stand, from whence did fly
A rich perfume that did imbalm the sky.
From thence flowd laughter and such sweet discourse,
That Men to Stones she with her words could force
But hearing of her speak, and could again
Make Stones as gentle and as soft as Men.
All the fair features of this Face were seen
Closed in a round, a thick, and dimpled Chin,
Whose soft and dainty swelling did bettay
Another plumpness that beneath it lay.
Her Neck a pillar was of Potphyrie
Streaked with long azure vains, where you might see,
The Rose, the Lilly, and the Pink conjoined,
Stirred with a soft and pleasant Western wind.
Two hills of milk which one wind pressed and repess'd
Without removing quiver'd on her Breast,
Whose swelling Rounds, on which two pinks did grow,
The approaching flourish of her youth did show.
The rest I dare not; for how can the rest
Hid from my eyes be by my art expressed?
A sacred sequestration it is where Honor,
And Chastness waits as watchful Guards upon her.
White were her Hands, and slender, soft and long,
Which forth in veins and several branches sprung,
And into five-born twins themselves dividing,
Showed on their tops where were five pearls residing.
Of ma^ble pure with art most exquisite
Her comlyest Leg was framed, small were her Feet,
Such as they say has Nereus lovely Dame,
Two sure supporters of so brave a frame.
Swift as the darting of the lightnings flame,
This beauteous Nymph to Charles his Palace came,
And suddenly advanced her self unseen
Into the Hall where did the mask begin.
Dark was the night, whose danker curtain spread
Had round about the air enveloped,
When the bright Ladies came to dance, and did
Shine all like Stars, when all the Stars were hid.
Robes there with Gold and Silver richly wrought,
Their glistring flames in emulation shot,
Lights in the Air their rising fires threw high,
Which sparkling from the precious stones did fly.
There my brave King, there you my Lords might see
His Brothers come hung round with Majesty,
Fenced with the Laws which their Companions were,
Laws that were far more gentle than severe.
Our ages mirror, Margaret the fair,
There in her double value did appear,
And now a Pearl, and now a Flower did show,
A braver beauty than the Spring could know.
About the Hall a precious cloud did throw
Its Musk and Amber odours, and did show,
By that sweet wonder, that from Heaven, to dance,
Came down a Goddess into the Court of France.
Into the Chamber as the Sun does pass
Waving and pointed, yet never cracks the glass,
But breaks through th'envious object that would stay
The piercing force of his diviner ray;
So this fair lovely Nymph into the Room,
Where danced these Princes, unperceived did come,
And drawing near, shot, like Heavens sudden fire,
Her self into our Margaret entire.
So well her Soul was in her Soul enclosed,
So well her life was in her life reposed,
So well her blood into her blood was grown,
That of two bodies they were now but one.
Which my King seeing, though to Heaven he be
As near in judgment as in pedigree,
Was first of all himself deceived, because
He thought that only she his Sister was.
Locking his hand in hers, the King did lead
The Dance, and her who did not seem to tread,
But as she had no feet, she in her pace
Swimm'd as she moved with a celestial Grace.
Man heavy treads, and by his gate does show
The dull alliance he to earth does owe:
But Gods do fly, and unconfined to pace
Prove their eternal and Spiritual race.
When the Lavolto was of Provence danced,
The King with this his Sister Grace advanced
In a grave Sweetness nimbly following she
With Ayrie motion 'bout the Hall did flee.
So often in Autumns foggy nights we may
See a swift Meteor on the waters play,
Which now wheels here, and now whirls there his flame,
And no Repose does grant unto the same.
She in a thousand shapes did change anew
The hearts of all who but her face did veiw,
Flashes of fire from her bright eyes did flow,
And wheresoere she trod did Roses grow.
Virtue and Honor her chief Ushers were,
And joined to them did Majesty appear,
Which kept her beauty safe, as Fame does bruit
The Dragon sometimes did the Hesperian fruit
Soon as the noise of Viols did forbear
Their sweet Enchantments on the ravished air,
This Nymph returned unto her Heaven again,
Abandoning the Company of Men.
So the thick eyelid of the night being closed,
In slumbers sweet is oftentimes supposed
Some Angel seen, who sudden does display
Himself, and sudden fleets like smoke away.
Adieu fair Grace, Nymph heavenly born, adieu,
Or mount to Heaven, or fly where't pleases you,
Soon to this Court you shall again return,
And Hymen's torches all for you shall burn.
Then a more high, and a devouter fire
My reinforced Courage shall inspire,
To sound your happy Marriage Joys, as far
As are the fields of flourishing Navarre.
On the two Margarets.
A Sonnet.
THe famous Phoenix whom the East admires,
One in her kind, rare in her brave attires,
The brightest Ray the newborn Sun displays,
To whom she only her Devotion pays.
Soon as the Morn from Ti^hons bed does rise,
Her warbling lays she echoes round the skies,
And when that envious Age does life deprive,
Burning her self, she does her self revive.
How justly France may thou hereafter vant,
TO have had a Phoenix did so sweetly chant?
That none comes near her, all the world does grant,
Unless another Phoenix, who does own,
As well her Name, as glory, and renown,
Left by her Death, our Margaret alone.
Johan. Passeratus.

Another Sonnet.
THE Athenian Timon, Man's great Enemy,
Too strict a Judge of our Infirmity,
In horror great against those sins inveighed
To melt in tears Heraclitus which made,
His fleering mirth; Democritus did raise,
And, Jester-like, laughed at the vain assays
Of Men, whom pleasures and vile lusts control,
The poison of the Body and the Soul.
His laughter loud, the Seconds tears as rife
Against human frailty, the Thirds Hate and Strife,
Singly invite us to a virtuous life.
But in this Book, this peerless Queen to us,
Does, loathing vice, in tears, and smiles discuss,
Timon, Heraclitus, and Democritus
J. Troyen.

The PREFACE
ON the first day of September, in which the Baths of the Pyrenaean mountains
do begin to enter into their greatest virtues, there were lodged in the Houses
of those that kept the Baths several persons, as well of France and Spain as of
other places, Some of them to drink the water, others of them to bath
themselves in it, and some again to make use of the very mud thereof, which are
so wonderful in the effects, that the sick who have come thither, being
forsaken by their Physicians, have returned all sound and in good health. It is
not my intention to declare unto you the situation or virtue of these Baths,
but to give you an account of that only which shall concern the subject of what
I write. In these Baths the sick do continue three months and more, until by
their amendment they do find that they are in a good condition to return from
whence they came. But at that very time there fell such great and wonderful
showrs, that it seemed God had forgot his promise which he made to Noah, to
destroy the world no more by water; for all the Cubans and Lodgings of the
Hosts, that were toward the Baths, were so filled with water, that it was
impossible to continue in them. Those who came from the Coast of Spain returned
by the Mountains, making what shift they could, and those who knew which were
the nearest and most compendious ways, were those who escaped best of all: But
the Lords and Ladies of France thinking to return as pleasantly as they came
forth, did find the small Brooks so greatly increased, that they could not ford
them, and when they came to pass over the River Gane in Bearn, which was not
two foot in depth when they set forth, they found it on their return swolln so
impetuous, that they turned another way to find the bridge, which being made of
wood only, was carried away by the violence of the waters; and some of them
thinking that by the assembling together of many men, they should in their
passage break the course of the raging stream, they were suddenly born down
before it, so that those who were to follow, did lose both the power and the
desire to go after them, wherefore as well to find out a new way, as for that
they were of several opinions, they did separate themselves; Some of them
traveled over the hight of the hills, and passing by Arragon they came into
the County of Rousillon, and from thence to Narbon; Others repaired directly to
Barcelona, where some took shipping, and passed by Sea to Marseilles, and
others to Aiguemore: But an ancient Gentlewoman, and of great experience,
called Oysilla, did determine with her self to forget all the danger of the bad
ways to reach unto our Ladies at Serrance, being assured that if she could find
means to escape the danger, that the Monks there would give her courteous
entertainment, and so much she labored, that at last she arrived to that
place, passing by strange ways, up hill and down hill, so difficult, that for
all her age and the weight of her body, she was enforced to go on foot the
greatest part of the way, but the thing most to be pitied was that the
greatest part of her Servants and Horses dyed on the unpassable places, so that
she arrived at Serrance, attended only with one Man and one Woman, where she
was charitably received by the Abbot. There was also at those Baths amongst the
French two Gentlemen, who traveled thither rather to accompany the Ladies
whose servants they were, than for any indisposition of their bodies. These
Gentlemen observing the company to depart, and that the hushands of the Ladies
did take them along with them, did resolve with themselves to follow them at
some distance, that they might not be discovered by any. One Evening the two
married Gentlemen and their Ladies taking up their lodging at the house of one
who was rather a Nighway-man than a Peasant, the two young Gentlemen were
contented to take their repose for that night in a Cottage not far from them:
About midnight they heard a great noise, at the sound whereof they did arise
and their Grooms with them, and demanded of the Host of the House what was the
occasion of the Tumult, The poor man who did partake with them in the fear,
told them that they were naughty boys who came to a Highway-man who kept an Inn
close by him to take a part with him in the booty; Whereupon the two Gentlemen
with their Grooms did immediately arm themselves, and made have to the succor
of the Ladies, for whom they esteemed Death to be more happy, than to live
after them; And as soon as they came unto the house, they found the first Gate
broken open, and the two married Gentlemen gallantly defending themselves with
their servants; but because the Robbers were too numerous, and that they were
sorely wounded, they began to retire themselves, having lost a great number of
their servants; the two young Gentlemen looking up to the window, beheld the
two Ladies weeping and crying out so lowdly, that being transported with love
and pity (like two enraged Bears descending from the Mountains) they fell upon
the Robbers with so much sury, that having killed a great number of them, those
that were lest not desiring to come under such violent blows, did fly unto a
place of retreat. The young Gentlemen having thus defeated those Assassinates,
of whom the Host himself was one, did understand that the Hostess was worse
than her Hushand, and therefore they did send her after him by a thrust of a
Rapier, and entering into one of the lower Chambers, they found one of the
married Gentlemen giving up the Ghost, the other had received no hurt at all,
but only his clothes were much slashed, and run through with swords, and his
sword was broken, and being very sensible of the relief which these two
Gentlemen brought unto him, having embraced them, and thanked them, he desired
that they would not forsake him, which was a request very easy unto them to
grant, wherefore having interred the Gentleman that was dead, and comforted his
Lady in the best manner that they could, they took their way as God did direct
them, without knowing on what hand to go. If you please to understand the names
of the three Gentlemen and the Ladies, he that was married was called Hircan,
and his wife Parliament; the other Lady who so lately became a Widow was called
Longeren, the two Gentlemen who so happily came in to their succor, the one of
them was named Dagoucin, and the other Saffredant. After they had been all day
on horsback, on the Evening they heard a Bell, to which place, but not without
pain and travail, they did their utmost endeavor to arrive, and were
courteously entertained by the Abbot and the Monks; It was the Abbey of Saint
Savin. The Abbot who was of a noble family (having brought them to their
Lodgings, which were magnificent) did demand them of their fortunes; And having
understood the truth thereof, he told them, That they were not alone who
suffered in that Ruin, for in another Chamber there were two young Ladies who
had escaped the like danger, and so much the greater, by how much there is more
compassion in Man than in a Beast; for the poor Ladies, half a mile on this
side of Pyrchita, had discovered a great Bear coming down the Hill upon them,
from whom they sled with so much speed, that at their entrance into his Gates
their horses fell down dead under them, and two of their women who came a long
time after them, did inform them, That the Bear had destroyed all their
servants; whereupon the two Ladies, and three Gentlemen, did enter into the
Chamber where they were, and found them weeping, and knew that one of them was
Nomerfide, and the other Emarsuite, who embracing each other did recount what
had happened, and began to comfort themselves, being more incited thereunto by
the consolations of the good Abbot, that thus they met together. On the morning
they heard Mass with great devotion, praising God for their deliverance from
their dangers. When they were all at Mass, Behold a Man who had nothing on him
but his shirt only, did run into the Church, flying as some body had pursued
him, and crying aloud for Help. Immediately Hircan and the other Gentlemen made
up to him to see what the business was, and they found two men following him at
the heels with their swords drawn, who observing so great a company, would have
betaken themselves to flight, but Hircan and those with him did follow them so
close that they left their lives on the place. When Hircan had well observed
the party that was relieved, and who was in his shirt only, he perceived that
it was Guebron, who was one of their Companions, who did impart unto them, That
lodging in a Cottage near unto Pyrchita, there came three men to assault him
being in bed, who although he was in his shirt, he did wound one of them with
his sword in such manner, that immediately he died, and whiles the other were
busy and in debate where to bestow him, he observing that he was naked, and
they armed, did conceive that there was no other way to be too hard for them,
but by flight only, which he might the better do being not charged with
habiliments; and he thanked God and them, who thus had executed vengeance for
him on his Enemies. After that they had said Mass and dined, they sent to see
if it were possible to pass the River of Gane, and understanding the
impossibility of it, they were in a great distress, although the Abbot had
often offered them to continue there, until such time as the waters were
decreased, to which they only accorded for that day. As they were going to bed
at night, there arived an old Monk, who every year never failed in September to
have recourse unto our Lady at Serrance, who being demanded of the occurrences
of his Journey, made answer, That by reason of the high waters he came all
along the mountains, and the worst ways that were ever traveled, where he
beheld one spectacle of great pity, which was, That he met with a Gentleman
called Simontault, who being impatient at the long continuance of the
overflowing River, did resolve to force it, trusting in the goodness of his
Horse; to effect which, he did place his servants on each side of him, to break
the furious eddy of the stream, but when they were in the middle of it, those
who were worst of all mounted were carried away by the violence of the River,
and never did return again. The Gentleman seeing himself alone, turned back his
horse from whence he came; but his horse for all his force and promptness did
sink under him: But it pleased God that he was so near the Bank, that being but
four foot from it, and having drank much water, he waded forth, and sat down
upon two flints, so weak and feeble that he was not able to support himself. It
so fell out, that a Shepherd driving homeward his flocks in the Evening, did
find him almost covered with mud upon the stones, and no less sorrowful for
his people, whom he saw to be carried away by the River, and destroyed before
him, than for himself: The Shepherd who understood his necessity, as well by
hearing as by seeing him, did take him by the hand, and brought him into his
poor House, where with small bushes he dried him as well as the poverty of his
Chimney would permit. On that Evening God brought thither this old Monk, who
did direct him in the way to our Ladies at Serrance, assuring him, that he
should find better Lodging there than in any other place, and should meet with
an ancient Woman, called Oysilla, who would be his Companion in his Travels.
When all the Company heard him speak of the good Lady Oysilla, and the gentle
Cavalier Simontault, they were transported with an exilience of Joy, praising
the Creator, who in contenting himself with the Servants, had preserved their
Masters and their Mistresses, and above all Parliament was the devoutest in her
praises; for a time there was in which she esteemed him for her most
affectionat servant. And having diligently enquired concerning the way to
Serrance, although the good old Man did report it to be very difficult, yet
they could not forbear to put it to the adventure, and the next morning they
did set forth in so good order and equipage, that they wanted for no
accommodation: For the Abbot did furnish them with the best horses that were in
Lovedoon, and with good riding suits, and great store of provision, and with
honest Gentlemen to be their Companions and guides over the Mountains, having
traveled which, in great labor and sweat, and more on foot than on horsback,
they arrived at our Ladies of Serrance. The Abbot, although he was a man
churlish enough, did not dare to refuse to give them intertainment, by reason
of the fear he had of Seigneur du Bear, by whom he knew that they were well
beloved; he therefore looked upon them with the best Countenance he could, and
took them with him to see the good Lady Oysilla, and the Gentleman Simontault.
So great was the joy of all this Company, being so miraculously assembled, that
the night seemed but short unto them to praise God for the mercy bestowed on
them; and on the morning having taken a little rest, they did resort to hear
Mass, and to receive the holy Sacrament of Communion, by which all Christians
are united into one, beseeching him who had brought them together by his
bounty, to put a good end to their travells to his glory. After dinner they
sent to know if the waters were any thing diminished, and on the return of the
Messenger hearing that they were rather increased, and that it would be a long
time before they could travel with any assurance, they determined with
themselves to make a bridge between two Rocks which did stand very near to one
another, where yet the planks are to be seen, and are of use to those that
travel by foot, and coming from Cleron will not pass by the Gane. The Abbot who
was glad that they were at that cost, because the number of Pilgrims, and
Country, Travelers did increase, did provide them with workmen, But his
avarice would not permit him to pay one penny toward the work it self, and
because the workmen did all affirm that they could not finish the bridge in 10
or 12 days, the whole Company, as well both of the Gentlemen as of the Ladies,
began to be much perplexed. But Parliament the wife of Hircan, who was never
seen either heavy or melancholy, having asked leave of her husband to speak,
did say to the ancient Lady Oysilla, Madam, I do much wonder that you who have
so great experience, and are in the reputation of a Mother amongst Women, do
not find out some pastime to mitigate the sorrows which we do bear about us
during our long abode in this place; for if we have no exercise pleasant and
virtuous, we shall be in danger to fall sick; The young widow Longeren did add
unto her words and said, Nay which is worse, we shall grow burthensom to one
another, which is a sickness uncurable, for there is not one of us, if he
looks upon his loss, who has not an occasion of excessive sadness. Emarsuite
replied in smiles unto her, Every one has not lost her husband as you have,
and for the loss of our Servants we ought not to despair, for we may recover
them time enough; Howsoever I do join in opinion with you to have some pleasant
exercise to pass away the time as delighfull as we can. The Company (says
Nomerfide) has advised very well; for she said, That if she were but one day
without some Pastime, she should be dead on the next. All the Gentlemen did
accord to the counsel, and besought Madam Oysilla that she would be pleased to
order that which they had to do; who made answer, My Children, you demand a
task of me which I find very difficult for me to do, which is to show unto you
that Recreation which can divert you from your sorrows, for having through all
the travails of my life sought out a Remedy for it, I never could find but one,
which is the reading of the Holy Bible, in which is found the true and perfect
joy of the Mind, from whence the Repose also and the health of the Body does
proceed; And if you shall demand of me what Receipt it is that keeps me so sound
and unperplexed in my old age, It is, That as soon as ever I am up, I take into
my hands the holy Scripture, and read it, beholding, and with my self
contemplating the will of God, who has sent his Son into the world for us, to
declare the good News, by which he does promise Remission of sins, and
satisfaction for all offenses, by the gift which he has given us by his Love,
Passion, and his Martyrdom. This Consideration does administer so much joy unto
me, that I take my Psalter, and as humbly as possibly I can, I sing with my
heart, and pronounce with my voice the blessed Psalms and Hymns, which the Holy
Ghost composed in the heart of David, and of other Authors: The Contentment
which I receive from hence, does do me so much good, that all the sorrows which
the day can bring unto me, do seem to me to be so many Benedictions, seeing
that I have him in my heart by faith who has born them for me. In the like
manner after Supper I retire my self to give some food to my Soul by reading
some godly Book, and in the Evening having recollected with my self whatsoever
I have done in the time of the day, I demand pardon of God for my faults, and
giving him thanks for his mercies, I take my rest in his love, fear, and peace,
being a^med and assured against all Dangers that can approach me. Behold (my
Children) the Recreation to which for a long time I have devoted my self,
having searched all things, and found no other coutentment for my spirit. I am
confident that if every morning you would lay forth one hour in reading, and
afterward in the most humble manner exercise your Devotions at the Mass, that
even in this wilderness you would find that beauty which it may be you cannot
in the greatest Cities: For he who knows God behold h^all things that are
beautiful, in him, and without him all things are deformed; Wherefore I
beseech you to receive my counse^ if you will live well, and with Comfort.
Hircan took the word from her, and said, Madam, Those who have read the holy
Bible (as I believe that all of us have) will confess that you speak the truth;
but you must regard that we are not yet so mortifyed as to deprive our selves
of all Pastime and Corporal Recreation: For if we are in our own houses, we
have Dogs to hunt, and Hawks for the flight; which make us to pass over and to
forget a thousand foolish thoughts. And the Ladies have their works of
Housewifry, and sometimes their dancings, in which they honestly do delight
themselves, which causes me (speaking only on the behalf of the men) to desire
that you who are the most ancient amongst us, would every Morning read the life
unto us which our Savior Jesus Christ did lead, and the great and admirable
works which he has done for us; And after dinner until Vespers, that you will
make choice of some Pastime which may not be prejudicial to the Soul, and be
pleasant to the Body, and so with comfort we shall pass over the ten days.
Madam Oysilla made answer to him; That she had so much labored with her self
to forget all the vanities of the world, that she was afraid, they had made a
bad choice of her for such pastimes; howsoever she would submit to the
plurality of voices, desiring Hircan to understand what was his opinion first
of all. For my part (said he) If I thought the pastime I would choose were as
agreeable to any of the Company as to my self, my opinio should quickly be
known; wherefore for this time I will hold my peace, and will believe that which
others shall speak. Parliament began to blush, thinking that ^e spoke of her,
and half in choler, and half in laughter said, Hircan, It may be that she whom
you speak of can find enough to recompense her self if she has a mind
thereunto; but let us leave off this pastime wherein two of us only can bear
part, and let us speak of that which ought to be common to us all; whereupon
Hircan said to all the Ladies, Since my Wife has so well understood and
expounded, and glossed upon my sense, and allegeth that a particular pastime
does not please her, I believe that she will be able better than any other to
speak of that in which every one will take pleasure, and from this time I shall
be of her opinion, as being he who has no other opinion but her own. To this
all the Company did agree. Parliament perceiving that the Lot was fallen upon
her, did speak in this manner, If I knew my self as sufficient as the Ancients
who found out the Arts, I would invent some play or pastime to satisfy the
charge which you have imposed on me, but being conscious to my self of my
knowledge and faculties, which with much trouble can hardly remember things
well clone, I shall esteem my self happy to follow close unto those who have
already satisfied your demand. Amongst others I do believe that there is not
any of you who has not read over the hundred Novels of John Boccace, newly
translated out of Italian into French, which the most Christian King Francis
the first of that Name, Monseigneur the Daulphin, Madam the Daulphinesse, Madam
Margaret have and do so highly esteem, that if Boccace could but hear them in
the place where he is, he would be revived at the praises of such persons. I
have heard that the two Ladies abovenamed, with many others of the Court, have
determined with themselves to make the like work, and only different from
Boccace in one particular, which is, not to make mention of any Novell which is
not a perfect History. And first of all the said Ladies and Monseigneur the
Daulphin did conclude amongst themselves to make every one of them Ten, and to
have a List of Ten persons whom they conceived to be most worthy to give an
account of them, those being to be excepted out of that number who were given
to their study, and were lettered men; for Monsteur the Daulphin would not that
their art should be mingled in these Novells, and was also afraid that the
beauty of their Rhetoric should in some part be prejudicial to the truth of
this History. But the great affairs which since have taken up the King, and the
Peace betwixt him and the King of England, and the lying down of Madam the
Daulphinesse, and many other things worthy to divert the whole Court, have made
all that enterprise to be forgotten, which now by reason of our long leisure
may be brought unto a period, attending till the Bridge be made. And if you
please that every day presently after twelve of the clock we shall meet, and
continue until four in yonder Meadow by the River of the Gauve, where the
Trees are so leavie, that the Sun can neither prejudice the shade, nor grow so
hot as to vex the freshness of the air, being there sat at ease, every one man
repeat a story which he has seen or heard from some Man of Reputation; at the
end of ten days we shall have finished the Century. And if God shall please
that our labor shall be found worthy of the eyes of the Princes and Ladies
abovenamed, we will give it them at our Return, and I dare assure you that it
will be a present very acceptable to them. Nevertheless (whatsoever I have
said) if any amongst us shall find out a subject that shall be more pleasant, I
will accord in opinion with them. All the Company made answer, That it was
impossible to have advised better, and that the time seemed tedious to them,
that the next day was not already come to begin the Assembly. In this manner
they with delight passed away the travel of that day, rehearsing to one
another that which they had seen in their own times. As soon as the Morning was
come, they resorted to the Chumber of Madam Oysilla, whom they found already at
her Devotions, and when for the space of a full hour they had heard her
Lecture, and afterward the Mass, about ten of the clock they went to Dinner,
and afterward every one of them did retire into his own Chamber to do that
which was to be done, and failed not at twelve of the clock to be in the
Meadow, according as it was appointed, which was so pleasant a place that they
had need of a Boccace in earnest to set it forth to the life, but you may
content your selves that the like unto it was never seen. When the Assembly
were all sat down upon the green grass, so soft and delicate, that they needed
not either Cushion or Cloth of Arras, Simontault began to speak, Who shall be
that Person amongst us that shall have Command over the rest? Hircan made
answer, Because you have first made the motion, it is reason you command, for
at Game we are all equal. I would to God, said Simontault, that I had the power
to command all this Company, I would desire no other happiness in this world.
Parliament did well understand what he intended by those words, who began to
look red upon it; but Hircan perceived not the color which mounted into her
cheeks, but said unto Simontault, Begin to speak on some good Subject, and we
are ready to hear you, who being likewise invited to it by all the Company, did
speak in this manner, Ladies, I have been so ill requited for my long services,
that to revenge my self on Love, and on her who has been so cruel to me, I
will endeavor to make a repetition of all the ill offices and the injuries
under which Women do make poor men to suffer, and I will speak nothing but what
shall be perfect Truth.

The End of the Preface.
THE NOVELLS Of Queen MARGARET.
A Gentlewoman of Alencon had two friends, the one for her pleasure, and the
other for her profit. Of the two, she procured him to be murdered who first
detected her, for which she obtained pardon for her self, and her fugitive
husband, who afterward to save a little money did resort unto a Negromancer,
and their Enterprise was discovered, and punished.
The First Novell.
IN the City of Alencon, in the time of Duke Charles the last, there was a
Proctor called St. Aignan who had married a Gentlewoman of that Country more
fair than virtuous, who for her beauty and delightfullness was much covered by
a Prelat of the Church, whose name in reverence to his profession I shall
conceal; He, the better to arrive unto his own ends, did so cunningly entertain
her husband, that he not only perceivd not any thing of the vice of his wife
and of this Prelat, but he had made him also to forget the duty which he always
carried to the service of his Masters and Mistress, Insomuch that of a Loyal
Servant he became so contrary, that in the end he betook himself to sorceries
to procure the Death of the Duchess. Long time did this Prelate live thus
with this unhappy womam who was obedient to him more for avarice than for
affection; her husband also did solicit her to entertain him. But there was a
young man in the said City of Alencon, the Son of the Lieutenant General, whom
she affected with so much passion that she was almost transported with the
violence of it, and often times she would make use of the Prelat to employ her
husband in some Commission abroad, that more opportunely she might be enabled
to be with the Son of the Lieutenant of the City. This conversation of life did
continue a long time; she had for her profit the Prelat, and for her pleasure
the Son of the Lieutenant, to whom she did swear that all the indearments of
affection she professed to the Prelat were but only more freely to continue
their own, and whatsoever the thing was, the said Prelat had but only a fair
word, and he might be assured, that no man in the world should have an interest
in any other thing but himself only. One day when her Husband was going to the
Prelat, she demanded leave of him to take the air of the fields, alleging that
the closeness of the City was obnoxious to her health. She no sooner arrived
at her Country house, but immediately she did write to the Son of the
Lieutenant, desiring him that he would not fail to come to her about 10 of the
clock in that Evening, which the poor young Man did, and being come into the
entrance at the Door, he found there the Chambermaid who was accustomed to let
him in, who said unto him, Sir, You may go some where else, for your place is
taken up. The Young man conceiving that her Husband was come home, demanded
what was the Business? The Maid taking pity of him, seeing him so young, so
lovely, so ingenious, and withal to love so well, and so little to be beloved
again, declared to him the folly of her Mistress, conceiving with her self,
that when he understood what she was, he would reprove himself for the excess
of his affection. She therefore did inform him, that the Prelat did make his
daily visitations to her, and was now in bed with her. This was, howsoever, a
meeting which her Mistress expected not; for the Prelat was not to come until
the next Morning, who having detained her Husband at his own house, did steal
away privately by Night to come unto her. Who was almost sunk now into the
bottom of Despair? It was the Son of the Lieutenant, who nevertheless could
hardly give credit to it, but did hide himself in a house hard by, where he
watched until three of the clock in the Morning, at what hour he saw the
Prelat come forth, not so well disguised, but that he knew him better than he
desired. In this Discontent he returned to Alencon, whither not long afterward
his unfaithful Mistress did arrive, and thinking to abuse him (as she had
been accustomed heretofore) she did send to communicate with him: But he made
answer, That she was too great a Saint, having been touched with holy things,
to confer with such a Sinner as himself, whose repentance howsoever was so
great, that he hoped his offense should suddenly be pardoned. When she
apprehended that her Case was discovered, and that neither Excuse, Oath, nor
Promise could induce him to return unto her, but were all of no effect, she
made her complaint unto her Prelat, and having consulted with him about it, she
came unto her Husband and told him, That she durst no longer continue in the
City of Alencon, by reason that the Son of the Lieutenant, whom she had placed
in the first rank of all her friends, did of late incessantly importune her to
the violation of her Honor. She desired him to make his abode at Argentan to
take away all suspicion; Her Husband, who in all things suffered himself to be
governed by her, did accord unto it, where they were not long, but this
mischievous woman did write unto the Son of the Lieutenant, That he was the
most wicked man in the world, and that she sufficiently understood that
publicly he had spoken disgracefully of her self, and of the Prelat, for which
she would make him to do penance. This young Man who had never made the least
mention of it to any but to her self, and who feared to suffer in the bad
opinion of the Prelat, did repair to Argenlan with two of his servants, where
he found his Lady at her Evening Devotions in the Jacobins, and having kneeled
down close unto her, he said, Lady, I am come hither to protest unto you before
God, that I have not spoken to any in the world concerning you, but to your
self only; You have done me so ill an office, that I cannot reckon up unto you
one moiety of the Injuries which you deserve: For if there be any Man or Woman
who dares affirm that I have ever spoken any thing in the dishonor of you, I
am come to prove them liars before you. She observing that there were many
people in the Church, and that he was attended with two servants well
appointed, did constrain herself to speak as gently to him as possibly she
could, saying, That she made no doubt but that he spoke the truth, and that she
conceived him to be so much a Gentleman, as not to speak in the prejudice of
any Woman in the world, much less of her self who had born such respects of
friendship to him. But because her Husband had understood that some words had
passed, she desired him that he would declare himself before him, to give him
satisfaction that he had not spoken any thing in this nature, and to take away
from him the belief of it. To this most willingly he agreed, and having his
hand under her arm to conduct her to her own Lodging, she told him that it
would not appear so well if he should go along with her; for her Husband might
believe, that of her accord she had brought him to speak these words unto him:
She took hold therefore of one of his servants by the sleeve of his garment,
and said, Let this man go along with me, and on the first opportunity I will
send for you, in the mean time, go take your repose in your own Lodging. He not
having the least thought of any design upon him, did return unto his Lodging.
She bestowed a Supper on that servant whom she had detained with her, who
oftentimes would ask, when the hour would come that he should go for his
Master, she always did make answer, that it would come soon enough. When it
was Midnight, she privately sent one of her own servants to the Young Man, who
not thinking of the treachery that was prepared, went with confidence to the
house of St. Aignan, in which the Gentlewoman detained one of his servants, so
that he had then but one of them with him. When he was at the entrance into the
House, the servant that was sent for him told him, that his Mistress would
willingly speak with him alone, before he should come to his Master, for which
purpose she did attend him in a private room, where there was none with her but
his own servant, and that he should therefore do well to send back his other
servant which was with him, which was done accordingly, and coming up a little
pair of stairs which were very dark, Aignan who had placed an Ambuscado below
in the Wardrobe, did begin to hear the noise, and demanded, who was there? It
was answered, A man who privately would enter into his house. Immediately, one
named Thomas Guerin, who made it his trade to be a Murcherer, and who to
execute this Murder was well rewarded by the Proctor, did give, with other of
the Assassinates, this Young Man so many cuts with their swords, that what
defense soever he could make, it could not save him from falling down dead upon
the stairs. His servant who was in discourse with the Lady, said, I hear my
Master talking on the stairs, I will go to him. The Lady withheld him, and
said unto him, Take no care, he will come time enough; And not long aster
hearing that his Master cried out I am a dead Man, I commend my Spirit unto
God, he would have made have to his assistance; but she again restrained him,
and said, Let him alone, My Husband does only chastise him for some youthful
tricks of his; We will go see how it is; And leaning over the head of the
Staircase, she spoke unto her Husband, What! is it done? He made answer, Come
and see; I have now revenged you on him who has procured so much shame unto
you: And speaking these words, he with his Poynado gave him ten or twelve
thrusts into his Belly being dead, whom living he durst never have assaulted.
After this homicide was committed, and the two servants of this murdered Young
man were fled to tell this sad News to his poor Father, the said Aignan
conceiving that this Murder could not be kept secret, did take care that the
servants of the young Gentleman that was slain might not be believed as
Witnesses, and finding, besides, that there were none in his house conscious to
the fact, but the Murderers themselves, and an ancient Chambermaid, and a
young Girl of about fifteen years of Age, he would privately have made sure of
the old Woman; but she contrived a way to escape out of his hands, and lived in
safety in the Jacobins, and was the surest Witness that could be of this
Murder. The young Chambermaid continued some days afterward in the house, but
he found a means to suborn her by one of the Murderers, and brought her unto
Paris, to the public place there, that her testimony might not be received.
And the more to conceal the Murder, he caused the body of the poor dead Man to
be burned, and the bones which were not consumed with the fire, he did throw
into a Mortar, where some new buildings were raising in his house. In great
diligence he sent to the Court to obtain his pardon, alleging, That he had
oftentimes forbidden a young man to come into his house, of whom he had a great
suspicion to have attempted the dishonor of his Wife, who for all his
prohibition, came by night thither into a suspected place to communicate with
her, whereupon finding him at the entrance into the Chamber, being filled more
with Choler, than with reason, he did kill him. But he could not so soon
dispatch his Letter to the Chancery, but the Duke and the Duchess were by the
poor Father of the Dead advertised of the Case, who had sent to the Chancellor
to hinder the coming forth of the Pardon. The wretched Proctor (seeing he
could not obtain it) did fly into England, and his Wife with him, and some
others of his Kindred; But before his departure he told the Murderer (who at his
request had given this fatal blow) That he had seen an Express from the King
to apprehend him, and have him put to Death; but because of the service he had
done him, he said He would preserve his Life, whereupon he gave him ten Crowns
to go out of the Kingdom, which accordingly he did, and was never heard of
afterward. This Murder was so thoroughly proved, as well by the servants of the
dead Young Man, as by the Chambermaid retired into the Jacobins, as also by
the Bones found in the Mortar, that the Process was made and perfected in the
absence of the said Aignan and his wife, who were both judged for their
contumacy, and condemned to lose their lives, and to have their goods
confiscated to the King, and 1500 Crowns to be awarded to the Father for the
charges of the Process. The said Aignan residing in England, and seeing that
by Justice he was but a dead man in France, did so prevail there by his service
to many of the Nobility, and by the savor of the Kindred of his Wife, that the
K. of England did make a request to the King of France to vouchsafe him a
Pardon, and to repossesse him in his Goods and Honors; but the King having
understood the villainous and horrid Act, did send the Process to the King of
England, and desired him to consider if such a case deserved pardon or not,
adding besides, that the Duke of Alencon had in his Kingdom the only privilege
to grant pardons for offenses committed in his own Duchy. But for all these
excuses the King of England desisted not, but pursued his request with such
importunity, that in the end the Proctor obtained a pardon, and teturned to his
own house, where to complete his iniquity he acquainted himself with a Sorcerer
whose name was Gallery, hoping by his Art that he should be exempted from
paying the fifteen hundred Crowns to the Father of the young Man that was
murdered. To this end he came to Paris, and his wife with him, being both
disguised; His Wife observing that every day he locked himself up in a Chamber
with the said Gallery, and that he not acquainted her with the reason of it,
one morning she watched him, and observed that the said Gallery did show him
five Images of wood, three of them had their hands banging down, and two of
them had their hands lifted up, and speaking to the Proctor he said, we are to
make in wax such Images as these are, those who have their Arms hanging down
shall be those that shall die, and those who do lift up their hands shall be
those whose favor and countenance we desire. The Proctor said unto him, This
shall be then for the King by whom I desire to be favored, and this shall be
for Monseiur Brinon the Chancellor of Alencon. Gallery said unto him, we must
put these Images under the Altar at what time they are hearing Mass, and you
shall utter some words which at that instant I will teach you to speak, And
proceeding their discourse concerning those Images which held down their hands,
the Proctor told him that one of them was for Monseiur Giller du Mestrill the
father of the young Man that was killed, for he sufficiently understood, that
so long as he lived he would not cease to pursue him; And one of the women who
had their hands hanging down was for Madam the Duchess of Alencon, Sister to
the King, because she stood so well affected to her old Servant Du Mestrill;
and in many other things had so perfect a knowledge of the wickedness of the
Proctor, that if she died not, he could not live. The second woman that had her
Arms hanging down was for his own wife, who was the cause of all his troubles,
and who (he was sure enough) would never amend her wicked life. When his wife
saw all this through the Crevis of the Door, and understood that he had ranked
her amongst the number of the dead, she resolvd with her self that she would be
before hand with him, and under pretense of borrowing some moneys of her Uncle
who was master of requests to the Duke of Alencon, she repaired to him to give
him an account of what she had seen and heard from her Husband. Her Uncle (as
became a good old Servant) did address himself to the Chancellor of Alencon,
and repeated the whole story to him, and because the Duke and the Duchess of
Alencon were not that day at the Court, the said Chancellor repaired to Madam
the Queen Regent the Mother of the King, and to the Duchess, to give them an
account of it, who immediately sent for the Provost of Paris called Battre, who
used such diligence that he apprehended the Proctor and Gallery the Conjurer,
who without rack or constraint did freely confess the fact, and their Process
was made and brought unto the King. Some of the Court being willing to have
their lives saved, pleaded for them, and told the King that in their
enchantments they desired only to have his favor. But the King who esteemed
his Sisters life as dear unto him as his own, did command that the Sentence of
Death should be given, as if they had made an attainder upon his own Person.
Nevertheless his Sister the Duchess of Alencon did so supplicate to have the
life of the Proctor saved, and the sentence of his death to be turned into some
other grievous and corporal punishment, that it was at last condiscended to,
and he and Gallery were both condemned and sent to Marseilles to serve in the
Galleys of Saint Blanquart, where they finished their days in great captivity,
and had the leisure to acknowledge the grievousnesse of their offenses. The
wicked woman in the absence of her Husband did continue her transgressions more
than ever before, and died lamentably.

Lades, I do besecsh you to observe what evil does proceed from wicked women;
How many sorrows did this one produce? You shall find, that ever since Eve
caused Adam to sin, all Women have made it their profession, to torment, to
kill, and to damn Men. As for my self, I have such experience of their cruelty,
that I think to die no otherwise, but only by the Despair into which one of
them has thrown me, and yet I am so foolish, that I must confess that this
Hell is more pleasing to me coming from her hand, than Paradise could be
coming from the hand of another. Parliament seeming not to understand that she
was the Subject on whom those words reflected, did reply unto him, If Hell be
so pleasant as you express it, you need not to fear the Devil who has put you
there. He made answer to her in Choler, If my Devil had been as black as
scornful, he would put this Company into as great a fear, as I take pleasure
to behold it; But the Fire of Love does make me to forget that of this Hell;
And to speak no more of it, I do give my voice to Madam Oysilla, being assured,
that if she would but speak of Women what she knows, she would favor my
opinion. Immediately the whole Company turned toward her, entreating her that
she would be pleased to begin, which she accepted of, and smiling began thus to
speak; Ladies, It does appear to me that he who has given me his voice has
spoken so much ill of Women, though in the true story of a most wicked one,
that I ought to run back over all my old years to find out one whose virtue
might give a check to this bad opinion; And because already I have thought of
one not worthy to be forgotten, I will give you an account of her.

The Lamentable and Chaste Death of the Wife of one of the Keepers of the Mules
of the Queen of Navarre.
The second Novell.
IN the City of Ambois there dwelled a Keeper of Mules who served the Queen of
Navarre, Sister to King Francis the First of that Name, who was brought to Bed
of a Son at Blois, to which place the Keeper of the Mules repaired to be paid
for his Quarters service. His Wife continued still at Ambois, and lodged not
far from the Bridge. Her Husband had a servant who for a long time did love her
so desperately, that one day he could not contain from speaking to her, but she
who was a most virtuous Woman did reprove him so severely, threatening that her
Husband should beat him, and put him away, that after that time he durst not
speak to her any more, nor make any countenance of Love, but kept that fire
concealed in his heart; Until that on a time his Master was gone out of Town,
and his Mistress was at the Vespers at St. Florentines, a Church belonging to
the Castle of the City, and a great way from her own house. Being alone, it
came into his head, to enjoy that by force which by no prayer or service he
could obtain; whereupon he did break down a board which was the partition
betwixt his Mistress Chamber and that wherein he lay, but because there was a
hanging cloth near to the Bed of his Master and Mistress, which did cover the
walls so well, that the rupture which he made could not be perceived, his
malice and treachery was not discovered until that his Mistress was in bed
with a Girl she kept of about twelve years of age. As the poor woman was in her
first sleep, her servant came in his shirt only, into her bed, through the
whole made in the wall, and had a sword drawn in his hand; But as soon as she
perceived him to draw near unto her, she leaped out of the Bed, and used all
tho reasons and persuasions to him as it was possible for a good Woman to
deliver; but he who was transported with a Bestial desire, and did understand
better the language of Mules, than her honest Remonstrances, did show himself
more brutish than the Beasts with whom so long time he conversed; for observing
that she did run round the Table, and that he could not take hold of her, and
withal that she was so strong, that twice together she got off from him,
growing into a despair ever to enjoy her alive, he gave her with his sword a
great blow upon the back, conceiving to himself, if neither fear nor force
could make her to yield, that pain should effect it. But it proved contrary to
his expectation: for as a gallant Soldier seeing his blood is more inflamed to
revenge himself on his Enemies, and to purchase honor; so her chaste heart did
doubly enforce her to run, and to fly from the hands of this wicked villain,
and oftentimes, at some distance, she would hold him in the best discourse she
could, to see if by any means she could reduce him to the acknowledgement of
his offense; but he was inflamed with such a fury that there was no place in
him to receive good counsel, insomuch that he gave the poor Woman many wounds
more, which to avoid, she always ran from him, as long as her legs were able
to carry her, and when by the great effusion of her blood she found that Death
approached, joining her hands together, and lifting her eyes to Heaven she gave
thanks unto God, the God of Power, Virtue, Patience, and Chastity, and besought
him to accept of her blood, which by his appointment was shed in reverence and
obedience to that of his Sons, in whom she most assuredly did believe that all
her sins were washed and wiped away from the Memory of his Anger; And speaking,
Lord receive my Soul, which by thy mercy has been redeemed, she fell on her
face upon the Earth, where the bloody Miscreant did still print more wounds on
her body, and when she had lost both her speech and the strength of her body,
the Villain seized upon her by force who no longer could defend her self, and
having satisfied his reprobate concupiscence, he fled away so hastily, that for
all the Hue and Cries that did follow him, he could never be heard of more. The
young Girl who lay with this poor woman, being overcome with fear, did hide
her self under the bed, but when she saw that the Man was gone, she came unto
her Mistress, and found her without speech or motion, whereupon she cried to
the neighbors out of the window to come to her assistance. They who did love
and as much respect her as any woman in the City did immediately come to her,
and brought with them two Chirurgions, who found that she had on her body five
and twenty mortal wounds; they did what they could to keep that little life
that was left in her, but it was impossible, Yet she continued languishing away
for the Space of a whole hour without speaking any word, making signs with her
eyes and hands, by which she showed that she had not lost her understanding.
Being asked by a Churchman of the Faith in which she dyed, and of her
Salvation, she made answer by signs so evident that her words could not more
manifestly declare that her confidence was in the Death of Jesus Christ, whom
she hoped to behold in his celestial City; and thus with a joyful
countenance, lifting up her eyes to heaven, she surrendered her chaste Body to
the Earth, and her Soul to her Cre^tor. Being taken up and a shroud cast on
her, her Body was no sooner brought down to the Door of her house attending the
coming of the Company to her burial, but behold her poor Husband did arrive,
who first saw the dead Body of his wife at the Door of his house, before he had
heard the melancholy news of her death; And having understood the occasion of
it, he had double reason to lament, which he did in such a manner that he
almost had lost his life. Thus this Martyr of Chastity was carried to her
burial into the Church of Saint Florencin, where all the good women of the City
did not fail in their endeavors to accompany her, and did honor her as much
as possibly they could, esteeming themselves most happy to be of that City in
which so virtuous a woman lived. The foolish and light Huswives beholding the
honor that was done unto her, did resolve with them selves to change their
wanton lives.

You have heard, Ladies, a true History, which ought to make our hearts more
circumspest to guard this honorable Virtue of Chastity. And we that are
descended of noble Families ought even to die for shame to find in our hearts
that sensuality, to avoid which, a poor Mule-Keepers wife did not fear so
cruel a Death. Alas! How many are there who esteem themselves good women, and
yet never understood what it is to resest unto Blood? Wherefore we ought to
exercise our selves with repentance and humility; for the Graces of God are not
given unto us for our nobleness or our riches, but according to the pleasure of
his Bounty, who is no accepter of persons, and who chooses whom he pleases.
For those whom he chooses he does honor with his virtues, and does crown them
with his glory; and oftentimes he makes choice of base things, to confound
those which the world esteems to be high and honorable. Therefore (as he
himself says) let us not rejoice in our greatness, but in this, that our Names
are written in the Book of Life. There was not a Lady in the Company that had
not tears in her eyes in compassion of the lamentable and glorious Death of
that poor Woman. Every one resolved with themselves that if the like fortune
should befall them, they would imitate the same Martyr. Madam Oysilla observing
that the Time did pass away in the many praises of this dead Woman, did say to
Saffredant, If you speak not something to make the Company laugh, I do not see
any amongst you, who can forget the fault I have committed, which is, to make
you weep. Wherefore I give you my voice. Saffredant had a desire to speak some
good thing which might be agreeable to the Company, and above all to one of
them, how soever some wrong was done, in regard that there were some more
ancient and more experienced than himself, who should have spoke before him.
Nevertheless his lot being such, he had rather dispatch it now, for there were
more to come of good speakers, and the longer he stayed, the more his Account
would appear less pleasing.

A King of Naples abusing the Wife of a Gentleman, did in the end carry the
Horn himself.
The Third Novell.
LAdies, said Sassredant, Because I have oftentimes wished my self to be a
companion of his Fortune of whom I am now giving you an account, I shall tell
you, That in the City of Naples, in the time of King Alphonsus, whose Lust was
the Scepter of his Realm, there was a Gentleman so gallant, goodly, and
attractive, that for his perfections an ancient Gentleman gave him his Daughter
in Marriage, which in Beauty and sweetness of Disposition was nothing
inferior to her Husband. The Love between these two was great, until that
wanton time when the King in a Masque did go amongst the Houses of the Great
Ones of his Kingdom, where every one did strive to give him the greatest
entertainment that they could, and when he came into the house of this
Gentleman, he was more magnificently received than in any other place, as well
by Collations, as by Songs and Music, and by the most beautiful Lady that
ever he beheld, who at the end of the Feast did bear a part in a Song with her
Husband, which she did with so much grace, that it did increase her beauty. The
King beholding two perfections in one body, took not so much pleasure at the
mutual according of the Husband and the Wife, as he took care how to dissolve
it. He found the difficulty to perform it was in the united affection which he
observed betwixt them; Therefore he carried in his heart his passion as closely
as possibly he could, but to comfort it in part he made many Feasts to all the
Lords and Ladies of Naples, at which this Gentleman and his Wife were never
forgotten. And because that we do willingly believe that which we see, it
seemed to him that the fair eyes of this Lady did promise him some Good to
come, if the Presence of her Husband did give no hinderance to it; and to make
trial if this conjecture of his were true or not, he gave her Husband a
Commission to go to Rome for fifteen days, or three weeks, and as soon as he
was gone, his Wife who never before was deprived of the sight of him, made many
great laments, for which she was comforted by the King as often as he could, by
his persuasions, and by his presents, Insomuch that at last she was not only
comforred, but contented also with the absence of her Husband, and before the
three weeks were expired that her Husband should return, she was so amorous of
the King, that she was as much grieved at the return of her Husband as she was
at his going from her; And that she might not lose the presence of the King she
did conclude with him, that when her Husband did go unto his Houses in the
Country, she would acquaint him with it, who then with assurance might come
unto her, and so secretly, that no man (whom she feared more than her own
Conscience) could have any notice of it. In this hope the Lady remained very
joyful, and when her Husband was come home she gave him such good
entertainment, that although he understood that in his absence the King made
very much of her, yet he could not receive it into his belief. But in the
process of time, the fire so hard to be concealed did by degrees begin to show
it self, insomuch that her Husband began to have a strong suspicion of her, and
did keep over her so strict a watch, that he was almost assured of the Truth.
But by reason of the fear that did invade him, that he who had done him this
injury, would do him a greater, if he should make it known, he tesolved with
himself to dissemble it, for he believed it to be safer to live, though with
some discontent, than to hazard his life for a Woman that had forfeited her
love. Nevertheless in this despite he resolved to render the like unto the
King, if it were possible; And knowing that Love does assail those most of all
who have a heart great and honorable, he assumed the boldness one day talking
with the Queen, to tell her, That he did extremely pity her that she was no
better beloved of the King her Husband. The Queen, who had understood of the
familiarity of the King and his Wife, made answer, I cannot enjoy Honor and
Pleasure together; I know very well that I have the Honor of which another
receives the Pleasure, and she that has the Pleasure cannot enjoy the Honor
which I have. He who understood sufficiently upon what account those words were
spoken, replied to her, Madam, Honor is born with you, for you are of so
highborn an extract, that to be Queen or an Empress does not augment your
nobility, but your beauty, grace, and sweetness does deserve so much pleasure,
as she who has taken that from you which belongs unto you does do more wrong
to her self than you; she for a little glory which turns into her shame, does
lose as much pleasure as you or any Lady in the Land can enjoy, and I can tell
you Madam, that if the King would but put the Crown from off his head I am
confident he had no advantage above me in giving content unto a Lady, being
sure that to satisfy so gallant a personage as your self he ought to change
his complexion into mine. The Queen in laughter made answer to him, Although
the King be not of so delicate a complexion as your self, so it is that the
love which he bears to me does so much content me, that I prefer it above any
other thing. The Gentleman said unto her, Madam, If it were so, you should not
pity me, for I know well that the honest love of your heart would give all
contentment, if it sound the like love in the heart of the King, but God has
so appointed it, that (not finding in him that which you expected) you should
not make to your self any God on earth. I do confess unto you said the Queen,
that the love I bear him is so great, that the like cannot be found in any
other heart but my own. Pardon me Madam, said the Gentleman, you have not yet
sounded the love of all hearts, for I dare profess unto you, that such a one
does love you, whose affection is so great an insupportable, that yours in
comparison of his would appear nothing at all: And because he finds the love of
the King to decrease toward you, and his own most infinitely augmented, if it
be agreeable to you, you shall be recompensed for all your sufferings. The Queen
as well by his countenance as by his words did begin to understand that what he
spoke did proceed from the bottom of his heart, and did consider with her self
it was long since that he first professed service to her with such affection
that he became melancholy therewith, which at first she conceived to be
occasioned by his wife, but now she firmly believed that it was for the love of
her. And thus the virtue of Love which can make it self to be perceived when it
is not counterfit, does also make it self certain of that which is hid from all
the world. And looking on the Gentleman who was more lovely than her own
Husband, finding that he was forsaken by his wife, as she was by the King,
being possessed with despite and Jealousy of her Husband, and incited by the
love of the Gentleman, she began to speak with tears and sighs, O my God! And
can vengeance then force that from me which no Love could ever do? The
Gentleman who well understood the sense of her words, made answer, Madam, Sweet
is his Vengeance who instead of killing an Enemy, does give life to a perfect
friend. It appears to me, that it is now high time, that Truth, and a just and
reasonable love, should take from you that sottish love which you bear to him
who loves not you. Chase from you that sordid fear which cannot have a Mansion
in a heart great and noble. Let us lay aside, Madam, the greatness of your
Estate, and regard that you and my self are the most laughed at Man and Woman
in the world, betrayed by those whom most perfectly we have loved. Let us
revenge our selves, Madam, not so much to render them their deserts, as to
satisfy Love, which on my part cannot any longer be sustained without Death:
And I believe, if you have not a heart more hard than a flint, or diamond, that
it is impossible for you not to feel some sparks of that fire, which so much
the more increases in me, as I endeavor to conceal it; And if that pity on me
who die for the love of you, cannot incite you to love me, at least let the
pity which you ought to have on your self constrain you to it, who being so
absolutely perfect, do deserve to be the Mistress of the hearts of all the
gallant Men in the world, and are undervalued and forsaken by him for whom you
have disdained all others. The Queen hearing these words was so transported,
that she was afraid to show by her countenance the trouble of her spirit, and
leaning on the ^rm of the Gentleman, did go with him into a garden near unto
her Chamber, where a long time she walked without speaking one word to him. The
Gentleman seeing her half vanquished, when they were come to the end of an
Alley where none could descry them, did by effect declare that love unto her
which so long a time he concealed, and thus with delight they both fulfilled
their vengeance, the passion whereof before was so unsupportable to them. They
determined there between them both, that as often as he repaired to his Country
house, and the King should come from his Palace into the Town to her, that
immediately he should come about, and return to the Palace to the Queen: And
thus deceiving the deceivers, they were all four partakers in that pleasure
which two of them thought to have had alone by themselves. The agreement being
made, they returned, the Queen to her Chamber in the Palace, and the Gentleman
to his house, both of them with such content, that they had forgot all their
former distractions. And the fear which before possessed them that the King was
with this Gentleman's wife, was now turned into a desire to have it so, which
was the cause that the Gentleman more often than he was accustomed did repair
unto his Village, which was but half a mile from the City, and as soon as the
King understood of it, he did not fail to give a visitation to his Wife, and
when ever night drew on, the Gentleman did constantly come into the Palace to
the Queen to perform the Office of the Kings Lieutenant, but so privately, that
never any did perceive it. This course of life continued a long time, but the
King being a public person could not so well dissemble his love, and many
honest men took great pity on the Gentleman; for the naughty boys would make
horns at him behind his back in sign of Mockery, which he understood well
enough, but this mockery was so pleasing to him, that he as highly esteemed of
his Horns, as of the Crown of the King, who one day his Wife being with him,
could hardly contain themselves from laughing outright, they both beholding
the head of a Stagg which was nailed up in the House of the Gentleman, the King
said the head was very suitable in that place. The Gentleman who had as good a
heart as himself, presently after the Kings departure did write upon the head,
To porto le corna, chi ascundo vede ma talle porta chi nolo creed. The King not
long afterward returning to his house, did observe the writing on the head of
the Stagg, and demanded of the Gentleman the reason of it, who made answer unto
him, If the secret of the King be concealed to the Stagg, I see no reason that
the secret of the Stagg should be declared to the King; But you may content
your self he said, that those who carry horns do not all show the^ beaming
forth from their head, for some of the^ are so pleasant that they will not
unbonnet any Man, and he does bear them lightest, who thinks that he has
none at all. The King understood by these words well enough that he knew
something of his own affairs, but never suspected the love between the Queen
and himself; for the Queen seemed to be the more contented with the life of her
Husband; wherefore they lived a long time in familiarity both on the one side,
and on the other, until that old age did put a period to it.

Ladies, Behold here a History which I willingly represent unto you for
Examples sake, that when your Husbands do give you the Horns of a Goat, you may
present them with the Horns of a Stagg. Emarsuite laughing began to speak, I am
well assured Saffredant, that if you do love as much now, as heretofore you
have done, you would endure to wear Horns as great as any Oak, to give one
where you do fancy, but now since your hairs grow white it is high time to give
a respite to your desires. Madam, said Saffredant, Although that all Hope is
taken from me by her whom I did love, and the Heat of Love by Age, yet my good
will continues still; but because you have reproved me for so unblamable a
desire, I give you my voice to speak the fourth Novell, that we may see if you
can disprove me by any Example. True it is, that during this discourse one of
the Ladies in the Company began to laugh outright, knowing that she who took
up Saffredant for these words, was not so well beloved by him, as that for her
sake he would suffer either horns, or shame, or damage. And when Saffredant
perceived, that she who did so laugh did understand him, he did contain
himself, being very well contented, and gave Emarsuite leave to speak, who
began in this manner. Ladies, To the end that Saffredant and this fair Company
may understand that all Ladies are not like to this Queen of whom he has
spoken, and that the rash and unadvised do not always arrive at their own ends,
as also to conceal the opinion of a Lady, who judged the Despite to fail in the
Enterprise to be worse than Death. I will give you the account of an History,
in which I will not name the persons, because it is so fresh in Memory, that I
am afraid I shall displease some of her Kindred who are not far from me.

The rash Enterprise of a Gentleman to encounter a Princess of Flanders, and
the hurt and shame which he sustained.
The fourth Novell.
IN Flanders there was a Lady of so good a House that the could not be of a
better; she was a Widow, and had had two Husbands, but no children by them
living. During her widdo whood she lived privately in her Brothers House, by
whom she was very well beloved, who was a great Lord, and Husband to one of the
Daughters of the King. This young Prince was much addicted to his pleasures,
hunting, hawking, and other pastimes, and to the Company of Ladies, and such
sports as youth is prone unto: He had a very perverse Lady to his Wife, to whom
the Pastimes of her Husband were no way pleasing; whereupon he took his Sister
to live with him, who was of a merry heart, and the best Company that could be,
nevertheless very wise and provident. There was in the house of this Lord a
Gentleman, whose Greatness, Bounty, and sweetness of Disposition, did surpass
all his Companions. This Gentleman seeing the Sister of his Master to be
always merry, and of a lively disposition, did resolve with himself that he
would try whethor the propositions of an honest Friend would be displeasing to
her, or no, which he did accordingly, but received from her an answer quite
contrary to her countenance; and although her answer was such as became a
Princess, and a Lady of unquestionable honor, yet seeing him so lovely, and
in other things so noble, she easily pardoned his boldness, and told him, that
she would not be displeased as often as he should speak unto her, but desired
him to make no more words concerning such a purpose, which he promised to do,
being afraid to lose the happiness and the honor to converse with her.
Nevertheless at last, his affection did so increase, that he forgot the
promise which he had made unto her, not that he intended to court her any more
with words, for he had too often to his experience found the wise and grave
answers which she gave him, but he conceived with himself, that if he could get
her at a place of advantage, that she who was a Widow, young, lusty, and of an
excellent complexion, might possibly take some pity on him, and on her self
also. To arrive to this end, he told his Master that he had near to his own
house a very fair Chase, and if he pleased to repair thither to kill three or
four Bucks in the month of May, he could not see better sport. The Lord as well
for the love he did bear unto the Gentleman, as for the pleasure of the Chase,
did grant him his request, and did go along with him to his house, which was a
very fair one, and in good order, he being the richest Gentleman that was in
that Country. He lodged the Lord and his Lady in one body of the house, and,
over against them, her whom he loved better than himself. The Chamber was so
well hung with Arras, and so well matted, that it was impossible to perceive
the trap-door which he had made betwixt the Bed and the Wall, which descended
into that Room where his Mother lay, who was an ancient Lady, and troubled with
a weakness in her eyes, and because she had the cough being afraid to disturb
the Lady who lay above her, she changed her chamber for that of her Sons, and
every evening that old woman did carry Confects to the Lady for her Collation,
in which service this Gent did assist her, who (being much beloved by her
Brother, and of his most private counsels) was not refused to be present every
morning at the Princesses and at her rising up, and every night at their lying
down, where he saw daily an occasion to augment his affection. Insomuch that
one Evening having kept this Lady up so late, that sleep seizing on her eyes did
force him from her Chamber, he retired to his own, and when he had taken the
most gorgeous and perfumed shirt that he had, and a night cap so well accoutred
that nothing could be wanting to it, looking in his glass he thought unto
himself that there was no Lady in the world who could refuse so lovely,
gallant, and so proper a personage. Wherefore promising to himself a happy
issue of his Enterprise, he repaired to his bed, where he intended to make but
a short stay, for the desire and the hope he entertained to possess a place in
one more honorable and pleasant; As soon as he had sent forth all his people,
he did arise to shut the door after them, and a long time did listen if in the
Chamber of the Lady, which was directly above his own, he could hear any noise,
and when he could assure himself that all was quiet, he began his sweet
travels, and by degrees opening the trap-door, which was so fitly made and
covered with cloth, that it made not the least crack, he went up into the
Ladies Chamber between the bed and the wall, and without any regard to the
obligation which he made her, nor to the illustrious family of which she was
descended, and without demanding any leave, or making reverence to her, he lay
down close unto her, who sooner found her self in his arms, then perceived his
coming. But she being a lusty woman did wrest her self out of his arms, and
asking him who he was, began to strike, and bite, and scratch him, insomuch
that he was constrained for fear she should cry out, to stop her mouth with the
coverlet, which was impossible for him to do; for when she saw that he spared
nothing of all his strength to procure her shame, she spared nothing of her own
to defend her self, and as loud as she could she called for her Lady of Honor,
an ancient and wise Woman who lay in her Chamber, who presently in her Smock
made have unto her Mistress; when the Gentleman found that he was discovered,
he had so great a fear to be known who he was, that as fast as he could he went
down the same way he came up, and as great as his hope was before, and desire
to be entertained, so great a grief and despair possessed him to find himself
returned in that sad condition. He found his Glass and the Candle upon the
table, and looking on his face bleeding with the scratches which she had given
him, and the blood dropping on his short, which had discolored the gold, he
began to say, O beauty, thou have now well rewarded me according to my merit,
for through thy vain promises I have attempted a thing which is impossible, and
which it may be instead of augmenting my contentments may be the doubling of
all my sorrows, being assured, that if she should know that against the promise
I have made her I have enterprised this folly, I should lose all the respect
and familiar frequentation, which no man has with her more than my self. To
gain the love of her heart, I should not by force have attempted to have
surprised her fair body, but by my service and humble patience have attended,
until that Love became victorious; for without it all the virtue and force of
Man have no power at all. In this manner he passed away the night in
complaints, tears, and sighs, which cannot be numbered. In the Morning,
beholding his face so torn, he counterfeited that he was sick, and not able to
endure the light, until the Princes were gone from his House. The Lady who
remained victorious, being confident that there was not a man in her Brothers
Court who durst have attempted so lewd an enterprise, but he only who assumed
the boldness to declare his love unto her, did assure her self that it was he
who endeavored so much to work her shame, and with her Lady of Honor sought
every place and corner of the Chamber to find which way it could be, and when
she could not discover any thing she spoke unto her in a great choler; Assure
your self, that it can be no other but the Master of the house, and in the
morning I will make such a complaint to my Brother of him, that his head shall
be the witness of my Chastity. Her Lady of Honor seeing her in this
resolution, spoke unto her, Madam, I am very sensible of the Love which you
have unto your Honor, to increase which you will not spare the life of one who
has too much hazarded it through the force of that love he bears you, but
oftentimes we think to increase that which we diminish; Wherefore I beseech
you, Madam, that you would vouchsafe to represent unto me the truth of the
fact; and when the Lady had given her an account of it all along, her Lady of
Honor said unto her, You assure me then that he received nothing but blows and
scratches from you. The Lady made answer, Nothing else I dare assure you; and
if he meet not with a good Surgeon, I do believe that on to morrow the marks
will be apparent. Madam, since it i^slo, said her Lady of Honor, it seems to
me that you have more occasion to praise God, than to resolve with you self to
be revenged of him; for you ought to believe, since he has so great a heart to
make such an enterprise, the despite he has to have failed in it, is more
grievous to him than any Death that you can give him. If you desire to be
revenged on him, let him alone to Love, and Shame, which know better how to
torment him than you, or any Instigations of your Honor. Take heed, Madam, to
fall into an Inconvenience, such as is his own; for instead of enjoying the
greatest pleasure that possibly he could desire, he has received the greatest
shame that possibly a Gentleman can endure. So you, Madam, thinking to increase
your Honor, do go the next way to diminish it. For if you will make a
complaint, you will make that public, which now no Man knows, for you may be
sure that for his part he will not reveal it unto any. And when Monsieur your
Brother shall perform that Justice which you demand, and the poor Gentleman
shall come to suffer death, the Report will run, that he would have to do with
you according to his pleasure, and the greatest part will say, That it is a
strange thing for a Gentleman to make such an enterprise, if the Lady had not
given him some great occasion her self. You are fair and young, and merry in
all Company, there is not any in this Court who does not observe the daily
respects of Love which you vouchsafe this Gentleman you suspect; who will not
judge, that if he has made such an attempt, it is not without some fault on
your side? And your Honor, which until now has always gone with an advanced
head, shall be disputed of in every place where this story shall be repeated.
The Lady understanding the good reasons of her Lady of Honor, did apprehend
that she spoke the truth, and that justly she should be blamed, especially by
reason of the familiar love that she was pleased to show unto him: She
therefore demanded of her Lady of Honor, what she should do? who said unto
her, Madam, since you are pleased to receive my counsel, and do observe the
affection from whence it comes, it seems to me, that you ought to entertain a
perfect joy in your heart, that the most handsome and most accomplished
Gentleman that I have seen, knew neither by love nor force to dispossess you
of your Chastity. And for this, Madam, you ought to humble your self before
God, and to acknowledge that this is not by your virtue; for many great Ladies
who have led a life more austere than your self, have been humbled by Men less
worthy to be loved than himself. And moreover, you ought to take heed to
entertain no more discourses of love with him, because there are too many who
the second time have fallen into dangers, which they bad avoided the first.
Madam, remember that love is blind, and blinds us in such a manner, that when
we think the path most sure, it is oftentimes most slippery.

And, Madam, it seems to me, that you ought not to make the least show of what
in this case has happened to you, either to himself or to any other; and if he
shall yet speak any thing to you concerning it, do you pretend that you know
nothing at all, to avoid two dangers, the one of the vain glory of the victory
you have obtained, the other in taking pleasure in remembering things so
pleasant to the flesh; some the most chaste have enough to do to keep
themselves from feeling some heats thereof, although they fly from the
temptations as fast as possibly they can. And to the end Madam that he might
not think by this hazard, that he has done something which may be agreeable to
you, I shall advise you, that by degrees you will remove your self and your
accustomed familiarityes from him, to the end he might understand how much you
despise his follies, and how great your goodness is, which is contented with
the victory which God has given you, without demanding any vengeance on him:
And, Madam, God give you the grace to continue the honesty which he has put in
your heart, and understanding that all blessings come from him, to love and
serve him better than you have been accustomed to do. The Lady intended to put
in practice the counsel of her Lady of Honor, and slept with as much comfort,
as the Gentleman did keep himself awake with sadness. The next morning the Lord
prepared to be gone, and asked for the Gentleman, it was told him, that he was
struck with so sudden a sickness that he could not endure to see the light,
nor any Man to speak to him, whereat the Prince was very sorry, and would have
gone to see him, but being informed that he was asleep, he was unwilling to
awake him, and without saying Adieu unto him he departed from his house, taking
his Wife and Sister with him, who understanding the excuses of the Gentleman
not to see the Prince nor the Company at his departure, did hold her self
assured, that it was she who had brought this dangerous Indisposition on him;
because he duist not show the marks which she had given him. And although his
Master the Prince sent often to him to come to Court, yet he would not return
until he were well healed of all his hurts, but only that which Love and
Despite had printed in his heart. When he was returned to Court, and found
himself before his victorious Enemy, it was not without blushing on her part,
and he who was accustomed to be the most spiritfull in all the Court, was so
amazed, that oftentimes before her he held down his head; wherefore she was
fully assured that her former suspicion was true, and by little and little she
estranged her self from him, though not so closely, but he perceived it well
enough; but he durst take no notice of it, for fear of suffering worse, and
kept afterward that love of his concealed in his heart with that patience of
Restraint as he deserved.

Ladies, Here you may behold what ought to give a great fear to those who
presume on that which pertains not to them, and it ought to be an example of
encouragement to Ladies to behold the virtue of this young Lady, and the good
Counsel of her Lady of honor. If any one of you shall chance to be in the like
condition, the remedy is already given. It seems to me, said Hircan, that the
Gentleman of whom you have spoken had so faint a heart that he was not worthy
of that Lady, for having such an opportunity, he ought not either for young or
old to let fall his enterprise; And I might well say that his Heart was not
full of Love, since the fear of death and shame found so much room therein.
Nomerfide replied unto him, what would you have the poor Gentleman do, seeing
he had two women against him? Do? said Hircan, why he ought to have killed the
old one, and when the young one was with him alone, she had been half overcome.

Kill him? said Nomerfide, would you make a murderer of a Lover? If you are of
that opinion, one might well fear how he falls into your hands. If I had you so
far, said Hircan, I should account my self dishonored if I came not to the end
of my intentions. Whereupon Guebron said, Do you think it such a strange thing
that a Princess ^rought up in all the ways of Honor should be so difficult to
be surprised by one man? you ought then much more to marvel at one poor woman
who escaped from the hands of two men. Guebron ( said Emarsuite) I give you my
voice to speak the fifth Novel. Since you have chosen me said Guebron to be
that party, I will tell you a History which I know to be true, for I have made
inquisition of it at the place where it was done, and by that you shall
understand, that all the wit and virtue of woman is not altogether in the heads
and hearts of Ladies, nor all love and artifice in those of whom we do
oftentimes esteem more highly than they are.

A Beat-mans wise escaped from two Friars, who would have forced her, and
played her part so well that their sin was discovered to all the world.
The fifth Novell.
IN the Port of Couloon, hard by Niort, there was a Boat-mans Wife who night
and day did nothing else but ferry over passengers; It fell out that two gray
Friars of Niort did pass the River with her alone, and because it is one of
the longest passages in all France (to keep themselves in action) they courted
the woman in the way of Love; she made them such an answer as did become her,
but they who were not weary for any long travel they had on the way, nor cold
by any dis^^mper of the water, nor asha^ed at the denial of the woman, did both
determine by ^^^mselves to take her by force, and if she made any complaint
they threatened to throw her into the River; she being as wise and cunning as
they were fool^h and malicious, said unto them, I am not so hard hearted as I
have made you think, for I pray you only to grant me two things, and you shall
then understand that I have a greater desire to obey you than you have to
entreat me. The Friars did swear unto her by their St. Francis that she should
not ask that thing which they would not perform to have that of her which they
desired. In the first place I require of you said she, that you swear and
promise to me, that neither of you will declare, what shall be done, to any man
living, to which most willingly they did swear. Secondly, I require of you,
that one of you after another will take his pleasure of me, for I have too much
modesty that you should see me both together, therefore make choice which of
you will take me first. They sound this request very just, and the younger of
them did consent that he who was the older should begin; and drawing near to a
little Island she said to the younger Friar stay here and say your Orisons until
I have carried your Companion into yonder Island; if at his return he do commend
me to you, we will leave him here, and you and I will go together; whereupon
the younger of the Friars leaped into the Island, where he attended the return
of his companion, whom the Ferrywoman did row into another Island, and when she
came to it, she made a pretense as if she would have made fast her boat, and
said unto him; My friend, Look in what place we shall be, whereupon the Friar
entered upon the Island to find out some corner that might seem for their
purpose; as soon as she saw him on land, with one of her feet against a Tree
she thrust back the boat, which presently retired into the River, and left the
two Friars in the two deserts, and cried out unto them as loud: she could, My
friends, attend until the Angel of God shall come to comfort you, for this day
you are like to have nothing of me that shall do it. The two poor Friars,
finding the deceit fell both upon their knees upon the banks of the River,
beseeching her that she would not put them to that shame, and assured her that
if she would gently waft them to the place where they were to land, they would
demand nothing of her. But she rowing on did say unto them, I should be a fool,
having escaped your hands, if I should put my self again into them, and
returning to the village she called her husband and those who belonged to the
judicature, to come and surprise those enraged wolfs, whose teeth by the grace
of God she had escaped, who went along with her so well accompanied that
neither great nor small would stay behind, but would all partake in the pleasure
of this sport. The poor Friars, seeing so great a company coming, did hide
themseves in the Islands, as sometimes Adam did from the face of God. Their
shame did set their sins before their eyes, and the fear of being punished did
make them greatly to tremble as if they were more than half dead, but that did
not save them from being apprehended and led away prisoners, which was not
without being mocked and hooted at both by men and women; Some said, these
godly fathers do preach chastity unto us, and yet would take away our wives
from us; Her Husband said, they will not touch silver with a naked hand, but
will handle the thighs of our wives which are more dangerous; Others said, they
are Sepulchers, white without, and within full of rottenness; and some cried
out, by their fruits you may know what trees they are.

You may believe that all the passages and places which the Scripture urges
against Hypocrites were alleged against these poor prisoners, who by the means
of their Governor were acquitted and delivered; he with great diligence came to
demand them, assuring those who belonged to Justice, that they should suffer
greater punishment than the Seculars could inflict upon them, and to satisfy
the parties, did protest that they should say over so many suffrages and
prayers as they should charge them with; whereupon the Judge did yield to his
request, and gave him the prisoners, who were so well chaptered by their
Governor who was an honest man, that never afterward they passed the River
without making the sign of the Cross, and recommending themselves to God.

Ladies, I beseech you to consider with your selves, That if this Boat-woman
had the apprehension to cozen two such malicious men, what ought they to do who
have both seen and read such excellent examples? If these who know nothing, who
hardly in a whole year do hear two good Sermons, who have not the leisure to
think on any other thought but how to get a poor subsistence to maintain life,
being so strongly solicited do yet so carefully keep their Chastity, what
ought they to do, who being abundantly provided for, should have no other
business than to turn over the holy Bible, and to hear Sermons, and to
exercise themselves in every act of virtue? It is there where we are to learn
virtue and piety, which is to be lively ingrafted in the heart; And where the
sense and force of Man is found to be the less, there the Spirit of God does
the greatest works, and most unhappy is that Lady, who with all her care does
not guard that Treasure which does bring her so much honor being well
preserved, and so much d^shonor on the contrary. Longaren said unto her,
Guebron, It seems to me to be no great virtue to deny a Friar, nay which is
more, it is a thing almost impossible to love them. Guebron made answer,
Longaren, those who are not accustomed to have such Servants as you have, will
not be ashamed of a Friar; for they be as handsome, as strong men, and more
reposed than we who are unprovided of their harness; and if they speak like
Angels, they are some of them as importunat as Devils; therefore those women who
have seen no Robes but what are russet, are truly virtuous if they can escape
their hands. Nomerfide spoke aloud, By my faith, you may say what you please,
but of the two I had rather be thrown into the River than lie with a Friar.
Oysilla replied unto her in laughter, I make no question Lady but you can swim
well. Nomerside began to take exceptions at those words, thinking that Oysilla
had not that esteem of her as she deserved, wherefore she spoke unto her in
choler, There are some who to my knowledge have refused persons more agreeable
than a Friar, and have sounded no Trumpet neither. Oysilla begun to laugh to
see her angry, and said unto her, No more do they beat a Tabour for that which
they have done, and given their consent unto. Parliament said, I do w^ll
perceive that Simontault has a desire to speak, wherefore I give him my voice;
for after two sad stories we should have one told us that should not make us to
weep. Mary I thank you for that, said Simontault, for in giving me your voice,
I do not desire that you should call me pleasant, which is a Name I do find too
distasteful, and therefore to be revenged, I will declare unto you, that there
are women which make an appearance of Chastity amongst some, and for such a
time, but the end will demonstrate them to be as they are, as you shall find by
a true story which I will represent unto you.

The fultilty of a wife who helped her Friend to escape, when her Husband that
had but one eye thought to have surprised them.
The sixth Novell.
THere was an ancient Groom of the Chamber of Charles the last Duke of Alencon,
who had lost one Eye, and was married to a wife far younger than himself: His
Master and Mistress did love him as well as any Man of his rank in all their
House, which was the occasion that he could not see his Wife as often as he
would, who in his absence did so much forget her honor and her conscience,
that she fell in love with a young Gentleman; by reason whereof the report at
last was so hot and so current, that her Husband was advertised of it, who
could not believe it, by reason of the great signs of Love which his Wife did
show unto him. Nevertheless one day he determined with himself to make
experience of it, and, if he could, to revenge himself on that person who had
brought this shame upon him. To accomplish his design, he pretended to go to a
certain place not far from home for three or four days. He was no sooner
departed, but his Wife sent to her Friend to acquaint him with it, who was not
with her above half an hour, but, behold, her Husband was returned, and knocked
aloud at the Gate. She who knew him, told her Friend of it, who was so amazed,
and put into such a fright, that he could wish himself again in the belly of
his Mother, and cursed both her and her love who had brought him into so much
danger; but she assured him, that he needed not trouble himself, for she would
find a means to get him safe forth undiscovered, and without the least
disgrace, and desired him to put on his clothes with what speed he could. In
the mean time her Husband continued knocking at the Gate, and called upon his
Wife, as loud as he could, but she seemed not to take notice that it was be,
and spoke aloud to the Groom within, Why do you not rise, and answer those who
make such a noise at the Gate? Is this an hour of the night for any one to come
into an honest house? If my Husband were at home, he would make you to look a
little more about you. The Husband hearing the voice of his Wife, did call unto
her as loud as he could, Wise open the door, will you have me stay here until
morning? when she perceived that her Sweetheart was quite dressed, and ready
to go, she opened the door, and said unto her Husband, My dear Husband, how
glad am I of your coming? for I was in a mavelous Dream, and was so well
pleased, that I never received the like content before; for me thoughts that
you had recovered the sight of your other Eye, and in embracing and kissing him
she took him by the head, and putting her hand upon that Eye with which he did
see, she asked him, Tell me, do you not see better far than you were
accustomed to do? and in the mean time, whiles he could not see one, wink, she
did let her friend go out of the door, of which her husband immediately had a
doubt, and said unto her, My Wife, By God I will never watch you any more, for
in thinking to deceive you, I have the finest trick put upon me by you that I
think ever was invented; God amend you, for it is not in the power of any man
alive to put a stop to the desires of a woman, unless he should kill her
outright. But since the good entertainment I have given you cannot conduce to
reclaim you, my neglect and contempt of you for the time to come shall
peradventure be some chastisement to you; And speaking those words he departed
from her, leaving her perplexed and disconsolate enough, who by the means of
her friends and kindred, and by her tears and excuses was afterward reconciled
unto him.

By this you may perceive my Ladies, how prompt and how subtle a woman is to
escape a danger, and if her spirit can readily find a remedy to cover and
conceal a fault, I believe it is not impossible but that one day it may be as
fine and forward to perform some good; For the good spirit (as I have often
heard) is evermore the strong^st. Hircan made answer to her, you may talk what
you will of the subtilty of Women, but I have such an opinion of you that if
you had been taken in the same fault, you could not tell which way to conceal
it. She made answer, I had rather you should esteem me the veryest fool in the
world than to be found in such a condition. I do not mean so said Hircan, but I
conceive you to be such a one as would be rather amazed at the misfortune, than
be so cunning to contrive the means to conceal it; You think ( said Nomerfide)
that every one is like to you, to cover one Error with another, but there is
great danger that in the end the foundation to sustain the covertures would be
so much overcharged that it would des^^oy the whole building. But if you
conceive that the subtilty of men (with which you all think your selves to be
all sufficiently furnished) to be greater than the subtilties of women, I will
willingly give you my place to give unto us some account thereof; and if you
will propound your self for an example, I do believe that you could show us
instances enough. I am not here said Hircan to make my self worse than I am;
although I believe here are some that think hardly enough of me. Speaking those
words, he did look upon his wife, who incontinently said unto him, Be not
afraid to speak the truth for me, for it will be more pleasing to me to bear of
your prancks, than to see them acted before me, howsoever there is nothing that
can make me to diminish the love I bear unto you. Hircan made answer, I will
not here complain of all those false opinions which you have had of me; but
because we know one another so well, it will be the occasion of the greater
surety for the time to come: However I am not so great a fool to rehearse any
History of my self, the truth whereof might compass any discontent unto you,
but I will tell you one of a personage who is indeed one of my friends.

A Merchant of Paris deceived the Mother of his Sweetheart to cover their fault.
The Seventh Novell.
IN the City of Paris there was a Merchant who loved the Daughter of his
Neighbor, or to speak more properly, who was a greater Friend to her than she
was to her self; for the semblance he did make to love and court her, was only
in relation to a love more high and honorable: But she who consented to have
her self deceived, did love him so passionatly, that she had forgot the fashion
by which Maids are accustomed to deny young men. The Merchant having a long
time taken pains to go and wait upon her, did now make her come where he
pleased to wait upon him, of which her Mother had notice, and being a very
virtuous Gentlewoman did command her to speak no more unto the Merchant, for if
she found she did, she would put her into a Religious house. But the young girl
who loved the Merchant more than she scared her mother, did grow more fond of
him than before. It so fell out, that being one day in the wardrop the Merchant
came unto her, who finding her in a commodious place began to speak unto her as
privately as possibly he could, but one of her Chamber-maids seeing him come in,
did run to her mother to acquaint her with it, who in a great choler made have
into the wardrop; when her Daughter did hear her coming, she spoke with tear,
in her eyes unto the Merchant, Alas ^y dear friend, I shall at this time pay
dearly for the love I bear unto you: Behold my Mother is at the Door, who will
now well discover that which she has always feared and doubted; the Merchant
was nothing perplexed at it, but immediately did leave her, and did go unto her
Mother, and stretching out his arms he took her into them, and did embrace her
as closely as possibly he could, in the same heat as he began to entertain her
Daughter he threw her Mother upon the Couch, who found the manner of it so
strange unto her, that she knew not what to say unto him, but only Rise up for
Gods sake, what do you make account to do? but for all that he did not forbear
to press so close upon her as if she had bin the youngest and the handsom^st
Lady in the world, and had it not been that she cried out so loud that her
grooms and chamber-maids came to her succor, she had passed the same way her
self in which she feared that her Daughter walked; wherefore by fine strength
they forced the poor old woman from between the Arms of the Merchant, and
neither could she nor ever afterward did she know the reason why the Merchant
so much ruffled her. During this warm entertainment, her Daughter saved her
self in a house hard by, where a marriage was solemnized, in which the Merchant
and they have since oftentimes made good mirth at it, at the costs of the old
woman, who never perceived any thing.

By this Ladies you may see, that the subtilty of a Man both deceived an old
Woman, and saved the honor of a young one; but he that should name the persons
to you, or set forth in their true colors the Countenance of the Merchant, or
the Amazement of the Old Woman, must have some great burden of horror upon his
Conscience if he could refrain from laughing. I suffices me that by this
History I prove unto you that the Craft and Ingenuity of Men is as ready and
helpful at need as that of Women, to the end Ladies that you may not be afraid
to fall into their hands; for when your spirits shall fail you, theirs shall be
ready to protect your honors. Longaren said unto him, Hircan, I must confess
that this Account is very pleasant, and the subtilty great, but this is not an
Example which either Maids or Wives ought to follow. I do believe that there
are some whom you may persuade to think well of it, but you are not such a fool
to have your own Wife, or her whose honor above all pleasures you prefer, to
play at that game; I do believe that there is not one who would set a more
narrow watch, or would better order them than your self. Upon my credit, said
Hircan, If she of whom you speak should do the like, and I were not assured of
it, I should esteem never the less of her. Parliament could not contain her
self from saying, It is impossible for a man doing evil himself, not to be
suspicious, but thrice happy is he who gives no occasion to be suspected.
Longaren said, I have never seen a great fire from whence there proceeded no
smoke, but I have often seen a great smoke in which there has been no fire. A
person is suspected to be evil but by such as are evil, and oftentimes we are
thought to be such as indeed we are not. Hircan said, Truly Longaren you have
spoken so well in maintaining the honor of Ladies unjustly suspected, that I
give you my voice, but not to speak so as to make us weep, as Madam Oysilla
has done in her praises of a good Woman. Longaren beginning to laugh
outright, said, Because you have a desire that I should make you laugh,
according to my Custom, it shall not be to the prejudice of Women, and so will
I speak, that I may represent how easy they are to he deceived, when they set
their fancy upon jealousy, with a true estimation of their good Intentions, in
their honest attempts to deceive their Husbands.

A certain Man having lain with his Wife, instead of his Chambermaid, did send
his Neighbor to her, who made him a Cuckold, and his Wife perceived nothing at
all.
The eighth Novell.
IN the County of Albez there was a man named Borner, who had espoused a
virtuous Woman, and of good fortunes, whose honor and reputation he did much
cherish, as all men there are most tender of their Wives; and although he would
have his Wife to preserve her Loyalty to him, yet he would not that the same
law should be equally observed betwixt them both; for he fell in love with his
Chambermaid, in the change of whom for his Wife he feared nothing but that
diversity of Viands would not be agreeable. He had a Neighbor of his own
complexion, whose name was Saunders, a Drummer, and a Tailor, and so great was
the friendship betwixt them, that in all things they did partake with one
another, but in their Wives only: Wherefore he declared to his friend the design
he had upon his Chambermaid, who not only did like it well, but with all his
endeavors did assist him in the performance, hoping to have his share in the
booty. The Chambermaid, who by no means would consent unto him, finding her
self oppressed with so many solicitations, did acquaint her Mist^esse with it,
and besought her to give her leave to go unto her Kindred; for she said she
could live no longer in that torment: Her Mistress, who loved her Husband most
entirely and was a little jealous of him, was very glad that she had gained this
advantage on him, and that she justly could demonstrate that unto hm which she
so much doubted of; wherefore she said unto her, Be content good Wench, and by
little and little entertain my Husband with good words and promises, and
afterward you may assign him the place to be private with you in my Wardrobe,
but do not fail to acquaint me with the night in which he is to come, and have
a care that you tell no body of it. The Chambermaid did accordingly as her
Mistress did command her, of which her Master was so glad, that he repaired to
his Companion, to tell him what a Feast he was promised, who entreated him,
that when he was gone he might take what he left. This being agreed upon, and
the hour come, the Master made all the have he could to be with his
Chambermaid, as he thought, but his Wife, who at that present had renounced the
Authority to Command, for the Pleasure to Serve, had placed her self in her
room, and received her Husband, not as a married woman, but feigned the
countenance of a striving and an astonished Girl, and did deport her self so
well, that her Husband did not perceive her. I cannot represent unto you which
of these two thought themselves the most happy, either the Husband, who thought
he had deceived his Wife, or the Wife, who had deceived her Husband; who when
he had continued with her, not according to his desire, but according to his
power, (for he was an ancient Married Man) he departed from her, and found his
Companion far more young and lusty than himself, and told him in a great joy,
That he had found in the Wardrobe one of the best Robes that ever he did see:
His Companion made answer to him, You know the promise made betwixt us? Go then
quickly said the Master, for fear she may rise of her self, or my Wife having
need of her may call her. His Companion did repair immediately to her, and found
there the self-same Chambermaid whom the Husband had mistook, who thinking him
to be her own Husband, did not refuse unto him the thing which he demanded. I
understand here to Demand for to Take, for he durst not speak unto her. He
continued with her far longer than her Husband, which made the Woman much to
marvel, for she was not accustomed to have such night-work; howsoever she had
patience, comforting her self with the Lecture which she resolved to read unto
her Husband on the day following, and at the mocks which he should receive from
her. About the break of day the Man did rise from her, and going out of the
bed, being frolic with her, he took from her the Ring which she did wear on
her Thumb, with which her Husband had espoused her; a thing which the Women of
that Country do preserve with great superstition; and do much honor the Women
who keep the said Ring to their Deaths; And on the contrary; if by Misfortune
they do lose it, they are dis-esteem'd, as having given their Faith to another
besides their Husbands. She was highly contented that he took it from her,
supposing to her self; That it would be a most sure witness to him of the
trick she had put upon him. When the Companion was returned to the Master, he
said unto him, And well! How is it? He made answer to him, That he was of his
opinion, and if he had not feared the approach of the day, he had still
continued with her; And thus they went afterward both together to take their
rest as patiently as they could. In the morning as they were dressing
themselves, the Husband observed the Ring which his Companion had on his
finger, as like as could he unto that which on his Marriage he gave unto his
Wife: When he understood by him that he had taken it from the finger of his
Chambermaid; he was much amazed, and began to beat his head against the walls,
and to cry out, O the Virtue of God! I have made a Cuckold of my self, my self
knowing nothing at all. To comfort him, his Companion said unto him, It may be
in the Evening your Wife gave it her to lay up for her. The Husband repaired
straight to his House, where he found his Wife, more lovely to look on, more
gorgeous in her apparel, and more joyful of heart than she was accustomed to
be, as both rejoicing to have saved the conscience of her Chambermaid, and to
have made trial to the utmost what her Husband was able to perform, without
losing any thing but the sleep of one night. Her Husband seeing her with so
glad a Countenance, said to himself, If she knew her good Fortune she would not
make me so welcome; and talking to her of diverse subjects he took her by the
hand, and observed that she had not that Ring on her finger, which never before
came off it: Whereupon he was like a man altogether transported, and demanded
of her in a trembling voice, What have you done with your Ring? She being glad
that he had begun the subject on which she desired to continue the Discourse,
said unto him, O you most wicked amongst Men! from whom do you think that you
had taken, it? You do believe confidently enough that it was from my
Chambermaid, for the love of whom you have expended twice as much of your
goods, and more than ever you have bestowed on me. The last night on the first
time that you came to lie with her, I judged you so greedy and amorous of her
that it was impossible to be more, but after that you were gone away and
suddenly returned again, it seemed to me that you were a very Devil without
either order or measure. Fond and wicked as you are I think with your self what
a blindness did possess you, so much to praise my body and my plumpnesse,
with which so many years you have had your sport without making any great
esteem of it. It was not the beauty, nor the delicious plumpnesse of your
Chambermaid which you found so agreeable to you, but an infamous sin, and a
reprobate concupiscence, which did inflame your heart, and did render your
understanding so dull, that into that fury in which lust had thrown you in your
desire of your Chambermaid, I do believe that you would have taken a she goat
a coif on her head for a handsome maid. It is now time my Husband to correct
your self, and to be conrented with me, acknowledging me to be yours, and a
woman of integrity, and to consider what you have done, thinking that I am a
poor well-meaning creature. That which I have done has been to retire and
withdraw you from your misfortunes, that in our age we may live together in
love and quiet of Conscience. For if you will continue in your passed course of
life, I had rather separate my self from you than from day to day to see before
my eyes the ruin of your Soul, your Body, and your Fortunes. But if you please
to acknowledge your errors, and resolve with your self to live according to the
will of God, and to follow his Commandments, I will forget all your former
faults, as I beseech God to forget my Ingratitude that I love him not as I
ought to do. Who was now amazed and on the brink of despair? it was the poor
husband, to see that his wife, so lovely, chaste and courteous, should be
forsaken by him for one who did not love him, and which is worse, to be so
unfortunate as to make her a sinner without her knowledge, and another to
partake of that pleasure which was only for himself; wherefore he bequeathed to
himself the Horns of perpetual mockery. But observing that his wife was
thoroughly moved at the love which he did bear to his Chambermaid, he did
forbear to acquaint her with the evil turn that he had done her, and asking
pardon of her, he did faithfully promise to abandon all-together his idle
course of life. This being done, he gave back unto her the Ring which he had
taken from his Companion, whom he entreated not to reveal his shame to any. But
as all things whispered in the car are preached upon the Housetop, so not long
afterward the truth was known, and he was called Cuckold, without any disgrace
unto his wife.

Ladies, I believe, that if all those who have committed the like offenses
should endure the same punishment, Hircan and Saffradant would be in a great
fear and danger. And why so Longaren, said Saffredant, Are there none married
in this Company but only Hircan and my self? There are, (said she) but none
that do play at such a Game. When or where have you seen ( said Saffredant)
that we have made Chamber-maids of our Wives? If the Ladies whom it concerns
would speak the truth, said Longaren, there may be found of their Chambermaids
who have been gone from them before the Quarter day. Truly, said Guebron, Are
not you a strange Lady, who instead of making the Company to laugh, according
to your promise, do put these two poor Gentlemen into a choler? It Is all one,
said Longaren, as long as it proceeds not to the drawing of swords, their
choler shall but double our laughter. Let it pass, said Hircan, But if our
wives were so rash as to believe his Lady, she would move the most temperate of
them unto Jealousy. I know well enough before whom I speak, said Longaren; for
their Ladies are so discreet, and so entirely do affect them, that although we
should make them horns as great as those of a Stagg, yet they would persuade
themselves, and the world also, that they were Chaplets of Roses. At that the
Company, and they themselves whom most nearly it did concern; did begin to
laugh so heartily, that for the present they could not speak a word. Dagoucin,
who had yet been silent, could no longer contain himself, and said, That Man is
unreasonable, who having wherewith to content himself, will search after other
things, for I have often seen, that thinking to fare better, and not to content
themselves with their own sufficiency, Men do fall into the worst of all, when
it is too late to complain; for inconstancy is always to be disproved.
Simontault said unto him. But what think you of those who have not yet found
out their half part of love? Do you call it inconstancy to seek for it in every
place where it is to be found? Dagoucin made answer, Because a Man cannot tell
what that ^alf part is, whose union is so equal that the one differs not from
the other, it is requisite that we should stay there where Love constrains,
and (whatsoever the temptation may be) to change neither the heart nor the
will, for if she whom you love be so like unto you that she is of the same
will, and the same desire with you, It is your self whom you love, rather than
her. Hircan replied, Dagoucin, I will affirm, That if our love be founded upon
beauty, complexion, fashion, or the favor of a woman, and the end of that love
be for pleasure, honor, or for profit, the love cannot long continue; for if
that on which we do ground our love prove defective, the love will suddenly
decay: but I am confident in my Judgment, that he who loves has no other end
or desire but to be beloved, and will rather lose his life than his love. Upon
my faith, said Simontault, I do not believe Dagoucin, that you were ever in
love; for if you had known that fire as well as others, you would not here have
given us a description of Plato's Commonwealth, which he did write of only,
and had no other experience of it. If I ever did love ( said Dagoucin) I do
love still, and will love as long as I live; but I have so great a fear that
the expression of my love shall not be answerable to the perfection of it, tha^
I forbear to speak of it, lest she from whom I do desire the like height of
love should not understand me according (...) the absoluteness of it, as
indeed it is. And I dare not think my own thoughts, for fear my eyes should
reveal something of them; For the more that I keep this fire concealed and
covered, the more does the pleasure increase in me to find that I love so
perfectly. Shall I not believe then, said Guebron, that you would be glad to be
beloved? I do not say the contrary, said Dagoucin, but when I shall be so well
beloved as I do love, our love shall be so great, that it shall not know how to
increase, nor be capable either of extension or diminution: And till I find
that love, I shall be careful how I do reveal it. Parliament who suspected
whither that fancy tended, said unto him, Take heed, Dagoucin to your self, for
I have seen others, who had rather die than confess their loves. Those ( said
Dagoucin) do esteem themselves to be thrice happy. I ( said Saffredant) and
worthy to be put in the Chronicle of Innocents, of whom the Church speaks,
Non loquendo sed moriendo confessi sunt. I have heard much Discourse of these
ecstasies of love, but never yet have I seen any one to die for Love: And
because I have escaped all the torments that love can afflict, and have seen
(as I conceive) the utmost of his tyranny on others, I am of opinion that no
man can die for love? Say you so, Saffredant, said Dagoucin, and would you be
beloved because none of your opinion do die for love. I can reckon a whole
Catalogue to you of those who died of no other disease, than of too violent a
love. Because you are so well experienced in the stories of them, I will give
you my voice, said Longaren, to give us an account of one, which shall make the
Ninth of this Journall. To the end ( said Dagoucin) that my true History,
followed with signs and miracles, should work a faith into you to believe it, I
will in this place recite unto you, what to my knowledge did happen about three
years ago.

The Lamentable Death of a Gentleman in Love, who too late received comfort of
her whom he affected.
The ninth Novell.
BEtween Dauphin and Provence there lived a Gentleman more rich in virtue,
beauty, and in courtesy, than in the goods of Fortune, who most entirely loved
a young Gentlewoman, whose Name I will not rehearse, in respect unto her
Kindred, who are descended of good and great Families, but you may assure your
selves that the Story is most true, and because he was not descended of so
great a house as she was, he durst not discover his affection to her; for the
extreme love which he did bear unto her was so absolute and perfect, that he
did choose rather to die, than to desire any one thing which might tend to her
dishonor; and seeing himself in so low a condition, in comparison of her, he
could not entertain the least hope to espouse her. Wherefore his love was
grounded on no other end, but only with all his power to love her as perfectly
as possibly he could, of which at last she had some Intelligence. And seeing
the honest affection which he did bear unto her so full of virtue and civility,
she thought her self happy to be beloved by so worthy a personage, and made so
much of him, that he who could not have wished for more, was greatly contented
at it. But Malice the Enemy to all Quiet could not long suffer the continuance
of a life so happy; For some Informers whispered in the Mothers, ear, That they
much wondered that this Gentleman was of such power in her house, and that they
suspected the beauty of her Daughter to be the only occasion of it, with whom
they oftentimes observed him to hold discourse. The Mother who no ways doubted
the honesty of the Gentleman, of whom she was as much assured as of any of her
own Children, was very forry that there was spread abroad such an uncharitable
opinion of him, but fearing that some scandal might arise by the malice of bad
tongues, she entreated him at last, that for a certain time he would not come
so often to her house as he was accustomed to do. This was hard of digestion to
him, knowing that the civil discourse which he held always with her Daughter,
did not deserve that restraint. Nevertheless, to stop the report of all ill
tongues, he retired for a time, until that report was silenced, and afterward
returned, as he had been accustomed to do. His absence had no ways diminished
his affection; Being in the house, he understood that the young Lady was to be
married to a Gentleman, who in his opinion was not of that great Estate, but
that his own service might be as well entertained, and be as acceptable as his.
He therefore began to take heart to employ his friends to speak on his behalf,
supposing that if the choice were offered to the young Lady, that she would
prefer him unto the other: Nevertheless the Mother of the Daughter, and her
Kindred, did make choice of the other, because he was far more rich; whereat the
Gentleman was extremely melancholy, knowing that his Mistress would lose
thereby as much contentment as himself. Whereupon by little and little, without
any other Sickness, he did begin to consume away, and in a short time was so
much changed, that it seemed he had covered the beauty of his countenance with
the Mask of Death, to which day succeeding day, and hour following hour, he did
joyfully repair. So it was, that he could not sometimes forbear from speaking
to her whom he loved so entirely. But at last his strength failed him, and he
was enforced to keep his Bed, of which he would not advise her whom he loved,
because he was unwilling that she should partake in his affliction. And
suffering himself to sink into despair, he at last could neither eat, nor
drink, nor sleep, nor take any rest; insomuch that it was impossible to know
him, by reason of his leanenesse, and the strange and sharp countenance which
he had. Some there were, who advertised the Mother of his Mistress of it, who
was a Woman full of pity, and loved the Gentleman so well, that if all her
Kindred and Confidents had been of the same opinion as her self was, and her
Daughter, they had preferred his Honesty and fair Deportment, above all the
Fortunes of the other; but the Kindred who were on the Fathers side would not
understand it: Nevertheless she resorted with her Daughter to visit the poor
Gentleman, whom they found rather dead than alive; And perceiving that the end
of his life did approach, he sent for the Priest, and having made his
Confession, he received the holy Sacrament, thinking to have died without
seeing any one. But being ready to descend unto the sleep of Death, and
unexpectedly beholding her who was both his Life and Resurrection, he found
himself so fortified, that he did arise up in his Bed, and said unto the old
Lady; Some occasion has brought you hith^^ Madam, to give a visit unto him who
has already one foot in his Grave, and of whose Death you are the occasion.
The Lady made answer, How can that be possible, that he whom we do love so well
can receive his Death by our neglect? Tell me, I pray you, upon what account of
Reason do you speak these words? Madam, said he, Although as much as it was
possible for me, I have dissembled the love which I most faithfully have born
unto Mademoiselle your Daughter, so it is, that my friends (speaking of the
Marriage betwixt her and me) have been more hot upon it than I desired, seeing
thereby I have received this Misfortune to lose all my hopes; neither does it
so much afflict me for my particular, but for that I am confident she can never
be so well entreated by any other, nor will be so well beloved as by me. The
observation which I make, that she shall lose the most best, and most
affectionate friend and servant that she has in the world, does more afflict
me than the loss of my own life, which only for her alone I would preserve;
but because I find it cannot be serviceable any ways unto her, it is a gain
unto me to lose it. The Mother and the Daughter hearing these words, did do the
best they could to comfort him. The Mother said unto him, Take courage my
Friend, and I promise you upon my faith, that if God shall restore you unto
your health, my Daughter shall have no other Husband but your self. Behold she
stands here before you, and I command her upon the obligation of her Duty to
make the same promise to you. Her Daughter melting into tears, did the best
that she could to give him an assurance of that which her Mother had promised:
But he apprehending, that if he were recovered he should not enjoy his
Mistress, and that the good words that were given him, were only by degrees
to restore him unto his lost health, did say unto them, That if these words had
been spoken to him but three Months ago, he had been the most healthful, and
the most happy Man in all France, but this Relief came so late unto him, that
it could neither be believed, nor hoped. And when he observed that they did
endeavor to enforce a belief into him of what they promised, he said unto
them; Since so faithfully you have promised that great happiness which can
never arrive unto me, (though now your selves would have it so) by reason of
the great weakness in which I am, I shall crave a far less favor, which as
yet I have not had the boldness to demand. Immediately they did both swear unto
him that it should be performed, and desired him with confidence to demand it.
Whereupon he said unto the Mother of the young Lady, I do beseech you that you
would give her in my arms, whom you do promise shall be my Wife, and that you
do command her to embrace and kiss me. The young Lady, who was not accustomed
to such familiarities, did make some difficulty of it, but her Mother expressly
did command her, seeing he had lost both the understanding and the force of a
living Man. On that Command the Daughter did advance her self upon the bed of
the poor sick Gentleman, and said unto him, My old Friend, I pray you to be
frolic: The poor Gentleman, sanguishing in his extreme weakness, stretched
forth his arms, despoyled of flesh and blood, and with all the force of his
body embraced the Cause of his Death, and kissing her with his pale and cold
lips, did hold her close unto him as long as possibly he could, and said unto
her, The love which I have born unto you, has been so great and virtuous,
that, Marriage excepted, I never desired of you any other happiness than what I
now enjoy, for the event whereof, and in this possession of it, I with joy
shall commend my Spirit unto God, who being himself perfect love and charity,
does know the greatness of my love, and the honesty of my desires, beseeching
him, having now my desires in my arms, that he would receive my Spirit into his
arms. And speaking those words he took her again into his arms, and with so
much vehemence, that his weak heart could not endure the strength of his love,
which was immediately immediately abandoned of all the faculties of life, for
his Joy was so much dilated, that the seat of the Soul failed, which did fly to
her Creator. And although the poor body continued a long time without li^e, and
therefore could no longer possess the rich prise it so lately gained, yet the
love which the young Lady had till then concealed, did now so violently declare
it self, that the mother of the living, and the servants of the dead had much
to do to separate the union, and were at last enforced to pull the living
almost dead, from him who was already dead, whom they did honorably interr,
but the greatest triumph of his obsequies, were the tears, the sighs, and the
complaints of the poor young Lady, who decla^ed her self as much after his
death, as she concealed her self in his l^fe, and now as it were satisfied for
the injury she had done him. And since (as I have heard it reported) the
Husband that was given her (to take off from himself thoughts of melancholy)
could never be entertained with any true joy or comfort of heart.

You may see here Gentlemen, what before you would not believe, by my words.
This Example is sufficient to make you confess, that a true and perfect love
being too long concealed or misprised does bring us as low as death. There is
none of you who know not the friends and kindred both of the one side and the
other, wherefore you need not to make any doubt of it, and there is no man who
has made experience of it but will believe. The Ladies hearing it had every
one of them tears in their eyes. But Hircan said unto them, This is the veryest
fool that ever Thea^d speak; for tell me on your own credit, is it likely or
reasonable, that we should die for women who are made for us, and that we
should be afraid to ask them what God has enjoined them to give unto us? I
speak not for my self, nor for any man here that is married, for I have enough
of a woman, or rather more than will serve my turn, but for those only who are
in necessity, who in my opinion are but fools to be in fear of those whom they
ought to make afraid. Do you not observe the sorrow which this young Lady
suffered for her folly? for since she embraced a dead body (a thing repugnant
to Nature) she would not have refused his living body, if he had showed as
great boldness living, as dying be moved pity. Nevertheless said Oysilla,
The Gentleman in this made an excellent Remonstrance of the love and civility
he did bear her, for which he shall be commended throughout the whole world;
for to find chastity in an amorous heart is a thing more divine than belonging
unto man. Madam, said Saffredant, to confirm the opinion of Hircan, from whom I
differ no^, I must entreat you to believe me, that Fortune does assist the bold
spirit; and that there is no man, if he be beloved by a Lady, but if he can but
wisely, and affectionately follow his suit, will in the end receive all that
which he demands, or at the least in part. But Ignorance and a faint heart do
cause men to ^ose many brave adventures, and then they ground their loss upon
the virtue of their Mistress whom they never did attempt; for never was there
a place that has been gallantly assaulted, but it has been taken. I do much
worder at you two said Parliament, that you dare maintain this discourse. Surely
those whom you have loved, have either not held you long, or the assault bath
been made on so advantageous a place, that you think all Women alike. Madam,
said Saffredant, As for my self I am so unfortunate, that I have no reason to
make any boast, but I impute not my misfortune to any virtue of the Ladies, but
to my own defects, in having either not wisely begun, o^ too rashly prosecuted
my Design, and I will allege the old Romant of the Rose instead of many
Doctors, which says, we are merry Girls and Boys, no doubt all alike, the Boys
for the Girls, and the Girls for the Boys. Wherefore I do believe, that if love
be once in the heart of a woman, the man may arrive unto his ends, if he be not
sottishly overseen. Parliament said, And if I shall tell you of a Lady, of a
gallant personage that did love, and was solicited and importuned, and
nevertheless deported her self most virtuously, and was victorious over her
own body and her friend; will you say that a true thing is impossible? Yes said
he. You are hard of Faith, said Parliament if you believe not this example.
Dagoucin said unto her, Madam, since I have proved by example the virtuous love
of a Gentleman even unto death, I must entreat you, if you do know any like
unto it, in the honor of some Lady, that you will be pleased to rehearse it,
for the end of this days journey, and you need not fear to be too long, for we
have yet time enough to speak of many honest Subjects. Since the last lot falls
to my share said Parliament, I will hold you in a long discourse; for my History
is so good, so fair, and so true, that it seems long unto me until I make you
partakers of it, and that you know it as well as my self. And although I am no
eyewitness of it, yet it has been repeated to me by one of my greatest and
most entire friends in the world, to the praise and honor of her whom he most
affected in the world, who conjured me, that if ever I should come to give any
others an account of it, that I would change the names of the persons. The
story I dare assure you is all true; the Names, the Places, and the Country
only excepted.

The Love of Amadour and Florinda, wherein is contained many great subtilities
and dissimulations, and the admirable chastity of Florinda,
The Tenth Novell.
IN Aragon in the County of Arand, there was a Lady who although very young was
the widow of the Count of Arand; she had by him one Son, and a Daughter called
Florinda. The said Lady did bring up her Children in all virtues, and
honorable exercises, which belong to Lords and Ladies; insomuch that her house
was accounted to be one of the most honorable in all Spain. She resorted
oftentimes to Toledo, where the King of Spain did keep his Court; and when she
came to Saragossa (which was not far from her own house) she stayed long with
the Queen, and was as highly esteemed in her Court as any Lady could be. Upon a
time, according to her custom, repairing to the King, who was then in
Sarragossa in his Castle of Iuissur, this Lady in her way passed by a village
which belonged to the Viceroy of Catalonia, who stirred not from the frontires
of Perpignan by reason of the great wars which were then betwixt the King of
France and himself; but at that time there was peace, insomuch that the
Viceroy with all his Captains were come to do reverence to the King. The
Viceroy understanding that the Countess of Arand did pass through the Land
of his Jurisdiction, did go to meet her, as well for the ancient love he did
bear unto her, as for the honor of being a Kinswoman of the Kings. The
Viceroy had in his company many gallant Gentlemen, who by the long exercise of
their arms had acquired so much Fame and Honor, that those thought themselves
happy that could see them, and enjoy their company. Amongst others there was
one called Amadour, who although he was not of above eighteen or nineteen years
of age, had so assured a grace of Deportment, and so excellent an
understanding, that amongst a thousand he was thought most worthy to govern a
Kingdom. It is true, that his understanding was accompanied with so great, and
so sweet a beauty, that there was not any ey which conveyed not down to the
heart a more than ordinary pleasure to behold him, and so excellent a discourse
did accompany his exquisite beauty, that it could not be known to which to give
most honor, either to the gracefulness of his beauty, or the excellency of
his elocution. But that which made him most esteemed, was his height of
Courage, the fame whereof was increased by his youth, for in many places he
made so many gallant demonstrations of it, that not only Spain, but also France
and Italy did highly esteem his virtues, for in all the wars wherein ever he
was, he was always prodigal of his blood, and proud of danger, and when his own
Country was in peace, he did seek out Foreign wars, and was beloved and esteemed
both by his Friends and Enemies. This Gentleman for the love of his Captain was
now in this land, where the Countess of Arand was arrived; and beholding the
beauty and gracefulness of her Daughter, (who was not then twelve years of
age) he thought with himself that she was the most fair and most accomplished
creature that ever he beheld, and if he could but obtain her favor, he should
be more satisfied than with all the pleasures and profits that he might receive
from any other. After he had a long time looked upon her, he determined with
himself to love her, whatsoever impossibility there was on the contrary, both
in regard of the Illustrious Family from whence she was descended, and the
tenderness of her age, which as yet could not understand his Courtship.
Against these fears he fortisied himself with hope, and promised to himself,
that at the last, Time and Patience would bring a happy end unto his labors.
From that time Gentle love (who without any other occasion but freely by his
own force had entered into the heart of Amadour) did promise him favor and
opportunity to arrive unto the end of his desires; and to provide for the
greatest difficulties, which was the distance of the Country where he lived,
and the small occasions he had to see Florinda, he determined (but against the
first resolution he had taken) to marry one of the Ladies of Barcelona or of
Perpignan, amongst whom, by reason of the Wars, he was so conversant, that he
seemed rather to be a Catalonian than a Castilian, although he was born not far
from Toledo, and was descended of a rich and honorable family, but because he
was but a younger Brother he had no great patrimonies to inherit: So it was
that Love and Fortune seeing him abandoned of his Kindred, did determine to make
a Masterpiece of him, and by the means of his Virtues gave him that which the
Laws of his Country did deny him. He was singularly experienced in the feats of
War, and so well beloved by all Lords and Princes that he oftentimes refused
their gifts, which he never took any thought to demand. The Countess of which
I told you did come accordingly unto Sarragossa, and was magnisicently
entertained by the King, and all the Court. The Governor of Catalonia came
oftentimes to visit her, and Amadour never failed to accompany him for the
pleasure he received to speak unto Florinda. And that he might better
understand himself, and what Company did frequent unto the house, he addressed
himself to the daughter of an ancient Cavalier, called Avanturade, who was one
of the next neighbors. She from her Youth had been brought up with Florinda,
insomuch that she knew all which was hidden in her heart. Amadour, as well for
the honesty he found in her, as for that she had three thousand Ducats to her
portion, did resolve to entertain her, as that person whom he would espouse, to
which she did lend a willing ear; but because he was but poor, and the Father
of the Damfell rich, she thought that he would never agree unto the Marriage,
unless it were by the means of the Countess of Arand; Whereupon she addressed
her self to Florinda, and said unto her. Madam, You have seen the Castilian
Gentleman, who oftentimes does here speak to me, I do believe what he does
pretend, which is to take me in Marriage; You know what a father I have, who
will never give way unto it, if he be not solicited to it by Madam the
Countess and your self. Florinda, who loved the Maid as her self, did assure
her, that she would take that affair upon her, and lay it as near her heart as
it were her own business: And Avanturade so much prevailed, that she presented
Amadour unto her, who in ^issing of her hand had almost swouned away for Joy;
and although he was esteemed the best Speaker in all Spain, yet he was struck
dumb before Florinda, at which she was much amazed; for although she was but of
twelve years of age, yet she well understood, That there was not one in all
Spain that could speak better, or with a greater grace; and seeing that he said
nothing, she began to speak unto him, Amadour, the Renown which you have gained
throughout all Spain is so great, that it makes you known in this place and
company, and administers both a desire and an occasion to those that know you
to employ themselves to do you good; wherefore if there be any thing in which
I may be beneficial to you, you may employ me in it. Amadour, who observed the
beauty of the Lady, was so ravished with it, that he had much to do to say, I
thank you. Although Florinda was astonished to see him without an Answer, she
did impute it rather to his bashfulnesse than to any force of Love, and
departed from him without speaking any more. Amadour observing the virtue which
in such a tenderness of youth did begin to show it self in Florinda, did say
unto her whom he intended to make his Wife, Marvail not at all that I became as
a dumb Man before Florinda, for her virtues and wise discourse hid in so young
an age, did so amaze me, that I knew not what to say unto her; But Avanturade,
I must beseech you to inform me (for you know the Secrets of the House) what
Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen do frequent it; for they that know her, and do
not love her, are either Stones or Beasts. Avanturade, who before did love
Amadour better than any one in the world, could conceal nothing from him, and
told him, That Madam Florinda was beloved of all the world, but because of the
custom of the Country, there were but few admitted to speak unto her, and that
as yet she had not seen any that had made any profession of love unto her, but
only two young Princes of Spain, who desired to espouse her, one whereof was of
the House, and the Son of the Infant Fortunate, and the other was the young
Duke of Cadouce. I pray you, said Amadour, Tell me which of them do you think
that she loves best; She is so wise, said Avanturade, that she professes,
that she has no other will but that of her Mothers, but as far as we can
judge, she loves the Son of the Infant Fortunate, far better than the young
Duke of Cadouce; And I esteem you to be a man of that Judgment, that on this
day if it please you, you may satisfy your self therein, for the Son of the
Infant Fortunate is brought up in this Court, and is one of the most lovely,
and most absolute young Princes in Christendom: And if this Marriage should be
according to the opinion and desire of us Maids, he should be sure to have
Madam Florinda, that we might see together the most gallant couple in the
World. And you ought to understand, that although they are both of them very
young, she not being above twelve, and he fifteen years of age, yet it is three
years since first their love began, And above all things, if you would obtain
the favor of Florinda, I would advise you to be a Friend and Servant to the
Infant Fortunate. Amadour was very glad to understand that Florinda loved any
thing, hoping at last that he might gain the place, if not of a Husband, yet of
her Servant, for he feared nothing in her virtue, but only that she could not
be induced to love. After this Amadour did altogether frequent the Lodgings of
the Son of the Infant Fortunate, whose favor easily he obtained, for all the
Pastimes which the young Prince loved, Amadour knew how to perform; and above
all things he was most expert in the riding of great Horses, and in all kind of
weapons, and in other recreations and exercises which a young man ought to
know. After this the War began in Languedoc, and Amadour of necessity was to
return with the Governor, which was not without great grief, for he had no
longer the means nor opportunity to come into that place where he might behold
Florinda, for which purpose he did speak unto his Brother, who was the Major
Domo in the Court of the Queen of Spain, and told him of the entertainment he
found in the House of the Countess of Arand, and of the Damsel Aventurade,
desi^ing him, that in his absence he would use his utmost endeavor, that the
Marriage might suddenly be solemnized, and that he would employ therein the
Reputation of the King and Queen, and of all his friends. The Gentleman who
loved his Brother, as well for his virtues, as for the contiguity of blood, did
promise to perform the uttermost he was able, which he did accordingly:
Insomuch that the old and covetous Father of Avanturade did forget his nature
to regard the virtues of Amadour, which the Countess of Arand, and above all
the beautiful Florinda did set forth before his eyes: In the same manner also
did the young Count of Arand, who as he did grow in age, did grow also in love
with gallant and virtuous men. When the Marriage was accorded on, the Major
Domo sent to seek out his Brother, whiles the Truce lasted betwixt both the
Kings. During this time, the King of Spain retired to Madrid, to avoid the
contagion of the bad ait, which was in many places: And by the advice of his
Council, and the request also of the Countess of Arand, he made the Marriage
betwixt the Duchess Medina-Coeli, an Heiresse, and the young Count of Arand,
as well for the benefit and Union of both Houses, as for the love he did bear
to the Countess of Arand, and he commanded that that this Marriage should be
celebrated in the Castle of Madrid. At this Marriage Amadour was present, who
followed his own so closely, that he espoused her, by whom he was better
beloved, than he did love; for he only made this Marriage as a Coverture, and
a means to frequent the place where his Soul incessantly did abide. After he
was Married, he assumed that boldness, and was so familiar in the House of the
Countess of Arand, that the Ladies had no more regard of him, than of one of
the Gentlewomen of the House: And although he was then but two and twenty years
of age, he did deport himself so discreetly, that the Countess did communicate
to him all her affairs, and commanded her Son and her Daughter to make much of
him, and to take that counsel which he advised them. Having gained this high
Esteem, he did carry himself so wisely and so cunningly, that even those whom
he loved did not know his affection. But Florinda loved the wife of Amadour
more than any other, and was so intimate with her, that she concealed not from
her her most private thoughts, and declared to her all tho love which she did
bear to the Son of the Infant Fortunate; and she who did hope to gain him
entirely, did speak of him incessantly, and on any Discourse where mention was
made of him, she would with delight take hold of it, and a long time entertain
it. Amadour after his Marriage with Avanturade, stayed not above one month
with this Company, but was constrained to return to the War, where he continued
above two years without seeing of his Wife, who kept always with her with whom
she was brought up. During this time Amadour did often write unto her, but the
greatest part of his Letter was Commendations to Florinda. Avanturade did not
fail to show the Letters to Florinda, who returned him thanks for it, and
sometimes with her own hand would signify as much unto him in the Letters
which Avanturade answered, which was the occasion that made her Husband more
careful to write more often unto her. But in all this Florinda knew nothing,
but only that she loved and respected him as her own Brother. This was the
Intercourse of Letters betwixt Amadour and Avanturade; and Amadour, who in the
space of five years had hardly seen Florinda two whole months, yet
nevertheless his Love, in despite of absence, did continually increase. But
now the time was come that he made a voyage to see his Wife, and found the
Countess of Arand a great way from the Court. For the King of Spain was gone
to Vandelusia, and had taken with him the young Count of Arand, who already did
begin to bear arms. His Mother the Countess was retired to a House of pleasure
which she had upon the Frontires of Arragon and Navarre, she was very joyful
to see Amadour returned, who almost for three years together had been absent.
He was very welcome to them all, and the Countess of Arand commanded that he
should be entertained as her own Son. As long as he was with her, she declared
to him the whole state of her affairs, and committed the greatest part of the
Government of her House to his discretion. He gained so great an estimation,
that in all places thereof wheresoever he came, they opened the doors unto him,
believing him to be so able and so wise a personage, that in all things they
did put their confidence in him, as if in some Saint or Angel. Florinda, for
the love which she did bear to his Wife, and to himself, did give great respect
unto him in all the places wheresoever she did see him, not knowing any thing
of his Intention, wherefore she minded not what countenance she gave him, for
her heart felt not any heat of a violent passion, but only she received a
great contentment when she was near Amadour, and no other thought of love
possessed her. Amadour to avoid the Judgment of those who are experienced in
the looks of Lovers, in comparison of others, was in a great perplexity: For
when Florinda came familiarly to speak unto him (as one who thought no hurt)
the fire concealed in his heart did so violently inflame it, that do what he
could, his color would rise in his checks, and the sparkles of Desire would
fly from his eyes. And to the end that in their daily conversation it might not
be discerned, he pretended to court a very fair Lady, called Paulina, a Lady
who in her time was esteemed so beautiful, that few men that ever saw her did
escape her bonds. This Paulina understanding how well Amadour had deported
himself at Barcelona, and Perpignan, insomuch that he was beloved by all the
most beautiful and virtuons Ladies of that Country, and above all by the
Countess of Palamons, who in beauty was esteemed the chiefest in all Spain,
told him, That she much pityed him, that after so many great fortunes he had
married so ill-favored a woman. Amadour apprehending by those words that she
had a desire to remedy her own necessity, did entertain her with the best
Language that possibly he could, thinking, by making her to believe a pretense,
that she should serve to be a coverture for the truth; but she being cunning
and experienced in love, was not contented with words, but (conceiving to her
self that his heart was not satisfied with her Love) she doubted lest he did
not make her serve for a cloak only; whereupon she did so closely observe him,
that her eyes were always fastened upon his, but he did so well dissemble it,
that she could not make any certain judgment of any thing, but only had an
obscure suspicion, which was a great torment to this Gentleman. But Florinda
(who was ignorant of all those Jealousies) did speak oftentimes before Paulina
so familiarly to Amadour, that he put himself to an extraordinary task, to
command his eyes against his heart; And to prevent the falling into an
Inconvenience, speaking one day to Florinda, and leaning both upon the Window,
he said unto her, Madam, I beseech you that you will be pleased to advise me,
which is the best, to speak, or to die; Florinda readily made answer to him, I
shall always advise my friends, that it is best to speak, and not die; for a
few words may be mended, but life being lost, can never be recovered. You shall
promise me then, said Amadour; that you shall neither be offended, nor be
astonished at the words I shall speak, until you shall understand the end for
which I speak them. She replied to him, Speak what you please, for if you shall
astonish me, no man else shall recover me to my senses, I assure you. He then
began to speak, Madam, I have not yet expressed unto you the great affection
which I bear you, for two Reasons: First, That I intended by my long service to
give you an experience of it: and Secondly, because I doubted you would
conceive it to be an unpardonable arrogance to address my self unto you, who,
were I a Prince as your self, yet the loyalty of your heart would not suffer
any other but he who has taken possession of it, the Son of the Infant
Fortunate, to hold any discourse of Love with you. But Madam, as in great wars
Necessity does constrain us to make a wast of our own goods, and oftentimes to
spoil the Corn in the blade, that the Enemy may make no advantage of it; so
have I made an adventure to hazard the fruit which in time I did hope to
gather, that neither your nor my Enemies might make to themselves any profit by
our Damage. Understand Madam, that since you were scarce twelve years of age, I
have been so devoted to your service, that I have never ceased from searching
out the means to obtain your favor, and for that occasion, I married her whom
I thought that you loved best; And understanding the love which you bear to the
Son of the Infant Fortunate, I have endeavored to serve and honor him, as you
have seen. And whatsoever I thought would be pleasing to you, I have sought it
with all my power; you see, How I have procured the good opinion of the
Countess your Mother, of the Count your Brother, and of all those whom you do
love, in a manner, that in this house I am not taken so much to be a Servant,
as a Child, and all the travel that for these five years I have undertaken,
has been to live all the remainder of my life with you. And you must
understand, that I am none of those who by this means presume to enjoy any
pleasure or profit by you, but what shall be virtuous. I know well enough, and
am confident, that I can never marry you, and if I could, I would not do the
least Injury to the love which you bear to him, whom I desire to see your
Husband. To prosecute you with a vicious love, as those, who hope for some
recompense for their service, by the dishonor of their Mistresses, I am so far
from that, that I had rather see you dead, than to know you less worthy to be
beloved, or that virtue was abated in you, for any pleasure that could arive to
me. For the end and recompense of all my service, I do desire only but one
thing, which is, that you will be so constant a Mistress to me, that you will
never remove me from your favors, and continue me in the degree in the which I
am, reposing more confidence in me, than in any other; and having this
assurance, that if for your honor, or any thing that does concern you, you
shall need the life of a Gentleman, mine shall be employed with all my heart
for you. In like manner, that all honest and virtuous things that I shall do,
shall be done only for the love of you: And if for Ladies of a far lower
condition than your self, I have performed deeds that have highly been
esteemed, be you assured, that for such a Mistress my enterprises shall be
doubled; so that those things which before I left off, as difficult, and
impossible, shall now become easy to me. But if you will not accept me to be
altogether yours, I have resolved with my self to leave off the Exercise of
Arms, and to bid Adieu to Virtue, that has not helped me at my need.
Wherefore, Madam, I most humbly beseech you, that my just suit may be granted
to me, which neither your Honor nor your Conscience can deny. The young Lady
hearing those words so unusual to her, did begin to change her color, and
held down her eyes, as a Woman astonished: Howsoever being of a ready, and a
great understanding, she said unto him, Since it is so, Seignior Amadour, that
you demand that of me which you have already, how does it come about that you
have made unto me so long an Oration? I have so great a fear, that under your
honest words there are some ill Intentions hid to deceive the Ignorance of my
youth, that I am in a great perplexity to answer you. For if I should deny that
honest love which you offer me, I should do contrary to that which hitherto I
have done, who do put more confidence in your self, than in all the Men in the
world. Neither my Conscience nor my Honor do contradict your Demand, nor the
love which I do bear to the son of the Infant Fortunate; for that love is
grounded upon Marriage, to which you can have no pretense. I know nothing that
may withhold me from giving you an answer according to your desire, but only
Fear which invades my heart, grounded on the small occasion you have to begin
this Discourse: for if you have already that which you demand, what is it does
constrain you to speak so affectionatly? Amadour, who now was not without an
answer, said unto her, Madam, you speak most wisely, and do me so much Honor
by the Confidence which you say you repose in me, that if I should not content
my self with this happiness, I should be unworthy of any other: But you are to
understand Madam, that he who would raise a lasting edifice, ought to regard
that he does lay a sure foundation; therefore I who desire to continue
perpetually in your service, do not only look upon the means to keep me near
unto you, but also to hinder what I can that the great affection which I bear
unto you may not be discovered. For though it be so honest, that the least sin
cannot be found in it, yet so it is, that those who know not the hearts of true
lovers, do oftentimes judge against the truth; and from hence proceed so many
ill reports, the events whereof have been so mischievous. The cause which has
enforced me to speak, and to declare this unto you, is Paulina, who does so
strongly suspect me, perceiving in her own heart that I cannot love her, that
in all places wheresoever I do come, she is always with a watchful eye
looking steadfastly on my face; and when you come to speak familiarly unto me
before her, I have so great a fear to give some sign by which she might ground
some bad construction, that I am ready to fall into an Inconvenience, from
which I would fain keep my self; so that I have conceived it expedient to
beseech you, That before her, and such creatures as she is, you would not be
pleased to speak so suddenly unto me, for I had rather by far be out of the
world, than any one alive should have the least knowledge of it; And were it
not for the love which I owe unto your Honor, I should not have taken this
resolution to speak these words unto you; for I am sufficiently happy in the
love and confidence you have in me, without demanding any thing more, but only
your continuation of it. At these words Florinda received so great content,
that she could not endure a greater, and began to feel in her heart something
more, than before she was accustomed to find; and considering the honest
reasons he alleged, she told him, That Virtue and Honor had made answer for
her, and did accord to that which he desired. If Amadour was not joyful of
this assurance, I leave it to those to judge who have been themselves in love.
But Florinda began to follow his counsel more than he desired; for she who was
fearful, did not only forbear to speak unto him before Paulina, but also
before all others; and in this discontinuance of Discourse, she began her self
to suspect the frequent communication which Amadour had with Paulina, who did
like it very well, and now did confidently believe that Amadour did love her.
Florinda to pass away this sorrow, did daily entertain Aventurade, who began
to be very jealous of her Husband and Paulina, and oftentimes did complain of
it to Florinda, who did comfort her the best she cold, being one who was
infected her self with the same Disease. Amadour quickly perceived by the
Countenance of Florinda, that not only she estranged her self from him,
according to his Counsel, but also that there was some ill opinion which was an
Adjunct to it. One afternoon going with her to hear Vespers in the Monastery,
he said unto her, Madam, with what countenance do you look upon me? Florinda
made answer, With such a one I think as you would have me. Amadour suspecting
what she meant, and the better to find out the Truth, said unto her, Madam, I
have prevailed so much by my daily Endeavors, that Paulina has no longer any
suspicion concerning you. She replied to him, You cannot do better for your
self and for me, for in doing a Pleasure to your self, you do Honor to me. By
these words Amadour was assured, that she believed that he took a pleasure to
be in communication with Paulina, whereat he was so passionate, that he could
not contain himself, but in a great choler said unto her, Madam, It is well
begun to torment your Servant, for I never suffered any trouble that was more
afflicting to me, than the constraint to speak unto her whom I love not: And
because that which I have done for your service is taken in another sense, I
will speak no more unto her, let come what will come; and to the end to
dissemble as well my indignation as I have done my contentment, I will retire
unto some other place, until this Fancy of yours be passed over. But I hope I
shall receive some news from my Captain to return unto the wars, where I will
so long continue, that you shall understand, that not any in the world but your
self could have detained me in this place; and in speaking those words (without
attending any answer) he immediately departed, and she remained alone so sad,
and so disconsolate, that it was impossible to be more. Love now being beaten
by a contrary wind did begin to show his overcoming power, insomuch that she
acknowledged the Injury, and immediately did write to Amadour, and besought him
that he would be pleased to return, which (some days being expired) when his
great choler was abated he did accordingly. I know not in this place how to
undertake to give you the least account of the words that passed betwixt them
to break this jealousy, but he did gain the day, insomuch that she promised
him that she would never believe any more that he loved Paulina, and withal
that she would remain assured, that it was a Martyrdom insupportable to him to
speak either to Paulina or to any other, unless it were to do her self
service. After that love had overcome this present suspicion, and the two
Lovers did begin to take more delight than ever to converse together, there
arrived intelligence that the King of Spain had commanded all his Army into
Saulce. He therefore who was accustomed to be the foremost, failed not to be
present where honor was to be purchased, but true it is, it was with some grief
of heart which he was not accustomed to feel, as well to be deprived of his
delight, as for fear that he should find some great change at his return,
because that he saw Florinda was courted by great Princes and Lords, and was
now arrived to the age of fifteen years. He considered with himself that if in
his absence she should be married, he should have no more occasion to see her,
unless her mother the Countess of Arand were pleased so far to honor his
wife as to make her her Companion. And he so well ordered this affair among all
her friends, that both the Countess and Florinda promised him, that into
whatsoever Country she was married, his wife Avanturade should go with her: And
although the question was, that Florinda should be married into Portugal, it
was resolved howsoever that his wife should never abandon her. In this
assurance, but not without an unspeakable grief, Amadour departed and left his
wife with the Countess. When Florinda after the departure of her Servant did
find herself to be alone, she exercised her self in all good and virtuous
employments, hoping thereby to attain the honor of the most absolute Lady in
that age, and to be reputed worthy to have such a Servant. Amadour being
arrived at Barcelona was feasted by the Ladies as he was accustomed heretofore,
but they found him so much changed, that they thought that Marriage could never
have such power upon any as it had upon him, for he seemed unwilling to look on
those things which heretofore he delighted to behold, and the Countess of
Palamons her self who had so entirely loved him, could not find any means to
persuade him to go so far as her own house with her. Amadour made as little
stay at Barcelona as possibly he could, for the Hours seemed tedious to him
until he were in the place where honor might be obtained. Being atrived at
Saulce there began a great and crucl war betwixt the two Kings, of which I will
give you no account in this place, nor of the brave at chievments which Amadour
performed, for if I should give you a just account of them it would make a
large Volume: But you may understand that he was more renowned than all his
Companions. The Duke of Naygueres not long after came to Perpignan, and brought
with him two Thousand men, and desired Amadour to be his Licutenant, who with
that Brigade did so well his Devoir, that in all the skirmishes there were none
other cried up but the Naygueres. It so fell out, that the King of Tunis, who
for a long time made War with the Spaniards, understanding that the Kings of
France and Spain were in War one with another upon the Frontires of Perpignan
and Narbon, conceived, that he never in a better season could do a displeasure
to the King of Spain, he therefore sent a great number of Frigots and other
Vessels, to pillage and destroy that which they should find to be ill guarded
upon the confines of Spain. They of Barcelona observing a great Fleet to pass
by them, did advertise the King of it, who was then at Saulce, and immediately
commanded the Duke of Naygueres to march with all speed to Palamons. When the
Turks understood that the place was so well guarded, they pretented to sail
beyond it, but upon the hour of midnight they returned, and laid so many of the
Defendants upon the ground, that the Duke of Naygueres being surprised by his
Enemies was led away prisoner. Amadour who was very watchful, heard the
Alarm, and on a sudden did draw into a body as many of his Soldiers as he
could, and defended himself so well, that the whole power of his Enemies could
not for a long time be prejudicial to him. But in the end, understanding that
the Duke of Naygueres was taken, and that the Turks were resolved to set
Palamons on fire, and to burn him in the house where he defended himself
against them, he thought it safer to surrender himself, than to be the cause of
the destruction of so many gallant Soldiers who were in his Company, and
having paid his ransom, he hoped withal, that he should be so happy as to see
again Florinda. On this, he yielded himself prisoner to a Turk called Derlin,
Governor of Tunis for the King, who immediately did bring him to his Master,
where he was very well received and honored, and had a stronger guard set on
him; for the Turks thought, having him in their hands, that they had got the
Achilles of the Spaniards. In this condition Amadour continued almost two yeats
under the King of Tunis. In the mean time the News of this Captivity was
brought into Spain, for which the Kinsmen of the Duke of Naygueres made a great
lamentation, but those who loved the honor of their Country, did esteem the
loss of Amadour to be far greater. The report of this Defeat was brought unto
the House of the Countess of Arand, at the same time when poor Avanturade was
extremely sick. The Countess, who had a great doubt her self of the affection
which Amadour did bear unto her Daughter, (which she suffered and dissembled,
by reason of the great virtues which she saw to shine in him) did call her
Daughter to her, and did acquaint her with this melancholy News; Florinda, who
knew well enough to dissemble, said unto her, that it was a great loss to all
their House, but most of all she pityed his poor Wife, especially considering
the great weakness she was in; but seeing her Mother weep so bitterly, she let
fall a few tears also to keep her company, to the end that by dissembling too
much her dissimulation might not be discovered. After that, her Mother did
speak often to her concerning him, but could never collect any thing from her
countenance whereby to assure her judgment. I will here forbear to make mention
of those Pilgrimages, Prayers, Orisons and Fasts, which Florinda ordinarily
made for the safety and deliverance of Amadour, who as soon as ever he arrived
at Tunis, did not fail to send the News of his Misfortunes to his friends, and
by a sure Messenger he advertised Madam Florinda that he was in good health,
and in good hope to see her again, which was the only comfort this poor young
Lady had to sustain her affliction. And you may be assured that she found the
means to write back unto him, which she did so diligently, that Amadour could
not complain for any want of comfort in her Letters and Epistles. Some months
after the Countess of Arand was commanded to come to Saragossa, where the King
was arrived, and the young Duke of Cardona with him, who used such
importunities with the King and Queen, that they entreated the Countess to
make up the Marriage betwixt him and her Daughter. The Countess being she who
in nothing would disobey them, did consent unto it, believing, that her
Daughter being very young had no other desire but what was hers. When all was
agreed upon, she told her Daughter, That she had made choice of that party for
her who was most necessary. The Daughter knowing that in a thing that was
already done there needed not any more counsel, made answer to her, God be
praised for all; And seeing her Mother to grow strange unto her, she chose
rather to obey her, than to have any pity on herself. And to increase her
affliction, she understood, that the Son of the Infant Fortunate was sick unto
Death, but before her Mother, or any other, she made not the least appearance
of any sorrow, and did contain her self so much, that her tears by force being
retired into her heart, did make the blood to spin out of her nose in such
abundance, that she was in danger of her life; but her Mother to recover her,
did marry her unto him, whom willingly she would have exchanged for her Death.
After the celebration of this Marriage, Florinda did repair with her Husband
into the Dukedom of Cardona, and took along with her Avanturade, whom she made
partaker of her Complaints, as well of the severity of her Mother, as of the
grief she had to have lost the Son of the Infant Fortunate, but of her chief
grief, for Amadour, she spoke not one word unto her, but only in the way to
comfort her. After this, this young Lady did resolve with her self, to have God
always and her Honor before her eyes, and so well concealed her afflictions,
that not any of her Servants did ever understand that her Husband was
unpleasing to her. Thus a long time Florinda continued, and lived a life not
much better than Death; of which she failed not to inform her good Servant
Amadour, who knowing her great and honest heart, and the love which she did
bear to the Infant Fortunate, did conceive with himself, that it was impossible
that she should live long, and did lament her, as one whom he concluded to be
worse than dead. This affliction did augment that which he had for himself, for
he wished that he might continue all his life a Slave, as he was, so that
Florinda had but a Husband according to her desire. Thus he forgot his own
sorrow, for that which he perceived his Mistress did endure. And because he
understood by a friend, That the King of Tunis had an Intent to send for him to
the Court, and put him to death by drawing a stake through him, or to make him
renounce his Faith, for the desire he had to have him turn Turk, and to keep
him with him, he prevailed so much with the Governor that took him Prisoner,
that he gave him leave to go away upon his parole, to procure his Ransom,
which was so great, that he thought it was impossible for a Man of his Estate
to pay it. And thus without speaking one word to the King, the Governor let
him go. Having showed himself at Court to the King of Spain, he made no long
stay there, but made have to procure his Ransom amongst his Friends, to which
purpose he did direct his course to Barcelon, to which City the young D. of
Cardona, his Mother, and Florinda were gone, to disparch some business.
Avanturade, as soon as she had heard the good news of the approach of her
Husband, made no delay to acquaint Florinda with it, who was very joyful to
hear it, but so carried it, as it were for the love only she did bear to
Avanturade. But fearing lest the Joy which she had to see him, should make her
change her countenance, and that those who did observe it might give a bad
construction to it, she stayed at a window to see him afar off, and when ever
she did behold him to approach, she went down a pair of winding stairs so
obscure, that one could not perceive that she changed her color; and having
embraced him, she brought him first into her own Chamber, and from thence into
the Chamber of her Mother-in-Law, who had never seen him. But he had not
continued there two days, but he so carried himself, that he was as well
beloved there, as he was before in the House of the Countess of Arand. I will
leave unto you to imagine what was the discourse which Amadour and Florinda had
between themselves, and of the complaints they made of the sorrows they had
suffered in the absence of one another. After a flood of tears from Florinda's
eyes, for the grief she entertained, as much that she was married against her
heart, as that she had lost him whom so entirely she did love, and was out of
hope ever to see him alive again, she resolved with her self to take comfort in
the love, and the assurance which she had of Amadour, which nevertheless she
durst not declare unto him; but he who debated with himself what to do, did
lose neither time nor occasion, to make her understand how great was the love
which he did bear unto her. Just on the time as she was almost gained to
receive him, not as a servant, but for her best and most assured friend, there
fell out a wonderful Accident; For the King on some business of great
Importance, did immediately send for Amadour, for which his Wife did take so
great a grief, that in hearing of the News she swouned away, and falling down
the stairs on which she stood, she hurt her self so grievously, that she never
did rise up again. Florinda, who in her Death did lose all her comfort, did
make so great a Lamentation, as she could do who found her self destitute both
of her Friends and Kindred: and Amadour took it as much to heart; for on the one
side he lost one of the most honest Women that ever lived; and on the other he
lost the means ever to be able to see Florinda again, by reason whereof he fell
into so great a sickness, that he thought that immediately he should die. The
old Duchess of Cardona did visit him uncessantly, and alleged to him some
Reasons from Philosophy, to cause him with Patience to endure that Death, but
nothing would serve; for if Death on the one side did torment him, Love on the
other did increase his Martyrdom. Amadour observing that his wife was interred,
and that the Goverour had sent for him, and that it was impossible to pretend
an excuse to continue where he was, entertained such a despair in his heart,
that he thought he should have lost his life with his understanding. Florinda,
who was in a desolation her self, to comfort him, did come unto him one day
after dinner to administer unto him the best words of comfort that she could,
hoping thereby to abate the greatness of his grief, assuring him, that in what
place soever he was, she would find the means to see him, and oftener than he
conceived. And because he was to be gone the next morning, and was for the
present so weak that he did keep his bed, he did beseech her that after every
one was departed from him, she would be pleased to give him a visit in the
Evening, which she accorded to, being ignorant that the extremity of Love does
know no reason, and he who saw no hope left ever to see her again whom for so
long a time he had served, and who never had received any entertainment from
her but what you have heard, was so assaulted with his love a long time
dissembled, and with despair that did present unto him that it was almost
impossible for him to see her again, that he did resolve with himself to play
with her either Double, or Quit, either to lose all, or to win all, and in one
hour to pay himself with that, which he thought he had so well deserved. For
this purpose he commanded that the Curtains should be drawn close about his
bed, that those who came into the Chamber might not see him, and complained far
more than he was accustomed to do, insomuch that those of the House did think
he could not live four and twenty hours longer. In the Evening after every one
had been with him, Florinda (at the request of her own Husband) did repair unto
him, deliberating with her self (the more to comfort him) to declare unto him
her affection, and that she would love him altogether, and none but him as far
as her honor would permit; and sitting in a chair near to the tester of
Amadours bed, she did begin to comfort him by weeping with him. Amadour seeing
her filled with lamentation, thought that in that trouble of her mind he could
most easily arrive to the end of his intention; and rising up in his bed,
Florinda thought that he was in some ecstasy being too far spent, and with all
the eyes of sorrow began to look upon him, who kneeling on his knees did say
unto her, And must I for ever lose the sight of you? and speaking those words
he did let himself fall into her arms, just like a man that swouned away. Poor
Florinda did embrace him, and held him up a pretty while, doing the uttermost
of her desires to comfort him; but this Physic which she gave him to amend his
grief, did render his power more strong, for in counterfeiting himself half
dead and speachless, he began to search after that which the honor of Women
does forbid to be found: When Florinda perceived his ill intention, she could
not believe it, and remembering the most civil and virtuous discourse that had
always passed betwixt them, she said unto him, What is it you would have? But
Amadour fearing to hear her words, which he knew would be no other but chaste
and honest, returned no answer at all, but pursued his intention with all the
force he had; whereat Florinda being amazed, suspected that he was our of his
wits, and would rather have conceived any thing of him than that he attempted
to dishonor her: Wherefore she spoke aloud and called unto a Gentleman whom she
knew to be in a Chamber hard by; whereat Amadour being thoroughly amazed did
throw himself upon the bed, and that so suddenly, that the Gentleman believed
that he had been dead. Florinda (who was risen up from the chair) said unto
him, Go quickly, and bring hither some good Vinegar, which the Gentleman did,
who being departed, Florinda began to say unto him, Amadour, what folly has
possessed your understanding? And what is that which you thought and would have
done? Amadour, who by the force of Love had lost all his reason, did say unto
her, Does so long a service as is mine, deserve to be rewarded with such a
cruelty? Florinda replied, And where is now the Honor concerning which so many
times you have preached to me? O Madam, said Amadour, It seems to me impossible
to love your Honor more perfectly than I have done; For when you were to
marry, I knew so well to master my heart, that you never understood my Desires;
but now since you are married, and your Honor may be concealed, What wrong do
I do unto you, to demand that of you which is my own? for by the force of love
I have gained you. He who first had your heart was so cold a Suitor to your
body that he deserved to lose both together: He who does now possess your
body, is not worthy to have your heart; wherefore neither is your Body his, nor
can it properly appertain unto him. But I Madam, for the continued space of
five or six years, have endured so much love and travel for you, that you
cannot be ignorant, that both your heart and your body do pertain to me, for
which I have so often hazarded my own. And if you think to defend your self by
Conscience, be you assured, that those who have proved the power of Love, will
lay all the blame upon you who have so ravished my liberty from me, and by your
divine perfections blinded my understanding, that for the time to come not
knowing what to do, I am constrained to be gone from you, without any hope of
ever seeing you again. Nevertheless you may be most confident, that in any
part of the World wheresoever I shall be, whether it be on the Sea, or on the
Land, or in the hands of my most cruel Enemies, you shall have my heart, which
shall continue for ever yours: And if before my departure I could have that
assurance from you which my great love does merit, I should be made strong to
endure with patience the affliction of my long absence; And if you please not
to grant me my request, you will quickly hear it spoken, that your cruelty has
given me an unhappy Death. Florinda being transported with as much sorrow as
amazement to hear these words to proceed from him, of whom she had never the
least suspicion, did reply in tears unto him, And woe is me now, Amadour, Are
these the effects of the virtuous Discourses which from my Youth hither to we
have had together? Is this the Honor of Conscience, which so oftentimes you
have counseled me rather to die, than to abandon? Have you forgotten the great
Examples you have instanced to me of so many excellent Ladies who have resisted
that foolish Love? Have you forgotten the neglect which you your self have had
of light and inconstant Ladies? I cannot believe, O Amadour, that you should be
so far from your self, or that God, your Conscience, and my Honor, should be
all dead in you. But if it be accordingly as you speak, I bless the Divine
goodness which has prevented the mischief into which I headlong was falling,
by showing me by your words, your heart, of which I was so much ignorant; for
having lost the Son of the Infant Fortunate, not only by being married my self
unto another, but because I found, and sufficiently understood that he loved
another Lady, and seeing my self married to one whom I cannot love, and that,
let me do what I can, he cannot be agreeable unto me, I considered, and
entirely resolved with my self to love you with all my heart and affections,
grounding my love upon the Virtue which I have found in you, and which by your
means, I have in some measure attained my self, which is, to love my Honor and
my Conscience more than my life. To this rock of Honor I am come, where I was
confident I should find a most sure foundation; but in one moment, Amadour, you
have shown me, that in the place of a Rock, sure, as I thought and beautiful,
the foundation of the building is upon loose and uncertain Sands, or upon a
soft and ruinous Bogg; And although I had already begun a great part of the
building where I resolved to have made my perpetual residence, you on the
sudden have overthrown it. Wherefore you ought by degrees to forsake all hopes
which you have promised to your self of me, and to resolve with your self, that
in whatsoever place you see me, not to court me at all, either by words or
countenance. And be not so vain to hope, that I either can or will ever change
my thoughts. I speak them to you with so much sorrow, that it is impossible it
should be greater; but if I had proceeded so far as to have sworn unto you
perfect love, I do well perceive my heart to be such, that it would have been
dead within me in this rupture, although the amazement that is upon me (to be
deceived by you) is so great, that I am confident it will render my life either
short or dolorous. And on these words I do bid you Adieu for ever.

I will not here undertake to tell you the grief which entered into the heart of
Amadour hearing these words, for it is not only impossible for a pen to
express it, but for a heart to conceive it, unless it be such a heart, who by
experience has found the like. And observing on that ^^el conclusion that she
was going away, he did stay her by the arm, knowing very well, that if he
should not take from her again that evil opinion of him, which he had caused
her to entertain, he should lose her for ever; wherefore he said unto her, with
the most dejected countenance that he could put on, Madam, Through the whole
travels of my life I have desired to love a virtuous Lady, and because I have
found so few, I thought good to make experience to see if by your virtue, you
were as worthy to be esteemed, as you are to be loved, which now I understand
for certain, and I thank God, who has put it into my heart to love such great
perfection; beseeching you to pardon that foolish and presumptuous enterpise,
and the rather, because it turns to your honor, and to my great contentment:
Florinda, who by him did begin to understand the subtility of men, (as she was
difficult to believe the Evil in which he was, so she was more difficult to
believe the Good in which he was not) did say unto him, I would to God that you
did speak the truth, but I am not so ignorant, but the estate of Marriage in
which I am, does make me clearly enough to understand, that a blind and a
violent passion did make you to do that which you have done; for if God had
suffered me to let loose my hand, I am sure enough that you would have gone
away with the bridle. Those, Signior Amadour, who make it their business to
follow virtue, must not tread in that path in which you would go. But it is
enough that heretofore I have lightly believed any Good in you, it is now time
that I should know the truth which does deliver me from you. And speaking those
words, she departed out of the Chamber, and did weep away that night, finding
so great a grief in this change, that her heart had enough to do to sustain the
assaults of sorrow which love had given her; For although according to her
Reason she resolved never to love him more, yet he heart, which now was not
subject to the rules of Reason, would not consent unto it; wherefore being not
able to love him less than she was accustomed to do, and knowing that love was
the occasion of that defect, she determined with her self to satisfy her love,
and to love him with all her heart; but withal, to be no ways forgetful of
her honor. In the morning Amadour departed sick and sad, as I have told you;
nevertheless his heart, which was so great, that the World could not show an
equal to it, did not suffer him to despair, but did give him a new intention to
enjoy the presence of Florinda, and again to be entertained in her favor.
Wherefore repairing to the King of Spain, who was at Toledo, he made it his way
to go by the Countess of Arands, to whom he came one Evening very late, and
found the Countess very sick, by reason of the sorrow which she had for the
absence of her Daughter Florinda. When she beheld Amadour, she kissed and
embraced him as if he had been her own Son, as well for the love she (...) bear
unto him, as for the Love which she conceived he did bear unto Florinda,
concerning whom she very sollicitously did demand: He informed her the best
that possibly he could, but did not acquaint her with all the Truth, and
confessed unto her the love betwixt Florinda and himself, which Florinda had
always concealed, desiring her that he might hear from her as often as she
could, and that she would be pleased to send for her, for the more speedy
recovery of her own health. In the morning he departed, and having dispatched
his affairs with the Queen, he advanced to the Wars, but so sad, and so changed
in his complexion, that the Ladies, Captains, and all those who had been
accustomed to his Company, did not know him. He was altogether clothed in
black, and by the outward mourning which he made for his wife, he concealed the
inward mourning of his heart. In this manner Amadour lived three or four years
without returning to the Court. And the Countess of Arand hearing it spoken,
that Florinda was so extremely altered that it would grieve any one to behold
her, did send for her, hoping that she would be joyful to come to her; but it
fell out to the contrary: for when Florinda understood that Amadour had
declared to her Mother the love that was betwixt them, she was in a wonderful
perplexity; for on the one side she saw her Mother did esteem so highly of him,
that if she should acquaint her with the truth, Amadour would receive some
great displeasure, which she would rather die than be the occusion of, for she
thought her self able enough to punish him for his follies, without any
assistance of her friends; On the other side she feared, That in dissembling
the evil which she knew, she should be constrained by her Mother, and by her
friends, to continue her Discourses, and to make much of him, by which she was
afraid that she should fortify him in his Presumptions. But seeing that he was
far remote, she made an appearance of being willing to it, and sometimes did
write unto Amadour when the Countess did command her, but they were such
Letters, that it was easy to be perceived, that they did proceed rather from
obedience to her Mother, than good will to him. Wherefore Amadour was as much
grieved at the reading of them, as he was accustomed to rejoice at those
Letters which heretofore were sent him. At the end of two or three years, after
so many admirable atchievments in the Wars, that all the Paper in Spain was not
able to contain them, he entertained a strange invention, not to gain the heart
of Florinda (for he held that for lost) but to obtain another victory over her.
He did cast behind him all the Counsel of Reason, and fear of Death it self, to
the danger whereof he did so manifestly expose himself. The Debate being
discussed and concluded, he prevailed so much upon the Governor, that he was
deputed by him to go unto the King concerning some enterprise to be made upon
Locat, which he adventured to communicate to the Countess of Arand, before he
declared it to the King; to take her counsel therein, he came in Post into the
County of Arand, where he knew that then Florinda was, and sent privately a
friend of his to the Countess of Arand, to acquaint her with his coming,
beseeching her, That she would be pleased to keep it secret, and that at night
he would have some conference with her, without the knowledge of any one
besides. The Countess being very joyful of his coming, acquainted Florinda
with it, and sent to her to prepare her self in the Chamber of her Husband, to
the end that she might be ready, when she should send for her, and when every
one else were withdrawn. Florinda, who yet was not delivered from her first
fear, made an appearance to her Mother, to do as she commanded, but betook her
self to her Devotions, and did commend her self to God, beseeching him to
preserve her heart from all inordinate affections; and considering with her
self, that Amadour had often praised her beauty, which was not much diminished,
although she had been a long time sick, she determined that it was better to
commit an injury upon her beauty, than by her means to suffer that the heart of
so brave a Man should burn in so loose a fire: Wherefore she took a great stone
which she found in the Chapel, and gave her self so great a blow on the face,
that her mouth, her nose, and her eyes were all hurt and bruized with it. And
because it might not be suspected that she her self had done it, when the
Countess her Mother sent for her, she fell down at the door of the Chapel upon
a great stone, and crying out aloud, the Countess came her self to her relief,
and found her in that pitiful estate; Her face was immediately dressed, which
being done, the Countess did bring her into her own Chamber, and did entreat
her to repair into her Cabinet to entertain Amadour until such time as she
could get clear of the Company that was with her, which accordingly she did,
thinking that there were some of his servants with him, but finding her self
all alone, and the Do^e shut upon her, she became as sorrowful as Amadour was
content, thinking that either by love, or by force, he should now enjoy that
which he had much desired. Having entertained her with a short Discourse, and
found her in the same mind as he left her, and that she had rather die than
change her opinion, he said unto her, Madam, I vow unto you, the fruit of my
labor shall not be taken from me for a scruple, and since that Love, Patience,
and humble Prayers can nothing prevail upon you, I will not spare by force to
obtain that, which if not had, will procure my Death; when Florinda saw his
face and eyes so much changed, and that the best Complexion in the world did
grow red as fire, and that most sweet and pleasant look did become so horrible
and furious, that the fire seemed to sparkle forth from his eyes, which burned
in his heart, And when in that fury, with one of his strong hands he had taken
fast hold of both her weak and delicate ones, she seeing that all the defense
that she could make did fail her, and that both her hands and her feet were
held in such captivity, that she could neither fly, nor defend her self, and
knew not what remedy to find, unless it were to see if any little root of his
first love remained, in the honor of which he might forget his cruelty, she
said unto him, Amadour, If now you are an Enemy unto me, I must beseech you for
the honesty of the love which at other times I have found in your heart, that
you will first hear me, before you will torment me. When she perceived that he
began to give ear unto her, (following her Discourse) she said unto him, Alas
Amadour! What occasion does transport you to look after a thing, of which, if
enjoyed, you can receive no Content, and which will bring unto me the greatest
sorrow that possibly I can have. You have had such experience of my good will
unto you since the time of my Youth, and of my greatest Beauty, (for which your
passion might find some excuse) that I do much wonder that in my greater age,
and this Deformity into which Misfortune has now brought me, you have the
heart and desire to torment me. I am assured you know that my Will is the same
which it has been accustomed to be, so that you cannot have, unless it be by
force, that which you do demand; And if you observe but how my face is
martyred, (in the forgetting the beauty which you have seen in it) you would no
longer have a desire to come near me; and if there do as yet remain any
relics of love in you, it is impossible but that your pity should overcome
your sury; And to that pity and honesty which I have so often found in you, I
do address my complaint, and do desire their protection, to the end that
according to their better counsels you would permit me to live in peace and
honesty, which I have resolved to do. But if the love which you have born unto
me is converted all into hate; and if rather for vengeance than affection you
will make me the most wretched woman in the world, I do assure you, that it
shall not be so, and that you will enforce me (against my resolution) to
declare your cruelty, and inordinate appetite to her, who does conceive so well
of you, and, in that apprehension, you may assure your self that your life will
be in danger. Amadour breaking off her Discourse, said unto her, If I must die,
I care not, I will be immediately freed of my torment, and the deformity of
your face (which I believe was done by your own Will) shall not hinder my will,
for if I could have nothing but your bones only, I would keep them always with
me. When Florinda saw that neither her prayers, reasons, nor her tears could
work any Impression upon him, and that so great a fury did pursue his wicked
desires that she no longer could make resistance, she aided her self with a
remedy which she feared as much as the loss of his life, and with a sad and
pitiful voice called to her Mother, as loud as possibly she could, who hearing
her daughter to cry unto her in such a manner, had a mavelous great fear of
that which was probable enough, and did run as fast as her legs could carry her
into her Wardrobe. Amadour, who was not so ready to die as he pretended, did
let go his Prize in so good a time, that the Lady opening her Cabanet did find
him at the door, and Florinda standing a good way from him; The Countess
demanded of him, Amadour, what is the matter, tell me the Truth? He who was
never unprovided of an Excuse, with a pale Countenance said unto her, Madam,
Into what a Temper is Madam Florinda brought? I was never so amazed as at this
present, I thought that I had some part in her affection, but I have nothing
less. It seems to me, Madam, that since the time she was brought up under you,
she was never less wise nor virtuous than now she is. She was accustomed to
make no conscience to speak, or to look on any, and now I would but only look
on her, and she would not permit me, and when I beheld her face (not thinking
it was so altered) I demanded to kiss her hand, according to the fashion of
the Country, she altogether refused me. Madam, It is true that I have done her
wrong, for which I demand pardon of you: It was, that I took her hand by force,
and kissed it, demanding no other contentment of her, but she who (as I
believe) has determined my death, cried out unto you, (as you did hear) I
cannot tell for what, unless she entertains a fear, that I had other desires
about me than indeed I have; Nevertheless, Madam, in whatsoever manner it be,
I dow avow the Injury to be mine; for although she ought to love all your good
Servants, yet Fortune has so ordered it, that I alone, and the most
affectionate of them all, am turned out of her favor. Nevertheless I will
always continue most faithful both to you and her. And I must beseech you,
Madam, that you will be pleased to continue me in your good opinion, since
without any demerit of mine, I have lost hers. The Countess who in part did
believe, and in part did suspect what he alleged, did go unto her Daughter,
and said unto her, Wherefore did you call upon me with so loud a voice?
Florinda made answer, Because I was struck with a sudden fear; and although the
Countess did put many Interrogatories to her concerning Amadour, both at this
present, and many times afterward, yet she never would make any other answer
to her; for seeing that she had escaped out of his hands, she thought him
sufficiently punished having hindered his enterprise. After that the Countess
had a long time spoken to Amadour, she suffered him before her to speak unto
Florinda, to observe what Countenance he carried to her, to whom he spoke but
little, but only thanked her, because she confessed not the truth unto her
mother, and besought her, that since he had lost his place in her affections,
that no other might be possessed in it. To the first she made answer, That if
she had known any other means to defend her self from him, but her voice only,
her voice should never have been heard, neither by her Mother, nor any other.
To the second, she desired him never to fear that she would love any other, for
since she had not found in the heart of that Man, whom she esteemed to be the
most virtuous in the world, that Good which she expected, she would never be
induced to believe that it can be in any others. This Misfortune, she said,
should be a Help unto her, to preserve her self ever in liberty from those
passions which Love does bring. And having spoke these words, she took her
leave of him. Her Mother who observed her Countenance, knew not what to judge
of it, but after that time she perceived plainly that her Daughter did no more
affect Amadour, and concluded thereupon, that she was of a cross disposition,
and hated all those things which she loved, and from that hour did carry her
self so strangely to her, that she spoke not one word to her in seven years
together, unless it were to chide her, and all this was at the request of
Amadour. During this time Florinda turned the fear which she had to be with her
Husband, into a desire to be never from him, only thereby to avoid the rigor
of her Mother: But seeing that nothing would prevail, she resolved with her
self to be even with Amadour; and for two or three days together looking upon
him with a more pleasing countenance, she counseled him to hold discourse of
love with a Lady, who, she said, had spoken very liberally of theirs. This Lady
was in the Court of the Queen of Spain, and was called Loretta; she was proudly
glad to have obtained such a Servant as Amadour, and so great were the
familiarities betwixt them, that the report thereof was noised every where, and
the Countess of Arand being at Court did her self perceive it; wherefore
afterward she did not so much torment Florinda as she had been accustomed to
do. Florinda one day understood, that the Captain (the Husband of Loretta) was
possessed with so great a Jealousy, that he was resolved, by one means or
other, to kill Amadour; Florinda, who for all her dissembled countenance, could
carry no ill will in her heart to Amadour, did immediately advertise him of it;
but he who was most easy to be drawn into his first train, did make answer to
her, That if she pleased to entertain him but three hours in a day, he would
never speak to Loretta more, which she would not consent unto, Whereupon
Amadour said unto her, Since you will not have me to live, wherefore do you
deny me to dye? unless you hope to give me more punishments by life than a
thousand Deaths can afflict upon me. But although Death does fly me, I will
never leave looking after it, until I have found it; for in Death only I
shall have Rest. Whiles they were in this Conference, news was received that
the King of Granada had begun a most cruel War against the King of Spain,
insomuch that the King had sent thither the Prince his Son, and with him the
Constable of Castile, and the Duke of Alba, as two Adjunct, of great trust and
experience; Whereupon the Duke of Cardona, and the Earl of Arand would not stay
behind, and besought the King to assign them some charge in the Army, which he
did according to their Houses, and appointed Amadour to be their Guide, who
during the War was so famous for his atchievments, that they seemed rather to
proceed from a desperate rashness, than a well-grounded resolution; and to give
you the intention of my account, I must inform you, that his great Courage was
approved to his Death: For the Moors pretending that they would give battle to
the Army of the Christians, having better observed how it was marshalled, and
how great it was, did make as though they fled, and the Spaniards did follow
them in the pursuit, but the old Constable, and the Duke of Alba, suspecting
the Stratagem of the Moors, with much importunity did withhold the Prince of
Spain that he passed not the River, which, notwithstanding the Orders to the
contrary, the Count of Arand, and the Duke of Cardona did, and when the Moors
saw that they were followed with so unconsiderable a number, they did return
upon them, and with one blow of a Scemiter, did Iay the Duke of Cardona dead
upon the place, and so wounded the Count of Arand, that he fell to the Ground.
Upon this Defeat Amadour arrived, so furious and enraged, that with great
slaughter he did break through the Army of the Moors, and commanded the two
Bodies of the Duke and of the Count to be taken up, and to be brought into the
Princes Camp, who did so much lament their deaths, as they had been his own
Brothers. But, in beholding their wounds, he found the Count of Arand yet
living, who was sent in a Litter to his own house, where he continued a long
time sick, and on the other side the body of the young Duke was brought unto
Cardona. Amadour having done his endeavor to bring off these two Dukes, did
think so little of himself, that he was suddenly environed with a great number
of the Moors, and he who would no more be taken, having lost his Mistress,
falsified not his faith which he made unto God and her; and knowing, That if he
should be brought to the King of Granada, that either he should cruelly die, or
renounce his Christianity, he did resolve with himself to add Glory to his
Death, and kissing the Cross on the hilt of his sword, (rendering his Soul and
Body to his Creator) he did give himself so mortal a blow, that there needed
not a Second to dispatch him. So dyed the poor Amadour, and was as much
lamented as his Virtues deserved. The News thereof was immediately carried
through all Spain; insomuch that Florinda who was at Barcelona, where her
Husband was interred, after that she had honorably performed the Funerals,
without speaking either to her own Mother, or her Mother-in-Law, or any other,
did render her self a Votaress in the Monastery of Jesus, taking him for her
Husband and her Friend, who had delivered her from a love so vehement as that
of Amadour, and from a persecution so grievous as was the Company of her
Husband. She employed all her affections to the love of God, and that so
perfectly, that having lived a long time a religious life, she surrendered her
Soul to God, with so much joy as the Espoused does go to behold her Spouse.

Ladies, I know that this long History does prove tedious unto you all, but if
I should have satisfied him who first of all gave me the account, I should have
yet made it longer. I must beseech you Ladies, that in following the Example of
the Virtues of Florinda, you would abate a little of her cruelty, and not at
the first to believe so much Good of Men, as by the acknowledgment of it, to
give them afterward a cruel Death, and to your selves a sorrowful life. After
that Parliament had spoke so long, she turning to Hircan said unto him, It
appears now plainly to you, that this Lady was solicited and importuned to
the last, and that most virtuousty she resisted. No, said Hircan, For a woman
cannot make the least resistance but by crying out, and if she had been in a
place where she could not be heard, I know not what would have become of her;
And if Amadour had been more amorous, and less fearful, he had not for so
little have left off his enterprise. And this Example does not move me at all
from the opinion I maintain, that there was never any Man who loved perfectly,
or was beloved by a Lady, that ever failed in the event, if he followed his
suit as he ought to do. Nevertheless I must here praise Amadour, that he did
some part of his Duty. Duty? what Duty, said Oysilla? Do you call it Duty in a
Servant to take his Mistress by force, to whom he owes all reverence and
obedience? Saffredant took the word, and said unto her, Madam, when our
Mistresses do keep their ranks, either in Chambers or in Halls, and do sit at
their own ease, an our Judges, we are on knees before them; and when in all
humility of observance we lead them forth to dance, and serve them so
diligently, that we even prevent their Commands, and seem so fearful to offend
them, and so desirous to serve them, that those who see us, have pity on us,
and esteem us out of our wits, and more sottish tha^ Beasts, and attribute all
the glory to our Ladies, whose countenances are so bold, and whose words so
attractive, that they make themselves to be feared, loved, and esteemed by
those who look not but only on the outside: But when we are by our selves, and
Love is the only Judge of our countenances, we understand well enough that they
are Women, and that we are Men, and then the Name of Mistress is converted
into Sweetheart, and the Name of a Servant into Friend; it is from thence that
the Proverb finds its beginning, To serve well, and to be loyal, is from a
Servant to become a Master. They have the honor, which Men at their pleasure
can give and take from them, and beholding that we patiently do endure, it is
reason they conceive, that our sufferance should be recompensed, when their
Honor is not wounded. You do not speak of true Honor, said Longaren, which is
the only contentment of this World; for when all the World shall speak me a
virtuo us woman, and I am conscious to my self to the contrary, their praise
does increase my shame, and does render me more confused in my self; and on the
other side, when they speak evil of me, and I perceive my Innocence, their
blame does turn into my contentment; for there was never any one that ever did
find content, but only in himself. Because all have spoken now, said Ouebron,
it seems to me that Amadour was at gallant and virtuous a Gentleman as a man
can be; and because the Names are feigned, I suppose I did know him; but seeing
that Parliament would not give him his right Name, no more will I. And I am most
confident, that if he be the same whom I conjecture, his heart did never
entertain any fear, nor was ever void of Love and Courage. Oysilla said unto
them, It seems to me that this Days work is passed away with joy, and that if
in this manner we shall continue the rest, we shall make the time seem short,
with the variety of our honest Discourse. For see yonder how far the Sun is
gone, and you may hear the Bell of the Abbey, which a long time has called us
to the Vespers, of which I have not advertised you, for the Devotion to hear
the end of this Account, was more great than that to hear Vespers. And in
speaking those words, they did all arise, and coming to the Abbey they found
there the religious Men, who had attended for them above an hour. Vespers being
heard, they repaired to Supper, and all the Evening they discoursed of stories
which they had heard, and examined their Memories, to see if they could make
the following Days work as delightful as was the former; and after a thousand
sports and courses in the Meadow, they resorted to their Rests, crowning the
first Days work with a most joyful period.

The End of the First days Work.
The Second Days Work of the Novells of the Queen of NAVARRE.
The Preface.
ON the next morning they did arise with a great desire to return into the
place where the day before they had received such pleasure; and everyone had
his Account so ready, that it seemed long unto them until it was brought unto
the light. After they had heard Madam Oysillas Lecture, and, after that, the
Mass, where every one recommended himself to God, and besought Elocution and
Gra^e of him in the continuation of this Assembly, they repaired to Dinner,
repeating to one another many histories of things passed.

After Dinner, having reposed themselves a little in their Chambers, they
returned upon the appointed hour into the Meadow, where it seemed to them that
both the time and the day did favor their enterprise; and being all sat down
upon the natural cushion of the green grass, Parliament said, Because last night
I did put an end to the Tenth Novell, it belongs, I conceive, to me, to choose
one who shall begin the continuation of yesterdays discourse: And because that
Madam Oysilla was the first of all the Women who did speak yesterday, as being
the most wise and ancient, I will this day give my voice to the most young, I
will not say to the most weak in apprehension, being assured, that if we should
all but follow her Example, we shall not make them to stay so long for us at
Vespers as yesterday they did; wherefore Nomerfide, you shall have this day the
first place in the discourse; but I must beseech you that you will not make us
to begin our Days work with tears. You need not to entreat me, said Nomerfide,
for I was before resolved to the contrary, remembering myself of an account
which was told me about a year ago, by a Burgess of Tours, who was born in
Amboys, and affirmed to me that he was present at the Preachment of the Friar,
of which I will now speak unto you.

THE NOVELLS Of Queen MARGARET.
The facetious passages of a Friar in his Sermons.
The First Novell.
Near unto the City of Blere in Tourain, there is a Town called St. Martin
le-beau; to which place a Friar of the Covent of Tours was called to preach on
the Advents, and in the Lent ensuing. This Friar, more loud than learned,
having not wherewith to inform his Auditors, did deliberate with himself to
begin his hour with some account that might give some satisfaction to the
people of the Village. On Maundy-Thursday, preaching of the Paschal Lamb, when
he came to speak that it was to be eaten at night, and beheld so many young and
fair Women of Amboys to be present at his Sermon, who were lately arrived to
keep there their Easter, and to continue in that place some days afterward,
he began to be on a merry pin, and demanded of all the Women that were present,
if they knew not what it was to eat raw flesh at night? (Ladies, I assure you I
speak his own words after him) The young Men of Amboys who were present, and
came commonly with their Wives, Sisters, and Kinswomen, and who knew not the
humor of the Confessor, began to be offended at him; But after that they had
heard him further, they turned their scandal into laughter, especially when he
said, That to eat the Paschal Lamb, they must have girded their reins, and
their feet on their shoes, and their hands in the staff. The Friar observing
them to laugh, and doubting for what it was, did immediately correct himself,
and well, well, said he, their shoes then on their feet, and a staff in their
hands; A hat white, or a white hat, is it not all one? His auditors did fall
all a-laughing at this, and the Ladies themselves could not contain, to whom he
did apply himself with variety of such vain discourse; and perceiving that his
hour was almost out, he was unwilling that the young Women should depart
discontented from him, he said therefore unto them, And now my young Ladies, I
am sure, that by and by you will in your prattle, ask the Gossips that are with
you, What Mr. Friar is this that delivers himself so confidently this day? Why
I will tell you Ladies, he is a good Fellow, and be not you astonished, be not,
I say, though he talks never so lowdly; for I am of Anjou, and at your
service, Ladies. And speaking those words, he did make an end of his
Preachment, by which he did leave his Auditors more ready to laugh at his
foolish discourse, than to weep in the memory of the Passion of our Savior,
the Commemoration whereof was then to be solemnized. His other Sermons, during
the said Feast of Easter, were of the same efficacy. And, as you know well
enough, that these Brothers are very forward in their exhortations to receive
their benevolences at Easter, by which they have not only their Eggs given
them, but many other things, as odd Remnants of Linen, and Flax, Puddings,
Gammons, or Legs of Bacon, and Chines of Bacon, and many other such small
Collations; Easter Tuesday being come, when he was to make his Recommendations
(of which these people are always liberal enough) he directing his course
again to the Women, said, Ladies, I am bound to give you thanks for your
liberality which you have showed to our poor Covent, but it is requisite that I
speak plain unto you, That you have not considered of the Necessities in which
we stand; for the greatest part of that which you have given us, are Links and
Puddings, and, God be praised, we have no need of them; our Covent is full of
good Puddings already, What shall we do with them then? would you know what?
Ladies I shall advise you then, if you would but put your Gammons to our
Puddings, you would give us a good Alms indeed. In this manner continuing his
Sermon, he gave a new occasion of offense; and discoursed very briskly from
above, and having instanced some Examples, he did put himself into an
Admiration, and said, My good Sirs, and Ladies of St. Martins, I am much
astonished at you, that you should make strange at that which is nothing, and
speaking of me to one another, should say, This is a strange Friar, I will tell
you what; Suppose that a Monk should get the Daughter of his Hostess with
Child, this would be some wonder, that a Monk should get a Girl with Child, but
let us come to the point, my Ladies, Suppose that this Girl should get the Monk
with Child, why there would be your cause of wonder indeed.

See here, my Ladies, the Viands with which this gentle Pastor did nourish the
flock of God; And yet he is so impudent, as still to go into the Pulpit, where
he ought not to make any discourse at all, which is not wholly for the
Instruction of his neighbors, or the glory of God. This was a Master-Frier in
earnest, said Saffredant, I should love him as well as I do Friar Annebant, on
whose back I would put all the merry Discourse which can be delivered in a
whole Parish. Oysilla made answer, I love not to have men laugh at such
profaneness, especially in this Case. Nomerfide replied, Madam, it is not long
ago, if it be not so still, that not only the honest people of the Villages,
but also a considerable part in the greatest Towns (who think better of
themselves than the rest) had such Preachers in far greater Reverence, than
those who purely and sincerely preached the Holy Gospel. In whatsover sort it
was, said Hircan, Was it not an Injury to demand the Women's Gammons to be
mingled with their Puddings, since there is far more meat in the Gammons? Nay,
and if some devout Woman had understood him, according to his fallacy, (as I
believe that he himself did mean it) neither he nor his Companions would be in
any other condition, than the young Girl who had her Sack too full. But you may
behold, said Oysilla, what a most impudent Man this was, to corrupt at his
pleasure the Text of holy Scripture, thinking to meet with such Beasts as
himself, and in doing so, most wickedly to endeavor to supplant poor women, by
teaching them how to eat raw flesh at night. You take no notice at all, said
Simontault, that he saw before him the young women of Amboys, in whose Troughs
he would willingly have washed his Whatch-I-call-it; No: but you understand it
well enough; and make them to taste it, not roasted, but hot in a wanton
Exercise, to give them greater pleasure. Good, good (Signior Simontault, said
Parliament) you do forget your self, or do you keep your accustomed Modesty in
Reserve, to be only ready when you have need of it. No Madam, said he, but the
dishonesty of the Monk did cause me so far to wander from my self; Therefore to
put our selves again into our first course, I desire Nomerfide, who was the
occasion of my digression, to give her voice to some one who might make us to
forget our common fault. Since you make me to partake of your fault, said
Nomerfide, I will address my self to one who will help our present
imperfection; it is Dagoucin, who is so grave, that he will rather die than
have a foolish word come from him. Dagoucin thanked her for the good opinon she
had of him, and began to spoak his History, the effect whereof was to make you
understand how much Love does blind the most great, and the most honest hearts,
and that a Discourtesie is hard to be overcome by any former benefit, how great
soever it be.

The Inconvenience that b^ fell a Duke, and his impudence to arrive to his
Intentions, with the just punishment of his illlaid Design.
The Second Novell.
SOme time since, in the City of Florence there lived a Duke, who espoused
Madam Margaret, daughter to the Emperor Charles the Fifth; and because she was
so young, that it was nor yet lawful for him to lie with her, he entertained
her very honorably and lovingly, until she did arrive unto the ripeness of
age. For, to forbear her, he became amorous of some other Ladies in the City,
whom in the night he went to court when his Wife was asleep. Amongst others,
there was a most beautiful and virtuous Lady, who was Sister to a Gentleman
whom the Duke loved as himself, and to whom he gave so much authority in his
House, that his word was obeyed, and feared, as that of the Dukes, and he had
no secret in his heart, which he declared not unto him: Insomuch, that he might
well be called his second Self. The Duke observing his Sister to be so
accomplished a Lady, and that he had not the means to declare the love which he
did bear unto her; having sought all ways that were possible for the effecting
of it, at last addressed himself to the Gentleman whom so entirely he did
affect, and said unto him, If there were any thing in the world (my Friend)
which I would not do for you, I should be afraid to declare unto you my
thoughts, and much more to desire you to be ayding to me in them, but I bear
you so much good will, that if I had Wife, Mother, or Daughter, that might
conduce to save your Life, I would rather employ them all in it, than to suffer
you to die in torment; and I believe that the Love which you bear to me is
reciprocal to mine. And if I who am your Master do bear such an affection to
you, I presume that you do not bear any less to me: Wherefore I will declare
one secret to you, the concealment whereof does keep me in this estate, wherein
you see me, of which I can look for no amendment, but only by Death, or by the
service which you may do me. The Gentleman observing the Reasons of his Master,
and that his face in earnest was bathed in tears, had so great a compassion of
him, that he said unto him, Sir, I am your Creature, all the Fortunes and
Honors I enjoy, do proceed from you, you may speak to me as to your friend,
being assured, That all which lies in my power is in your own hands.
Incontinently the Duke began to declare unto him the love which he did bear
unto his Sister, which was so great and violent, that if by his means he had no
redress, he found he could not live long; for he knew by experience, that
neither Letters, nor Prayers, nor Presents, could prevail upon her: Wherefore
he conjured him, If he loved his life, as deerly as his life was beloved by
him, that he would find a means to procure him that benefit, which without him,
he concluded, it was impossible to enjoy. The Brother, who loved his Sister,
and the honor of his House more than the pleasure of the Duke, did endeavor to
make him some Remonstrance to the contrary, beseeching him in all other ways to
employ him, but to excuse him only in this thing, it being too cruel and too
unnatural to him to purchase the dishonor of his own blood, and that neither
his heart nor his Honor could comply with this Command. The Duke enflamed with
an anger insupportable, did bite his nails, and made reply unto him in great
fury, It is no matter, seeing I find in you no respects of Friendship to me, I
know what I have to do. The Gentleman understanding the cruelty of his Master,
was struck into a fear, and said unto him, Sir, Because it is your pleasure, I
will speak unto her, and I will give you an account of her answer to me. The
Duke answered departing from him, As you make much of my life, (...) will I of
yours: The Gentleman understood well enough what he did mean by those words,
and abs^^ted himself a day or two from the Duke to consider what he had to do.
On one side there was presented to him the Obligation which he owed to his
Master, and the benefits, and the Honors which he had received from him. On
the other side his thoughts reflected on the Honor of his House, the honesty
and chastity of his Sister, and the assurance he had that she would never
consent to so foul a Motion, if she were not surprised by deceit, or by force.
Wherefore having taken these Premises into his consideration, he concluded,
That he would rather die, than be the Author of so ill an Office to his Sister,
who was one of the most virtuous Ladies in all Italy. He was rather obliged, he
did judge, to deliver his Country from such a Tyrant, who by force would stain
the Honor of his Family. He was assured, besides, that unless the Duke was
dead, the life of himself and of his Sister were absolutely lost. Wherefore,
without so much as speaking one word unto his Sister, he determined with
himself to save his own life, and by the same way to revenge the shame which
was intended to be brought upon her. At the end of two days he addressed
himself to the Duke, and told him how he had practiced with his Sister, who
(but not without great difficulty) did consent unto his pleasure, which she
hoped should be kept secret, seeing none but himself, who was her own Brother,
had any knowledge of it. The Duke, who desired this News, did easily believe
it, and embracing the Messenger, did promise him whatsoever he would demand,
and desiring him that it might quickly be put in execution, they agreed between
themselves upon the day. If the Duke were not high with hopes and Joys, I will
leave it to you to judge. When he saw the night so much desired to approach, in
which he promised himself to have the Victory over her, whom he thought
invincible, he withdrew himself betimes from his Court, having none in his
Company but this Gentleman alone, and forgot not to take along with him a
Nightcap, and a shirt perfumed in the best manner as possibly it might be. And
taking his opportunity in the Evening, he did go along with this Gentleman to
the Lodging of this Lady, where he came into a Chamber very richly prepared.
The Gentleman assisted him to put off his clothes, and helped him into Bed,
saying to him, Sir, I will now go and setch her my self unto you, who will not
enter into this Chamber without many blushes, but I hope before the Morning she
will be assured of you. In this manner her left the Duke, and did go into his
own Chamber, where he found but one of all his Servants, to whom he said, Have
you the heart to follow me into a place where I will revenge my self on the
greatest Enemy I have in the world? His Man not knowing what he would do, said
unto him, Yes Sir, and it were the Duke himself. Immediately the Gentleman did
take him with him, who on the sudden had not the leisure to take any other
A^ms, but a Poniard only which he had always about him; When the Duke did hear
him coming, conceiving that he had brought her along with him whom he loved so
entirely, he opened the Curtain, and his eyes, to behold her, and to receive
her into his arms whom so long he expected; but instead of beholding her from
whom he hoped to have the preservation of his life, he beheld the precipitation
of his death, which was a drawn sword which the Gentleman had in his hand, with
which he struck at the Duke with all his force, who was in his shirt, and being
without arms, but not without heart, defended the blow with the Bed-cloaths,
and taking hold of the Gentleman about the body, said unto him, Is this the
fulfilling of the promise which you made me? And seeing he had no other weapon
but his teeth and nails, he did bite the Gentleman on the pulse of his hands,
and with the strength of his arms did so long defend himself, that they both
fell down between the Wall and the Bed. The Gentleman who began to be overborn
by him, called to his servant, who sinding the Duke and his Master so tied
together, that he knew not which of them to choose, did dragg them both by the
feet into the middle of the Room, and with his Poynard did cut the throat of
the Duke, who defended himself until the loss of blood did render him so
feeble, that he could make no more opposition. Then the Gentleman and his
Servant did carry him into the bed, where with many blows and thrusts of the
Poniard they did over-act their Murder. Afterward, having drawn close the
Curtains, they did both depart, and shut up the dead Body in the Chamber. When
the Gentleman saw himself victorious over his Enemy, by whose death he thought
to procure the Liberty of the Public, he conceived that his work was
imperfect, if he did not as much to five or six more of those who were next in
power to the Duke. And to put his hand to the work, he told his Servant, that
he should go for them one after another, and do with them as he had done with
the Duke. But his Servant, who was not of any great heart or courage, said unto
him; Sir, Methinks you have done well enough already for one time, and that you
should rather think of saving your own life, than of taking more lives away
from others; for if we should stay to do as much to every one of them, as we
have done unto the Duke, the day would discover our enrerprize, before we
should have put any period to it, although we should have found them all
without defense. The Gentleman, whose evil conscience did render him fearful,
did believe his Servant, and taking him along with him, he addressed himself to
the Bishop, in whose Custody were the charge of the Keys of the City, and the
Command of the Posthorses. The Gent. said unto him, I have this Evening
received News, that my Brother is on the point of Death, I have been to demand
leave of the Duke to go unto him, who has granted it; Wherefore I desire you
to command the Posts to let me have two good horses, and the Porter of the City
to open the Gates unto me. The Bishop, who esteemed his entreaty no less than
the Commandment of the Duke, with whom he knew he was most gracious, did give
him incontinently a Ticket, by virtue whereof both the Gates of the City were
opened to him, and the Posthorses suddenly provided, accordingly as he desired.
And instead of seeing his Brother, he took his way directly to Venice, where he
caused the bitings which the Duke had given him, to be healed, and not long
after he traveled into Turkey.

In the Morning the Servants of the Duke found it very long before he came
forth, and did attend his return; for they suspected that he was gone to see
some Lady: But seeing the morning far spent, and they could hear nothing of
him, they began to look for him in every place. The poor Duchess, who began
to affect him most entirely, understanding that they could not hear any News of
him, wa^ in a great perplexity. But when the Gentleman, whom so well he loved,
could be heard of no more than himself, they resorted to his house to seek him
our, and finding some drops of blood at his Chamber door, they did enter into
his Chamber, and found not any there to give them the least Intelligence; but
their suspicion increasing, they followed the tracts of the blood, and came to
the Door of the Chamber where the Duke was, which they found locked, and having
broken open the Door they found the place full of blood, and drawing the
Curtains, they found the body in the Bed asleep, to wake no more. You may
imagine what Lamentation his poor Servants made, who carried his dead body into
the Palace, whither the Bishop came, and informed them how in the time of night
the Gentleman in great diligence departed, under pretense to see his Brother.
By which it most clearly did appear, that it was hewho did commit that Murder.
And it was also proved, That his poor Sister did never hear the least word of
any thing; who, although she was astonished at the sad news she heard, yet it
increased her love unto her Brother, who had delivered her from so cruel a
Prince, the Enemy of her Chastity, by the apparent hazard of his own life; And
continuing more and more her Progress in all virtues, although she was poor
(for her House and all her goods were confiscated) she found good friends and
rich Kindred in Italy, by whom being assisted, she lived a long time in great
and good reputation.

Ladies, here you see what may make you fear that little God, who takes
delight to torment Princes, as well as Beggars, and the mighty as well as the
feeble, and who does render them so blind, that they lose God, and their
Conscience, and at last their own lives. And Princes, and those who are in
authority, may well be afraid how they displease those who are inferiors to
them, for there is none so weak, but he can do hurt, when God will take
vengeance upon a sinner, nor so great, that can guard himself from his Enemy,
when he is under his power. This History was much listened to by all the
Company, but it produced great diversities of Judgment; for some maintained
that the Gentleman had done his duty in saving his own life, and the honor of
his Sister, as also in delivering his Country from a Tyrant. Others were of
another mind, and affirmed, that it was a great Ingratitude in the Gentleman to
put him to death, who had bestowed upon him so many benefits and honors. The
Ladies said, that he was a good Brother, and a virtuous Citizen. The Men
professed the contrary, and that he was a Traitor, and a wicked Servant.

It would be requisite in this place to allege the reasons on both sides, but
the Ladies (according to their Custom) did speak as much by passion as by
reason, assirming, that the Duke was worthy of Death, and that happy was the
hand that did give the blow; wherefore Dagoucin perceiving the great
contestation that he had made amongst them, did say unto them, For Gods sake
Ladies, Let there be no more a quarrel concerning a thing already passed, but
take heed that your own beauties do not commi! more cruel Murders than hers of
whom I have given you an account. Parliament said, The fair Lady without mercy
has taught us to say, That her gracious Malady many did slay. Madam, I would
to God said Dagoucin, that all the Ladies in this Company did know how false
that opinion is, I believe they would not own the Name to be without Mercy, nor
resemble that incredulous Woman, who did let her Servant die in refusing to
give him a gracious answer. You would then ( said Parliament) to save the life
of one who says be loves us, that we lose at once both our Honors and our
Consciences. That is not that ( said Dagoucin) which I do mean; For he who
loves perfectly, will fear how he wounds the honor of his Mistress; more
than her self: Therefore it seems to me, that a civil and a courteous answer,
such as a sair and an honest love requires, cannot but increase Honor, and
confirm the Conscience; for he is no true Servant that does desire the
contrary. This always ( said Emarsuite) is the end of your reasons, which
begin with Honor, and end in the contrary: And if those Men who are here
present would speak the truth, I should believe them without their Oaths.
Hircan did swear, for his part, that he never loved any woman, his wise
excepted, with whom he did not desire to be a Sinner. Simontault said as much,
and added, That he had often wished that all wives in the world were pliant,
and easy to be gained, his own excepted. Gue bron said unto him, Truly you do
well deserve that your own Wife were such as you desire others to be; but for
my self, I can justly swear, that I do so truly love one Lady, that I had
rather die, than that for me she should suffer such a change, that I should
esteem her the less afterward; for my Love is so much grounded on her
virtues, that for all the good which in this world can arrive unto me, I would
not see her in the least sort blemished. Saffredant began to laugh, and did say
unto him, I did think Guebron, that the love of your wife, and the good opinion
that you have of her, had excused you from being amorous of others, but I
perceive it is not so: For you use the very same terms with which we are
accustomed to deceive the most subtle, and to be heard by the most wisest
Ladies; for who are they will stop their ears when we shall begin with Honor
and Virtue: But if we did show them our hearts, such as indeed they are, there
are many of us (who are bid very welcome amongst Ladies) whom they would make
afterward no account of at all. We cover therefore our Devil with the best
Angel that we can find out. And under that coverture, before we are discovered,
we receive gallant entertainment; And by this means we do so draw on the hearts
of the Ladies, that they do think they do go in the direct way to virtue, and
knowing afterward the vice of the deceit, it may be they have neither the
means nor the leisure to retreat. Truly said Guebron, I took you for another
Man than such as you express your self, and that Virtue was more agreeable to
you than Pleasure. How, said Saffredant, Is not the greatest virtue to love as
God commands us? It seems to me to be far better done, to love a woman as a
woman, than to idolize her, as diverse others do. And as for my self, I continue
firm in that opinion, That it is better far to use them, than to abuse them.
The Ladies were all of Guebrons opinion, and constrained Saffiedant to hold his
peace, who said, I am well contented to speak no more; for I have been so
scornfully used amongst them, that I have no mind to return thither again. Your
subtilty, and malice, said Longaren, is the cause of our course entertainment
of you, for what honest Lady is there who would maintain you for a Servant,
after this Discourse you have held with us? Some who do find me not so
troublesome ( said Saffredant) Will not exchange their honesty for yours. But
let us talk no more, that my choler may not be displeasing to my self, or to
any one else. Let us observe to whom Dagoucin will give his voice, who said; I
give it unto Parliament; for I conceive that she knows better than any other,
what is that love which is most true and perfect. Parliament said, Since I am
chosen to give you an account, I will declare unto you a History which happened
to a Lady who has been one of my greatest friends, and the thought of whom is
always lodged in my memory.

A Captain of a Galley, under the pretense of Devotion, became amorous of a
young Lady, and what Fortune he incountred.
The Third Novell.
IN the House of Madam the Regent Mother of King Francis, there was a very
devout Gentlewoman, married to a Gentleman, who, as her self, was piously
affected. And although her Husband were old, and she was beautiful and young,
yet she served and loved him, as if he were the handsomest, and the youngest
man in the world. And to take away from him all occasion of suspicion, she
attired her self in the habit of an Old woman, and suitable to the age in which
he was, and abandoned all Companies, Fashions, Dances, and Plays, which young
Ladies are accustomed to frequent, and placed all her pleasure and recreation
in the Service of God. Wherefore her Husband did repose so great a love and
trust in her, that she governed both his House and himself at her own pleasure.
It so fell out, that one day the Gentleman told her, that from his Youth he had
a great desire to make a voyage to Jerusalem. She who desired nothing more than
to please him, said unto him, Sweetheart, Since God has deprived us of
Children, and bestowed upon us wealth sufficient, I would desire you to set
apart some quantity of it for so holy a voyage; for go where you will, thither,
or elsewhere, I am resolved to go with you, and never to abandon you. The good
Man was so glad of it, that he thought he was already upon the Mount of
Calvary. During this resolution, there came a Gentleman to the Court, who had
been often in the War against the Turks, and besought the assistance of the
King of France in an enterprise upon one of their Cities, by which he said that
great profit would redound to all Christendom: The old Gentleman demanded of
him his Expedition, and after he understood his Resolution, he demanded of him,
If after that voyage he would make another to Jerusalem, whither his Wife and
himself had a great desire to go. The Captain being very glad to hear their
good desires, did promise them to be a guide unto them in the way, and desired
him to keep the affair secret. The good old Gentleman thought the time long
till he had found his wife, to give her an account of what he had done, who had
as great a desire to undertake the voyage as her Husband. And eftentimes on
this occasion, she conferred with the Captain, who regarding her beauty more
than her words, became so amorous, that speaking to her of the voyages he had
made upon the Seas, he would tell her of his imbarking at Marseilles upon the
Archipel^g^^ and thinking to speak of a Ship, he would tell her a story of a
Horse, as a Man transported, and out of his sense. But he found her to be such,
that he durst not speak to her, nor make any Countenance of Love; And the
concealing of his Love did beget such a fire in his heart, that he oftentimes
fell sick, but the Gentlewoman was as careful of him as of the Cross it self,
and circumspect to guide her course: howsoever she sent many times to visit
him, by which he understanding that she had some respect unto him, did recover
of himself, without any Physic at all. But diverse Gentlemen observing this
Captain, who had the report to be as gallant and brave a Man, as a good
Christian, did much wonder to see him so often to accost this Gentlewoman; and
seeing that he had changed the condition of his life, and frequented altogether
the Churches, Sermons, and Confessions, they suspected it was to obtain the
favor of the young Gentlewoman, and could not refrain, but spoke some words
unto him concerning that subject. The Captain fearing that it might be brought
unto her ear, did absent himself from her company in public, and told her
Husband and her self, That he should suddenly be dispatched at Court and be
gone, and that he had many things to inform them with, but because the Affair
should be kept secret, he would neither speak with himself nor his Wife in
public, but desired them to send for him when they were in private both
together. The Gentleman approved his Counsel, and failed not every night to go
to bed betimes, and to make his Wife also to put off her clothes to keep him
Company: And when their Servants were departed from them, they sent for the
Captain, and consulted on their voyage to Jerusalem, and the good old Man in
great devotion talking of it, would often fall asleep with the word Jerusalem
in his mouth. The Captain seeing the old Gentleman asleep in his Bed, and
himself in the Chair, and near unto her whom he thought the most beautiful and
most accomplished in the world, had his heart so locked up and besieged with
fear, and a desire to speak, that he often lost his speech. But to the end that
she might not perceive him, he employed himself to talk of the holy places in
Jerusalem, where still remained the signs of the great love which our Savior
Jesus Christ did bear unto us; And in speaking of that Love he covered his own,
looking on the young Gentlewoman with tears and sighs, who perceived nothing at
all. For observing his demure countenance, she conceived him to be a grave and
a pious man, and desired him to acquaint her what was the course of life which
he had lead, and how he did arrive to this Love of God. He declared unto her
that he had been a poor Gentleman, who to purchase Riches and Honor had forgot
his Conscience, and espoused a Wife too near allied unto him, only because she
was rich, and whom he could not love, being both old and ill-favored. But
having consumed a great part of her Estate, he went to Sea to seek adventures
there, and had thrived so well by his endeavors, that he was become Master of
a considerable Fortune: But ever since he was so happy to arrive unto the
Knowledge of her self, she, by her Godly discourse and good Examples, was the
only Cause that he had changed his life, And all that he resolved upon (if God
should return him in safety from his enter prize) was to be a Guide to her
Husband and to her self unto Jerusalem, to satisfy in some part for all his
sins, to which he had put a period, but only one sin, which was, that as yet he
had not given satisfaction to his Wife, to whom he hoped to be shortly
reconciled. This discourse did much please the Gentlewoman, but above all she
rejoiced that she had drawn such a Man to the love and the fear of God. Till
the time of his departure from the Court he had with her every evening these
long discourses, and never offered to declare unto her his Intentions, he only
presented her with a Crucifix, to which was annexed our Lady of Pity, and
besought her, that in his absence looking on that, she would call himself into
her Memory. The hour of his departure being come, having taken his leave of her
Husband, who immediately fell asleep, he came to his Wife to give her a
Farewell, and seeing tears in her eyes for the honest love she did bear unto
him, it did render his passion so insupportable, that not daring to declare it,
he did fall down in a swoun, bidding her Farewell in so great an agony and
sorrow, that not only his eyes, but all his body did sweat down tears. And
without speaking any more words, he departed, at which the Gentlewoman was much
amazed, for she never beheld any such sign of Grief before. Nevertheless she
changed not the purpose of her good will toward him, and accompanied him with
Prayers and Orisons. At the end of one month, as this Gentlewoman one evening
returned her to her Lodgings, there met her a Gentleman, who presented her with
a Letter from the Captain, desiring her that she would be pleased to read it by
her self, and told her that he saw him imbarqued, and resolved to go thorough
with the enterprise, for the Honor of the King, and the augmentation of the
Faith; and for himself, that he was to return to Marseilles to give order for
the affairs of the Captain. The Gentlewoman retired to a Window by her self,
and did read the Letter all along, which contained two sides, and much
marvelled at the affection of the Captain, which she never did suspect; And
observing that he had presented her with a great and fair Diamond, the Ring
wherein it was set being enameld with black, She was in a great perplexity what
to do, and having troubled her self all that night concerning it, she was very
glad that she had no occasion to write back unto him, or to return him any
answer. Nor would she fall out with the Messenger, thinking with her self, that
considering the pains he had taken for the service of his Master, he had no
need to be rewarded with an ill answer; but she resolved to deliver it her self
unto him upon his return from his enterprise. Above all, she was much perplexed
with the Diamond, for she was not accustomed to dress her self at the expenses
of any other but her Husband; wherefore being of a good understanding, she
deliberated with her self to bring some profit by that Ring to the Conscience
of the Captain, and immediately dispatched one of her servants to the
disconsolate wife of the Captain, pretending her self to be a religious woman
of Tarasco, and did write unto her in these words, Madam, Monsieur your Husband
passed this way a little before he took shipping, and after he had confessed,
and received the Sacrament as a good Christian ought to do, he declared unto me
one fault which lay heavy upon his Conscience, which was, the grief that he had
not loved you so much as he ought to have done, and prayed and conjured me at
his departure to sead you this Letter with this Diamond, which he desires you
to keep for the Love you bear him; assuring you, That if God shall return him
in safety, there was never any woman better used by a Husband, than you shall
be by him, and this Diamond for the performance of it, shall be a firm pledge
unto you of the assurance of his faith. I beseech you to recommend him to God
in your prayers, and he shall not want of mine during my life. This Letter,
made up, and sealed in the name of one of the Nuns of Tarasco, was sent by the
Gentlewoman to the Captains Wife; when the old woman beheld the Letter and the
Ring, you need not demand how she wept for joy and grief to be so beloved, and
esteemed of her Husband, of the sight of whom she saw her self deprived. And
kissing the Ring a thousand times she did bedew it with her tears, blessing God
that at the end of her Days he had restored the love of her Husband to her,
which she held to be lost for a long time. She also much thanked the Nun that
was the Cause of her Good; To whom she sent the best answer that she could,
which the Messenger reported to his Mistress, who could neither read nor hear
what her servant brought unto her from her, without laughing very heartily, and
was well contented to be rid of the Diamond, to procure so great a good, as to
establish the Love betwixt the Husband and the Wife, in doing which she thought
to her self she had gained a Kingdom. Not long after there arrived the News of
the Defeat, and Death of the poor Captain, and how he was abandoned by those
who ought to succor him, and that his Enterprise was betrayed by the Rhodians,
who most of all should have kept it secret, insomuch that himself and those who
landed with him, who were about the number of four and twenty, were killed upon
the place; amongst whom was a Gentleman called John, and a Turk whom the
Gentleman above-specified had answered for at the Fount, both whom she had
given to the Captain to attend upon him in his voyage, one whereof died with
him, and the Turk being wounded with five arrows, did save himself by swimming
to the French ships, by whom alone the Truth of this Defeat was understood: For
a Gentleman whom the poor Captain had taken for a Friend and a Companion, and
had advanced him into the favor of the King, and the greatest of the Nobility
of France, as soon as ever he saw the Captain landed, did retire back with the
Ships into the Sea. The Captain seeing his Enterprise discovered, and above
Four thousand Turks coming down upon him, would have retreated to the ships,
as he ought to have done; but the Gentleman in whom he did repose his only
Confidence, knowing that in his Death the Charge and Command of the whole Army
would be devolved upon himself, did declare unto the Gentlemen and others that
were on shipboard, That they ought not to hazard the Vessels of the King, nor
so many good Soldiers that were in the ships, to save a few persons only: By
this persuasion they who of themselves wanted Courage, did agree in opinion
with him. The Captain observing, that the more he called upon them, the more
they drew back toward the Main, and removed themselves from his succor, did
return toward the Turks, being in Sands up to the knees, where he made such
demonstrations of his Valor, and of his knowledge in Arms, that it seemed that
he alone was able to defeat all the numbers of his Enemies; by reason whereof
his treacherous Companion entertained a greater fear, than a desire of his
Victory. At the last (whatsoever defense he could make) he received so many
wounds by arrows from those who durst not approach near unto him, that he began
to lose much blood, and the Turks perceiving the weakness of these poor
Christians, and scorning their unconsiderable numbers, did fall in upon them,
and charged them with their Scemiters, which made deep cuts in their bodies,
but as long as God gave them strength and life, they defended themselves, but
that failing, the Captain called unto him the Gentleman whose Name was John,
whom the Gentlewoman gave unto him, and the Turk, and sticking the point of his
Sword on the Sands, falling on his knees, he kissed and kissed again the Cross
upon the hilts thereof, saying, Lord, Take into thy mercy the Soul of him who
has not spared his life to exalt thy name. The Gentleman whose name was John,
perceiving that his life ended with those words, embraced him, and the Cross
on the hilt of the Sword which he had, thinking to have assisted him, but a
Turk behind him did give him a mortal blow with his Scemiter, who crying aloud,
Let us go Captain, Let us go into Paradise to see him for whom we die, he was
made the Companion of the Death, as he had been of the life of the poor
Captain: The Turk seeing he could neither serve or fave either one or the other
of them, being hurt himself with five arrows, did fly to the ships, and
demanding to be received, although he was the only person that escaped of four
and twenty, yet it was refused by the traitorous Companion of the Captain. But
he who could swim well enough did throw himself into the Sea, and at last
prevailed so far, that he was received into a small Vessel, and in a few days
cured of his wounds. And by this poor Stranger the truth of this Act was
perfectly known, to the Honor of the Captain, and the Infamy of his Companion,
whose offense the King, and all those who ever heard of him, did judge to be so
great, both against God and Men, that there was no death so grievous, but they
thought he most justly did deserve it. Howsoever at his return to Court, he
made so many pretenses, and excuses, and gave such great Presents, that he was
not only saved from punishment, but had the Command of the Captain conferred on
him, whose Groom he was not worthy to be. When this News was first brought unto
the Court, Madam the Regent Mother who highly did esteem him, did wonderfully
lament him, so did also the King, and all the personages of Honor about the
Court: And she whom too well he loved, hearing of his lamentable and Christian
death, changed the roughness of her language with which she thought to have
entertained him at his return, into tears and sighs, in which her Husband did
keep Company with her, being thus sadly disappointed of his hopes in his
Journey to Jerusalem. I cannot here forget, That a Damosel who lived with this
Gentlewoman, whose Name was Joan, and loved the Gentleman that was given to the
Captain better than the loved her self, on the same morning that the Captain
and the Gentleman were slain, did come unto her Mistress and told her, That
she had seen him in her sleep last night whom so well she loved, clothed all
in white, who was come unto her to take his Farewell of her, being on that day
to go into Paradise with his Captain. But when she found that her Dream was
true, she made so great a lamentation, that her Mistress had enough to do to
comfort her. Some months afterward the Court removed into Normandy, of which
Province the Captain was, whose Wife never failed to come to do Reverence to
Madam the Mother Regent; And to be presented to her, she addressed her self to
that Gentlewoman whom her Husband so much loved; And attending the hour in
which they were to go unto the Church to hear Mattens, the old woman began to
praise and to lament her Husband, and amongst other discourses she said unto
her, Madam, My misfortune is greater than ever did befall any woman; for just
at the time that he began to love me better than ever he did before, God took
him from me. And speaking those words, she showed her the Ring which she had
upon her fingers, as the token of his perfect love, which was not without many
tears, at which the Lady (though she was sensible enough of the old Woman's
grief) had so great a desire to laugh, especially since her deceit produced
this good, that she was unable to present her to Madam the Regent, but gave her
to another, and retired her self into the Chapel, where having laughed her
fill, she passed away the defire she had to laugh any more.

Ladies, It seems to me, that they unto whom such gifts are presented, should
desire to do works that may come to so good an end, as this Gentlewoman did,
for they only by experience do find, that good Deeds do redound to the joy of
the Doers. And we ought not to accuse this Gentlewoman of Deceit, but to esteem
of her good Intentions, who converted that into a Benefit, which of it self is
worth nothing. Will you say so (said Nomerfide) Is a fair Diamond of two
hundred Crowns price worth nothing? I dare assure you, that if it had fallen
into my hands, neither his Wife nor any of his Kindred should ever have seen it
again. There is nothing better to any one self than that which is given. The
Captain was dead, No man knew any thing of it. Upon my word you have reason for
it, said Hircan, for there are some women, who to show themselves more
excellent than others, do some works apparently against their Natures; for we
all know well enough, that there is nothing more covetous than a woman; and yet
their Glory does oftentimes exceed their Avarice, which does enforce their
hearts to do those things which they would not, And I believe that she who
forsook the Diamond was not worthy to wear it. Hola, Hola, said Oysilla, I do
suspect I know the Gentlewoman, I do beseech you therefore, not to condemn her
before you see her. Madam, said Hircan, I do not condemn her; but if the
Captain were as virtuous as you say he was, she had been honored to have had
such a Servant, and to have worn his Ring: but it may be that one less worthy
to be beloved, did take so fast hold on her finger that his Ring could not come
on. Truly said Guebron, she might well have kept it, because there was not one
who knew any thing of it. How is that, said Guebron, Are all things lawful to
those that love, because no man knows of them? Take my word for it, said
Saffredant, I never saw any mis-deed punished, but only foolishness; for there
is neither Murderer, Thief, nor Adulterer (but let him be as cunning as he is
wicked) that was ever either condemned by Justice, or reproved amongst Men, but
oftentimes their subtilty is so great, that it does blind them, so that they
become fools, and (as I have said) only the fools, and not the vicious, are
punished. You may speak what you please, (said Oysilla) God only can judge of
the heart of that Lady, but as far as I can conjecture, I do find the Deed most
honorable, and virtuous. And to debate no more upon it, I pray you Parliament
to give your voice to some one. I give it most willingly, said she, to
Simontault, for after these two sad Novells, he will give us one, you may be
sure of it, that will not make us weep. I thank you (said Simontault,) for in
giving me your voice, you do not now (as lately) call me pleasant, which is a
word I love not, and to revenge myself on you, I will demonstrate, that there
are women who make a great appearance that they are wondrous chaste to some,
(and for a time) but the event does show them to be as they are, as you will
find by this Story, which is undoubtedly true.

The Subtilty of a Lover, who under the pretense of a true Friend, did gather
of a Lady of Milan the fruit of his passed labors.
The Fourth Novell.
IN the Duchy of Milan, in the time when the great Master Ch^umont was
Governor, there was a Gentleman called Signior de Bonninet, who afterward for
his virtues was made Admiral of France, and was highly esteemed at Milan by the
great Master, and by all the world for the rare parts that were in him. He was
often invited to the Banquets where the chiefest of the Ladies met, by whom he
was better beloved than ever Frenchman was, as well for his Beauty,
Gracefulness, and Language, as for the great Name he had in Arms, being second
therein to none of his Time. One day being in a Mask, he did lead in the Dance
one of the most brave, and most beautiful Ladies that were in that City, and
when the Hoboyes ceased, he did always discourse unto her of Love, which he
could better do than any other; but she would make no answer to him, but
oftentimes to interrupt him in his Discourse, and to give a stop to his
desires, she would assure him, That she neither did, nor ever would love any
but her Husband, and would by no means seem to understand him. At this answer
this refused Gentleman would not desist, and vigorously prosecuted his suit
until the Middle of Lent. But for all his endeavors he found her firm in her
resolutions, neither to love him, nor any else, which he could hardly believe,
seeing the hard favor, and course deportment of her Husband, and the excellent
beauty of her self. He determined therefore with himself, since she used
dissimulation, to practice the same art himself, and from that hour did forbear
to Court he, and so narrowly enquired after her conversation, that he found at
last she loved an Italian Gentleman, who was very young, and wise, and lovely.
Signior Bonninet by little and little acquainted himself with that Gentleman,
with such cunning and sweetness, that he perceived not the occasion, and the
Gentleman loved him so entirely, that next unto his Mistress, who was this
Lady, there was not any in the world whom he tendered more affectionately.
Signior Bonninet, to pluck his secret from his heart, did counterfeit to tell
him all his own, and amongst other things, told him, That he loved such a Lady,
when indeed he scarce ever thought of her, and desired him to keep it private,
because that they two had but one heart, and but one thought. The poor
Gentleman to show him a reciprocal Love, did declare unto him all along the
affection which he did bear to that Dame, on whose disdain Bonninet would
revenge himself; Once a day they met together, to acquaint one another with the
fortunes which on that day they incounter'd, which the Gentleman did in Truth,
and the other in Dissimulation. The Gentleman confessed unto him, That he had
loved this Lady three years, without receiving any thing but good words from
her, and an assurance to be beloved. Bonninet did counsel and instruct him in
all the ways that possibly he could, by which he might arrive to the fruition
of his Desires, which the Gentleman found so effectual, that in a few days she
consented to all that he desired, there nothing remained but to find out the
opportunity, which by the means of Signior Bonninet was brought about. One day
a little before Supper, the Gentleman said unto him, I am more obliged to you,
than to all the Gentlemen in the world; for by your good Directions I hope to
enjoy that this night, which so many years I have desired. I pray you, said
Bonninet, tell me the manner of your enterprise, to see if there be any deceit
or danger in it; that I may assist, and serve you, according to the obligations
of our friendship. Whereupon the Gentleman did particularly account unto him,
that the Lady had got the opportunity to have the great gate of her House left
open, in pretense of an Infirmity which one of her Brothers had, by reason
whereof every hour in the night they must send into the City, to help him with
some remedy in his necessities, she informed him that he might safely come into
the Court, but advised him to have a care how he went up the stairs, and that
he might more safely pass another way, and on less stairs, which were on the
right hand; and that being come into the first gallery, where were the chambers
of her Father-in-law, and her Brother-in-law, he should come to the third
Chamber next to the little stairs, and (knocking at the door gently) if he
should find it latched, that then he should be gone, for he might assure
himself that her Husband was come home, but if he found the door open, that he
should softly come in and latch the door fast, being confident that there was
none in the Chamber but her self; and above all things, that he should not
forget to come to her with shoes made of Felt, for fear of making a noise; and
withal, that he should have a great care that he came not till two of the
clock after Midnight, because her Brothers-in-law, who were much given to play,
did seldom go to bed till after one. Bonninet said unto him, Go my Friend, God
be thy guide, whom I beseech to guard thee from all Inconveniences, if my
Company may do thee any good, I will not spare any thing that lies in my power.
The Gentleman did thank him very heartily, and told him, That in that affair he
could not be too secure, and that he would go to prepare himself. But Signior
Bonninet would not hear on that ear; and seeing it was the only hour to revenge
himself on that cruel Lady, he retired to his own Lodging betimes, and caused
his beard to be cut after the same length and largeness as was the Gentleman's;
he also commanded in the same manner the hair of his head to be cut, that by
her touch she might not find any difference. He did remember also the shoes of
Felt, and did put on such clothes as were most like unto those which the
Gentleman was accustomed to wear when he would be most gallant. And because he
was very well beloved by the Father-in-law of the Lady, he feared not to go
thither before the appointed hour; conceiving with himself, that if he was
perceived, he would go directly to his Chamber, with whom he had some
business. About twelve of the clock he came into the House, where he found
many servants, and some others coming and going, amongst whom he passed
without being known, and came into the gallery. And thrusting against the two
first doors he found them shut, but the third not, having softly knocked at
which, he entered into it, and having latched fast the door, he found all the
Chamber hung with white Linen, and the floor and the feeling with the same,
and a bed of Needlework excellently wrought all in white, that it was
impossible to have it better, and the Lady alone within it, having on a most
rich Coyf, and a Smock all covered with pearls and precious stones, which he
saw through one corner of the Curtain, being not himself perceived by her, for
there was burning in the Chamber a great Candle of white W^x, which made the
Chamber as bright as day. And for fear he should be known by her, he first of
all put out the light which was burning in the Chamber, afterward he put off
his clothes, and came into the bed to her, who thinking it was he whom so long
she loved, did receive him with all the Love that possibly she could. But he
who knew well enough that it was in the Name of another, did not speak one
word, and thought on nothing but thoroughly to put his vengeance into
execution, which was to take away from her her honor and her chastity against
her will.

But the Lady was so well contented with that vengeance, that she thought she
had recompensed him for his long sufferings. The clock had now struck one,
which was the time to bid her Farewell; And speaking to her as softly as he
could, he asked her, If she was as well contented with him, as he was with her.
She thinking that it was her Friend, made answer, That she was not only
contented, but also marvelled at the greatness of his Love, which had held him
a whole hour without speaking to her. At that he began to laugh outright, and
said unto her, Now Madam will you refuse me another time, as you have been
accustomed to do, until this present. She knowing him too late, both by his
laughter and his voice, was struck into an amazement with the shame she had
brought upon her self, and called him a thousand times wicked Traitor, and
Impostor, and would have thrown her self out of the Bed to look out a knife to
have killed her self, because she was so unfortunate to have lost her Honor
with one whom she loved not, and who, to be revenged of her, might divulge her
shame throughout the world. But he held her in his arms, and by sweet words did
assure her, That he loved her more than he did whom she loved, and that he
would conceal that which touched her Honor, that she never should receive the
least discredit, which the poor Lady believed, and understanding the Invention
which he had contrived to obtain her, and the difficulties he went through to
accomplish it, she did swear unto him, That she did love him better than the
other, who knew not how to conceal a Secret: And moreover, whereas there was a
false report raised on the French, she now knew to the contrary, and that they
were more wise, constant, and discreet, than the Italians, wherefore she would
now differ from the opinion of her own Nation, to comply with them. But she did
heartily entreat him, that for a time he would forbear to appear at any Feast
or Meeting where she was, unless it were a Mask only, for she knew well enough
that she should have so many blushes upon her cheeks, that her Countenance
would declare it to all the world. This he promised to perform, and also
entreated her, That when his Friend should come about two hours hence, that she
would make him good cheer, and by little and little withdraw her self from him.
Of which she made a great difficulty, but because it was his desire, she at
last consented to it. And taking his Farewell of her, he did leave her so
satisfied, that she could have been well contented to have had him to have
stayed longer with her. After that he rose, and had dressed himself, he made
have out of the Chamber, and left the door half shut, and half open, as he
found it: And because it was almost two a-clock after midnight, he entertained
a fear that he should find the Gentleman in the way, he retired himself a
little into a private corner on the top of the stairs, where not long
afterward he observed the Gentleman to pass by, and to enter into the Ladies
Chamber, whereupon he himself repaired directly to his own Lodging, to take
some repose after his nights travels, which he did, and did not rise until it
was past nine of the clock in the morning, at what time the Gentleman came to
him, who never failed to give him an account of his Fortune, which was not now
so good as he hoped it would have proved; For he told him, That when he came
into the Chamber of the Lady, he found her out of Bed, and in her Nightgown,
having a great Fever on her, her pulse beating very violently, her face all on
fire, and a great sweat running down her face; wherefore she did immediately
entreat him to return from whence he came, for fear that she should be enforced
to call unto her Maids to come to her assistance, so violent was her distemper,
insomuch she said, that she had more need to think of Death, than Love, and to
talk rather of God, than of Cupid. Howsoever she was very sorry for the hazard
into which he had put himself for the love of her, because she had no power to
make him in this world any requital for his true love, being ready to be gone
into another. At this he was so sad, and so astonished, that his Fire and his
Joy were converted into Ice and Sorrow, and so immediately he departed. In the
morning, on the break of Day, he sent to be more surely informed of her health,
and found for certain, that she was in an extreme Indisposition, and
multiplying his complaints for her, he wept so abundantly, that it seemed his
Soul was coming out with his tears. Boninet, who had as great a desire to
laugh, as the other to weep, did comfort him the best that possibly he could,
and told him, That things of a long continuance, did always meet with an
untoward beginning, and that Love did a little draw back, but to come on with
the greater force, and to make the Delight more grateful. And on these words
they departed.

The Lady for a certain time did keep her Bed, and on the recovery of her
health, she bid Adieu to her first Servant, and grounded it on the fear which
she had of Death, and the Remorse of her Conscience, and continued her
familiarities with Signior Boninet, the continuation of whose Love (according
to the Custom) was as the Beauty of the Flowers of the Fields.

It seems to me (my Ladies) that the subtilties of this Gentleman did equal the
hypocrisy of the Lady, who having so long counterfeited her self a virtuous
woman, did at the last declare her self a Fool. You may speak what you will of
women, ( said Emarsuite) but that Gentleman acted a wicked part; for suppose
the Lady had a Friend, must another circumvent him by his policy? You may
assure your self, said Guebron, that such Merchandises can never be better
sold, but to those that offer most, and to those Buyers who come last, and give
the greatest price: Never believe, that those who in this nature do court
Ladies, do endure any great pain for the love of them, No, no, it is only for
the love of themselves, and for their own pleasures. On my credit, said
Longaren, I do believe you, for to declare the truth unto you, all those
Gentlemen which ever yet courted me, began all their Complements on my behalf,
pretending to desire my Life, my Good, my Honor, but the end was only for
themselves, and for their own pleasure, and their own glory; therefore it is
the safest course to take leave of them at the first part of their Sermon, for
when we come to the second, it is not so much honor to refuse them, seeing
that Vice when it is once known, is refusable of it self. It behooveth then,
said Emarsuite, that as soon as ever a Man does begin to open his mouth, we
must refuse him, without knowing what he would say. Parliament answered, My
Companions, you must not understand it so, for you know well, that at the first
words a Lady should not seem to understand any thing, neither after he has
declared himself should she much less believe him, but when he comes to swear,
and add oath unto oath, it seems to me that it is the best course for a Lady
to forsake him then at his climbing of the Hill, before he has have to come
down unto the Valley. Shall we believe (...), said Nomerfide, that they love
all for ill? Is it not a sin to judge our Neighbor? You may believe as you
will, said Oysilla, but you ought to be in fear, and since you perceive some
sparkles, you ought to fly the danger of that fire, which already is burning in
one heart that perceives it not. Truly, said Hircan, your Laws are too severe,
and if women (according to your advice) would be rigorous, whose sweetness is
so powerful, we would also change our entreaties and complements, into
subtilties and forcings. The best way which I see, said Simontault, is, that
every one should follow his own nature, and without dissimulation should
declare, whether he loved, or loved not. I would to God ( said Saffredant) that
such a Law could bring with it as much honor as it would pleasure. But
Dagoucin could not contain himself from laughing, and said, They who had rather
die than have their desires known, will never accord to your ordinance. Die?
said Hircan, that Cavalier is yet to be born that would die for such a public
thing But let us leave off this discourse of Impossibility, and observe to whom
Simontault will give his voice, I will give it, said Simontault, to Longaren,
for I have observed her to talk a little to her self, and I believe she is
studying to give us some good account, being accustomed out of the goodness of
her nature to speak the truth, whether the Subject be on Men or Women. Because,
said Longaren, you esteem me to be so impartial, I will re^^at a History to
you, which although it be not so much to the praise of Women as I would have
it, yet you shall find they have as stout hearts, and as great understandings,
and as good as those of Men, and if my Account be something long, you must have
patience.

A Lady of the Kings Court perceiving her self disdained by her Husband, who
made love to another, did by the like love revenge her self.
The Fifth Novell.
IN the Court of King Francis the first, there was a Gentleman whose name I
know so well, that I will not here give it to you. He was but poor, having
hardly five hundred Livres in yearly Rents, but so beloved of the King for the
virtues with which he was accomplished, that by his means he espoused so rich a
Lady, that a great Lord might well be contented with her fortunes. And because
she was not yet of age for a husband, he entreated one of the greatest Ladies
of the Court to take her to her, which very willingly she accorded to. This
Gentleman was so courteous, and so lovely, that all the Ladies of this Court
did very much esteem him, and amongst others, one whom the King loved, who was
not so young nor so beautiful as his own wife, and for the great love which he
did bear unto this Lady, he did make so small an account of his own wife, that
he hardly lay with her one night in a whole year; and which was more grievous
to her, he would never so much as speak unto her, nor show her the least sign
of love. And although he ranted it with her Estate, he allowed her so small a
part out of it, that she was not apparelled as pertained to a Gentlewoman of
her birth, nor as she desired: whereupon the Lady with whom she was, did
oftentimes reprove the Gentleman, telling him, your wife is fair, rich, and of
a great descent, and you make no reckoning of her, which her infancy and youth
has yet endured, but I am afraid, that when she shall behold her self fair and
great, that her glass, and some one who loves you not, will remonstrate her
beauties to her so little esteemed by you, and she may by despite do that,
which she durst not do if she were assured of your love. The Gentleman, who
had his heart elsewhere, did but laugh at her, and for all her instructions did
not forbear to continue that course of life he led. But after the space of two
years or thereabouts, his wife began to be one of the most handsome Ladies in
all France, insomuch that she was accounted the Non-pareill of the Court; and
the more worthy she perceived her self to be beloved, the more she grieved to
see her Husband to make no reckoning of her, insomuch that she contracted so
great a melancholy, that for all the exhortations of the Lady with whom she
lived, she seemed to be a creature given up to despair. And having studied all
the means that possibly she could to be complacent to her Husband, she thought
with her self, that it was impossible for him to love her, seeing she loved him
so entirely, and could not find out any reason to be given for it, unless he
were in love with some one else, and entertained some other fancy in his
apprehension, which she enquired after with so much subtilty, and dexterity of
Circumspection, that she found out the truth, and that every night he was so
taken up in courting another Lady, that he forgot his Conscience, and his Wife:
And after she was certain of the life he did lead, she so wholly abandoned her
self to grief, that she clothed her self all in black, and would not resort to
any Feasts or Sports, which the Lady perceived with whom she lived, and did
what she could to withdraw her from her melancholy thoughts, but it was not
possible for her, and although her Husband was often advertised of it, he was
more ready to increase than to redress her sorrows. You know Ladies, that
Grief foregoeth Joy, and also that Grief by Joy does come to an end. Wherefore
it fell out upon a day, that a great Lord, a near kinsman to the Lady who was
as a Guardian to this Gentlewoman, and often did frequent the house, having
understood of the strange manner of life of this young Gentlewoman with her
husband, taking pity of her, did endeavor to comfort her, and in discoursing
with her, he found her so wise, and lovely, that he desired to have a place in
her affection far more than to discourse with her of her husband, unles it were
to demonstrate to her the small occasion she had to love him. This young Lady
perceiving her self forsaken of him who ought to love her, and on the other
side to be loved and courted by so great and gallant a Prince, did conceive her
self thrice happy to be entertained in his good opinion; And although she had
always a great desire to preserve her honor, yet she took so great a pleasure
to discourse with him, and to perceive her self to be beloved by him, that she
was noted for it. This love continued a certain time, until the King himself
perceived it, who esteemed so well of the Gent. that he would not permit that
any dishonor should accrue unto him; Wherefore he very earnestly entreated the
Prince, to remove his love from her, and told, that if he did still continue it
he should be very ill pleased at it. The Pr. who preferred the favor of the. K.
to all the beauties of the Ladies of the world, did promise him that in
obedience to his commands he would abandon his enterprise, and on that Evening
he would take his leave of her, which he did, when ever he understood she was
retired into her lodgings, over which were the lodgings of her Husband; and
being that evening at the window, he perceived the Prince to enter into the
Chamber of his Wife, which was under his own, but the Prince, who observed him
well enough, did not desist to go to her, And bidding her Farewell, whose love
was but on the beginning, he did allege unto her all the reasons and
commandments of the King; After many tears, and sorrows, which lasted until an
hour after Midnight, the young Lady said unto him in the conclusion, Sir, I
give thanks to God, that he has been pleased that you should forbear your
affection, seeing it is so little and so weak, that you can take it and leave
it at the commandment of Men. As for my self, I have not demanded counsel
either of my Guardian, or of my Husband, or of my Self, to love you; for Love,
aided by the deportment of your fair self, and by your civilities, has had so
much power on me, that I have not acknowledged any other God, or King, but him
only. And since your heart is not filled with such true Love, but Fear does
find a place within it, you cannot be a perfect Friend, and one that is
imperfect shall never be a Friend of mine. For I loved perfectly, as I resolved
with my self to love you, and I am constrained to bid Adieu unto you, whole
tame fear does not deserve the height and courage of my love. In this manner
the Prince departed weeping, and looking back, observed her Husband still
looking out at the window, who did observe both his coming in, and his going
out. Wherefore on the next morning he did give him an account of the reason
wherefore he did repair to his Wife, and told him the Commandment which the
King had laid upon him; with which the Gentleman was much contented, and most
humbly thanked the King. But observing that every day his Wife did grow more
fair than other, and that he himself became old, and was much altered in his
Complexion, he did begin to change his mind, and to leave her for whom he had
disdained his Wife, and now to make much of his Wife only; But she, the more
she saw him to affect her, the more she fled from him, resolving to return him
part of those pangs that she endured, for being so little beloved by him: And
to take away the pleasure which Love had begun to possess him with, she
addressed her self to a young Gentleman, so graceful, lovely, and well-spoken,
that he was beloved by all the Ladies of the Court; and making her complaints
unto him how she had been used by her Husband, she did incite him to take pity
on her, so that this young Gentleman omitted nothing that might bring comfort
to her, and she to recompense her self for the loss of the Prince, who had
forsaken her, did endeavor her self to love this Gentleman so entirely, that
she forgot all her past affliction, and thought on nothing, but so to carry on
this n^w love that it might not be discovered. Which she performed with such
dexterity, that her Guardian perceived nothing of it; for in her presence she
took great care how she did speak unto him: but when she would hold any
Conference in private with him, she would pretend to go to give a visit to some
Ladies at the Court, amongst whom there was one of whom her Husband would seem
to be in love. One night after Supper, when it was very dark, this young
Gentlewoman stole away without calling any one to keep her company, and came
into the Presence Chamber, where all the Ladies were, where she found him whom
she loved far better than she loved her self, and sitting close by him, she
leaning on a Table did talk unto him, feigning as if she had read on some book.
One whom her Husband had employed to watch her, did in great have report unto
him where his Wife was, and in whose Company; he who was a knowing man, made
all the have he could unto her, and coming into the Chamber did behold his
Wife reading of a Book, and seemed not to see her, but directed his course to
the Ladies, to discourse with them who were on the other side of the Chamber.
This poor young Lady perceiving that her Husband had found her with him, with
whom she never entertained the least discourse before him, was so amazed, that
for a little while she lost her sense, and being to go all along by the Bench,
she took her course quite cross the room at the tables-end, and ran away as if
her Husband had pursued her with a naked sword; she did run to the Lodgings of
her Guardian, whom she found going to bed, and when she had put off her
clothes, she left her, and retired to her own Chamber, whither one of her Maids
came unto her, and told her, That her Husband would speak with her. She
answered her very resolutely, that she would not go to him, and that he was of
so strange, and violent a Temper, that she was afraid he would do her some
Injury. At the last, for fear of worse, she did go to him, and her Husband did
not speak so much as one word to her, until they were in Bed together. She who
could dissemble as well as himself, began very tenderly to weep; and when he
demanded of her the occasion of her tears, she told him, That she was afraid
that he was angry with her, because he found her reading in a Book with a
Gentleman. Immediately he did assure her, That he never did forbid her to speak
to any Man, and that he was not angry that he found her speaking with him, but
because she fled away so fast, as if she had done something worthy of Reproof,
and that only by that running away he had a suspicion that she loved the
Gentleman. Wherefore he did now forbid her to speak with any man in public or
in private, assuring her, That the first time he should take her speaking to
any Man, he would kill her, without consideration or compassion. Which she
willingly accepted, being resolved with her self not to be so sottish as to be
taken again. But because that in things to which we have a desire, the more we
are forbidden, the more violently we seek them; This poor Lady not long after
did forget those threatenings of her Husband; for on the very next Evening, she
being returned to lie in another Chamber with other young Ladies, she sent to
seek out the Gentleman, and to request him, that he would come and see her that
night. But her Husband, who was so tormented with jealous pangs that he could
not sleep, did rise in the night, and took one of his Grooms with him, because
he heard that somebody else was sent for, and knocked at the Door of his Wives
Chamber. She who thought of no man less than himself, did rise, being alone,
and took her petticoat, and her nightgown, that was next to her hand, and
seeing that three or four of her Maids were all asleep, she did go to the
Chamber door, and asking who was there? she was answered by his Name whom she
had sent for, and whom so passionately she loved, but (to be more assured) she
opened the little Wicket, saying, If you are he that you do say you are, give
me your hand, I shall readily know it. And when she had taken her Husband by
the hand, she immediately knew him, and shutting suddenly the Wicket, she began
to cry out, Ah Monsieur, It is your hand. Her Husband did answer her in a great
Rage, It is the same hand which is the pledge of the love and promises betwixt
us, wherefore fail not to come when I shall send for you. And speaking those
words he departed to his Lodging, and she returned into her Chamber rather dead
than alive, and spoke aloud unto her Women, Rise my Friends, you have slept too
much for me; for in thinking to deceive you, I have been deceived, first of
all, my self. And speaking those words she swouned away in the middle of the
Chamber. The poor women did all rise at her cry, so astonished to see their
Mistress, as dead, and lying on the ground, and to hear those words she did
speak, that they knew not what to do, but only to run for Remedies to revive
her; And when she had recovered speech, she said unto them, This Hour you see
me, my friends, the most unfortunate creature upon the Earth, and repeated to
them all her fortune, desiring them to be ready to perform their last service
to her, for she reckned her life as lost. They endeavoring to comfort her,
behold one of the Grooms of her Husbands Chamber, by whom he commanded to
acquaint her incontinently to repair unto him. She embracing two of her women,
began to weep, and to lament, desiring them that that they would not let her
go, for she was sure never to return again. But the Groom of the Chamber
assured her to the contrary, and that upon the hazard of his own life he would
undertake that she should receive no Ill. She seeing that there was no
resistance, did put her self into the arms of the Groom, and said unto him,
Friend, Since it must be so, carry this unhappy body unto Death, and being
overcome with sorrow, she was carried away by the Groom into his Masters
Lodging, at whose feet the poor Lady trembled down, saying, Sir, I beseech you
to have pity on me, and I will swear unto you by the faith which I owe to God
that I will tell you the truth of all. Immediately he said unto her as a Man
transported, And I vow unto you, you shall tell me the truth of all, and on
those words commanded all his Servants to be gone. And because he knew his wife
to be religious, he believed that she would not forswear her self, if she did
swear upon the Cross, wherefore he brought her a very fair one which he had
borrowed, and there being none present but themselves, he made her swear upon
the Cross, that she should tell him the plain truth of that which he demanded:
But she who had already passed over the first apprehensions of Death, took
heart, and resolved with her self to conceal nothing from him, seeing she was
to die, but so, as not to reveal any thing that might bring any danger to the
Gentleman whom she loved. And having heard diverse questions which he made unto
her, she made answer, Sir, I will not justisie my self, nor make less unto you
the Love which I have born unto the Gentleman, of whom you have suspicion; but
I have a desire to acquaint you with the occasion of that Love. Sir, you are to
understand, that never any Woman did love her Husband with such an entire
affection as I have loved you, for since I have been first married to you,
there never entered into my heart the love of any but of your self alone; you
know that in my Nonage, my Parents would have married me to a personage of a
far nobler Family than your self, but they could never make me give the least
consent unto it, from the hour that you first spoke unto me; for I stood most
firm against their persuasions for you, without regarding your poverty, or the
Remonstrances which they made. And you cannot be ignorant of the hard use which
ever since I have received from you, and how you have loved and esteemed me,
which has brought so much sorrow and affliction on me, that had it not been
for the Lady under whose Government you did put me, I had been sunk into the
Bottom of Despair. But in the end, observing my self to grow into Age, and to
be esteemed to be beautiful by all the world, but your self, I began so
vigorously to feel the Injury which you did me, that the love I did bear unto
you was turned into hatred, and the Desire to please you, into vengeance. And
in that resolution, a Prince courted me, who, to obey his King more than his
Love, did love me on the same time, when I began to feel some comfort and
releasment from my torments by the honest love I did bear unto him. And in
leaving him, I found this Gentleman, who needed not to be entreated to love me.
Howsoever, his Beauty, his sweet Deportment, and his Virtue, did deserve to be
sought after, and esteemed by all women of a good understanding. At my request,
and not his own, he loved me, and with so much honesty, that never in his life
he required any thing of me contrary to honor. And because the little love
which I have cause to bear unto you, did give me the occasion to keep neither
faith nor loyalty with you, yet the love which I do bear unto God alone, and to
my honor, has hitherto preserved me from doing any thing, for which I should
either stand in need of Confession, or of the fear of shame. I will not deny
unto you, that as often possibly I could, I have gone to speak with him in a
Wardrobe, pretending to go to my Devotions; for I never trusted either Man or
Woman for the managing of that affair. I will not moreover deny, but that
(being in a place so private, and free from all suspicion,) I have kissed him
with a better heart than ever I kissed you; but I desire no mercy of God, if
there were ever any other familiarities betwixt us, or if ever he solicited me
for other by any hot Importunities, or if ever my own heart had any desire
thereunto, although I was so glad to see him, that it seemed to me that I could
have no greater pleasure nor happiness in the world. And you Sir, who are the
only Cause of my misfortune, will you take vengeance for a Deed, which (for so
long a time) you have given me the Example? an Example which has out-gon me in
this, that what you have done has been without Honor, and without conscience.
For you know, and I know well enough, that she whom you do love, will not
content her self with that which God and Reason do command. And although the
Laws of Men do give so great a dishonor to Women who do love other Men
besides their Husbands, yet the Law of God does not except the Husbands, who
love others besides their Wives. And if you will put into the balance your
offense, and the offense which I have committed; You are a Man wise, and
experienced, and of age to know, and to be able to eschew Evil; I am but young,
and without any experience of the force and tyranny of Love. You have a Wife
that does cherish, esteem, and love you better than her own life; and I have a
Husband that does eschew, hate, and disdain me more than a Servant. You love a
Woman that is grown into a great age, discomplexioned, and nothing so handsome
as my self; and I love a Gentleman far younger than your self, and more lovely
and delightful. You love a Woman that pertains to one of the greatest Friends
that you have in the world, transgressing on the one side the love, and on the
other side the Reverence which you should carry to them both; and I love a
young Gentleman, who is tied in no obligation, but only of his love to me. Now
judge Sir, and be impartial in your Judgment, which of us two are most to be
punished, either you, or my self; I believe there is no man that is either wise
or honest, but will lay all the blame on you, seeing that I am but young and
ignorant, despised and contemned by you, and beloved by the most courteous, and
the handsomest Gentleman in all France, whom I do love, by a despair only that
I shall never be beloved by you.

The Gentleman hearing her words full of truth, and spoken and pronounced with
so assured a grace that she showed that she neither feared nor deserved any
punishment, did find himself so surprised with wonder, that he knew not what to
reply unto her, but only, that the honor of a Woman, and of a Man, were not
alike, but differed in several respects: Nevertheless, because she did swear,
That there was no sin committed betwixt her, and the Gentleman whom she loved,
he was resolved to make much of her, upon a condition that she would return no
more unto him, and that he for his part would abandon her whom he had loved;
and that neither he nor she for the time to come should call to mind any thing
that had passed betwixt them, which was promised on both sides, and so in good
accordance they went to bed together. In the morning one of the young Ladies
old Maids, who had a great fear of the life of her Mistress, did come early to
her rising, and said unto her, And well Madam, how goes it with you now? She
laughing, made answer, Why my Friend, there is not a better Husband in the
world than mine, for he believed what I did swear. In this manner she continued
five or six days, and the Gentleman did keep so close a guard upon her, that
she was watched both night and day; but he could not watch her so narrowly, but
that she would still in one obscure place or other hold communication with him
whom she loved. But she carried her affairs so privately, that neither Man nor
Woman could ever discover the truth; and had not one of the Grooms reported,
that he had seen a Gentleman and a Lady together in a Closet, under the Chamber
of the Lady that was Guardian to this young Gentlewoman, the suspicion had
ceased; the doubt whereof did so torment this Gentleman, that he was resolved
to be the Death of the young Gentleman, and assembled a great number of his
Friends and Confidents together to kill him wheresoever they should find him;
but the chiefest of his Friends in this confederacy was so much a friend to the
young Man whose life was sought after, that instead of surprising him, he did
advertise him of all things that were contrived against him: And he was so well
beloved at the Court, and so well accompanied, that he feared not all the force
of his Enemies, which was the reason that they could never find the opportunity
to exercise their vengeance on him. But it so fell out not long after that he
did meet in a Church with the Guardian of the young Lady whom he loved, who
knew nothing at all of any thing that had passed, for before her self he never
durst speak unto her.

The Gentleman made report unto her of the suspicion, and the ill will which
the Husband did bear unto him, and although that he was innocent, he was
resolved to make a long voyage to take away the Report, which began to
increase. This Lady that was Guardian to his Mistress, was much amazed to hear
those words, and did protest unto him, that the Husband did commit an
unpardonable offense, to suspect a Lady of Honor, in whom she never knew nor
saw any thing but Honesty, and Virtue. Nevertheless by reason of the Authority
in which the Husband was, and to stop the current of this false Report, the
Princess advised him to absent himself for a time, and assured him, that she
believed not any thing of al^ these follies and suspicions. The young Gentleman
was very glad that he continued in the favor and good opinion of the old Lady,
who advised the Gentleman, before his departure, to speak unto the Husband of
the young Gentlewoman, which he did according to her counsel, and found him in
the gallery hard by the Chamber of the King, where with an assured countenance
he said unto him. Sir, I have had all my life a desire to serve you, and for a
recompense for it, I understand that this night you have a design to seek me
out to kill me. Sir, I beseech you to consider, that although you have more
authority and power than my self, yet that I am a Gentleman as well as your
self, and it would grieve me to fling away my life for nothing. I must beseech
you also to consider, that you have a most virtuous Lady to your Wife, and if
there be any that will speak to the contrary, I will tell him, that he lies
like a Vilain. And for my self, I thought I had not done any thing to give you
an occasion to wish me evil; if you please I will continue your servant; if
not, I am a servant of the Kings, for which I have reason enough to content my
self. The Gentleman to whom he addressed this Discourse, made answer, That true
it was he entertained some suspicion of him, but he found him so good a Man,
that he desired rather to have his friendship than his enmity, and bidding him
Farewell (with Hat in hand) he embraced him as one of his fastest friends. You
may think with your selves what those men thought, who on the Evening before
had received Commission to kill him, when they saw such signs of Honor, and of
a familiar Love. In this manner the Gentleman departed, who because he was not
so well furnished with Silver, as with gallant qualities, the young Lady gave
him a Ring that was worth three thousand Crowns, which he morgaged for fifteen
hundred. And not long after his departure, the Gentleman (Husband to the young
Lady) came unto her Guardian, and besought her to give his Wife leave to go for
a certain time to a Sister of his to continue with her, which the old Lady
thought very strange, and besought him to acquaint her with the occasion of it,
part whereof he did impart unto her, but not all. After that the young married
Lady had taken leave of her Guardian, and of all the Court, without any tears
at all, or the least sign of grief, she traveled to that place which her
Husband did assign her, and was conducted by a Gentleman, to whom an express
charge was given to keep a strict watch over her, and above all things, that on
the way he should not speak unto her, who was suspected to love her too
familiarly. She who understood the Commandment of her Husband, did give them
alarms every day, and laughed at them, and at their too officious Care. One day
amongst the rest, just at her departure from the Inn, she found a Friar on
horseback, and she being mounted on an ambling Nagg, did hold him in Discourse
from Dinner until Supper, and when she was about a mile from the place where
she was to lodge, she said unto him, Good Father, for the consolations which
you have given me this afternoon, behold two Crowns which here I give you, and
have put them in this Paper, because I know that you dare not touch them with a
bare hand, desiring you, that when ever you are gone from me, that you will
cross the way with all the speed you can make. When he was gone a good way
from her, the Lady spoke aloud to those that waited on her, Do you think that
you are good Servants, and diligent to guard me, since he himself (concerning
whom you were bid to have such a care) has Discoursed with me all this day,
and you have permitted him so to do? you do well deserve that your good Master,
who does repose so much trust in you, should reward you with blows of a Cane on
your shoulders, instead of the wages you expect. When the Gentleman who had the
charge of her heard this, he was so impatient that he could make no answer, but
immediately did put spurs to his horse, calling to two others that were in the
Company to follow him; they made so great a dispatch, that they had almost
overtaken the Friar, who looking back, and seeing them to make up unto him, did
ride away as fast as ever his horse could carry him, they in a full gallop
pursued him; and because they were better mounted, the poor Friar was taken,
but not knowing wherefore, he did cry them mercy, and putting off his hood, he
showed his bare and shaven crown, and began humbly to beseech them: Whereupon
they knew that he was not the Man they looked for, and that the young Lady did
but laugh at them; which she yet did more at their return, saying, That such
people were fit to be a guard to such Women, who suffer them to speak they know
not to whom, and then adding faith to their words, they go to act a mischief on
the servants of God; and after all these mocks she came to the place where her
Husband appointed she should have her residence, where her two Sister-in-laws,
and the Husband of one of them, did keep her in great subjection; And during
that time, her Husband understood that his Ring was engaged for fifteen hundred
Crowns, for which he was sorry. But to save the Reputation of his wife, and to
recover the Ring, he sent her word, that she should call for it back of the
Merchant, and that he would pay the fifteen hundred Crowns. She who had no care
of the Ring, because her Friend had the money that was lent upon it, did write
unto him, That her Husband was importunate with her to Redeem the Ring; And
because he might not think that she did it to diminish the good will that was
betwixt them, she sent him a Diamond which her Guardian gave her at her
departure from her, which she loved better than the Ring she had of her
Husband. The Gentleman that was her friend did willingly send her back the
Merchants Obligation, and was well content with the 1500 Crowns, and to have
received a Diamond, the witness of the Continuation of the affection of the
young Lady to him. Howsoever, as long as her Husband lived, he could never
arrive to the opportunity to speak unto her, but only by Letters; And after the
Death of her Husband, thinking that she would continue faithful, according to
her promise, he used all his diligence and endeavors to procure her in
Marriage, but he found that in his long absence she had provided her self with
a Companion that was better beloved than himself; for which he was possessed
with such a sotrow and indignation of spirit, that flying the company of
Ladies, he sought altogether after great adventures, and places of as much
danger as honor, where he was as well beloved as it was possible for a young
Man to be, and so he finished his days.

See here, my Ladies, that without sparing our own Sex, I have given an Example
unto Husbands, to show them that women of a great spirit, are sooner overcome
with anger and vengeance, than with Love and Courtship; and although this Lady
knew a long time to resist, yet at the last she was vanquished by despite,
which a virtuous woman ought not be; or in whatsoever sort it be, she ought not
to find an Excuse to do evil: And by how much the more great the occasions of
the offense are given, by so much the more virtuous ought they to demonstrate
themselves, by resisting and overcomming Evil with Good, and not by
recompencing Evil with Evil; And oftentimes the Evil which one thinks to render
to another, does fall upon his own head. Thrice happy are they in whom the
Graces of God do demonstrate themselves, by the Examples of Chastity,
Sweetness, Patience, and Longammity. Hircan said unto her, It seems to me,
Longaren, that the Lady who was the subject of your Discourse, was led on more
by despite, than Love; for if she had loved the Gentleman as well as she made
an appearance, she had not abandoned him for another, and by the whole tenor of
your discourse she showed her self to be spiteful, revengefull, obstinate, and
inconstant. You speak at random (said Emarsuite to Hircan) but you know not
what a heart-braking it is to love, and not to be beloved again. It is true,
said Hircan, I have too lately made experience of it, but let her but continue
in that sullen humor, and I shall quickly leave Love and the Lady both
together. Now much good do it such Husbands (said Parliament) who love nothing
but their own pleasure, but a Woman of Honor will never love her Husband so.
Nevertheless (said Simontault) this Lady of whom the Account has ^in made,
had, for the present Time, forgotten that she was a woman; for a Man knows not
how to exercise a fuller vengeance. She was not wise, said Oysilla, and it is
not requisite that others should be accounted such as she was. Such as she was
(said Saffredant) why, what was she? He that shall under your Petticoats
examine what are the fair and honest accoutrements you carry there, shall find
you all to be but Women. Nomerfide said unto him, We have enough of this: I
would fain hear an Account that should carry some observations of worth in it;
Therefore I pray you (Longaren) to give your voice to whom you please. Longaren
looked on Guebron, and said unto him, If you have any story of some virtuous
Lady, I pray you to give us the Narrative of it. Guebron replied to her, I am
to speak what I conceive my self to be expedient; I will therefore account unto
you what not long since did happen in the City of Milan.

A Lady of Milan approved the hardiness and conrage of her Friend, which was
the reason that afterward she loved him with all her heart.
The Sixth Novell.
IN the time of the grand Master de Chaumont, there was in the City of Milan a
Lady who was esteemed one of the most virtuous women that lived in that age.
She had been married to an Italian Count, whose Relict she was, and lived in
the same house with her Brother-in-laws. She could never endure to hear any
talk of a second Husband, and did deport her self so discreetly, and devoutly,
that there was not either a Frenchman or Italian in the whole Duchy of Milan,
who did not highly esteem her. One day when her Brother-in-laws, and others of
her Kindred made a great Feast to the grand Master De Chaumont, this widow was
constrained to be present at it, being never before at such a meeting since her
Husbands Death, or in any other public place. When the Frenchmen beheld her,
they did highly extol her beauty, and flowing carriage, and above all one
Gentleman whose Name I will conceal, but it shall suffice, that in all Italy
there was not a Frenchman more worthy to be beloved than himself: For he was
accomplished with all the beauties and the graces that are requisite to a
gallant Gentleman. And although he beheld this Lady Dowager in her black
attires, severed from the youth, and in a corner amongst the old Ladies, yet he
whom neither man nor woman could ever subdue unto a Capacity of Distrust, did
begin with confidence to court her, and to take off her mask, and forsaking the
Dancing did altogether addict himself to the Company of this Lady; And all the
evening he stirred not from her, but discoursed with her, and the old Ladies in
her Company, amongst whom he found more delight than amongst all the brave and
gallant Ladies of the Court; Insomuch that when they were all to depart, he had
not the leisure, he thought, to hold discourse with any of the rest. And
although he talked with her of common subjects fit for such a public Company,
yet she perceived well enough that he had a great desire to be acquainted with
her, and resolved with her self to keep from him as much as possibly she could,
insomuch that he could never see her afterward, neither at any Feasts or
Public assembly, which made him to enquire the more after her, and he found
that she often frequented the Churches and religious places, where he kept so
good a watch, that she could not go so privately, but he would be there before
her, and would be sure to stay in the Church as long as possibly he could see
her, and all the time he was there he would contemplate on her beauties with so
devout an affection, that she could not be ignorant of the love which he did
bear unto her. To avoid which, she for a certain time resolved with her self to
counterfeit her self sick, and to hear Mass in her own House; at which the
Gentleman was so sorry, that it was impossible to be more, for he had no other
means to see her, but only in the Church: She believing that in her absence he
had discontinued his Custom to frequent the religious places, did return to the
Churches as before, which love presently declared to the Gentleman, who betook
himself again to his former Devotions; and because she should make no more
obstructions in the progress of his love, and for fear that he should not have
that happy leisure again to make known his affections to her, (one morning,
when she thought she was safe enough in a little Chapel where she heard Mass)
he came to the end of the Altar, and seeing but two or three more near unto
her, as the Priest showed them Corpus Domini, he turned to her, and said,
Madam, Let that be my Damnation whom the Priest now holds in his hands, if you
are not the only cause of my Death. For although you have taken from me all the
means of speaking to you, yet you cannot be ignorant of my Love, for the Truth
does sufficiently declare it to you by my languishing eyes, and by my pale
countenance. The Lady seeming not to understand him, made answer, That God
ought not in that manner to be invoked in vain, although the Poets do affirm,
that at Lovers perjuries the Gods do laugh, and that women who love their
honor ought nor to be credulous or compassionate; And speaking those words,
she did arise, and returned to her Lodging. If the Gentleman were not touched
to the heart with this answer, those who by experience have found the like, are
able to affirm. But he who wanted not a good heart, had rather go away with
that unpromising answer, than to have failed in declaring his good will unto
her, which he continued for the space of two or three years, and courted her by
Letters and presents, without losing time or tide; But during all that time, he
could obtain no other answer, but that she did fly from him, as the Lamb did
from the Wolf; yet something was insinuated, that it was not so much for any
hatred she did bear him, but for the fear of her honor, and reputation, which
he perceived so well, that more vigorously than ever before he pursued his
affair. And after many pains, refusals, torments, and despairs, the Lady
observing the force and continuance of his love, did take pity on him, and did
grant him that which he had so much desired, and so long attended. And when
they had agreed upon the means, the French Gentleman failed not to adventure
into the House, although his life thereby was in great jeopardy, seeing that a
great part of her Kindred did lodge in the same house with her. But she who had
no less wit than beauty, did direct him so discreetly, that he came into her
Chamber on the hour she assigned, where he found her lying alone in a very rich
Bed, and as he made have to put off his clothes to go into the Bed to her, he
heard a great noise at the door of people speaking to one another, and of
swords clashing against the walls. The Lady with a Countenance half dead, said
unto him, At this minute is both your Life and my Honor in the greatest Danger
that possibly can be, for too well I understand, that my Brothers are seeking
you out to kill you. Wherefore I entreat you to conceal your self under my Bed,
for when they cannot find you, I shall have a just occasion to be angry with
them, by reason of this alarm, which without Cause they have given. The
Gentleman, whose noble heart did always scorn the base effects of Fear, replied
unto her, And who are your Brothers, that they should make me afraid? If the
whole Generation of them were together, I am confident that they would not
stand against the point, or the edge of my Sword; wherefore lie still in your
Bed, and let me alone to guard your Door. Immediately he clapped his cloak about
his arm, and took his Sword in his hand, and opened the Door to find those
Swords more near him, which made so great a noise; The Door being opened, he
beheld two Chambermaids, who with two swords in either hand did occasion the
Alarm; they said unto him, Monsieur, Pardon us, for we have received Commission
from our Mistress to do as we have done; but you shall have no other
hinderance or disturbance by us: The Gentleman seeing they were two Maids, did
wish all the Devils in Hell take them both, and shutting the Door on the faces
of them, he made all the speed he could to the Ladies Bed, whose frights had no
ways diminished his love, and forgetting to ask her the reason of that
skirmish, he thought on nothing but to satisfy his desires. And perceiving
that the Day approached, he entreated her to tell him, wherefore she had done
him so ill an office, by holding him so long in delays, and also what was the
meaning of the Enterprise of the two Chambermaids the last night. She laughing,
made answe^ to him, My Resolution was never to love again, which from my
Widdowhood I had a long time observed, but your civil Deportment from the first
hour wherein you spoke unto me at the Banquet, has made me to alter my purpose,
and I began at that instant to love you as much as you could love me; It is
true, that Honor, which in all my actions has been my guide, would not permit
that Love should cause me to do any thing, whereby my Reputation might suffer;
but as the Heart wounded to Death does think by changing of place, to change the
malady he bears along with him, so did I remove from Church to Church,
thinking to fly from him whom I carried in my heart, who has now proved his
love to be so perfect, that the Agreement is made, and Honor does accord with
Love. But, to the end that I might be the more assured to commit my heart and
my love to an absolute Man, I was willing to make this last proof by my
Chambermaids, assuring you, that if either for fear of your life, or any other
regard, I had found you so timorous and so tame, as to have hid your self under
my Bed, I was resolved with my self to rise, and to withdraw my self into
another Chamber, without ever seeing you again. But because I have found you
courteous and lovely, and more full of Spirit and courage than it was reported
to me, and that fear cannot enter into your heart, nor make cold that love
which you bear unto me, I am resolved to continue with you until the end of my
days, being confident, that I cannot put my Life and Honor in a surer hand,
than in his, who I believe has not his equal in all Virtues: And (as if the
Will and Desires of Lovers were immutable) they did promise and swear unto one
another to perform that which was not in their power to perform, which was a
perpetual Love, which cannot continue in the hearts of Men, as those Women
know, who have made trial of it, and how long those Resolutions do endure.

And therefore (Ladies) you should take heed of us, as the Buck (if he had
understanding) would of the Hunter; For our Glory, Felicity, and Endeavor, is
to see you surprised, and to take that from you which is more dear unto you
than life it self. How now! said Hircan unto Guebron, How long ago is it, since
you have been a Preacher, I have known the time that you have maintained
another Doctrine. It is true, said Guebron, I do speak now against that which I
have practiced heretofore all the whole Course of my life, but because I have
teeth so weak that I cannot eat Venison my self, I would advertise the poor
Does to beware of the Hunters to make some recompense in my old age for the
sins I have committed in my youth. We thank you Guebron ( said Nomerfide) for
that which you have counseled us to our profit, but we do now perceive our
selves to be a great deal too young for you, for it appears that in your Youth
you gave not the same exhortations to her whom you loved, which is a sign that
now in your age you do neither love us, nor your self, neither would you
willingly suffer us to be loved by any other; Howsoever we think our selves to
be as wise and virtuous as she, whom so long you followed and courted in your
Youth: But it is always the Glory of the gray beard, and those that walk with
a staff, to think themselves more wise than those who do come after them.
Nomerfide ( said Guebron) it is very well, when the Deceit of some of your
Servants shall by experience teach you to understand the subtilty of Men, you
will then believe what now I have spoken to be truth. Oysilla said to Guebron,
It seems to me, that the Gentleman whom you so much commend for Courage, ought
to be praised more for the violence of his love, which is a Power so strong,
that it will make the greatest Cowards in the world to enterprise that, which
the most valiant would think and think of again before they would undertake it.
Saffredant said unto him, Madam, It seems to me that if this French Gentleman
esteemed not the Italians to excel more in their words than in their deeds, he
might have some great occasion for fear. He had so indeed (said Oysilla) were
it not for that fire in his heart which consumed his fear. If you find not his
Courage commendable enough (said Hircan) give us an account of some one else,
who is more worthy of praise. To speak the Truth (said Oysilla) the Gentleman
was to be praised; but I can give you an instance of One in the same nature who
is to be admired. I pray you, if it be so (said Guebron) will you take my
place, and give us some agreeable account, and worthy of a gallant Man,
accordingly as you have promised. Gentlemen (said Oysilla) if a Man for the
life and honor of his Lady has showed such a confidence amongst the
Inhabitants of Milan, and has been esteemd so valiant, how ought he to be
extolled, who without any Necessity at all, by the mere Instigation of Valor,
did perform this Exploit, as I shall tell you?

King Francis showed his Generosity to Count William, who would have been the
Author of his Death.
IN the City of Dijon in the Duchy of Burgundy, there came to the service of
King Francis, a German Count called William, of the House of Saxony, to which
that of Savoy is so near allied, that heretofore they were but one Family. This
Gentleman being esteemed to be as gallant, and as brave a Man, as any was in
Germany, was so well entertained by the King, that he not only received him
into his service, but preferred him to a place of Honor near unto him, and
made him Gentleman of his Chumber. One day the Governor of Burgundy, Lord of
Tremoville, an ancient Cavalier, and a loyal servant of the Kings, being
cautious, and suspecting the damage of his Master, did always keep Spies upon
his Enemies, to observe what they did do, and carried himself so discreetly,
that few things were concealed from him. Amongst other advertisements, it was
written to him by one of his Friends, that Count William had received a certain
Sum of Money, and a promise to have the Sum doubled, to procure the Kings
Death, upon any attempt whatsoever. The Lord of Tremoville, who was also
Governor of Burgundy, did not fail to come in his own person to acquaint the
King with it, and concealed it not from his Mother Madam de Louise of Savoy,
who forgot all the Alliance she had to that German Count, and besought the King
to remove him from his service with what speed he could. The King required them
to make no more words of it, for it was impossible, he said, that so honest a
Gentleman, and of so fair a Fame, should enterprise so foul a sin. At the end
of a few Months there arrived another advertisement, in confirmation of the
former; whereupon the Governor, inflamed with the zeal which he did bear to
his Masters safety, demanded leave of him either to put him away, or to give
him order to apprehend him; but the King expressly charged him to make not the
least appearance of any discontent, and assured him, that he intended to find
out the truth himself some other way. One day when he repaired to the Chase, he
took with him the best Sword that was in all his Armory, and desired Count
William to go along with him, and to be the foremost and the next Man unto him.
The King having some hours hunted the Buck, did observe, that all his people
were far behind him, but Count William only; whereupon he turned out of the
Road-way, and riding with Count William into the bottom of the Forest, he drew
his Sword, and asked Count William If it were not a good one. The Count taking
it into his hand, told him, That he never saw a better. You have reason so to
say, said the King, and methinks if a Gentleman had resolved to kill me, and
knew the Goodness of my heart, and the force of my hand armed with this sword,
he should think to assault me twice, before he undertook it once, howsoever I
shall account him but a Coward, if he and I being alone, without any witness
at all, he shall not dare to execute what he has not been ashamed to
undertake. Count William with an amazed countenance did answer him, Sir, The
wickedness of the Enterprise should be great enough, and the folly to put it
in Execution would be greater. The King laughing, did put his Sword into the
scabbard again, and understanding by the noise of the Hounds, and the Hollas of
the Hunters, that the Game was near him, did put spurs to his Horse, and
galloped up toward them as fast as ever he could. Being amongst them, he spoke
not the least word to any of that affair, and assured himself that Count
William, although he was as able in height and Courage, and as well disposed in
his limbs, as any man in his Kingdom, yet he was not the Man that would
adventure on so bold an enterprise. But Count William being vexed to be
suspected, came one morning very early to Robertet, Socretary of the Treasury,
and told him, That he had considered of the benefits and promises that the King
had either bestowed or made unto him, to continue with him, which were not of a
competency to maintain him above one half of the year; and if the King pleased
not to double his allowance, he must be constrained to retire into his own
Country: he therefore besought Robertet, that as soon as possibly he could he
might understand the pleasure of the King, who told him, that he could advance
his Exhibitions no higher, and if he would he might depart immediately; which
Commission he very willingly accepted; for he had seen the advertisements of
the Governor of Burgundy. And as soon as the King was awake, there being
present the Governor of Tremoville, and Admiral Boninet, (who were both
altogether ignorant what the King had done in the Forest) he said unto them,
You have a desire to drive away Count William, and Count William has a desire
to go away of himself; Wherefore you may tell him, That if he will not be
contented with the Pension which hitherto he has accepted in my service, and
which diverse Gentlemen of Honorable Families do think themselves happy to
receive, it is reason that he should seek out better Fortunes in some other
place: And as for my self, I will no ways hinder him, but shall be very glad to
hear that he has found a Fortune, such as with content he may live upon, and
suitable to his merits. Robertet was as diligent to carry this answer to the
Count, as he was willing to carry his Request unto the King. The Count replied,
That with the Kings leave he was then resolved to be gone; And, as one whom
Fear constrained to depart, he knew not how to carry it four and twenty hours:
But as the King was set at the Table at dinner, he took his leave of him,
pretending a great grief that his Necessities were such, that they enforced him
to lose his presence. He also addressed himself to the Mother of the King, to
take his leave of her, who gave him leave to depart as willingly as she
received him joyfully, being both a Kinsman and a Friend. And in this
discontent he departed to his Country. The King observing his Mother and his
Servants in Extraordinary to be astonished at his sudden departure, did inform
them of the Alarm which he had given him, saying, That although he believed he
was innocent of that which was laid to his charge, yet he found that he was
possessed with a great fear, which brought forth a desire to be gone from that
Master whose complexion he as yet not understood.

For my own part, Ladies, I can find no other thing that could move the heart
of the King to hazard himself alone against so brave a Man at Arms, and leaving
all the Company, and the place and Majesty due unto a King, to demand the
Combat of his Inferior, but only that he would render himself equal to that
admirable Prince who doubted of his Enemy, and to content himself, did give him
the Experience of the Nobleness and Courage of his own heart. And without
contradiction ( said Parliament) he had reason for it; for the praises of all
the Men in the world cannot so much satisfy a good heart, as the knowledge and
the experience that it has of the Virtues wherewith God has endued it. It is
many hundred years since ( said Guebron) that the Poets and others have
informed us, that to come to the Temple of Renown, we must first pass through
the Temple of Virtue. And for my self, who knew very well the two Personages
who were the Subjects of this Account, I am most assured, that the King was
absolutely one of the most valiant men that were in his Kingdom. Upon my faith
( said Hircan) from the hour that Count William came first from Germany into
France, I did more stand in fear of his Sword, than of all theirs who were
esteemed to be the most stout Italians in the Court. You know well ( said
Emarsuite) that the King was so highly reputed for his valor, that our praises
cannot reach his Deserts, and that this Days work will be finished, before
every one of us shall have given a due character of him. Wherefore, Madam, Give
your voice to some one else, who has yet something to say of the Goodness of
Men, if there be any Goodness at all in them. Oysilla turning to Hircan, said
unto him, you have been so much accustomed to speak ill of Women, that it seems
to me it will be easy to you to give us some ready account of the praise of
Men; Wherefore I give you my voice. It will be a thing easy to me to do, said
Hircan, for it is not long since, that one did give me an account of the
praises of a Gentleman, whose Love, Patience, and Perseverance is so
commendable, that I cannot lose the Memory of it.

A fair young Lady made trial of the Faith of a young Scholar her Friend,
before she would permit him to entrench too far upon her Honor.
The Eighth Novell.
IN one of the good Cities of France, there was a Lord of a great Family, who
was at the University, desiring to attain unto the knowledge by what means
virtue and honor ought to be acquired amongst virtuous Men. And although he
was so knowing, that, being but eighteen years of age, he seemed to be a
Document, and an Example unto others, yet Love made him to sing after his
Lesson; And to be the better understood and received, Love hid himself under
the Damask complexion, and in the eyes of the most beautiful young Lady that
was in all that Country, who for the following of a Suit she had in Law, was
come to that City. But before Love had assayed to overcome the Gentleman by the
beauties of this Lady, he had gained the heart of her, by observing the
perfections that were in him; for in Beauty, Grace, good Sense, and gallant
Elocution, there was not any, of whatsoever condition he was, that could
surpass him. You (who do apprehend the ready and uncontrolled way which this
Fire does make, when it has taken hold of one of the corners of the heart, and
of the Fancy) will easily judge, that in two so perfect Subjects Love made no
long delay, but had them both at his Commandment, and filled them both with so
clear a light, that all their thoughts, will, and discourse, were but the
flames of that Love, which (with their youth, which begot a fear in them) did
make him to purchase and complete his Affairs with the greatest sweetness that
possibly could be. But she who at first was overcome by Love, needed no force.
Nevertheless, by reason of the shame which accompanies young Ladies, to the
uttermost of her power she did stand upon her guard, and did forbear to show
her good will, until that at the last, the Fortress of her heart, which is
the Seat of Honor, was so ruined, that the poor Lady did agree to that, to
which she could not be disagreeing: Howsoever, to make trial of the patience,
assurance, and love of her Servant, she did grant him that which he demanded,
but upon too hard conditions, assuring him, That if he should observe them, she
would always love him most entirely, and if he failed in the performance, he
should never enjoy her whilst he lived. The Condition was, That she was
content to Discourse with him in Bed together, having nothing on him but the
Linen next unto their Bodies; but so, that he must not demand any thing at all
of her, but only a Complement, and a Kiss. He, who thought there was no Joy
that was worthy to be compared to this, did easily accord unto it.

The Evening being come, the promise was accomplished, where for all the good
entertainment she gave him, and his and her striving desires, he would not
violat his oath; And although he conceived that his torment was not less than
that of Purgatory, yet his love was so great, and his hope so strong (being
sure of the perpetual continuance of her love which with so long reluctation he
had purchased) that his patience overcame, and in the morning he did rise from
her without doing her the least dishonor. The young Lady (as I believe) being
more astonished than contented with it, did immediately begin to suspect with
her self, that his love was not so great as she conceived, or that he found not
in her so much delight as at first he propounded to himself; she had not the
least thought of the greatness of his honesty, nor of his patience, or
fidelity, and his care to keep his oath: Wherefore she resolved with herself to
make one proof more of his Love, and entreated him to Court a Gentlewoman in
her company, that was younger than her self, and almost as handsome, that those
who observed him so often to come unto her lodgings, might conceive that his
love was to her Companion, and not unto herself. The young Lord, who assured
himself to be beloved by her, as long as he was a faithful Servant to her, did
obey her command, and enforced himself by the love he did vow to her, to make
love to this young Gentlewoman, who seeing him so lovely, and so well spoken,
did believe his pretense as it had been a truth, and loved him, as if
altogether she had been beloved by him. When the Mistress perceived that it
did go on so forward, and that nevertheless, the young Lord did not cease to
put her in mind of her promise, she concluded with him, that he should come
unto her one hour after Midnight, and because she had such experience of the
greatness of his love and obedience to her, it was reason, she said, that he
should be recompensed for his patience. We make no doubt of the great Joy which
this affectionate Servant received to hear this promise, who failed not to come
at the time appointed. But the Lady to make a further trial of the force of his
love, did speak unto her young Companion, I understand the love very well which
such a young Lord does bear unto you, and I believe your passion is equal unto
his. I have such a tender regard unto you both, that I am resolved to give
place unto you, and leisure to discourse together at your own case as long as
you will. The young Gentlewoman was transported with so great a Joy that she
could not dissemble her affections to her, but assured her, that she would not
fail to be obedient to her counsels; Whereupon she did put off her clothes, and
all alone did go into a fair bed in one of the next chambers; The Lady left the
door open, and caused a great wax candle to be lighted in it, that the beauty
of this young Gentlewoman might be the more apparent; And counterfeiting to go
to her own lodgings, she did hide herself behind the hangings so closely that
she could not be perceived. Her poor Servant thinking to find her (accordingly
as she had promised him) did not fail to come into the chamber on the appointed
hour as softly as possibly he could, and after he had shut the door, and put
off his Gown and his Breeches, he leapt into the bed, where he thought to have
found her whom he so much desired, and no sooner did he stretch forth his arms
to embrace her, whom he conceived to be his Lady, but the poor young
Gentlewoman who thought she had him sure enough, had her own arms about his
neck, and did deliver to him such affectionate words, and with so sweet a
countenance, that there is no Hermit so holy but would have forgot his
Pater-nosters. But when he discoverd who she was, both by his eye and by his
ear; Love, who with so great a speed brought him to bed, made him to rise from
it with a greater; And with an indignation as much against the Lady as the
young Gentlewoman, he repaired to the Lady (who betrayed herself by her
laughter) and said unto her, The folly as much of your self as of the Damsel,
whom with so much subtilty you have put in yonder bed, shall make me no other
than I am; but do your endeavor to be a good woman, for by no occasion of
mine you shall lose your good Name. And speaking those words, being as full of
Despite as it was impossible to be more, he departed out of the chamber, and
for a long time came not into any place where this Lady was. Nevertheless
Love, who is never without hope, did assure her that the more firm his love
was, and known to be more great by so long experience, the more happy and
grateful would the fruition prove. And having considered on the passages of
the young Lord her servant, and her companion, she was so well contented and
amazed to perceive the greatness and strength of his love, that it seemed long
unto her until she found some occasion to seek him out to crave pardon of him
for the many intricate sorrows which she had brought upon him, and as soon as
ever she had the much desired happiness to speak unto him, she not failed to
give him so many couteous and good assurances, that he not only did pass over
his former torments, but judged them most happy, since they were all turned
into the glory and perfection of his love, of which ever afterward he had the
fruition without any hinderance, or weariness, even to the height of his
desires.

Ladies, I beseech you, find me out one woman so constant, so patient, and so
loyal in love as this man has been. Those who have made trial of them by such
intentions do find them to be such whom we find painted at St. Anthonies, very
little and rare, but of a great price: and to speak the truth, few men
themselves are of this man's temper; for he who can be chaste with the beauty and
the love of women, and patient at the time and the leisures of women, is
virtuous enough to overcome all the Devils in Hell. It is pity ( said Oysilla)
that he did not address himself unto a Gentleweman as virtuous as himself, for
it would have been the most honest and most absolute love that had been ever
rehearsed. But tell me I pray ( said Guebron) which task of his two do you
conceive most difficult? It seems to me the last, ( said Parliament) for Despite
above all is the most violent temptation. Longaren was of opinion that the
first was the greatest; for it was necessary, she said, to fulfill his promise,
that he should overcome both Love and himself. You speak at random, said
Simontault, but we who know well enough what things are, ought to speak what we
know: And for my self, in performing his first command I think he was a Fool,
and in the second a Sot: For I believe, that in performing his promise to his
Lady, she had as much or more trouble than himself. She had not caused him to
take that Oath, but only because she counterfeited her self to be a far better
woman than she was; for she knew it was sure enough, That a strong Love cannot
be bound, either by Commandment, or by Oath, or by any thing that is in the
world. But she did dissemble her vice to be so virtuous, that it could not be
obtained but by Heroic Virtues. And in the second place he showed himself a
Sot, to forsake her who loved him, and was more worthy than she to whom he had
made his Oath, and had so good an Excuse, by reason of the Despite which at
that time possessed him. Dagoucin reproved him, saying, that he was of a
contrary opinion; And that at the first time he showed himself to be firm,
patient, and true; and at the second, loyal, and entire in his love: And what
know we, said Saffredant, if he were not one of those who are treated of, in
the Chapter De Frigidis and Maleficiatis? But if Hircan would accomplish his
praises, he ought to account us, what a gentle Companion he was, after that he
had enjoyed that which be desired: And for the present, how can we judge,
whether it were a Virtue, or a Weakness, that made him so tame? You may be
sure, said Hircan, that if I had been informed of it, I would have concealed it
no more than the rest; but if you did look upon his person, or knew his
complexion, you would say after me, that he was guided rather by the force of
Love, than any weakness or frigidity. If he were such a one then (as you speak
him) said Simontault, he should have broken his Oath, and if she had been angry
for so little, she might have quickly been appeased. But it may be ( said
Emarsuite) that at that time she was not willing. What and if she were not,
said Saffredant, had she not been easy to have been forced, having already
given unto him the possession of the Camp. Saint Mary ( said Nomerfide) How
wide you draw? Is that the way to obtain the favor of a Lady whom you esteem
wise and honest. It seems to me, said Saffredant, that we cannot do more honor
to a woman, of whom we desire such a favor, than to take it by force: for the
poorest Baggage in the world does desire to be a long time entreated; and some
there are who must be presented with great gifts, before they can be obtained;
and others are so foolish, who neither by presents nor by Complements can be
obtained, to whom we must make use of other means. And when we have to do with
one so wise, that she will not be deceived, and so good, that she will not be
gained either by great gifts, or good words, is it not reason to use all the
means that possibly we can to obtain the Victory? And when at any time you hear
it spoken, that a Man has taken a woman by force, believe it, that the Woman
had deprived him of all hope of any other means; and think not the worse of the
Man, who has put his life in jeopardy to give place unto his Love. Guebron
began to laugh, and said, I have seen in my days places besieged, and taken by
force, because it was not possible to bring those unto a Parley who did keep
them, either by money, or by threatenings, for they say, That a Parlying Town is
half gained. I believe ( said Emarsuite) that all the Loves of the World are
grounded upon these Follies; howsoever there are some to my knowledge, who have
loved, and honorably continued in their love, without being subject to any
such loose Intention. If you know of any such, said Hircan, I give you my
voice, and the Speakers place; I know it to be true, ( said Emarsuite) and
therefore I will willingly give you an account thereof.

Of two Lovers, who despairing to be married the one unto the other, did betake
themselves to two places of Religion, the one to a Covent of St. Francis, and
the other to S. Anne of Clare.
The Ninth Novell.
IN the time of the Marquess of Mantua who was espoused to the Sister of the
Duke of Ferrara, there lived in the House of the Duchess a Damsel named
Paulina, who was so well beloved by a Gentleman who was a Servant to the
Marquess, that the greatness of his affection was admired by all the world;
And because he was but poor, and a gentile Companion, his Master, in the love
he did bear unto him, did advise him to look out some wife that was rich, and
able to maintain him; but he thought that all the Treasure in the world was in
Paulina, which, in marrying her, he should possess. The Marchioness also
desiring, That Paulina might have a richer Husband, or none, did distaste the
proceedings of the Marriage as much as possibly might be, and oftentimes would
not suffer them to hold any Discourse with one another, and did demonstrate to
them, that if the said Marriage should go on, they would be two of the poorest,
and most miserable creatures in all Italy. But this reason could not enter into
the understanding of the Gentleman. Paulina (as well as she could) did for her
part dissemble her love she did bear unto the Gentleman, howsoever her heart
was entire unto him. This love continued a long time, and was attended with a
hope, that at last they should meet with some Fortunes that were answerable to
their desires. Some few years afterward this Gentleman in a great Battle was
taken prisoner with a Frenchman, who was as deep in love with a Gentlewoman in
France, as he was with one in Italy. And when they found themselves Companions
of one fortune, they began more familiarly to discover the secrets of their
hearts the one unto the other. The Frenchman confessed that his heart was a
prisoner as well as his, but would not name him the person or the place. But
being both in the service of the Marquess of Mantua, the Frenchman knew well
enough that his companion loved Paulina, and for the love which he did bear to
his profit and advantage he did advise him to remove his affections from her,
which the Italian Gentleman did swear was not in his own power, and that if the
Marquess of Mantua, in recompense of his imprisonment, and the good service he
had done for him, would still refuse to let him have his Sweetheart, he would
turn Gray Friar, and never serve any other Master but God; which the Frenchman
could not believe, for he saw not in him any sign of religion at all, but only
the devotion he had unto Paulina.

At the end of three months the French Gentleman was delivered from prison, and
prevailed so much by his diligence, that not long afterward he procured the
liberty of his Companion, and used his utmost endeavor both with the Marquess
and Marchioness, that they would give their consent to his Marriage with
Paulina; but he could not persuade them to it, for they represented to him the
poverty in which they should both live, and that on both sides their Parents
and Kindred were much discontented at it, and they forbade him to speak unto
them any more of it, to the end that their love at last might pass away by
absence and impossibility. When the Italian Gentleman perceived that he was
constrained to obey the command of the Marquess, he demanded leave of the
Marchioness to take his leave of Paulina, seeing he should never speak unto
her again, which was agreed unto, and immediately in these words he spoke unto
her. Since it is so Paulina, that Heaven and Earth are against us, not only to
hinder us in our Marriage, but (which is worse) to take from us for ever the
sight of one another, and that upon command I must not speak any more to you,
nor you to me; This command is rigorous indeed; our Master and Mistress may
well boast that with one word they have wounded two hearts whose bodies needs
must languish, and they have proved that neither love nor pity did ever enter
into their breasts. I do know that their aim is to marry us richly to some
others, but they are ignorant that the truest riches do consist in a contented
mind, and hereby they have done me so great an injury that it is impossible I
should ever do them service again. I do believe, that if I had never spoken to
them of this marriage, they had not been so scrupulous as not to have suffered
us to discourse together, and I do assure you that I had rather dye than change
my affection into worse, having loved you with so honest and so virtuous a
love, and purchased that of you which during my life I ought to defend; And
because that in seeing you I cannot endure that hard patience as not to speak
unto you, and because in not seeing you, my heart (which never can be empty)
will be filled with despair which will make my end unfortunate, I am resolved,
and have a long time been, to put my self in a religious house, not, but that I
know very well that in all Estates a man may be saved, but to have the more
leisure to contemplate the divine bounty, which I do hope will have pity on the
faults of my youth, and will work a change in my heart to love spiritual things
as well as temporal; and if God shall give me the grace to arrive to the
knowledge of the Religion, my devotions shall incessantly be employed to pray
unto God for you, beseeching you by that love so firm and loyal which has been
betwixt us two, to remember me in your prayers, and to beseech our Lord to give
me as much patience in not seeing you, as he has given me content in seeing
you. And because I hoped all my life to have enjoyed you in marriage, which
honor and conscience do permit, I am contented that I had that hope, although
I must now lose it; and because I cannot receive the entertainment from you
which belongs unto a Husband, yet at the least, in bidding farewell unto you,
vouchsafe me the entertainment of a Brother, and give me leave to kiss you.
Poor Paulina who had been always too severe unto him, understanding the
extremity of his grief, and the honesty of his request, that in so great a
despair he would content himself with a thing so reasonable, without giving any
answer to him, did throw her arms about his neck, and weeped with so much
bitterness and fainting of heart, that her words, her understanding, and her
force failed her, and she swouned away between his arms, and the pity thereof
accompanied with his love and sorrow, did cause him to do the like, Insomuch
that one of her companions seeing her to fall down on the one side, and him on
the other, did call out for help, and by force of remedies did revive them.
Paulina who was desired to dissemble her affection was ashamed that she had
showed her love to be so violent; Nevertheless, the pity she had on the poor
Gentleman did serve her for an excuse, and being not able to endure the word
that did bid her farewell for ever, she did go away presently, her teeth as
shut up as her heart, and entering into her chamber as a dead body without a
Soul, she fell down upon her bed, and passed away that night in such complaints
and lamentations, that her servants believed she at once had lost her parents,
and all her kindred, and friends, and whatsoever was of comfort to her upon
Earth. In the morning she in her prayers recommended to our Savior the
Gentleman that was her friend, who after he had distributed amongst his
Servants the poor fortunes he was master of, and taken with him a certain sum
of silver, he did forbid any of his people to follow him, and repaired all
alone to a Religious house to demand the habit, being resolved with himself
never to put on any other. The Warden of the Covent, who had seen him before,
did think at first that it was but a Fable or Mockery; for in all the Country
there was not a Gentleman that showed less respect unto a Gray Friar, than
himself; for he had in him all the knowing virtues and graces that could belong
unto a Gentleman. But after he had understood his words, and observed his tears
falling like Rivers from his eyes, being not ignorant from whence the source
proceeded, he courteously did receive him; and not long afterward seeing his
perseverance, he gave him the habit of a Friar, which he did put on with great
Content.

The Marquess and the Marchioness being advertised of it, did find it so
strange, that not without great difficulty they could believe it. Paulina, to
show her self not subject unto the tyranny of Love, did dissemble it as well as
possibly she could; insomuch, that every one told her, That she quickly had
forgot the great affection of her loyal Servant: She continued thus five or six
months without making any other Remonstrance; during which time, there was
showed unto her a Song by one of the Religious Men, which her Servant had
composed presently after he had put on his religious habit, the Song is in
Italian, and common enough; Which when she had perused, and read it all over,
going into the Chapel by her self, she wept so abundantly, that she dewed all
the paper with her tears; and were it not for a fear she entertained, that she
should show her self more affectionate than became her, she had immediately gone
into some Hermitage, with a resolution never to see again any creature in the
world: but the Discretion which she had, did constrain her for a short time to
dissemble it. And although she had taken a resolution altogether to renounce
the world, she pretended the contrary, and kept her countenance so reserved,
that being in Company there appeared nothing of that Melancholy to which she
had abandoned her self. She carried this Resolution covered in her heart five
or six months, showing her self more joyful than she was accustomed to be; But
one day waiting upon her Mistress to hear the High Mass, after that the
Priest was come out of the Vestry to go unto the great Altar, her poor Servant,
who was yet in the year of his Probationership, did serve at the Eucharist, and
carrying two little bottles covered with white Silk in either hand, was the
first that presented himself, having his eyes fixed on the Ground. When Paulina
saw him in that habiliment, in which his Gracefulness and Beauty was rather
increased, than diminished, she was so troubled and astonished, that to cover
the blushes which took possession of her cheeks, she began to cough; Her poor
Servant, who did better understand that sound, than the Bell of the Monastery,
durst not turn aside his head, but passing along by her, he could not govern
his eyes from beholding that Object to which so long they had been accustomed,
and looking on Paulina, he was so inflamed anew with the fire which he thought
had been almost extinguished, that beyond his ability endeavoring to conceal
it, he fell down all along before her. And the fear which he had that the Cause
of his Misfortune should be discovered, he made an Excuse, that the Pavement of
the Church, which was broken just in that place, was the occasion of his fall.
When Paulina understood that the change of his habit had not changed his heart,
and that it was so long since he took that Order upon him, that every one
thought she had forgotten him, she resolved with her self to put her Design in
Execution, which was, to render their loves alike, in habit, form, and in
condition of life, as it was when they lived in one house, under one Master and
Mistress; And because that fourteen Months before, she had given order for all
things that were necessary for her to enter into a Religious house, she one
morning demanded leave of the Marchioness to go to hear Mass at the Covent
of St. Clare, which she granted (being ignorant wherefore she did ask it) and
passing by the Gray Friars, she entreated the Warden of the Covent to give her
leave to see one of the Friars, whom she called her Kinsman. When she saw him
in the Chapel by himself, she said unto him, If my Honor had permitted me to
put my self into a Religious House, as soon as you did, I would not have
attended until this time, but having by my patience broken through the
opinions of those, who are more apt to judge Evil, than Good, I have determined
with my self to take upon me the same Condition, Robe, and Life, which I see
you have done, without inquiring what it is: for if you find any Good, I shall
have my part therein; and if you find any thing that is grievous, I will not be
exempt from it; for by what way you go into Paradise, in the same I will follow
you; being assured, that he who is the true, perfect, and the most worthy to be
called LOVE, has drawn us to his service, by a chaste, and virtuous love, which
by his holy Spirit he will convert to our advantage, beseeching him, That my
self, as well as you, may forget the Body that perishes, and the tincture of
the old Adam, to receive and put on him who is our Spouse, Jesus Christ. Her
religious Servant, the Friar, was so well contented, and so glad to hear her
holy Resolution, that with weeping tears of Joy, he fortified her in her
opinion as much as possibly he could, saying, Since he could have nothing of
her in this world but words only, and was hardly permitted to have those also,
that he thought himself very happy to have now the means daily to see her, and
that she was of the same mind with him, that neither the one, nor the other,
did care which of them were the happiest, living in one estate of Love, of one
heart, and of one spirit, being persuaded and conducted by the bounty of God,
whom he besought to keep them both in his hand, where none could take them from
him; And speaking those words, and weeping with tears of love and joy, he
kissed her hands, and she stooped her down unto his hand, and in true charity
did give it the holy kiss of Dilection.

And thus in a great content Paulina departed, and entered into the Covent,
where she was received, and veiled. Which afterward she sent word of to Madam
the Marchioness who hardly could be induced to believe it: Wherefore the next
morning she repaired to the Monastery to see her, and to dissuade her from her
resolution, and if words would not prevail to add force unto her words; but
Paulina did assure her, that if she had the power to take from her a Husband of
flesh (a man whom she loved best in this world) she ought to content her self,
without attempting to divorce her from him who is immortal and invisible, for
he was not in her power, nor under any power in the world. The Marchioness
observing her resolution, did kiss her, and full of sorrow did take her leave
of her. After that time Paulina and her servant did live so holily, and so
devoutly in their places of observance, that we ought not to doubt, but that
he, the end of whose Law is charity, did in the end of their lives say unto
them as unto Mary Magdalen, that their sins were all pardoned because they had
loved much, and that in peace he brought them to a place where their recompense
does surpass all the merits of men, and their good deeds are crowned with an
incomprehensible reward.

Ladies, you cannot be ignorant, that never any man did show a greater love, or
which so perfectly was returned to him by her whom he loved that I could wish
that all those in their condition of love were as well recompensed. There would
be then ( said Hircan) more he-Fools and she-Fools than were ever yet seen in
the world, Do you call it folly ( said Oysilla) to love honestly in our youth,
and afterward to convert all that love unto the love of God? Hircan laughing
made answer to her, if melancholy and despair be virtues, I will confess that
Paulina and her servant are most worthy to be praised. So it is ( said Guebron)
that God has many means to draw us to him, the beginnings whereof may seem to
be unpleasant, but their end is good. I am of opinion ( said Parliament) that a
man can never love God perfectly, until first he has perfectly loved some
Creature in this World. What do you call it to love perfectly ( said
Saffredant) Do you esteem those to be perfect lovers who are in a rapsody at
the sight of their Mistress, and kneel down before them at a great distance,
without daring to declare their affections to them? Parliament made answer, I
call those perfect lovers, who do seek for some perfection in those they love,
whether it be goodness, beauty, or gracefulness, or whatsoever it be that is
always tending unto virtue, and who have a heart so high, and honest, that they
will rather by their deaths put an end to all corrupt desires, than that their
honors or their consciences should suffer. For the Soul which is not created
but to return unto its sovereign good, has (as long as it is even in this
Body) a desire to arrive unto it; But by reason that the understanding, by
which it should learn the way, is obscure and carnal, by the sin of our first
Father, it cannot represent any thing unto it but things visible, and which
only do approach unto perfection, after which the Soul does run, thinking to
find in a visible grace, and in moral virtues, the Sovereign beauty, and the
Sovereign Grace, and Virtue. But when she has examined and proved them, and
found that it is not that which perfectly she loves, she throws them by, and
goes on further, like an infant who in its first infancy loves apples, and
pears, and puppets, and the fairest things that can be presented to the eye,
and does esteem it great riches to heap small stones together; afterward,
growing into age, it loves living creatures, and to amasse those precious
stones and treasures which are necessary for the life of man. But when by grave
experience it knows that in transitory things there is no perfection nor
felicity, it desires to search after true happiness, and the Giver, who is
the Fountain of it. Nevertheless, if God should not open unto us the ey of
Faith, we are in danger from being Ignorants, to become unbelieving
Philosophers. For Faith only does represent unto us, and. causes us to receive
that Good, which a carnal man cannot apprehend. See you not ( said Longaren)
that the Ground not husbanded does produce many herbs and trees, although they
are unprofitable? which shows unto us the good desire of it, and the promise
it does make, that it will bring forth good fruits, when it shall be sowed and
weeded: So the heart of Man, which has no other understanding but by things
visible, will never arrive unto the love of God, but only by the sowings of his
holy word in the heart; for the Ground of the heart is of it self barren, and
cold, and almost lost to all hope. And this is the Cause ( said Saffredant)
that the greatest part of Men are deceived, who look not but only on exterior
things, and despise that which is most precious, and is lodged within. If I
could speak Latin well, said Simontault, I would allege unto you what St. John
says, That He who loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love
God, whom he has not seen? for by things visible we are drawn to the love of
things invisible. Show us the Man ( said Emarsuite) that is so perfect in that
love, Et laudabimus eum. There are some, said Dagoucin, who love so purely, and
so perfectly, that they had rather die, than to think one thought against the
Honors or the Consciences of their Mistresses, and would so carry it, that
neither their Mistresses themselves, nor any other, should perceive it. They (
said Saffredant) are of the Nature of the Cameleon, who lives on the Air. For I
am of a belief, that there is not a Man in the world who does not desire to
declare his Love, and to be assured that he is beloved; and there is no Fever
of Love so violent, but suddenly will slack, when we come to know the contrary.
I will speak it of my self, I have seen such Miracles made evident. I beseech
you ( said Emarsuite) to take my place, and to give us an account of some one
who has been raised from Death to Life, by finding his Mistress to act
contrary to that which he desired. I am so afraid (said Saffredant) to
displease Ladies, to whom I have been, and ever shall be a Servant, that
without their express Command, I durst not give any account unto them of their
Imperfections, but to show my obedience I will not conceal the truth.

A Gentleman unexpectedly is recovered of the malady of Love, finding his
Mistress, too severe unto him, in the Arms of her Horse-Keeper.
The Tenth Novell.
IN the Country of Dauphine, was a Gentleman called Signior de Ryant, who
belonged to the House of King Francis the first of that Name, and was as honest
and as fine a Gentleman, as could be looked on. He was a long time servant to a
Lady that was a Widow, whom he so much loved and reverenced, that for the fear
he had to lose her favor, he durst not importune her for that which he so much
desired, And being handsome himself, and worthy to be beloved, he firmly
believed that which she had often sworn unto him, which was, that she loved him
better than all the Gentlemen in the world, and if she were put to it to do a
Gentleman a courtesy, it should be for him only, as being the most
accomplished Man that she knew, and did entreat him to rest himself contented
with it, without transgressing that honest love, assuring him, That if she knew
that he pretended to any thing more, and would not be contented with reason,
that he should lose her Love, and all. The poor Gentleman not only contented
himself with it, but conceived himself to be a happy Man to have gained the
heart of that Lady, whom he believed to be so virtuous. It will appear tedious
unto you to repeat the discourse of their love, and the long frequentation
which he had with her, and the voyages which he made to see her. But in the
conclusion, this poor Martyr being in so pleasant a Fire, that the more he
burned, the more he would burn, did search after all means to augment his
Martyrdom; One morning, a fancy did possess him to take Post to see her whom
he loved better than himself, and esteemed above all the Women in the world.
Being arrived, he entered into the Court, and demanded where she was, answer was
made, That she was but just come from Vespers, and was gone into the Garden to
complete her Devotions; whereupon he alighted from his Horse, and took his
course directly to the Garden where it was told him that she was. In the way he
did meet with some other of her servants, who informed him, That she was
walking all alone in a long Allee in the Garden; whereupon he began more than
ever to hope that he should meet with some happy Fortune, and as leisurely as
possibly he could he pursued his design, thinking to find her in most private
Retirements. And being come to a long Arbor of plashed Trees, it being the most
pleasant, and most delightful place, that Art or Nature ever did contrive, he
suddenly entered in, as one who thought long till he had seen her whom he loved.
At his first Entrance he found her in the Arms of the Horse-keeper of the
House, as loathsome, and as nasty a fellow, as she her self was fair and lovely.
I will not in this place undertake to declare unto you the Indignation that
poffessed him, which was so great, that in one moment it had power to quench
the fire which so long had burned. And being filled with as much despite, as he
was before with love, he said unto her, Madam, Much good do it you, This day,
for your discovered Incontinence, I am recovered, and delivered from a
perpetual perplexity, occasioned by the rare Honesty which I conceived to be in
you. And without any other Farewell he departed from her, with greater speed
than he came. The poor Woman made no other answer to him, but only covered her
face with her hands It was fit indeed that because she could not cover her
shame, she should cover her eyes, that she might not see him, who saw her now
too clearly, notwithstanding her long dissimulation.

Wherefore I beseech you, Ladies, if you have not a desire to love perfectly,
do not dissemble with an honest man, nor seek to displease him for your own
glory; for Hypocrites are paid in their own Coin, and God does favor those
who do love entirely. It is well ( said Oysilla) you have given us a good one,
for the conclusion of this days work; And were it not, that we have sworn to
speak the Truth, I could not believe that a woman of Estate, as she was, could
be so wicked, as to forsake an honest Gentleman for such an ugly Varlet. Alas
Madam ( said Hircan) If you knew the difference betwixt a Gentleman who all his
lifetime has born arms on his back, and followed the War, and a strong
chined, and a well-fed Groom, who never stirred out of door, you would easily
excuse this poor widow. Hircan ( said Oysilla) I cannot believe that
whatsoever you can allege, will make any Excuse for her. I have often heard it
spoken ( said Simontault) that there are women, who keep Men on purpose to
preach unto the world their Virtue and their Chastity, and do give them the
best entertainment, and the most private, that possibly they can, assuring
them, that if their Honors and Consciences might not suffer in it, they would
comply with them in all their desires; And those silly Creatures, when they
speak of them in company, will swear, That they have put their fingers in the
fire without burning them, to prove that they are Ladies of Honor and Virtue,
because they have had experience of their Goodness, even to their singers end.
And thus those women do hear themselves to be commeaded by such dishonest Man,
and show themselves such as they are to those of their own Complexion, and
choose such to be their Servants, who amongst Men of worth have not the
considence to speak, or if they do speak, by reason of their sordid and vile
condition, they have not the credit to be believed. This is the same opinion,
said Longaren, which in another sense I have heard spoken of jealous, and
suspicious men. But this is to pourtray a Chimaera; for although it may fall
out to be true in one unfortunate woman, it ought not to be suspected in
another.

Before we proceed further in this discourse ( said Parliament) and the
Gentlemen here present exercise their wits on our expense, let us rise, and
repair to the Vespers, that we may not make the religious men to attend us so
long as yesterday they did. The Company were all of her opinion, and being on
their way to the Chapel, Oysilla said unto them, If any of us were too blame
for having not this day spoken the truth in those histories which we have
delivered, Saffredant ought to demand pardon for having made so vile a
commemoration to the dishonor of our Sex. Upon the credit of my oath, said
Saffredant, I believe my account to be true enough, yet I must confess that I
only heard it speken, but I know so much of women that should I speak all what
I knew of them, I should make as many or more signs of the Cross than they do
at the consecration of a Church. Parliament replied, He is far enough from
Repentance whose confession does aggravat his sin. But because you have such a
bad opinion of women, they ought to deprive you of all entertainment and
familiarity with them. He made answer, some of them, in my behalf, have so used
the Counsel that you now give them, in denying me things just and honest, that
if I could either speak, or do worse unto them, I would not forbear it, to
revenge my self on her who does detain me in so great a thraldom: And speaking
those words, Parliament began to sneeze as she entered with the other Ladies into
the Church, where although the Saints bell had rung, yet there were none of the
Monks to say service, because they understood, that this gallant Company were
assembled in the Meadow to discourse of those pleasant Subjects, and being such
who preferred the vanity of their delight above their Devotions, they hid
themselves in the bottom of a ditch behind a thick hedge lying with their
Bellies on the Earth, where they listened so attentively to their agreeable
accounts, that they could not hear the Bell of the Monastery. Which did easily
appear, for they arrived in so much have, that their breath failed them to
begin Vespers. And the service being ended, they confessed to those who
demanded the reason why they came so late, and chanted so disorderly, that it
was to listen to these Histories in the Meadow; wherefore seeing their good
will, it was permitted to them, that, sitting at their ease, they should every
afternoon be behind the hedge. Supper being ended, they began the continuation
of the discourse to which they had not put a period in the Meadow. Oysilla at
the last entreated them that she might retire herself, to have her spirits more
cheerful against the next morning: And after many passages full of variety and
delight, Oysilla affirming that one hour before midnight was worth three
afterward, this gnllant Company parted, putting an end to their discourse and
the recital of their Histories for the second day.

The end of the second Book.
The Third Days Work of the Novells of the Queen of NAVARRE.
The Preface.
ON the morning the Company could not come so soon into the Hall, but Madam
Oysilla was there half an hour before them, having before hand studied the
Lecture which she was to read. And if they were content with the foregoing
Discourse, they were no less taken with this second; and had it not been that
one of the Monks had come to call them to the Mass, their contemplation had
hindered them from hearing the Bell. Mass being heard, and a short Dinner ended,
that their memories might not be prejudiced by the abundance of too much
Viands, they all began in their orders to acquit themselves as well as they
could, and retiring to their Chambers, to read over again their Accounts, they
attended the accustomed hour to go into the Meadow, which being come, they
sailed not to commence their happy voyage. Those who had determined with
themselves to discourse on some merry Subject, had already such joyful
countenances, that the rest did promise to themselves a just occasion of
laughter to come. When they were sat down, they demanded of Saffredant, to whom
he would give his voice? Since (said he) the fault which yesterday I committed
is so great, that you suppose there can be no Account given that is worthy
enough to make amends for it, I give my voice to Parliament, who by her good
discourse does know so well to please, and to commend the Ladies, that she will
make them to forget the truth which I have spoken. I take not upon me (said
Parliament) to mend your faults, but to take heed to my self that I do not
follow them; wherefore I am determined (giving you an account of the Truth, as
we are sworn to do) to demonstrate to you by Example, that there are Ladies who
in their loves have sought for no other end but honesty: And because she, of
whom I shall now speak unto you, was of a great house, I will change nothing in
her History, but the Name only, desiring you, Madams, to understand, that Love
has not the power to change a chaste heart, as you shall find by this History
which I shall recite unto you.

THE NOVELLS Of Queen MARGARET.
The honest and wonderful Love betwixt a young Lady of an honorable Descent,
and a Bastard, and the Obstructions which the Queen made in their marriage,
with the wise Answer of the young Lady to the Queen.
The First Novell.
THere was in France a Queen, who in her Court brought up many young Ladies of
great and good Houses. Amongst others, there was one called Rolandine, who was
her near Kinswoman: But the Queen, by reason of some displeasure she did bear
unto the Father, did not entertain her with that respect as she deserved; and
although this young Gentlewoman, was neither one of the fairest, nor yet one of
the foulest, yet she was so wife and so graceful, that many great Lords and
Personages did demand her in Marriage, of whom they all received but a cold
answer. For her Father did love his money so well, that he forgot the
advancement of his Daughter, and the Queen her Mistress (as I have said) did
bear her so little favor, that she was not courted at all by those whom the
Queen respected; so that by the negligence of the Father, and the disdain of
her Mistress, the poor young Lady did continue a long time unmarried. And thus
afflicting her self, not so much for the desire she had to be married, as for
the shame that she was unmarried, she at last altogether retired ^her self to
her Devotions; and abandoning all the flant and vanities of the Court, she made
it all her Recreation to pray unto God, or to perform some curious workmanship
with her Needle.

In this solitary life she passed away her youth, living a life so retired, and
so holy, that she became as well the Wonder as the Discourse of all that knew
her. When she approached unto thirty years of age, there came unto the Court a
Bastard, descended of an Illustrious Family, as courageous a Man, and as
gentile a Companion as any in those times, but Fortune had altogether abandoned
him, and he was so little beholding to Nature, that no Lady, whatsoever she
was, would ever have chosen him for her pleasure. This poor Gentleman was a
Bachelor, and as often it comes to pass, that one unfortunate Creature is
acquainted with another, he courted this poor young Gentlewoman Rolandine in
the way of Marriage; for their compsexions, fortunes, and conditions were alike,
and finding themselves both to be the Companions of Misfortune, they did seek
in all places to comfort one another, and by the long society of discourse, did
hold a perfect Correspondence. Those who had observed Rolandine so retired
before, that she would not speak with any Man, perceiving her every hour to
entertain the Bastard, did take an offense thereat, and acquainted her
Governesse with it, saying, It was unseemly they should be permitted to hold
such long Discourse together. The Governesse was no sooner informed of it, but
she presently did declare it unto Rolandine, assuring her, that every one did
take exceptions that she was always speaking to a Man who was not rich enough
to marry her, nor handsome enough to be beloved by her. Rolandine, who had more
often been reproved for her melancholy, than her affability, did make answer to
her Governesse, Alas my Mother! you see that I cannot have a Husband according
to the honor of the Family from whence I am derived, and that I have always
kept company with those who are young and beautiful, and would avoid those
Inconveniences which I have seen others to fall into. And having found now this
Gentleman to be wise and virtuous, (as you cannot deny) what hurt have I done
to you, or to those who brought this information to you, to comfort my self in
my afflictions? The poor old Woman, who loved her better than her self, did
reply unto her, Mademoiselle, I must confess that you speak the Truth, and that
you are otherwise used by the Queen, and by your Father, than you do deserve;
but so it is, That since they speak so prodigally of your honor, you ought to
abstain from speaking to him, if he were your own Brother. Rolandine weeping,
did say unto her, Mother, since you counsel me, I will obey you; but it seems
strange to me, to be allowed no Comfort in this World. The Bastard (according
to his Custom) did not long afterward wait upon her, to whom all along she
told the Discourse that she had with her Governesse, and weeping, did entreat
him, That for a time he would content himself until the Rumor were passed over,
to which, though to his grief, he condescended. But in this discontinuance of
his Company, both the one and the other being deprived of all comfort, she
began to feel so great an anxity of mind, that for her part she had never
endured the like before. She ceased not continually to pray unto God, to go in
pilgrimages, and to observe days of Abstinence. For love as yet unknown unto
her did give her so much disquier, that it would not grant her the respite of
one hour. And on the other side, The Bastard was, possessed with no less
affection, but he who had already concluded in his heart to love her, and to
use all the means that lay in the compass of his power to marry her,
reguarding with his love the honor he should have to enjoy her, did conceive
it his best way to declare his good will unto the Governesse, and to gain her
consent; which he did by remonistrating unto her the great misery in which his
poor Mistress was detained, from whom they would take away all comfort. The
old woman weeping, did thank him for the honest affection which he did bear
unto her Mistress, and did consult with him of the means by which without
being discovered they might talk to one another, which was, that Rolandine
should counterfeit herself to be sick of a contagious disease, and when her
Companions were all gone from her they two might remain alone, and he might
have the opportunity to speak unto her. The Bastard was very joyful at it, and
did altogether govern himself by the counsel of her Governesse, insomuch that
he spoke unto Rolandine as often as he pleased; But this contentment did not
long continue, for the Queen, who never did much care for her, did demand, what
wa^ the reason that Rolandine did keep her chamber, some of the young Ladies
made answer that it was by reason of her sickness; But one of them, who had
too good a memory, told her, that the joy which Rolandine had to entertain the
Bastard was the great occasion of her ficknesse. The Queen who feared that
venial sins in her might by degrees prove to be mortal ones, did send to see
how she did, and did forbid her to speak any more to the Bastard, unless it
were openly in her chamber of presence, or in the Hall. The young Lady made not
the least appearance of discontent, but made answer, that if she had thought
that either he or any other had been displeasing to her, she would never have
spoken the least word unto them. Nevertheless she debated with herself to find
out some other means which the Queen should not understand, and it was that on
Wednsdays, F^ydays, and Saturdays, she would fast, and continue in her chamber
with her Governesse, where all the time her Companions were at dinner and
supper she had the leisure to speak unto him whom so entirely she affected, and
by how much their time by constraint was made more short, by so much their
words did come from them with a more great affection, for they did steal time
to maintain their discourse; as a thief does steal a precious creasure. But
this meeting could nor be kept so secret, but one of the Grooms did observe the
Bastard constantly to enter into the chamber upon the days when Rolandine did
keep her fasts, and at last it was known to all, and to the Queen herself, who
was thereupon so passionate, that the Bastard after that check durst never to
enter again into the chamber of the Maids: Nevertheless, not to lose the
happiness to converse with her whom so much he loved, he often pretended to
take a journey out of Town, and on the Evening would return to the Church or to
the Chapel at the Court in the habit of a Friar or a Monk, so well disguised,
that it was impossible for any one to know him, and to the same Church or
Chapel Rolandine, with her Governess, did not fail to come to entertain him. He
observing the great love which she did bear unto him, was not afraid to speak
unto her. Madam, you know the danger into which I do put my self for your
service, and the Queens prohibitions, that you should speak no more unto me.
You know also too well, what a Father you have, who cares not to whom he shall
espouse you, you have refused so many good matches. I must confess I am but a
poor man, and that you may marry a Gentleman with a fortune far greater than my
own; but if love and good will be to be esteemed a treasure, I ought to be
accounted the richest man in the world. God has endued you with a great
estate, and you are in a possibility to have yet a far greater, if I could be
so happy, as that you would vonchsafe to choose me for your Husband, I would
all my life be both a Husband, a Friend, and a Servant to you; and if you
should take one equal to your self (which is very hard to do) he would become
your master, and would more regard your goods than your person, and altogether
making it his employment to be conversant in your estate, and to receive the
Rents and profits thereof, he would not be observant to your self, as you do
desire. The desire I have to give you this contentment, and the fear which does
surprise me that you cannot enjoy it with any other, does cause me to beseech
you, that at once you will make me happy, and your self the most satisfied
woman that ever was. Rolandine hearing these words which she had resolved with
her self to speak unto him, with an assured countenance did make answer to him.
I am very glad that you have begun this disscourse which a long time I had
thought to have propounded my self unto you. Those two last years, since I had
more perfect knowledge of you, I have thought and thought again, and examined
within my self all the reasons which I could invent, either for you, or against
you. And at the last, resolving with my self that I would take upon me the
estate of Marriage, it was time, I conceived, that I should begin to make
choice of him with whom I believed I should live best, and with most peace of
mind; I cannot find any one, be he never so handsome, so rich, or so great, that
my heart and my spirit do so well accord with as your self. I know that in
marrying you I shall not offend God, but do that which he commands; And as
for Monsieur my Father, he has so little sought after my Good, nay he has so
much refused it, that the Law will give leave that I may marry without him,
although it lies in his power to dis-inherit me; Yet let me have but that which
belongs unto me, in marrying such a Husband as you are, I shall esteem my self
to be the richest Woman in the world. As for the Queen my Mistress, I ought
not to make it a point of Conscience to displease her, to obey God; for she did
not forbear to hinder me of that comfort in my youth which I should have
enjoyed. But that you may understand that the love which I do bear unto you is
founded upon Virtue and Honor, you shall promise faithfully unto me, (that
although I do accord unto this marriag) that you shall not undertake the
consummation of it until my Father be dead, or until I have found a means to
procure his consent unto it. To this the Bastard most willingly did engage
himself, and on these promises they did give to one another a ring in the
obligation of marriage, and kissed each other in the Church before the Face of
God whom they took to be the witness of their promises, and afterward, during
the society of their loves, there was no other familiarity betwixt them but a
kiss only.

This little contentment gave great satisfaction to the hearts of those two
perfect lovers, and they lived a long time in this assurance without being
discovered by any; And there was no place where Honor might be gained to which
with great contentment this Bastard did not go, being confident that he could
never be poor or miscrable being blessed by God in so happy and so rich a Wise,
who in his absence did so well preserve her perfect love, that she took not the
least delight in any man in the world; And although that diverse did demand her
afterward in marriage, she made no other answer to them, but that having
stayed so long without a Husband, she was now resolved never to marry. This
answer was given and understood by so many, that it came at last to the ear of
the Queen, who demanded of her what was the reason of it. Rolandine made
answer, That it was to obey her; for she understood well enough that she never
desired that she should be married to any, who should not honorably provide
for her, and to her own content, and that Age and Patience had instructed her
to content her self with the Estate in which she was. And evermore when they
discoursed with her concerning Marriage, she did return the like answers.

When the Wars were ended, and the Bastard entertained again at the Court, she
never had any conference with him before any, but repaired always to the
Church to hold Discourse with him there, under the color of Confession; for
the Queen had forbid both him and her to talk together, upon pain of Death:
unless it were in some great Company. But the Honesty of Love, which knows no
prohibition, was more ready to find means to bring them to speak together, than
all their Enemies were prepared to prevent them, and under the habit of all the
religious Orders they could devise, they entertained their honest love, until
the time that the King made a progress to one of his Houses of pleasure, which
was not so near to any Church, as to go on foot to it; so that the Ladies were
enforced to repair in their Devotions to the Chapel of the Castle, which was so
inconveniently builded, that there was no place to conceal ones self at the
time of Confeilion, and the Confessor himself must apparently be seen;
Nevertheless, although on the one side Opportunity failed them, Love on the
other side did provide them with a more grateful Expedient. For there arrived
a Lady at the Court who was a near Kinswoman of the Bastards. This Lady, with
the young Prince her Son, were lodged in the House of the King, and the
Lodgings of the young Prince advanced themselves all along beyond that part of
the House where the King lodged; so that the Bastard might see and speak with
Rolandine out of the Princes window, for the windows did butt forth one against
another at the Corner of the House. And in that Chamber which was above the
Hall of the King, were lodged all the young Ladies of the Nobility who were the
Companions of Rolandine; who oftentimes observing the young Prince to look out
of the window, did by her Governesse advertise the Bastard of it, who having
taken a full notice of the place, did pretend to take great pleasure in reading
the Book of the Knights of the Round Table, which was in the Chamber of the
Prince: And when they were all gone to Dinner, he desired the Groom of the
Chamber to lock him in it, that he might read it over, assuring him, that
during his abode in the Chamber nothing should be lost, or displaced. The Groom
knowing him to be a Kinsman of his Masters, and an honest Gentleman, did give
him leave to read as long as he pleased. On the other side, Rolandine came to
the window of the Maids, and (for no other occasion but to continue there some
hours together) did counterfeit to have an infirmity in one of her legs, and
dined and supped by her self so early, that she did not go to the Ordinary of
the young Ladies. She had begun to make a Bed with Crimson Silk, and did fasten
the woof to the window, where she would abide alone; and when she saw that
there was none in the Room, she entertained her Husband at the window, and when
any approached, she would cough, and make a sign, by which on the other side
the Bastard might draw back from being seen. Those who were employed to watch
them, did believe for certain that their Love was passed over, for she never
stirred out of her Chamber, where they were sure the Bastard durst not come,
because he was expressly forbidden it by the Queen.

One day, the Mother of the young Prince being in the Chamber of her Son, did
go to the window where the great Book was, and staid there not long, but one of
the Companions of Rolandine, (who was of her own Chamber) seeing the Queen at
the window over against her, did assume the civil boldness to salute her, and
to speak unto her. The Queen did ask her how Rolandine did, she made answer to
her, That she should see her if she pleased, and caused her to come to the
window, having a Night-kercher on her head, and having spoken some few words to
her concerning her Malady, they did both withdraw. The Queen looking on the
great Book of the Round-Table, did speak unto the Groom of her Sons Chamber, I
do wonder that young people can spend their time in reading such follies as
these. The Groom of the Chamber made answer to her, That he more wondered that
Gentlemen of Age and Understanding should take greater delight to read it, than
those of younger years; and to give an Instance for his wonder, he assured her,
That the Bastard her Cozen would stay there four or five hours together, to
look on that goodly Book. The Occasion wherefore it was, did suddenly touch the
apprehension and the heart of the Queen, and she gave a charge to the Groom of
the Chamber to hide himself in some place, to observe what the passages were,
which he did accordingly, and found that the Book which he did read in the
window, was Roland^ne, who came to hold Conference with him, and understood
many words of desire and love betwixt them, which they thought they had kept
secret.

In the morning he acquainted the Mother of the young Prince with it, who sent
for her Cozen the Bastard, and after many Reasons and Remonstrances did
expressly forbid him to be seen there any more. In the evening she did speak
with Rolandine, threatening, That if she continued any longer in that foolish
love, she would inform the Queen of it, and of all the t^ains they had made.
Rolandine, who was nothing (...) at it, did protest unto her, That since the
Injunction of the Qu. to the contrary, she never spoke any word unto him,
whatsoever she might allege to the contrary, and (if she pleased) she might be
satisfied with the truth thereof by her Companions, and her Servants; and as
concerning the window she did talk of, she understood not what she meant by it,
and for her part she did never speak to the Bastard out of it: But the Bastard
fearing that the affair was revealed, did remove himself from the Danger, and
returned not a long time afterward to the Court: Nevertheless he did write to
Rolandine, and so finely contrived a way for the delivery of his Letters, that
for all the strict watches of the Queen, there passed not a week, but twice at
least she had Intelligence of him. And when the Means under a Religious habit,
by which they oftentimes assisted themselves, did fail, he sent a little Page,
sometimes in one Livery, sometimes in another, who stayed at the door where all
the Ladies were to pass, and privately in the crowd would deliver his letters
unto Rolandine. Upon a day when the Queen was gone into the Fields, one of the
Spies suspecting the Page, having a charge narrowly to watch him concerning
that affair, did run after him, but the Page who was as cunning as himself
(doubting that he would examine and search him) did run into the house of a
poor woman who was making her pot to boil on the sire, into which fire he
immediately did thrust the Letters. The Gentleman who did follow him did strip
him naked, and examined his clouths all over, but finding nothing, he did let
him go.

When the boy was departed, the old woman demanded of him, wherefore so rudely
he did handle the poor boy. He made answer, that it was to find some Letters
which he thought he had about him. You came not soon enough said (the old
woman) to find them, for he did hide them where you could not easily find them.
I pray you (said the Gentleman) tell me where, flattering himself with a great
hope to recover them. But when he understood that he had hid them in the fire,
which had consumed them, he understood that the boy was too hard for him, and
immediately did acquaint the Queen with it.

The Bastard after this time did never employ ^his little Page any more, but
sent an old Servant which he had, who forgetting the fear of death threatened by
the Queen to any, whosoever they were, that should be taken in that affair, did
promise his Master, that for all those threatenings he would deliver his Letters
unto Rolandine. And when he was come into the Castle where she was, he
addressed himself to a Door at the foot of the stairs where all the Ladies were
to pass, but one of the Grooms who had seen him elsewhere did presently know
him, and acquainted one of the Officers of the Queen with it, who immediately
came to apprehend him. The old Servant of the Bastard being wise and advised,
observing that a far off they looked upon him, did turn himself toward the
wall, as if he would make water, and did tear the Letter into as small pieces
as possibly he could, and threw them behind the door. Immediately he was
apprehended and searched all over, and when they could find nothing about him,
they did put him to Interrogatories upon his oath, if he brought not any
Letters, using all rigors and persuasions that possibly they could to make him
to confess the Truth, but neither by premises nor by threatenings could they
draw any confession from him. The Report thereof was made unto the Queen, and
some of the Company did give advise that it were necessary to look behind the
door, near unto which he was taken, which was done accordingly, and the pieces
of the Letters were found for which they sought. Immediately the Confessor of
the King was sent for, who having put the pieces in order upon the Table, did
read the Letter all along, in which the truth of the marriage, so long
dissembled, was perfectly understoood, for the Bastard in many places of it did
call her his Wife, The Queen who deliberated not with her self to cover the
fault of her kinswoman as she ought to do, did raise a great noise, and
commanded that by all means the poor man should be enforced to confess the
truth of the Letter, alleging to him that he could not deny it; but all the
persuasions they could use, and the remonstrances they could make, could
prevail nothing with him, nor change him from his first resolution.

Those who had the charge of him did bring him to the Bank of a River, and did
put him into a sack, saying, that he had lied against God and the Queen, and
against the proved truth: But he who had rather lose his life, than accuse his
Master, did desire that he might be allowed a Confessor, and having satisfied
his Conscience as well as he could, he said unto them, Sirs, Tell my Master the
Bastard, that I commend unto his care the lives of my Wife, and of my Children,
for with a good heart I lay down my own for his service; And do with me now
what you please, for you shall never force one word from me, that shall be
against my Master.

Immediately to put him into a greater fear they did throw him being in the Sack
into the water, crying out unto him, If thou will speak the Truth thou shall be
saved, but seeing that he would confess nothing, they did draw him out, and
made a Report of his Constancy to the Queen, who immediately replied, That
neither the King her Husband, nor her self were so happy in a Servant, as was
this Bastard, who had not wherewith to recompense him, and did what she could
to dissuade him from his service, but he would never, he said, be enforced to
abandon his Master. Nevertheless, It being his Masters desire, he was
afterward admitted into the service of the King, where he lived well and
happily. The Queen, after she understood the Truth of the Marriage by the
Letter of the Bastard, did send to seek out Rolandine, and with an angry
countenance did oftentimes, instead of Cozen, call her wicked and unfortunate
Creature. She showed her the Dishonor that she had done her Fathers house, and
to all her Kindred, and to her self also, to be married without her knowledge
and consent. Rolandine who a long time did know the little affection which the
Queen did bear unto her, resolved to answer her with the like; and because the
Queen was wanting in her love, she was resolved there should be no place in her
own heart for fear; for she knew that this Rebuke given to her before so many
Personages, did not proceed from any love, but only to procure her shame, as
being one whom she took more pleasure to reproach, than grief to see her to
transgress; She therefore, with a countenance as joyful and assured, as the
Queen had showed an angry and a troubled one, did say unto her, Madam, If you
know not your own heart to be such as it is, I will represent unto you the ill
will which along time you have born unto Mounsier my Father, and to my self,
but you know it so well, that it cannot be strange unto you, though all the
world should doubt it; and for my self (Madam) I have a long time perceived it
to my great prejudice. For if it had pleased you to grace me as much with your
favor, as you have done those who are not so near unto you as my self, I had
been married to your honor and my own; but you have left me as one forgotten
in your good opinion, insomuch that all the good Matches which I might have
had, are passed from me by the negligence of my Father, and by the little
esteem which you have had of me, by reason whereof I do find my self so
forlorn, that if my health had permitted me to take upon me the condition of a
Nun, I had most willingly put on that religious habit, to free my self from
those continual afflictions, which your rigor has imposed upon me. In this
despair, it was my fortune to find out him who was of as good and as great a
Family as my self. He has a long time loved and courted me; but you Madam (who
never pardoned me for the least fault, nor commended me for the greatest good)
although by experience you do know, that I am not accustomed to maintain any
discourse of love, or of the vanities of this world, and that I was altogether
retired from it, being resolved to lead that life which was most religious, do
now find it strange, that I should speak unto a Gentleman as unfortunate as my
self, in whose love I neither desired nor sought for any thing, but only some
relaxation of my spirit. Of which when altogether I beheld my self to be
frustrated, I did enter into such a despair, that I had as great a resolution
to procure some case unto my self, as you had a desire to take it from me; And
not long after, we entered into a discourse of marriage, which was consummated
by mutual promises, and by the Ceremony of a Ring. Wherefore Madam, it seems to
me that you do me a great wrong to call me wicked, seeing that in so great and
perfect a love I could find occasion if I would, to do evil, which I do
forbear, for there has been never betwixt him and my self any other privacy
but to kiss only, hoping that God would so bless my undertakings, that before
the public celebration of my marriage, I should gain the heart of my Father to
consent unto it. I have neither offended God nor my Conscience; For I have
attended unto the age of thirty years to see what you and Monsieur my Father
would do for me, having preserved my youth in so much chastity, that no man
living can in the least manner reproach me. And by the counsel of that reason
which God has given me, seeing my self growing into age, I determined with my
self to espouse one according to my own heart, nor to satisfy the
concupiscence of my eyes (for you know he is not handsome) nor the desires of
the flesh (for I do hope he is not carnally given) nor to satisfy my
ambition, or the pride of this life (for he is but poor and unadvanced) but I
look purely and sincerely upon the Virtue, the Honesty, and the Graces that are
in him, for which all the world commends him, and on the great love which he
bears unto me, which does cause me to hope that I shall find comfort and good
use with him; and having well considered with my self all the good, and all the
evils that could arrive unto me by him, I have taken that part which did seem
to be the best unto me, and which I have looked up in my heart these two years
and more, which is, to lay out all the remainder of my life in his company. And
I am determined to hold this resolution so firm, that all the torments I can
endure, be it death it self, shall never cause me to startle from this
resolution: Wherefore Madam, Be pleased to excuse that in me, which is most
excusable, as your self no doubt do well understand, and give me leave to live
in that peace which I do hope to enjoy with him.

The Queen beholding her countenance so constant, and finding her words so
true, could not answer her according unto reason, but continuing her chole^ick
and reproachful words, did begin to weep, and said unto her, Wicked and
stubborn as you are, who instead of humbling your self before me, and of
repenting of so great a fault, do assume the boldness to speak so
peremptorily in the justification of it without so much as one tear in your
eye, whereby you show the obstinacy, and the insensiblenesse of your heart. But
if h^ King and your Father would take my counsel, they should send you into
another place, where you should be constrained to speak words of another sense.
Madam, (said Rolandine) because you accuse me of speaking too boldly, I am
resolved to hold my peace, if that you are not pleased to give me leave to
speak, and answer you. When she had received commandment to speak, she said
unto her; Madam, Far be it from me to speak boldly, and without reverence to
you, who are my Mistress, and the greatest Princess in Christendom, I have
not the least thought so to do; but because I have no Advocate to plead for
me, but the truth only which I my self do know, I am bound to declare it
without fear, hoping that when it is well understood by you, you will not
esteem me to be such as you call me. I fear not, that any mortal creature
understanding how I have carried my self in the affair I am charged with,
should condemn me for it, for I know that God and my Honor are not offended in
it. And but be pleased to consider what it is that makes me to speak without
fear; It is an assurance that he who sees my heart is with me, and since I have
so great and so just a Judge for me, I should offend if I should fear those who
are subject to his Judgment; And wherefore then, Madam, ought I to weep, since
neither my conscience nor my honor do any ways reprove me for this fact, and
that I am so far from repentance, that (...) I were to begin it again, I would
do no otherwise than what I have done. But you (Madam) have a great occasion to
weep, as well for the many great injuries which you have done me from my first
youth hitherto, as for that which you do me at this present, in rebuking me for
a fault before all the world, which ought more to be imputed to you than to my
self. If I had offended God, the King, you, my Parents, or my Conscience, I
should appear very obstinate, if I should not melt in repentance for so great a
fault; But for a good cause, which is just and holy, and which always carried
with it an honorable report (unless you have too much undervalued it, and
made it an offense, which shows the desire you have to deprave me to be
greater than your endeavor to preserve or advance the honor of your house and
kindred) I have no reason to weep at all. But, Madam, since it does please you,
I will not contradict it; For albeit that you inflict upon me what punishment
you please, I shall take no less pleasure without reason to suffer it, than
you shall take without reason to command it. Wherefore, Madam, do you and my
Eather give order what shall be the torment I am to endure, for I know he will
not be wanting to you, and I shall be glad at least, that for my punishment
only he does altogether follow your will, and having been negligent for my
good, yet (it being your desire) that he is ready for my evil, to be obedient
to you, But I have a Father in Heaven, who I am confident will give me as much
patience, as I see there are afflictions prepared by you for me, and in him
alone I have perfect confidence.

The Queen being full of anger and in dignation to hear those words to proceed
from her, did command that she should be taken away from before her, and put in
a chamber by her self, where not any should be permitted to speak unto her, but
they took not her Governesse from her, by the means whereof she acquainted the
Bastard with the whole progress of her fortunes, and desired to be informed of
him what she ought to do; who conceiving that his Employments in the Kings
service were of some value to render him acceptable unto him, did with all
diligence repair unto the Court, and finding the King in the fields, he
acquainted him with the truth of the fact, and besought him that he would do
him (being a poor Gentleman) so great a pleasure as to appease the Queen, and
be a means that the marriage might publicly be solemnized. The King made no
other answer to him, but only demanded; Do you assure me that you have married
her? yes, Sir, said the Bastard, but by words and a contract only; and if you
please the full period will be put unto it. The King did hold down his head,
and without speaking any word returned directly unto the Castle, and when he
came near unto it he called the Captain of the Guard, and commanded him to take
the Bastard prisoner. Immediately one of his friends, who observed the
countenance of the King, did advise the Bastard to absent himself, and to
withdraw into a house of his not far from thence, and if the King commanded him
to be sought out (as he suspected he would) that immediately he should have
notice of it that he might provide for his own safety by his slight out of the
Kingdom, but if the King seemed not to be displeased, he would send him word to
return to the Court. The Bastard did believe him, and his diligence made such
dispatch that the Captain of the Guard could not find him. The King and the
Queen did take counsel together what they should do with Rolandine, who had the
honor to be their Kinswoman, and by the counsel of the Queen it was concluded,
that she should be sent unto her Father, to whom the whole truth of the
business was to be declared. But before she did go, it was ordered, that
diverse of the Kings Counsel, and some also of the Church should represent unto
her, that as yet there had passed nothing in her marriage but her word only,
and that she might easily recall herself, if both one of them and the other
would alter their opinions, and their loves, and disclaiming all interests,
make the contract of no effect.

This the King desired that she would do, to preserve the honout of the house
of which she was, but she made answer, that in all other things she was both
obliged and ready to obey the King, but in this only which so nearly concerned
her conscience she desired to be excused, alleging, that those whom God had put
together ought not to be separated by men, and desired that she might not be
tempted to so unreasonable a thing; for if love and good will grounded on the
fear of God is the true and sure tie of Marriage, she was tied so fast, that
neither Steel, nor Fire, nor Water could either break or consume that bond, but
death only, to whom alone, and to none else she was resolved to surrender her
oath and her ring, beseeching them not to urge her to the contrary, for she was
so firm in her resolution, that she had rather perish keeping her says, than
live having infringed it. Those who were deputed by the King made the report
unto him of her constancy, and when they saw they could provide no remedy to
cause her to renounce her husband, they carried her to her Father, in that
pitiful manner, that wheresoever she passed they did all fall on weeping to
behold her; and although she had her failings in this contract, yet so great
was her punishment, and so strong her constancy, that she made her fault to be
esteemed a virtue. Her Father, hearing this unwelcom news, would not see her,
but sent her to a Castle of his in a Forest, which he had builded for another
occasion, worthy to be declared after this Novel. He kept her there a long time
in prison, and sent her word oftentimes, that if she would forsake her Husband
he would account her for his daughter, and set her at liberty; Nevertheless
she always did hold firm in her determination, and loved better the place of
her prison, and the miseries she endured for her Husband, than all the liberty
of the world without him; and it seemed to those who did behold her, that all
her punishments were but pleasant recreations, because she suffered them for
him whom so entirely she affected. What shall I say, in this place, of men? The
Bastard, who (as you have heard) was so much obliged to her, did fly into
Germany, where he had many friends, and showed by his Inconstancy, that not
Truth and perfect Love, but Avarice and Ambition did persuade him to the
marriage of Rolandine; Insomuch that in a short time after, he grew so amorous
of a German Lady, that by his Letters he did forget to visit her, who sustained
so many tribulations for him; For Fortune (as rigorous as she was unto them)
did never take from them the means to write to one another: but the heart of
Rolandine had (of its self) the first apprehension of the foolish love into
which the Bastard was fallen, so that she could not take any rest, for she
observed that the language in his Letters was so cold, and so much altered,
that they nothing resembled those hearty expressions which she was accustomed
to receive from him, she therefore truly did suspect that some new love had
diverted her Husband from her, and when all the punishments and the torments
she endured could nor work the least change in her at all; and because her
perfect love would not allow that she should ground her judgment upon a
suspicion, she did contrive a way to send privately a servant of hers in whom
she trusted (not to speak unto him, or bring any Letters from him) but strictly
to observe him, and to relate the truth. He being returned from his Journey
told her, that for certain he found the Bastard passionatly amorous of a German
Lady, and the report was, that he did court her in way of marriage, for she was
very rich.

This news did convey so extreme a grief to the heart of poor Rolandine, that
being unable to endure it, she fell grievously sick. Those who understood the
occasion did acquaint her, that since she perceived the great inconstancy of
the Bastard, she might now justly abandon him, and did the uttermost they could
to persuade her to it; but notwithstanding she was thus tormented, to the last
they could find no means to make her change her resolution: And in this last
temptation, to the great commendation of her virtue, she did manifest the
absolute love which she did bear him. For as love did diminish on his side, so
it did increase on hers, and did continue firm, when he had no entire nor
perfect love, for love which failed on his side did turn on her side, and when
she knew that the love was entire in her alone, which before was divided
betwixt them both, she resolved to preserve it to her death, both for him and
her self. Wherefore the Divine bounty, who is perfect charity and true love,
had pity on her griefs, and did regard her patience, insomuch that after a few
days the Bastard dyed in pursuit of another woman; she being well advertised of
his death by those who saw him laid in the earth, did send unto her Father to
beseech him that he would be pleased to come unto her, who having not spoken to
her since the time of her imprisonment, did immediately repair unto her, and
having all along understood her just reasons, instead of reproving her, and
killing her (as oftentimes he threatened in his words) he took her in his Arms,
and weeping abundantly, said unto her; My daughter, you are more righteous than
my self, for if there were any fault in you, I was the principal cause: But
since God has so ordained it, I will give you satisfaction with advantage for
the time to come; and having brought her into his house, he did use her as his
only child.

She was at last demanded in marriage by a Gentleman of her Fathers own name,
and who gave with him the same Coat of arms, who was a wise and a virtuous man,
and so highly esteemed Rolandine, that he praised her for that, for which other
men did blame her, knowing that the end did only tend unto virtue. The marriage
was agreeable both to the Father and Rolandine, and was immediately concluded.
True it is, that a Brother which she had, who was the only heir of the house,
would not agree that she should have any part in the Estate, objecting against
her that she had been disobedient to her Father, and after the death of the
good Man, he did deport himself so churlishly unto her, that her Husband, (who
was but a younger brother) and her self had enough to do to live, for which God
provided, for the Brother who would needs have all, by a sudden death did leave
unto her all the Fortunes which he had of hers, and of his own with it. And
thus was she the Heiresse of a very great Estate, and lived honorably and
holily in her husbands love; And after she had brought up two children which
God had given her, she rendered with joy her Soul to him, of whom for a long
time she had such perfect knowledge.

Now my Ladies, I would desire that those men who do declare us to be so
inconstant, would come hither, and show me as good a Husband, as this was a
wife, and such a faith and perseverance; I am confident it would be so
difficult unto them, that I had rather acquit them than put them to such an
endless task; But I must beseech you Ladies, by the luster of this example to
continue your glory, and not to love at all, or as perfectly as this Lady did,
and to have a care that your honors be not scandalized, since by her firmness
and constancy, she is an occasion to increase yours. In good earnest Parliament
( said Oysilla) you have reported to us the story of a Lady, who had a great
and an honest heart, and who gained as much glory by her constancy, as her
Husband contracted shame by his disloyalty, who did leave her for another. I
believe (said Longaren) that this affliction was too grievous to be endured;
for there is no burden so heavy, but the love of two persons well united may
sweetly undergo it; but when one of them does fail, and lays all the charge
upon the other, the weight is insupportable. You ought then (said Guebron) to
have compassion on us who carry all the love, and do not deign of your selves
so much as to put one finger forth to assist us. Ah Guebron ( said Parliament)
the burdens of the Husband and the Wife do often differ much; For the love of
the Wife being well grounded, and depending upon God, and on her Honor, is so
just and reasonable, that he who parts himself from that love ought to be
esteemed an inordinate man, and guilty before God, and all honest men: But the
love of the most part of men is grounded only upon pleasure, and ignorant Women
are oftentimes too prone to serve their loose desires; but when God does
instruct them to understand the wickedness of the hearts of those men whom
they esteemed to be good, they will leave them with honor and reputation. The
knowledge of the sin does leave a greater guilt upon the Conscience. Hircan
replied, A goodly reason indeed! grounded on a fancy that honest women may
honestly leave the love of their Husbands, and not honest men the love of their
Wives, because forsooth their hearts you say are different; but suppose they
are, and that they do differ as much as the countenances and the habits of men
do differ from those of women, yet I believe their affections and wills are
both alike; unless they differ in this, that their follies being more covered
are always the worse. Parliament in a little choler said unto him, I understand
well enough that you esteem those to be least evil, whose intentions are most
discovered.

But let us leave off this discourse, said Simontault, for to draw a conclusion
from the hearts of men or women, the best of them is worth nothing; Let us know
to whom Parliament will give her voice, that we may hear some new account. I do
give it said she to Guebron. Before I do begin (said he) to speak of the Gray
Friars, I must not forget those of the order of Saint Benedict, and what befell
unto two of them in my time; Howsoever, in giving you an account of a man
wickedly religious, It is not my intent to alter your good opinion, which you
ought to have to those of them, who are religious indeed. But since the
Psalmist says, that every man is a liar; And in another place, that there are
none that do good, no not one, It seems to me that we cannot err in esteeming
Man to be such as be is; For if there be any thing good in him, we ought to
attribute it to him who is the original of all good, and not unto the Creature,
in giving too much praise and glory to it, or in esteeming better of men than
indeed they are, the greatest part of men are deceived and deceivers: And to
the end that you may see, it is not impossible under an extreme severity to
find an extreme concupiscence, understand what not long since happened in the
time of King Francis the first of that name.

A Prior, a great Reformer of the times, under the shadow of Hypocrisy, did
by all means attempt to seduce a religious Virgin, whose wickedness at last
was discovered.
The Second Novell.
IN the City of Paris there was a Prior of St. Martins in the Fields, whose
name I will conceal for the love which I have born unto him. His life until he
was fifty years of age was so austere, that the report of his holiness was
spread over all the Kingdom of France, insomuch that there was neither Prince
nor Princess but entertained him with all honor and reverence when he came to
see them; And there was no Reformation of Religion but it passed first through
his hand, for he was called, the Father of true religion. He was chosen Visitor
of the great religion of the Ladies of Frontenaux, who stood in such fear of
him, that when he came into any of their Monasteries, all the religious women
did tremble for fear, and to appease him in taking off the great rigours which
he did impose upon them, they did entertain him when he made his Visitations as
if he had the King himself, which at first he refused, but at last arriving to
five and fifty years of age he began to like very well of, and esteeming
himself to be the public assertor of all religion, he desired to preserve his
health better than he had been accustomed to do; And although his Rule
prescribed him never to eat flesh, yet he dispensed with himself, which he
would not do with any other, saying, that upon him alone lay all the burden of
religion, wherefore he feasted himself so much, that of a lean Monk he became a
fat Prior, and the change of his heart did follow the change of his life,
insomuch that now he began to look upon beautiful faces, of which before he
made a great conscience; and observing the beauties of the Nuns, whose veils
made them more desirable, he begun to be very covetous of them, and to satisfy
his salt and wanton appetite he studied so many artifices, that instead of
doing the office of a Pastor, he became a wolf, insomuch that in diverse
Religious houses if there were any one found more weak than another, he never
failed to deceive her. And having for certain years continued this wicked
course of life, the Divine goodness which had compassion on the poor misguided
sheep would no longer endure the ravening of this treacherous Fox; For one day
going to visit a Covent not far from Paris called Gif, it fell out, that in
confessing all the holy Nuns he took an especial notice of one Sister called
Mary Herouet, whose language was so pleasant and agreeable, to him, that it
promised her face and her heart would be the same; Wherefore but to hear her
speak only, he was struck with such a fever of love, that it surpassed all
passions which he ever had for any other of these religious women, and speaking
to her, he held down his head very low, that the better he might observe her,
and perceiving her lip to be plump and red, he could not forbear to lift up her
vail to see if her eyes were the Companions of those beauties that were about
them; which he found to be true; whereupon his heart was filled with so violent
a heat, that he forgot to eat and drink, and suddenly lost his complexion,
although he dissembled the occasion of it. Being returned to his Priory he
could take no rest; wherefore in great perplexity he passed away the days and
nights, searching out the means by which he might arrive to his desires, and
make of her as he had made of diverse others; this he found difficult to be
performed, because he found her wise in all her answers, and of a subtle
spirit, and on the other side being above threescore years of age, he found
himself so old and so wrizled, that he resolved with himself not to speak to
her at all, but to make an attempt to gain her by fear. Wherefore, not long
afterward, he returned to the said Monastery of Gif, in which place he showed
himself more severe than ever before he was accustomed to do: he grew angry
with all the Religious Women, reproving one for not wearing her veil low
enough, another, for holding up her head too high, a third, for not making her
Courtesy with that Reverence as she ought to do, and in these small trifles he
showed himself so severe, that they stood in the greatest fear of him that
could be.

Having don this, he traveled to visit the other places of Regulation, and
about the hour of Vespers he came again to the Dormitory where these Nuns were.
The Abbess said unto him, Reverend Father, It is time to go to Vespers. To
whom he answered, Go Mother, go, for I am so weary that I will stay here, not
so much to rest my self, as to speak to Sister Mary, of whom I have heard a
very bad Report, for I am told, That she goes up and down and prattles, as if
she were one of the wide world. The Abbess who was near of Kin to her Mother,
did desire him to school her well for it, and left her alone with him, save
only a little Girl, who being very young was newly entered into the Religion,
and stood at the furthest door. When he found himself all alone with Sister
Mary, he did begin to take off, her veil, and commanded her to look upon him;
She made answer, that her Rule did forbid her to look on any Man. It is true my
Child (said the Prior) but you ought not to think, that we who are men of
Religion are to be comprehended in that Rule. Whereupon Sister Mary, fearing to
commit a fault by disobedience, did look in the face of him, which she saw so
extremely warped and ill-favored, that she thought with her self, she did
rather Penance, than commit a Sin to behold him. The Prior having held her in a
long discourse of the Love he did bear unto her, did offer to put his hand upon
her Breasts, but she did thrust it back as she ought to do, and grew so
impatient, that he said unto her, What? And will not the Nuns be known that
they have Breasts? She made answer to him, I know I have; and am resolved with
my self; that neither you, nor any one else shall touch them; for I am not so
young nor ignorant, but I understand well enough what is sin, and what is not.
When he found he could not gain her that way, he attempted another, and said
unto her, Alas! (my Daughter) I am put to that distress, that I must declare
unto you my Necessity, which is, that I have an infirmity which the Physicians
do all of them find to be incurable, unless I do delight my self, and play
with a Woman whom I love very well; For my self, I had rather die than commit
any mortal sin, but if I must venture so far, I know that Fornication and the
sins of Lust are no ways to be compared to the sin of Manslaughter: Wherefore
if you love my life, you may both save it, and save your Conscience also from
the stain of cruelty. She demanded of him, What kind of play it was that he did
mean? He told her, That it was to put his Conscience upon hers, and that she
should do nothing, in which he would not join with her in the accomplishment
thereof: And to show her the beginning of the Pastime which he demanded, he did
embrace her, and endeavored to throw her on one of the Beds in the Dormitory.
She perceiving his wicked Intention, did so well defend her self by the softnes
of her words, and the strength of her Arms, that he could touch nothing of her
but her clothes. The Prior, when he beheld all his designs, and the force he
used, to be frustrated, like a man possessed with a fury, and as much besides
his Reason as his Conscience, did put his hands under her Coats, and
whatsoever he could touch with his fingers, he scratched with his nails, with
so much violence, that the poor Girl crying out as loud as ever she could, did
fall down from the height where she was, and lay as one quite dead upon the
ground. The Abbess, hearing her to shriek, immediately entered into the
Dormitory where she was, and being then at Vespers, she remembered that she had
left her alone with her Confessor, and having thereupon a scruple in her
Conscience, she made all the have she could to the Door of the Dormitory, to
listen what they were doing, but hearing the voice and complaints of her Niece,
she knocked at the Door where the young Nun her Companion stayed, and when she
was enentred in, the Prior beholding the Abbess, did show her her Kinswoman
lying on the ground, and said unto her, Mother, Without all doubt you are very
much to blame, that you did not acquaint me with the conditions of Sister Mary,
for being ignorant of her weakness, I had her in confession before me, and in
chaptering her, she has swouned away as you see: They quickly brought her to
her self again with Vinegar and other Remedies, and found that in her fall she
had extremely hurt her head. When she was recovered again to life, the Prior
fearing that she would confess unto her Aunt the occasion of her Evil, did
call her aside, and spoke unto her by her self, My Daughter, I command you upon
the pain of disobedience and eternal Damnation, that you neither now, nor ever
hereafter, do speak the least word unto the Abbess of what I have said or done
unto you, for you are to understand that the Extremity of Love did force me to
it, and because I see you will not consent unto me, I will never speak any more
unto you; howsoever I assure you, That if you will love me, I will procure that
you shall be made an Abbess in one of the best Abbeys of the Kingdom. She made
answer to him, That she had rather die in perpetual Durance, than to have any
other friend but him only who dyed on the Cross for her, with whom she had
rather suffer all the torments that the world could inflict upon her, than
without him to enjoy all the pleasures it could bestow, and desired him to make
no more any such loose motions to her, for if he did, she would acquaint her
Mother the Abbess with it, but if he would desist, she would hold her peace
concerning what had passed.

In this manner this ungracious Pastor did depart, who to show himself to be
another Man than he was, and to enjoy the pleasure a little longer of seeing
her whom he so much loved, did turn to the Abbess, and said unto her, Mother,
I pray you to command all your Daughters to sing one Salve Regina in the honor
of that Virgin in whom I have all my hope. This was done accordingly, during
which time this Fox did nothing else but weep, with no other Devotion, but for
a wicked grief only that he could not have his desires on that Virgin whom he
accounted to have made his own. The Nuns observing his Tears, supposed that it
was in love to the Virgin Mary, and esteemed him to be a most holy Man. But
Sister Mary, who knew his ill intentions, did pray to God in heart to confound
him, who so much would dishonor, and did despise Virginity.

The Hymn being ended, this Hypocrite returned to St. Martins, in which place
the unruly fire which he had in his heart, did burn day and night, and where he
studied all the ways that possibly he could, to arrive to his Designs. And
because above all things he feared the Abbess, who was a very virtuous woman,
he contrived a way to remove her from that Monastery, and repaired to Madam de
Vendosm, who was then at La Fere, where she founded and builded a Covent for
the Order of St. Benedict, called Mount Olivet; And as one who was the
Soveragin Reformer of all things in Religion, he did give her to understand,
that the Abbess of Mount Olivet was not fit to govern so great a place. The
good Lady desired him to name another who was more worthy of the office. He,
who desired nothing more, did advise her to take the Abbess of Giff, who was
the most able Governesse in all France. Madam de Vendosm did immediately send
for her, and gave her the charge of the Monastery of Mount Olivet. The Prior of
St. Martins who had in his power the preferment of most of the religious places
for women about Paris, did procure that a Governesse at his own devotion should
be chosen for the Abbey of Gif. After this election he did repair to Gif to try
once more, if either by humility of entreaties, or by the flattery of fair
words he could gain unto him the heart of Sister Mary Herouet, and finding her
as refractory to him as ever, he returned in great despair to his Priory of St.
Martins, in which place, the better to come to his ends, as also to revenge
himself on her who was so cruel to him, and for fear also that his incontinence
should be divulged, he plotted with himself that the relics of the Saints of
Gif should privately be taken away by stealth, and that a Confessor belonging
to that house, a very ancient and an honest man, should be accused to have been
the man that had stoll'n them, for which cause he was brought prisoner to St.
Martins; during which time he stirred up two witnesses, who ignorantly signed
to that which the Prior of St. Martins did command them, which was, that in the
garden they had seen the Confessor with Sister Mary, and taken them in the
wanton and dishonest act of lust, which they did avow to the old religious man;
But he who knew all the faults of the Prior, did beseech him to bring him to
the Chapter, and that there before the whole order he would speak the truth of
all what he did know. The Prior fearing that the Justication of the Friar would
be his own condemnation, would not understand that request, but finding him
intractable to his design, he did use him very cruelly in prison, where some
affirm that he dyed, others, that he constrained him to abandon his religious
habit, and to depart the Kingdom of France; howsoever it was, he was never seen
afterward.

The Prior with confidence believed now that he might make a Prize of Sister
Mary, and repaired to the Covent, the Abbess whereof being of his own
Complexion, and put in by his request, would not contradict him in any thing.
Here he began to exercise his authority of Visitation, and made all the Nuns to
come to him into the Chamber one after another, to Visit, and to hear them
apart, after the manner of Confession, and Visitation. And when it came to the
turn of Sister Mary, (who had lost her good Aunt the former Governesse,) he
begun to say unto her, Sister Mary, you know of what Crime you are accused, and
that the dissimulation you have used to be so chaste, has served you in no
stead; for it is known well enough that you lead a life clean contrary. Sister
Mary with an assured countenance made answer to him, Procure that my accusers
may be brought before me, and you shall see if they dare to justify before my
face, what you object unto me. He made answer to her, There needs no other
proof, for the Confessor himself has been convinced. Sister Mary replied, I
conceive him to be so honest a Man, that he will not confess such a notorious
falsehood; but if it be so, I pray let us be brought face to face, and I will
prove that what he says to be contrary to the Truth. The Prior observing that
she would no way be daunted, did say unto her, I am your Father, and for that
cause have a desire to save your honor, I will therefore remit the Truth to
your own Conscience, and will add my belief unto it. But I do command you, and
conjure you, upon the pain of Mortal sin, to tell me the Truth, which is, If
you were a Virgin when you first came into this House. She made answer to him,
My Father, The Age but of Six years, at which I then was, shall be a Witness
with me of my Virginity. He replied, You say well, my Daughter, but since that
time have you not lost that fair flower? She did swear unto him, that she had
not, nor had ever the least solicitation by any one, but by himself only. To
which he said, That he could not believe it, and that it lay in the proof. She
replied, What proof are you pleased to make of it? The Prior said, The same
proof which I make of others; for as I am a Visitor of Souls, so am I also a
Visitor of Bodies; your Abbesses, and Prioresses, do pass all under the
Visitation of my hand, you need not to fear that I desire your Virginity.
Wherefore, that I may be assured of it, make no more to do, but lie down upon
the Bed, and pull up your clothes over your face? Sister Mary in choler made
answer to him, You have held me so long in a vain discourse with the foolish
love you bear me, that I am afraid you will rather take away my Virginity, than
visit it; Wherefore understand, that in this I will never consent unto you. He
then assured her that she should be Excommunicated, for refusing obedience to
the Religion; and that if she consented not, he would dishonor her in a full
Chapter, or Assembly of the Religious, being met together for that purpose,
and would moreover reveal the shame which he knew betwixt her and her
Confessor. But she with a Countenance without fear, made answer, He who knows
the heart of his Servants will give me as much honor before him, as you will
render me shame before Men: And since your Malice is gone so far, I had rather
that it should go thorough with its cruelty toward me, than that it should
have a desire still to do me mischief, for I know that God is a just Judge.
Immediately he departed to gather all the Chapter together, who being
assembled, he forced Sister Mary to fall on her knees before them, to whom in a
great spite and choler he said, Sister Mary, It does greatly displease me,
that the good admonitions which I have often given you have been unprofitable,
and that you are brought to such an Inconvenience, that I am constrained to
enjoin you Penance against my Custom, which is, that having examined your
Confessor of what was laid to his charge, he has confessed to me, That he has
abused your body, in the place where the Witnesses do affirm that they did see
him. Wherefore, as you have been advanced into an honorable estate, and made
Mistress of the Novices, I ordain, That you shall not only be made the lowest
of them all, but that sitting on the Ground before all the Sisters, you shall
feed on bread and water, until I shall find, that your Contrition is sufficient
to obtain favor and absolution.

Sister Mary being advertised by one of her Companions, who understood all the
business, that if she answered any thing which displeased the Prior, he would
put her in pace, that is to say, in perpetual imprisonment, did endure that
heavy Sentence, lifting up her eyes to Heaven, and beseeching him who gave her
resistance, to give her patience also in this great tribulation. Moreover, this
venerable Prior did give order (if her Mother, or any of her Kindred came to see
her) that they should suffer none of them to speak with her for the space of
three years, and that she should not be permitted to send any Letters to them,
but what were written before Company, and first perused by them. And thus this
wicked Friar departed from her, without returning any more, and the poor Girl
remained in a long tribulation, as you have heard.

But her Mother, who loved her better than any child she had, seeing that she
could hear nothing of her, did greatly wonder at the cause of it, and told one
of her Sons (who was an honest and a knowing Gentleman) That she believed her
Daughter was dead, and that the Abbess, and those in the Covent did dissemble
it, because they would still receive her annual Pension; she therefore desired
him to use one means or other, whatsoever it were, to see his Sister. He
immediately tepaired to the Covent of Gif, where they made him the accustomed
excuse, which was, That it was above three years and more since she stirred out
of her Bed: But this did not content him, who did swear unto them, That if he
could not be allowed to see her, he would make his way over the walls, and
force the Monastery. At which they were so amazed, that they brought his Sister
to the Grate to him, but the Abbess stood so near unto her, that she could not
speak the least word to her Brother, which she did not plainly understand; but
she who was wise enough, did give him what she had prepared in writing, which
was a Narrative of all that which above I have rehearsed, with a thousand other
Inventions which the Prior had put in practice to deceive her, which I forbear
to repeat. But yet I cannot forget, that during the time when her Aunt was
Abbess, he conceiving with himself that she did refuse him by reason of the
deformity and the crookedness of his Age, did cause her to be tempted by a
handsome young Friar, thinking, that if she yielded to the Friar for Love, she
should yield obedience unto him for Fear; But she from the Garden (where the
Friar courted her, and used such uncivil gestures, that I am ashamed to repeat
them) did run to the Abbess, who was talking unto the Prior, and said unto
her, Mother, Those who come to visit us, are Devils in the stead of Saints,
whereupon the Prior being afraid to be discovered, did speak in laughter to
her, Mother, without all doubt, Sister Mary has good reason for it, and taking
her by the hand, he said before the Abbess, I understood by diverse, that
Sister Mary delivered her mind in such prompt words, and with such a graceful
flourish, as if she had received her Education rather at the Court, than at a
Covent, and for this occasion I was constrained, against my Nature, to
discourse with her in the idse way, as Men of the World do ordinarily with
Women, and as I ^ind it written in their Books (for in my own experience I am
as ignorant as the Day in which I was born) and because I conceived that my Age
and ^eformity were the occasions, that she entertained me always with such a
virtuous discourse, I commanded a religious young Man to hold such conference
with her, as I thought was most suitable to her, and you see she has very
virtuously resisted the Temptation, by reason whereof I do esteem her to be so
wise, that it is my pleasure, that for the time to come she shall be next unto
you, and Mistress of the Novices, to the end that she may daily advance her
self in her good endeavors, and increase more and more in virtue.

This Prank, and many others like unto it, this good Prior did play for the
space of three years together, when he was amorous of her, who (as I have said)
did give unto her Brother in a Paper through the Grate, all the discourse of
her doleful History; Her Brother immediately brought it to his Mother, who,
overcome with the indignity of it, did come to Paris, where she found the Queen
of Navarre, the only Sister of the King, to whom she represented the Truth of
this pitiful Story, and said unto her, Madam, For the time to come trust no
more to such Hypocrites, I thought I had my Daughter in the Highway to Heaven,
and the Suburbs of Paradise, and I have put her into Hell, and into the Hands
of the worst Devils that ever were; for the Devils do not tempt us but to what
we our selves have an Inclination to, but these will have us by force, whether
Love will or no. The Queen of Navarre was in a great perplexity; for she
reposed a more than ordinary confidence in the Prior of St. Martins, having
bestowed upon him the charge of the Abbeys of the Mountrevillyes, and some
other places. But the Crime being so odious, did strike such a horror into her,
and did give her such a desire to revenge the Innocence of the poor Virgin,
that she did communicate it to the Chancellor of the King, (then Legate in
France) and sent for the Prior, who could make no other Excuse, but that he was
threescore and ten years of age; he Petitioned to the Queen of Navarre, that
(if she would ever vouchsafe any favor to him in recompense of all his
services) she would be pleased to be a means that the Process should proceed
no further, and that he would acknowledge Sister Mary Herouet to be the Pearl
of Honor, and of Virginity. The Queen hearing him, was so amazed, that she
knew not what answer to return unto him, but left him on the place, and the
poor Man being confounded in himself, did retire into his Priory, where he
would not permit any one to see him, and lived not above one year afterward.
And Sister Mary Herouet being esteemed as highly as she did deserve to be, for
the great virtues with which God had endued her, was removed from the Abbey of
Gif, where she endured so much tribulation, and made Abbess (by the Gift of
the King) of the fair Abbey called Gien, not far from Montargis, which place
she reformed, and lived full of the Spirit of God, praising him throughout the
whole course of her life, that he at once had bestowed upon her both Rest, and
Honors.

Ladies, Oserve here a History which may serve to declare the truth of that
which the Gospel makes mention of, and St. Paul to the Corinthians, That God
by weak things does confound the mighty, and by things contemptible to the eyes
of Men, he dazles the glory of those who believed themselves to be something,
and are indeed less than nothing. And, believe it, Ladies, that without the
Grace of God there is not any Man from whom we may expect the least Goodness;
nor is there so strong a temptation, but by his Grace we may overcome it, as
you may perceive by the Confusion of this Prior, who was accounted a just Man,
and by the exaltation of the other whom he would have made a sinner. And in
that is verified the saying of our Savior, Who does exalt himself shall be
humbled, and who does humble himself shall be exalted. Alas, ( said Oysilla)
How much has this Prior deceived the expectations of honest minds? for I find
by him, that he relied more on himself, than on God, and (what is much to be
lamented) many are so misguided, that they repose more confidence in their
Priests than on any Authority either in Heaven or Earth. So will not I, said
Nomerfide, for I desire no more conversation with Priests, than what of
necessity cannot be avoided. No doubt ( said Oysilla) but there are amongst
them many excellent Men; and therefore because some of them are wicked, they
must not all be judged; and you shall find, that those who are the best of
them, do not frequent either the Houses of Secular Men, or the Company of
Women. You say well ( said Emarsuite) for the less we see them, the less we
do know of them, and the more we esteem them: for it is our daily frequentation
with the others that does show them what they are. But let us leave them as we
found them ( said Nomerfide) and let us see to whom Guebron will give his
voice. It shall be (said he) to Madam Oysilla, for I know she will rehearse
unto us something in the honor of these Religious Brothers. We have sworn so
deeply ( said Oysilla) to speak the Truth, that I know not how to maintain any
other Subject. And in delivering this last Account, you have renewed in my
memory a very sad History, which at this time I shall exhibit to you, because I
am a Neighbor to the Country, where in my time this following History did
fall out: And Ladies, to the end that the Hypocrisy of those who esteem
themselves to be more religious than others, may not inchant your
understanding, and divert your Faith out of the right way, to find salvation in
any other, but in him alone, who will have no Companion in our Creation and
Redemption, who is Almighty of himself to save us in the life eternal, and to
comfort us in the life temporal, and to deliver us from all our tribulations;
and because that Satan himself can transform himself into an Angel of Light;
that therefore the exterior eye, being blinded with the appearance of Sanctity
and Devotion, may not fix it self on those objects which it ought to fly, it
seems good unto me to give an Account unto you of this memorable History which
happened in our times.

Three Murders committed in one House, that is to say, of the Gentleman who was
Master of it, of his Wife, and his Child, occasioned by the wickedness of a
Friar.
The Third Novell.
IN the County of Perigord there was a Gentleman who had such a Devotion to St.
Francis, that it seemed to him that all those who did wear that habit ought to
be like unto that good Saint. In the honor of whom he had caused to be made in
his house a Chamber on purpose, and a Wardrobe to entertain them, and after
their counsel he managed all his affairs, even almost to the Government of his
menial Servants, conceiving with himself, that both he and they walked surely
in treading in the paths of their counsels. It so fell out, that the Wife of
this Gentleman, who was fair, and no less wise than virtuous, was brought to
Bed of a Son, whereby the love which her Husband did bear unto her was doubly
augmented: And a Feast being prepared, the Brother-in-law was sent for. The
Hour of Supper being come, there arrived a Friar, whose Name I will conceal for
the honor I bear unto Religion. The Gentleman was very glad to see his
spiritual Father there, from whom he did conceal no secret. And after much
discourse betwixt his Brother-in-law, his Wife, and himself, they did sit down
to Supper; during which time the young Gentleman looking on his Wife, who had a
great gracefulness with her, and beauty enough to render her desirable, did
speak aloud unto the Friar, and propounded the Question to him; Father, Is it
true, that a Man sins mortally to lie with his Wife during the month that she
lies in? The Friar, who had a Countenance and a Tongue contrary to his heart,
did make answer to him, Sir, without all controversy it is one of the greatest
sins that can be committed in Marriage: And this may appear by the Example of
the blessed Virgin Mary, who would not come into the Temple until after the day
of her Purification, although she had no need of being purified: As much ought
you to abstain from a little pleasure, seeing (to obey the Law) the blessed
Virgin abstained to enter into the Temple, where was all her Consolation;
Moreover, the Doctors of Physic do affirm, that there is great danger of the
Issue that may ensue thereby. When the Gentleman heard those words, he was much
troubled, for he well hoped that his Confessor would have been so far indulgent
to him, but giving ear unto his counsel, he did speak no more unto him.

The Confessor during this Discourse (having drunk a little deeper than was
expedient for him) and beheld the young Gentlewoman, he debated, and concluded
with himself, that if he were her Husband he would not ask the advice of any
one, whosoever he were, when he should lie with his own Wife. And, as the Fire,
by little and little does kindle, and increase its flames, until at the last it
does set the whole house on fire; so this poor Friar did begin to burn in such
a Concupiscence, that incontinently he resolved with himself to arrive to the
end of that Desire, which, for above three years together, he had carried
covered, and glowing in his heart.

After the Table-cloath was taken away, he took the Gentleman by the hand, and
leading him near unto the Bed of his Wife, he said unto him before her. Sir,
Because I am assured of the great love that is betwixt you and this young Lady
your Wife, which (together with the heat and lustiness of your youth) does so
much solicit you, I must confess, I have great compassion of you, and
therefore I will acquaint you with a secret of our Theology, which is, that the
Law (how rigorous soever is be, by reason of the abuse of indiscreet Husbands)
will not permit, that those who are of a good Conscience, as your self, should
be frustrated of their honest Desires: Wherefore, Sir, in the presence of your
People, I have laid down before you the Ordinance and seveverity of the Law,
but from you who are a virtuous Man, I will not conceal the sweetness of it;
For know (my Son) as there are Women and Women, so there are Men and Men. In
the first place therefore you must demand of the young Lady your Wife, that
seeing there are but three weeks since she was brought to bed, If her flux of
blood be yet ceased? to which the young Lady made answer, That for certain it
was, and that she was clean: Why then, said the Friar, My Son, I give you leave
to lie with her, without any scruple; but you must first promise me two things,
which the Gentleman did most willingly consent unto: The First is, (said the
Confessor) That you must not speak the least word, but come with all privacie
unto her: the other is, That you approach not to her until two hours after
Midnight, that the Digestion of the young Lady be not troubled by your
Familiarities. The Gentleman did promise to observe this, and did swear unto it
so solemnly, that he who knew him to be a greater Fool than a Liar, was assured
in himself that he would keep his word. After much variety of Discourse, the
Friar retired himself into his Chamber, bidding them both Goodnight, and
giving them a great Benediction.

The Gentleman withdrawing himself, his Wife took him by the hand, and said
unto him, Without doubt then you will come, and will not make your poor Wife to
wake any longer. The Gentleman kissing her, said unto her, Sweetheart, Leave
your door open, which words the Friar heard very well, and so they all retired
into their own chambers. The Friar, as soon as he was come into his, did take
no thought either for sleep or rest, but as soon as ever he heard all things
quiet in the house (it being much about the hour in which he was accustomed to
go to Mattens,) repaired directly and softly to the Chamber, where the
Gentleman was expected, and having found the door half open, he finely and
suddenly did put out the Candle, and lay as close unto his Wife as possibly he
could, without speaking any word. The young Lady, thinking it was her Husband,
did say unto him, Sweetheart, you have kept your promise but ill which last
night you made unto our Confessor, which was, that you would not come unto me
till two of the clock. But the Friar being more intentive to the life that was
active, than contemplative, and withal being afraid that he should be
discovered, did think more to satisfy his desires, which for a long time had
impoysoned his heart, than to make any answer to her. The young Lady was much
astonished at it, and the Friar finding the hour to approach in which her Husband
was to come, he did rise from the young Lady, and returned suddenly into his
own Chamber; and as the Fury of his Concupiscence had before taken away all
sleep from him, so now the guilt of his Fear, which always follows
wickedness, would not permit him to take any Rest, but he directed his Course
to the Porter of the House, and said unto him, Friend, Mo^ensieur your Master
has commanded me to go immediately to our Covent to make some prayers, it being
now the second hour of Devotion; wherefore, I pray you, give me my Packet of
Papers, and open the Door, but do it so softly that no body may hear it; for my
business is necessary and secret. The Porter knowing very well, that to obey
the Friar was a service very agreeable to his Master, did open the Door very
softly for him, and did let him forth.

The Gentleman at that instant did awake, and finding that the hour did
approach which was admitted to him by his Confessor to give a visit to his
Wife, he did arise from his bed, and having put on his Nightgown, he made have
thither, whither he lawfully might come by the Ordinance of God without any
permission of Man. When his Wife did hear him speak unto her, (being ignorant
of her miscarriage) she was possessed with such an amazement, that she said
unto him, Is this your promise, Sir, which you have made to the Confessor, to
have such a care both of your Soul and mine? was it not enough to come to me
once before your hour, but do you now return again? The Gentleman was so
troubled to hear this Interrogatory, that he could not dissemble his
affliction, but said unto her, What mean these words which you speak unto me? I
know for a truth that these three weeks I have not lain with you, and do you
reprove me for coming so often to you? If you continue in this discourse you
will make me to believe that my Company is hateful to you, and (against my
custom, and desire) you will constrain me to look for that pleasure from
others, which by the Law of God I am to receive from you. The young Lady, who
thought that he had mocked her, said unto him, Sir, I beseech you, that in
imagining me to be a deceiver, you do not deceive your self; for though you did
not speak unto me, about an hour ago, when you were with me, yet I am satisfied
within my self, that it was you. The Gentleman immediately understood, that they
were both deceived, and added Oaths to his Protestations, that he did not come
unto her: whereupon the Lady took so great a grief, that with tears she
besought him to make a diligent scrutiny to find who it was, for none, that
night, lay in her house, but her Brother and the Friar. The Gentleman being
surprised with a Jealousy that it was the Friar, did in all have repair unto
the Chamber where he lay, and found him not there. And the better to be assured
what was become of him, in an angry and a trembling speed, he did go unto the
Porter, and demanded of him if he knew what was become of him? who (according
to what the Friar told him) did give him a full Relation of the Truth. The
Gentleman being fully assured that it was he who did commit this wickedness,
did presently return to the Chamber of his Wise, and said unto her, Without all
doubt, Sweetheart, the Man who lay with you, and did ring so well his Mattens
Bell, was our Father the Confessor. The young Lady, who all her life had loved
her Honor as her Conscience, did enter into such a Despair, that forgetting
all humanity, and the nature of a woman, she did on her knees beseech him to
revenge that great Injury. Wherefore on a sudden, without any delay, the
Gentleman took horse, and pursued the Friar.

The poor young Lady being alone in her Bed, and as much without counsel as
without comfort, save only in her little Infant but newly born, considered with
her self the mavelous and horrible mischance that had befalln her, and
without excusing her own Ignorance, did repute her self the most guilty, and
the most unfortunate Woman in the world, and found her self so overcome in this
assault of her Despair, grounded on the enormity and greatness of her sin, and
the love of her Husband to her, and on the honor of both their Families, that
she esteemed Death far more happy than Life, and was suddenly transported with
so violent a Melancholy, that she fell into such a Despair, that she not only
lost that hope which every Christian ought to have in God, but was quite
estranged from common sense, and forgot her own Nature. Insomuch, that being as
far from all knowledge of God, as from all knowledge of her self, as a Woman
quite bereft of sense and reason, she took the cord of her Bed; and with her
own hands strangled her self, and which is worse, being in the agony of this
cruel Death, her body, which combated against it, did remove it self in such a
sort, that with her foot she struck against the poor Infant, whose Innocence
could not preserve it, from following by her own Death her most afflicted and
dolorous Mother: But dying she made so great a noise, that one of her Maids in
the next Chamber being amazed at it, did rise in great have to light the
Candle, and on her Return having beheld her Mistress hanging, and strangled
with the cord of the bed, and her Infant dead, and lying at her feet, she
afrighted did run into the Chamber where her Mistresses Brother did lie, whom
she took along with her to behold this lamentable spectacle.

The Brother crying out Woe, and Alas, and making so great a lamentation as
such a Brother ought to do who loved his Sister with all his heart, did demand
of the Chambermaid, Who it was that had committed so great a villainy? She made
answer, that she knew not who, and that none but her Master came into the
Chamber, who was not long since gone out of it. The Brother entering into the
Chamber of the Gentleman, and finding him not there, did assuredly believe that
it was he who was guilty of this horrible Murder, and taking his horse, without
demanding any further, did gallop after him, and met him in the way returning
from the pursuit of the Friar, being sad that he could not overtake him. When
ever his Brother-in-law did behold him, he did cry out unto him, Wicked and
Wretched as thou art, defend thy self, for this day I doubt not but with this
sword God will revenge me. The Gentleman, who would have excused himself, did
see the sword of his Brother-in-law so near unto his throat, that he found he
had more need to defend himself, than to make any pause to demand the Cause of
the Debate, and drawing upon him, they gave one another so many cuts and
slashes, that the effusion of their blood, and their weariness together, did
constrain them to sit down upon the Ground, both on the one side and on the
other, to take breath: The Gentleman said unto him, What occasion is it (my
Brother) that has converted the great love that has been always between us,
into so cruel a Fight? The Brother-in-law made answer to him, What was the
occasion that moved you to put my poor Sister, who was one of the most virtuous
women that ever lived, to so ignominious a death, and so barbarously to act
your Murder, as under the prerence of lying with her, to strangle her with the
Cord of the Bed. The Gentleman understanding these words, being more dead than
alive, did say unto him, Is it possible? Have you seen your Sister in that
Estate as you inform me? When the other Brother did assure him of it, he
proceeded and said, But what was the Reason that did cause you to forsake your
House? Whereupon he told him what the wicked Friar had done, at which his
Brother was much amazed, and being sorry at the heart that against all reason
he had assaulted him, he demanded pardon of him. The Gentleman replied unto
him, Although you have done the Injury, it is I who have the punishment, for I
am so sorely wounded that I believe I shall not escape with life. His
Brother-in-law did endeavor the best that possibly he could to help him upon
his Horse, which being done, he did bring him gently to his house, where the
next morning he died. His Brother-in-law confessed before all his Friends and
Kinsmen, that he was the only occasion of his Death. And to satisfy Justice,
he was counseled to address himself to King. Francis the first of that Name,
to demand pardon of him. Wherefore, having honorably interred the Husband,
Wife, and Infant, he repaired on Good Friday to the Court, to purchase his
Remission, and obtained it, by the solicitation of Mr. Francis Oliver, who was
then Chancellor of Alencon, and since for his great Virtues, chosen by the King
to be Chancellor of France.

Ladies, I believe, that understanding this most true History, there is not any
of you here, but will beware, and beware again, how you lodge such people in
your houses, and be assured, that there is no poison more dangerous than that
which is most concealed. Do you not think ( said Hircan) that this Husband was
a very Fool, to bring such a gallant to Supper, and to sit near to such a fair
and virtuous Lady? I have known in my time, ( said Guebron) that there was not
a House in our Country in which there was not a Chamber set apart for these
Friars, but now they are so well known, that they do fear them more than before
they loved them.

It seems to me, said Parliament, that a Woman being in bed (unless it were in
case of necessity to administer the Sacrament unto her) there ought not to come
either Friar or Priest into her Chamber; and when I send for any of them, you
may well judge me to be in a very dangerous condition. If all the world were as
severe as you ( said Emarsuite) the poor Priests would be worse than
Excommunicated, being to be deprived of the sight of Women. Take no care for
that, ( said Saffredant) for it will never come to pass. No, ( said
Simontault) It is they who by marriage do tie us unto Women, and by their
wickednsse do attempt again to untie the knot, and tempt us to break the Oath
which we have made unto them. It is great pity ( said Oysilla) that they to
whom are committed the Administration of the Sacraments should play thus fast
and loose, they deserve to be burned alive. But let us proceed, and see who
shall have the voice of Oysilla. I give it (said she) and the Speakers place
with it, to Dagoucin, for I perceive him to enter into a Contemplation, which
(as it seems to me) does promise to give us some good account. Although I
neither can, nor dare speak ( said Dagoucin) what I think, I will nevertheless
give you the Account of One, to whom Cruelty first brought loss, and afterward
advantage. For although Love does esteem himself so great and mighty, that he
will go stark naked, and it is a thing at the first troublesome unto him, and
afterward insupportable to be covered, yet it so falls out, that they who
oftentimes to obey his counsel have advanced too soon to discover themselves,
have been found to be but bad Merchants, as it happened ^^o a Gentleman of
Castile, whose History I will give unto you.

The fine Invention of a Gentleman to declare his love unto a Queen, and what
became of it.
The Fourth Novell.
IN the Court of the King and Queen of Castile (whose Names shall not be
expressed) there was a Gentleman, so exquisit in his Complexion, and proportion
of Body, and the sweetness of Condition, that in all Spain there was not an
Equal to him. Every one had his Virtues in admiration, but admired more the
strange Conditions of him, for it was never known that he loved or served any
Lady; and although there were in the Court so great and so fair a number of
them, that they were able to melt the very Ice it self, yet not any of them had
the power to captivat the heart of this Gentleman, whose Name was Elisor. The
Queen, who was a Lady of great Virtue, but not altogether exempt from the
Flame, which, the less it is known, the more it burns, observing this
Gentleman who courted not any one of all the Ladies in her Court, did much
wonder at him, and one day demanded of him, If it were possible that he did
love so little as he did make the world to believe. He made answer to her, that
if she could see his Heart as well as his Countenance, she would not propound
that question to him. She desiring to know what it was that he would confess,
did press him so much, that he acknowledged to her, that he did indeed love a
Lady, and the most virtuous one in all Christendom. She used all her power by
Entreaties and Commands to understand who it was, but she could not learn it of
him. Whereupon, seeming to be angry with him, she did swear, That she would
never speak unto him more, if he would not give her the Name of that Lady whom
so much he loved; at which he was so much perplexed that he was constrained to
profess unto her, That he had rather die than confess unto her who it was,
but seeing that he should be deprived of her respects and favor, if he should
not acknowledge the Truth unto her, which was so honest, that it could not be
taken in ill part by any, he said unto her, in a great fear, Madam, I have
neither the force nor the boldness to declare it to you, but the first time
that you go a hunting, I will show you her, and be you assured, that you will
believe her to be the fairest, and the most accomplished Lady in the world.
This answer being made, the Q^. did go a hunting sooner than she was
accustomed, and Elisor being advertised of it, did prepare himself to wait upon
her, and had caused to be made a great Mirror of Crystal in the fashion of a
Corslet, and having buckled it to his Breast, he did cover it with a Coat of
black Frize, richly imbroydered with Gold and Silver purle. He was mounted on a
black Horse, richly trapped with all the gallant furniture that belonged to a
Horse. The trappings were all covered with Gold, and with a Morresk work
enameled with black. His Cloak was of black Silk, on the shoulder thereof was
a badge most curiously wrought, and adorned with precious stones, where he had
for a Devise Love covered by force; His sword and his poynado were no less
beautiful, and set forth with as rich devices. To be short, he was complete
cap a pei'd, and most remarkable when he was on horsback, and knew so well to
manage his Horse, that all those who did observe him, neglected the recreation
of hunting, to observe the Courses and Corvettoes which he made. Having in
those Courses brought the Queen unto the place where the Nets were pitched, he
alighted from his Horse, and came to assist the Queen as she was alighting, who
stretching forth her arms unto him, he opened his Coat, and taking her in his
arms, did show her his Corslet where the Mirror was, and said unto her, Madam,
I beseech you to behold your self in it, and without attending any answer, he
did set her softly on the Ground. The Hunting being ended, the Queen returned
to the Castle, without speaking one word to Elisor, but after Supper she sent
for him, and told him, That he was the greatest Liar that she ever knew, for he
had promised her faithfully to show that Lady in the Chase unto her whom he
most loved, which he had not performed, wherefore she resolved with her self
not to esteem him any more. Elisor fearing that the Queen had not understood
what he had said unto her, did make answer, That he had performed what he
promised; for he had not only showed her the woman, but that part of her which
he loved best. The Queen pretending not to understand him, did reply unto him,
That she did not remember that he had showed any one of her Ladies to her. It
is true, said Elisor, But what did I show unto you, as you were alighting from
your Horse? Nothing, said the Queen, but only a fair Glass upon your Breast: And
what did you behold in that Mirror, said Elisor? I saw nothing but my own face,
said the Qu. Elisor said unto her, then Madam, in obedience to your
Commandment, I have fulfilled my promise, for there shall be never any other
representation in my heart, but that which you saw upon my Breast, and it is
that only whom I love and reverence, and adore, not as a Woman, but as a
Goddess upon Earth, into whose hands I do put both my Life and Death;
beseeching you, that my most entire and absolute affection (which was all my
Life, as long as I concealed it) may not prove my Death by my discovering it:
And if I am not worthy to be regarded, and accepted as your Servant, at least
permit, that I may live (as I have been accustomed to do) upon the Contentment
I have to behold you, my heart having been so bold to choose so high, so
perfect, and so Majestic a place for the foundation of its love, of which I
can have no other satisfaction, but to know, that my love is so great and
absolute, that I am contented only to love although I am not be beloved again;
And if it does not please you by the knowledge of my great love to have me more
agreeable to you, and to affect me more than heretofore, at the least take not
my life from me, which consists in the happiness I have to see you, as I
have been accustomed to do. If you please to look upon me with more rigor, you
will have one servant less, and lose the most affectionate one which you ever
had, or ever can have.

The Qu. whether to show her self what she was not, or else all along to make
more trial of the love which he did bear unto her, or whether she loved some
other Servant, whom she would not leave for him, or else to reserve him until
he whom she had loved had done some fault, and then, afterward to receive him
into his place, did speak unto him with a countenance neither angry, nor yet
contented, Elisor, Being ignorant of the authority of Love, I do not demand of
you what folly did betray you into so great, so high, and so dangerous a humor,
as to be in love with me; for I know that the heart of Man is so little at Man's
Commandment, that he cannot make it either to hate or to love, as he himself
would. But because you have so well declared your mind, I desire to know how
long it is since you first did begin to love me. Elisor observing her to smile
upon him, and that she inquired after his Malady, did well hope that she would
vouchsafe some remedy unto him, but beholding on a sudden her countenance to
change again, he was struck with a fear, thinking himself to be before a severe
Judge, who was ready to pronounce sentence upon him. Howsoever, he took the
confidence to assure her, that his love had taken a deep root in his heart ever
since his childhood, but it did not burn within him to make him feel the pain
thereof, but the last seven years, and he said he could not properly call it a
pain, but rather a Malady, which gave such a contentment, that the recovery
from it was Death. Since it is so, said the Queen, that you have labored in so
great a trial, I ought to be no more light to believe it, than you have been to
express it; wherefore, if it be as you say, I will make such a proof of it,
that afterward I shall have no reason to doubt it, and this proof being made,
I shall esteem you to be such unto me, as you your self do swear you are, and I
knowing you to be such, as you say, you shall find me to be such, as you
desire. Elisor besought her to make what proof of him she pleased, for there
was nothing so difficult that should not be very easy to him, to obtain that
great happiness, that she might know, and be assured of the affection which he
did bear unto her, and besought her to command him that which she would have
don. She said unto him, Elisor, If you do love me as much as you affirm, I am
assured that to enjoy my favor nothing can be too hard for you. Wherefore I
command you, by all your desires to have it, and your fears to lose it, that
without seeing me any more, you do depart the Court to morrow, and retire into
some place where you may not hear from me, nor I have any tidings of you, for
seven following years. You who have already passed seven years in this love, do
know in your self that you love me. When I have had the like expecience of it
for seven other years, I shall know and believe that, which your words cannot
make me to understand, much less to believe. Elisor hearing this cruel
Commandment, doubted on the one side, that if he should stay, she would remove
him from her presence; and on the other side, hoping that the Event would speak
better for him than her words, he did accept the Command, and said unto her,
Since I have lived seven years without any hope at all, having concealed this
fire, now it is known unto you, I shall bear and pass away these seven years
to come with more patience. But Madam, in obeying your Commandment, by which I
am deprived of all the happiness I have in the world, what hope will you give
me at the end of seven years, when you have found me to be your faithful and
your loyal Servant? The Queen taking a ring from off her finger, did say unto
him, Behold this Ring which I do give you, Break it in the middle, and you
shall keep one half thereof, and I the other; to the end, that if the length of
time shall take away from my memory the knowledge of your face, I may know it by
that half part of the Ring which you shall keep. Elisor did take the Ring and
did break it in two pieces, and gave one part thereof to the Queen, and kept
the other himself; and taking his leave of her, more dead than those who have
rendered up their souls, he departed to his Lodgings, to take order for his
journey, which he performed in such a manner, that he sent all his train from
the Court to his own House, and did travel himself attended but with one
servant, into a place so solitary, that not any of his Kindred or his Friends
for the space of seven long years, did know where he was, or heard the least
tidings of him. The life he did lead during that time, and the afflictions he
endured by reason of his absence, cannot be known; howsoever those that
perfectly do sove, cannot but in some measure be acquainted with them.

At the full end of seven years, just as the Queen was going to hear Mass, a
Hermit with a great beard came unto her, who kissing her hand, did present her
with a Petition, which on the sudden she did not take the pains to look on,
although she was accustomed with her own hands to take all the Petitions that
were presented to her, how poor soever they were that did present them. When
the Mass was half said, she opened the Petition, and in the fust place found
enclosed in it, that part of the Ring which she had given unto Elisor, whereat
she was transported with as much Joy as Amazement, and having read what was
contained in the Petition, she suddenly commanded her Almoner to bring the
Hermit to her who had presented that Petition. The Almoner did seek him every
where, but he could hear no tidings of him, but only that he was seen to take
horse, but which way he did go it was impossible to be known.

The Queen did read the Petition over, and over, attending the answer of her
Almoner, and found also a Letter enclosed in it most excellently penned, the
substance whereof was to show the strange effects which time had produced, in
renewing and resining the affections, and changing a Love Temporal into a Love
Spiritual, and Eternal.

This Epistle was not read without many tears, and a great amazement,
accompanied with a grief incomparable: For she thought that the loss she
received in a servant full of so perfect love, ought to be esteemed so great,
that neither all her Exchequer, nor the Kingdom it self, could take from her
the title of being the most poor and most miserable Lady in the world, because
she had lost that which no treasure could redeem; And having heard Mass, she
returned unto her Chamber, and by her self alone, did make so great a
lamentation as her Cruelty did deserve. And there was neither Mountain, Rock,
or Fortest whither she did not send, to find out this Hermit; but he who had
taken him from her hands, did preserve him from falling into them again, and
did receive him into Paradise, so that in this world she could hear no more
tidings of him.

By this Example no Servant ought to confess that which can do him no good,
and may assuredly hurt him: And much less (Ladies) ought you, by reason of
your Incredulity, to demand a proof so dissicult, that in having it you may
lose the life of your Servant. Truly Dagoucin ( said Guebron) I have heard that
Lady highly commended as the most virtuous Princess in the world who imposed
this task upon her servant, as a proof of his Fidelity, but now I shall believe
her to be the most foolis^ and the most cruel that ever was. Nevertheless, in
my opinion ( said Parliament) she did him no great wrong to make a proof of him
for seven years, if he loved so much as he professed, for men are so accustomed
to dissemble, that before we trust them (if at all we must trust them) we
cannot make too long a proof of them. Ladies ( said Hircan) are now a great
deal more wise than heretofore they were, for in seven days proof they have
now as much assurance of a Servant, as they had heretofore in seven years; And
yet there are some in this Company ( said Longaren) who seven years together
have been courted, and have endured all the proofs of the Harqu^buse, and yet
their love could never be obtained. They ought then ( said Simontault) to be
numbered in the rank of the sormer times, for in these days they are not to be
received. Howsoever it was ( said Oysilla) the Gentleman was much obliged to
the Lady, by whose means he was reclamed from the vanity of Terrestrial love,
and wholly devoted his heart to God. He met with an extraordinary happiness (
said Saffredant) to sind God on the Highways; for seeing the affliction he had
on him, I do much wonder that he did not give himself to the Devil. Why then,
when you are ill entreated of the Lady you do love ( said Emarsuite) do you
wish the Devil take you? A thousand and a thousand times ( said Saffredant) but
the Devil seeing that all the forments in Hell cannot make me more miserable,
than the torments wherewith she afflicts me, will not vouchsafe to take me,
knowing well enough that there is no Devil so insupportable, as a Lady that is
loved, and will not love again. If you are of that opinion ( said Parliament to
Saffredant) if I were as you, I would never have any thing to do with any
Woman. My assection to the Sex has been always such ( says Saffredant) and my
Error so great, that I hold my self thrice happy to serve there, where my
service is most undervalued; For the treachery and cruelty of Women, cannot
overcome the love which I bear unto them. But I pray tell me in your
Conscience, Do you commend that Lady for her so great rigor? Yes ( said
Oyfilla) for I believe that she would neither love, nor yet be loved. If she
had that resolution ( said Simontault) wherefore did she give him such a
promise to entertain him after the seven years were passed? I am of your
opinion, ( said Longaren) for those who for love will not return love again,
will give no occasion of love to those that bear love unto them. It may be (
said Nomerfide) that she loved another, who was in deserts far inserior to this
honest Gentlemen, and that she left the better for the worse. Upon my credit (
said Saffredant) I conceive that hereby she made good provision for her self to
take him in an hour when she had left off the other, whom peradventure at that
present she loved better. I see very well ( said Oysilla) that the more we
examine and debate upon this Subject, the more those who will have all things
go on their side, will take occasion to speak the worst of us that possibly
they can, wherefore Dagoucin, I request you to give your voice to some one. I
do give it (said he) to Longaren, being assured that she will acquaint us with
some grateful novelty, and will not, to speak the Truth, forbear either Man or
woman. Since you do esteem me to be so impartial ( said Longaren) I will assume
the hardiness to acquaint you with the Fortune which happened to a very great
Prince, who in virtue surpassed all others of his time. Understand withal,
that the thing which we ought least to use, but in the case only of extreme
Necessity, is Dissimulation: It is a Vice both vile and infamous, especially
amongst Potencates and Princes, in the mouths and countenances of whom Truth is
far more becoming, than in any other person. But there is no Frince so great,
although he has all the honors and the riches that he can desire, who is not
subject unto the Empire, and the Tyranny of Love; insomuch, that the more noble
the Prince is, and of greater spirit, the more Love delights to make him to
stoop under his powerful hand, for that wanton and glorious little God does
take no care of small or common things, and his Majesty does make it his
exercise every day to do wonders, as to make weak the strong, and to make
strong the weak, to give understanding to the ignorant, and to take it away
from the wise, to savor passions, and to destroy reason, and all his delight
is in such changes. And because Princes are not exempt from love, no more are
they from the extremity into which the servitude of Love does throw them. And
therefore by force they may be permitted to use Dissimulation, hypocrifie, and
fiction, which are the means to overcome their Enemies, according to the
Doctrine of Master John de-Moon. And since in such an act the Condition of a
Prince is pardonable, which in no other act is to be allowed, because it lays
them open to Disrepute, I will in this place give an account unto you of the
Inventions of a young Prince, by which he deceived those who are accustomed to
deceive all the world.

The subtilty which a great Prince used to delight himself in the Company of
the Wife of an Advocate of Paris.
The Fifth Novell.
IN the City of Paris there was an Advocate more esteemed than nine Men of his
profession, and by reason of his great sufficiency being sought after by all,
he was the richest man of all those of his Robe: who finding that he had no
children by his first Wife, did hope to have issue by his second; And although
his Body was old and dried up, yet his heart and his hope were not dead;
wherefore he did choose to wife a young Geutlewoman of the City, of about
eighteen or nineteen years of Age, very fair, and of a delicat complexion, whom
he loved and tendered as much as possibly he could, but she had no more Children
by him, than he had by the former, which at the last did much trouble her.
Wherefore her youth, which was not suitable to Melancholy, did cause her to
seek out recreations in other places than in her own house, and she repaired
oftentimes to Feasts and Dancings, but she always deported her self so civilly,
that her Husband could not entertain any bad opinion of her. For she was
always in the company of those in whom he had great confidence. Being one day
invited to a Marriage, there was present a great Prince, who in rehersing the
account, did for bid me to use his name. But I may well say unto you, that he
was so brave a Prince, and of such a Grace, that the like was never seen before
in France, nor ever (I do believe) will after him be seen again. This Prince
beholding this young Gentlewoman, whose eyes and whose Countenance did incite
him to affect her, did come unto her, and did court her with such fine
language, that she her self was much taken with him and it, and did not conceal
from him, that for a long time she had that love in her heart, for which he did
entreat her, and that he should not take pains to persuade her to that, to
which at the first sight Love had made her to consent. The young Prince, by the
courage of Love, having obtained that happiness, the purchase whereof did well
deserve a longer time, he thanked the blind little God, who so much favored
him. And after that hour he so well followed his affair, that they did both
agree upon the means, how they might come together, without the observation of
any.

The place and time being agreed upon, the young Prince did not fail to come,
and to preserve the honor of the Gentlewoman, he did come disguized, but by
reason of the dissolute boys, who did run up and down the streets in the
night, by whom he would not be known, he took some Gentlemen with him to attend
him. And in the entrance into the street where she lived, he did dismiss them,
saying to them, If you hear no noise at all within this quarter of an hour, you
may retire into your own lodgings, and about three or four hours hence fail not
to expect me in this place again. This they did accordingly, and hearing not
any noise they withdrew themselves into their own Chambers. The young Prince
did directly take his Course to the House of his Advocate, and found the Door
open as it was promised him. But going up the stairs he did meet with her
Husband, by reason whereof he was more seen than he desired; Nevertheless
Love, which gives understanding and boldness in the greatest necessities, did
so dispose it, that the young Prince came directly to him, and said, Monsieur
the Advocate, You know the confidence which I and all those of my House do
repose in you, and that I do esteem you to be one of the best, and most
faithful Servants that I have, I was willing to come privately to you to visit
you, as well to recommend my affairs unto you, as to desire a Cup of your wine,
for I stand in need of it, and not to acquaint any whomsoever that I am here,
for from this place I must immediately go into an other, where I would not be
known.

The good Man the Advocate was so glad of tho Honor which the Prince had done
him to come so privately unto his house, that he brought him to his Chamber, and
gave a charge to his Wife with all speed to make ready a Collation of the best
fruits and Confects that she had. This most willingly she did, and brought him
the best banquet that in so short a time she possibly could provide. And
although her Night habit in which she was dressed did render her most lovely and
desirable, yet the young Prince did make a semblance before her Husband nor to
regard her at all, but did speak to him altogether concerning his affairs, as
having always managed them for him. And as the Gentlewoman on her knees did
hold the Confects to the Prince, and her Husband did go to the Cupbord to fetch
him some Wine, she whispered to him, that at his going our of the chamber he
should not fail to go into the Wardrobe on the right hand, where, as soon as
possibly she could, she would come to him. When ever he had drank he rose up,
and thanked the Advocate, who was very importunate with him to attend him to
the door of his House; but he would not give way unto it, assuring him, that
whither he was going, he had no need of his Company: and turning to the
Advocates Wife, he said unto her, Neither will I do you so much wrong as to
take away your good Husband from you, who is one of my most ancient servants;
you are so happy in him, that you have occasion to thank God for him, and to
serve him, and obey him, and if you shall do otherwise, you will be too blame.

The young Prince speaking these words did depart, and shutting the door after
him, that he might not be followed to the stairs, did enter into the wardrobe,
where, after her Husband was asleep, the fair Wife came, and did lead him into
a Cabinet the best accommodated that possibly could be, although the two best
pictures (whatsoever habiliments they had on them) were her and himself there.
I make no doubt but she performed all the promises which she had made unto him,
from whence, about the hour in which his Gentlemen were commanded to attend
him, he retired, and found them waiting for him in the same place, accordingly
as he had enjoined them. And because this life continued a long time, the young
Prince did find out a nearer way to go unto her, which was to pass through a
Monastery, having prevailed with the Prior that every night about midnight, the
Porter should open the door unto him, and likewise when he returned; And
because the House whither he did go was contiguous to the Monastery, he took
not any with him to attend him. And although he did lead this life as I have
told you, yet this Prince (for all that) did fear and love God; and though he
never made any stay when he did go through the Monastery, yet on his return he
never failed to continue in the Church a long time in the exercise of prayers,
which gave a great occasion to the religious Men, (who going in, and coming
forth from their Mattens, did see him always upon his knees) to esteem him to
be the most holy Young man in the world. This Prince had a Sister who did much
frequent this Religious place, and loving her Brother more than all the
creatures in the world, did commend him to the prayers of all the religious
personages she did know: And one day most affectionately commending him to the
Prior of the said Monastery, he said unto her, Alas Madam! what is that which
you command me? you talk to me of your Brother, as of a man of the world, in
whose prayers I have more need to have my self recommended; for if he be not
holy and religious, and sure to go to heaven, (repeating that place of
Scripture, that Happy is he who can do evil, and will not) I have no hope to be
there at all. His Sister, who had a laboring desire to understand what
knowledge this Prior had of the goodness of her Brother, did press upon him with
such importunities, that under the veil of Confession he acknowledged the
Secret, and moreover said her, Is it not indeed wonderful to behold so lovely,
and so young a Prince to abandon his pleasures and his rest, to come so
constantly to hear our Mattens; for, not as a Prince seeking the honor of this
world, but as one sincerely Religious, he comes every morning one hour after
midnight by himself into one of our Chapels. Without all question that piety of
his does render my self and my Brethren so confounded, that in comparison of
him, we ought not to be esteemed by any, nor indeed are worthy to be called
Religious. His Sister, who understood these words, could not but believe it;
for, notwithstanding that her Brother had no relation to Orders Ecclesiastical,
yet she knew that he had a good Conscience, and a great faith and love in God,
but that he did repair to the Church so constantly, and in such an hour, she
had not the least imagination of it. Wherefore she came unto him, and telling
him of the good opinion that the religious Men had of him, he could not forbear
from laughing outright, and with such a countenance, that she who knew him as
well as her own heart, did know that there was some mystery in that Devotion,
and did never leave him, till he acknowledged the truth unto her; which is such
as I have here put down in writing, and which he did me the honor to account
unto me.

By this, Ladies, you may know, that neither the crast of the Lawyer, nor the
cunning of the Divine, can privilege them, but Love (in the case of Necessity)
can deceive them; and since Love can deceive the deceivers, we poor ignorant
creatures ought well to stand in fear of it. And methinks ( said Guebron) if I
may speak what I think, that he is to be commended in that thing: for we find
but sew of those great personages, who have any care at all to save the benour
of women, or to desend them or themselves from public soandal; nay, oftentimes
they are the cause that we think worse of Ladies, than indeed there is reason
for. Truly ( said Oysilla) I could wish that all young Lords and Princes would
take example by him, for oftentimes the scandal is more than the sin. Do you
think ( said Nomerfide) that the prayers which he made in the Monastery
thorough which he passed, were well grounded? You ought not to be a Judge (
said Parliament) for it may be that on his Return, his Repentance was such that
his sin was forgiven him. It is a hard task ( said Hircan) to repent of so
pleasant a sin. As for my self, I have often confessed, but repented but a
little. It were better ( said Oysilla) not to confess at all, unless you had a
true repentance. O Madam ( said Hircan) the sin indeed has much displeased me,
and I have been sorry that I have offended God, but the pleasure has pleased
me. You, and such as are like unto you, ( said Parliament) would have neither
God, nor Laws, but such only as your affections do prescribe unto you. I must
confess ( said Hircan) I could wish with all my he^rt that God took as great
pleasure in my pleasures, as I my self do. You must not make to your self any
new God (said Guebron) but be careful to obey him whom you have: but let us
leave this disputation to the Divines, and let Longaren give her voice to some
one else; I do give it (she said) to Saffredant, but I must entreat him to give
us the best account that he can call to mind of Women, and that he would not
regard so much to speak evil of them, as to conceal the truth when good is to
be spoken of them. Yruly (said Saffredant) I do consent unto you, for I have in
my hand an example of a wise Woman and a foolish one, you may take that example
which shall most please you, and you shall understand, that as in the hearts of
the wicked love does work wickedness's, so in an honest he art it does produce
things worthy of pr^ise. For love of it self is good, and it is the iniquity of
the subject that oftentimes does make it take the surname of foolish, light,
cruel, or outrageous: Nevertheless by this History which I shall account unto
you, it will easily appear, that love does not change the heart at all, but
does show it such as it is, foolish unto the fools, and wise unto the wise.

The pleasant discourse of a great Signior, and the fine invention which he
used to delight himself with a Lady of Pampelone
The sixth Novel.
IN the reign of Lewis the twelfth, there was a young Signior called Monsieur
D' Avanes, the Son of Monsieur Alebret, brother to King John of Navarre, with
whom the said Signior D' Avanes had his ordinary residence. This young Signior
was about fifteen years of age, so lovely and graceful, that it seems he was
not made, but to be loved and honored, which he was by all those whoever saw
him, and above all by a Gentlewoman living in the City of Pampelone in Navarre,
who was married there to a very rich man, with whom she lived in a good and a
great repute; and although she was not above three and twenty years of age, yet
because her Husband was above fifty, she did attire her self so modestly, that
she seemed by her dress to be rather a Widow than a young married Woman; and
never did any one see her go to Wedding or Feast without her Husband, whose
virtue and goodness she did so much esteem, that she preferred it to the youth
and loveliness of all others. Her Husband finding her so discreet, had such a
confidence in her, that he committed to her care and charge all the affairs of
his house. One day this rich man with his Wife was invited to the marriage of
one of his kinted: in which (the more to honor the Nuptials) there was the
young Signior of Avanes who naturally loved dancings, in which exercise of
delight there was none that could surpass him. After dinner, when the Mask
began, the rich man desired Signior D' Avanes to dancent the Signior demanded
of him what Lady he should lead; who made answer to him, Sir, if there were any
here more lovely, or more at my commandment than my own wife, I would present
her to you, and I beseech you that you would do me the honor as to lead my
Wife in the dance, which the young Prince did; but his youth at that time was
so unexperienced, that he took more pleasure to vault and cut capers, than to
regard the beauty of the Ladies: And on the contrary, she whom he did lead, did
more reguard the beauty and gracefulness of the said Signior, than the dance
in which she was, although her discretion was such, that she made not the least
appearance of it. The hour of Supper being come, Signior D' Avanes did bid
adieu to the company, and returned to the Castle, to which place the rich man
did accompany him being mounted on his Mule; and in the way he said unto him,
Sir, you have this day done so great an honor to my self and to my kindred,
that in me it would be ingratitude, if with all my fortunes I should not offer
my self to do you service: Sir, I know very well that such young Lords as you,
who hard and covetous Fathers, have oftentimes more need of money than we, who
keeping but a poor train, and an ordinary house, do think more of the heaping
of it up, than which way to lay it forth; Sir, so is is, that God having given
me a Wife according to my own desire, has not only in this World given me my
Paradise, being frustrated of those hopes and joys which Parents have of their
Children. Sir I know that it is too much honor to me to adopt you as my child,
but if you please to receive me for a Servant, and declare unto me what your
occasions are, I will not fail to be ayding to you in your necessities, as far
as one hundred thousand Crowns will stretch; Monsieur Avanes was very joyful of
this offer, for he had such a Father as the rich man had charactered; and
having heartlly thanked him, he called him Father by alliance.

From the same hour the rich man did take such affection to Signior D' Avanes,
that Evening and Morning he did not fail to send unto him to hnow if he stood
in need of any thing; And he concealed not from his Wife the Devotion he had to
Signior D' Avanes, which made her doubly to love him, and after that hour the
Signior had of him whatsoever he desired: He oftentimes would repair to the
rich man's house to eat and drink with him, and when he was not at home his Wise
would give unto him whatsoever with reason he desired, and moreover would speak
so discreetly to him, admonishing him to be virtuous, that he stood in fear of
her, and did love her more than all the Women in the World.

She who had God and her Honor before her eyes, was contented with his sight,
and to heat him speak unto her, in which consists the satisfaction of honesty
and true love, insomuch that she never gave him any sign whereby he might
conceive or judge, that she did bear any other affection to him, but what was
pious and fraternal. During this covered Love, Monsieur D' Avanes, having
received the large supplies above-spoken, was very gorgeous in his clothes, and
maintained a gallant Equipage; and being about eighteen years of Age, he began
to court Ladies, and to seek after them more than he was accustomed to do: And
although he had rather make love to this wise young Gentlewoman, than to any
other, yet the fear he had to lose her love, if she should understand his
Intents, did cause him to hold his peace, and to think where to place his
affections somewhere elfe.

In this resolution he did address himself to a young Lady not far from
Pampelone, who had a house also in that City, and was newly married to a young
man, who above all things did love horses, and dogs, and hawks. For the love
of her Signior D' Avanes began to make a thousand pastimes, as Tournaments,
Horse-races, Masks, Feasts, and other sports, at all which this young Lady
would be always present. But because her Husband was very fantastical, her
Father and Mother, being jealous of her honor, because they knew her to be
beautiful, and of a frolic disposition, did keep her so close, that Signior D'
Avanes could have nothing of her, but now and then some few words when they
danced together; although in a small time he did easily perceive that to the
completing of their loves there was nothing wanting but Time and place:
Wherefore he came to his good Father the rich Man, and told him, that he had a
great Devotion to go visit our Lady of Mont-serral, desiring him till his
return to take into his House all his servants, because he had a desire to
travel alone; to which the Gentleman consented. But his Wife, who had in her
heart that great Prophet called Love, did incontinently suspect the truth of
the voyage, and could not contain her self from speaking to him, and said,
Monsieur, the Lady which you are going to adore, is not out of the walls of
this City; wherefore, above all things, I do beseech you to have a care of your
health, especially of the health of your soul. He who did both fear and love
her, did blush so much to hear those words, that without speaking any thing,
his cheeks did confess the truth thereof unto her, and upon that he departed;
and having bought two gallant Spanish Jennets he disguized himself in the
habit of a Horskeeper, and so discolored his face, that none could know him.
The Gentleman who was Husband to this foolish Lady, who above all things loved
Horses, having beheld those two which Signior D' Avanes had brought with him,
did incontinently buy them, and having well looked upon the Horsekeeper that
did bring them, he demanded of him, if he had a mind to serve him? Signior D'
Avanes made answer, Yes, and told him, That he was a poor young Man that had no
other way to live, but only by dressing and looking to Horses, in which he
could so well acquit himself, that he was most consident that he would rest
content. The Gentleman being very glad of it, did give him the charge of all
his Horses, and entering into his house, he told his Wife, That being to go unto
the Castle, he did recommend his Horses and his Horsman to her.

The young Lady, as well to please her Husband, as having no other recreation,
did go unto the Stable, and looked upon the Horses, and observed the new
Horsekeeper, who seemed to her to be a very handsome young Man, but she had not
the least knowledge of him. He, when he perceived that he was not known by her,
did approach to make his reverence to her after the manner of Spain, and having
taken her by the hand, he kissed it, and kissing of it, did lock her hand so
fast in his, that presently she knew him; for in dancing with her heretofore he
oftentimes would use the same; From that time the young Lady ceased not to seek
out some place where she might discourse with him by her self; which she did
the very same Evening; for being invited forth to a Feast whither her Husband
would have her to go with him, she feigned that she was sick, and not able to
go. Her Husband, who would, not disappoint his friends, did say unto her,
Sweetheart, Since you are not pleased to go with me, I pray have a care of my
Dogs, and my Horses, and see that they want nothing.

The young Lady found this Commission very agreeable unto her, and without
making any other appearance, she said unto him, That seeing he would not employ
her in any better business, she would make him understand in the meanest
services how much she desired to be complacent to him. Her Husband was no
sooner out of the Gate, but she came down into the Stable, where she found
diverse faults, and to redress them she employed all her Grooms on so many
errands, that she remained alone with the Master Horsekeeper; And for fear that
any one should interrupt her, she said unto him, Go into the Garden, and stay a
little in the Cabinet which is at the end of the Allee. Which he so readily
performed, that he had not the leisure to thank her; and after she had given
orders to all the Grooms of the Stables, she did go to see the Dogs, taking
the like care that they might want nothing sitting for Dogs to have, insomuch,
that of a Mistress she was become a servant-maid. Returning to her Chamber,
she sound her self so weary, that immediately she did go to bed, saying that
she would take a little rest, and all her women left her, excepring one whom
she trusted, to whom she said, Go into the Garden, and bring him hither to me
whom you shall find at the end of the Allee. The Chambermaid did go thither,
where she found the Master Horse-keeper, whom she brought immediately to the
Lady, who commanded the Maid to go forth, and watch when her Husband did come.

Signior D' Avanes seeing himself alone with the Lady did despoil himself of
the habiliments of a Horse-keeper, he took off his false Nose and his false
beard, and not as a fearful Horse-keeper, but as a gallant young Signior,
without demanding any leave of the Lady, he did leap boldly into the bed to
her, where he was received as the bravest young man that was in those days, by
the most wanton of all the Ladies of that Country, and he continued with her
until such time as her Husband did return; of which having timely notice he did
put on his disguises, and forsook the pleasures which by subtilty he usurped.
The Gentleman coming into the Court did understand the diligence which his Wife
had used to obey him, and gave her many thanks for it. Sweetheart (said the
Lady) I have but only done my duty, but it is true, that if a narrow eye be not
had over those naughty boys, you will not have a Horse but will be lean, nor a
Dog but will be mangy; But since I understand their sloth and your good will,
they shall be better looked unto, than they were ever heretofore.

The Gentleman who thought he had got the best Horse-keeper in the World,
demanded of her what she thought of him: I assure you Sir (said she) that he
understands himself as well as any Servant you could have chosen, but he had
need to be followed and rouzed up, for he is one of the most drouzy Knaves that
ever I saw. And thus the Husband and the Lady did continue in greater Love than
heretofore, and forgot all the suspicion and jealousy which he had of her; for
before she loved Feasts, dancings, and the keeping of company, and now she did
keep altogether at home, and was contented oftentimes to wear nothing but a
loose Gown next unto her smock, when before she was at least four hours in
dressing her head: For this she was beloved by her Husband and by all the
World: and thus under the veil of Hypocrisy and the reputation of being
virtuous, this young Lady lived in such pleasure, that neither Reason,
Conscience, Order, or Measure had any more place in her, which the young and
delicate complexion of Signior D' Avanes could not long endure, for he became
so pale and lean, that without wearing a disguise one might well be deceived in
the knowledge of his countenance, nevertheless the fond love which he did bear
unto the Woman did rendet his sen ses so stupid and lost, that he still
presumed on his strength, which by this excess would have failed him, although
he had a body as strong as was the body of Hercules. And being at the last
constrained by his weakness, and advised to it by the Lady, who did not love
him so well being weak and sickly, as when he was lusty and in health, he
demanded leave of his Master to go unto his friends, which to his great grief
he condescended to, and Signior D' Avanes saithfully promised him, that when
ever he was recovered he would return again to his service.

In this manner he did go away on foot, for he had to travel but the length of
one street, and as soon as he was arrived at the house of the rich man, he
found none at home but his Wife, whose virtuous love which she did bear unto
him was nothing diminished by his voyage: but when she beheld him so lean and
so discolored she could not forbear from speaking to him; Monsieur, I know not
how it goes with your Conscience, but your Body is not any thing the better for
your pilgrimage, and I do much fear that the way in which you have traveled
by night has been more hurtful to you, and has wearied you more, than all
your travells by day, for if you had gone on foot to Jerusalem, you might have
returned more comforted in your self, but not more lean and feeble in your
Body; therefore with whomsoever you have been, account her but an Idol, and
serve no more such Images, who instead of raising from the dead, do make the
living look as if they were in the number of the dead. I should speak more unto
you, but if your Body has transgressed, I do find it to be so much punished,
that I have pity to add any new affliction to you. When Signior Avanes had
understood those words, he was no less sorrowful tha^ ashamed, and said unto
her, Madam, I have elsewhere heard it spoken, That Repentance does follow sin
so close, that it even treads on the heels of it; and I have now proved it by
my own expense, and I must beseech you to excuse my youth, which could not
otherwise be instruct, but by making trial of that Evil which it did not
believe.

The Lady, changing her Discourse, did bring him to a very rich bed, and did
persuade him to repose himself in it, where he continued for the space of
fifteen days, and fed on nothing but Restoratives, and was so attended both by
her Husband and her self, that one of them were always with him; and although
against the will and counsel of the wise young Lady he had committed the
follies which you have heard, yet she never diminished that virtuous Love which
she did bear unto him. For she hoped, that having passed away his first days
in vanities, he would retire himself to the conversation of an honest love, by
which means she should have him altogether with her. And during the fifteen
days which he continued in her House, she did give him such good Instructions
tending to the love of Virtue, that he began to entertain a horror and an
indignation against the follies he had committed; And looking on this Lady, who
in beauty surpassed the other, and observing more and more the graces, and the
Virtues which were in her, he could not choose one day, although obscurely
enough, to chase all fear from him, and to speak unto her, Madam, I find no
other means to be so virtuous as you demonstrate to me, and desire me to be,
than to frame my heart to be altogether amorous of virtue; And I must beseech
you, Madam, to inform me, if therein you will not give me all the aid and
advice that possibly you can. The Lady being very joyful to hear him enter into
such discourse, did say unto him, Sir, I do promise and assure you, That if you
will be in love with virtue, (as it belongs to so great a Lord as you are) I
will serve you to attain unto it with all the faculties and the power which God
has given me. Well Madam, (said Signior D' Avanes) remember your promise, and
understand that God, unknown to Christians but by Faith only, has vouchsafed
to assume unto him flesh, like unto the flesh of a sinner, to the end, that
taking our flesh upon him by the love of his Humanity, he might also draw our
Souls unto him by the love of his Divinity, and is willing to serve himself
with things visible, to cause us by Faith to love things invisible. In the like
manner, This Virtue, which all my life I do desire to love, is a thing
invisible, and lodged within us, is not to be known, but only by her effects:
wherefore it is necessary that she assumes some body, to be known amongst Men,
which she has done, and has invested her self in your body, it being the most
pure, and the most accomplished that she could find; whereupon I do acknowledge
and confess you not not only virtuous, but Virtue her self; and I who do
observe her to shine in the veil of the most perfect body that ever was, which
is yours, will serve her and honor her all my life, abandoning all other love
that is vain and vicious.

The Lady no less contented than amazed to hear these words to proceed from
him, did so well dissemble her Joy, that she said unto him, Sir, I will not
take upon me to answer your Theology, but as she who is more fearing the Evil,
than believing the Good, I must beseech you, that on my behalf you will for
bear this Discourse. I know very well that I am a Woman, and not only as all
others are, but so imperfect also, that Virtue should do a greater Act to
transform me into Her, than to assume my form, unless she would be altogether
unknown in this world; for under such a Body as is mine, Virtue cannot be known
to be such as she is. Sir, so it is, that according to my imperfection I will
not cease to bear you that affection which shall become a Woman fearing God and
her own Honor, but this affection can never be fully made known unto you,
until your Heart be capable of the patience which a virtuous Love does command;
And for the present Sir, I do know what Language I am to hold with you;
Howsoever you may assure your self that you love not so well your own Good,
Person, or Honor, as I do love it. Signior Avanes being daunted, did make a
little pause, and taking new Courage, he did humbly beseech her, That to give
him an assurance of what she spoke, she would be pleased to kiss him. But she
refused it, affirming, that for so vain a thing she would not break the Custom
of her Country.

As they were in this Debate her Husband did come in, to whom Signior D' Avanes
said, My Father, I do perceive my self to be so much obliged to you, and to
your good Wife, that I must beseech you that for ever you will repute me to be
your Son, which the good Man most willingly did consent unto; And in the
assurance of this love, I do entreat you (said Signior D' Avanes) that I might
kiss you; Immediately the good Man kissed him, and Signior Avanes said unto
him, If it were not for fear to offend the Law and Custom of the Country, I
would do as much to my Mother your Wife. The Husband, hearing that, did command
his Wife to kiss him, which she did, without making any appearance to be
either willing, or unwilling, because her Husband did command her. Immediately
the fire (which her words before did begin to kindle in the heart of the poor
Signior) did vehemently increase by her kiss, so much desired, and at first so
cruelly refused. This being done, Signior D' Avanes repaired to the King his
Brother in the Castle, where he told many fine stories of his Voyage to
Montserrat, and understood that the King his Brother was preparing to go to
Olly, and Tassares; and considering with himself that the Journey would be
long, he was surprised with a great sadness, which constrained him to resolve
before his departure to make an essay, whether this virtuous Lady did bear him
more good will than she seemed to do; whereupon he took up his lodgings in a
house of the City, and in the same street where she lived. The house being old,
and ruinous, and made of Wood, about midnight he did set it on fire, whereupon
the Cry was so great throughout the City that it came to the house of the rich
man, who coming to the window demanded what the business was, it was answered
to him, that there was a great fire at the House of Signior D' Avanes. He
immediately repaired thither with all his people, and found the young Signior in
the middle of the street in his shirt, having pity on him, he took him in his
Arms, and covered him with his Gown, and conveying him to his house with all
the speed that possibly he could, he said to his Wife who was in bed,
Sweetheart, I give you here this prisoner to keep, use him as you would use my
self: And as soon as ever he was departed, Signior D' Avanes who would
willingly be entreated by her as if he were her Husband, did lightly leap into
the bed, hoping that the occasion and the place would aler the resolution of
that virtuous Woman; but he found it otherwise, for as soon that on one fide he
leapt into the bed, she made have out of it on the other, and throwing her
night Gown on her, she came up to the head of the bed, and said unto him; How
now Monsieur, do you believe that any opportunities can alter a chaste heart?
You may assure your self, that as Gold is proved in the furnace, so is a chaste
heart in the midest of all temptations, by which oftentimes it is proved to be
more strong and virtuous, and does grow more cold by being assaulted by the
most violent hears: Wherefore rest your self assured, that if I had any other
will than what I have represented to you, I could not fail to find means to
make you know the injury you would do me, which not desiring to use, I do
account them nothing. But I must desire you, if you would have me to continue
the affection which I do bear unto you, that you would remove far from you, not
only the will, but also the very thought to find me otherwise than I am. During
this Discourse her Maids came in, to whom she gave a command to bring her a
Collation of all manner of Confects. But he at that time was sensible neither
of hunger or thirst, with such a desperation was he possessed that he had
failed in his enterprise, and he was afraid that the demonstration which he had
made unto her of his passionate love might be an occasion to deprive him of all
familiarities with her for the time to come.

Her Husband having given order for the extinguishing of the Fire, was now
returned, and entreated Monsieur D' Avanes that he would stay in his House for
that night, which he consented to. But the night was passed away in such a
manner, that his Eyes were more exercised in weeping than in sleeping. And
early in the morning he came to their bedside, to bid them Farewell, and
kissing the Lady, he readily found, that she had more pity of him, than ill
will toward him for his offense; and this was a new coal, which over and above
was added to the fire of his Love. After Dinner he did set forth with the King
to Trassares, but before he took Horse, he did once more repair to the House of
his Father and Mother to bid them Adieu, who after the first Commandment of
her Husband, did make no more difficulty to kiss him, than if he had been her
own Son. But you may be sure, that the more that Virtue did forbid her to
reveal her hidden flame by her eyes, and by her countenance, the more it did
increase and become insupportable, insomuch that (being no longer able to
endure the War which Love and Honor had made in her Heart, which nevertheless
she had determined with her self never to demonstrate) having lost the comfort
both of seeing and hearing him for whom she lived, she was surprised by so
violent a Fever, occasioned by a continual melancholy, that the outward parts
of her body became cold, although she burned incessantly within. The
Physicians, in whose hands the health of men do always depend, did begin to
doubt of her recovery, by reason of her great oppilation, which did render her
so melancholy, and counseled her Husband to advise her to make her peace with
the Physician of her Soul.

The poor Husband, who most entirely loved his Wife, was oppressed with so
extreme a sorrow by reason of those words, that to comfort himself, he did
write to Signior D' Avanes, beseeching him to take the pains to come and see
him, hoping also that his sight would conduce something to the health of his
Wife; Signior D' Avanes, having received the Letter, did make no delay at all,
and came in Post to the House of his Father: At the entrance into the house he
found the Men servants and the Maid servants making so great a lamentation as
the loss of so good a Mistress did deserve, whereat the Signior was so
amazed, that he stayed at the door like a man in a trance; the good old man his
Father seeing him did make have to embrace him, and began to weep so
abundantly, that he was not able to speak one word. He brought him into the
Chamber where his Wife was, who turning her languishing eyes toward him, did
give him her hand, and drawing him with it toward her, with all the strength
she had, she embraced him, and kissing him again and again did make a
mavelous complaint, and said unto him, O Sir, the hour is now come that all
dissimulation must cease, and that I must confess the truth which I have so
much endeavored to conceal from you. It is, that if you for your part have
born any love to me, you may believe that my love has been altogether as great
as yours: but my affliction has surpassed yours, because I have taken such
pains to conceal it against my own heart. For Sir, you are to understand, that
God and my Honor did not permit me to declare it to you, fearing that I should
add that unto you which I had a desire to diminish. But know Sir, that the word
of Denial which I have so often spoke unto you, has done me so much prejudice
to pronounce it, that it is the occasion of my death, with which I am well
contented, since God has made me so happy, that neither the violence, nor the
excess of my love has blemished at all my conscience or reputation: For with
a far less Fire than is mine, there has been far greater, and more noble
structures ruined. But now I shall depart contented, that before I die I shall
declare my affection to you to be equal unto yours, nothing excepted, but that
the honor of men and women are not alike. I shall desire you Sir for the time
to come that you will enforce your self to make no addresses but to the most
noble and most virtuous Ladies, for in their hearts do dwell the strongest
passions, and are always most wisely managed; and the Grace, Beauty, and
Civility which is in you will not permit that you shall be fruitless; And I
beseech you so to remember me, and to think of my constancy, as that you will
not impute that unto cruelty which is to be attributed to Honor, Conscience,
and Virtue, which ought a thousand times to be more dear unto us than life it
self. Now Sir, I shall bid you farewell, and commend you to the good man whom
you vouchsafe to call Father, and who is my Husband, to whom I must beseech you
to declare the truth what you know of me, that he might thoroughly understand
how much I have loved God and himself, and I must beseech you to forbear to
come any more before my eyes, for the few hours I have to live I will
altogether employ them in the meditation of the promises which God has made
unto me before the Creation of the World, and speaking these words she gave him
the last kiss, and embraced him with all the force of her feeble arms.

Signior D' Avanes who had his heart within him as surprised with compassion as
was hers with the Agony of Death, being not able to speak one word unto her,
did withdraw himself from before her, and threw himself upon a Bed which was in
the next Chamber, where oftentimes he swouned away. Not long after the Lady
called for her Husband, and having made many honest remonstrances unto him, she
did recommend unto him the care of Signior D' Avanes, assuring him that next
unto himself he was the person whom she best loved in the World; And kissing
her Husband she did bid him adieu. Immediately afterward she commanded that the
Sacrament of the Altar should be brought unto her, and after that the Unction,
which she received with great joy, as being assured of her Salvation: And
finding that her eyes began to grow dim, and all her strength to fail her, she
did speak aloud her In manus. At that Cry Signior D' Avanes did rise from the
bed, and looking compassionatly on her, he came in a sweet sigh to render his
Soul unto her, as she was rendering her Soul unto God, to whom she was going;
and when he perceived that she was dead, he did run to the dead body (to which
being alive he durst not approach but in fear) and embraced it, and kissed it
in such a manner that with much difficulty they did take her from between his
Arms; her Husband was much astonished at it, for he never perceived that he did
bear such an affection to her, and saying to him, Sir It is too much, they both
retired from her; And having made a long lamentation, the one for the Death of
his Wife, the other for the Death of his Friend, Monsieur D' Avanes did give
him an account at large of the whole course of his Love, and that to her Death
she never made any sign unto him, but what did express Severity, and an
obstinate Chastnesse; whereat her Husband being more contented than ever, did
double his grief for the loss of her, and continued all his life afterward in
doing good services to Signior D' Avanes, who was then not above eighteen years
of Age. After this he departed to the Court, where he continued diverse years
without seeing or speaking to any Woman in the world, and he did wear mourning
apparel two years together for her.

Ladies, you may here observe the difference betwixt a wise woman and a
foolish, who do show distinctly by themselves the different effects of love; by
which one of them received a death commendable and glorious, and the other did
lead a life loose and infamous: For as the Death of a holy Man or Woman is
precious before God, so the Death of a Sinner is as displeasing. Truly
Saffredant ( said Oysilla) you have rehearsed to us as pleasant a History as I
have ever heard; and he who knew the persons as well as my self, would find it
yet more pleasant, for I have never seen a braver Gentleman, nor of a greater
Gracefulness, than the said Signior D' Avanes. Do you think ( said Saffredant)
that a wise and a young Woman (to dissemble her love, which the counsel of
Nature does admit that she should bear to so desirable a Gentleman) should
ever suffer her self to die, for denying her self that pleasure of which so
violently she desired the content, covertly, and he openly? If she had such a
desire ( said Parliament) she had place and occasion enough to declare it to
him; but her Virtue was so great, that she would not suffer her desires to go
beyond her reason. You may paint it forth unto us ( said Hircan) as you please,
but I know, that the worse Devil always does turn out the other, and that Pride
and Hypocrisy did turn from her away her pleasure; for Ladies robes are so
long, and so woven with dissimulation, that we cannot know what they carry
within them; for if they were not more nice of their honor than we are, we
should find that Nature had forgot her self no more in them, than in Men: And
by reason of the fear they have not to dare to take the pleasure they do
desire, they have changed that vice into a greater, which they conceive to be
more honest, and that is into a Glory and a Cruelty, by which they hope to
purchase themselves an Immortality; and thus they boast they can resist the
vice of the Law of Nature. If our Nature be vicious, what is theirs? who not
only make themselves like unto Beasts, which are inhumane and cruel, but also
like unto Devils, from whom they receive their Pride and Dissimulation. It is
pity ( said Nomerfide) that you have so virtuous a Lady to your wife, seeing
you do not only undervalue Virtue in another, but would prove all Women to be
vicious. I am happy ( said Hircan) to have a Wife who is not scandalized, and I
would not have her to be so; but as for that Chastity of Heart you speak of, I
believe that she and I are both of us the Children of Adam and Eve; wherefore
in beholding our selves we should not only cover our nakedness with leaves,
but also confess our frailty. I know ( said Parliament) that we do all stand in
need of the Grace of God, because we are inclined unto Sin; but our Temptations
are not like unto yours, and if we do sin through Pride, there is no second
prejudiced by it, neither are our hands soyled, or our bodies defiled. But your
pleasure does consist in the dishonouring of Women, and it is your Honor to
kill men in Wars, which are two positions directly contrary to the Law of God.
I do confess unto you ( said Guebron) that you speak the Truth; but God having
said, That whosoever looks with Concupiscence is already an Adulteress in his
heart, and that whosoever hates his neighbor is an homicide; satisfy me, I
pray you, Are Women exempted more than Men? God who judges the heart ( said
Longaren) will give sentence: But it is too much that Men should be our
Accusers; for the goodness of God is so great, that he knows and pardons the
frailties of our hearts. But let us leave off this Dispute ( said Saffredant)
for it does savor more of a Preachment, than of a pleasant Account.

Wherefore (said he) I give my voice to Emarsuite, desiring her, that she will
not forget to make us to laugh. Truly (said she) I shall take care not to fail
you, being determined to give a brief account of two servants of a Princess,
so pleasant, that it does make me to forget the melancholy of another History
which I had an intent to exhibit unto you, and to put some mirth upon my face
to make it appear more agreeable unto you.

The rashness of a foolish Secretary, who solicited the Wife of his
Companion, by the means whereof he received great shame.
The seventh Novell.
IN the City of Ambois there dwelled the Servant of a Princess, who was Groom
of her Chamber, an honest Man, and who gave good entertainment to all that came
unto his House, but above all to his Companions. It is not long since, that one
of the Secretaries of his Mistress did come thither to lodge, where he stayed
ten or twelve days. This Secretary was so deformed, that he seemed rather to
be King of the Canibals, than a Christian. And although his Host, who was also
his Companion, did entreat him as his Brother, or his dearest friend, and with
all the honor that possibly he could, yet he did go about such an Enterprise,
that it did seem he had not only fogot all honesty, but had never entertained
any in his heart, which was in a dishonest and an unlawful way to solicit the
Wife of his Companion, who had nothing in her that might incite him to love,
although she was indeed as virtuous a Woman as any was in the City where she
lived; she perceiving the lustful desires of the Secretary, thinking it better
by dissimulation for a time, to discover his Vice at last, than to cover it by
a sudden refusal, did counterfeit to approve and like his motion. Therefore he,
who thought that he should gain her to his will, without regarding her age,
which was above fifty, and that she was none of the handsomest; and without
considering the good report she had to be a very honest Woman, and to love her
Husband most entirely, did incessantly importune her. One day amongst the rest
her Husband being employed about some great business at home, and they two
being together in the Hall, she pretended that she only deferred him, to find
out a ^ure place to be alone with him, accordingly as he desired; To whom
immediately he replied, That he would go up into the Cockloft. She suddenly did
rise, and did desire him to go before, and said, she would follow after him. He
laughing for joy, with a sweetness of face much like unto a great Baboon when
it is about to feed, did very lightly go up the stairs, and with a laboring
Expectation attending that which he so much did desire, burning not with a
clear five, but as a great Coal in the forge, did listen if she were coming up
after him; but instead of hearing her feet, he did hear her voice speaking unto
him, Master Secretary, Stay there a little, I am going to my Husband to know of
him, If he be pleased that I shall come up unto you. You may imagine with your
selves what a face he made when he wept, who did look so ugly when he laughed.
He immediately came down with tears in his eyes, and for the love of God did
beseech her to be silent, and nor by her words to break the love which was
between her Husband and himself. She made answer to him, that she was sure he
loved her Husband so well that he would not speak of any thing to her which he
would not have him to understand, wherefore (said she) I go to acquaint him
with it; which she did, whatsoever entreaties he made, or constraints he could
use to the contrary; whereupon he took himself to his heels and did run away
out of the doors, and was as much ashamed as her Husband was glad to understand
the honest deceit which his Wife had used, and her virtue so much pleased him,
that he made no account of the vice of his Companion, who was sufficiently
punished to carry on him his own shame which he would have brought upon that
house.

Ladies it does appeart to me that personages of worth ought to learn by this
account not to entertain those whose Consciences, hearts, and understandings
are ignorant of God, and true love and Honor. Although your account be but
short (said Oysilla) yet it is as pleasant as may be, and conduces much to the
honor of the good Woman. In sober sadness (said Simontault) it is no great
honor to an honest woman to refuse so deformed a Creature as you have
expressed this Secretary to be, but if he had been lovely and debonair, then
had she showed her Virtue. And because I peradventure do conceive who this
Secretary was, if it were now my turn I could rehearse another account unto you
as pleasant altogether as this; you shall not he wanting for that (said
Emarsuite) for I give you my voice; whereupon he did immediately begin. Those
who are accustomed to have their residence at the Court, or in some great
Cities, do esteem so highly of their own knowledge, that they think all others
are but fools and clowns in the comparison of them; but it is not so, for in
all Countries, and amongst all conditions of men there have been found some as
witty always and as subtle as the others possible can be, nevertheless by
reason of the Pride of those who think themselves most cunning, the mockery of
them (when they are over-matched) is always more remarkable as I shall show you
by this true Account which happened not many years ago.

A certain Secretary was resolved to be too hard for a Merchant who was too
hard for him, and what befell him thereupon.
The eighth Novel.
FRancis the first of that name being in the City of Paris, and his Sister the
Queen of Navar in his company, she had a Secretary who was none of those who
would let any thing fall down on the ground and refuse to take it up again;
insomuch there was neither President nor Counselor, which he did not know, nor
Merchant or rich man whose house he did not frequent, and hold intelligence
with them. There came into the said City of Paris a Merchant of Bayons named
Bernard du Ha, who as well for the discharge of his affairs, as for that the
Lieutenant Civil was of his Country, did address himself unto him for his
Counsel and Assistance.

This Secretary of the Queen of Navar did oftentimes repair to visit the
Lieutenant, who was a good Servant of his Master and of his Mistress; and
going to him upon a Holy Day he found neither him nor his Wife at home, but
heard Bernard du Ha within as busy as might be with a Viol or some other
Instrument, teaching the Maidservants to dance the Morice of Gascogny. When
the Secretary beheld him he would have made him believe that he did very ill,
and assured him that if the Lieutenant or his Wife should know of it, they
would be highly displeased with him: And having sufficiently laid forth the
inconvenience of what he had done, and the danger that might ensue thereon,
Bernard du Ha did beseech the Secretary not to speak unto the Lieutenant of it,
who said unto him what will you give me, and I will hold my peace? Bernard du
Ha who entertained not so great a fear as he made a show for, observing that
the Secretary would cajole him to a forfeit, did promise him to give him a
Pasty of the best Hanch of Gascony Venison that he did ever ear. The Secretary
being well contented with it, did desire him that he might have his Pasty on
Sunday after Dinner, which Bernard du Ha did promise, and assured him that he
should not fail of it; Whereupon the Secretary repaired to a Gentlewoman in
Paris whom above all Creatures he desired to espouse, and said unto her, Madam,
If you please, I will come on Sunday next to sup with you, but you are to take
care for nothing but only good bread and good Wine, for I have overreached so
hansomly a Merchant of Bayons, that all the rest shall be at his expense, and
by my fine circumvention of him, you shall eat of the bravest Hanch of Venison
that ever was brought from Gascogny to Paris. The Gentlewoman who did believe
him did send for three or four of the most considerable of her Neighbors, and
did assure them of something which was very dainty, and which they never tasted
of before.

When Sunday was come, the Secretary was fain to look after the Merchant, and
finding him upon the bridge he graciously saluting him said unto him, The
Devils take you all of them, what a trouble have you put me to to find you
out? Bernard du Ha replied unto him, many men have taken more pains than you,
who have not been recompensed with such a present, And speaking those words
unto him, he showed him the Pasty which he had underneath his cloak, and was
big enough to feed a whole Camp, at which the Secretary was so overjoyed, that
having made up his wide mouth he hastily took it, and leaving the Merchant in
the street without inviting him to cat of his own Venison, he brought his
Present to the young Gentlewoman, who had a great desire to know, If the Viands
of Guyen were as good as the Dainties of Paris. The hour of Supper being come,
as they were earing their pottage, the Secretary said unto them, Let us leave
off this watery Diet, and taste of this Flagon of Wine; and speaking those words
he uncovered the Pasty, and thinking to cut up the Hanch, he did find it so
extremely hard, that he could not put his knife into it; wherefore he used the
utmost of his strength, and found that it was a broad piece, or Sabot of wood,
of which their shoes are made in Gascoigny, to which, on each side, he had
placed two great brands taken out of the Chimney, and strowed on the tops
thereof the Dusts of rusty Iron, mingled with foot, which could not but render
a grateful smell. Who was perplexed now? It was the Secretary, as much that he
was deceived by him whom he thought to deceive himself, as also that he had
deceived her to whom he thought that he had spoken the Truth. And on the other
side, he was no wise pleased to content himself only with pottage for his
Supper; The women, who were altogether as sorry as himself, had accused him for
his Imposture, but that they perceived by his Countenance, that he did partake
with them in the abuse.

Having thus contrary to his expectation made but a light Supper, he departed
in a great choler. And seeing that Bernard du Ha had failed in his promise, he
resolved with himself to break his own; and addressing himself to the
Lieutenant, he did speak the worst words that possibly he could of Bernard. But
he could not come so soon, but Bernard du Ha had been with him before, and
revealed unto him all the mystery: The Lieutenant therefore did pass his
sentence on the Secretary, and said, that at his own expense he had now learned
to circumvent a Gascoign, and must therefore return with no other comfort, but
the divulgation of his own shame.

The like does happen unto many, who thinking to be too cunning, do forget
themselves in their own subtilties; wherefore it is the only wisdom, Not to do
that unto any, which we would not have done unto our selves. I do assure you
(said Guebron) that oftentimes I do see the like things come to pass, and
those who are accounted to be the fools of the Town, do often overreach the
finest wits; for there is no man a veryer fool, than be who thinks himself to
be wise, nor any more wise, than he who knows that he knows not any thing.
Howsoever (said Parliament) he knows something, who knows that he knows nothing.
Well, (said Simontault) for fear that time will be wanting to us, I give my
voice to Nomerfide; for I know that her Rhetoric cannot be tedious. Let it be
so then, (said Nomerfide) I will give you such an Account as shall answer the
Discourse we have had. And I do not wonder, Ladies, that Love does give to
Princes, and to personages brought up in places of Honor, the means how to
decline all danger, for they have their education amongst so many knowing
persons that I should wonder far more if they were ignorant of any thing. But
the Artifice of Love does show it self by so much the more clearly, by how much
it finds less apprehension and capacity in the Subjects it does work upon. And
to manifest this, I will account unto you what a Priest did do, being only
instructed by Love; for he was so ignorant in all other things, that he could
hardly say his Mass.

An honest Labourer in the Village, who did suffer himself to he easily
deceived by his Wife, who was amorous of the Curat.
The ninth Novell.
IN the County of Mayn, in a Village called Arcelles, there was a rich Man a
labourer, who in his old Age married a handsome young Woman, who had no Children
by him, but for that loss she did comfort her self with many Friends; and when
Gentlemen of appearance, and her Friends did fail, she did go to the last
Recourse, which was the Church, and took him to be the Companion in her Sin,
who ought to absolve it. This was the Curat, who good man, came very often to
visit this tender Lamb. Her Husband being of a heavy and lumpish spirit had not
the least suspicion of her, but because he was of a churlish constitution, and
very strong she managed the affair as secretly as possibly she could; fearing
if he should perceive her, that he would undoubtedsy kill her. One day when he
was abroad, his Wife not thinking that he would return so soon, did send to
seek out Monsieur the Curat to confess her; And as they were making good cheer
together, her Husband did arrive so unexpectedly, that he had not the leisure
to retire into his own house, but looking up and down where to hide himself, by
the counsel of the Woman he did climb up into the Granary, and covered the
trap-door with a Bolter.

The Husband came into the house, and she (that he might entertain no
suspicion) did feast him so well at Dinner, that she spared for no Meat or
Wine, of which he did drink so great a quantity, that with the weariness of
his labor in the fields, he had after Dinner a great desire to sleep, being
seated in a Chair before the fire. The Curate, who was impatient to be so long
in the Granary, hearing no noise in the Chamber, did open the trap-door, and
stretching forth his neck, as far as ever he could, he observed that the good
Man was asleep, And looking down upon him, he not minding of it, did lean so
hard upon the Bolter with all his weight, that both Bolter and Man did fall
down close to the good Man where he was asleep, who awaked at the great noise.
The nimble Curat, who had got up upon his legs before the other had thoroughly
opened his eyes, did say unto him, My good Friend, behold your Bolter, and many
thanks; and having said those words, he did go away with all the have he could
make.

The poor Labourer being much amazed, demanded of his Wife what was the
business? who made answer to him, Sweetheart, It is that Bolter of yours
which is made in fashion of a Boat, which the Curat having borrowed, has
brought it back again unto you. Her Husband grumbling at it, said unto her, He
has returned clownishly enough that which he borrowed; for I thought the whole
house was falling down upon my head. By this means the Curat did save himself,
and the good Man found nothing amiss at all, but only the rudeness which he
used in bringing back his Bolter.

Ladies, the Master whom he served did save him at that time, that he might
take the greater possession of him, and tormont him afterward the longer. Do
not imagine (said Guebron) that poor people are more exempt from Excuses than
our selves? nay they have a great deal more: For if you look upon Thieves,
Murderers, Sorcerers, Coyners of false money, and all such kind of people whose
spirits are never at rest, you shall find them all to be poor people, and
Mechanics. It is not strange at all to me (said Parliament) that subtilty
should reign more amongst them, than others; For I have heard that Love does
torment them amongst all their labors, neither is there a heart so tough, but
this gentle passion does possess it. Madam (said Saffredant) you are not
ignorant what Mr. John De Moon says, That Lovers are as common in the Cottages
of Beggars, as in the Palaces of Kings; And the Love (of which this Account
speaks) is not that love which makes us to bear arms in the field; For
although poor Men have not our wealth nor honors, yet they have other
commodities, more for their comfort then we have; Their viands are not so
dainty, but they have a better appetite, and they are better nourished with
brown bread, than we are with Restoratives; They have not beds so rich, nor so
well made as ours, but they do rest better in straw, and do sleep sounder; They
have no Ladies painted, nor so gorgeously set forth as those whom we do
Idolize, but they have their pleasures more often than we have, and fear no
other eyes, but the Birds and the Beasts that do behold them. Briefly, in that
which we have they do want, and in that which we want, they do abound.

I pray you (said Nomerfide) let us leave off this discourse of peasants, and
before that Vespers do begin let Hircan put a period to this third days
Journal. Truly (said Hircan) I will deliver to you as sad and as strange a
story as ever you have heard; and although it is most unpleasing to me to speak
evil of any Lady, knowing that men are so full of malice, that daily out of the
consequence of the fault but of one Womon alone, they will lay the blame upon
the whole Sex, yet this account being so strange does make me to forget all
fear, and it may be that Folly being discovered will make others more wise.

A mavelous Example of humane frailty in a Lady who to have her Honor
concealed did fall from bad into worse.
The tenth Novel
IN the time of King Lewis the twelfth, one of the house of Amboys named
George, being then Legate in Avignon, and Nephew to the Legate of France, had a
Lady in the County of Languedock, whose name I will conceal for the Love I do
bear unto her Family, she had yearly about four thousand Crowns in Rent, and
was a Widow in a very young age, being the Mother but of one Son; And for the
grief for the loss of her Husband, and for the love she did bear unto her
Infant, she resolved with her self never to marry again, and to avoid all
occasions enducing thereunto, she refused to keep company with any, but only
with people of Devotion, thinking with her self that it is opportunity that
makes sinners. This young Lady Dowager did altogether addict her self to the
reading of Godly books, and did eschew all companies that had relation to the
World; Insomuch that she made Conscience to assist at any marriage, or to hear
the Organs to play in the Church. When her Son arrived at the age of seven
years, she took a Man of a holy conversation to bring him up at School, by whom
he might be indoctrinated in all virtues, moral and divine. When her Son was of
fifteen years of age, Nature who is the most secret Schoolmaster finding him
high fed, and living a life as slothful as luxurious, did teach him another
Lesson than ever the Doctor did, for he began to behold and to desire those
things which were beautiful, and amongst others a young Maid who did lie in his
Mothers Chamber, of which not any had the least suspicion, for the Woman took
no more regard of him than if he had been still an Infant, and because that all
the house over there was no other talk but of God only. This young man began
privately to court this Maid, who could not be quiet for him, insomuch that she
came to her Mistress and did acquaint her with it, who did so much love and
esteem her Son, that she conceived with her self that the Maid had made this
report unto her of him only to cause her to hate him; But she so often did
press her Mistress concerning it, that she said unto her, I will know if it
be true or not, and if I find it to be true accordingly as you report it, I
will chastise him; but if it shall appear to be otherwise, and the report shall
be found to be false, be sure that you shall endure punishment; And to make
trial of it, she did command her to appoint her Son a set time to come at
midnight to lie with her, in her chamber, in the bed hard by the door where the
said Damoisel was accustomed to lie alone. The Damsel obeyed her Mistress, and
when the night came, the Lady did put her self into the Maids bed, being
resolved that if it were true as the Maid reported, she would chastise him so
well for it, that she would make him to remember whiles he lived how he lay
with a woman again. Being in this determination and choler, her Son did come at
the set hour to lie with her. She, who for all she saw him come into the Bed to
her, did believe that he would not commit the dishonest act it self, and
deferred to speak unto him, till she knew some evident sign of his hot will,
believing that his desires would content themselves with some small pleasures,
and not proceed unto the Act it self. But her patience was so strong, and her
Nature so frail, that forgetting the Name of a Mother, she converted her choler
into an abominable pleasure; And as the water by force retained, does run with
a greater impetuousnesse when way is made for it, than when it runs in its
ordinary course, so this poor Lady did forfeit her glory by the restraint which
she did give unto her self: For when she began to descend from the first degree
of her honesty, she found herself suddenly transported to the last, and she
herself was great with child by him whom she watched to keep another from
running into the same enormity with him.

This Sin being committed, the remorse of Conscience did bring unto her so
great a torment, that her repentance did not leave her during her life. Rising
from her Son, who always afterward thought it had been the Maid, she entered
into her Cabinet, where calling to mind her good resolutition, and her bad
execution of it, she passed away all that night in tears and lamentations hy
her self. But instead of humbling her self as she ought to do, and
acknowledging an impossibility in her self, and the perverseness of her flesh,
which without the grace of God can do nothing else but fin, thinking of her
self, and by her own tears to give fatisfaction for what was passed, and by her
own prudence to eschew all evil to come, excusing her sin by the occasion, and
not imputing it to her own weakness, for which there is no remedy but only the
grace of God, she resolved with her self that she would do a thing whereby she
would never fall into the like inconvenience again: And as if there were but
one kind of sin to condemn her only, she endeavored with her self for the time
to come to avoid that sin. But the root of Pride did increase continually in
her heart, insomuch that eschewing one evil she committed diverse others; for
the next morning as soon as it was day, she sent for the Governor of her Son,
and said unto him, My Son begins to grow up, it is time to send him to travel,
I have a Kinsman that is on the other side of the Hills with Monsieur the
Grand-Master Chaumont, who will be very glad to give him entertainment, I would
desire you presently to go along with him, and that I may take no grief at his
departure, let it be your care that he comes not to me, not so much as to crave
my blessing; and speaking those words, she did give him so much money as was
necessary for the Journey. On that morning the Young Man departed, who was very
glad of it; for he desired nothing more, than after his Pleasure with his
Sweetheart to travel to the Wars.

The Lady continued a long time in a great me lancholy, and were it not that
she had the fear of God before her eyes, she had oftentimes made an end of that
unhappy fruit with which her womb was pregnant; wherefore she for many months
pretended her self to be sick, that her Nightgown might cover her
Imperfection; And when she was ready to lie down, finding there was none in the
world in whom she had so much considence, as in her Bastard Brother whom she
had endued with great possessions, she sent to seek him, and did acquaint him
with her misfortune (but she did not confess unto him who was the Father of
the Fault) and did beseech him to be careful to preserve her Honor, which
accordingly he did: Some few days before she was brought to bed, he counseled
her to change the air, and to make use of his House, where she might better
recover her health, than in her own. She repaired thither with a very small
Retinue, and found a Midwife prepared for her, who was sent for under a
pretense to come unto her Brothers Wife; this Midwife, one night, without
knowing who was the Mother of it, did receive the Infant, which was a very
pretty Girl. The Gentleman did deliver it to a Nurse, and caused her to bring
it up, as if it had been his own child. The Lady having continued there the
space of one month, did return into her own house, where she lived more
austerely than before, observing days of abstinence, and all manner of
religious discipline. But when her Son came unto age, and found that at present
there was no war in Italy, he sent to his Mother, to beseech her that he
might return to her House. She fearing to sall again into her former Evil,
would not permit him; but in the end he so far importuned her, that in reason
she could not refuse him. Nevertheless she commanded him, That he should not
come before her, unless he were married to some Gentlewoman whom he loved very
well; and sent him word withal, that she did not look after any great Fortune,
but if she were a Gentlewoman of good Education it was sufficient.

During this time, her Brother the Bastard seeing the Girl of which he had the
charge to grow into years, and to be accomplished with perfections, he
determined with himself to send her to a House at some distance from him, where
she should be unknown; and by the Counsel of her own Mother, he did give her
unto the Queen of Navarre. This Girl, whose name was Katherine, was then
thirteen years of age, and had her beauties accompanied with such a
gracefulness, that the Queen of Navarre did love her very well, and had a
great desire to marry her to some personage of Honor; but because she had no
portion that was considerable, she had many servants, but no Husband.

It fell out one day, that the Gentleman, who was her Father unknown, returning
into this side of the Alps, did address himself unto the Court of the Queen
of Navar, where whenever he observed this young Maid, he was very amorous of
her; and because he had leave of his Mother to marry whom he pleased, he only
inquired, If she were a Gentlewoman? and understanding that she was, he desired
the Queen, that she would be pleased to give her in marriage to him, who most
willingly did consent unto it, for she knew well enough that the Gentleman was
very rich, and, with his riches, that he was handsome and honest.

This Marriage being consummated, the Gentleman did write unto his Mother,
imparting, That for the time to come she ought not to shut her door any more
against him, because he had brought with him as accomplished a young
Gentlewoman as could possibly be desired. The Lady his Mother, who inquired to
what alliance he was married, did find, that it was the Daughter of her own
Son, and of her self; by reason whereof she entered into so great a sorrow,
that she thought she should forthwith have dyed, finding, that the more checks
and hindrances she did endeavor to give to her Misfortune, the more she was
the means whereby it was increased.

Not knowing what to do, she repaired to the Legate of Avignon, to whom she
confessed the enormity of her Sin, demanding his Counsel how she should demean
her self. The Legate, to satisfy her Conscience, did send for diverse Doctors of
Divinity, to whom he did communicate the affair, without naming the persons,
and their Counsel was, That the Lady should never speak any thing of it before
her Children, who, by reason of their Ignorance, were to be excused from the
sin, but she ought to repent of it during the whole Course of her life, and be
careful to commit the same folly no more; And so the poor Lady returned to her
own house, where not long afterward her Son and her fair Daughter did arrive,
who loved one another with such an entire affection, that it was never seen
that Man or Wife did better agree together; for she was his Daughter, his
Sister, and his Wife, and he was her Father, her Brother, and her Husband. In
this love they flourished and continued all the days of their lives, and the
poor Lady did continue in her penitence; for she never saw them to make much of
one another, but it was an Occasion of Grief unto her.

Ladies, Here you may observe, how they may be deceived, who think, by the
force of their Virtues, to overcome both Love and Nature, with all the powers
wherewith with God has armed them. It is be^ter by slight to overcome these
Enemies, than by Invasion, and to say with the Psalmist, Make thou, O Lord, an
answer for me. It is not possible ( said Oysilla) to hear the account of a
stranger story, and it appears to me, that every Man and Woman ought to stoop,
and to submit themselves unto the will and the fear of God, seeing that under a
presumption to do well, so many Evils did fall out. We may understand also (
said Parliament) that every step that a Man advances forward in the Confidence
of himself, he does go as many backwards from the Confidence which he ought to
have in God. He is wise ( said Guebron) who knows that he has no greater
Enemies than himself, and who, whatsoever appearance of goodness or of
holiness there be in him, does always suspect his own will, and counsels;
There can be no appearance so great of Good to ensue thereby ( said Longaren) as
ought to make a wise Woman to venture to lie with a Man, be he never so near of
blood: for the fire once stopped, will break forth with the greater violence.
Without all doubt ( said Emarsuite) she is some glorious fool, who does think
her self so holy that she cannot sin, as some will persuade, and make the
Ignorant to believe, that we can do good, and refrain from Evil of our selves,
which is a great Error. Is it possible ( said Oyfilla) that there are such
fools as to believe that opinion? They do a great deal worse ( said Longaren)
for they say they can habituate themselves to the virtue of Chastity; and to
prove their strength, they discourse with the most handsome creatures that can
be found, and whom they love the best in the world, and with kisses and
touchings of their hands, they make trial if their flesh be mortified, or no;
And when by such pleasure they find any carnal motions, they separat themselves
from one another, and fast, and discipline themselves with the greatest
severity; And when they have brought their flesh to such a temper, that neither
words nor kisses can heat them to any Insurrectio^, they come to assay the
strongest and the last temptation, which is to ly together, and to embrace one
another without Concupiscence. But not one of a thousand have attained to this
perfection, and from hence there have arised so many inconveniences, that the
Archbishop of Milan, when this Religion was first exercised, was advised to
sepeparate them for altogether, and to put the Women in the Covents of the Men,
and the Men in the Covents of the Women. Truly ( said Guebron) it is the
extremity and height of Folly, to believe that we cannot sin, and so violently
to seek out all the occasions of sin. There are some ( said Saffredant) who
altogether do clean contrary to those fools; for although as much as possibly
they can they do avoid all occasions of sin, yet their Concupiscence still does
follow them, and the good Saint Hierom after he had chastised himself, and had
retired himself into the Desert, did confess that he could not there escape
the fire that did burn within him: Wherefore we must recommend our selves to
God, for if by his Power, Virtue, and Goodness, he does not restrain us, we
are so weak and wicked of our selves, that we shall take pleasure to fall. You
do not observe that which I take notice of ( said Hircan) that whiles we are
here relating our Histories, the Monks behind yonder hedge did not hear the
Bell ring to their Vespers, and now when we begin to speak of God they are all
gone, and because the Bell does ring the second time, we shall do well to
follow them ( said Oysilla) and praise God that we have passed away this day so
joyfully, and speaking those words they did all rise up and repaired to the
Church, where they heard Vespers very de coutly, which being ended they
departed from thence to Supper, and communed amongst themselves of the
Discourses which had that day passed, and called into their memory diverse other
things which had happened in their times, to understand which of them were
worthy to be the next day recited: And having with great content passed a way
the Evening, they repaired all unto their Refts, hoping the next day not to
fail to continue their Convention; which was so agreeable unto them; And there
was an end put unto the third days Journal.

The end of the third days Account.
The Fourth Days Account of the Novells of the Queen of NAVARRE.
The Preface.
MAdam Oysilla according to her good Custom did rise far more early than any
of the rest, and meditating on her Book of the Holy Scriptures she attended the
coming of the Company, who by little and little did begin to assemble
themselves; but the slothful did excuse themselves, saying; I have a Wife and
cannot come: And Hircan and Parliament his wife did perceive that the Lecture
was begun a great while before they came; but Oysilla knew very well to find
out those places where the Scripture reproves those who are negligent; And she
not only did read the Text, but moreover did make so many good expositions and
exhortations, that it was impossible to be weary to hear her. The Lecture being
ended, Parliament said unto her, I am sorry I have been so neglegent to appear
in this place, but since my fault has been the occasion that you have spoke so
well, my sloth has soundly profited, for I have had with advantage the repose
of my Body having slept so soundly, and have now the repast of my Soul, having
heard you to speak so soundly to me. For penance (said Oysilla to her) let us
go to Mass, and beseech the Lord to give us both the will and the means to
execute his Commandments, and let him then command us what he pleases. And
speaking these words they entered into the Church where they heard Mass very
devoutly: And afterward they sat down at the table to dinner, where Hircan
did not forget to make merry with that mornings slothfulness of his Wife.
After dinner they did all separate themselves to study their accounts, and when
the hour came they repaired to the accustomed place. Oysilla demamded of Hircan
to whom he would give his voice; If my Wife (said he) had not begun yesterday,
I had now given her my voice, for although I always thought that she loved me
more than all the men in the World, yet this morning she has made it manifest,
that she loves me better than she loves God or his Word, in being absent from
your good Lecture to keep me company; I would willingly therefore have bestowed
this honor on her: But since I cannot give it to the wisest Woman in the
Company, I will give it to the wisest Man, which is Guebron, and will entreat
him that he will not forhear the, Monks: Guebron replied, you had not need to
entreat me, I have them recommended to me; For it is not very long, since I
heard an Account delivered to me by Monsieur of Saint Vincent who was then
Ambassador to the Emperor, which is worthy not to be buried in oblivion.

THE NOVELLS Of Queen MARGARET.
The Execrable cruelty of a Friar to obtain his detestable Desires, and the
punishment which he endured.
The first Novell of the Fourth Book.
IN the Lands subject to the Emperor Maximilian of Austria, there was a Covent
of Friars in high Estimation, near unto which a Gentleman had his house, and
did bear so great a love to the Religious people that were within it, that he
gave them a part in all his Goods, to have a part himself in their Abstinences
and Prayers. Amongst others, there was amongst them a handsome lusty Friar, whom
the Gentleman loved above the rest, and made him his Confessor, who had as
great a command and power in the Gentleman's House as he himself. This Friar
observing the Wife of this Gentleman to be so wise and beautiful, that it was
impossible to be more, did become so amorous of her, that he forgot to eat, and
to drink, and began to lose the light of his reason. Resolving with himself one
day to execute his Enterprise, he alone repaired to the house of the Gentleman;
and not finding him within, he demanded of his Wife, whither he was gone? She
made answer to him, That he was gone to some Lands of his about twenty miles
from thence, where he intended to stay two or three days; but if he had any
business to him, she would send a man on purpose to inform him of it. He
replied, No, and began to walk up and down the room, as if he had in his mind
some business of great importance; And when he was gone out of the Chamber, she
said to one of her Maids, (having at that time but two about her) Go to the
Confessor, and ask of him, What it is he would have? For I do find by him, that
he has the Countenance of a discontented Man. The Chambermaid did go down into
the Court, and demanded of him, If he would have any thing? He answered, Yes,
and taking her aside to one of the Corners of the House, he drew forth his
Poynado, which he carried in his sleeve, and did thrust it into her throat.

As soon as he had performed this horrible act, there arrived in the same Court
a Servant of the Gentleman's, who was on Horseback, who had brought him Rent
from a Farm he had; As soon as ever he alighted, he saluted the Friar, who
embracing him, thrust his poynado with all his force into his neck behind him,
and did make fast the out-doors of the Castle. The Gentlewoman perceiving that
the Chambermaid did not return, did much wonder what was the business that she
stayed so long with the Friar, and said unto her other Chambermaid, Go down,
and see what is the reason that your Companion does not return. The Chambermaid
did as her Mistress did command her, and was no sooner down the stairs, but
the Friar came unto her, and enticed her to the same corner of the house where
he killed the other Maid, and did by her, as he did by the other. When he
beheld himself to be alone in the house, he repaired to the Gentlewoman, and
told her, That it was a long time since he was deeply in love with her, and the
hour was now come in which she must be obedient to him. She, who had never the
least suspicion of him, did say unto him, My Ghostly Father, I do believe that
if I should entertain so wicked a Desire, you would be the first that would
stone me. The Religious man said unto her, Come down into the Court, and you
shall see what I have done; When she beheld her two Chambermaids and her Groom
killed, she was so transported with fear, that she stood like a Statue without
speaking one word. Immediately this wicked man, who would not delight himself
with her only for one hour, nor take her by force, did say unto her, Lady, be
not afraid, You are in the hands of him who does love you the best in the
world; And speaking these words he did put off his long habit, and did show
unto her another less religious habit which he carried under his arm, and did
present it to the Gentlewoman, and withal did threaten her, that if she would
not put it on, he would put her also amongst the number of those whom she saw
dead before her eyes.

The Gentlewoman, more dead, than alive, did determine with her self to put on
a face to be obedient to him, as well to save her life, as to gain some time,
in which she hoped her Husband might return. And according to the Commandment
of the Friar, she began to put off her Colf, and was as long about it as
possibly she could; when she was in her hair flowing down to her middle, the
Friar seemed not to regard the beauty of it, he did cut it off as hastily as he
could, which being done he made her to strip her self into her smock, and to
put on that little habit which he had brought, and reinvesting himself with his
own which he was accustomed to wear, he made all the have he could out of the
doors, taking with him that little pretty Friar, whom for a long time he so
much desired.

But God who has pity on his Children in their tribulation, did regard tho
tears of this innocent. Lady; so that her Husband having dispatched his affairs
sooner than he expected, did return to his house the same way in which his Wife
did go with the Friar. When the Friar beheld him at some distance, he said
unto the disguised Lady his Wife, behold your Husband who is coming yonder, I
know if you do look upon him with such a fixed Eye that he may discover you, he
will take you out of my hands, wherefore go before me, and see by no means you
turn your head on that side that he does come, for if you make the least sign,
be sure I will have my Poynado in your tbroat before he shall be able to
deliver you from me. As he did speak these words the Gentleman approached, and
demanded of him from whence he did come, He made answer, from your house, where
I have lest the Gentlewoman your Wife in good health, who does attend your
coming. The Gentleman did ride on without perceiving his Wife, but his Servant
that was with him, who was always accustomed to entertain the Companion of the
Friar, called Friar John, did speak unto his Mistress, thinking she had been
Friar John. The poor Woman, who durst not turn her head on that side toward
her Husband, did not answer one word, which made the Groom (fearing that he had
mistook) to ride cross the way the better to observe her; and without speaking
one word unto him, the Gentlewoman made a sign unto him with her Eyes, which he
found to be full of tears. The Groom did ride up unto his Master, and said unto
him, Sir, In riding on the other side of the way, I have observed the Companion
of the Friar, and I do find it not to be Friar John, but one who does much
resemble my Mistress your Wife, who with eyes full of tears did look most
sorrowfully upon me. The Gentleman told him that he did speak at random, and
did not well enough observe who it was, and made no account of what he said;
But the Groom persisting in it, he did beseech his Master to give him leave to
go back, and to come more near unto them, and be pleased to stay himself in
the way to be satisfied in the event of the doubt. The Gentleman did consent
unto it, and stood still to observe what was the news which his Groom would
bring back unto him: But when the Friar heard him riding after him, and that he
called Friar John, Friar John, suspecting that the Gentlewoman was discoverd,
he came up unto him, and having in his hand a great Staff, and armed with Iron
at the end thereof, he did give the Groom so great a blow upon his Ribs, that
he did fall off from his horse unto the ground, and the Friar leaping on him
did immediately cut his throat. The Gentleman who at a distance did behold the
Groom to fall, thinking it was occasioned by the fright, or the stumbling of
his horse, did gallop up to his assistance. As soon as the Friar did behold him
to be within the reach of his Staff, he gave him a blow with it in the same
manner as he gave his Servant, at the violence whereof the Gentleman being
dismounted, the Friar began to drag him and throw him upon his Servant: but the
Gentleman who had a stout heart, and an able body, held the Friar close to him,
with so much force, that he took from him the power to do him any further
mischief, and made the Poynado to drop from his hand, which his Wife
immediately did take hold on, and did give it to her Husband, and with all her
force held the Friar by his Cowl, whilst her Husband did give him many wounds
with the poynado, so that the Friar desired pardon, and confessed the Truth of
all his wickedness. The Gentleman (although he might) would not kill him, but
entreated his Wife to go home to his House, and bring some of his servants to
him, and to bring a little Wagon with them to convey himself to his House with
more ease, which she did.

The Friar being despoyled of his habit, which he had polluted with so much
blood and lust, did run in his shirt, and his shorn head toward his own
Covent; But the servants of the Gentleman did overtake him, as they were going
to their Master to assist him to bring away the Wolf which he had taken, and
did dragg him to his house, who did cause him to be brought before the Justice
of the Emperor in Flanders, before which Court he confessed his villainy; and it
being found by his Confession (and proof made by the Commissaries there
present) that a great number of Gentlewomen, and beautiful Maids had been
brought into that Monastery by the same Art, as this Friar would have brought
this Gentlewoman, It was ordered, That the said Monastery should be examined,
and despoyled of those beautiful Larcenies, and that in the perpetual memory of
this Crime, the Monks should be all shut up, and be burned with the Monastery.
By this it may appear, that there is nothing more cruel than Love, when it is
grounded upon Vice, as there is nothing again more commen dable than Love, when
it does dwell in a virtuous heart.

Ladies, I am very sorry that the truth of these Accounts does not lead us as
much to the commendations of Friars, as it does unto their prejudice; for it
would be a great pleasure to me, in the respect of the love which I do bear
unto their Order, to know any one of them who would give me a just cause to
praise them. But we have sworn so much to speak the truth, that, after the
report of Men so worthy to be believed, I am constrained not to conceal it:
assuring you, that when the Friars of these times shall do any act worthy of
memory, I will endeavor to set it forth far better to their Glory, than I have
given you the account of this Truth unto their Infamy. In good carnest Guebron
( said Oysilla) Behold here a Love which ought to be called Cruelty. I do
wonder ( said Simon^ault) how this Friar had the patience, seeing this
Gentlewoman in her smock, and in a place where he himself was Master, that he
did not take her by force. He had not so sudden a stomach, ( said Saffredant)
but was a true Gormandizer; for through the desire which he had to be-glut him
self with her all day long, he would not make any stay ^ow, to take a taste of
her. It is not so ( said Parliament) for you are to understand that every Man
who is furious, is also timorous, and the fear which surprised him that his
prey should be taken from him, did cause him to take away that Lamb (as a Wolf
does a sheep) to seed upon it with more appetite, at his own leisure. I cannot
believe ( said Dagou^in) that he did bear any love unto her, or that Love could
ever inhabit in a heart so barbarous. However it was ( said Oysilla) I do
beseech God, that as he was punished, so the like enterprises may always meet
with the like chastisement. But to whom will you give your voice? To you (Lady)
said Guebron; for you will be sure to give us some good Account. Since it comes
to my turn ( said Oysilla) I will give you a memorable account which happened
in our times, and of which she her self was an ey-witnesse, who did acquaint me
with it. I am sure that you are not ignorant that Death is the end of all our
Miseries; and therefore putting an end unto our miseries, it may be called our
Felicity, and sure Repose; for the greatest misery that a man can have is to
desire Death, and to be deprived of it, and of the means to enjoy it. The
greatest punishment which can be given to a Malefactor, is not Death, but to
afflict him with a perpetual torment, so great, it makes him to desire it, and
so little, that he cannot obtain it: just as a Husband did deal by his Wife, as
you shall hear by this following story.

The punishment more rigorous than Death, which a Husband inflicted on his
Wife, having taken her in Adultery.
The second Novell.
KIng Charles the Eighth of that Name did send into Germany a Gentleman called
Bernage, Lord of Cyure near unto Ambois, whose diligence was so remarkable in
his Masters service, that he traveled both day and night. One evening he
arrived very late at the Castle of a Gentleman, where he demanded lodging,
which with great difficulty was at last granted. Nevertheless, when the
Gentleman understood that he was the Servant of so great a King, he did go
forth to meet him, and did beseech him not to be discontented at the rudeness
of his people; for by reason of some kindred of his Wives who intended ill unto
him, he was enforced to keep his Gate shut. Immediately Bernage acquainted him
with the occasion of his Legation, in which the Gentleman did offer him all
service that possibly he could in the behalf of the King his Master, and
brought him into his House, where he did lodge him, and gave him honorable
entertainment. The hour of Supper being come, the Gentleman did lead him into a
Parlor hung round with very rich tapestry, where, as soon as the meat was upon
the Table, he did behold a Lady of a most excellent beauty to come forth from
behind the Arras; her head was shaven all over, and the rest of her body
clothed with Blacks of Almaign. After the Gentleman had washed with Monsieur
Bernage, water was brought to the said Lady, who having washed her hands, did
sit down at the end of the Table, and spoke not to any one, nor any one to her.
Signior Bernage did often look upon her, and she seemed to him to be the most
beautiful Lady that ever he beheld, but only that she looked pale, and withal,
was very sad; After she had eaten a little, she demanded Drink, which a Servant
did bring her in a wonderful vessel, for it was the scull of a dead Man, the
edge whereof was round about tipped with silver: The Lady did drink twice or
thrice in it, and after she had supped, and washed her hands, she made a low
Reverence ^o the Master of the House, and returned again from whence she came,
without speaking any word. Bernage was so amazed to see a thing so strange,
that he became very sad, and pensive. The Gentleman perceived it, and said unto
him, I observe very well, that you are astonished at what you have seen at this
Table; but because of the civility which I have found in you, I will not
conceal from you the occasion of it, that if in me there be any cruelty at all,
you may perceive I have a just cause for it; That Lady which you beheld, is my
Wife, whom I loved better than it is possible for any other to love his Wife;
insomuch, that to marry her I did forget all fear, and brought her hither in
spite of all her Kindred. She also did express unto me such signs of love,
that I would have hazarded ten thousand lives to have her always with me, to
her own content and mine. Having married her, we lived a long time in such a
mutual assurance of one another love, that I conceived my self to be the most
happy Gentleman in Christendom. But in a Voyage which I made, (to which my
Honor did engage me) she so much forgot her own Honor, and her Conscience,
and the Love which she had in to me, that she became amorous of a young
Gentleman whom I brought up in this House, which, a^ my retu^n, I thought not
to have found. So it is, that the love which I did bear unto her was so great,
that I could not harbor the least mistrust of her, until Experience opened my
eyes, and I beheld that which I feared more than Death; wherefore my Love was
converted into fury and despair, and I did watch her so narrowly, that one day
pretending to go abroad, I did hide my self in that Chamber where now she
resideth, into which, not long after my departure she retired, and caused the
young Gentleman to come to her, whom I saw to deport himself with that
familiarity, that it did belong to none, but to my self only: when I beheld him
to lie down upon the Bed by her, I came forth, and taking him in her arms, I
did kill him; And because the guilt of my Wife did appear to be so great, that
such a Death was not enough, wherewith to punish her, I contrived a punishment
for her, which I believe was more unpleasing to her than Death it self. I
locked her up in that chamber to which she was accustomed to retire to receive
her greatest delights, and in his company whom she loved better than mine, into
which place I sent her, enclosed in an armory, all the bones of her friend,
hanging as some precious Jewels in a Cabinet: and to conclude, (when she eats
and drinks at the Table before me) that she might not forget the memory of
him, I cause her to be served, instead of a cup, with the scull of that fond
Young Man, to the end that she may both see him alive, whom by her fault she
has made her Mortal Enemy, and see him dead for the love of her, whose
friendship she preferred above my own. And thus constantly at Dinner and Supper
she beholds two objects which ought most to displease her, her Enemy living,
and her Friend dead, and all by her own default. For the rest, I do use her as
I do use my self, only she does go without any hair at all; for the ornament of
hair does not belong to an Adulteress, nor a veil to one that is unchaste,
wherefore she does go without a veil, and without hair, to show that she has
lost her honor and her chastity. If you please to take the pains to see her
once more, I will conduct you to her, to which Bernage seemed very willing, and
descended with him into a low place, where he found her in a very fair Chamber
fitting alone before the fire. The Gentleman opened a curtain which was before
a great Armory where he did see hanging all the bones of a dead man.

Bernage being touched with compassion had a great desire to speak unto her,
but durst not for fear of her Husband. The Gentleman perceived it, and said
unto him, If you please to speak any thing unto her, you shall observe what
words and language she has; Whereupon Bernage immediately said unto her,
Madam, if your patience be equal to your torment, I do esteem you to be the
happiest Lady in the World. The Lady having tears in her eyes, did answer him
with a most graceful hudblenes: I do confess my fault to be so great, that
all the Evils which the Signior of this place (whom I am not worthy to name
Husband) can bring upon me, are nothing in comparison of my deserts, and the
grief I have so much to have offended him: And speaking those words she did
weep abundantly, which the Gentleman observing took Bernage by the hand and did
lead him forth.

The morning being come Beruage departed to put his charge in execution which
the King had given him, and taking his farewell of the Gentleman, he could not
forbear to say unto him, Monsieur, the love which I do bear unto you, and the
honor and the privacy which you have showed to me in your house do constram me
to declare unto you, that it seems to me (seeing the great repentance of your
poor Wife) that you ought to look upon her, and to use her with compassion, and
since you are but young, and have no children, it will be a great loss that so
noble a House should fall for want of Heirs, and that those who love you not
peradventure will succeed you. The Gentleman who determined with himself never
more to speak unto his Wife, did consider with himself of this discourse and
Counsel of Bernage, and acknowledged that he had given him good advice, and did
promise him that if she persevered in this humility he would look with some
pity on her.

In this manner Bernage departed to the performance of his Commission; and when
he was returned to the King his Master he gave him all along the Account of
what he had done in his behalf, which the King found to be as he expressed, and
amongst other things Bernage having spoken of the beauty of that Lady, the King
sent his own Painter named John de Paris to limn that Lady to the life, and
bring her picture to him, which (having the consent of her Husband in it) he
performed? And some weeks afterward the Husband after the long penance of his
Wife, as well in the desire to have Children by her, as in the compassion of
her, did take her again into his bed, and had by her many lovely children.

Ladies if all those who have committed the like fault should drink in the like
vessels, I am shrewdly afraid that many gilded cups should be converted into
Dead men's Skulls. Now God take us into his keeping, for if his Grace does not
restrain us, there is not one here amongst us but is prone to do as much; but
having our confidence in him, he will preserve those who confess they are not
able to preserve themselves; and those Ladies who do most of all confide in
their own strength and virtue, are in greatest danger to be tempted to
acknowledge their own infirmity, and be you assured that there are very many
whom Pride has made to fall in such a case, whiles humility has saved others
who were esteemed less virtuous. The old Proverb does therefore truly affirm,
that those whom God keeps are well kept. In my opinion ( said Parliament) the
punishment is but reasonable, and as just as moy be, for as the offense was
worse than death, so was the punishment worse than death. I am not of your
opinion ( said Emarsuite) for I had rather all my life time behold the bones of
dead Servants in my Cabinet, than endure to die for them, there is no crime so
great which cannot be amended, but after death there is no amendment at all.
How is that ( said Longaren) can you amend your Honor? you know (I am sure)
that after such a misfortune, whatsoever a Woman can do, she can never recover
her honor. Tell me I pray you ( said Emarsuite) if Mary Magdalen has not more
honor now amongst men, than her Sister who was a Virgin. I must confess (
said Longarine) that we do praise her more, but it is for the great love which
she did bear our Savior, and for her repentance; for if you do observe it,
the title of a Sinner does continue with her still. I care not ( said
Emarsuite) what name men give unto me, for if God does pardon me, and my
Husband to boot, there is nothing that I know of, for which I would die.
Although that Gentlewoman did not love her Husband as she ought ( said
Dagoucin) yet I do wonder that she did not die for grief to behold the bones
of him whose death she occasioned by her own offense: Say you so Dagoucin (
said Simontault) are you yet to understand that Women are capable neither of
grief nor love. Yes (said he) and that is the reason that I never dare to tempt
their loves, for fear I should find less than I desire. You live then ( said
Nomerfide) like a Plover of the Wind, upon Faith and Hope, we may seed you at a
cheap rate. I am contented (said he) with the love which I do find in my self,
and the hope I have in the heart of one Lady, which if I know to be such as I
hope it is, the extreme content thereof would so transport me that I should not
endure it without death. Nay be wise ( said Guebron) and take heed of that
Plague, for it is a dangerous malady I dare assure you: But I would know to
whom Madam Oysilla will give her voice. I do give it (said she) to Simontault,
who I do know will not spare any. You praise me so highly ( said Simontault)
that you do almost call me a Detractor; Howsoever I will not forbear to
represent unto you, that those whom they call Detractors have spoken the truth;
And Ladies I am confident ye are not so foolish to believe, that in all these
Novells which have been spoken (whatsoever appearance they may have of truth)
yet if they were brought to the trial, the proof is not so great but they may
be a sufficient Subject for the Sceptick; nay oftentimes we find, a great abuse
under the pretense of a miracle, and therefore I have a desire io give you an
account of one, which will be no less to the honor of a faithful Prince than
to the Dishonor of a wicked Minister of the Church.

The abomination of an incestuous Priest whose Sister under the pretense of a
holy life was great with child by him, and of the punishment that did follow
thereupon.
The third Novell.
COunt Charles of Angoulesm, Father to King Francis the first of that name, a
virtuous Prince and fearing God, being at Coignac intelligence was brought unto
him, that in a Village not far from thence, called Chernes, there was a Vigin
lived so austere a life that it was admirable, yet nevertheless she was great
with Child, which she no ways dissembled, but was proud of it, and assured all
the people that came to behold her that she never knew man, and that she could
not conceive which way she conceived it, if it were not by the adumbration of
the Holy Ghost, which the people easily believed, and did repute her to be a
second Virgin Mary. Every one that knew her did affirm, that from her Infancy
she was so precise, that there never appeared the least sign of any
worldliness in her: She fasted not only the Fasts commanded by the Church, but
many days in the week she made Fast-days for her private Devotion, and as song
as any service was said in the Church she never stirred from it; wherefore her
life was so much esteemed by all the people, that every one did come on purpose
to look upon her as a wonder, and happy was he who could but touch her garment.

The Curat of the Parish was her Brother, a man of about fifty years of age,
and of a very austere life, and accounted by his Parishioners to be a very holy
Man, who to outward appearance did entreat his Sister so roughly, that he did
in a House keep her shut up as in a prison, at which the people were very much
displeased; and the report of this miracle was so great, that the news thereof
was brought to the Ears of the Count, who perceiving the abuse with which all
the world was possessed did desire to take it away; wherefore he sent the Master
of the Requests and his Almoner (two very accomplished personages) to
understand the truth thereof, who repaired to the place, and to be informed as
diligently as possibly they could, they did address themselves to the Curat,
who seemed to be much amazed at the affair, and besought them both to assist
him in the attestation of it, which he said he hoped would give satisfaction to
the World.

The next morning the said Curat did sing Mass in the Church, at which his
Sister did assist him on her knees being very big with Child, At the end of the
Mass the Curat did take into his hand Corpus Domini, and in the presence of
all the Assembly did speak unto his Sister, Wicked and Blasphemous as thou art
accused to be, Behold here him who has suffered death, and who was crucified
for thee, before whom I demand, if thou art a Virgin, as thou have always
assured me; She boldly, and without the least Impression of fear, made answer
to him, Yes. And how then is it possible (said he) that thou should be great
with Child, and yet remain a Virgin? She answered, I can give no other cause
thereof, but that it is only by the Grace of the Holy Spirit, who does in me
that which he pleases. Howsoever, I ought not to deny the grace which God has
vouchsafed to me, which is to preserve my Virginity; for I had never the least
desire to a Husband. Her Brother then said unto her, I give thee here the
precious Body of Jesus Christ, which thou shall receive to thy own Damnation,
if it be otherwise than thou allegest, of which these Honorable personages who
are sent hither from the Count, shall be the Witnesses; whereupon his Sister,
who was about thirty years of age, did take this following Oath, I take the
Body of my Lord here present to my Damnation, before you Gentlemen, and before
you my Brother, that never any Man has touched me any more than you. And
speaking those words she received the Body of our Lord.

The Master of the Request, and the Almoner, hearing those words, departed with
great Amazement, believing, that amongst such Protestations no Dissimulation
could have place, and made report thereof unto the King, persuading him to
believe that which they believed, But he who was wise, having thoroughly
considered of it, did cause them to repeat again unto him the words of the
Oath; and having well weighed them, he said unto them, She has taken her Oath
upon the Sacrament, that never any Man has touched her any more than her own
Brother; And I do believe it for a Truth, that she is big with child by her
Brother, and would cover her sin with that dissimulation; for we who believe in
Jesus Christ, already come, ought not to expect any other: wherefore they shall
both suffer, and be burned for their most horrible and blasphemous attempts:
And do you but put the Curat in Prison, I am confident that he will confess
the Truth.

This was performed according to his Commandment, but not without the great
offense of the People, that so holy a man should so unjustly suffer. The Priest
had not been long under custody, but he confessed his wickedness, and that he
had counfelled his Sister to speak those words, and to carry her self in so
confident a posture as she did, to cover the life which they did lead together,
not only by a light Excuse, but also by a blasphemous one, that they might be
honored by all the world. And when it was objected to him, how he could be so
profane, as to take the body of the Lord to enforce her to swear upon it? He
made answer, That he was not so bold, and that the bread which he gave her was
not consecrated. The Report hereof was made unto the Count of Angoulesin, who
commanded that Justice should be executed on the Friar, accordingly as belonged
to such a blasphemous Imposter. A little respite whereof there was, until his
Sister was brought to bed, who in the space of a few weeks was delivered of a
lusty Boy, and not long after they were both burned; whereat the people were
wonderfully amazed, having under a religious mantle, seen so horrible a
Monster, and under a life so holy, and so commendable, so detestable a Vice to
reign.

Ladies, You may here behold, that the faith of this good Count was not
overcome by signs, nor exterior miracles, knowing well enough that we have but
one Savior, who in saying, Consummatum est, has showed, that he left no place
for any other to be his Successor in the work of our Salvation. I promise you (
said Oysilla) it was a great presumption, under an extreme hypocrisy to cover
so enormous a sin with the mantle of Religion, and pretendings to the Holy
Spirit. I have heard ( said Hircan) that those who under the Color of the
Kings Commission do exercise cruelties, and tyrannies, are doubly punished,
because they cover their Injustice with the Royal Justice; So you may see that
hypocrites, although they prosper for a while under the covert of Religion, yet
so it is, that when God shall take off that mantle, he does discover, and set
them open stark naked to all the world, and then their nakedness and
enormities are found as loathsome, as their Coverture was honorable. There is
nothing more pleasant ( said Nomerfide) than to speak truly what the heart does
think. It is the way indeed to grow fat ( said Longaren) and I believe that you
speak your opinion, according to your Condition. Why, I will tell you ( said
Nomerfide) I do observe that Fools (unless you kill them) do live longer than
those who are wise; and I can find no other reason for it, but because they do
not dissemble their passions: if they are angry, they do strike, if they are
joyful, they do laugh; when those who do believe themselves to be wise, do
dissemble their Imperfections, with the poison whereof their heart is all over
infected. I do believe ( said Guebron) that you speak the truth, and that
Hypocrisy, whether it be toward God, toward Men, or toward Nature, is the
Cause of all the Evils which we suffer. It would be a brave thing ( said
Parliament) if our hearts were so filled with Faith, as to believe on him who is
all Virtue, and all Joy, and that we might all, and altogether enjoy him, and
freely communicate that Joy to one another. That will be in the hour ( said
Hircan) when there shall be no more flesh on the Bones of Men. So it is, ( said
Oysilla) that the Spirit of God, which is stronger than Death, can mortify our
hearts, without any change of our body. Madam ( said Saffredant) you speak of
the gift of God, which is not common to Men. It is to those only who have Faith
( said Oysilla) But because this cannot be understood by those who are carnal,
let us know to whom Simontault will give his voice. I do give it, said he, to
Nomerfide; for because she has a merry beart, her discourse cannot be
melancholy. In good troth ( said Nomerfide) because you have a desire to laugh,
I will give you the occasion; And to show you how much Fear and Ignorance are
prejudicial to us; and that the want of a good understanding, is oftentimes the
occasion of great trouble, I will acquaint you with what happened to two Friars
of Niort, who, by their ill understanding of the language of a Butcher, had
almost killed themselves, by the only violence of their fear.

Two Friars too curious to listen to what did not belong unto them, were so
well recompensed for their vain curiosity, that they thought they both should
have dyed.
The fourth Novell.
THere is a Village betwixt Niort and Fors called Grip, which belongs to the
Signiory of Fors. One day it fell out, that two Friars coming from Niort, did
atrive very late in this village of Grip, and lodged in the house of a Butcher;
and because betwixt their Chamber and their Hosts, there was but a thin board
ill nailed, they had a great desire to listen to what the Husband did speak
unto his Wife, being in Bed together, and they came up so close unto them, that
they both laid their ears directly against the Bedstead where their Host and
his Wife lay; who not suspecting the vigilance of his Guests, did talk in
private to his Wife of what belonged to his profession, and said unto her,
Sweetheart, to morrow I must rise betimes to see my two Gray Friars, whom I
intend to kill, and to sell them in the Market to make my profit of them. And
although by those words he did mean his two Hoggs, whom he called Gray Friars,
so it was, that the two poor Friars who heard that resolution, did interpret
that it was meant by them, and in great fear and trembling they attended the
break of the Day. One of these Friars is very fat, and the other lean enough.
The fat one would have confessed himself to his Companion, and told him, That
the Butcher, not having the fear of God before his eyes, did make no more
account to cut his throat, than if he had been an Ox, or any other Beast: And
because they were locked up in their chamber, and had no other way down, but
must pass thorough the Chamber of their Host, they both did collect unto
themselves that they were sure enough to be killed, and did both of them
recommend their Souls unto God; But the younger of them, who was not
altogether so overcome with fear as his Companion, did say unto him, That
since the Door was locked up, they must assay to escape out of the Window, and
come what will, there could come nothing to them worse than Death.

To this the fat Friar did consent. The younger of them opened the Window, and
observing it was not very high from the ground, he did leap lightly down, and
ran away as fast, and as far as ever he could; He being gone, and not staying
for his Companion, the corpulent Friar did attempt the danger, but the weight
of his body did constrain him to lie where he fell; for instead of leaping, he
fell down so heavily, that he much bruised his Leg. When he beheld himself
forsaken of his Companion, and that he was disabled to follow him, he looked
round about him to find where he might hide himself, but he could discover no
place but a Piggssty only, to which he did creep as well as he could; and
opening the door to go into it, two Hoggs did run out, and escaping, grunted
their gratitude to him. The poor Friar did possess himself of their place, and
intended, when ever he heard the noise of any Travelers that passed that way,
to call unto them, and crave their assistance.

But as soon as day appeared the Butcher took into his hand his two great
knives, and desired of his Wife to keep him company to kill his two fat hoggs.
When they came unto the Stie where the Friar did hide himself, he opened the
door, and cried aloud, come forth my gray Fires, come forth, this day I shall
both eat and sell of your Puddings. The Friar being startled, and not able to
stand on one leg did hop out of the Stie the length of four feet with the
other, and cried out, Mercy, Mercy, as loud as ever he could: And if the Friar
was surprised with a great fear, much more was the Butcher and his Wife, for
they verily believed St. Francis was angry with them because they gave the name
of a Friar unto a Hogg, they therefore kneeled down before the poor Friar, and
demanded pardon of Saint Francis and his Religion, so that on hoth sides, the
Friar cried and called for mercy of the Butcher, and the Butcher and his Wife
on the other side cried as loud for mercy to the Friar, insomuch that they were
above a quarter of an hour in this agony of fear before they could understand
one another. At last the Friar perceiving that the Butcher did intend no harm,
did declare unto him the cause wherefore he did hide himself in the Hoggs-Stie;
whereupon their fear was immediately dissolved into an abundant Argument of
laughter, which had been greater but the poor Friar who had his Leg sorely
hruised (by reason of his great pain) could not go along with them in their
mirth, the Butcher therefore did lead him to his house where he continued until
he was well recovered. His Companion who did forsake him in his greatest need,
did run all night long, and in the morning came unto the house of Signior de
Fors where he complained of this Butcher, who (as he verily believed) had
killed his Companion, because he found he did not follow him. Signior de Fors
did immediately send to the Village of Grip to understand the truth, which
being known, he found there was no argument of grief, and immediately he made an
Account thereof to his Mistress, Madam the Duchess of Angoulesm Mother to
King Francis the first of that name.

Ladies you may from hence observe, that it is not good to listen to a secret,
to which we are not called, or give a false interpretation to the words which
another man does speak. Did not I know well enough ( said Simontault) that
Nomerfide would not make us weep, but heartily to laugh, in which I find that
every one of us have had their share. And how comes it about ( said Oysilla)
that we are inclined to laugh at folly, and not so much as to smile at any
thing that is well and wisely done? The reason is ( said Hircan) because it is
more agreeable unto us, and near of kin unto our Nature, which of it self is
never wise, and every one affects that which is like unto it self, and this
makes the Fools to be addicted unto Folly, and the Wise unto wisdom. But I
believe there is neither wiseman nor Fool that can restrain from laughter at
the hearing of this Account. There are some ( said Guebron) who have their
hearts so addicted to the Love of Wisdom, that say or do what you will you can
never make them langh, for they have so moderate a Joy and Contentment in their
hearts that no accident can move them. who be they ( said Hircan?) Guebron made
answer, The Philosophers of former times; whose joys and sorrows were never
perceived, so great a virtue they esteemed it to overcome themselves and their
own passions; I do approve of it as well as they to overcome a vicious passion
( said Saffredant) but to strive against a natural property, which does no hurt
to any, it seems to me to be impertinent. Howsoever you judge it ( said
Guebron) others did esteem it a great virtue. It is not so much because they
were wise men ( said Saffredant) but because they had no occasion to testify
their grief or joy, and therefore it was rather an appearance than an effect of
Virtue. Howsoever you shall find ( said Guebron) that they reproved all Vices,
and so Diogenes himself trampled with his feet on Platoes bed, because it was
adorned with more than ordinary accoutrements, and ( to show how much he
despised the vainglory and the avarice of Plato) he said, thus do I tread
upon the pride of Plato. But you do not speak all ( said Saffredant) for Plato
suddenly replied unto him, It was true that he did tread upon it, but with far
greater pride than his own; for Diogenes undervalued and despised all neatness
in a vain and dogged affectation of Simplicity. To speak the truth ( said
Parliament) it is impossible that the victory of our selves should be obtained
merely by our selves, nor can we go about it without a mavelous presumption,
which is the Vice that every one ought to hate, for from it death first
proceeded, and is the ruin of all Virtues.

Did I not read this morning to you ( said Oysilla) that they who thought
themselves more wise than other men, and by the light of Reason attained to
some knowledge of the Creator, yet attributing this glory to themselves, and
not to him from whence it was derived, thinking that by their own labor they
had gained this knowledge, have become not only more ignorant and unreasonable
than other men, but more se sual than beasts; For erring in their minds, they
have attributed that unto themselves which belongs unto God alone, and have
manifested their errors by the abuse of their bodies, perverting the order of
their Sin, as St. Paul does write unto the Romans. There is none of us ( said
Parliament) but by that Epistle may confess, that all actual and outward sins
are the fruits of the inward infidelity, which the more covered it is with
gifts and miracles, it is so much the more dangerous to pluck away. Of both
Sexes ( said Hircan) we men are more near unto Salvation than you Women; for
not dissembling our fruits, you may easily know the root, but you who dare not
put forth your fruits to the open view, and do make so many gallant
appearances, cannot without much difficulty discover the root of your arrogance
and presumption which does grow up under your fair coverture. I must confess (
said Longaren) if the word of God had not by the application of our faith
showed us the infidelity hidden in our hearts, we should be all prone to fall
into some visible offense; And thrice happy are they whom Faith has so
humbled, that they have no need to prove their natural corruptions by exterior
effects.

But let us see ( said Simontault) from whence we have digressed; for in
discoursing first of great follies, we fell into Philosophy, and from thence
into Divinity. Let us leave these Disputations to those who can better argue
them; and let us know to whom Nomerfide will give her place, and voice. I do
give it (said she) to Hircan, but I shall entreat him to be favorable to the
honor of Ladies. You could never entreat me ( said Hircan) in a better time;
for the History which I have prepared is framed on purpose, in obedience to
your desires. By this you shall confess, that the Nature of Men and women is
of it self inclined to all Vice, if it be not preserved by the bounty of him,
to whom the honor of all Victory is to be imputed. And to abate the confidence
you have, when you do speak of your own Honors, I will show you an undoubted
President.

The Endeavor and Success of a wise Husband to divert the Love which his Wife
did bear unto a Preacher.
The fifth Novell.
IN the City of Pampelona there lived a Lady, who was esteemed to be as
virtuous as she was fair, and to be the most chaste, and the most devout Woman
in all that Country. She entirely loved her Husband, and was so obedient to
him, that he reposed all his confidence in her. This Lady did incessantly
follow the Divine Service, and the Sermons. She persuaded her Husband and her
Children to hold that resolution as well as her self, who was then about 30
years of age, at which time women are accustomed to leave off the Name of fair,
to be reputed Grave. On Ash Wednesday, which is the first day of Lent, this
Lady did repair to the Church to hear something for the tribulation of the
Flesh, where she heard a Sermon preached by a Friar, who was esteemed by all
the world to be an honest Man, by reason of his great austerity, and abstinence
of life, which did render him both pale and lean, but not so altogether, but
for all that he was handsome enough, and a good Companion. This Lady in great
Devotion did hearken to the Sermon, having her eyes fastened in contemplation of
this venerable person, and her ear, and all the faculties of her undestanding,
were taken up altogether in attention to him; wherefore the sweetness of his
words did enter into her ears, and dived down into her heart, and the beauty
and grace of his countenance did so surprise her eyes, and so depserately did
invade her Spirit, that she was like a transported Creature. The Sermon being
ended, she diligently attended where he was to say Mass, at which she
assisted, and took the ashes from his hand, which was as slender as her own,
and white as the ashes themselves. The devout Lady did more regard his hand,
than the ashes he did give her, and did most assuredly believe that such a
spiritual love, whatsoever pleasure she apprehended in it, could never hurt her
conscience; she never failed a day to repair unto the Sermon, and did take her
Husband along with her, and both the one and the other did give so great a
Commendation to the Preacher, that both at bed and at board they had almost no
other Discourse but of him only. And thus the fire, under the title of
spiritual, did become so carnal, that being lodged and burning in her heart, it
did set all the body of this poor Lady into a flame. And as she was but slow to
perceive it, so she was prone to be inflamed, and first found the contentment
she received in that passion, before she knew that she was subjected to it. And
thus being in every part surprised by her grand Enemy Love, she no longer
resisted any one of his Commandments; but the greatest trouble was, that her
Physician who was to cure her was ignorant of her disease; wherefore, having put
away all fear, (which she ought to have enterrained) to show her folly before
so wise a Man, and her imperfections before so absolute and so virtuous a
Preacher, she undertook by writing to discover the love which she did bear unto
him, which at the first she did as gently as she could, and delivered the
Letter to a little page, with Instructions how to behave himself in this
service, and, above all, she did give him a special commandment that he should
be most careful that her Husband did not see him, as he did pass unto the
Friars.

The Page going on directly in his way, did pass through a street where his
Master by chance was sitting in a shop, The Gentleman seeing him, did step
forth out of the shop to see which way he did go, and the Page perceiving him
(being amazed at it) did hide himself in a house; His Master being startled
thereat, did follow him, and taking hold of him by his arm, he demanded of him,
whither he was going? and perceiving that the Excuses he did make were to no
purpose, and that he had an affrighted countenance, he threatened to beat him
foundly, if he did not tell him whither he was going. The poor Page said unto
him, Woe is me, Sir, If I shall tell you, my Mistress will kill me. The
Gentleman suspecting that his Wife had made a Market without his knowledge of
it, did assure the Page that he should receive no harm, if he would confess
the truth, but be well rewarded; and with^^^, that if he told him a ly, he
would keep him in prison during his life. The poor Page, to receive good and to
escape punishment, did show him the Letters which his Mistcesse had wrote unto
the Preacher, whereat her Husband was as much astonished and grieved, as he was
before assured of her loyalty, having never before received the least
discontent from her. But he who was wise did dissemble his choler, and (to know
the farther intentions of his Wife) did return an answer by writing to her
Letter, as if the Preacher had thanked her for her good will, and declared to
her that he for his own part did bear as much true affection unto her. The Page
having sworn unto his Master to carry on this business with all silence and
discretion, did return unto his Mistress, to whom he delived that counterfeit
Letter, whereat she was surprised with so much joy, that her Husband did easily
perceive it by the change of her countenance, for instead of contrition and
making her self lean with abstinence, she did look more fresh, more fair, and
more lovely, than before that Lent did begin.

It was now middle-lent, yet this Lady neither for the holiness of the season,
nor the approach of the Passion did alter her accustomed manner, but continued
by Letters to declare unto the Preacher her furious fantasy; and it seemed to
her (poor Lady) that when he turned his eyes on that side where she sat, it was
only to look on her, and as often as he did speak of the love of God, she did
apply it to herself, and thought in her interpretation of it, that it was
spoken altogether for the love of her, and as much as her eyes could show what
she thought, she spared not to return in glances to him: her Husband in his
Letter failed not to send her like answers. After Easter was passed, he did
write unto her in the name of the Preacher, and did entreat her to instruct him
what means he should use to come unto her. She, who thought every hour a year
until she had returned an answer to that Letter, did counsel her Husband to
take a journey into the Country to survay some lands which he had there, which
he promised her to do, and concealed himself in the house of one of his
friends. The Lady failed not to write unto the Preacher on what hour he might
have his opportunity to come and see her, for her Husband was gone forth. The
Gentleman desiring to make trial of the love of his Wife even to the last, did
repair unto the Preacher, and (for the honor of God) desired him that he would
be pleased to lend him his habit: The Preacher, who was a very righteous man,
did assure him, that it was against the Rules of their order, and that he would
not for any thing lend it to have it brought upon the Stage. The Gentleman did
protest unto him, that he would only use it for his own pleasure, and in a
business that was necessary for the good both of Soul and Body. The Friar
knowing him to be an honest man, and fearing God, did lend it to him; and with
this habit (which covered the greatest part of his face, insomuch that she
could not see his eyes) he took a false beard, and a false nose, and near in
resemblance to the Preachers, and he did put a Rise into his shoes that he
might be just of his height. Thus habited he did come in the Evening, into the
Chamber of his Wife, who did attend him with great devotion, and (poor
Gentlewoman) could not forbeat till he came to her, but as a Woman out of her
senses she did run to meet him, and embraced him: He who held his head down
into his bosom for fear of being discovered, did begin to make the sign of the
cross, and to fly from her, and to cry out aloud, Temptation, Temptation. The
Lady said unto him, alas my dear Father, you have reason for it, for there is
no more violent temptation than that which does proceed from Love, to which you
have promised to give me a remedy, beseeching you, that now having time and
leisure you will have pity on me, and speaking those words she did enforce her
self to embrace him, but he running from her round about the Chamber, and
making many and great signs of the Cross, did continually cry out Temptation,
Temptation; but perceiving that she came up close unto him, and to examine some
where about him too familiarly, he took a good cudgel which he did carry under
his mantle, and did give her so many, and such effectual blows, that he made
her to forsake and forget the Temptation, and being not discovered by her, he
repaired immediately to the Preacher, and restored him his habit, assuring him
that he had received an especial favor by it. The next morning, pretending
that he had returned from a long Journey, he came into his house, where he
found his Wife sick in bed, and as if he was ignorant of what had passed, he
enquired of her the cause of her disease: She made answer, that it was a cold
she had taken, which was so violent upon her, that she could not stir either
hand or foot. Her Husband (who had a good desire to laugh) did pretend to be
extremely sorry, and (to administer some comfort to her) did acquaint her, that
on that Evening he had invited the holy man the Preacher unto Supper. She
immediately made answer, far be it from you (Sweetheart) to invite any of that
Tribe, for they do bring ill luck with them into all the houses wheresoever
they do come. How (my dear Sweetheart) said her Husband, have you so much
praised this man unto me, and do you make no more reckoning of him? As for my
own part, I do verily believe, that if there be a holy man in the world, it is
verily he. His Wife made answer to him, they are good in the Church, and in
their Pulpits, but in our houses they are very Antichrists; I must beseech you
Sir (if he does come) that I may not see him, for it will be enough (with the
sickness that already I have on me) to kill me outright. Her Husband said unto
her, because you have no mind unto it, you shall not see him, and therefore he
shall sup with me in the Parlor. She made answer to him, do what you please,
but I pray let not me see him, for in my own house I do hate such people as I
hate the Devil. Her Husband, after he had supped with his Ghostly Father, did
say unto him. My Father, I do esteem you to be so beloved of God, that he will
deny you no just Petition. I do beseech you therefore to have pity on my poor
Wife, who (for these eight days) has been possessed with an evil spirit,
insomuch that she biteth and scratcheth all the World; there is neither
crossing nor holy water of which she makes any reckoning at all; I do believe,
that if you shall but put your hand upon her, that the Devil will leave her,
and in this I must beseech you to do as much for me as lies in your power. The
Confessor did reply unto him, my Son, All things are possible to the true
believer; And do you assuredly believe, that the goodness of God refuses not
any who in faith demands mercy of him? My Father, I do verily believe it,
said the Gentleman. Assure your self also my Son said the Friar, that he both
can do it, and he will do it, and that he is no less powerful than merciful.
Let us therefore go in the power of Faith to resist that roaring Lion, and
pluck from him the prey which is redeemed by the blood of his Son Jesus Christ.

The Confessor having spoken these words, the Gentleman did bring him into the
Chamber where his Wife was laid upon a Truckle-bed, who was so much amazed to
see him, verily believing that it was he who had beaten her, that she did grow
into a wonderful Rage, as might appear by her countenance, but by reason of
the presence of her Husband she did look down with her eyes, and did not speak
one word. Her Husband said unto the Holy man, As long as I am with her, the
Devil does not torment her, but as soon as ever I am departed from her, do you
sprinkle holy water on her, and you shall quickly see how the evil spirit will
play his pranks. Having spoken those words, he did leave the Preacher alone
with his Wife, and stayed himself behind the Arras to observe their
Countenances. When she beheld that there was no man with her but the Confessor,
she did begin to cry out as a woman enraged, and out of her sense, and called
him Villain, Murderet, and Impostor; The Friar (for certain) believing that she
was possessed with an evil Spirit, did attempt to take her by the Head, to say
his Oraisons over it, but she did so scratch him, and so bite him, that she
enforced him to stand further off, who perpetually sprinkling her with his
holy water, did number Oraisons upon Oraisons.

When her Husband perceived that he had done his Duty, he came into the
Chamber, and gave him many thanks for the pains that he had taken; as soon as
ever she perceived her Husband, she held both her hands and her tongue, and did
forbear all Injuries and Maledictions, and standing in aw of him, she gently
did kiss the Cross: But the Holy Man (who before did see her so much
transported) did firmly believe, that at his prayer, our Savior had cast the
Devil out of her, and departed praising God for so great a Miracle. The Husband
seeing his Wife well chastised for so foolish a fantasy, did conceive it not
to be sit to declare unto her what he had done, for he contented himself to
have overcome her violent affection by his wisdom, and that he had put her into
such a condition, that she now detested her own folly, and mortally hated that,
which before so indiscreetly she had loved. And after this (having abandoned
all Preciseness) she devoted her self altogether to her Husband, and followed
her business better at home, than she did ever before in all her life.

Ladies, by this you may understand the Discretion of a good Husband, and the
Frailty of a Woman, that was esteemed of a devout and honorable life: I do
believe that when you do behold your selves in this Mirror, instead of trusting
in your own strength, you will learn to return to him in whose hand all Honor
is enclosed. I am very glad, said Parliament, that you are become a Preacher to
Ladies, and should be yet more glad, if you would but continue in this good
discourse unto all those with whom you hold communication. As often, said
Hircan, as you please to give ear unto me, I am consident that I shall not
speak otherwise. It is as much as to say, said Simontault, that when these
Ladies are not present, you will speak in another sense. That shall be, said
Parliament, as he himself pleases; but for my own content, I shall believe that
he will never speak otherwise: Nevertheless the Example he has alleged, will
serve to convince those, who believe that a love spiritual cannot be dangerous,
which appears to me to be the most dangerous of all others. It is true, said
Oysilla, that to love an honest Man, and one fearing God, ought not to be a
thing we should despise, for we should love none but such. Madam, said
Parliament, I must beseech you to believe, that there is nothing more foolish,
nor more easy to be deceived, than a woman who has never been in love; For
Love, of it self, is a passion which takes possession of the heart before we
are advised of it, and this passion is so pleasant, that if it can be so far
assisted by Virtue, as to put on her cloak, it will not, without much
difficulty, be discovered, until some Inconvenience shall ensue thereby. What
Inconvenience can arise, said Oysilla, to love a Man of worth and Honor?
Madam, answered Parliament, There are many Men esteemed Men of Honor toward
Ladies, but to be so much a Man of Worth toward God that a Lady may love him,
and reserve both her Honor and her Conscience, I do believe is near unto a
wonder, and very rare to find. And those who are confident there are such; and
that there are many of them, will find themselves at the last to be deceived;
and they have entered into a Love under the Notion of God, the events whereof
does lead them to the Devil; for I have seen too many, who, under the Color of
Piety, have entertained a Love, from whence, in the end, they would have
willingly retired, but could not, because the honest Coverture of it did keep
them in a fond subjection. For a vicious Love does of it self defeat it self,
and cannot be lodged in a virtuous heart; but a virtuous Love is that which
carries with it nets of silk, so finely woven, that we are innocently taken in
them, before we do perceive them. If it be as you speak, said Emarsuite, there
would never any Woman love a Man^; but your Law is too severe to be observed by
any. I know it very well, said Parliament, but for all that I will not leave off
to desire every Woman to be contented with her own Husband, as I am with mine.
Emarsuite, who by that word did believe that she her self was understood,
changing her color, did say unto her, You ought to judge that every one has
as good a heart as you your self, and not to believe that you are more perfect
than all others. Well, well, said Parliament, that we may enter no further into
this Discourse, Let us know unto whom Hircan will give his voice. I do give it,
said he, to Emarsuite, that she may be reconciled to my Wife. Since then, it
comes to my turn, said Emarsuite, to make all equal, I will spare neither Man
nor Woman; and I will make trial, if I cannot overcome your heart once more to
acknowledge the Virtue and the Goodness of Men, which causes me to follow the
trace of the last account, by giving you a History that has relation to it.

A President of Grenoble being adverised of the inordinate affection of his
Wife, did so well manage the business, that his honor was not interested in
it, and he himself was thoroughly revenged.
The sixth Novel.
IN the City of Grenoble there was a President, whose Name I will conceal
(howsoever he was no French man) he had a very handsome Wife, and lived in great
peace with her. This Woman observing that her Husband was grown old, did fall
in love with a Clerk of his, a lovely young fellow, and coming on. Every
morning when her Husband repaired to the Palace, the Clerk entered into his
Chamber, and possessed his place. One of the servants of the President did
perceive it, who having served him above thirty years, and being loyal to his
Master, could not contein himself from giving him notice of it. The President
who was a wise man would not lightly give any credence to it, but told him,
that he had a desire to plant Division betwixt his Wife and himself; And to
prove the truth, he commanded him to show her to him in the manner of it. Which
if he could not do, he would believe, he said, that he had contrived that
slander to make a separation betwixt them. His Groom assured him, that what he
had spoken, he would cause him to see with his own eyes, and accordingly one
morning as soon as the President was gone unto the Palace, and the Clerk was
entered into the Chamber of his Wife, The Servant sent one of his fellows to
acquaint his Master, that he might come at that instant and take them together,
and stayed at the Chamber door himself to watch that the Clerk should not come
forth. The President had no sooner this news brought unto him by his Servant,
but feigning himself to be sick on the sudden, and that a great qualm came over
his stomach, he returned in great have to his own house, where he found his old
Servant at the door of his Chamber, who assured him for certain that his Clerk
was within, and that he had not been very long there. His Master said unto him,
stir not from this door, for thou know well enough that there is no other
entry nor door but only this, saving only a Cabinet within, of which I always
take the Key with me. Having spoke these words, the President entered into his
Chamber, and found his Wife and the Clerk both in bed together. The Clerk
seeing him, did in his shirt throw himself down at his feet, and craved pardon
of him, and his Wife on the other side did begin to weep. The President said
unto them, Although the injury which you have done me is such, as you your
selves may well conceive to be unpardonable, yet I do tender you so much, that
I will not have my house to be dishonored, nor my children which I had by you
to be disgraced; wherefore said he to his Wife, do not weep, but observe what I
will do, and do you Nicholas (for so his Clerk was named) withdraw and
conceal your self in my Cabinet, and make not the least noise: When he had so
don, he opened the door, and calling in his old Servant he said unto him, Did
not thou assure me that thou would show me my Clerk lying in bed with my
Wife? and on thy word am I come hither, and had taken a full resolution to kill
my Wife; I have not found any thing of what thou have said unto me, and yet
have thoroughly searched the Chamber, as I will show unto you; and speaking those
words, he commanded his Groom to look under the Bed, and in every corner of the
Chamber. When the Groom could not discover him, he said to his Master in a
great amazement; The Devil sure must carry him away, for I will take my oath
that I saw him go in, and which way he is gone out, God knows, but out at this
door he is not gone. His Master replied unto him, Thou art a wicked Knave to
attempt to make any difference between me and my Wife; wherefore I do charge
thee to be gone out of my house, and for the Services which thou have done me,
I will pay thee what I owe thee, and more than what I owe thee; but get thee
out of my doors, and be sure that thou art not in this City fout and twenty
hours: And having thus rebuked him, he liberally paid him his wages, and gave
him a reward for 5 or 6 years service to come, and knowing that he had been a
dutiful Servant, he told him, that for all the discharging his house of him, he
might be yet more beneficial to him. The Servant being dismissed and gone, the
President commanded the Clerk to come out of the Cabinet, and having (as he
thought good) reproved him and his Wife for their irregular excess of love, he
did forbid them to make any appearance of it to any man, and desired his Wife
to attire her self more gorgeously than she was accustomed to do, and gave her
leave freely to go to all Companies and Feasts. He also did look upon the
Clerk with a more friendly eye than he was accustomed, and whispering him in
his ear he bid him to go into the City, and take his pleasure there for three
or four hours. This being done, the President repaired to the Palace without
making the least appearance of any thing, and for fifteen days together (quite
contrary to his former custom) he did nothing but Feast his Friends and
Neighbors, and after the Banquet he had Music to invite the Ladies to dance.

One day observing that his Wife was melancholy, and did refuse to dance, he
commanded his Clerk to lead her forth into the dance: The Clerk believing that
he had forgotten all former faults, did with great joy take her by the hand,
and used many frolicks with her in the dance, but the dance being ended, the
President pretending he had some business with him, did whisper him in the
ear, and said unto him, Now get thee gone for good and all, and be sure that
thou do come no more into my house. The Clerk was very sorrowful to forsake
the Genwoman his Mistress, but as glad on the other side that he had saved his
own life.

After that the President by this good entertainment of them had given
assurances to all the kindred and friends of his Wife, and to all the Country,
how much he did affect her, He retired in his Garden on a Sunshine day to
gather a Sallad of herbs for her, which his Wife had no sooner tasted of, but
she died within four and twenty hours, for whom he made so great a funeral, and
so much lamenration, that not any one could suspect he was the occasion of her
death, and by this means he revenged himself of his Enemy, and saved the Honor
of his House.

Ladies, I have no inclination to praise the conscience of the President for
this, but only to show the lightness of a Woman, and the prudence and great
patience of a Man, and I must ^^^eat you not to be offended at the Truth, which
speaks sometimes as much against you as it does against men, for Women do
partake of the same Vices and Virtues with them. If all those Women said
Parliament who loved their Grooms were constrained to eat of such Sallads, I do
believe they would not love their Gardens half so well as they do, but would
root out all the berbs, that they might avoid those which give honor to the
Family by the death of the Mother of it. Hircan who did well foresee to what
end she did speak those words, did answer her in choler, A virtuous woman ought
never to judge another concerning that which she never will do her self.
Parliament did reply, Knowledge is not judgment upon conjecture, and sure it is
this poor Gentlewoman did endure the punishment which diverse have deserved; and
I do believe that her Husband, since he would be revenged on her, did govern
himself with wonderful wisdom and patience; and also with as much malice, said
Longaren, and cruel Vengeance, which sufficiently does witness, that he had
neither God nor his Conscience before his eyes. And what would you have had him
to have don, said Hircan, to revenge himself of the greatest injury that a
Woman can do unto a Man? I would, said she, that he had killed her in his
choler; for the Casuists say that such a sin is pardonable, for the first
motions of Wrath are so violent in themselves, that they are not in the power
of a Man to give a stop unto them, and therefore he is in some capacity of
pardon.

No, said Guebron, for although his Children and all his posterity had born the
infamy of the Mothers fault, he ought not to have killed her, for after that
his first and greatest choler was passed over, we find that he lived with her
as if she had never given any occasion of offense, and as if that all thought
thereof was quite blotted out of his Memory. Do you believe, said Saffredant,
that he was pacified, because he did dissemble his choler? For my self I do
believe, that on the last day wherein he made that salad, he was the same Man
as he was in the first, when he found her in incontinency, although there are
some, the first motions of whose choler have no respite at all, until they have
put their passion into act. And you do me a great pleasure, to affirm that the
Divines do hold such sins are easy to be pardoned, for I am of the same
opinion with them. We ought to take good heed, said Parliament, what we do speak
before such dangerous persons as you are; that which I have said, is to be
understood when the passion is so strong, that it suddenly does so seize upon
the sense, that there is no place left for Reason. So, so, said Saffredant, I
rest my self well satisfied with what you say, and will conclude by it, That a
man violently amorous does more easily deserve pardon, than any other who does
sin being not in love; for if Love does lay him bound in chains, Reason cannot
easily command him, and, if We will confess the truth, there is not here
present any ^^e of us, who at one time or other has not had experience of his
furious folly, and which of us does not now expect to have pardon for it? For
true love is a degree to mount to the love of God, to which none can easily
ascend, who has not first climbed up the Ladder of trials, and who does not
love his Neighbor, and wish him as much happiness as to himself, which is a
great step unto perfection; for St. John says, How can you love God whom you
have not seen, if you love not your Neighbor whom you have seen?

There is no place nor passage in the Scripture, said Oysilla, that is so
direct, but you can turn it to your own purpose; but take heed that you do not
like the Spider, which converteth all wholesome food into poison, and you ought
to be advised how dang roas it is to allege the Holy Scripture without
Necessity. What do you call it, said Saffredant, to allege the Scripture
without Necessity? You will say, that in speaking to such incredulous Creatures
as your self, and appealing to God to be our witness, we do take his Name in
vain; but if it be a Sin, you Women your selves ought altogether to endure the
punishment, for your incredulities do enforce us to seek out all the
Protestations, and make all the Oaths we can devise, and yet for all that we
cannot kindle any fire at all in your hearts of Ice. It is a sign, said
Longaren, that you are great dissemblers, for if there were any truth in your
words, the truth would be so strong, that it would enforce us to believe you,
but it is to be feared, that the Daughters of Eve do too much believe the
Serpent that does tempt them. I understand well enough, said Saffredant, that
Women are invincible, wherefore I will hold my peace, and attend to whom
Emarsuite will give her voice. I do give it, said she, to Dagoucin, for I
believe that he will not speak any thing in the derogation of Ladies. I would
to God, said he, that they would carry a correspondence with me, and be as
favorable to me, as I am ready to speak in the praise of them; and to manifest
unto you, that I do make it my business to honor the virtuous, in laboring to
find out their good works, I will give you a History of one, of them that shall
be remarkable enough. Ladies, I will not deny, but that the patience of the
Gentleman of Pampelona, and of the President of Grenoble, has been very great,
but the vengeance they have taken has been as great as was their patience.
When we do praise a virtuous Man, we ought not to give all the glory to one
single Virtue, which he makes to serve only as a cloak to cover as great a
Vice. He is to be commended, who for the love of Virtue only does do a virtuous
work, as, I hope, I shall make apparent to you by the patience, and the virtue
of a young Lady, who in her good work sought after nothing but the honor only
of God, and the salvation of her Husband.

The Discretion of a Lady to retire her Husband from a fond love, which did too
much torment him.
The seventh Novell.
THere was a Lady of an Illustrious Family in this Kingdom of France, whose
Name I will conceal, so wise she was, and virtuous, that she was beloved and
honored of all her Neighbors. Her Husband, as he ought to do, did trust her
with all his affairs, which so wisely she did manage, that by her means, her
House became one of the richest, and most accommodated with the best movables
that was in all the Country of Anjou or Tourain. Having lived a long time with
her Husband, by whom she had many goodly Children, her happiness (after which a
contray does always follow) did begin to diminish; wherefore her Husband, being
weary with his case, and great contentment, did seek out both his travel and
his torment, and made it his custom, as soon as ever his Wife was asleep, to
rise from her, and to return no more unto her, until it was near unto the
morning. His Wife did take this manner of life of his so much to heart, that
entering into a great jeasousie, (although she would make no appearance of it)
she did neglect all her household affairs, as also her self, and her children,
being one who believed she had lost all the fruit of her labors, when she had
lost the love of her Husband, to continue which love, there was no labor which
she would not willingly endure. But having lost that, she was so careless of
all the rest, that she soon perceived the great loss which her Negligence had
occasioned; For on the one side, ^er Husband did carry himself without order,
and on the other side, she looked no more to the affairs of the house: insomuch
that the whole House was so disordered, that all things did run confusedly into
Ruin.

Some of her Kindred, who undrstood her Disease, did represent unto her the
fault she did commit, and did advertise her, If the love to her Husband could
not persuade her to look unto the profit of her House, at least the regard of
her Children should enforce her. The Compassion which she had on them, did at
the last cause her to pluck up her spirits, and by all means to attempt to
regain the love of her Husband. On the night following she watched when he did
rise from her, and immediately after her was gone, she rose also, and putting on
her Nightgown, she caused her Bed to be made, and reading her Hours she
attended the return of her Husband; when her Husband was come into the Chamber,
she did go directly to him to kiss him, and brought him a Basin of water to
wash his hands. He being amazed at this unaccustomed complement, did assure
her, that he came only from casting up some accounts, and for that, there was
no need that he should wash at all. She made answer to him, That although it
was no great matter of Necessity, yet it was Civility to wash his hands when he
came from a filthy and polluted place; Belike, desiring by this to prompt him
to understand and to hate his wicked life: But he did not reform himself,
although his Wife for a whole year did continue this Custom.

When she perceived that it was uneffectual, one morning attending the return
of her Husband, who stayed longer than he was accustomed, she had a great
desire to seek him out, and did go so long from Chamber to Chamber, that she
found him at last asleep in the hindermost Wardope with one of the most
unsightly and deformed Maids that was in all the house; whereupon she resolved
to teach him what it was to forsake an honest woman for so soul a slut. In this
humor she took straw, and did set it on fire in the middle of the Chamber, and
when she perceived that the smoke had almost killed her Husband, and enforced
him to awake, she took him by the arm and cried out, Fire, Fire: If her Husband
were amazed and ashamed to be taken by his fair Wife with so foul and so nasty
a Creature, he had good reason for it. His Wife said unto him, Sir, I have
endeavored one whole year to withdraw you from this loose life with
gentleness and patience, and to show you, that by washing without, you ought
to purge what was unclean within, But when I perceived that whatsoever I could
do did prevail nothing, I attempted to assist my self with that Element which
commonly does put an end to all things, assuring you Sir, that if this at this
present should not correct you, I know not, if I shall be so patient the second
time to pluck you from this danger, as I now have done. I must beseech you to
consider that there is no greater despair than what proceeds from love, and if
I had not God before my eyes, I had not known that patience which I have used.
Her Husband being very glad that he was escaped so well, did faithfully promise
to give her no more occasion to torment her self, which the Lady very willingly
believed, and by the consent of her Husband did immediately turn out of doors
that party which did discontent her. And after that hour they did live together
in great love, insomuch that the faults committed and passed, in regard of the
comfortable life which they now enjoyed, was an augmentation of their content.

Ladies, I must entreat you, if God should give you such Husbands, that you
would not despair of them, until you have a long time assayed all the means
that possibly you can to reduce them; for there are four and twenty hours in
the day, in the which a man might change his opinion, and a woman ought to
conceive her self more happy to have gained her Husband by her own patience and
expectation, than if Fortune or her friends had offered her a more ready way.
Behold here an example, said Oyfilla, which ought to be of great use to all
married women. Let her take the example who has a mind to it, said Parliament,
it is impossible for me to have so much patience, for though in all estates
patience he a great virtue, yet I am of opinion, that in marriage it does lead
unto Enmity; for in suffering an in jury from an equal, we are thereby
constrained to separate our selves from him as far as possibly we can, and in
this separation there proceeds an undervaluing of the fault of being
disloyal, and in that undervaluing by little and little love does diminish, for
so long we do love a thing, as we do esteem the value of it. But it is much to
be feared, said Emarsuite, that an impatient wife may find a surious Husband,
who instead of patience may give her sorrow. And what can a Husband do said
Parliament more than this of whom you have had an account in this last History?
What, said Emarsuite? why he may beat her soundly, until her bones ratile again
in her skin, and make her lie in the Truckle bed, and her whom he loved in the
High bed. I do believe, said Parliament that a Woman of worth will not take it
so ill to be beaten by her Husband in choler, as to be undervalued by him for
one who is not to be compared to her, and having endured the punishment of the
separation of his love, the Husband cannot do any thing which can put his wife
to a greater sorrow, or can make him to care less for him, for so says the
Account, that the pains she took to recall him, was for the love only which she
did hear unto her Children, and I do believe it. And do you find any great
patience in this woman, said Nomerfide, to put fire under the bed where her
Husband was afleep? Yes, said Longaren, for when ever she saw the smoke about
him, she awaked him, and peradventure it was in that only that she committed
the greatest fault, for to such Husbands Fire and Cinders are the best
admonitions. Longaren, you are too cruel, said Oysilla, you have not so lived
with your Husband. No, said Longaren, for God be praised, I had no such
occasion, but instead of complaining of him, I shall grieve all the remnant of
my life that I have lost him. But if you had such a Husband, said Nomerfide?
what would you have done with him? I do believe, said Longaren, that I should
not have loved him so well, but that I should have killed him first, and
afterward my self, for to die after such a vengeance had been a thing more
agreeable unto me, than to live loyal with one that is disloyal. For ought that
I can see, said Hircan, you only love your Husbands for your selves, if they
are good according to your desire you do love them, but if they commit the
least fault in the world, they have lost the labor of all their week for one
Saturday; And this is the reason that you will be Mistresses, but for my part,
I am resolved, and if all Husbands would be but of my mind -- It is reason,
said Parliament, that the man should goveru us as our Head, but not that he
should forsake us, or entreat us ^udely. God, said Oysilla, has given so good
an order ^oth to the man, and to the Wife, that (if it be not abu^^d) I doc
believe marriage to be the most delightful, and the most sure estate that is in
this world, and I am ^^nfident that all those who hear me (whatsoever they
^^etend to the contrary) do think my thoughts, and (peradventure) more than my
self; and by how much the man is said to he more wise than the woman, he shall
by so much be the more grievously punished, if the fault does proceed from him.
But having discoursed enough let us see to whom Dagoucin will give his voice. I
do give it, said he, to Longaren. You have done me, said she, a great pleasure
therein, for I have an account that is worthy to follow yours; and because we
are now upon the praise of the virtuous patience of Ladies, I will show you one
examrle more commendable than any that has been yet recited, and so much the
more to be esteemed, in that she was only the Wife of an ordinary Citizen, who
for the most part are not b^ed up so virtuously as those of the Gentry, or in
the Court are.

The memorable Charity of a Woman of Tours toward her Husband who was a
whoremaster.
The eighth Novel:
IN the City of Tours there was the wife of a Burgess, a fair and an honest
woman, who was not only beloved for her Virtues, but highly esteemed by her own
Husband; who following the frailty of men (that are weary to feed always on
good bread) did become amorous of a Dairy maid he had, and oftentimes would
travel into the Country to see how his Dairy thrived, where he would constantly
stay two or three days, and when he returned to Tours he would be so full of
the Morphy, that his poor Wife, and all the Doctors of that City had enough to
do to recover him; and as soon as ever he was on his legs, and well again, he
failed not to return to his Dairy, where for a short pleasure he did forget all
his former weaknesses. His Wife who above all things did love the life and the
health of her Husband, observing him ordinarily to return in this weak Estate,
did repair her self unto the Dairy, where she found the young Woman whom her
Husband loved, to whom (with an unclowded, and most pleasant Countenance)
without the least show of discontent, or choler, she said, That she knew very
well her Husband came oftentimes to see her, and that nothing troubled her, but
that she did not use him well; for he always returned unto her full of
f^intnesse, and a discolored Infirmity. The young Wench (as well for the
reverence she did bear unto her Dame, as constrained unto it by the force of
the Truth) did not deny the fact, but required pardon of her.

Her Dame desired to see the Bed and the Chamber in which her Husband, being
there, was accustomed to lodge, which she found, so cold, so dampish, and so
musty, that she had great Compassion on him; wherefore immediately she did send
for a good Bed, and Curtains and Valance correspondent to it, as also for
pillows, sheets, and coverlets. She also caused the chamber to be hung with
Tapestry, and sent in fair bowls, and good dishes, in which her Husband might
eat and drink; she sent in also a pipe of good Wine, and Confects, and other
Restoratives, and desired the Dairy-maid, that she would not send back her
Husband any more unto her, so full of his former Morphy.

Her Husband being all this while at Tours, and not knowing what his Wife had
done, thought long to return unto his Dairy (as he had been accustomed to do)
whither being come, he much wondered to see all things there in so good order,
and much mote when the Maid did give him Wine to drink in a great Bowl of
Silver. He demanded of her, How she came by those Goods? The poor Maid melting
into tears, told him, That his Wife had sent them, who taking compassion of her
ill usage of him when he was there, had sent in all those movables into the
house, and desired her at her departure to have a great Care of his health. The
Husband observing the great Goodness of his Wife, and that she had returned
him so many good offices, for all the bad ones which he had performed to her,
esteeming his Fault as great as was her Virtue; did give a sum of money to the
Dairy-maid, and desired her for the time to come to live in the reputation of
an honest Servant; and returning to his Wife, he confessed his trespass unto
her; as also, that without that incomparable goodness and sweetness of her
disposition, it was impossible for him to forsake the life he lived. After this
they lived together in great peace, and he altogether abandoned his former
Incontinence.

Believe me, Ladies, that there are few Husbands, whom the Patience and the
Love of their Wives cannot gain at the last, unless they have hearts more hard
than a stone, which the water makes soft and hollow by the length of time.
Behold, said Parliament, a Woman without a heart, and without wit! what would
you have her do, said Longaren, she has put that in practice which God has
commanded; to do good unto those who do evil. I do believe, said Hircan, that
she was in love with some Friar, who in penance did command her to send those
movables to emertain her Husband in the Country, that during his residence
there, he himself might have the opportunity to be as well entertained by her in
the City. Go too, said Oysilla, you show too much the malice of your heart, to
judge ill of a good act. I do rather believe that she was so mortified in the
love of God, that she look care for nothing more than for the health and safely
of her Husband. It seems to me, said Simontault, that be had more occasion to
return unto his wife, when be was cold in his Country house, than when he was
so well provided for. For ought that I see, said Saffredant, you are not of the
opinion (Madam) of the rich Man of Paris, who would not put off his clothes
when he lay with his Wife, son fear of getting the Morphey, but when in a cold
winters day he did go to see his Maid in the fields, without shoes on his feet,
or his Bonact on his head, he was never sick at all; although his Wife was a
handsome woman, and his Maid but an ill-favored, and a dirty slut. Have you not
heard, said Guebron, that God is always savourable to Lovers, Fools, and
Drunkards? It may be that this Burgess alone was all three of them himself. By
that you would conclude, said Parliament, that God does not favor the chaste,
the sober, nor the wise. They who can aid themselves, said Guebron, do not need
to be aided by any other. For he who has said that he is come to cure the
sick, and not those who are sound, is come by the law of his Mercy to help our
insirmities, and to break the arrests of the rigor of his Justice, and he who
does think himself wise, is a fool before the face of God. But to end our
Sermon, to whom will Longeren give her voice. I do give it, said he, to
Saffredant. I hope then, said Saffredant, to show you by example, that God does
not favor Lovers; For (Ladies) although it has been heretofore affirmed, that
the Vice of Love is common both to Women and to men, yet the invention and the
artifice is always more ready in a woman than in a man, as I shall demonstrate
to you by this example.

A good invention to drive away an evil Spirit
The ninth Novel
A Lord of Grignaux who was a Cavalier of Honor to Anne Queen of France, and
Duchess of Brittany, returning to his house, from whence he had been absent
two years and more, did find his Wife removed to another place, and not in the
Castle where he left her, and enquiring of the occasion, it was told him, that
the Castle was haunted with a Spirit which did so torment them that none could
endure to stay in it. Monsieur de Grignaux who was not afraid of Hobgoblins
made answer, that if it was the Devil himself he was resolved to see what it
was, and took his Wife with him. All the night he burned great Candles to
discover the Spirit more plainly, and having kept himself a long time awake and
heard nothing at all, he fell asleep.

But immediately he was awaked by a great blow that was given him on his cheek,
and he heard a voice crying Revigne, Revigne, which was the name of his
Grandmother. He therefore called to his Wife who was in bed with him to light
more Candles, for the others were all burned out, but she durst not rise. Not
long after Signior Grignaux did plainly perceive that something was drawing
away the Coverlet from him, and he heard a great noise of Tables, and
Trenchers, and Dishes that did fall down in the Chamber, which did continue
until the break of day. The Signior was more troubled that he had lost his
Rest, than surprised with any fear of the Spirit. On the night following he did
resolve with himself to take hold of the Spirit, and not long after he was in
bed he counterfeited as if he had suorted extremely, and did keep his hand open
close unto his face. Having in this manner attended the Spirit, he at last
perceived something to come near him. wherefore he did begin to snort as loudly
as he did before; and the Spirit growing too saucy with him, did give him a
good sound blow on the face. Signior Grignaux having his hand prepared, did
immediately take fast hold on the hand that struck him, and cried out to his
Wife, I have the Spirit by the hand, who immediarely did rise, and bringing the
Candle more near unto him, they did find that it was their Chambermaid who did
lie in their own Chamber, who trembling down upon her knees did demand pardon,
and promised to confess the truth unto them, which was, that the Love which
she had born for a long time to one of his Servants in the Castle, did tempt
her to undertake this goodly mystery to drive both Master and Mistress from
thence, to the end that they two (to whom the whole charge of the House was
committed) might have the opportunity to make better cheer, which they did when
they were alone by themselves. Monsieur de Grignaux, who was a blunt and a
rough man, did command that they should both be punished with stripes, and be
taught to remember the ill Spirit as long as they lived, which being done
accordingly, they were both discharged the Castle, and by this means the House
was deliverd from all trouble of those evil Spirits, which before (for two
years together) had played their pranks in it.

Ladies, It is a strange thing to consider of the wonderful effects of the
puissant God of Love, who taking all fear from women, does prompt them to
endure all trials to arrive to the end of their own Desires. And as this
Invention in the Chambermaid was to be blamed, so the good understanding of her
Master is to be commended, who knew very well, that a Spirit goes forth, and
returns no more. Truly, said Guebron, Love at this time did not favor the
Groom, not the Chambermaid, but seems to confess, that the good Understanding
of the Master was more effectual. Howsoever, said Emarfuite, the Chambermaid by
this Invention did live a long time wholly at her own pleasure. Wicked is that
Pleasure, and most Unhappy, said Oysilla, which is grounded upon Sin, and does
end in shame and punishment. It is true, Madam, said Emarsuite, but many people
take pains and grief enough to live uprightly, and in all their lives have not
so much sense of pleasure, as these two in this Account. I am of that opinion,
said Oysilla, that without peace of Conscience, it is impossible to have any
perfect pleasure. Say you so, said Simontault, the Italian has a Proverb, That
the greater the sin is, it is always the more pleasant. Truly, said Oysilla,
they who do affirm that Tenent, are Devils themselves. Wherefore let us leave
off this Dispute, and know to whom Saffredant will give his voice. To whom
should I give it, said he, since every one has spoken their History, but to
Parliament only? but if they had not, I should have given it her before any
other, because from her we do always learn something that is both grateful,
and remarkable. Since I must put an end to the discourse of this Afternoon,
said Parliament, and that I promised yesterday to give you the reason wherefore
the Father of Rolandine did build that Castle in the Forest, where so long a
time he did keep her a prisoner, I will in this place give you an Account
thereof.

The Excellent Relation of a Lord who caused his Brother-in-law to be put to
death, not knowing the nearness of the Alliance.
The tenth Novell.
THe Lord who was the Father of Rolandine, had many Sisters, some whereof were
married very richly, others of them were Religious Votaries, and one of them
who lived in his own house was beyond comparison more beautiful than the rest.
Her Brother did love her so entirely, that he preferred her above his Wife and
Children. She was demanded in Marriage by many gallant personages, but because
he would not have her removed from him, or, peradventure, because he loved his
wealth too well, he would not seem to understand it, which was the Cause that
she lived the greatest part of her age unmarried, leading a most virtuous life
in her Brothers House; in which there was bred up with her a gallant young
Gentleman, who as he increased in age, so he increased in beauty, and was so
esteemed for his virtue, that he governed all things in his Masters house,
insomuch that when he desired his Sister to do any thing, he employed this
Gentleman to deliver his mind unto her. This authority was the occasion of a
great familiarity, which by sending him both early and late unto her, was by
their daily frequentation much increased. But the young Lady fearing her
Honor, and the Gentleman his life, if he should offend his Master, they
received no other pleasure by their love, but only the content to converse
together.

At the last her Brother told her how much he was obliged to this young
Guntleman, who was in the same house with her, and that he never saw any man
whom he desired more to his Brother in law than this Gentleman. He so often
expressed these words unto her, that she having communicated them to this
Gentleman, they presumed, that if they should marry, he would give them an
easy pardon: And Love which willingly believes that which it desires, did
prompt them to conceive, that if they should marry, nothing but good would come
of it. In this assurance therefore they did conclude and accomplish their
marriage, there being no man that knew of it but the Priest only, and some few
Women. And having lived certain years in that pleasure which a married man and
woman ought mutually to enjoy, as being the most accomplished couple at that
time, and the truest Lovers that were in Cristendom, Fortune envying to behold
two persons to live in so great a happiness, would not vouchsafe to grant a
continuance to it, but stirred up an Enemy to them, who observing this Lady did
take notice of her great happiness, not knowing of her marriage; Whereupon she
came unto her Brother, and informed him, that this Gentleman in whom he reposed
so great a trust had recourse too often to his Sister in her Chamber, and in
such hours when entrance ought not to be admitted.

This report was not believed the first time (so much he trusted to his Sister
and this Gentleman) but the woman brought in against them so many informations,
pretending that it was for the honor she did bear unto his house, that he so
narowly did watch them, that these two parties thinking no ill, were surprised
fast asleep in one another Arms. Her Brother having one Evening received
advertisement that the Gentleman was gone into his Sisters Chamber, he
immediately repaired thither, and found them both blinded with love, and asleep
together. The indignation which possessed him at the sight thereof, did take
away the utterance of his words, and drawing his sword he did run after the
Gentleman to kill him, but he being very nimble of body did fly away in his
shirt, and being not able to escape out of the door did leap out of the window
into the Garden. The poor Lady his Sister being in her smock did on both her
knees kneel down to her Brother, and said unto him, Sir, Save the life of my
Husband, for I am espoused to him, and if he has offended, punish me only, for
what he has done has been at my request. Her Brother being outrageous made no
answer at all, but only said; And if he were your Husband a hundred thousand
times, yet will I punish him as an unfaithful Servant, who has both deceived
and disgraced me; And speaking those words he did put his head out of the
Window, and commanded aloud, that they should kill him without mercy, which was
suddenly put in execution before his own eyes and his Sisters, who beholding
this lamentable spectacle, which no prayers of hers could remedy, did talk unto
her Brother as a woman out of her senses.

Brother (said she) I have neither Father nor Mother alive, and I am at that
age, that I may marry whom I will at my own pleasure, I have chosen that
Gentleman concerning whom you your self have oftentimes spoke unto me, and
assured me that it was your desire that I should marry him, and for my
obedience to your Counsel, (although for what I have done, I could justify my
self by Law without you) you have killed that Man, whom you your self loved the
best in all the world. Since it is so that my prayers could not preserve him
from Death, I do beseech you by all the love that you have born unto me, that
at this present you will make me the Companion of his Death, as I have been in
the fortunes of his Life. Doing this, you shall both satisfy your cruel, and
most unjust choler, and give rest unto her Soul and Body, who neither can, nor
will live without him.

Her Brother, notwithstanding he was so transported, that he had even lost all
Reason, yet he was touched with such a compassion at his Sisters words, that,
without granting or denying her Request, he did leave her alone to her self;
and having considered what he had done, and understood in earnest that the
Gentleman had married his Sister, he wished with all his heart that he had
never committed so rash a deed, and he was possessed with so strong a fear,
that his Sister would demand either Justice or Vengeance, that he caused a
great Castle to be builded in the midst of a Forest, into which he did put her,
and did forbid that any one should speak unto her. Some years afterward, to
satisfy his Conscience, he did assay to gain her, and did employ some persons
of trust to commune with her concerning a second Marriage; but she sent him
word, That he had given her already so bad a Dinner, that she would have no
Supper of such Viands again; and that she resolved to live in such a manner,
that he should not be the Butcher of her second Husband: for she could hardly
be induced to believe, that he would pardon another, having showed himself so
merciless to him, whom he loved best in the world. And although she was but
weak, and unable to revenge her own Cause, yet her Hope was in HIM, who is the
true Judge, and who will suffer no Sin to pass unpunished, to whose only love
she would devote her self, during her life in that Hermitage, which she did
accordingly, for she never departed thence until the day of her Death, until
her Soul departed from her Body, living with such patience and austerity, that
after her Death every one did run thither, as to the Seat of a Saint; and so
great a Ruin did fall upon her Brothers House, that of six Sons which he had,
not one remained alive, but all of them dyed most miserably, and in the end the
Inheritance was devolved (as you heard in my other Account) upon his Daughter
Rol^ndine, who succeeded in the Prison which was made for her Aunt.

Ladies, I pray to God, that this Example may be prefitable to you, that none
of you may have a desire to marry for your own pleasure, without the consent of
those ^o whom you do ow obedience; for Marriage is an Estate of so long a
Continuance, that it ought not lightly to be undertaken, nor without the
Consent of our best Friends and Kindred. And it cannot at the best be so well
managed, but it will undoubtedly bring with i^ as much pain as pleasure. In
good faith, said Oysilla, if there were neither God, nor Law, to teach fools to
be wise, this Example is sufficient enough to instruct them to bear more
reverence to their Parents, and Kindred, than to marry at their own pleasure.
Madam, It is so, said Nomerfide, that she who has one good day in a year, is
not unfortunate throughout all her life. She had a long time the pleasure to
see, and to discourse with him whom she loved better than she loved her self,
and after that, she had the delight of the Marriage Bed, without any trouble,
or remorse of Conscience. And I esteem that Contentment to be so great, that,
it seems to me, it does exceed the sorrow it brought with it. You will say
then, said Saffredant, that Women do receive more pleasures to ly with their
Husbands, than they do receive grief to to see them killed before their eyes.
That is not my in tention (said Nomerfide) for I should then speak against the
Experience which I have of married Women, but I conceive that so great and
extraordinary a pleasure as to marry that man whom we love best in the world,
is more greatly to be esteemed, than to lose him by death which is a common
calamity. So it is, said Guebron, if it were by a natural death, but this here
spoken of was too cruel, for it is very strange to me, seeing this Signior was
neither her Father, nor her Husband, but her Brother only, and moreover that
she was of full age, and that the Laws do permit the Daughters to marry whom
they please, how he durst execute such a cruelty. I do find it not strange at
all, said Hircan, for he killed not his Sister whom so perfectly he did love,
but the young Gentleman whom he cherished and brought up as his own Son, and
loved as his own Brother, and having preferred him, and enriched him in his
Service, the Gentleman ought to have been content, and not to have sought his
Sister in marriage, which nothing at all did pertain unto him. The Honor and
pleasure, said Nomerfide, is not usual for a Gentleman who is but a Servant to
marry a Lady of so great a Family; And if the death be strange, the pleasure
must be new also, and so much the greater that it has the opinion of all wise
men to affirm it, and the contentment of a heart full of love to aid it, and
the repose of the Soul to attend it, which is a quiet Conscience, seeing God is
not offended with it. And as for that death which you say was cruel, it seems
to me, that it being inevitable, the speediest death is the best, for we all
know that of necessity we must pass through Nature to eternity: And I esteem
them most happy who stay not any long time in the Suburbs; and from the
felicity (which only in this world can be so called) do in an instaet fly unto
that which is eternal. What do you call the Suburbs of death, said Simontault?
Those, said Nomerfide who have had many tribulations in Spirit, those who have
been a long time sick, those who by the extremity of corporal or Spiritual
griefs are come so far as to despise death, and to complain that their last
hour comes too slowly: These are they who have already passed through the
Suburbs of Death, and have lodged in those Inns in which there is more noise
than rest. It was impossible but that this Lady must lose her Husband by death,
but in losing him by the choler of her Brother, being exempted from seeing him
sick, or bedrid, and exchanging the joy she had to be with him, into the love
and the service of God, she might well call her self happy. Do you make no
reckoning, said Longaren, of the disgrace which she received, and of her
tedious imprisonment? I do believe, said Nomerfide, that a Man or Woman who
absolutely do love according to the Commandment of God, do know neither shame
nor dishonor, but when they alter or diminish from the perfection of their
love, for the glory to love truly does not know, nor is it capable of disgrace;
And as for the imprisonment of the Body, I do believe this Lady had such an
enlargement of her Soul, which was united to God, and to her Husband, that she
was hardly sensible where she was, but esteemed her solitude to be the greatest
liberty; for they who cannot behold that which they love, have no other
happiness but incessantly to think upon i^; And that confinement is never
straight where the Soul is free, and the thoughts can exercise themselves at
their own preasure. There is nothing more true, said Simontault, than that
which Nomerfide does declare, but he who by his fury made that separation may
truly be called guilty and unhappy, for he at one and the same time offended
both God, and Love, and Honor. In good earnest, said Guebron, I do much wonder
at the different loves of women, and do well observe that those who have the
most love, have the most virtue, and that those who have the least do endeavor
by dissimulation to counterfeit themselves to be virtuous. It is true, said
Parliament, that a Heart honest to God and Men does love more sincerely than
that which is vicious, for it fears not that we may sound the depth of its
intention. I have often heard it affirmed, said Simontault, that Men ought not
to be reproved when they purchase the love of Women; for God has planted in
the hearts of Men, Love, and Boldness to demand them, and in the hearts of
Women, Fear, and Chastity to refuse them. If Man should be punished for using
the faculties which are given to him, he should suffer wrong.

But this seems strange to me, said Longaren, that he had so often praised
him to his Sister; for it would appear great folly or cruelty in any one who
keeps a fountain, to praise the clearness of the water to one that looks upon
it, and is languishing for thirst, and then to kill him if he offers to take
any of it to drink. Without all doubt, said Parliament, the fire was the
occasion that did kindle the fire by the temptation of his words, which he
ought not to have extinguished with the edge of his sword. And why should it so
heinously be rendered, said Saffredant, that an ordinary Gentleman, using no
other force, but service, should come to marry a Lady of so great a Family,
seeing the Philosophers do affirm, That the least, and most inconsiderable man
in the world, is worth more than the greatest, and the most virtuous Woman? The
reason is, said Dagoucin, That to establish the Public peace, the Degrees of
Families, the Ages of persons, and the Ordinances of Laws, are altogether
looked upon, without weighing the Love, and the Virtues of Men, that so there
may be no confusion in the State; and from hence it does proceed, that the
Marriages which are made amongst equals, and according to the Judgment and
Consent of Friends and Kindred, do differ oftentimes so much in heart,
complexion, and condition, that instead of entering into a state that leads unto
Safety, they are brought into the Suburbs of Hell. And it is as much to be
observed, said Guebron, that those who marry only for pure love, having hearts,
conditions, and complexions alike, without any reflection at all on the
differences of Houses and Descents, are not left without repentance; for this
great and indiscreet Love, does oftentimes turn it self into Jealouste and
Fury. In my opinion, said Parliament, neither the one nor the other is
commendable, but those only are to be praised who submit themselves to the will
of God, and look not either upon Glory, Avarice, or Pleasure, but only upon a
virtuous love, and by a mutual Consent do desire to live in the state of
Marriage, as God and Nature have ordained. And although there is no Estate
without some tribulation, yet I have seen these to live without Repentance, and
we are not all so unhappy in this Company, but some of us who are married, are
in this number. Thereupon, Hircan, Saffredant, Guebron, and Simontault, did all
swear that they were married in the like resolutions, and that they never
repented of their Marriages. But whatsoever the Truth herein was, they whom
this Discourse concerned were so much contented, that it is impossible they
should hear any thing that was more agreeable to them, they did all rise from
Ground to give praise and thanks unto God, and found the Monks ready to begin
Vespers. The Service being ended, they did repair to Supper, the whole Subject
of their Discourse being concerning their Marriages, which continued all that
Evening, repeating the Fortunes they incountered during the time of their
wooing, and the Joys of their Bridal Days; but because one interrupted the
Discourse of the other, I cannot give you a particular Account of it, which was
no less pleasant to describe than was their Discourses in the Meadow: but sure
enough it is that they did take great delight therein, and had no other
Conference til the hour was come in which they were accustomed to go to bed,
which did steal upon them sooner than they perceived. But Madam Oysilla finding
that it was high time to retire her self, did give occasion to the whole
Company to do the like, every one being much joyed in his own particular, but
especially the married, who that night did not sleep at all, but having spent
the first part thereof in the Accounts of their past love, they employed the
remainder in the Demonstration of their present; And thus pleasantly this Night
did pass away until the Morning.

The End of the Fourth Days Work.
The Fifth Days Account of the Novells of the Queen of NAVARRE.
The Preface.
When the Morning was come, Madam Oysilla did prepare for them their spiritual
Breakfast, which was of so transcendent a relish, that it was able to fortify
both the Body and the Soul, and the whole Company was so much pleased, that it
seemed to them they never heard a Sermon which did profit more. And when they
heard the Bell to tole unto the Mass, they resorted all together to it,
exercising their contemplations in the way on the holy Instructions which they
had received. Mass being heard, having walked a little after it, they did sit
down to dinner, promising to themselves that the Account of that present day
should be as pleasant as were the Discourses of the days before. Saffredant
said unto them, he could wish that the bridge might be a whole month in
building, so great was the pleasure he received in this gallant Company. But
the Abbot within caused all possible diligence to be made, because it was not
for his advantage to have so many honorable personages in his Abbey, whose
presence detained his accustomed Pilgrims from going so often as before to
visit the holy places. Having reposed themselves a little after dinner, they
returned to their pastime in the Meadow, and every one of them having taken
their seat, they demanded of Parliament to whom she would give her voice. It
appears to me, said she, that Saffredant should do well to begin this Journal,
for I do already perceive by him, that he has not a countenance that would
make us weep. Ladies, said Saffredant, you may think what you please, but
beshrew me you will show your selves cruel enough if you should not take pity
on the poor Friar whose History I shall account unto you, and although his
Design was prevented by the virtue of a chaste Lady, such as are amongst us, yet
you may imagine what does become of those poor maids whom the desire of the Act
has made without fear to begin the Enterprise. To show therefore unto you that
the blindness of concupiscence does take away all fear and prudent
consideration, I will in this place give you an account of a Friar in Flanders.

THE NOVELLS Of Queen MARGARET.
The strange, and wild penitence, imposed by a Friar Confessor on a young Lady.
The first Novell.
IN that year when Madam Margaret of Austria did come unto Cambray, on the
behalf of her Nephew the Emperor, to treat of a Peace betwixt him and the most
Christian King, there was the Countess of Aiguemont in the Company of Madam
Margaret of Austria, which Countess of Aiguemont did carry the Fame to be the
most beautiful, and bravest personage amongst all the Ladies of Flanders. On
the departure of this great Assembly, this Countess of Aiguemont did return to
her own House, and the time of Advent being come, she sent to the Covent of
Friars to demand a good Preacher, and a Man of a godly Conversation, as well to
preach, as to confess her self, and all her Company. The Warden of the Friars
did make choice of the most worthy in his Covent to perform this office, in
regard of the great benefits he had received from the House of Aiguemont, and
that of Pienne, of which this Lady was; and being more desirous than all others
to gain the good Esteem and the Love of great Houses, he did send the most
remarkable Preacher which he had in the whole Covent, who the Advent did his
duty very well, and gave the Countess great Content. The time being come, in
which the Countess would receive her Creator, she did send for her Confessor,
and was confessed in her Chapel, the door being locked, that the Confession
might be the more private; which being ended, she resigned her place to her
Dame of Honor, who being confessed, did send her Daughter to pass under the
hand^ of this goodly Confessor, who after she had confessed to him all that she
knew, he found something as well by her Complexion, as Confession, which gave
him the desire and the boldness to impose upon her a penance which was not
usual; He therefore said unto her, My Daughter, your Sins are so great, that to
give satisfaction for them, I impose this penance on you, to wear my Cord on
your naked Body. The young Gentlewoman, who would not be disobedient to him,
did reply, Give it me my Ghostly Father, and I will not fail to wear it. N^, my
good Child, (said the Friar) you must not put it on with your own Hands. It is
necessary that my hands must first of all tie it about you, and after wards
absolve you (...) all your sins. The young Gentlewoman beginning to weep, did
tell him, T^^^ she did not know what to think of that penance. Say you so,
(said the P^eacher) Are you a Heretic, that you refuse the penance which God
and our holy Mother the Church does ordain? I do use Confession (said the young
Gentlewoman) as the Church does command me, and would willingly do penance,
and receive absolution, but I would not that you should put your hands upon my
naked body, for in that manner I shall refuse your penance. Then (said the
Confessor) I can never give you absolution. On these words the Damosel did rise
from her knees, having her Conscience much troubled, for she was so young, that
she was afraid she had sinned in refusing to do what her Confessor had
enjoined her.

The Countess of Aiguemont having received Corpus Domini, her Dame of Honor
desiring to be made partaker of it after her, did demand of her Daughter if she
were ready; her Daughter weeping made answer, No, for she was not yet
confessed; and what did you so long then with the Preacher, said the Mother?
her Daughter made answer, nothing at all, for refusing the penance which he
imposed upon me, he refused also to give me absolution. Her Mother so discretly
enquired of her what penance it was, that at the last she understood the whole
manner of it, and causing her to confess unto another they received the
Eucharist both together.

As soon as the Countess was returned from the Church, her Dame of Honor did
complain unto her of the Preacher, at which she was possessed with equal sorrow
and amazement, having before entertained a very good opinion of him. The
novelty of the penance did turn her anger into laughter, but her laughter did
put on that authority as to command the Friar to be taken and beaten in her
kitchen, where by the force of Rods he confessed the Truth, and being tied hand
and foot, she sent him afterward to the Warden of the Covent, desiring him
that for the time to come he would send more honest men to preach unto her the
Word of God.

Ladies, Consider with your selves, if in so honorable a house as this they
were not afraid to declare their follies, what do they do in poor places, where
they ordinarily do make their requ^sts, and where the opportunities are so
easily presen^ed to them, that it is a miracle young women do escape without a
scandal? And this (Ladies) does occasion me to entreat you, that you would turn
your bad Esteem of them into Compassion, and to ponder with your selves, that
he who can thus blind the heart of Friars, will not spa^e the hearts of Ladies,
when he shall make them his subjects. We may here see, said Oysilla, a good
wicked Friar, to be religious, a Prtest, and a Preacher, and yet to use such
villainy on so great a F^st^val, and in the Church, under the pretense of
Confession, which are all Circumstances that do aggravate the Sin. And what of
all this, said Hircan, Do you think that Friars are not men, and to be excused
as well as we, especially this Friar, who in the Nighttime saw himself all
alone with so fair a young Gentlewoman? Certainly, said Parliament, if he had
thought on the Nativity of Jesus Christ, which was at that time represented, he
could not have had so wicked a desire. You do not observe his method, said
Saffredant, for he would begin with the Incarnation, before he did come to the
Nativity. Nevertheless he was faulty enough, seeing upon so high a day, and on
so fair a Creature, he would have committed so foul a sin. In my opinion, said
Oysilla, the Countess did give him such a punishment, that his Companions may
take Example by it. But it is worth your observation, said Nomerfide, if she
did well, to bring a Scandal upon him, and if it had not been better that she
had privately reproved him, than thus openly to have divulged his fault.

I do believe, said Guebron, it had been indeed the best Course, for we are
commanded to reprove our Neighbor in private, before we do declare his faults
to any, or to the Church it self; for when a Man is become once shameless, he
is not, without great difficulty, brought to amendment: and I am of opinion,
that it is Shame, as much as Conscience, that retireth many Men from Sin. We
must therefore, said Parliament, practice that Counsel of the Gospel to one
another, but not to those who preach one thing, and who do another, for we
ought not to be afraid to scandalize those who do scandalize others. And it
seems to me to be a meritorious work, to make them to understand themselves to
be such as they are, that we may take heed of their seducings, and teach young
Maids to do so too, who are not always so well advised. But to whom will
Hircan give his voice? Because you do ask me, I will give it to your self, said
Hircan. Since you give it unto me, said Parliament, I will give you an Account
of one, concerning whom I my self may serve for Witness, and I have often
heard it affirmed, that how much the more that Virtue in a weak and seeble
subject is assaul^ed by a strong and powerful Contrary, by so much she is the
more admirable, and does show her self more clearly to be such as indeed she
is; for it is no wonder at all that the strong Man does defend himself from the
strong; but that the feeble has the Victory, is the greatest glory in the
world. To understand aright the persons of whom I am to speak, I shall,
peradventure, do some little wrong to the truth, as also that I shall cloth
their story in so poor a Dress, that none will regard it; Howsoever the
Accomplishments of the young Maid, by whom such worthy things were done, do
enforce me to declare them.

The Continence of a young Maid, against the obstinate and amorous Suit of one
of the greatest Lords of France, and the happy Success which the Damsel did
obtain.
The second Novel.
IN one of the greatest Towns of Tourain there did dwell a Lord of a great and
honorable house, who had there his education from his Infancy. I will make no
mention in this place, of the perfections, the grace, and beauty, and the great
virtues of this young Prince, I shall only exhibit to you, that France had not
his equal. Being at fifteen years of age, he took more pleasure to ride and to
hunt, than to behold the beauties of Ladies. One day when he was at Church he
fixed his eyes upon a young Maid, who in her Infancy had been brought up in the
Castle where he lived, and after the death of her Mother, her Father did remove
to another place, whereupon she did go to Poictou with her Brother. This Maid
whose name was Frances, had a Bastard Sister whom her Father loved very well,
and married her to the chief Butler of this young Prince, who did esteem as
well of her as of any in his House. The Father died and left unto Frances for
her portion all the demeans and houses which he had in this great Town.
Wherefore after her Fathers death she removed from Poictou unto this place
where her Estate was, and because she was but 16 years of age, and unmarried,
she would not live alone in her own house, but agreed for her board with her
Sister who was the Butlers Wife. The young Prince observing this Maid to be
very lovely, being of a brown hair, but of a clear complexion, and having a
carriage that did transcend her Estate, for she seemed rather a Princess than
the Daughter of a Citizen, he a long time with a steadfast eye did look upon
her, and being never in love before, did find in his heart an unaccustomed
heat, and retiring into his Chamber he did enquire after her whom he saw in the
Church, and remembered that it was she, who in her infancy was accustomed to
come unto the Castle to play with his Sister, and acquainted his Sister with
it. His Sister did send for her, and made her very welcome, desiring her, that
she would take the pains to come often to her, which she did, as often as there
were any Marriages, or public Meetings, where the young Prince would behold
her with such a greedy eye, that he did begin to love her entirely, and because
he knew show was but of mean parentage, he hoped easily to obtain that which he
desired, but having not the means to speak unto her, he sent unto her a
Gentleman of his Chamber, to solicit her for him. But she, who was as wife as
she was young, and feared God, did allege unto him that she could not believe
that his Master, who was so gallant and so accomplished a Prince, would so
undervalue himself as to look upon a Creature so imperfect as her self,
especially seeing in the Castle where he had his residence there were so many
great and beautiful Ladies, she therefore conceived, that what he did speak was
from himself, and not from the commandment of his Master. When the young Prince
had understood this answer, Love which always does grow more strong where it
finds most resistance, did make him more hotly to pursue his enterprise,
Whereupon he did write a Letter to her, desiring her that she would believe
that whatsoever this Messenger did say unto her did proceed from himself. She
who very well could both read and write, did read the Letter all over, to which
(whatsoever entreaty the Gentleman did make) she would return no answer at all,
affirming that it did not belong to a Person of so base a condition as her self
to write unto such a Prince as he was, but did beseech him not to suppose her
so weak, as to believe that he had so good an opinion of her, as to bear any
love unto her; and if he thought by reason of her poor estate to have her at hs
pleasure, he did much deceive himself, for she had as honest a heart as the
greatest Princess in Christendom, and esteemed no treasure in the World
comparable to her Honor and her Conscience. She humbly besought him that he
would not hinder her to preserve that treasure, for should she die, she would
never alter her resolution.

The young Prince did not find this answer to be agreeable unto him,
nevertheless he continued passionately to love her, and failed not every day
to be present at the Mass in that Church to which she repaired, and all the
while that Mass was saying he perpetually addressed the Devotion of his eyes
to that fair image, which when she perceived, she changed her place, and
repaired to another Church, not to avoid the sight of him (for she had not been
a reasonable creature if she had not taken pleasure to look upon him) but she
was afraid to be seen by him, for since she conceived her self not worthy to be
beloved by him in the way of Honor and Marriage, she would not that it should
be by the way of folly and of pleasure; and whenever she saw any place in the
Church where she might seat her self, the Prince would fit as close by her as
possibly he could, which made her to go from Church to Church to hear Mass
daily, and to the furthest Churches that possibly she could; and when any great
marriages were solemnized at the Castle, she did forbear to be present at them,
and although the Sister of the Prince did invite her, she would always excuse
her self by some indisposition or other.

The Prince perceiving that he could not have that access (nor speak unto her)
as he desired, did aid himself by his Butler, and promised him many great
rewards, if he would assist him in this affair. The Butler did promise to do
the utmost of his endeavor, as well to please his Master, as for the profit
which he hoped to receive from him, and every day he did give an account unto
the Prince of what she both said and did, and that above all things to the
utmost of her power she did fly all temptations to behold him.

At the sast, the great Desire which he had to express his love unto her, did
prompt him to an Expedient for the accomplishment thereof, which was to ride on
his great Horse, (he being most experienced in that Art) in a public place of
the City before the house of his Butler, where Frances lived; and having made
his Horse to tread many Rings, and to rise aloft into many dangerous Corvetts,
where Frances might behold him, he did premeditately fall from his Horse into a
deep Mire, and so easily, that he received no hurt at all; howsoever he
complained much, and demanded if there were no lodgings thereabouts, that he
might change his habiliments? Every one was ready at his Door to present their
service to him; but some that stood by, did assure him, that his own Butlers
house was the next, and the best, of which he made choice above all others.

He found there a Chamber richly accommodated, and stripped himself into his
shirt, for his clothes were all corered with Mud: When he was in Bed, and
observed that his Servants were gone from him, to provide him with new
habiliments, he called for his Host, and Hostess, and demanded of them where
Frances was? They had much to do to find her, for as soon as she perceived the
Prince did enter into the house, she did hide her self in the most obscure and
unfrequented place thereof. Nevertheless her Sister found her out, who did
entreat her not to be afraid to hold Discourse with such a Civil, and so
Virtuous a Prince. How my Sister, (said Frances) Do you, whom I reverence as my
Mother, advise me to Discourse with a young Lord, whose Desires, you can
witness with me, I do know too well? Her Sister made her so many
Remonstrances, and Promises, that she would not leave her alone with him, that
at the last she did go along with her, but with a countenance so discolored,
so wan, and spiritlesse, that it would rather beget Pity, than Concupiscence.
When the Prince beheld her near unto his Bed, he did take her by her hand,
which was cold and trembling, and said unto her, Frances, Do you esteem me to
be so cruel a man, so barbarous and devouring, that I ear up Women when I do
look upon them? Wherefore have you so great a fear of him, who regards
nothing more than your honor and advantage? You know that in all places that
it was possible for me to find you, I have sought you out, only to see you, and
to speak unto you, and to do me the greatest spite in the world, you have
forsaken all those places where I was accustomed to see you at Mass, that I
might receive no contentment at all, either by seeing you, or by speaking to
you; But all this has served you to no purpose, for I have not ceased to
follow you, and am come hither by the means which you have seen, having
endangered to break my neck by falling wilfully from my Horse, to receive the
Contentment only but to speak to you; Wherefore I entreat you, Frances,
because I have put my self into Danger with so much inconvenience, that it may
not be unprofitable to me, and that with my great love I may purchase yours.
When a long time he attended her answer, and beheld that she had tears in her
eyes, which were fixed on the ground, drawing her unto him as close as possibly
he could, he thought to have kissed, and embraced her; but she said unto him,
No, Sir, No, That which you search after must not be had; for although I am but
a Worm of the Earth in comparison of you, my honor is so dear unto me, that I
had rather dye, than have it diminished for the greatest pleasure in the world,
and the fear which I have that those who have seen you come into this House, do
suspect me to be the cause of it, is the occasion of that great trembling which
is upon me, And because it has pleased you to do me so great an Honor as to
speak unto me, you must pardon me, if I make an answer to you according as my
Honor does command me; I am not so blind (my Lord) either in my understanding,
or my eyes, that I do not perfectly see the great Beauty and the Graces with
which God has endued you, and I do believe that Lady shall be the most happy
Woman in the world, who shall possess the Body and the Love of so accomplished
a Prince; But to what purpose is all this, seeing it is not for me to enjoy,
nor any Maid of my low condition, insomuch, that but only the desire of it
should be in me a perfect folly? What may I conceive to be the Reason which
does cause you to address your self to me, but only that the Ladies of your
Court (whom you cannot choose but love, if Beauty, and all her Graces are to be
loved by you) are so virtuous, that you dare not demand that of them, which the
smallness of my Estate does prompt you unto a hope to receive from me? And I
am confident, that when you shall enjoy that which you do desire of such a
silly Maid as my self, it will serve as a subject only to you to entertain
discourse with your Mistress, for two long hours and more, in accounting to
her your great Victories, to the prejudice and overthrow of a weak and
credulous Virgin. But (my Lord) I must beseech you to consider with your self,
that I am not of that Condition; I have been brought up in a House where I have
learned what it is to love: My Father and my Mother were your faithful
Servants, wherefore I must beseech you, since God has not made me a Princess,
to be espoused to you, nor of Estate to be accounted your Mistress, or your
Sweetheart, that you would not make me your Prostitute; for I do highly esteem
of your Virtues, and do desire that you may be the most happy of all the
Princes in Christendom. And if, for your Recreation, you will have Women of my
Estate, you may find enough in this City, and (beyond all comparison) far more
handsome than my self, who will not put you to so much trouble to entreat them.
Address your self therefore unto those, the purchase of whose honor may be
pleasing to you, and let her alone, who does love you better than her self; for
if it should so fall out, that either your life or my own should this day be
required of God, I should esteem my self most happy to sacrifise my own for the
preservation of yours. It is not for want of love that I do fly from your
Company; but something else is lodged in my Conscience, for my Honor is more
dear unto me than my life. If it please you (my Lord) I will do the uttermost
of my endeavor to continue in your good opinion, and through all my life will
pray unto God for your health and happiness. It is true that the Honor you
have done me will make me the more to be esteemed amongst People of my
condition, but what Man is there (after I have seen you) that I shall take care
to look upon? And by this means my heart shall be in a perpetual liberty, but
only for the obligation with which it always shall be charged, to pray to God
for you, for there is no other service which I can do you.

The young Prince observing this honest answer (although it was not according
to his desire) did not esteem less of her than he did before, and used the
utmost of all his art and eloquence to persuade her to a belief, that he would
never love any other Woman but her self, but she was so discret, that so
unreasonable a thing could never enter into her understanding. During this
discourse (although it was often represented to him, that his Clothes were
brought from the Castle) yet he took such a delight to hear her, that he caused
it to be reported that he was asleep, until the hour of Supper was come, at
which he durst not but be present by reason of his Mother who was one of the
wisest Ladies in the world. And thus this young Prince departed from the house
of his Butler, and mote highly than ever esteemed of the honesty of this Maid.
He oftentimes discoursed of her to the Gentleman that did lie in his Chamber,
who conceiting that money would prevail more than love, did counsel him to
offer her a round sum of money to condescend unto his will: But the young
Prince whose Mother was his Treasuresse, had no large allowances for such petty
pleasures, howsoever he did take up all he could borrow, and made up a sum of
five hundred Crowns, which he did send unto her by his Gentleman, desiring her
to alter her resolution. But she, when ever she did behold the present, did say
unto the Gentleman, I pray Sir, tell your Master, that I have a heart so
upright and honest, that if I must obey him in that which he commands me, the
beauties and the graces that are in him had already overcome me to it, but if
they have not prevailed upon my honor, all the money in the world can never
corrupt me to it; wherefore I pray you to return it back unto him, for I
prefer an honest poverty above all the Goods that can be desired.

The Gentleman seeing her obstinatenesse, had recourse unto thoughts of
Cruelty, and did proceed so far, that he did threaten her with the power, and
the Authority of his Master. But she smiling, did reply unto him, Make those
afraid with that who do not understand it; for I know well enough that he is so
wise, and so virtuous, that such words cannot proceed from him; and I am most
confident that he will disavow them, when you shall repeat them to him: But if
it should be as you say, there is neither Torment, nor Death so cruel, that
shall make me to alter my resolution; for (as I have told you) since Love
cannot turn my heart, not all the Good, nor all the Evil that in this world can
arrive unto me, shall ever be able to divert me from the fastness of my
Counsels. The Gentleman, who had made a Promise to his Master that he would
gain her for him, did with a mavelous despite bring back this answer to him,
and did persuade him to use all means possible to obtain his Desires of her;
telling him, that it was not for his Honor to be denied by a Maid of her
Condition. But the young Prince, who would use no other means but what Honesty
did command, fearing also the report that might ensue thereon, if it were
brought to his Mothers ear, who being a very austere Lady, would be very angry
with him, did not dare to undertake it. But his Gentleman at last contrived a
way so easy for him, that he did think he had her already in his Arms; and to
put it in execution, he did speak unto the Butler, who, resolving with himself
to serve his Master in any way, whatsoever it were, did one dey desire his Wife
and his Sister-in-law, to go with him to a House which he had near unto a
Forest, to see his Vineyard there, which they both promised to do. When the Day
was come, he did acquaint the young Prince with it, who determined with himself
to go thither, without any Companion at all, but his Gentleman who lodged in
his Chamber, and gave order to have his Mule in readiness on the appointed
hour. But God so pleased, that on that day his Mother did accouter a marvelous
rich Cabinet which she had made, and to assist her in it, she had all her
Children with her, where, amongst the rest, the young Prince was busied until
the appointed hour was passed; Being withheld by his Mother, the young Prince
could not keep his word with his Butler, who had taken his Sister-in-law on
horseback behind him, and advised his Wife to counterfeit her self sick; so
that when they were ready to set forth, there came one to tell him, that she
was fallen ill on the sudden, and could not go with them.

When the Butler was at his Farm in the Country, and saw that the hour was
passed in which he expected the young Prince, he said unto his Sister-in-law,
It is in vain to stay any longer, we will return from whence we came. His
Sister asked him who it was he stayed for? I did expect the young Prince here,
(said the Butler) who did promise to give me a meeting. When his Sister-in-law
did understand that wickedness, she said unto him, Make no stay at all (my
Brother) for his occasions at the Court are so importunate, that on this day I
do know he cannot come. Her Brother did believe her, and did ride back to the
City with her. When she was come back, she told her Brother in the height of
her choler, that he was the Varlet of the Devil, and did more than he was
commanded by the Prince, for she was assured that this design of carrying her
abroad was an invention of his own, and of the Gentleman's, and not of the
Princes, whose money he had rather gain to encourage him in his follies, than
perform the office of a good Servant; and because she had found him to be such
a man, she would stay no longer in his house, and immediately she departed from
her Sister, and did go to her own inheritance.

The chief Butler having failed in his enterprise, did repair unto the Castle
to understand the reason why the Prince did not come according to his promise,
and in the way he found him on his Mule, and none with him but the Gentleman in
whom so much he trusted. The Prince said unto him, what now, is she there? The
Butler declared every thing to him according as it fell out. The young Prince
was heartily sorry that he performed not his promise, and the rather because he
conceived with himself, that it was the only and last expedient he could use.
And seeing there was no remedy, he did seek her out so diligently, that at the
last he did find her in a company and place where she could not avoid him, and
he did chide her much for her harsh and rigorous usage of him, and for her
leaving of her Brorhers house. She made answer to him, That she knew no place
more dangerous than that, and that he was much beholding to his Butler, who
served him not only with his Body and his Goods, but with his Soul also, and
his Conscience. The Prince perceiving, there was no remedy, resolved with
himself to force his passion, and to importune her no more, nevertheless all
his life afterward he had her in high esteem. A Servant of the said Prince,
observing the honesty of this Maid, did court her in the way of marriage, to
which she would not consent without the leave and commandment of the Prince, to
whom she had given up all her affection, which the Prince was acquainted with,
and with his good will the marriage was concluded, in which she lived all her
life afterward with great reputation, and the young Prince did enrich her with
daily benefits.

Ladies, what shall we say to this? have we hearts so low as to make our
Servants our Masters? Seeing this Virgin could not be overcome neither by love
nor importunities, I must beseech you that by her Example we may become
victorious over our selves, for it is the most noble victory that we can
obtain. I do lament, said Oysilla, that such virtuous acts were not in the
time of the old Historiographers, for they who so much extolled their Lucretia,
would let their pens sall from their hands, and have altered their Subjest, to
have described all along the Virtues of this Virgin, which I do find to be so
great, that I should bardly have believed them, were it not for the solemn Oath
which does oblige us to speak the truth. I find not her virtues to be such,
said Hircan, as you declare them, for oftentimes we have seen sick men, whose
Palats are out of taste, to refuse good and whotsom Diet, and to feed on that
which is naught and hurtful: And so it may be that this Maid was in love with
some one else which made her to despise Nobility. Parliament made answer, Her
life and her death did sufficiently manifest that she never (during the whole
course of her life) had a better opinion of any man living than of him whom she
loved more than her life, but not more than her Honor. Remove from your fancy
that fond humor, said Saffredant, and understand from whence that word Honor
is derived, so far as it belongs unto Women: For it may be that those Who
speak so much of it do not know the Intention of the word; Know then, that in
the beginning, before Dissimulation was too common amongst Men, and Women, love
was so full of life and strength, that Hypocrisy had no place, and they were
most praised, who most truly lo^ed; But when Decript and Avarice had seized
upon their hearts, they did drive both God and Love out of them, and in their
place entertained the love of themselves, Hypocrisy, and Dissembling. And
Women perceiving that they had not in their hearts the virtue of true Love, and
that the Name of Hypocrisy was so odious amongst Men, they did give it the
surname of Honor, so that those who had not in them that true and honorable
Love, did pretend that their Honor did forbid them to do this, or that, and
have made thereby so cruel a law, that even some Women who would love
perfectly, do Dissemble, esteeming Virtue to be Vice; But they who are of a
good understanding, and of a sound Judgment, do never fall into such errors;
for they do know the difference betwixt light and darkness, and that true love
consists in this, to show the chastity of the heart, which cannot live but by
true love, and will not seek for false Honor from the vice of Dissimulation.
Nevertheless, I have heard ( said Dagoucin) that the most private Love is the
most commendable. Private ( said Simontault) and concealed from the eyes of
those that judge not aright, but which is clear, and known enough unto those
two at least, whom it does concern. I so understand, said Dagoucin, and I
believe that this Virgin did love more violently, because she did not declare
it unto any.

Whatsoever she did, said Longaren, we ought to look upon her Virtue, which to
overcome her own heart, was the greatest of all virtues, and the occasions and
temptations which she had, being considered, I do s^y that she ought to be
accounted a most excellent Virgin. If you esteem, said Saffredant, the
greatness of Virtue, by the mortification of our selves, the young Lord was
more commendable than she, whether you look upon the greatness of the love
which he did bear unto her, or his power, and the opportunities, and the means
he might have had; yet nevertheless he would not offend the rule of true love,
which makes the Prince and the Poorest Creature to be equal, and does use no
other means, but what Honesty does permit. There are many, said Hircan, who
would not have done so. Indeed he was highly to be esteemed, said Longaren,
having overcome the common Imperfection of Men; for he who can do evil, and
does it not, is a happy Man. To this purpose, said Guebron, you cause me to
think of one, who had a greater fear to offend the eyes of Men, than God, his
Honor, or his Love. I pray you, said Parliament, will you be pleasid to
rehearse that Account unto us, for the performance whereof I do give you my
voice. There are diverse, said Guebron, who believe that there is no God, or, if
there be a God, they do conceive him to be so far from them, that he can
neither see, nor understand the works they do, and although he does see them,
they do think he is so tame, or so unmindfull of them, that he will not punish
them, and that he takes no Care of the things that are done on Earth. And of
this opinion was a Lady, whose Name (for the honor I do bear unto her Family)
I will change, and I will call her Camilla. She was often heard to say, that He
or She who had nothing to do but with God only, were happy, if in the mean time
they could preserve the reputation of their Honor entire from the eyes of the
world; but you shall perceive, that neither her Wisdom, nor her Hypocrisy,
could guard her, but the mystery of her Lust was revealed, as you shall find by
this History, the truth whereof, I will give you all along, excepting the Names
of the Persons and the places, both which shall be changed.

The Hypocrisy of a Lady of the Court was discovered by the misdemeanors of
her Loves which she thought cunningly to have concealed.
The Third Novel.
IN a fair Castle there lived a great Princess, and of a great Authority, who
entertained in her Company a young Lady called Camilla, a Gentlewoman of a bold
spirit, by whom her Mistress was so governed that she did nothing but by her
Counsel, esteeming her to be one of the wisest and the most virtuous Damosells
that lived in that Age. This Camilla did so much inveigh against all fond love,
that if at any time she knew a Gentleman to be amorous of one of her
Companions, she would most sharply reprehend them, and would be sure to make so
bad a report of it unto her Mistress, that severely she would check them for
it, wherefore she was far more feared than beloved by her Companions, and if at
any time she did speak to any Man, it would be so loud, and with so great a
confidence, that she had the same to be a mortal Enemy to all love, although it
was altogether contrary to her heart, for there was a Gentleman in the Service
of her Mistress, with whom she was so much taken, that it was impossible to be
more: But the love she did bear to her Glory and reputation did make her to
dissemble her affection. And having endured this passion a whole year, refusing
(as others) to comfort her self by discourse and looks, her heart so violently
was inflamed, that she was enforced to seek out the last remedy, and in the
conclusion determined with her self, that her only course was to satisfy her
Desires, and wherein none but God should know her heart, without making any Man
partaker of it, who at one time or other would reveal it.

This resolution being taken, looking one day down upon the Terrasse from the
Window in her Mistresses Chamber, she observed him to be walking there whom so
passionately she loved, and having observed him until the setting of the Sun
had taken away the full sight of him, she called to a little Page whom she had,
and showing the Gentleman to him, she said unto him, Do you see yonder
Gentleman in that rich Cloak and Crimson Satin Doublet, go to him, and tell
him that there is one of his friends who would speak a word with him within in
the Garden Gallery; and when the Boy was gone she passed by the wardrope
belonging to her Mistresses Chamber, and came into the Gallery, having so
muffled herself with her Scarses that she could not be discovered. The
Gentleman being come where she was, she did go immediately to shut the Doors
of the Gallery, that no man unexpectedly might enter in upon them, and without
taking off her Masks and her Scarses she embraced him with all the strength
she had, and spoke unto him as softly as possibly she could, It is a long time
(my friend) since the love which I have born unto you has made me to seek out
both the place and the occasion to enjoy your company, but the fear of my
Honor has been so strong upon me, that it has constrained me to dissemble my
passion. But at last the force of love has overcome all fear, and in the
knowledge which I have of your goodness, if you will promise to love me, and
never to acquaint any one with it, and not to enquire who I am, I dare assure
you for my part, that I will be to you a loyal and a faithful friend, and that
I will never love any one but your self, but I had rather die than you should
know who I am.

The Gentleman did promise what she demanded which made her the more ready to
render him the like, which was to refuse nothing which he did desire to take.
It was about five or six of the clock in the Winter, so that it was impossible
for him to perceive who she was, but touching of her clothes, he did find they
were of Velvet, which in those times was not worn on every day, but only by
Ladies of the noblest Families, and of great Authority; And concerning that
which was underneath, he without light could make judgment good enough with
his hand, and he found nothing but what was plump, lusty, and in good liking.
If he on his part did his uttermost endeavor to give her the best
entertainment he could, she did no less on hers, and the Gentleman perceived
well enough that she was a married woman. She incontinently would return from
whence she came, but the Gentleman said unto her, I do most highly esteem this
favor, which without my merit you have conferred on me, but I shall more
esteem of that which at my request I shall receive of you: I hold my self so
honored with this courtesy, that I must beseech you to tell me, if I ought not
to hope to enjoy it again, and in what time or place you will please to command
me; for since I must not know you, I know not of my self how to procure it.
Take no care for that (said the Lady) but assure your self, that every Evening
before my Mistresses Supper is served in, I will not fail to send for you, but
be you sure to be upon the Terrasse where you were this afternoon; I will send
you word only to remember what you promised, by that word you may understand
that I do attend you in the Gallery: But if you hear talk of going immediately
to Supper, you may for that Evening either retire home, or come into the
Chamber of my Mistress: But above all things, I must desire you (if you will
have the continuance of my Love) that you will not seek after my name, nor
endeavor to know who I am.

This assurance being made, the Damosel and the Gentleman did return into their
several places, and did a long time continue this course of life, and he could
never perceive who it was, whereupon he entered into a great perplexity of mind,
doubting much within himself what it should be, for he was confident there was
no Woman in the word, who would not be seen, and be beloved, wherefore he
suspected with himself that it was some evil Spirit, and the rather, because he
had heard a foolish Preacher say, That if we could but see the Devil in the
face, we should never be in love with him. In this suspicion he determined with
himself to know who it was who came always so muffled to him. And on the next
night in which they were to meet, he carried with him a piece of chalk, and in
his embraces of her, he did give her a long mark with it on the shoulder
behind, which she perceived not, and as soon as ever they departed one from the
other, the Gentleman immediately repaired into the Chamber of her Mistress,
and stood so near unto the Door, to observe behind the shoulders of all those
Ladies who did enter into the Chamber; And, amongst others, he beheld the young
Lady Camilla to enter in with so severe a boldness, that he was almost afraid
to look on her, as he did upon the others, holding himself most assured that it
could not be she, but when ever she turned her back unto him, he observed
plainly the white stroke of Chalk upon her shoulder, whereat he was so amazed,
that he could hardly believe what he did see with his own eyes, and having a
long time observed her height, and the symmetry of her body, which in all
particulars resembled her whom he had in his arms, and marked well the fashion
of her countenance, which he could not so perfectly discover as he would, he
knew for certain that it was she, for which he was very glad, that a young Lady
who never before was know to have a servant, but did refuse the love of many
gallant Gentlemen, should be surprised by him alone.

Love who is never constant to one estate, could not endure that he should live
long in this safe happiness, but did transport him into such a glory and vain
hope, that he resolved with himself to make his love known unto her, thinking
that when she found that it was discovered, it would be a means to his
advantage to make her to increase it. One day when the great Lady her Mistress
did delight her self in the Garden, Camilla did walk by her self in one of the
Alleys of the Garden. The Gentleman seeing her alone, did advance himself to
entertain her, and counterfeiting that he had never seen her in any other
place, he did say unto her, Lady, A long time it is since in my heart I have
carried a great affection to you, and for fear to displease you, I have not
dared to reveal it unto you, which has rendered me so weak, that without death
I can no longer endure this torment, for I am confident that never any one did
know or feel so much of love as my self. The young Lady Camilla would not
permit him to finish his discourse, but said unto him in a great choler, Did
you ever hear in your life that I entertained either friend or Servant? I am
sure you have not; And I do much wonder from whence this boldness should
proceed, that you should presume to hold this discourse with one of so known
and unblemished a reputation as my self, for by my Carriage and Demeanor in
this Court, you might easily understand that I never loved any but my Husband
only, and for this cause take heed how you continue this discourse. The
Gentleman observing her great dissimulation could not contain himself from
laughter, and said unto her, Madam, you have not been so rigorous unto me as
you are at this present.

To what end does it serve you to use such dissimulation to me, were it not far
better to have a love perfect than imperfect? Camilla made answer to him, I
bear no more love unto you, either perfect, or imperfect, than I do unto any
other of the Servants of my Mistress: But if you continue in the discourse you
have begun, you shall find that I do bear such a hate unto you, that you may
have the leisure to repent it. The Gentleman, for all that, did pursue his
Discourse, and said unto her, And where is now the good entertainment you were
accustomed to give me, when I must not see you? why do you deprive me of the
happiness that the Day may not show me your beauties, attended with so many
Graces? Camilla making a great sign of the Cross, did say unto him, You have
either lost your understanding, or are one of the greatest liars in the world;
For never in my life (as I do know of) did I either give you better or worse
entertainment, than at this present; and I pray let me understand what you do
mean by it. The poor Gentleman thinking to assure her to him, did name unto her
the place whither she sent for him, and the mark which he made with the Chalk
upon her shoulder, to gain a more perfect knowledge of her: whereat she was so
transported with Choler, that she told him, that he was the most wicked man in
the world, and that he contrived so scandalous a lie against her, that she
would make him to repent it whilst he ^^ved. The Gentleman, who knew in what
credit she was with her Mistress, did endeavor to appease her, but it was
impossible. For, leaving him in the Alley, she did repair to her Mistress in a
most violent Rage, who loving her as her self, and seeing her so transported,
did forsake all the Company, to enquire of her the occasion of her choler,
which Camilla did not conceal, but word for word did acquaint her all along
with the Discourse which passed betwixt the Gentleman and her self, and so much
to the disadvantage of the poor Gentleman, that on that very Evening his
Mistress did command him immediately to depart her Court, and without speaking
any thing to any body, to retire himself to his own house, and to stay there
until she sent for him. This Command of his Mistress was disagreeable unto him,
but he did suddenly perform it, for fear of worse; and as long as Camilla lived
with her Mistress, the Gentleman came not any more to the Court, nor ever
received any News from her concerning that which she had so often promised, and
which he had lost on that hour when he had discovered who she was.

Ladies, by this you may perceive how she, who above her Conscience preferred
the glory of this world, did lose both the one and the other, for that was
discovered to the eyes of all men, which she would have concealed from her
Husband and her Servant, and seeking to avoid the mockery of them, she fell
into the scandal of all; And she cannot be excused by the simplicity of a
powerful Love, on which every one ought to have Compassion, but she is doubly
to be condemned, to have shaddowed her Deceit under the mantle of Honor and of
Glory, and to make her self before God and Men to be better than she was; But
he who gives not his Glory unto another, in drawing open the Curtain did
reveal her to her double Infamy.

We may here see, said Oysilla, an inexcusable sin, for who can speak for her,
when God, her Honor, and Love himself do accuse her? Who, said Hircan?
Pleasure, and Folly, who are the two great Advocats for Ladies. If we have no
other Advocats, said Parliament, but those two amongst you men, our Cause would
be very ill maintained. But those who suffer themselves to be overcome with
pleasure, ought not any more to be called Women, but Men, whose Fury and
Concupiscence do augment their honor; For a man who does revenge himself upon
his Enemy, and does kill him only for the Lie, is esteemed to be the bravest
Gentleman, and so is he who is in love with a dozen more besides his Wife. But
the honor of Women is grounded on another Bottom, which is Mildness, Patience,
and Chastity. You talk only of some few Women who are wise, said Hircan. I do,
said Parliament, because I do know no others. If there were none of us fools,
said Nomerfide, those who would be believed in whatsoever they do say, or do,
to supplant our female simplicity, would find themselves a great way off from
their Hope. I pray you Nomerfide, said Guebron, let me give you my voice, that
we may hear from you some Account to that purpose. I will rehearse unto you
one, said Nomerfide, as much to the commendation of true Lovers, as yours have
been to the dispraise of foolish Women.

Of two Lovers who subtly did enjoy their Loves, and of the happy issue
thereof.
The fourth Novell.
IN the City of Paris there were two Citizens of a considerable Estate, the one
a Lawyer, the other a Mercer, who for a long time did bear a great affection to
one another; by the means whereof the Son of the Lawyer, called James, a young
Man, and a fine Companion, did oftentimes frequent the Mercers house in
pretense of the Love that was showed to his Father, but it was indeed, in love
to the fair Daughter of the Mercer, whose Name was Frances; And James did make
his addresses so effectual to her, that he knew he was no less beloved than he
did love. But in the time of this Courtship the War began in Provence, by
reason of the Invasion of Charles of Austria, and James was enforced to follow
the War, to serve according to the Estate in which he was.

In the beginning of these Wars his Father dyed, the News whereof did convey a
double affliction to him, the one was for the loss of his Father, the other was
for the inconvenience which that loss brought with it, which was, that on his
return he should be deprived of the opportunity of seeing his Sweetheart so
often as he hoped to have done: Nevertheless in a short process of time the
one was forgotten, and the other increased; for as Death is a thing natural,
and more natural to the Father than to the Children, so grief by little and
little of it self does wear away: But Love, instead of conveying death unto us,
does bring us life by the propagation of Children who do render us immortal,
which is one of the most principal motives to increase our desires.

James being returned to Paris had no other thought or care than to put himself
again into the train, and the vulgar frequentation of the Mercers house, where,
under the umbrage of his former love, he might traffic with his dearest
merchandise. On the other side, during his absence, Frances was solicited and
courted by diverse, as well for her beauty as for her wit and understanding,
and also because she was fully marriageable, although her Father was not
forward to seek out a Husband for her, whether it were through covetousness,
or a provident desire to have her richly placed she being his only Daughter.

And this conduced nothing at all unto her Honor, for tongues now a days are
pro^e to slander and detraction when no occasion is administered, and especially
if it be upon any thing which concerns the Chastity of Maid or Woman. This her
Father understood, who was neither blind nor deaf to the vulgar chat, nor would
he be like those Fathers, who, instead of censuring Vice in their Wives or
Children, do provoke them to it; for he did keep her so short, that even those
who came unto her as Suitors only, could hardly be admitted to see her, although
she was always in her Mothers Company. I need not to ask you if this were not
very grievous to James to endure, being not able in his understanding to
resolve himself what was the reason that she was guarded with so much severity,
and finding no occasion for it, he could not tell what certainly to conclude
upon, but did waver betwixt Love and Jealousy. At the last he was resolved
with himself, come what would of it, he would know the reason. But first of all
to understand if she were of the same affection as she was before, he did so
often go, and come where she used to resort, that one Morning hearing Mass in
the Church, and being very near unto her, he perceived by her countenance that
she was no less glad to see him than he was to see her, and knowing also that
her Mother was not so strict over her as her Father, he took one day the
boldness (as it were unexpectedly seeing them go from their House unto the
Church) to accost them with a familiar and vulgar complement, and not too
expressly to declare himself, that he might better arrive to the end of his
Design.

The end of the year approaching in which his Father died, he determined with
himself to leave off his mourning, and to put himself into such a habit as
might become the honor of his Ancestors, and acquainted his Mother with it,
who did like it very well, desiring with all her heart to see him well married,
because she had no more Sons, and but one Daughter, who was already married and
very richly, and moreover she did inure her heart to the Love of virtue by the
infinite Examples of other young Gentlewomen of her age, who either did advance
themselves, or at least showed themselves worthy of the Family from whence they
were descended. There was nothing more to do, but to consider in what shop
they might best provide themselves. His Mother said unto him, James, I think it
most expedient to go to my Husbands Compeeire, Master Peter's (who was the
Father of Frances) for (said she) he it one of our Friends, and will not
deceive us. That word much pleased her Son, and he greedily swallowed it,
nevertheless he said unto his Mother, we will buy it there, where we can find
our best Market, but because he was an acquaintance of my Fathers I am content
to go thither in the first place.

The Agreement was made, and one morning the Mother and the Son did go to Mr.
Peter's house, who received them with many expressions of respect, as you know
few Shopkeepers are unprovided in that kind. A great variety of whole pieces
of Silks were laid open upon the board, and they might choose what they pleased,
but they could not agree upon the price, which James did on purpose, because he
could not see the Mother of his Sweetheart, and at last they were going
without buying any thing at all, to try what they could do in another place.
But James did like nothing so well, as what he cheapned at his Sweet-hearts
Fathers house, whither some hours afterward they returned. They found then her
Mother within, who did give them the best welcome in the world, and after the
words of course which are accustomed in such shops, the Wife of the Mercer
being more hard to deal with than the Mercer himself, James said unto her, You
are grown Lady very hard, see what it is to lose a good Father, Now we cannot
be known here, and with that he made an appearance as if he wept, and wiped his
eyes in the remembrance of the dear Father which he lost; but this was only to
play his own cards the better. The good Woman the Widow, who was James his
Mother, being present, did comply with him, and said, I in good troth, since
his Death we are no more visited than if we had never seen one another, and
this is all the reckoning that is made of poor Widows. Hereupon they did grow
into new Indearments, and the Mercers Wife did promise to visit her more often
than ever. And as they were speaking those words, there came in other
Customers, whom the Master did lead into another Shop; And the young Man taking
his opportunity, said unto his Mother, I would (forsooth) that she would be
pleased to come to us upon some Festival days to visit the holy places which
are about us, and especially the Religious; if she would vouchsafe sometimes
(as she passes by) to take a Cup of wine, it would be a great pleasure, and an
honor to us.

The Mercers Wife, who thought no evil, made answer to them, that a fortnight
ago she had determined with her self to walk abroad to see her friends, and
that if the Sunday following was a fair day, she would take her pleasure then,
and as she passed by, she would give a visit to her. This being agreed upon,
the agreement followed for the price of the pieces of silk; for James thought
it was not requisite for the value of a litttle silver to lose so fair an
opportunity. The plot being laid, and the Merchandise carried away, James
perceiving that he alone was not able to carry on the enterprise, was
constrained to declare himself unto a faithful Friend, and they both did lay
their heads so well together, that there wanted nothing but the performance. On
the Sunday following the Mercers Wife and her Daughter on their return from
their Devotions did not fail to call at the Widows house, where they found her
with a good Woman, a Neighbor of hers, talking together in the gallery
belonging to the Garden, there was also the Daughter of the Widow, James his
Sister, who was walking up and down the Allees of the Garden with her Brother,
and Oliver. James, when he beheld his Sweetheart, did so compose his
countenance, that he did not reveal the least sign of Joy, and in that grave
garb did address himself both to the Mother and the Daughter; And as it is
ordinary, that the Old do always keep company with the Old, the three Women did
sit upon a Bank, which was so made, that they were enforced to turn their backs
toward the Garden, into which, by degrees, the two lovers entered, and walked
until they came unto the place where Oliver and his Sister were, where some
Salutations and Complements being passed, they did walk again in the Allees of
the Garden, where the young Man did so well declare his entire affection to
Frances, that she could not but have compassion on him, and did not altogether
refuse that which her friend demanded, so that he perceived that she was
coming on, and according to his expectation.

But you are to understand, that during the time they were in this
Communication, they oftentimes walked up and down by the Bank where the good
Women sat, to take away suspicion from them, talking sometimes aloud of vulgar
and familiar Subjects, and sometimes making an appearance, as if they were in a
great Contestation. And in this manner they passed up and down not far from the
good Women for the space of half an hour, at which time James made a sign to
Oliver, who played his part also vell^ry we with the other Maid whom he
discoursed with, insomuch that it could not be perceived when the two Lovers
entered into a green plat shadowed with Cherry trees, and enclosed with
Goosberry Bushes and Roses, where they pretended to go to beat down Almonds in
one corner thereof, but it was indeed to gather Plumbs. Here James instead of
giving his Sweetheart a Green Gown did give her a Red one, for her blood did
flush into her cheeks to find her self surprised before she was aware. They had
so readily gathered their plumbs, because they were ripe, that Oliver could not
believe it, were it not that he beheld the Maid to hold her head down toward
the ground, as if she had been ashamed, which gave unto him a token of the
Truth, for before as she walked she did hold up her head, without any fear that
the vein in her eye which ought to be red, should be seen to have taken the
Azure color, which James perceiving with Remonstrances necessary to that
purpose, did endeavor to restore it to its first complexion; and walking
afterward three or four turns in the Garden, it was. (...) without tears and
sighs, Frances saying oftentimes unto him, Woe is me! Was it for this that you
did love me? Good God, And if I had but thought on it! What shall I do? you
have undone me for ever; In what Fame shall I now live? What shall become of
me? I assure my self that you will make no more reckoning of me, especially if
you are in the number of those who do only love for pleasure. Alas the time
that ever I was born, or being born that I had not died before I fell into this
error. These words were not uttered without abundance of tears; But James did
so comfort her with so many solemn Promises and Oaths, that after they had
walked three or four turns in the Garden more, and he had made a sign to his
Companion, they ented again into the Grasseplat by another way, where James did
not behave himself so unmanly, but she received far more pleasure at the giving
of the second Green Gown than at the first, and moreover did like so well of
it, that they entered into a consultation how they might see one another more
often, and more to their delight. In which a young Woman, a Neigbour of the
Merchants, and one of James his Kinswomen, and one who was a very good Friend
to Frances, did very much assist them: In this condition of life (for ought
that I can understand) they continued without scandal until the consummation of
their marriage, which was a very rich one for the Daughter of a Mercer, in
regard she was the only child he had. True enough it is, that James a long time
stayed for the death of the Father, who was so locked up to himself, that it
seemed to him, what he held fast in one hand, the other would steal from it.

Ladies, you may here behold, a Love well begun, well continued, and best of
all concluded; for although it is a common thing with you Men, to disdain a
Maid or Woman, who has been too liberal to you of that which you most seek of
her; so it is, that this Gentleman being possessed with a true and sincere
Love, and having known that in his Sweetheart which every Husband desires in
her whom he has espoused, and finding her also wise, and well descended, would
not forsake her, he himself being the occasion of the fault that was committed;
neither would he be the Cause that she should be unfortunately married to
another, but with much patience attended the happy hour to espouse her himself,
in which he is much to be commended.

To speak the truth, said Oysilla, they were both of them worthy of blame, and
the Third also who was their Go-between, and an Adjunct in this Violation of
Chastity. Do you call that a Violation, said Saffredant, when two parties are
so well accorded? Can there be a better Marriage than that which is celebrated
by Lovers? This is the occasion of the Proverb, that Marriages are made in
Heaven; And it is not to be understood of forced Marriages, not of those which
are made for the lucre of money, and which have been approved, because the
Father and the Mother have given their Consent unto them. You may speak what
you please, said Oysilla, but it is necessary that in this we must acknowledge
an obedience to our Parents, and in the defect of Father and Mother, we ought
to have Recourse to our next Kindred: For otherwise, if it were permitted to all
to marry themselves according to their own pleasure, How many cornuted
Marriages would there be? Do you believe that a young Man, or a Girl of twelve
or fifteen years of Age being married together, do understand what does belong
unto them? He who with a stedfast^ey shall look upon the occasion of the
Contempt of all Marriages, shall find that there are at least as many of those
whose Events are unfortunate, that have passionately been begun by Lovers, as
of those which have been carried on by force; Wherefore let young people, who
know not what does belong unto themselves, first examine, and prove, what
without Consideration they have begun, and by little and little they will
discover those errors, which will occasion them to enter into a greater
emazement. On the other side, the most part of those Marriages which are made
by compulsion, do proceed from the experience of those, who have more sight and
judgment than those whom most nearly it does concern: insomuch, that when they
come to the years of discretion, to be sensible of the Good which they did not
understand, they will then both acknowledge it, and embrace it with a more
distinct acceptance, and with a far greater affection. But Madam, said Hircan,
you make no mention at all that the Maid was of a good Age, and marriageable,
and understood well enough the Iniquity of her Father, who would not have the
Maidenhead of his Daughter to be lost, because he would have his Crowns to be
saved; And do you not know, that Nature of her self is the most provident
Huswife? This Maid loved, she was beloved, she knew of her self what she had to
do, and was old enough to remember the Proverb, Those who refuse, do afterward
repent. All these things put together, with the prompt execution of the Wooer,
did not give her the leisure to withstand him. You have heard also in this
Account, that presently afterward it was to be discovered by her face, that
there was some remarkable change, which, peradventure, was occasioned by the
sorrow which she entertained, that she had no more leisure to judge whether the
thing that was done was good, or evil; for she did not with any great
unwillingnesse, draw back from giving consent to the second Assault. For my
part, said Longaren, I cannot excuse her, but must approve of the faith of the
young Man, who governing himself by the Laws of Honesty, would not abandon her,
especially since he had made her such as she was. In which he seems to me to be
worthy of the highest Commendation; especially if we consider the depraved
Corruption of Youth in these present times: Howsoever, for all this I cannot so
excuse him for the first fault, but if I look upon the Maid I must accuse him
of a Rape, and if I look upon her Mother, I must accuse him of subornation. No,
no, said Dagoucin, Here is no place at all, either for Rape, or Subornation, It
was done on all sides with pure consent, as well on the Mothers side who did
not hinder it, as on the Daugh^ers who did like so well of it that she did not
complain. All this proceeded, said Parliament, out of the great good Nature and
Simplicity of her Mother, who under the title of good neighborhood, without so
much as thinking of it, did bring her Daughter to the Butchery. Not to the
Butchery, but to her marriage, said Simontault, insomuch that this simplicity
was profitable to the Maid. If you have any Account in readiness, said
Nomerfide, I do give you my voice to recite it to us. I will not fail, said
Simontault, but upon condition that the Ladies shall promise me not to weep.
And (Ladies) they who will affirm that your subtility does exceed that of Men,
will have enough to do to produce such an Example to prove it, as I now am
going about to account unto you, to prove the contrary, in which I intend not
only to declare unto you the great cunning and dissimulation of a Husband, but
withal the greater Simplicity and Goodness of his Wife.

A Husband chastising his Chambermaid did deceive the Simplicity of his Wife.
The fifth Novel.
IN the City of Tours there lived a man of a subtle and a sharp understanding,
who was the maker of the Tapistry for the late Duke of Orleans, Son to King
Francis the first; and although by the injury of sickness he became deaf, yet
he had nothing at all diminished in his understanding, for he was the most
experienced man alive in his profession, and in other things you shall hear how
ready he was to assist himself. He was married to a good Woman and of good
fortunes, with whom he lived in great peace and comfort. He was afraid to
displease her, and her endeavor was to obey and please him in all things, but
for all the good love he did bear unto her, he was withal so charitable, that
oftentimes he gave that unto his neighbors which did belong unto his Wife,
although he carried it as secretly as possibly he could. He had in his house a
Chambermaid, a Wench of a delicate complexion, of whom he was very amorous, and
nevertheless fearing that his Wife should take notice of it, he often made an
appearance to his Wife to rebuke and chide her, telling her Mistress that she
was the laziest Slut that ever he saw, and that he did much wonder that she did
not beat her; And speaking one day of whipping and chastising little Children,
he said unto his Wife, it would be a good Alms to give such stripes to your
lazy Girl whom you keep, but then it must not be with your hand, for your hand
is too weak, and your heart too pitiful; I do believe if she should feel the
weight of my hand, we should be far better served by her than we are.

The poor Woman who thought no hurt at all, desired him that he would put in
execution what he said, confessing that she had neither the heart nor the
strength to beat her. Her Husband who willingly accepted of this Commission,
did put on the Face of a cruel Beadle, and provided himself with Rods of the
smallest twigs that possibly he could find, and to manifest the great desire he
had to show no mercy, he did put them into urine, so that the poor Woman took
more pity of her Chambermaid, than she had suspicion of her Husband.

The Day of Innocents being come, her Husband did rise yery early in the
morning, and did go up into the Garret where the Chambermaid was all alone, and
there he did chastise her, but in anot^^^ manner than he told his Wife. The
Chambermaid began to weep abundantly, but it would not serve her turn;
Nevertheless, for fear his Wife should surprise him, he took the Rods, and did
so lay on with them upon the posts of the Bed, that he did break and split them
to pieces, and so brought them to his Wife, saying, Sweetheart, I do believe
she will remember Innocents day as long as she does live, and going upon some
occasion out of doors, the Chambermaid observing that her Master was gone
forth, she did come unto her Mistress, and kneeling down with both knees, she
told her, That her Husband had done her the greatest wrong that ever was done
to a poor Chambermaid. Her Mistress believing that it was by reason of the
Rods, and the stripes which she thought her Husband had given her, did not
permit her to end her Complaints, but said unto her, My Husband has done well
in it, for I have been with him every day this Month and more to entreat him
to it, and if he has made you to endure that which you would not, I am very
glad of it, you ought to take it as it comes from my self, and to believe, that
he has not taken half so much pains with you, as he ought to have done.

The Chambermaid perceiving that her Mistress did approve what was done, did
believe that it was not so great a Sin, as she did persuade her self to be, and
the rather, because that she, who was esteemed to be so good a Woman, was the
occasion of it; wherefore she durst not talk to her any more concerning it: And
her Master observing his Wife to be as well contented to be deceived, as he was
to deceive her, did determine with himself to content her in this kind more
often, and gained so much the heart of his Chambermaid, that she would weep no
more at any such chastisements. This life he continued a long time, and his
Wife perceived nothing at all. At last the great Snows came, and her Master, as
he often before had given his Maid chastisement upon the green grass, so he
would now give it her upon the Snow also. One morning before any one else in
his House was stirring, he took her with him, having nothing on her but her
smock only, and laying her down, he stretched forth her hands and her legs, to
make a Crucifix upon the Snow, and afterward exercising themselves with
flinging Snowballs on one another, he forgot not the sport of chastisement,
which a good Woman, one of his Neighbors, observed, looking out at a Window
whose prospect was directly into that his Garden, Her Intent was only to see
what Weather it was; but discovering so hot an Exercise in so cold a Morning,
she was so angry at it, that she resolved with her self to acquaint her
Neighbor with it, to the end she might be no more abused by so bad a Husband,
nor so untoward a Maid. Her Husband having performed all his Recreations,
looked up to see if no body did observe him, and perceived his Neighbors Wife
looking out of the window, for which he was very sorry; but he, whose
profession it was to give a good Color to any work, did contrive with himself
which way so well to shadow this, that his Neighbor might be as well deceived
as his Wife: and going to Bed again, he was no sooner warm, but immediately he
caused his Wife to rise, and in her smock did lead her into the same Garden
into which he had brought his Maid, and played with her along time in the Snow,
and at the last did give her the same Chastisement as he gave his Chambermaid,
and afterward they did both go to Bed again.

Some three hours afterward when this good Woman did go to Mass, her Neigbour
being a good friend of hers, did not fail to be there also, and out of the
great zeal which she had to her, she desired her that she would put away her
Chambermaid without asking her any further for what cause, for it was enough
that she knew her to be a naughty and a dangerous baggage. The good Woman
refused to do it, unless she were informed upon what grounds her neighbor
had entertained so bad an opinion of her, who in the end did account unto her
all what she had seen that morning in the Garden betwixt her and her Husband.

The good Woman could not forbear from laughter, and said unto her, Alack a day
my good friend, it was my self. Say you so? replied her neighbor, She had
nothing on her but her Smock only, and it was about five or six a clock in the
morning. The good Woman made answer, in good troth (Gossipp) it was my self.
The other not willing to be contradicted proceeded in her observations: First,
said she, I did see them to throw Snow, and to play together with one another,
afterward he did put his hand to her Breast, and after that to another place as
closely as possibly could be. The good Woman laughing out right did assure her
that it was none but her self. Say not so (said the other) I did see him upon
the Snow to do such and such a thing, which in my opinion is not fair nor
honest. Why Neighbor (said the good Woman) will you not believe me, I have
told you often enough already, and must tell you again, that it was my self and
none else, I did all this as you speak of with my Husband, I pray you to take
no offense at it, for you know we are bound to please our Husbands.

Her Neighbor seeing she could not prevail upon her to believe it, did return
to her own house more desirous to have such a Husband than to make any more
complaints against him. Her Husband being returned, his Wife did acquaint him
Word for Word with what her Neighbor told her. He said unto her, You may see
by this (Sweetheart) if you were not a good Woman, and of a good
understanding, we had long ago been separated from one another, but God (I
hope) will preserve us in our Love, to his Glory and our Contentment: Amen
(Sweetheart) said the good Woman, I do hope that on my part you shall find no
fault.

Ladies, He will hardly be believed, who after this History will affirm that
there is such a subtilty in Women as in Men, nevertheless, without doing wrong
to either sex, I may be allowed to speak the truth both of Men and women, and
to affirm that there is nothing good at all either in the one or the other. But
this Man, said Parliament, was marvellously deceitful; for on the one side he
cousened his Maid, and on the other side his Wife. You do not well understand
the story I perceive, said Hircan, for that says, that he did content them
both on one morning, and not deceive them, which I look upon as a great Act of
Virtue, both of body, and of mind, as well by deeds as by words to give content
unto two diverse persons. In that, said Parliament, he is doubly to be blamed, in
satisfying the simplicity of the one by Dissimulation, and and the longings of
the other by Lust; but I understand well enough, that such Sins as these being
brought before such a Judge as you, will find an easy pardon. You may assure
your self, said Hircan, to please two at once is no easy task, and for my own
part I will never undertake so great and difficult an enterprise. I have given
you my Account already, and think herein I have not ill employed my days work.
If a mutual Love, said Parliament, cannot content the heart, I know no other
thing in the world that can give content unto it. To speak the truth, said
Simontault, I do believe that there is not a greater punishment in the world,
than to love, and not to be beloved again. I do believe you, said Oysilla, and
to that purpose I do remember a Story, which indeed does not deserve to be
numbered on the file of good ones, but because it is for the present purpose, I
am content to declare it to you.

Of a Friar, whose Custom it was to bring his complaints to several Husbands,
which was the occasion that they did beat their Wives.
The sixth Novell.
IN the City of Angoulesm, where Count Charles the Father of King Francis had
oftentimes his residence, there was a Friar called De Valles, a very knowing
Man, and so great a Preacher, that upon all Sundays in the Advents he preached
in the City before the Count, by means whereof his Reputation was much
increased. It so fell out, that during the Advent a lusty young fellow of the
City having married a handsome young Wench, did not desist for all that to
ramble up and down, and to live as dissolutely, if not more, than those who
were unmarried; of which the young Woman being advertised, could not hold her
peace, so that following him up and down, and exclaiming on him, she received
such tokens from him as she would not willingly have, and nevertheless for all
that she did not forbear to continue her exclamations, and oftentimes would
speak very high words, and most passionately rail against him. The young Man
being much incited at it, did begin to lay about him, and to leave on her
shoulders the marks of his displeasure; whereat she began to cry out far louder
than before, and her Neighbors also that knew the occasion of it, would
inveigh against him, and making a great noise in the streets, would cry out,
Now fie on all such Husbands, Let them go all to the Devil. The Friar De Valles
passing by that way, and understanding the noise, and the occasion of it, did
determine with himself to speak one word of it in his next days Sermon, which
accordingly he did; for speaking of marriage, and of the love which ought to be
betwixt the Husband and the Wife, he did highly praise it, and blamed those
that did go about to violate it; and making a comparison betwixt conjugal and
paternal Love, he said, amongst other things, That it was a greater danger, and
a more grievous punishment for a Husband to beat his Wife, than to beat his
Father, or his Mother; for (said he) if you beat your Father, or your Mother,
you are sent to Rome to do penance, but if you beat your Wife, both she and all
her Neighbors will fall a cursing of you, and send you immediately to the
Devil, that is to say, to Hell. You are to observe now (said he) what a
difference there is betwixt these two penances, for from Rome they do
ordinarily come back again, but from Hell-Oh- There is no teturning, Nulla est
redemptio.

Not long after that Sermon, he was advertised that Women made their boasts of
that which he preached, and that their Husbands could live in no quiet for
them, for which in his next Sermon he did resolve to prescribe an Order for the
redress of that inconvenience: And in some part of it, he compared Women unto
Devils, and said, that they two were the greatest Enemies that Man had, for
they did always tempt Man without any intermission, and he could never get rid
of them, especially of the Woman; for the Devils (he said) will fly away, if
they be but showed the Cross, but Women, clean contrary to them, will cleave
the faster to them, being the greatest cross themselves that can be to their
Husbands, And this does make them so to run, and to go, and does throw them
into such an infinity of passions: But good people, be ruled by me, and I will
tell you what you shall do; When you do find that your Wives do torment you in
this manner without cease, as (I have said) they are accustomed to do, take off
the handle from your crucisix, and with that handle drive them as far from you
as you can. Do as I bid you, and vigorously make experience of it three or four
times, and you shall find the good that will come of it; you shall find that in
the same manner that you do chase away the Devil by the virtue of the Cross,
you shall also chase away and make your Wives to hold their peace by the Virtue
of the handle of the Cross, and they will no more presume to come too near
unto you.

Lo here some part of the Preachments of that venerable de Valles of whose
life I will make here no larger a recital, but I can tell you (whatsoever
appearance he made to the contrary, for I knew the man very well) yet in his
heart he took the Women's parts more than the Men's. Madem, said Parliament, he
did not show it in that last Sermon, in which he gave instructions unto Men to
beat their Wives. You do not understand his drift in it, said Hircan; had you
been exercized in the discipline and the Stratagems of War, you would have
found that one of the greatest policies that is required, is to make a Civil
sedition in the Camp of the Enemy, because it is then most easy to overcom^
him. In the like manner this Monk, the Master of his Arts, did understand well
enough, that the Anger and the Hatred betwixt the Husband and the Wife is the
Cause oftentimes that makes the Wife to let loose the reigns of her honesty,
which being governed no more by virtue, does fall into the hands of Woo^^ss,
and that almost before she can perceive that she is gone astray. Howsoever it
is, said Parliament, I should never love that man who would make so great a
separation betwixt my Husband and my self, as to make him beat me; for blows
make love to sly away. Yet nevertheless (as I have heard) so cunningly these
Impostures do carry themselves, when they would have a poor Woman at advantage,
that I do believe it is more danger to give ear unto them privately, than
publicly to receive blows from their Husband, who, if it were not for such
busy pretenders, would be good enough. To speak the truth, said Dagoucin, the
trains they have laid are on every side so many, that it is not without cause
to fear them, although in my opinion that Person who is not fearful or
suspicious is worthy of praise. Nevertheless, said Oysilla, we ought to
suspect the evil which we would avoid, for it is better to suspect the Evil
which is not, than foolishly by not believing it to fall into the Evil which
is. For my part, I never saw a Woman deceived in being slow to give credence to
the words of Men, but I have heard of many that have been ruined by giving too
ready a belief to their false protestations; wherefore I affirm, that the Evil
which can arrive cannot be too much suspected by those who have the charge both
of Men and Women, and Cities, and Estates; for be the watch never so strictly
observed, and be there never so many eyes employed, yet Forgeries and Treasons
will abound: The Shepherd that is not vigilant is every way deceived by the
subtilty of the Fox and the cruelty of the Wolf. And yet so it is, said
Dagoucin, that a person that is suspicious can never entertain any absolute
friendship, and love has been oftentimes estranged, if not separated, by
suspicion only. If you can render us any Example of it, said Oysilla, I will
give you my voice. I know one, and so true a one, said Dagoucin, that you will
take Delight to hear it. Ladies, I will tell you what it is that does most
easily break true Love; It is when the assurance of Love does b^gin to give
place unto suspicion; for as to believe a friend is the greatest honor can be
done unto him, so to doubt of him is the greatest dishonor can befall him; by
that suspicion we begin to esteem him otherwise than we would he should be,
which is the cause that many great friendships are dissolved, and Friends made
Enemies, as you shall find by this Account which I have now in hand to exhibit
to you.

A Gentleman of Percha unjustly suspecting the love of his Friend, did provoke
him unwillingly to put in practice the Cause of his Suspicion.
The seventh Novell.
IN the Country of Percha there were two Gentlemen, who from the time of their
first Infancy did continue in so great and an entire a love, that betwixt them
there was but one heart, one house, one bed, and one table. They along time did
live in this perfect Amity, enjoying one thought, and one will; you might see
indeed a distinction of persons, but they lived together not only as two
Brothers, but as if that both of them had made but one entire Man. The one of
them was married, yet did not discontinue for all that to maintain his old
Love, and daily to live with his Companion as he had been accustomed to do; And
if at any time in their Travels they wanted a second Bed, his friend did lie in
the same Bed with himself and his Wife; It is true enough that at that time he
himself did always lie in the middle. Their Goods were also in common. It was
not Marriage that could hinder the establishment of their love. Nevertheless in
the progress of time the felicity of the world, which is subject to mutability,
could not any longer continue in this House, which was indeed too happy, and in
too permanent a condition; for the Husband forgetting the assurance which he
had in his Friend, without any occasion at all, did entertain a great jealousy
of his Wife and him: He did not dissemble it to his Wife, and did acquaint her
with the unpleasing tidings; whereat she was much astonished, for he had
commanded her in all things, but in one, to make as much of his Companion as of
himself, and now he expressly did forbid her to speak unto him, unless she were
in some public Company. She took the opportunity to acquaint the Companion of
her Husband with it, who did not believe it; knowing well enough that he never
thought, nor did any thing, whereat his Companion should be afflicted: And
being accustomed to conceal nothing from him, he did acquaint him with what he
understood, desiring him that he would not conceal the truth from him; for he
would not, either in that, or any other thing, give him an occasion to break
that love with so long they had entertained.

The Gentleman that was married did assure him, that he had never any such
thought, and that they who brought this Information to him were most wicked
liars. His Companion told him, I know well enough that Jealousy is a passion
as insupportable as Love, and if you should be surprised with it, yet I would
do you no Injury at all; for I know it is a passion that grows so upon a Man,
that he cannot help it. But of one thing which lies in your power to help, I
find I have just reason to complain, which is, that you conceal this passion
from me, seeing heretofore there was not that thing which you would conceal
from me. I will say as much of my self, If I were amorous of your Wife, you
ought not to impute it unto me as any great Iniquity; for it is a fire which I
hold not in my hand to do with it according to my own pleasure; but if I should
conceal it from you, and endeavor to make your Wife acquainted with it, I
should be one of the wickedest Companions that ever was. For my part I do
assure you, that albeit she is an honest and a virtuous Gentlewoman, yet, were
she not your Wife, I do not know any Woman that I have a less Fancy to. But,
although there be no occasion for it, I desire you, if you but harbor the
least scruple of suspicion that possibly may be, that you would acquaint me
with it, to the end I may give such Order, that our love, which has so long
continued, may not be dissolved for a Woman, for if I loved her above all
Creatures in the World, yet I would never speak any more unto hrr, because I
do prefer your love above all others. His Companion did swear unto him by the
greatest Oaths that could possibly be imagined, that he never had any such
thought, and desired him to make use of his house as he was accustomed to do.
His Friend made answer to him; because it is your desire I will do it, but I
must entreat you, that if for the time to come you shall entertain any such
opinion of me, that you will not dissemble it, and that you will not think ill
of it, if I shall never again keep company with you. At the end of some
Months, after they had lived together in their accustomed familiarities, the
married Gentleman did enter again into his former Jealousy more than ever, and
commanded his Wife to look no more upon him with that Countenance which she had
been accustomed to do, which she again imparted to the Companion of her
Husband, beseeching him, of her self, that he would be pleased to forbear to
speak any more unto her, for she had received for her own part an express
Commandment to that purpose from her Husband.

The Gentleman understood by these words of hers, and by the Countenance which
he observed that she did make unto her Husband, that he had not kept his
promise with him, wherefore he said unto him in a great Cholet, If you are
jealous my Companion, it is a thing natural, but after so many Oaths which you
have made unto me, I am forry to find that which you labor so much to conceal
from me; For I always thought that there had been no Medium, nor Obstacle
betwixt your heart and mine, but to my great grief, and without the least
occasion I do find the contrary, because you are not only foolishly jealous of
your Wife and of my self, but you do endeavor to cover it, that the disease
may increase so long upon you, that it may turn all into hatred, and as our
love has been the greatest of any that has been known in our age, so the
enmity may prove as mortal.

I have hated that which you suspect, and have done what I could to avoid the
inconvenience, but because you do suspect me to be so wicked, and to be
contrary to that which I have always been unto you, I do swear unto you, and
do promise you upon my faith, that now I will be such as you esteem me to be,
and I will never cease until I have had that of your Wife which you think I
have obtained already, and for the time to come look to it, for since that
Jealousy has separated you from the love of me, Despite shall sever me from
the love of men. Although his Companion did endeavor to persuade him to the
contrary, yet he would not take any notice of it, but took his part of those
goods and movables, which before were in common betwixt them, and they were as
much divided in their affections as they were before united, and the Gentleman
that was not married was as good as his word, for he did never leave to court
the suspected Lady until he had cornuted his Companion, as he promised him that
he would.

Here Ladies they may learn, and grow wise, who unjustly do suspect their
Wives, for many are the cause that they are such as they suspect themselves to
be, for a Woman of spirit and understanding is more overcome by Despite than by
all the pleasures in the World. If any one shall affirm that jealousy is love,
I shall deny it, but it does proceed from it indeed, as the sparks from the
fire, and is as destructive. I do believe, said Hircan, that there neither is
nor can be a greater displeasure to Man or Woman, than to be suspected when
there is no cause for it, and for my self, there is nothing that so much does
make me to break off the Company of my Friends than this suspicion. It is not,
said Oysilla, a reasonable excuse for a Woman to revenge the jealousy of her
Husband, by bringing a shame and a dishonor upon her self. It is to do like
that weak man, who not being able to kill his Enemy, does wound himself with a
sword; or that weak woman, who because she cannot come to scratch her Enemy,
does bite off her own nails for anger: But she had done more wisely not to have
spoken to him, but only to have represented unto her Husband the wrong which he
had done her by his unjust jealousy; for time might have made them friends
again. If this, said Emarsuite, was the Resolution of a Wife, and that other
Wives should do the like, there are many Husbands who would not be so arrogant
and outrageous as they are. Whatsoever it were, said Longaren, it is patience
that does render a Woman at the last victorious, It is chastity that does
render her commendable, and it behooves us to stay there. Nevertheless, said
Emarsuite, a Woman may well be not chaste without sin.

How understand you that, said Oysilla? When she mistakes another for her
Husband, replied Emarsuite; or is so sottish, said Parliament, that she knows
not the difference between her Husband and another, in whatsoever habiliments
he shall disguise himself. There have been, and are still of those Women, said
Emarsuite, who have been deceived by others, and yet themselves have remained
innocent, and inculpable of Sin. If you know any such, said Dagoucin, I do give
you my voice, that we may receive from you an account of her; for it seems
strange to me that Innocence and Sin can lodge together. Then listen to me,
said Emarsuite; And Ladies, if by the foregoing stories you are not
sufficiently advertised how dangerous it is to lodge those in your houses who
call us worldly things, and do esteem themselves to be holy, and far more
worthy than our selves, I will yet add one Example more, to show unto you that
they are but Men, as others are, and altogether as subtle and sinful as they,
as it shall appear unto you by this History.

Of Two Grey-Friers who on the Wedding-Night did one after the other usurp the
place of the Bridegroom, for which they were severely punished.
The eighth Novell.
IN a village in the Country of Perigard, there was kept in an Inn the Marriage
of the Daughter of the Host, where her Parents, and all her Friends did enforce
themselves to make the best cheer that possibly they could. On the Wedding Day
there arrived two Friars, who had their Supper sent them up into their Chamber,
because it was not lawful for such mortified Men to be present at Weddings;
But the Elder of them, who had more Authority and Knavery than the other, did
resolve with himself, that although he could not be present at the Table with
the Bride, yet he would partake with the Bridegroom in his Bed, and that he
would now play a game, in which he would show his Masterpiece.

When the Night came, and the Dancing began, the Friar did look a long time out
of the Window upon the Bride, and observed her to be fair and lovely, and
according to his own mind; and enquiring of the Governor of the Chamberlains
where she was to lie, he found that the Brides Chamber was next unto his own,
at which he was very glad, and so strictly did watch her, that he saw the Bride
undressed by the old women, who (according to the Custom) did bring her to her
Chamber: And because it was a day of mirth, and his friends were round about
him, the Bridegroom would not forsake the Dance, but was so much affected to
it, that it seemed he had forgot his Wife. But the Friar had not forgot her,
for as soon as he perceived that she was in bed, and left alone, he did put off
his gray mantle, and took the place of the married man, but for fear of being
discovered he made but a short stay there, and made have to the place where he
found his companion, who watched for him; Putting on his gray mantle he stood
now Centinul for the other Friar, who to satisfy his wicked concupiscence did
go to the Brides bed as the other did before him, where he stayed till his
Companion made a sign that it was time to come away. The Bridegroom afterward
came to the bed, and the Bride who had been so much tormented by the Friars,
that she defired rather rest than pleasure, could not forbear from saying to
him, What? do you not make account to sleep this night? will you never let me
alone?

The poor Bridegroom who was but just come to her, was amazed to hear these
words, and demanded of her, what trouble was it he had put her to? seeing that
he was but now come from the Dance; Dance (said she) why you have danced to
some tune, for this is the third time that you have come unto me to dance the
shaking of the Sheets, me thinks that it should become you better now to sleep.
Her Husband hearing those words was much astonished, and forgot all other
things that he had to do, to understand the truth of this Mystery; and when she
had given him an account of it, he immediately suspected that it was the Friars
who were lodged the very next door to him; wherefore rising from his Bed he
presently did go unto their Chamber, and finding them not there, he called out
so loud for help, that all his friends assembled themselves, who having
understood the fact did assist him with Candles, and Lanthorns, and all the
dogs of the Village to find out the Friars; And when he perceived them not in
the dwelling house, nor the outhouses, their diligence made such a dispatch
that they did apprehend them amongst the Vines, and did use them as they had
deserved, for having soundly beaten them, they did cut their Legs and their
Arms, and did leave them in the Vines to the protection of Bacchus and Venus to
whom they were better Disciples than to Saint Francis.

Do not wonder (Ladies) if these Religious people separated from our common
fashion and manner of living do act those things which other Men are ashamed
to perform. You may wonder that they do no worse, when God does draw back his
hand from them, for the habit does not make a Monk, but oftentimes does undo
him through pride and arrogance. Good God, said Oysilla, can we find no other
Subjects for these Accounts but Monks and Friars only. Emarsuite said, if in
these Histories we spare not Ladies, Princes, and Gentlemen, me thinks that the
Monks should not be displeased that we make them our Subjects, for the greatest
part of them is so unprofitable, that if they did not some evil by which they
might be remembered, there is neither Man nor woman that would make the least
mention of them. It is vulgarly spoken, that it is better to do ill than to do
nothing at all; and this Packet of our Accounts will seem more delightful, the
more it is filled with different Subjects. If you will promise not to be angry
with me, said Hircan, I will give you an Account of two Persons so burning in
the flames of love, that you will excuse the poor Friars, and say that they did
but take their necessity where they could find it, but this Lady who had enough
to seed on, did too fondly seek after fresh Diet. As we have sworn all to speak
the truth, said Oysilla, so we are sworn also to give ear unto it. Wherefore
(f^r ought I know, you may speak at freedom, for the evil which we speak of Men
or Women is not for the particular shame of those to whom the Account is
related, but to take away all presumption and confidence from creatures, in
showing the miseries to which they are subject, to the end that our hope may
rest it self by leaning and relying altogether on him who is only perfect, and
without whom there is nothing but imperfection, wherefore without any more
suspense I will declare my History to you.

The Subtilty of a Countess, privately to have her pleasure of Men; And how she
was discovered.
The ninth Novell.
IN the Court of a King of France, named Charles, I will not tell you what
Charles, for the honor of the Lady of whom I speak, neither will I name her to
you by her own Name, but she was a Countess of a great house, but not a
French-woman by her birth; And as all new things do please, this Lady at her
first coming to the Court, as well for the Novelty and Fashion of her
Garments, as for her wealth, with which she abounded, was much looked upon by
every one: And although she was none of the most beautiful, yet she had so
great a grace and confidence, that it was impossible to have more. Such was her
language, and her gravity, that there was not a Man in the Court who was not
afraid to speak unto her, unless it were the King, who loved her entirely. And
to express himself more privately unto her, he gave her Husband a Commission,
and employed him in the affairs of state, where he continued a long time, and
during his absence the King made very much of his Wife. Many Courtiers and
Gentlemen of Honor, who perceived that the King their Master was gallantly
entertained by her, did assume the boldness to speak unto her, and amongst
others, one named Astillon, who was a Gentleman of her own temper, and of a
great grace and boldness; but she checked him with so great a gravity,
threatening him that she would acquaint the King his Master with it, that he
began to be afraid, but being a Soldier, and not accustomed to fear, he did so
assure her of his affection, and did follow her so closely, that she consented
to speak unto him alone, and instructed him in what manner he should come unto
her Chamber, which he did not fail to put in execution. And that the King might
have no suspicion of it, he demanded leave of the King to go into the Country,
and so he departed from the Court. On the first days Journey he left all his
followers behind him, and came at night to receive the fruit of those promises
which the Countess had made unto him, and found her as good as her word;
wherewith he was so satisfied, that he was constrained to stay there seven or
eight days, shut up in a Wardrobe, and during that time he never did go forth
of it, living only upon Restoratives.

During those eight days in which there he stayed, there came another Courtier,
one of his Companions, to make love unto the Countess, whose Name was Duraceir.
At the first she entertained him with the same words, as she did young
Astillon, and was rather more rough in her language, but at the last she looked
on him every day more smilingly than other: And when the Day came that she did
give leave to her first prisoner to depart, she did put the second into his
place; and during the time that he was there, another of their Companions,
called Valcebron, did court her in the same manner as the two former, and after
him there came two or three others, who all did partake in that sweet prison.

This life continued a long time, and was so finely carried, that they
understood nothing of one another adventures: And although they knew well
enough the love which one another did bear unto her, yet every one thought,
that none of them all had any Interest in her, but himself alone, and every one
flouted his Companion for being disappointed in his great expectation. One day
when the Gentlemen abovenamed were at Dinner, where they were all very merry,
they did begin to discourse of their fortunes, and of the prisons they had been
in during the wars; but Valcebron, who was unable for any time to conceal so
good a fortune as that which they had all enjoyed, did say unto his Companions,
I know not what prisons you have been in, but as for my self, for the love of a
prison in which I have been, I will speak the praises of it during my life
above all others, For I do believe there is no pleasure in this World that can
be compared to that where I have been Prisoner.

Astillon, who was the first Prisoner, did suspect what Prison it was he meant,
and said unto him, Valcebron, Under what Jaolor, or Jaoloresse were you so well
used, that you so much extol your Prison? Valcebron made answer to him,
Whosoever was the Jaolor, the Prison was so agreeable unto me, that I do wish
with all my heart that it had continued longer, for I was never better used,
nor more contented. Duraceir who was a man but of few words, did understand
well enough that they discoursed of that Prison in which he had his share as
well as they, and said unto Valcebron, With what Viands were you nourished in
that Prison which so highly you commend? The King, said Valcebron did not feed
on better nor more nourishing. Nevertheless it were requisite, said Duraceir,
I should know, if the Person whosoever it were that kept you Prisoner did not
make you earn your bread. Valcebron, who doubted he was understood, could not
contain himself, but said, Ha! Is it so? O Wit and grave discretion, I find now
that I have Companions, where I thought I had been alone. Astillon observing
the Debate, and knowing that he had a part in the prison as well as the rest,
could not forbear from laughing, and said, We all follow one Master, and are
the Friends and Companions of his youth. If we have been Companions together in
any bad fortune, we have occasion to laugh at it, but to know whether that be
true or no which I suggest unto my self, I must beseech you to give me leave to
put an interrogatory or two unto you, and that you will be pleased to confess
the Truth unto me, for if that is befallen us as I do conjecture, it will be
one of the most pleasant adventures that ever in any place was heard of.

They all did swear to speak the truth, since it was so that they must not deny
it. He said unto them, I will tell you my fortune, and you shall all answer me,
I, or no, if yours be not like unto mine. They did all accord unto him, and
immediately he began. In the first place I demanded leave of the King to take a
Journey into the Country. They all answered, And so did all we. When I was two
miles from the Court, I left all my followers behind me, and did go to render
my self Prisoner. They all made answer, We did all the like. I stayed, said
Astillon, seven or eight days locked up in a Wardrope, where I did feed on
nothing but Restoratives, and the most pleasant Viands which ever I tasted, and
at the end of eight days, they who kept me prisoner did let me go, but far
more feeble than when I came. They did all swear, The very same was all their
fortunes. My imprisonment, said Astillon, did end on such a day; And then did
mine begin, said Duraceir, it was on the very same day in which yours did end,
and it continued eight days. Valcebron lost all patience, and did begin to
swear s'Blood! For ought that I can see I am the third, who thought my self to
be the first and only man, but I came in on such a day, and did go forth on
such a day. The other three who were at table, did swear, that one after
another they all observed the same order. Since it is so, said Astillon, I will
inform you with the condition of my Jaoloresse. She is a married Woman, and her
Husband is far off employed in the Kings service. They all made answer, It is
the very same woman. Well then, said Astillon, to put our selves out of all
doubt, I who was the first of all enrolled will first of all name her, it is
Madam the Countess, who is so full of state, forsooth, that in gaining her
love, I thought I had overcom Caesar. May all the Devils take the Slut who has
put us all to so much trouble, and made us to think our selves so happy in
having a place in her affection. There was never any like unto her, for when
she had one in her Cage, she was looking about, and dealing for another, to
keep her self always in exercise. I had rather be dead, than let her go so
without any punishment at all.

They demanded of Duraceir what he thought of it, and what punishment she ought
to have, protesting they would be all ready to inflict it on her. In my opinion
(said he) we ought to acquaint the King our Master with it, who does reverence
her like a Goddess. We will not do so, (said Astillon) we have means enough in
our own hands to be revenged on her, without appealing to our Master: We shall
find her to morrow morning when she goes to Mass, at what time we will all be
ready to attend her, every one with a little hoop, or collar of Iron about his
neck; and when she enters into the Church, we will all together present our
selves at once before her, and salute her as we shall think sitting. This
Counsel was approved by all the Company, and every one provided himself with a
Collar of Iron.

The morning being come, they being all clothed in black, and every one with a
Hoop of Iron about his neck in the fashion of a Collar, they came to attend the
Countess as she was going to Church, who when she beheld them so strangely
accoutred, began to laugh, and said unto them, From whence come these dolorous
people? Madam (said Astillon) We your poor slaves and prisoners are come to do
you service. The Countess making a semblance as if she knew nothing at all, did
say unto them, You are not my prisoners, neither can I understand what occasion
you have to do service to me, more than to any other: whereupon Valtebron
advanced himself more near unto her, and said, Since we have fed so long on
your Bread, we should be ungrateful, Madam, if we should not do you service.
She did put so good a countenance upon it, pretending to understand nothing at
all, that she thought with her bold dissimulation to have amazed them; but they
followed their process so closely, that she perceived that the business was
discovered. Wherefore incontinently she did find an expedient to deceive them;
for she who had lost her honor and her Conscience, would not receive the shame
which they thought to have brought upon her, who, but as one who preferred her
pleasure above all the honor of the world, did make nothing of what they said,
and did not alter her Countenance at all, at which they were all astonished,
seeing that they had brought upon themselves that shame which they thought to
have done to her.

Ladies, If you find not this History able enough to make you understand that
there are Women as subtle, and as wicked as Men, I will look out some others
for you. Howsoever, it seems to me to be sufficient to demonstrate to you, that
a Woman having lost her shame, is a hundred times more bold, and more ready to
do evil, than a Man. There was not a Woman in all the Company who heard this
History, but made as many signs of the Cross, as if at that present before
their eyes they had seen all their Enemies in Hell.

But Oysilla said, Ladies, Let us humble our selves, when we do hear of such
horrible things; for a Woman forsaken by God, does render her self like unto
him with whom she joyneth. For, as they who do adhere to God, have his Spirit
with them; So they who adhere unto the Devil, have always with them the
temptations of the Prince of Darkness. And there is nothing so Bestial, as a
Woman destitute of the Spirit of God. Why? what had this poor Lady done, said
Emarsuite? I can find nothing, I only hear a story of Men who vaunted of their
prison. I am of opinion, said Longaren, that it is no less pain and trouble
for a man in this kind to conceal his good fortune, than it is for them to
obtain it; for there is no hunter but sounds his horn at the fall of the Game,
nor Lover but does glory having gained the Victory over his Mistress. Lo here
an opinion, said Simontault, which before the inquisition it self, I will
maintain to be heretical; for there are more men by far than Women that can
keep Secrecies, and I do know very well that there may be some found, who had
rather have no good cheer at all, than that any body should understand it. And
the Church as a good Mother has ordained Priests who are men to be Confessors,
and not Women, because they can conceal no secrets.

It is not for that occasion, said Oysilla, but because Women are so great
Enemies to Vice, that they would not so easily give absolution as Men, and
would be far more austere in their injunctions of penance. If they would be as
severe in their penances, said Dagoucin, as they are in their answers, they
would make Sinners rather to despair than they would lead them to Salvation;
Wherefore the Church has provived well in all things. Howsoever, I cannot
excuse those Gentlemen who did boast so much of their Prison, for there was
never any Man that received honor by speaking ill of Women. Because the Act
was common amongst them all, said Hircan, in my opinion they did well to
comfort one another.

But they ought not to have confessed it, said Guebron, for their own honor;
for the Books of the Round Table do teach us, that it is no point of honor in
Chivallry to beat one who is not worth any thing. I do much wonder, said
Longaren, that this poor Lady did not die for shame before these Prisoners.
Those who have once lost it, said Oysilla, do hardly or never recover it again;
unless it be those whom a violent Love has made to forget it, and I have seen
many of those to recover their lost shame. I believe, said Hircan, that you
have seen those to return who have never set foot forward, for an entire love
in a Woman is very hard to find. I am not of your opinion, said Longaren, for
I know there have been some who have loved until death. I have such a desire to
hear that Novelty, said Hircan, that I do give you my voice, to find that Love
in Women which I thought had never been. But when you have heard it, said
Longaren, you will believe it, and confess that there is no passion so violent
as that of Love; And as it makes us to undertake things almost impossible, to
purchase a little contentment in this life, so (more than any other passion) it
inforceth Him or Her who have lost the hope of their desire, as it will appear
unto you by this History.

One in love having been let blood received the gift of Mercy by which he died,
and his Sweetheart killed her self for the loss of him.
The tenth Novel.
IT is not yet a full year, since there was a Gentleman in the City of Cremona,
named Monsieur John Peter, who a long time had loved a Lady who lived near unto
his house, but in the purchase which he made, did not receive the Answer he
desired, although she did love him with all her heart: At which the poor
Gentleman was so perplexed, that he retired into his own Chamber, and
determined with himself no more in vain to seek after that, the pursuit whereof
did consume his life, and endeavoring to divert his fancy and affection, he
did keep within some days without seeing the Lady whom he loved, by reason
whereof he did fall into so extreme a melancholy that it quite altered his
Complexion. His Kinsman caused the Physicians to come unto him, who finding his
complexion to be turned yellow, did judge it to be an opilation of the Liver,
and did prescribe him Medicines for his Recovery. The Lady who had been so
rigorous unto him, knowing well enough that his Disease came only by her
denials, did send unto him an old Woman in whom she trusted, and did command
her to acquaint him from her, that since she found by experience, that his love
was true, and not counterfeit, she was resolved to accord unto him in all those
things which for so long a time she had refused. She had found a way to go out
of her own house into a place where privately she might see him.

The Gentleman who on that morning had been let blood in the arm, finding
himself to be better recovered by that Message, than he could be by Physic, or
all the receipts that could be given him, did teturn word, that he would not
fail to come at the hour she appointed, and that she had wrought an apparent
Miracle; for by one word she had cured a Man of a Disease, for whom all the
Physicians could find no Redress.

The Evening being come which he so much longed for, the Gentleman repaired to
the place which was appointed, with so great a Contentment, that it could not
be increased. He attended not long, but she, whom he loved better than his own
soul, did come to find him. He did not study to make any long Oration, for the
fire which did burn within him, did make him hastily to possess himself of
that, which he could hardly persuade himself that he had in his own power; and
being drunk with Love and Pleasure, whiles he sought to provide a remedy for
his life more than was requisite, he found the advancement of his Death; for in
the love to his Sweetheart, having forgot himself, he perceived not his Arm,
from which (the Vein opening again.) the blood did come forth so abundantly,
that the poor Gentleman was almost bathed in it: But he believing that his
faintness did proceed from his Excess of pleasure, did think with himself to
return to his own Lodging. But Love, who had too much united them together, did
so dispose of it, that in departing from his friend, his soul did depart from
himself, and by the great effusion of blood he had lost he fell down dead at
her feet, who was so amazd, both in the consideration of the loss which she had
of so entire a friend, of whose Death she was the only Cause, as also of the
shame that would fall upon her if the dead body were found in her house, that
not knowing what to do, she and one of her Chambermaids in whom she altogether
trusted, did carry the body into the Street, where she would not leave it
alone, but taking the sword of her dead friend, she resolved to partake of his
fortune, and perish by the effusion of blood also, in punishing that heart
which was the cause of all this Evil, and forcing the sword quite through her,
she fell down upon the Body of her Friend.

The Father and the Mother of this young Gentlewoman coming forth out of their
house on the next morning, did behold this pitiful spectacle; And making as
great a lamentation as the Case deserved, they did bury them both together.

By this Ladies you may see what mischiefs do attend the extremity of love.
This is that which does please me well, said Simontault; when Love is so equal,
that the one dying the other cannot live, and if God had made me so blessed as to
have found such a one, I do verily persuade my self, that no man had ever loved
so perfectly as I should have done. But I am of opinion, said Parliament, that
love would not have so much blinded you, but you would have remembered to have
kept your Arm better than that Gentleman did, for those days are passed, that
Men do forget their lives for their Ladies. But those days are not passed, said
Simontault, that Ladies for their pleasure do forget the lives of their
Servants. I am of opinion, said Emarsuite, that there is no Woman in the World
that takes pleasure in the death of a Man although he were her Enemy.
Nevertheless if Men will kill themselves, Ladies cannot help their
willfulness. So it is, said Saffredant, that she who refuses a piece of bread
to a poor men dying for hunger is esteemed to be a Murderesse. If your
requests, said Oysilla, were as reasonable as the poor Man's begging for his
necessity, Ladies should be too cruel to refuse you: But God be praised, the
malady of love does kill no man but only those who would die of themselves that
year. I know not Madam, said Saffredant, what is the greatest necessity, but
only that which does make us to forget all others: For when Love is violent we
mind neither bread nor any other delicates whatsoever, but only the looks and
words of those we love. They who would suffer you to fest, said Oysilla,
without giving you any other Viands, would quickly make you change your
thoughts of Love. I must confess, said Saffredant that the Body would fail,
but the Heart and the good will would still remain. Then, said Parliament, God
has given you a great grace, that you should address your self to one where
you find so little Contentment, that you must comfort up your self with eating
and drinking, with which me thinks you may acquit your self so well, that you
ought to praise God for that friendly cruelty. I am so nourished in affliction,
said Saffredant, that I do begin to solace my self in those torments of which
others do complain. It may be, said Longaren, that your love does so withdraw
you from all Company, that no other contentment can be welcome to you, for there
is nothing more troublesome, than an importunate Lover. Nothing, said
Simontault, unless it be a cruel Lady. I do perceive, said Oysilla, that if we
should attend to hear an end of the Reasons of Simontault, that we should bear
no Vespers this Evening. Wherefore let us rise and praise God that this Days
work is so well accomplished. She did begin first of all to rise her self, and
all the rest did follow her, but Simontault and Longaren did continue all the
way to discuss the Argument, and so gently, that without drawing of his Sword
Simontault did get the better, showing that the strongest passion was the
greatest necessity. And speaking those words they did enter into the Church
where the Monks did attend them. Vespers being ended, they did go to Supper,
where they entertained one another with as much discourse as Diet, for the
Dispute continued all the time of Supper, and all the Evening afterward, until
Oysilla told them that it was high time to go to rest, and that five days
Journeys were adorned with such delightful Histories that she was afraid that
the sixth day would not be like unto it, for it was not possible to invent
better Accounts, than what were here delivered, and which were not Fictions but
Truths. But Guebron said that as long as the world endured there would
something fall out every day which would be new and worthy to be remembered, for
the depravednesse of bad men, and their corruptions, will be always such as
heretofore they have been, and in the same way will be the Goodness of Good
men; And as long as Grace and Corruption do reign upon the Earth, they will
always fill it with one Novelty or another, although it be written, That there
is nothing new under the Sun; But we who have not been called to the privy
Counsel of God, being ignorant of the first Causes, do find all things new, and
so much the more admirable, as we have the less desire or ability to perform
them: Wherefore fear not but that the Days Works that are to come will be
altogether as pleasing, and as full of variety, as those which are passed, only
do you on your parts use your best endeavors. Oysilla said that she did
recommend her self unto God, in whose name she did bid them Goodnight; with
that all the Company withdrew, putting a period to the fifth Days Work

The End of the fifth Days Work
The Sixth Days Work of the Novells of the Queen of NAVARRE.
The Preface.
IN the Morning more early than ordinary Madam Oysilla was in the Hall ready to
begin her Lecture, of which when of all those her Company were advertised (for
the desire they had to partake in her good instruction) they did make
themselves ready with so much diligence, that she stayed not long for them. She
knowing their hearts did read unto them the Epistle of Saint John the
Evangelist, which is full of Love. The Company found those Viands to be so
sweet, that although they stayed there above half an hour longer than on other
days they were accustomed, yet it did not seem to them to be half a quarter of
an hour; departing from thence they repaired to Mass, where every one of them
did commend himself to the holy Spirit, that on that day they might satisfy
the pleasant audience. After they had dined and taken a little repose in their
chambers, they resorted to the Meadow to continue there their accustomed
Recreations. Madam Oysilla demanded, who should begin that days Journey.
Longaren made answer, Madam, I do give you my voice, for this day you have read
unto us so excellent a Lecture, that it is impossible but you should rehearse
unto us some history that may deserve to accomplish the glory which this
morning you have merited. It does much grieve me (said Oysilla) that I cannot
rehearse unto you this afternoon something which may be as profitable to you as
what I did speak in the morning. Nevertheless the intention of my History
shall not stray much from the Doctrine of the Word of God, where it is written,
Put not your Confidence in Princes, nor in the Sons of Man, for of them comes
not your Salvation. And that (for want of an Example) you may not bury that
truth in oblivion, I will recite unto you a sad Legend, the memory whereof is
so fresh, that the tears are yet scarce wiped from their eyes who beheld the
pitiful spectacle.

THE NOVELLS Of Queen MARGARET.
The perfidiousnesse and cruelty of an Italian.
The first Novel.
A Duke of Italy, whose name I will conceal, had a Son of eight and twenty
years of age, who was much in love with a young Maid of a good and honest
Family, and because he could not have the liberty to speak unto her as he would
according to the custom of the Country, he assisted himself by a Gentleman who
was his Servant, who was amorous also on a handsome young Maid a Servant to his
Mother, by whom he caused the great affection which he did bear unto his
Sweetheart to be discovered. The poor Maid thought no hurt of it, but did take
pleasure to do him service, conceiving his desires to be so just and honest
that he had no other intention but she might well do the message with honor
and a good Conscience. But the Duke who had more regard to the advancement of
his House than to honest Love, had so great a fear that these Loves might
proceed to marriage, that he did set a very strict watch over them, and he was
informed that the poor Girl was employed to carry Letters from his Son to her
whom he loved, at which he was so incensed, that he resolved to give an order
to prevent it. But he could not so well dissemble his choler but the Damosel
was advertised of it, who knowing the cruelty of the Prince, which was as great
as his Conscience was little, she was in a mavelous fear, and addressed her
self unto the Duchess, beseeching her to give her leave to withdraw her self
into some place out of his sight, until his choler was passed over; But her
Mistress made answer to her, that she would know her Husbands pleasure before
she would give her leave.

Not long afterward she understood the evil resolution of the Duke, and
knowing his complexion too well, she not only did give the Maid leave to
depart, but advised her to retire her self into a Monastery until the Tempest
was blown over, which accordingly she did, and as privately as possibly she
could, howsoever the Duke by his Spies was advertised of it, and with a
countenance pretending Joy, he demanded of his Wife where the Maid was, who
thinking that he already knew the truth, did confess unto him where she was,
for which he seemed to be sorry, and told her, that she needed not to put on so
sad a Countenance, for he on his part did mean no hurt unto her, wherefore he
advised her to send for her back again, for (he said) the report of such a
thing would not be good. The Duchess said unto him, if the poor Girl were so
unfortunate as to be deprived of his favor, it were better that for a certain
time she should not appear in his presence. But he would not receive nor allow
her reasons, and did command her that she should send for her again. The
Duchess did not fail to declare unto the Maid the pleasure and good will of
the Duke, of which she could not assure her self, but besought her that she
might not tempt her fortunes, for she knew well enough the conditions of the
Duke, and whatsoever pretense he made, it was most difficult unto his Nature to
forgive. The Duchess assured her that she should receive no prejudice at all,
and by her Messenger made protestations to her of it upon her life and honor.
The Maid who knew well enough that her Mistress loved her, and would not for
any thing circumvent her, did take a confidence in her promise, believing that
the Duke would never violate that security in which the honor of his Wife was
engaged, and thereupon returned to the Duchess.

The Duke when ever he understood thereof did come into his Wives Chamber, and
having seen the Maid, he said unto his Wife, look yonder who is returned? and
turning himself toward the Gentlemen that followed him, he commanded them to
take hold of her, and to carry her to prison. The poor Duchess, who upon the
honor of her Word had tempted her out of the place of her protection, was so
astonished at it, that she kneeled down before him, and besought him most
importunately for his own honor, and for the honor of his House, that he
would not commit such an Act, seeing that to obey him she had taken her from
the place of security where she was; but whatsoever prayer she could make, or
reasons she could allege, nothing would mollify his heart, nor overcome the
heady resolution he had taken with himself to be revenged on her, for without
answering his Wife one Word he withdrew himself from her as fast as he could,
and forgetting God, and the honor of his House, without any form of Justice he
most cruelly caused the Maid to be apprehended. I will not in this place
undertake to describe unto you the perplexity of the Duchess, which was such
that a Lady of Honor and of a good spirit ought to have, who on the obligation
of her faith did see her to die whom she desired to preserve. But much less
may the lamentations of the poor Gentleman be represented, who was his Servant,
and failed not to use the utof his endeavor as much as it was possible for him
to do, to save the life of the Maid, offering to lose his own life for her,
but it would not be accepted, and no pity could touch the heart of the Duke,
who knew no other felicity, but to revenge himself of those whom he hated. In
this manner was the innocent Maid put to death by this cruel Duke, against all
Law of honesty, to the great grief of all those who knew her.

See here Ladies what are the effects of malice when power is joined unto it. I
have heard it spoken, said Longaren, that the greatest part of the Italians ( I
say the greatest part; for no doubt there are some honest men amongst them, as
in all other Nations) are subject to their Vices, in which none do exceed them,
but I though that Vengeance and Cruelty had not been so predominant, as upon
every small occasion to give so cruel a death. Saffredant smiling did say unto
her, Longaren, you have given us a true Account of one of the three Vices, I
would fain know what are the other two. If you do not know them already, said
Longaren, I will tell them you, but I am confident you are not to learn what
they are. By your words, said Saffredant you would make me a very vicious Man.
Not by deeds, said Longaren, but in knowing the filthiness of Vice, you can
better than another know how to avoid it. Wonder not, said Simontault at their
cruelty, for those who have traveled into Italy will tell you such incredible
things of them, that this in the comparison will appear but a little Sin or no
Sin at all. Believe me, said Guebron, when Rivoli was taken by the French,
there was an Italian Captain who was esteemed to be a Gentleman, who seeing one
dead who was not his Enemy in particular, but only took part against the
Gibelins, did tear his heart out of his belly, and rosting it upon the Coals
did greedily devour it, and some present demanding of him what taste it had, he
made answer that he never did eat a sweeter or a more voluptuous morsel; And
not content with this goodly Act, he killed the Wife of the Dead Man, and
tearing her young child out of her belly, being almost ready to be delivered,
did dash it into pieces against the walls, and afterward filled the two Bodies
of the Husband and Wise with Oats, and threw them to his Horses to seed on. How
do you think he would have used this Girl whom he had suspected to have done
him a displeasure. It might well be affirmed, said Emarsuite, that the Duke was
very much afraid that his Son should have married poorly, and that was the
reason that he would not suffer him to have a Wife according to his own mind.
You are not to doubt, said Simontault, that the Nature of them is to love that
more than Nature which was only created for the use of Nature. Behold, said
Longaren, the second Sin which I would have represented to you, for we all know
well enough, that to love money beyond the use of it for which it serves, which
is only to aid us in our necessities, is to make an Idol of it. Parliament added
that Saint Paul had not forgot their Vices, nor the vices of those men who
think they do surpass and excel all others in wisdom and humane reason in
which they do confound themselves, because they render not to God the glory
which is due unto him. Therefore God who is jealous of his Honor has renderd
them more insensible than Beasts, who believed they had more sense than all
other men, and by their lusts against Nature they do show that they are
delivered up to a reprobate sense. Longaren interupted her in her discourse and
said, this is the third Sin to which the greatest part of the Italians are
subject. In good earnest, said Nomerfide, I take an extraordinary delight to
hear this discourse, for since those Spirits which we esteem to be the most
subtle, and the greatest Discoverers, do endure such a punishment as to be more
senseless than beasts: We ought to conclude, that those who are humble and
dejected in their beauty, as I my self am, shall be filled with the wisdom of
Angels, and with the grace of God. I assure you, answered Oysilla, I am not far
from your opinion; for no man is more ignorant than he who thinks he knows
something. I never, said Guebron, saw a mocker but he was mocked, nor a
deceiver but he was deceived, nor a vain glorious person but he was humbled.
You do make me to remember an Imposture, said Simontault, which if it had been
an honest one I would willingly have recited. It is no great matter, said
Oysilla, for since we are met here to speak the truth (be it of what quality it
will) I do give you my voice to speak it. Since the place is given to me, said
Simontault, I must take it, and will give you an Account thereof.

The Slovenly Breakfast prepared by an Apothecaries man for an Advocate and a
Gentleman.
The second Novel.
IN the City of Alencon, in the time of Charles the last, there was an Advocate
named Anthony Bachet, an honest man, and a great Lover of a good Breakfast in a
Winters, morning. One day sitting very early at his door he observed a
Gentleman to pass by, who was called Monsieur de Tyrelier, who by reason of
the great Frost which was that morning was come a foot from his own house into
the City to dispatch some business, and he had put on a long Coat furred with
Fox-skins. When he beheld the Advocate, who was of his own complexion, he told
him that he had been in the Town almost two hours, and already done all his
business, and that nothing remained but to go to some place of resort to find
out a good Breakfast, The Advocate made answer to him, that the Breakfast was
easily to be found, but then he must pay for it, And taking him by the Arm, he
said unto him, Let us go (my Companion) we may possibly find one fool or
another who will pay the shot for us both.

By fortune there was behind them an Apothecaries Boy, a close and a cunning
knave, and one to whom the Advocate did bear a long time a splean, and by no
means could endure him. The Boy thought with himself that he had now found a
good opportunity to revenge himself, and going aside not above ten paces he
found behind a house a great Excrement frozen all over, which he did put into a
paper, and did wrap it up so artificially that it seemed to be a piece of Naple
biscuit. He observed where the two Companions were, and passing in great have
before them he entered into a house, and at the door did as it were by
negligence let fall his Naple-bisket which was so handsomely made up. The
Advocate took it up with great Joy, and said unto his Companion, Monsieur de la
Tyrelier this cunning knave shall this day pay for our Breakfast, but let us
make have lest the knave should find us in our larceny. And entering into a
Tavern he said unto the Maid, make us a good fire, and give us good Bread, and
good Wine, and some good salt bit to relish our Mouths this Morning, we have
enough wherewith to discharge the house.

The Maid did serve them according to their defire, but the Advocate having eat
and drunk, and sufficiently warmed himself before the fire, the suger'd bread
which the Advocate had put into his Breast did begin to melt, and the smell
thereof was so strong, that not thinking from what place it came, he said unto
the Maid, you have brought us into the filthiest and most stinking room that
ever I did come into, I do believe that you do let your Children do their
business upon the place. The Signior de la Tyrelier who had his part of the
perfume was of the same opinion with the Advocate. But the Maid being angry
that they should lay so foul an imputation to her charge, did reply unto them
in a great choler, By Saint Peter, Gentlemen, the house is an honest house, and
the room so clean, that there is nothing stinking in it, unless you have
brought it with you.

The two Companions did rise from the table, and did go again unto the fire to
warm them, and the Advocate taking his handkerchief out of his Breast, he found
it to be full of the Sirrop of the melted Sugar, which being a bit preserved to
sweeten their mouths, he did at the last bring forth to light. You may well
imagine how the Maid of the Tavern that did attend upon them did mock them, who
was before upbraided by them, and what a shame it was to the Advocat to see
himself overreached by an Apothecaries boy in the same trade of deceit in
which he himself had all his life been conversant. But the Maid of the Tavern
had not the least compassion on them, but made them pay their shot to a Denier,
telling them, that they could not choose but be drunk, having received such a
fragrancy as well into their Noses as their Mouths.

The poor Gentlemen departed with as much shame as cost, and were no sooner
come into the street, but they saw the Apothecaries boy, asking every one who
passed by, if they had not taken up a quantity of Suger'd bread, made up in a
white paper, and they could not so readily turn aside from him, but he cried
out to the Advocate, Sir if you have my bread made with Sugar, I beseech you
that you will restore it, for such losses are not profitable to such a poor
Servant as I am. At that word the people stood still in the street, and others
came out of their houses to understand the debate; And the Act was so
apparently justified, that the Apothecaries boy was as glad that he had been
robbed of his Suger'd bread, as the Advocate was sorry being guilty of the
larceny that he had took it up, but hoping to be even with him another time, he
for the present did content himself.

Ladies, we commonly observe, that oftentimes they are cajoled themselves who
make it their profession to cajole others. If this Gentleman would not have
eaten at the expense of another, his Nose had not drank so strong a perfume. It
is true, my Account is none of the sweetest, but you did give me leave to speak
the truth, which I have acquainted you with, to represent unto you, that when a
Deceiver is deceived there is no man that is sorry. It is proverbially spoken,
said Hircan, that words in themselves are never unsavory, but those things by
which they are spoken cannot be so easily acquitted but they may smell strong
enough. It is true, said Oysilla, that such words stinck not, but there are
other words which we call filthy words, that are of so bad a smell, that the
Soul is as much troubled to hear them, as the Body was with the evil smell of
the Sugar Bread of which you have spoken. Tell me, I pray you, said Hircan,
what words are those which be so unclean, that they leave such a filthy favor
behind them in the heart of an honest Woman? Would it be good do you think,
said Oysilla, that I should tell you that which as yet I have not asked counsel
of any Woman whether I should speak or no? By that word, said Saffredant, I
understand what terms they are by which Women would be reputed to be wise in
the concealing of them. But I ask in earnest of all the Ladies that are
present, wherefore it is, that since they dare not speak such words, that they do
laugh so readily when they are spoken before them, for it is not in my
understanding to believe that a thing which is so greatly displeasing to them
should make them laugh. We do not laugh, said Parliament, because we do hear
such wanton or filthy words spoken, but there is a natural inclination in every
one to laugh, as when we see a man to stumble, or when a word is spoke out of
season, or to no purpose, as it often falls out that the tongue does trip,
and one word is spoken commonly for another by the wisest and the best
speakers. But when you men in your sensualness do on set purpose utter unclean
words, I know no Woman of worth, who does not abhor them, and who will not only
forbear to lend an ear unto you, but will avoid your Company. It is true, said
Guebron, I have seen diverse Women make the sign of the Cross having heard
such words spoken, but they have taken a delight immediately afterward to have
heard them repeated again. Nay, said Simontault, how often have they pulled
down their Masks, that they might laugh in earnest with the greater liberty?
which shows their displeasure was but feigned. And it were better by far to do
so, said Parliament, than to give you to understand that such a discourse was
pleasing to us. You praise then, said Dagoucin, as much the Hypocrisy as the
virtue of Women. It would be better, said Longaren, to praise their virtue, but
when that is wanting we must borrow something of Hypocrifie, just as we do when
we wear Pantofles to make us appear a little higher than we are; and does it
not do well howsoever that we can find a way to cover our imperfections? To
tell you what I think, said Hircan, it were better sometimes to show some
imperfection, than peremptorily to cover it with the mantle of Virtue. It is
true indeed, said Emarsuite, that a Garment borrowed does as much dishonor him
who is enforced to return it, as it did him credit when he did wear it; And
there has been that Lady to my knowledge alive who to cover a small fault has
fallen into a greater. I do suspect, said Hircan, who it is you speak of,
wherefore at the least do not name her. And why so, said Guebron, I do give
you my voice, but upon a condition that after you have recited your Account,
you will declare the Name, and we will all swear unto you never to make any
reiteration of it. I do promise you that I will, said Emarsuite, for there is
nothing but may be spoken of with Honor.

The personal diligence of a Prince to remove an importunate Lover.
The third Novel.
KIng Francis the first of that name, having retired himself into a most
pleasant Castle, with a small Retinue, as well to solace himself with the
pleasure of hunting the Buck, as to repose himself from the troubles and the
noise of the City, had in his Company a Pr. as wise, as virtuous, and as
gallant a man as any in the Kings Court: He had espoused a Lady who had none of
the greatest beauties, but he did love her as well, as a Husband could love a
Wife, And reposed so great a trust in her, that if by chance he did take an
affection to any other, he did not conceal it from her, knowing that she had no
other desire but what was his. The Prince did fall in love with a Lady that was
a Widow, who had the reputation to be one of the fairest Ladies that could be
looked upon, and if the Prince loved her well, his Wife did love her no less
than he, and did oftentimes invite her to eat and to drink with her, finding
her so wise and so honest, that instead of being sorry that her Husband loved
her, she was glad with all her heart to see him to address himself to so fair
a Creature filled with Honor and Virtue.

This love continued long, insomuch that the Prince employed himself in his own
person in all the affairs of this Lady, as if she had been his own Wife, and
the Princess his Wife did do no less. But because she was so exceeding
beautiful, many great Lords and Gentlemen did court her, and were importunately
sollicitous to obtain her favor, some for love only, and some for gifts, for
besides her beauty she was very rich. Amongst others there was a young
Gentleman who did follow her so close, that he failed not to be in her Chamber
every morning when she made her self ready, and every evening when she
undressed her self to go to bed, and as long as possibly he could he stayed
with her all the day, which pleased not the Prince, for he thought that a Man
of so poor a condition, and of so rude a deport, did not deserve that civil and
gracious entertainment, of which in private he often made Remonstrances to the
Lady. But she who was the Daughter of a Duke did excuse it, saying, That she
without distinction did speak to all the World, by reason whereof her love was
the more concealed, seeing that she did speak as much to one as to another.

At the end of half a year this Gentleman did court her in the way of marriage,
and did follow his suit with so much diligence, that more for importunity than
for any love, she did promise him that she would accept him for her Husband,
entreating him that he would not declare it until her Daughters were all
married. After this promise, the Gentleman without any fear of Conscience did
go at all hours into her Chamber when he pleased, and there was but one
Gentlewoman belonging to her Chamber, and but one Gentleman that did know of
the Contract they had made. The Prince observing that the Gentleman did grow
more and more familiar in the house of her whom so much he loved, did take it
so ill, that he could not forbear thus to impart his jealous heart unto the
Lady. I have always loved your Honor as if you were my own Sister, and you do
know the honest discourses with which I did always entertain you, and the
contentment which I received to love a Lady so wise and so virtuous as your
self, but I do find that another who does not deserve it has by his
importunity gained that, which against your approbation I would not desire; and
this is an affliction not to be endured by me, and will prove no less
dishonorable to your self. I do acquaint you with it, because you are young
and beautiful, and until now have lived in the height of reputation, which
every day will sink lower and lower, and being lost will not be easy to be
regained; And although he is no ways to be compared to you in Birth or
Fortunes, and much less in Authority, Knowledge, or Gracefulness, it would be
better far that you should marry him, than to make all the world to suspect
you; Wherefore I beseech you to tell me truly, if you are determined to love
him, for I will not have him to be my Companion, and am resolved to leave you
to him for altogether, and I will by degrees withdraw my self from that
familiar love which I have born unto you.

The poor Lady did begin to weep, fearing to lose his love, and did swear unto
him that she had rather die than espouse that Gentleman of whom he did speak,
but she said that he was so importunate, that she could not hinder him from
coming into her Chamber on the hour when all the rest were accustomed to
enter. Of those hours (said the Prince) I do not speak at all, for I can then
come in as well as he; and every one may see what you do. But I am Informed
that he finds admission into your Chamber after you are in bed, a thing which I
do find so strange, and which comes so quite cross unto me, that I must tell
you, that if you continue that life, and you do not declare him for your
Husband, you will be one of the most dishonored Women that ever was. She made
unto him all the Oaths that possible she could, that she did not esteem him
either for a Husband or a Friend, but for an importunate Man as he was. Well
(said the Prince) since it is so, that he is so much troublesome unto you, I
will take a course to prevent it. How? (said she) will you cause him to be put
to death: No, no, (said the Prince) but I will give him to understand, that he
is not in such a place, or in such a House, as is this which is the Kings, to
procure dishonor unto a Lady, and I do protest unto you upon the faith of a
friend, that after I have spoken to him if he does not refrain, I will so
chastise him, that others shall take example by him.

Having spoke those words he departed, and going out of the Chamber it was his
fortune to meet with that Gentleman who had been the Subject of their
discourse, to whom he repeated all the words which had passed betwixt the Lady
and himself, and assured him, that the first time he found him in her Chamber,
unless it were in the prescribed hours when Gentlemen are accustomed to go to
their Ladies Chambers, he would put him into such a fear that he should
remember it whilst he lived, and she her self should repent for playing fast
and loose with him. The Gentleman assured him that he never came into her
Chamber but at the accustomed hours with others, and if at any time he should
find or hear that he was there at any other hour, he would give him leave to
do the worst that he could. Some days afterward when the Gentleman thought
that the Princes words and threatenings were forgotten by him, he addressed
himself one Evening to visit this Lady, and stayed with her very late. The
Prince that Evening said unto his Wife, that the Lady whom she knew he loved,
was fallen sick of a great Rheum, wherefore the good Princess his Wife did
entreat him to go unto her, and to visit her for them both, and also to excuse
her that she could not come her self, for she had some business of importance
to dispatch in her own Chamber. The Prince attended until the King his
Brother-in-law was in bed, and afterward he repaired to the Chamber of the
Lady whom he loved, to bid her Good night, and thinking to go up the stairs he
found the Groom of the Chamber coming down, of whom he demanded how his
Mistress did, who did swear unto him that she was in bed, and fast asleep;
Whereupon the Prince did go down the stairs again, but suspecting that he told
him a lie, he looked behind him, and observed the Groom to go back to his
Mistresses Chamber with all the speed he could, he therefore walked in the
Court before the door to see if the Groom did return again. About a quarter of
and hour afterward, he saw the same Groom to come down the stairs, and to look
round about him on all sides to desery who were in the Court. The Prince then
conceived with himself, that the Gentleman was in the Ladies Chamber, and that
he durst not come down for fear of him, which made him to walk up and down a
good while longer, and observing in the Ladies Chamber that there was a Window
which was not very high that looked down into a little Garden, he remembered the
old Proverb, which says, He that cannot come out of the Door, must leap out of
the Window, wherefore he said unto the Gentleman that waited on him, do you
go into yonder Garden, and if you shall see a Gentleman to come out at the
Window, when ever he shall set foot on ground, draw your Sword, and clashing it
against the wall, cry out, Kill him, Kill him! but be sure you do not touch
him, the Gentleman did accordingly as his Master had commanded, and the Prince
walked in the Court until it was three hours after Midnight.

When the Gentleman who was in the Ladies Chamber did understand that the
Prince was still in the Court, he determined with himself to go out of the
window, and having first of all thrown down his Cloak, with the help of his
good friends he leaped out of the Window into the Garden. As soon as the
Gentleman who belonged to the Prince did observe him, he failed not to make a
great noise with his sword against the Wall, and cried out, Kill him, Kill him.
The poor Gentleman thinking it had been the Prince his Master, was possessed
with so great a fear, that without advising to take his cloak he did run away
us fast as his Legs could carry him, and met with the Yeomen of the Kings
Guard, who watched that night, who were much amazed to see him make such have,
but he said nothing to them, but only entreated them to open the Gate for him,
or give him leave to stay in the lodge with them until the next morning, which
they did, for on that night they had not the keys. Immediately afterward the
Prince retired to his own lodgings to go to bed, and finding the Princess his
Wife asleep, he did wake her, and said unto her, Do you sleep Sweetheart, what
a clock is it? She made answer to him, Since I have been in bed, I have not
heard the clock strike. He said unto her, It is three a clock in the morning.
Jesus, Sir, said she, where have you been so long? I am much afraid that your
Health may be prejudiced by it.

Sweetheart (said the Prince) I shall never be sick with waking, when I keep
those from sleeping who endeavor to deceive me, and speaking those words he
did begin to laugh heartily; The Princess did earnestly desire him, that he
would be pleased to acquaint her with the cause of his laughter, which he did
all along, and showed her the Skin of the Wolf, which the Gentleman that waited
on him had brought unto him; And having passed away a little time in making
mirth at what had befallen the Gentleman and the Lady, they did fall both
asleep, and did rest as sweetly as the other two did travel in fear and shame
that their loves were discovered.

Nevertheless the Gentleman understanding well enough that he could no longer
dissemble it before the Prince, did come on the next morning very early to
attend him at his ^ifing, and most humbly besought him that he would be pleased
not to reveal him, and restore his Cloak unto him. The Prince made a semblance
to understand nothing at all of it, and did hold his countenance so well, that
the poor Gentleman did not know what was become of it. But at the last he had
another lesson than he thought to have heard. For the Prince assured him that
if ever he did come into that Ladies Chamber again, he would acquaint the King
with it, and cause him to be banished the Court.

Ladies, I do beseech you to judge, if it were not better for that poor Lady to
have spoken freely to the Prince, who did her the honor so much to love her
and esteem her, than by dissimulation to put him to a proof which reflected so
much on her own disgrace. She knew well enough, said Guebron, that if she had
confessed the truth; she should for ever have lost his favor, which she would
not lose for any thing. Me thinks, said Longaren, since she had chosen a
Husband to her own fancy, she ought not to have feared the loss of the love of
any other.

I do believe, said Parliament, that if she durst have revealed her marriage,
she would have been well contented with her Husband, but because she would not
have it known until her Daughters were married, she was enforced to make use of
so private a love. It was not so, said Saffredant, but the desires and ambition
of women are so great that they can never be contented with one alone. Nay I
have been informed that those who are accounted the wisest of all their Sex,
have willingly entertained three at one time; One for their Honor, another for
their Prosit, and a third for their pleasure, and every one of the three did
conceive himself to be the best beloved, but the two first did serve the last.
You speak of those, said Oysilla, who knew neither Love nor Honor.

Madam, said Saffredant, there are some of that condition whom you do esteem to
be as honest Ladies as any in the Country where they live. You may assure your
selves, said Hircan, that a woman who has a good wit will know how to live
when all others do starve for hunger; it may be so, said Longaren, but when
their cunning is discovered they had better to be dead and out of the world.

Nay it is all their life, said Simontault, for they esteem it no little glory
to be reputed more wise than their Companions, and this Title of being more
wise, which they have learned to their own expense, does more powerfully draw
their Servants to their obedience, than does their beauty, for amongst those
that love it is one of the greatest pleasures finely to manage their love. You
speak, said Emarsuite, of a wanton and inordinate love; for an Honest love
never need to be covered. Ha, said Dagoucin, I beseech you trouble not your
head with such a fancy, for the more precious the Drugg is, it is always the
less vented by reason of the indiscretion of those who look upon the cheaper
and more common Receipts which to an unknowing man are all one.

Wherefore when our love is virtuous we ought the more to conceal it, than if
it were vicious and imperfect, because we would not fall into the ill judgment
of those, who cannot believe, that a Man can love a Lady for Honor, but that
they do love as much for pleasure, and so they do conceive and conclude every
to one be like themselves.

But if they were all in good earnest, neither the word nor the countenance
should carry the least dissimulation, especially amongst those who had rather
die than think any Evil of love. I do assure you Dagoucin, said Hircan, You are
upon a point of such high Philosophy, that no Man here does understand you, for
you would make them to believe, that Men are either Angels, or Stones, or
Devils. I know well enough, said Dagoucin, that Men are Men, and subject to all
passions, but there are those to my knowledge who had rather die than that for
their pleasure their Mistresses should do any thing against their Consciences

It is too much to die, said Guebron, I will not believe that word should it
proceed from the Mouth of the most austere and the most religious man that is.
But I do believe, said Hitcan, there are many who do desire as much, but they
are like to those who do not love Grapes because they do grow so high that they
cannot gather them. Howsoever I do believe, that the wise of that Prince was
very joyful that her Husband had learned to understand what such women are. I
will assure you, no, said Einarsuite, she was very sorry for it by reason of
the great love that she did bear unto him. I should rather love her, said
Saffredant, who always did fall a laughing when her Husband did kiss her
Chambermaid. Truly, said Emarsuite, you shall give us the Account of it, I do
give you my place. Although it be but short, said Saffredant, I will recite it
to you, for I had rather make you laugh than affict you with a tedious
discourse.

A Gentle woman of so good a disposition, that seeing her Husband to kiss her
Chambermaid, did nothing but laugh at it, and being demanded the reason of it,
she made answer, that she only laughed at his shadow.
The fourth Novel.
BEtween the Pyrenaean Mountains and the Alps, there lived a Gentleman called
Thogas, who had a handsome Wife, Sweet Children, a stately house, and such
abundance of riches and pleasures, that he had a just occasion to live most
contentedly, nevertheless he was subject to a great pain under the roots of
his hair, for which the Physicians did advise him not to lie with his Wife; to
which she willingly consented, reguarding nothing more than the life and the
health of her Husband. She caused her bed to be placed in another corner of the
Chamber over against her Husbands, and in so direct a line, that they could not
put their heads out of their beds without seeing one another.

This Gentlewoman did keep in the house two Chambermaids, and whenever their
Master and their Mistress were in bed, they did either of them take some merry
book in which they did read for their recreation, and their Chambermaids did
all the while stand by and hold the Candle, the youngest of the Maids held the
Candle to her Master, and the eldest to her Mistress. The Gentleman observing
his Chambermaid to be more young and handsome than his Wife, did take a great
delight to look upon her, and oftentimes would interrrupt his reading to
entertain her. His Wife did very well observe it, and did well approve that
both her Maidservants, and the Menservants, were so officious to please their
Master, presuming that he loved none but her self.

One Evening having read a great deal longer than they were accustomed to do,
his Wife did put her head out of the bed, and looked toward her Husband, where
she saw her young Chambermaid who held the Candle, but she turning her face
toward her Master as she waited on him, his Wife could not see her face but
her back only, and the Maid standing directly before her Master, she could not
see him at all; but on the white wall over against them, where the light of the
Candle did cast a shadow, she could observe him, and knew very well by their
shadows, which was the Maid and which was her Husband, and could easily
perceive when they met together, and when they did draw back from one another,
and when they laughed, and all the postures of them.

The Gentleman who never thought of being discovered, being assured that his
Wife could not see him, did kiss the Chambermaid, at which for the first time
his Wife was very patient without speaking a word, but when she saw that the
shadows did often meet together, and did oftentimes return unto that union,
fearing they would proceed to worse, she begun to laugh as loud as possibly she
could, insomuch that the shadows were afraid of her laughter, and did separate
themselves. The Gentleman demanded of her wherefore she did laugh so, and
desired her that she would make him a partaker of her joy. She made answer to
him, Sweetheart, I am such a fool that I laugh at my own shade, and for all
the entreaties he could make or use, he could never get any other answer from
her. This is that story which you did cause me to remember, when you made
mention of that great Lady who loved the Sweetheart of her Husband.

In good troth, said Emarsuite, If my Chambermaid should have served me so, I
would have rose, and stung the Candle in her face. You speak too terribly, said
Hircan, but what would you think, if your Husband and the Chambermaid should
have set themselves against you, and should have beaten you soundly, for you
should make no reckoning of a kiss? Howsoever his wife might have done better
to have made no noise at all, but have let them take their recreation together,
It might peradventure have cured him of his Malady. No, said Parliament, she was
afraid that the end of that Recreation would have made him more weak than he
was before.

She was none of those, said Oysilla, of whom our Savior speaks, We have made
our lamentation unto you, but you have not weeped; We have sung, but you have
not danced; for when her Husband was sick she wept, and when he was joyful she
laughed.

And so all women of worth and honor ought to partake both of the Good and of
the Evil, and the joys and the sorrows of their Husbands, and to love, obey,
and serve them as the Church does Jesus Christ. It were requisite then, said
Parliament, that our Husbands were to us as Jesus Christ is toward his Church.
So we are, said Saffredant, and if it were possible we would endure as much,
for Jesus Christ died but once for his Church, and we die every day for our
Wives. Die? said Longaren, In my opinion, you and the other good Husbands who
are here do not look as if you were such dying men. I can give you a reason for
that, said Saffredant, It is because our Valor is tried, which our shoulders
do feel having so often born the Corslet. If you were put to it, said
Emarsuite, to wear arms but one month, and to lie on the cold and the hard
Ground, you would have a good desire to return to the beds of your own wives,
and to make much of that of which you do now complain. But I have heard it
spoken, that all things can be endured but ease, and we know not what Repose is
until we have lost it. The good Woman, said Oysilla, who laughed when her
Husband was joyous, had much to do I warrant her to go thorough with it. I do
believe, said Longaren, that she loved her own ease better than she loved her
Husband, for it seems she took not any thing to heart whatsoever he did. No,
for with a good heart she took that, said Parliament, which might have been
prejudicial to the health and the Conscience of her Husband. When you speak in
this place of Conscience, said Simontault, you do make me laugh, for he would
not have done what he did if he thought his wife would have taken it to heart,
and I do not see which way the Conscience can be much prejudiced for a kiss.
It would not be amiss, said Nomerfide, that you had such a wife as he had,
who, after her Husbands death, did manifest that she loved his Money better
than her Conscience. I do desire you, said Saffredant, that you would rehearse
unto us that Novel, for which I do give you my voice. I did not determine, said
Nomerfide, to account unto you so short a History, but because it has relation
to the subject on which we have discoursed, I will recite it to you.

The Subtilty of a Spanish woman to defraud the Friars of the last Testament of
her Husband.
The fifth Novel.
IN the City of Saragossa there lived a Merchant, who seeing his death to
approach, and that he could no longer keep the Goods which he had gotten, it
may be, with a bad Conscience, he thought to satisfy his sin, by giving away
all to the poor, without any regard that after his decease his Wife and his
Children should die with hunger, and when he had ordered all things in his
House, he said, it was his last Will, that a good Spanish Jennet which he had
(and was indeed all his goods that were worth any thing) should be sold at the
greatest rate that could be, and that the Money should be distributed unto the
begging Friars, desiring his Wife that when ever the breath were out of his
Body, she would not fail to sell the Horse, and distribute the Money according
to his Will.

The burial being past, and the first tears wept, his Wife, who was no more a
fool than the Spaniards are accustomed to be, did repair unto her Servant, who
as well as her self did understand the last Will of her Husband, and said unto
him, It seems to me, that I have lost too much already, in losing my Hushand
whom so much I loved, without losing any more of my goods; but so it is that I
would not be disobedient to his charge, but do the best I can to satisfy his
will according to his intention. For the poor Man who in his life as you know
well enough would not so much as spare one Crown for the greatest necessity,
has after his death given a round sum to the poor Friars, thinking it to be a
Sacrifice that will be acceptable to God; wherefore I am advised to do that
which at his death he did bequeath, and which is more than he could give
himself if he had lived but fifteen days longer, and by so doing, I will
provide for the necessities of my Children.

But I must so carry it, that none in the World shall know any thing of it; And
when her Servant had faithfully promised to keep secret what was to be done,
she said unto him, You must go sell his Horse, and if any shall ask you what is
the price of it, you shall say one Ducket, but I have a good Cat, an excellent
Mouser, which you shall sell -- let me see -- I -- for ninety nine Ducats, and
so the Cat and the Horse shall make in all just one hundred Ducats, at which
price my Husband would have sold the Horse alone. The Servant did readily
accomplish the commands of his Mistress, and walked the Horse up and down the
Market, holding the demure Cat under his arms. A Gentleman who had seen the
Horse before, and had a great mind to buy him, passing that way, demanded of
the Servant at one word to give him the price of him. The Servant made answer,
one Ducket. Do not mock me (honest friend) said the Gentleman. I assure you,
Sir, said the Servant, you shall give me for it one Ducket and no more; But
Sir, I must tell you, that you must buy the Cat with it, for which I will have
ninety and nine Ducats. The Gentleman thought it was but reasonable, and in
ready money laid down one Ducket for the Horse, and ninety nine for the Cat,
accordingly as he demanded, and took away with him his Merchandise. The Servant
on the other side brought home the money to his Mistress, who was so joyful
at it, that she failed not to give the Ducket, at which price the Horse was
sold, to the begging Friars, as her Husband had ordained, and reserved the rest
to provide for her self and her Children.

Give me your advice now, was she not more wise than her Husband, and had as
great a care of her own Conscience, as of the profit of her Children? I do
believe said Parliament, that she loved her Husband well, for seeing that on his
deathbed he had but ill considered of his own affairs, she who did know his
intentions, did know also to give the best interpretation of it for the
advancement of his Children, for which I do commend her for her wisdom. ^ow,
said Guebron, do you not esteem it a great fault to fail to perform the Will of
the dead? So I should, said Parliament, provided the Testator were in good
sense. Do you think, said Guebron, that he was not in perfect memory to bestow
his goods on the Church, and on religious men? I do not think it to be an
error, said Parliament, when a man does distribute to Beggars what God has
given into his hands; but for a married man to give away all that he has at
his death, and to leave his Family not long afterward to perish for hunger, I
do not approve it, and in my opimon it would be more acreptable to God, if he
had taken more care of the poor Orphans whom he loft behind him, who having
nothing wherewith to feed themselves, and being oppressed with poverty, would
oftentimes curse the memory of their Father, instead of blessing him, when they
shall find themselves to pine away for hunger; for God who knows the hearts
of Men cannot be deceived, and will not only judge according to works, but
according unto Faith and Charity who do derive themselves from him. Wherefore
is it then, said Guebron, that covetousness at this day is so rooted in all
estates of the World, that the greatest part of Men have not the leisure to
think of the distributing of their Goods, until they do find themselves to be
assailed by death, and that they must give up their accounts to God? I do
believe that they do so settle all their affections upon their riches, that if
they could carry them away with them, they would most willingly do it, but
there is an hour, in which our Savior will make them more grievously to feel
their punishment, than in the hour of death; for then whatsoever they have done
all the time of their lives, be it good or evil, shall in an instant be
represented before their eyes; it is the hour in which the Books of our
Consciences shall be opened, and where every one shall see the Good and ^vil
which he has done, for the wicked Spirits will omit nothing, which they will
(...) represent unto a sinner, either to tempt him to a presumption that he
has lived well and holily, or to throw him into a desperation of the Mercies
of God, to the end that he may turn aside out of the right way. If you know any
History, said Nomerfide, that is to this purpose, I entreat you Hircan, if you
think us worthy of it, that you would rehearse it to us, I will with all my
heart, said Hircan, and although it will be ^^pleasing to (...) to repeat a
story to you to the disadvantage of any man, yet seeing we have not (...)
either Kings, or Dukes, or Earls, or Barons, there ought no^ offense to he
taken if we put any others into the rank amongst so many noble personages; for
we do know that there are good men in all Estates, and that the good ought not
to be prejudiced by the bad. Let us ^^ave off therefore this discourse, and
give a beginning to our History.

One Friar fraudulently did marry another Friar who was one of his Companions
to a fair young Gentlewoman, for which they were both afterward severely
punished
The sixth Novel
A French Lady so journing in Padua, it was there ^old her that there was a
Friar in the Bishops Prison, and demanding the occasion of it, because she
sound that every one did talk of it in mockery, she was informed that this
Friar an ancient Man, was a Confessor to a very noble and a devout Lady, who
was a W^ddow, and had but one Daughter, whom she loved so entirely, that she
thought it no trouble not pains at all to heap up wealth to provide a round sum
for her portion; And finding that she did begin to grow into age, she was in a
continual care to look out a good Huband for her, who might live with her in
peace and quiet, that is to say, who was a Man of as good a Conscience as she
was esteemed to be. And because she heard a foolish Monk preach, that it were
better to do ill by the Counsel of the Doctors of the Church, than to do well
against the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, she addressed her self to a Friar
who was a Confessor, an ancient Man, and a Doctor in Divinity, being esteemed
to be a good liver throughout all the City, who assured her that if his
Counsels or his prayers could prevail, he would not fail to provide for the
comfort of her self, and of her Daughter. And when she had often and earnestly
entreated him to choose a Husband for her Daughter, and such a one whom a
Virgin loving God and her Honor ought to wish for; He made answer to her, that
first of all by fasting and prayers he would implore the Holy Spirit, that God
would be pleased to conduct him in what he had to do, and he then doubted not
to find such a Husband for her Daughter as she desired; and having put her into
this comfort, the Friar departed, and considered by himself what he had to do;
and because he understood by the Lady that she had gathered together two
thousand Ducats, which she had in a readiness to give unto him who should be
her Daughters Husband, and that she would take upon herself the care and charge
of them both, furnishing them with house, movables, and all accommodations; he
considered with himself that he had a young companion, a handsome and a likely
man, on whom he would bestow the young Gentlewoman, and a house with all the
furniture, and an assured maintenance during his life, and resolved to keep the
two thousand Ducats for himself, to satisfy his ardent avarice.

After that he had spoken with his Companion about it, they both immediately
accorded, and he returned to the old Lady, and said to her, I do undoubtedly
believe, that God did send unto me his Angel Raphael as he did to Toby to
procure an accomplished Husband for your Daughter, for I dare assure you that I
have now in hand one of the most honest young Gentlemen in all Italy, who has
somewhere seen your Daughter, and is so much taken with her, that this day
being in Prayer, God did send him to me, and of his own accord he declared unto
me the passionate desire he had unto this marriage. I who do well know his
Family and his Kindred, and what is the conversation of his own life, did
promise him to acquaint you with it. True it is, there is one inconvenience in
it, and it is all which I do know, that engaging himself to assist one of his
friends whom another would have killed, he did draw his Sword thinking to part
them, but it so fell out that his friend did kill his Enemy, wherefore he,
although he did strike no blow at all, was constrained to fly out of the Town,
because he was present at the Manslaughter, and by the counsel of his Parents
he is come to this Town in the Habit of a Scholar, where he does live unknown
until his Parents do give satisfaction unto Justice, which he hops will be
in a very few days. For this cause the marriage ought to be as private as
possibly you can, and you must be content to have him go every day to the
public Lectures, and every night he may come home to Supper, and lie in your
house. The Lady being over-joyed did say unto him, Sir, in that which you speak
I do find a great advantage, for by this means I shall have him near unto me,
and every night in my house, which I desire above any thing in the world. To
accomplish this, the Friar brought him to her in a very good Habit, having on a
Crimzen Satin doublet, at which she was very glad.

After he was come, the preparations for the Wedding immediately began, and when
ever the midnight was passed, Mass was said, and the young couple were
married, and afterward did go to bed together. About the break of day, the
Bridegroom said unto the Bride, that because he must not be missing at the
Lecture, he was constrained to go unto the College, and having put on his
doublet of Crimson Satin, and his Scholars Gown, not forgetting his square
Cap, he came to bid his Bride good morrow, who was in bed, and assured her that
in the Evening he would come to Supper to her, but at dinner he desired her
that she would not expect him, and so having kissed her he took his leave of
his Wife, who thought her self to be the happiest Woman in the World having got
so good a Husband. And the young married Friar returned to his old Father to
whom he brought the two thousand Ducats accordingly as they had covenanted
between themselves at the agreement of the marriage, and at Evening he failed
not to return to Supper unto her, who did believe he was her Husband, who
preserved himself so well in hers and her M^thers love, that they would not
have changed him for the greatest Prince in the World.

This life continued a certain time, but as God has pity on those who out of
the simplicity of a good intent are deceived, it so fell out, that one morning
this young Gentlewoman and her Mother had a great Devotion to hear Mass, at
the Covent of St Francis, and to give a visit to their Father the Confessor by
whose means they were so well provided, the one with a Son-in-law, and the
other with an Husband, and by fortune not finding their Confessor nor any other
of their acquaintance, they were resolved to hear high Mass which was then
beginning, expecting the coming of their Confessor. The young Gentlewoman being
attentive to the Divine Service, and the Mysteries therein contained, (when the
Priest turned toward the common people to say Dominus Vobiscum) was struck
with a sudden amazement, for she thought with her self that it was her Husband,
or one very like him, but she would not speak one word, but attended until he
turned once more toward them, when she looked upon him more advisedly, with
the sharpest discretion of her eye, and she did then assure her self that it
was he; wherefore she took her Mother by the Arm who was in a great
contemplation, and said unto her, Woe is me, Madam, Who is that whom I see
yonder? Her Mother being startled at it, said, Who? She replied unto her, it is
my own Husband who says Mass, it is impossible that any one in the world
should so much resemble him. Her Mother who had not well observed him did say
unto her, Daughter, I pray you suffer not such a thought to invade your fancy,
for it is a thing absolutely impossible, that those who are religious and holy
men should be guilty of such a trompery; you do greatly Sin against God to
believe such an opinion. Nevertheless her Mother did more steadfastly fasten
her eyes upon him: And when he turned again to say Ite, Missa est, she
confessed, that truly, never two Brothers that came out of one Belly were more
like; for all this she was so innocent, that lifting up her eyes she said, My
God assist me that I may not believe what I see; but because it so much
concerned her Daughter, she determined to examine the business further, and to
be resolved in her self of the truth thereof.

When the Evening came, her Husband who did not see them at Mass did return
according to his Custom, and the Mother coming to the Daughter said unto her.
We may now know the truth if you will, whether he who said Mass be your
Husband, or no; For as soon as he shall be in bed, I will come to you, and he
not thinking of it, you shall pluck his Cap from off his head, and we shall
both see if he has such a Crown as he had who said Mass this day. This
resolution being taken was accordingly put in execution, for as soon as the
ungracious Husband was in bed, the old Woman came into the Chamher, and taking
him by both his hands as it were in sport, her Daugher pulled off his Cap, and
beheld his shaven Crown, whereat they were so much astonished, that it is
impossible to be more. And immediately they called their Servants who did take
him, and bind him until it were morning, the many excuses and the fair words he
made being all in vain.

The morning appearing, the Lady sent to seek her Confessor, pretending that
she had a great Secret to impart to him, who immediately did come unto her, and
she caused him to be taken and bound as was the younger Friar, reproaching them
for the horrible abuse they had committed: And presently afterward she
delivered them unto Justice into whose hands she did commit them both, where
you may judge, if any of understanding be present to judge, that they did not
go unpunished.

Here Ladies, by demonstration you may find, that all those who do vow poverty
are not exempt from being tempted with avarice, which is the occasion of so
many Evils. Nay rather of so much goods, said Saffredant, for the two thousand
Ducats which the old Woman gave the Friars out of her Treasury, were goods
enough to make them merry. And the poor Girl her Daughter who had so long
stayed for one Husband, might now by this means have two, and be better enabled
to dispute the truth of all Complexions. You entertain always the worst
thoughts that may be, said Oysilla; for in your own opinion, all women are of
your own temper. Madam, by your leave, said Saffredant, I did not care if they
were, provided they were as easy to be contented as we Men are. You speak
against the Truth, said Oysilla, for I am consident, there is not a woman here
amongst us but knows the contrary, and moreover you speak directly against the
sense of the Account just now rehearsed, which was to show the ignorance of
poor woman, and the subtilty and the sin of those whom we do commonly believe
to be better Men than all others; for you shall find, that neither the good
Woman nor her Daughter did any thing of their own heads, but submitted their
desires unto the Counsel of their Confessor. Howsoever there are some women so
difficult to please, said Longaren, that in their own opinions they do deserve
to have Angels for their Husbands; and that is the reason, said Simontault,
that so oftentimes they do find Devils, especially those Women, who not relying
on the Grace of God, do trust altogether to their own apprehensions, or are
slattered to a conceit by others, to find in this world that felicity which is
not given, nor can come from any but from God only. How now Simontault? said
Oysilla, I thought you had not known so much. Madam, said Simontault, I am
sorry that you conceive me to be no better experienced, for through my defect
of knowledge, I perceive that you entertain a bad opinion of me, but for all
that (by your leave) why may not I perform the office of a Friar, since a Friar
has performed the office of such a Man as I am, Fie, fie, Do you call it an
office, said Parliament, to deceive Women? in doing so, out of your own mouth
you judge your self. If I should deceive a hundred thousand of them, said
Simontault, I should not be revenged for the torments which but from one of
them I have received. I know well enough, said Parliament, that oftentimes you
do make your complaint against Ladies, yet nevertheless we see you jocund, and
in so good liking, that we cannot believe you suffer so much as you say you do.
But the Author of the fair Lady does affirm that from bad promises no good can
be expected to ensue. You do allege a notable Doctor, said Simontault, who is
not only stubborn and churlish himself, but also makes them all to be so who do
read and follow his Doctrine. So it is, said Parliament, that his Doctrine is
more profitable to young Women than any Doctrine that I know. But, said
Simontault, If Ladies were without mercy, we might set up our Horses in our
Stables, and let our Armor rust upon our walls, and think on nothing but our
Country affairs. I pray tell me, if it be for the honor of a Lady to have the
Name to be without pity, without Charity, without Mercy? Without Love and
Charity, said Parliament, she must not be; but the word of Mercy does sound so
strangely in the ears of Ladies, that they cannot use it without some offense
unto their Honors; for Mercy properly, is to grant that favor which is
demanded, and we know well enough what is the favor which Men do desire: Be
not displeased Madam ( said Simontault) there are some Men so reasonable, that
they desire only but good words. You cause me now, said Parliament, to remember
him, who did content himself with a Glove. I would fain know, said Hircan, who
was that gracious Servant? and for that cause I do give you my voice. It will
be a pleasure to me, said Parliament, to repeat it to you, for the story is full
of Honesty.

A ridiculous account of a Lord of England, who on his Habiliments did wear the
Glove of a Lady.
The Seventh Novell.
KIng Lewis the eleventh did send the Earl of Montmorancy as his Ambassador
into England, who was there so well entertained, that the King and all his
Nobility did love, and highly esteem him, and many of them did communicate unto
him their private affairs to have his Counsel therein. Being one day at a
Banquet which the King had made, there sat next unto him a Lord, descended of
most noble Parentage, who did wear a Ladies Glove made fast on his Breast, as if
it were for a Favor; it was wrought all over with gold, and on the joints of
the fingers there were many rich Diamonds, Rubies, Emraulds, and Pearls,
insomuch that the Glove was valued at a very great price. The Earl of
Montmorancy did so often look upon it, that my Lord perceived that he had a
desire to know the reason wherefore he was in so gallant an equipage; and
because he conceived that it would conduce much to his honor, he began to
speak unto him, I do perceive you do find it strange, that I have so gorgeously
accoutred a poor glove, I have a great desire to acquaint you with the occasion
of it; for I conceive you to be so worthy a Man, and so knowing what the
passion of Love is, that if I have done well, I know you will praise me, if
not, you will excuse Love, who does carry a great Command over all noble
hearts. You must understand, That during all my life I have loved a Lady, that
I do love her, and will love her after my death: And because my heart had more
boldness to address it self on a time and place unto her, than my tongue had
to speak unto her, I stayed seven years without daring to make any semblance at
all unto her, knowing, that if she perceived it, I should lose both the means
which I had so often to frequent the place where she was, by the reason
whereof, I entertained as much fear as love. But one day being in the field,
and looking on her, such a beating of my heart did take me, that I lost both my
Color and all my Countenance, which she very well perceived, and asked me, How
I did? I made answer to her, That it was an insupportable Grief of my heart;
She, who thought that it was a Malady of another sort than Love, did show her
self to have pity on me, which made me to beseech her to put her hand upon my
heart to see how violently it did beat, which she did more for charity, than
for love; And putting her hand which was gloved upon my heart, my heart did so
beat and torment i^ self, that she perceived I did speak the Truth: Immediately
I did press her hand as close as I could unto it, and said unto her, Ah Madam!
Receive the heart which will break through my Breast to leap into your hand,
from whom I do hope for Grace, Life, and Mercy, which now constrains me to
declare unto you that love, which for so long a time I have concealed from you,
for neither you nor I are Masters of that puissant God. When she understood the
words which I did speak unto her, she found them very strange, and would have
drawn back her hand, but I did hold it so fast to my heart, that at last
although she plucked away her cruel hand, yet the gentle Glove stayed behind.
And because I had not then, nor had ever since any greater familiarity with
her, I have fastened this Glove near unto my wounded heart, it being the most
propper Plaster which I could give unto it: And I have adorned this Glove as
you see with all the fairest Rings, and the most precious things which are in
my possession, and I will not leave it for the Kingdom of England, for there is
nothing in the World which does me more good than to feell it near my Heart.

The Earl of Montmorancy who had rather kiss the Hand than love the Glove of a
Lady did much extol him for his gerat honesty, and assured him that he was the
truest Lover that ever he beheld, and seeing he made so much of so little, what
would he have done he told him if he had received a greater favor from her
than a Glove? It may be he would have dyed through the excess and violence of
his Joy. My Lord did readily acknowledge what the Earl of Montmorancy said, not
suspecting that he did speak it out of mockery.

If all Gentlemen in the World were of my Lords honesty, Ladies might well
repose their confidence in them, seeing it would cost them no more than the
loss of a Glove. I know so well the Earl of Montmorancy of whom you speak,
said Guebron, that I am confident he would not have lived in that torment, and
if he would have been contented with so little, he would never have received
those great fortunes which he has enjoyed by Love, for the old Song says, The
Amorous Coward is unsuccesseful. Do you think, said Saffredant, that the poor
Lady did not discreetly draw back her hand when she found his heart to beat so
violently? for she might think with her self that he would have dyed, and there
is nothing in the World which Women do hate more than to touch the dead. If
you had so much haunted the Hospitals as you have done the Taverns, said
Emarsuite, you would not have spoken those words, for you shall find Women
there to bury the dead, which is an office that Men oftentimes (as hardy as
they pretend themselves to be) are afraid to perform. It is true, said
Simontault, that there are none who do penance, but do clean contrary to that
in which they have taken pleasure, as the Gentlewoman whom I have seen in a
great house in this Kingdom, who to satisfy for the pleasure which she had to
kiss one whom she loved, was seen in a morning four hours together to kiss
the dead body of a Gentleman who was slain the day before, whom she loved no
less than the other, whereby it was known that she did penance for her passed
pleasures. We may see, said Oysilla, how all the good deeds which Women do,
receive a sinister interpretation amongst Men. I am of opinion, that neither
the dead nor the living ought to be kissed if God bad not commanded it. As for
my self, said Hircan, I do care so little for kissing any Woman but my own,
that I shall willingly accord to all the Laws that shall prohibit it, only I
shall pity young people from whom you would take that little contentment, and
nullify the Commandment of Saint Paul, who does give us order that we should
kiss in osculo sancto. If you were such a Man as Saint Paul, said Nomerfide,
we should find it by the operation of that Spirit which did speak in him. You
had rather, said Guebron, doubt of the Truth of the Holy Scripture, than fail
in one of your petty Ceremonies. We do not therefore doubt of the Truth of the
Holy Scripture, said Oysilla, because we do not believe your Fables. There is
no Woman here but knows well enough what she ought to believe, and what she
ought to do, which is, not to doubt of the truth of the Word of God, but to
give no belief to the vanities of men, who would turn us aside from the truth.

I am of a firm belief, said Simontault, that there are more Men deceived by
Women, than Women by Men, for the little Love which they bear to us does keep
them from believing the truth, and the great Love which we do bear to them,
does make us to repose confidence in their falsehoods, and their slatteries,
insomuch that we are deceived before we do suspect our selves to be so. I
believe, said Parliament, that you have heard the Complaint of the Fool who was
deceived by his own folly; for your Discourse is of so small authority, that i^
had need to be fortified by Example; wherefore if you know any one, I will give
you my Place to account it to us; And think not, that for one word or two we
will be subject to believe you, but in listening to you to speak evil of us, our
Novels shall find no prejudice at all. Since I have the place, said Simontault,
I will rehearse unto you my History.

A Lady of the Court did pleasantly revenge her self of her Servant for his
Love.
The eighth Novell.
IN the Court of King Francis the first, there was a Lady of a gallant Spirit,
who by her civility, gracefulness, and good language, had gained the hearts of
many Servants, with whom she knew very well to pass away the time, for, her
Honor being reserved, she entertained them all so pleasantly, that they knew
not what to think of themselves; for those who were most assured were in some
despair, and those who were most desperate did take some ^ssurance;
Nevertheless, making sport with all the rest, she loved one of them entirely,
whom she called Cousin, which gave a color to his better entertainment: But as
there is nothing permanent, their love oftentimes did turn into Discontent, and
not long afterward they would renew their affections more than ever, insomuch,
that (almost) not any of the Court were ignorant of it. One day this Lady, as
well to make him understand, that she took not so much delight in any thing, as
to put him to some perplexity, for whose Love she had endured so much, she
contrived with her self to give him better respects than ever she had done
heretofore.

Wherefore he, who neither in Arms or in Love did want for boldness, did begin
vigorously to purchase that, which so often he in vain had desired, and she
protending that out of mere pity she was no longer able to deny him, did seem
to accord to his demand, and told him, that for that purpose she would go into
a Chamber of hers which was three stories high, where she knew well enough
there would be none to disturb them, and counsolled him, as soon as be observed
her to go out of the Room where she was, not to fail to follow her, assuring
him, that he should find her there alone to satisfy the heat of that Love
which he did bear unto her. The Gentleman who believed her words, was so glad,
that he began to be frolic with the other Ladies, attending the happy minute
of her going forth, being himself immediately to follow her. And she, who did
excel in the Arts of Subtilty, (with which all other Women do abound) did
repair unto two great Princesses with whom she was familiar, and said unto
them, If you please, I will show you the best pastime that you ever saw. They
who of themselves were not addicted to Melancholy, did entreat her to tell them
what it was, and with whom. She made answer, It is with one whom you know to be
as honest a Gentleman as may be, and withal, as audacious: You are not
ignorant of the many evil offices he has done me, and especially that at this
time when I loved him best of all, he is in love with others, for which I do
endure more grief, than I do make apparent; At this time God has given me the
means to revenge my self, it is, That I am now going up up into my chamber
which is above this, and if you please but to watch him, you shall immediately
observe him to follow after me, and after he has gone all along the Gallery,
when you shall find that he goes up the stairs to my Chamber, I must beseech
you that you will stand both at the Windows to assist me to cry out, A Thief, A
Thief, and you shall perceive how red he will kindle with choler, and hear what
a noise he will make: And although I do believe that he will carry it with
confidence, and gracefulness enough, if he does not make any loud Complaints,
I shall believe that he is sensible of the Injuries he has done me.

This Agreement was not made without some laughing, for there was not a
Gentleman in all the Court that did quarrel more with the Ladies than himself,
and he was so beloved and esteemed by every one of them, that they could not
well be without him, and were glad when they found themselves in the danger and
circle of his mockery, and now they thought they should all three partake in
that Glory and Victory, which only one Woman hoped to obtain against him.

Therefore, when ever they did see the Lady to go out of the Room who had
undertaken the Enterprise, they did begin to observe the Countenance of the
Gentleman, who shifted himself from one place to another, and when he was gone
out of the door, the two Ladies did follow him into the Gallery, because they
would not lose the sight of him, He, who suspected nothing, did cast his cloak
over his shoulders, and muffled himself with it, because he would not be seen,
and first of all he did go down the stairs into the Court, and afterward came
up again, and descrying one whom he would not have a Witness of what he was
about to do, he did go down the Stairs into the Court again, and immediately
going round about did come up on the other side.

The two Ladies did observe him all the while, and he thought himself to be
undiscovered by any. When he came to the Stairs on which he was to ascend to
the Chamber of the Lady, the two Ladies did begin to put their heads out of the
Window, and immediately they perceived the Lady in her own Chamber, who putting
her Head out of the Window as far as ever she could stretch it, did cry out, a
Thief, a Thief, and the two Ladies at the Window below, bid repeat her words so
shrilly, that all the Castle did ring with them. I leave unto you to judge in
what a choler the Gentleman was, who did run down the Stairs into his own
Lodging, not so much muffled but he was plainly enough discovered by those who
knew the Mystery, who have since upbraided him with it, especially she did by
whom the plot was laid, who told him that she was now revenged of him; but he
had his defenses and his ananswers so ready, that he made them believe, that he
knew before hand of their enterprise well enough, and that he had promised the
Lady to give her only a civil visit, as for any love he did bear unto her, he
said, that was gone long ago. Howsoever it was, the Ladies were unwilling to
allow his reasons, the truth whereof is yet under doubt.

But if it were so that he did believe that Lady, as it is not probable, seeing
he was so wise, and full of spirit, that of his age there was not the like in
his time, as he has made apparent to us by his most resolute death, you must
confess with me, that the love of virtuous Men is such, that they are
oftentimes deceived in believing the flatteries of Women. In good earnest, said
Emarsuite, I do commend that Lady in what she has done; for when a Man is
beloved of a Lady, and does forsake her for another, she cannot too much
revenge the injury, Especially, said Parliament, If she were not beloved; for
there are some who do love Men without being assured to be beloved again, and
when they know that they do love others, all they can allege is, that they are
inconstant. Wherefore, those who are wise are never deceived with their Words,
for they make no reckoning of them, and will not believe any but those only
whom by experience they do find to be true, because they will not throw
themselves away upon Liars, for both the true and the false have both of them
one language. If all were of your opinion, said Simontault, Gentlemen may put
up their Requests in their Pockets. But for all that either you, or such as you
are can object, we will always believe that Women are as incredulous as they
are beautiful, and this opinion shall make us live as contentedly as you would
put us into trouble with your temptations. Truly, said Longaren, knowing well
enough who that Lady was, who did give that affront unto that Gentleman, I
cannot find any thing whereof to accuse her, for since she spared not her own
Husband, she ought not to forbear her Friend. It seems then, said Simontault,
that you know more of her than my self, wherefore I do give you my place to
recite unto us the Account of her.

A Gentleman thinking in secret to kiss one of the Maidservants of his Wife,
was taken by her in the manner.
The ninth Novel.
THe Lady of whom you made the Account was married to a Husband of a good and
an ancient Family. A rich Gentleman, and one who loved both the one and the
other of them very well did make the Marriage. She who was a pleasant Woman did
tell her Husband without dissimulation, that she had Servants in whose Company
she loved to pass away the time, with whom he himself might partake of the
Pleasure; at last this married life seemed too tedious to him; for on the one
side he was displeased that so long a time she did give so great entertainment
to those who had no relation to him at all; and on the other side he was much
grieved at the great expenses he was constrained to be at, to maintain her in
her gorgeous apparel to follow the Court. Wherefore as often as he could he
would retire unto his house in the Country, where so much Company came to see
her, that it did not much diminish his expenses at the Court; For his Wife, in
whatsoever place she was, would find some means or other to pass away the
time, either at play, or at dancing, or at some other exercise in which young
Ladies may honestly exercise themselves; and oftentimes when her Husband would
smiling say unto her, that they lived at too high a rate, she would make
answer, and assure him that she would never make him a Cuckold, although she
loved to be seen in those habiliments which were most rich and gorgeous, for
not any in all the Court did hardly exceed her, which was the occasion that her
Husband did bring her to the Court as seldom as possibly he could, although she
used all the means she could to resort often to it, and to win him the more she
would so comply with him in all things, that there was nothing almost so
impossible to be had that he would refuse to bestow upon her.

Finding one day, that all the inventions she could use were of no efficacy to
persuade him to make a voyage to the Court, she perceived that he made very
much of one of the Maids of her Chamber, and one day she did take her aside by
her self, and did cunningly propound unto her so many questions, that what by
promises, and what by threatenings, the Girl did confess unto her, that ever
since she came into her house, there passed not a day in which her Master did
not solicit her to Love him, but she had rather die than do any thing against
God or her Conscience; and seeing she had done her the honor to entertain her
in her service, she believed it would be a double, and an unpardonable sin to
yield unto her Masters importunities.

The Lady understanding the disloyalty of her Husband, was suddenly transported
with the two violent passions of Love and Joy, seeing her Husband, who made
such a semblance to love her, would procure such a shame both to her, and to
himself, although she knew her self to be far more beautiful, and of a more
flowing carriage than was the other for whom he would have changed. But her Joy
was, that she hoped to take her Husband in so great a fault, that he should
never reproach her more for her long stay at the Court, And the better to arive
unto it, she entreated the Maid by little and little to accord to what her
Husband did desire, but upon such Conditions as she should propound unto her.
The Maid was very difficult to be persuaded to it, but being assured by her
Mistress both of her Life and Honor, she agreed to submit unto her in all
things. The Gentleman continuing his suit, did observe the Ey and the
Countenance of the Maid to be much changed, wherefore he did prosecute her more
vigorously than he was accustomed to do, and she, who had her lesson by heart,
did represent her poverty unto him; and withal, that if she obeyed him, she
should lose her Mistresses love, and service, having received great hopes to
gain a good Husband by her. The Gentleman made answer to her, that she need not
take any care for all those things, for he would marry her better, and more
richly, than it was possible for her Mistress to do; and moreover, that he
would carry the affair so secretly, that no man should speak evil of her. At
these words the agreement was made, and considering with themselves what place
was most fit for the accomplishment of so goodly a work; she told him that she
knew no place more convenient for the business, nor more far from suspicion,
than the little Lodge that was in the Park, where there was a Bed, and a
Chamber fit for the purpose.

The Gentleman, who would have disliked no place, was very well contented that
she had nominated that, and the time seemed very tedious to him, until the day
and the hour were come. The Maid failed not in the performance of the promise
which she made unto her Mistress, and acquainted her all along with the whole
discourse of the enterprise, which was to be the next day after dinner, and
assured her, that on the hour when she was to go, she would not fail to give
her some notice of it. Her Mistress did heartily entreat her to take a great
care what she was about to do, and that she herself would not fail to be there
at the hour to keep her from the danger into which she had put her self by
obeying her Counsels. Moreover, to her assurances she added oaths, and charged
her not to be fearful of any thing, and that she never would forsake her, but
preserve her both then, and for the time to come, from the fury of her Husband.

The next day being come, the Gentleman made himself as fine as might be, and
after Dinner be seemed to make more of his Wife than he was accustomed to do.
But this, (because she knew of his Intentions) was not very agreeable to her,
but she dissembled her thoughts so well, that he perceived nothing at all.
Dinner being done, she demanded of him at what sport he would please to pass
away the time? He made answer to her, that for the present he could devise no
better pastime, than to play at Cards. Immediately they did begin to play, but
she would not play her self, but said, It would be pleasure enough for her to
look upon the Gamesters. As he began to set himself to play, he failed not to
speak unto the Maid not to forget her promise, and when he was at play she
passed through the Hall, and made a sign unto her Mistress of the pilgrimage
she was going, who took notice of it very well, but the Gentleman did not
perceive it.

An hour after, one of his Grooms did make a sign unto him a far off, whereupon
he said unto his Wife that his Head did begin to ache, and that he was
constrained to walk abroad a little for his health, and to take the Air. She
who knew his malady as well as himself, did ask him if she should play out his
Game, he said yes, with all his heart, and by and by he would return again.
Howsoever she assured him that for two hours it should never trouble her to
possess his place. In this manner the Gentleman departed, and did go first
into his Chamber, and afterward he came down into the Garden, and walked
thorough an Alley into his Park. His Wife who knew a nearer way did stay a
little behind him, and on a sudden making an appearance of some extraordinary
business, she did give her Cards to another; And as soon as ever she was gone
out of the Hall, leaving her high Pattens behind her, she did run as fast as
she could to that place; where she would not have the market to be made without
her, and was there in good time, for she came into the Chamber at one door, a
little before her Huband did enter at the other, and she did hide her self
behind the hangings, listening very attentively to the goodly discourse, and the
fair and flatering promises which her Husband had with the Chambermaid. But
when she perceived that he began to commit the Act, she plucked him by his
Garment behind, and said unto him. I am too near unto you to take any other
besides my self. If the Gentleman were angry to extremity, you need not to
doubt, being as well disappointed of the pleasures which he hoped to receive,
as to see that his Wife did know that which he would not have her; therefore
truly conceiving that the train was laid by the Maid, (without speaking one
word to his Wife) he did run after her with so much fury, that if his Wife had
not taken her out of his hands he had undoubtedly killed her, saying it was the
boldest and the basest baggage that ever he saw, and that if his Wife had but
concealed her self a little longer, she should find apparently enough that the
whole contrivement was nothing but mockery, for instead of doing that which the
Maid propounded to herself, he had brought rods to chastise her. But she who
knew well enough the metal of her Husband, did not think so well of it, neither
would she believe him, and made him so many Remonstrances, that he enterteained
a great fear that she would forsake him; wherefore he made her all the promises
that possibly she could desire, and confessed unto her that he had done her
wrong to think worse of her than he did of his Serving Maid; For an honest and
a fair Woman is not the less virtuous for being not beloved, because she
neither speaks nor does any thing that is against her Honor, but the Man is he
who does deserve a great punishment, and puts himself to an endless trouble to
court and follow one who does not love him, to wrong both his Wife and his
Conscience. Wherefore he did promise her that he would never hinder her more
from going to Court, nor would ever think ill of it, let her entertain as many
Servants to Court her as she pleased, for he knew well enough that she did
speak unto those rather out of Complement than affection.

This discourse did nothing displease the Lady, for she knew that she had got
him at a great advantage, nevertheless she did speak unto him clean contrary
to her heart, for she pretended that of late she took no pleasure at all to go
to the Court, and that she regarded his love more than any thing in the World,
without which all companies whatsoever were most unpleasing to her, saying,
that a virtuous Woman beloved by her Husband, and returning love to him again,
did carry with her a safe Passeport to speak to all the World, and not to be
controuled by any.

The Maid being gone down the stairs, the poor Gentleman took such great pains
to show her by effects the strength and assurance of his Love, that, at the
last, they departed from that place thoroughly reconciled. And to return no
more to the former Inconvenience, he did beseech her to put away that Maid, by
whose occasion he had run himself into so great a Danger. Which she did
accordingly, but it was by marrying her well and honorably, at his own
charges. And to make his Wife altogether to forget that folly, he not long
afterward did go along with her to the Court, with so brave a Retinue, and her
self so gorgeously set forth with variety of rich habiliments, that she had
great reason to be contented.

Ladies, This is that which in the foregoing Story did make me speak unto you,
that I find it not strange what she did to her Servant, seeing how she did use
her Husband. You have given us here, said Hircan, the Character of a subtle
woman, and a foolish Husband; for seeing he was come so far, he should never
have stayed in so fair a way. Why what should he have done, said Longaren? That
which he had in hand, said Hi^can, for seeing his wife was angry with him,
because she knew what he intended, she could not be more, if he had performed
it: Nay, it may be that ever after she would have thought the better of him,
having known him to be so gallant and so venturous a Companion. It is well
presumed, said Emarsuite: But where will you find one Man that overcame two
Women at one time; for the Wife did defend her Right, and the Maid her
Virginity. It is true, said Hircan; but a bold and a courageous Man would not
have been afraid to have assaulted them both at once. I do believe, said
Emarsuite, that if he had drawn his sword he might have killed them both; but
otherwise I do not see what he could have don. No, said Hircan, I would first
have embraced my wife, and carried her in my arms out of doors, and afterward
I would have don with the Chambermaid what I pleased, either by love, or by
force. Hircan, said Parliament, It is sufficient, and too much too, that you
know to do evil. I am sure, said Hircan, that I give here no offense to those
who are innocent in what I speak, neither would I maintain an evil Act my self;
for (to be serious) I do not praise any Enterprise which of it self is worth
nothing, neither will I prise this Enterpriser, since he did not put an end
unto it, rather for the fear, than for the Love of his wife. I do think it
commendable, and most worthy of true praise, when a man loves his wife as God
commands, but if he cannot love her, I do believe that he is not to fear her.
In truth, said Parliament, if Love will not make you a good Husband, I have
little hope that Fear will ever do it. You need not fear at all, said Hircan,
for the Love which I do bear unto you, does render me more obedient, than the
fear either of Death, or Hell. You may say what you please, said Parliament, but
I have occasion enough to satisfy my self with what I have seen and known of
you; And of that which I do not know I will never suspect, much less enquire. I
do find a great solly, said Nomerfide, in those Men and Women, who are always
enquiring after one another; for, sufficient for the day is the sorrow thereof,
without so much as taking the least care for to morrow. It is necessary
sometimes, said Oysilla, to enquire after things which may concern the honor
of a House, to give some Order therein, but not to pass any evil Judgment upon
persons, for there is none but does sometimes fail. Many great incoveniences
have come to diverse men, said Guebron, for being too inquisitive after the
faults of their Wives. I pray you, said Longaren, if you can give us any
Example, that you would not conc^al it from us. I can give you a memorable
instance of one, said Guebron, and because you will have it, I will in this
place exhibit it unto you.

A Citizens Wife of Paris did abandon her Husband to follow a Chanter, and
afterward counterfeiting her self to be dead, he caused her to be buried.
The tenth Novel.
IN the City of Paris there was a Man of so good a disposition, that he made it
a point of Conscience to believe that another Man was in bed with his Wife,
although that he himself had seen it. This poor Man espoused a Wife of so loose
a government, that it was impossible to be mote, which he himself would never
perceive, but did entreat her as if she had been the best Woman in the World.
One day when King Lewis the twelfth did come to Paris, this Woman did forsake
her Husband to follow a Chanter who was one of the Musicians in the Chapel of
the King, and when she saw that the King was departed out of the City of Paris,
she resolved with her self (come what would of her Husband) to follow the
Chanter wheresoever he did go.

The Chanter was very glad of it, and did bring her unto a house he had, not
far from Blois, where they did live a long time together. The poor Husband
could not be at rest, and searched every place round about the City for his
Wife, and at the last it was told him, that she was gone away with the Chanter.
He who had a great mind to recover the lost sheep whom he had not looked to so
well as he ought, did write unto her several Letters, entreating her to return
unto him, which if she would, he would take her still to be a good Woman; but
she who did take so much pleasure to hear the Charm of the Charmer, that she
had forgot the voice of her Husband, did make no reckoning of his Letters, and
but mocked at them, at the which her Husband being much moved, did send the
Chanter word that he would complain to the Church, and demand Justice of the
Cleegie if he would not return his Wife unto him.

The Woman fearing that if she should come once into the hands of Justice, the
Chanter and her self would have enough to do, did think of a remedy worthy of
her invention, and feigning her self to be sick, she sent for some of the
chiefest Women of the City, to come unto her and visit her, which willingly
they did, hoping that her sickness would withdraw her from her wicked course
of life, and every one made unto her the best Remonstrances that possibly they
could, and she counterfeiting her self to be most grievously sick, did seem to
weep, and to acknowledge her sin, insomuch that all the Company had pity on
her, and did firmly believe that what she did speak did proceed from the bottom
of her heart, Wherefore seeing her so much dejected in Spirit, and so repentant,
they did the best they could to comfort her, saying that God was not so
severely terrible as many Sinners did rashly propound unto themselves, and that
he never refused mercy to any, who from their hearts, being touched with the
grievousnesse of their offenses, did desire it; and speaking those words they
sent for a holy Man to confess her.

On the next morning the Curat of the place did resort unto her, to administer
the holy Sacament, which she received with so many devout apparences, that all
the good Women of the City who were there present, did weep to see her
penitence, praising God whose goodness did take pity of so poor a Creature;
pretending she could live no longer, the extreme Unction was brought unto her
by the Curat, which she received with many good signs for (to the conjecture of
the standers by) she could hardly speak or draw her breath; she for a pretty
while so continued, and then by little and little she seemed to them to lose
her sight, her hearing, and all her other senses, whereat they all began to cry
out, Jesus. And because that night drew on, and many of the Women had a long
way to go home, they did all depart. They were no sooner out of the Doors, but
word was brought them that she was dead, wherefore every one saying their De
profundis did return to their houses.

The Curate demanded of the Chanter, in what place he would have her buried?
who made answer to him, That she gave order her self to be buried in the
Churchyard, whither he would have her carried in the time of night. One of the
Maids of the House did put a shroud on that unhappy body, and took a special
care not to hurt it; And thus with many burning Torches she was carried to the
Grave which the Sexton had made for her: And when the Hearse passed by their
Houses who assisted to see the Unction on her, they came all again out of their
Houses, and did accompany the dead Body to the grave, where they and the
Priests left her, but the Chanter did not go with them. For when ever he saw
the Company departed, and that they were gone a good way off, he and his
Chambermaid did with all speed digg open the Grave, from whence he took his
Friend, more alive than ever, and secretly brought her unto his house, where he
kept her a long time concealed. Her Husband, who followed her, and had served a
Process against the Chanter, did come as far as Bloys to demand Justice, and
sound there, by the attestation of all the good Women of the City, that his
Wife was dead and buried, who did all acquaint him with the good end she made;
at which the honest man was very joyful, and believed, that the Soul of his
Wife was in Paradise. And being glad that he was well rid of so insatiate a
Creature, he returned with great contentment unto Paris, where he married a
handsome, a young, and an honest Woman, and (which is worth all) a good
Houswife, by whom he had many children, and lived with her fourteen or fifteen
years.

But Fame which can conceal nothing, does at last bring to her Husbands ear,
that his Wife was still alive, and lived with the ungracious Chanter, which the
poor Man for a time dissembled as well as he could, as if he had known nothing
of it, desiring with all his heart, that it might prove untrue; but his Wife,
who was a very wife woman, being advertised of it also, was surpriyed with so
great a sorrow, and anguish of mind, that she was almost dead with the
extremity thereof; And if it were possible (her conscience and honor being
preserved) she would willingly have dissembled her fortune. But that was
impossible; For the Rumor thereof being spread abroad, the Church did begin to
look after them, and gave order at first, that the good Man and his Wife should
live asunder, until the truth of the fact was more fully known. Whereupon the
poor Man, to his great grief, was constrained to abandon his good Wife, to seek
after his bad one, and came to Bloys, a little after that King Francis the
first of that Name was made King, in which City he found Qu. Claudia, and Madam
the Regent, before whom he made his complaint, demanding her, whom with all his
heart he desired not to have seen, (but it must be so, whether he would or no;
for which he had the pity of all the Inhabitants.) And when his Wife was
presented to him, she a long time would maintain, that it was not her Husband,
but some Impostor, which he also (if possibly he could) would have believed
with all his heart. She being more sorrowful than ashamed, did profess openly,
That she had rather die, than return to Paris with him, at which he was much
discontented. But the Ladies before whom she did express her self so boldly,
did so much condemn her, that she returned with him; and they so preached to
the Chanter, and followed what they preached with so many uses of Reproof and
Terror, that he was constrained to advise his Sweetheart to go home with her
Husband, and to assure him, that he would visit her no more. And thus being
discountenanced on all sides, the poor unfortunate Woman was constrained to go
with her Husband, by whom she was far better used, than she deserved.

Ladies, You may observe from hence, that if at first this Husband had been but
vigilant of his Wife, he had never been robbed of her; for a purchase well
guarded is hardly lost, and it is abundance that makes a Thief. It is a strange
thing, said Hircan, that Love should be so strong, where it is most
unreasonable: I have heard it spoken (said Simontault) that it is easier to
dissolve a thousand Marriages, than to separate the Loves of a Priest, and his
Lemman. I do easily believe it, said Emarsuite, for they who so often do^ty
others in Marriage, do know of themselves so well to tamper with the kuott, that
nothing but they and Death can dissolve it. And since the Doctors do affirm,
that the spiritual language is the most excellent of all, it does by
consequence fall out, that the spiritual Love also does surpass all other
Loves. It is a thing, said Dagoucin, which I know not how to pardon in Ladies,
to forsake an honest Husband, or a Friend, for a Priest, be he never so
handsome, or so civil. I must beseech you, said Hircan, that you would forbear
to speak, or to censure our Mother the Church; but to believe that it is a
great pleasure to Women fearful and secret to sin with those, who when ever
they have don, can absolve them of them sins; for there are diverse, who are
more ashamed to confess a sin, than to commit it. You speak of those only, said
Oysilla, who have not the fear of God, and who believe that secret things shall
not one day be revealed before the Angels in Heaven. But I have this opinion of
those Women, that they desire not so much Confession, as the Confessors: for
the Enemy has so blinded them, that they seek rather to be in a place most
covert, and secure, than to be absolved of their Evil, of which they are not
touched with the least Remorse.

Nay, said Saffredant, they are so far from Remorse that they conceive
themselves to be more holy than other Women, and I am confident there are some
who think themselves much honored to persevere in such Loves: You speak of
some only, said Oysilla, and it appears that you know something of them:
Wherefore I shall desire you, that to begin our Journal to morrow, you would
inform us of something which you know of this Subject, for this is the last
time that the Bell does tole, and hark, the Saints Bell does now ring in all to
Vespers. You might also have observed, that at the end of the sixth Novell of
this day, the Religious men did all depart from the shade of yonder hedge, and
left us to our selves to complete our Histories. Having spoke those words all
the Company did rise, and repaired to the Church, where they found that the
Monks did attend their coming, and having heard Vespers, they supped
altogether, entertaining one another with excellent discourse. Supper being
ended they delighted themselves with walking in the meadow according to their
custom, and afterward every one did go to rest in their several lodgings to
have the better Memory for the next day.

The end of the sixth Days Work of the Novels of the Queen of Navarr.
The Seventh Days Work of the Novells of the Queen of NAVARRE.
The Preface.
IN the Morning, Madam Oysilla failed not to administer to them the saving food
of their Souls, which she had gleaned in reading of the Acts, and Virtuous
Deeds of the glorious Martyrs, and Apostles of Jesus Christ, as they are
declared by Saint Luke, telling them, That what she read there, did inflame her
with a devout desire to see the happy condition of those times, and to lament
the Iniquity of these: And when she had sufficiently read and expounded the
beginning of that excellent Book, she desired them to repair to the Church with
her, in the same Union as the Apostles did make their prayers, and to demand
Grace of God, which is never refused to those who do in faith desire it.

This holy Counsel was well approved by all, and they came into the Church just
as the Mass of the holy Spirit did begin, which seemed to conduce much to their
present purpose, which made them to give ear unto it with more than ordinary
devotion; and afterward at Dinner all their Discourse was concerning the happy
lives of the Apostles in those Primitive times, in which they took so much
delight; that it seems they had forgot what they had been accustomed to do in
the Afternoon, of which Nomerfide, being the youngest, did advise them, and
said, Madam Oysilla has so long deteyned us with Discourses of Devotion, that
we have let pass the accustomed hour to retire us for the preparation of our
Novells. Her words were the occasion that all the Company presently did arise,
and having made a little stay in their Chambers, they failed not to meet all
together in the Meadow, as they had done on the days before; And being set one
by one, Madam Oysilla said to Saffredant, Although I am assured that you will
speak nothing that shall tend to the advantage of Women, yet I must desire you
that you will rehearse that Novell to us, which yesterday in the Evening you
did promise. I protest unto you Madam (said Saffredant) I shall get no
dishonor amongst Detractors by speaking the truth, neither shall I lose the
good opinion of virtuous Ladies by declaring those Errors which Fools commit;
for by experience I have found what a misery it is to be far removed from the
Honor of their society, and, if I had been out of their Favor, I should not
have been now alive: And speaking those words he turned his eyes toward her
who was the cause of all his grief, and joy, and looking on Emarsuite he made
her so to blush, as if she had known that she was the Lady to whom those words
did address themselves; howsoever, he was no less understood by her, by whom
he desired to be heard. Madam Oysilla assured him that he might speak the truth
freely to the expense of those only whom it properly concerned. Wherefore, said
Saffredant, I do begin.

THE NOVELLS Of Queen MARGARET.
The Mavelous obstinacy of the most impudent and bold Love of a Woman of
Burgundy to a Canon in the City of Autun.
The first Novel,
IN the City of Autun there lived a beautiful Woman, tall, fair, and of the
best features in her face that ever I have seen. She was married to an honest
Gentleman who seemed to be younger than her self, wherewith she had reason to
be contented. Not long after that he had married her, he brought her unto the
City of Autun having some affairs there to dispatch which required his
presence. And whiles the Husband followed the Courts of Justice, his Wife
altogether followed the Church to pray to God for him; she so much frequented
the holy place, that one of the Canons, a very rich man, did fall in love with
her, and did court her so affectionately, that in the end the poor Gentlewoman
did consent unto him. Her Husband had not the least suspicion of it, and had a
greater care to look to his money, than to his Wife. His business being ended,
and the time being come that he must depart, and return to his own house, which
was at the least seven leagues from the City, it was not without great grief
unto the Gentlewoman; but the Canon promised her to come oftentimes to visit
her, which he did, pretending some great journey, but his way lying always by
that Gentleman's house, He was not so foolish, but perceived it well enough,
wherefore he gave that Order, that when the Canon came he should not see his
Wife, but caused her to hide her self, that he might not speak unto her.

The Wife understanding the Jealousy of her Husband, did not seem to be
displeased at it, but resolved with her self to find out a way to come unto
him; for she esteemed it to be a Hell unto her to to lose the sight of her
Heaven. One day, when her Husband was gone abroad, she so employed all her
Grooms and Chambermaids, that she was left alone by her self, and taking with
her what she conceived to be necessary, she immediately, without any Companion
at all, but Love only, did go on foot to the City of Autun, where she came not
so late, but her Canon knew her well enough, who kept her locked up, and
concealed from her Husband above a year, for all the Admonitions and
Excommunications which her Husband did bring forth against him. At the last,
when he could find no other remedy, he made his Complaint to the Bishop, who
had an Archdeacon as pious a Man as any was in France, who so diligently
searched all the Houses of the Canons, that at last he found her whom he
thought to be lost; the Bishop put her in prison, and the Canon was censured to
suffer a very great penance. The Husband, finding that his Wife was reclaimed
by the Admonitions of the Archdeacon, and many other honest Gentlemen, was
content to take her again, upon the Oaths she made for the time to come to live
a chaste, and a virtuous life. The good Man her Husband did willingly believe
her, because he did bear an extraordinary affection to her, and bringing her
home to his house, did use her as respectfully as before, only he did employ
two old Chambermaids, whose business it was never to suffer her to be alone, but
the one or the other of them were always with her. But whatsoever good
entertainment he did give her, the inordinate love which she did bear unto the
Canon, did make her esteem all her pleasures but torment. And although she was
a goodly and a most beautiful women, and her Husband a man of an excellent
complexion, and of a very strong body, yet she had never any children by him;
for her heart was always seven leagues from her body: which she so well
dissembled, that her Husband thought she had forgotten all that had been
passed, as he did for his own part. But her desires could not be contained
within the Compass of her Husbands house; for at the very same time that she
saw her Husband most loving to her, and least of all suspicious, she
counterseited her self to be sick, and so well did carry the dissimulation,
that her Husband was in a great perplexity for her, and spared for no costs to
relieve her in her counterfeit Extremities. And she played her part so
cunningly, that both he and all in the house with him did think that she was
even sick unto Death, and that by little and little she did pass away. She
observing that her Husband was as sad as he ought to be joyful, did entreat
him, that he would give her leave to make her Will, which, weeping most
bitterly for her, he did willingly give way unto: She did give unto her Husband
all that which she could give, and desired pardon of him for the faults she had
committed against him.

Having sent for the Curat, she confessed, and received the holy Satrament of
the Altar so devoutly, that every one did weep tears of joy to see her make so
glorious an end. When the Evening came, she entreated her Husband that she
might have the extreme unction, for she grew so weak that she was afraid she
should not be able to receive it alive. In great diligence her Husband caused
it to be brought unto her, and she received it in so great humility that she
stirred up every one to praise God for her. After she had received all these
Mysteries, she said unto her Husband, that seeing God had vouchsafed her so
great a grace as to have taken all that which the Church commands, she found
her Conscience in so great a peace, that she had a desire to take a little rest,
desiring her Husband to do the like, having great need of it, by reasoo of the
many tears he had shed, and his long watchings with her. When her Husband was
asleep, and all his Servants with him, the two old Chambermaids who had so long
watched her in her health, being consident they could not lose her now, unless
it were by Death, did go both to bed also to sleep out their fill; And when
she heard them to sleep so soundly that they did snort again, she did rise in
her Smock, and did go out of the Chamber, listening if she could hear any noise
about the House, but being assured that all was quiet, she took a Staff in her
hand, and did go out at a little Garden door which was not shut, and all that
night in her Smock only she traveled bare foot toward Autun to her Saint that
did preserve her from death. But because the way was long she could not reach
to the end of her journey before the break of day. Not long afterward she
looked behind her, and observed two Horsemen in a full gallop riding toward
Autun, and suspecting that it was her Husband who did ride in the pursuit of
her, she did hide her self in the Fens hard by, and covered her head with the
Rushes, and her Husband in full speed passing clole by, she heard him to speak
unto his Man as if he were in some great perplexity. O wretched Woman! who
would have thought that under the covert of the holy Sacraments of the Church
she would cover so wicked and so abominable a design. His Servant said unto
him, Sir, Judas, who was one of the Apostles, taking such a Morsel, did not
fear to betray his Master, think not the treachery of a Woman to be so strange;
and speaking those words her Husband passed by, and his Wife continued amongst
the rushes more joyful that she had deceived him, than she was at home in a
bed of down in Slavery. Her poor Husband searched over the whole City of Autun,
and found for certain that she was not there. Wherefore he returned by the same
way which he came, and did nothing but complain of her all the way he did ride,
and of the loss which he received, threatening her with death without mercy, if
ever he should find her again, of which she had no more fear in her Soul, than
she felt cold in her body, although the season of the year, and the place
wherein she covered her self, might give her just reason to complain of her
cold and melancholy voyage. And by the imagination only how the fire of Hell
does burn those who are punished therein, we may conceive the wonder how this
poor wretch coming out of a Warm bed could be able to continue a whole day
together in that extremity of cold. Howsoever, she lost not her resolution, or
her way, for as soon as ever night appeared she did begin her journey again,
and in the dusk of the Evening when the Gate of the City was about to be shut,
this poor pilgrim arrived, and failed not to go directly to the place where
her Saint lived, who was so amazed at the sight, that he could hardly believe
that it was she, but having diligently examined her with his eye, and found by
his hand that she had flesh and bones, which a Spirit has not, he did rest
himself assured that it was no Apparition, and immediately did comply so well
with her, that she after wards did continue with him fifteen years together.

Having concealed her self for a certain time, at the last she lost all fear
and modesty, and which is worse, she took such a glory that she had such a
friend, that she showed her self openly at the Church before the greatest part
of the Ladies of that City, and before the Magistrates, the Officers and
others, and had many children by the Canon; and amongst others a Daughter, who
was married to a very rich Merchant, and so gorgeously apparelled at her
Wedding day, that all the good women of the City did murmur very greatly at it;
but it was not in their power to give any redress unto it. It so came to pass,
that in those days Queen Claudia, Wife to the late King Francis, traveling
that way, did lodge in that City, and had in her Company, Madam the Regent
Mother to the King, and the Duchess of Alencon, who was her Daughter. A
Gentlewoman of the Chamber, named Peretta, did come unto the Duchess, and said
unto her, Madam, I must beseech you to hear me, you may peradventure do a
greater work, than if this day you had heard the Masses in all the Churches of
France. The Duchess stayed very willingly to give ear unto her, knowing that
from her nothing but good Counsels could proceed. Peretta immediately declared
to her, That she had taken a little Girl to assist her in the Queens Landry,
and having asked of her what was the News in the City, she acquainted her with
the Indignation of a great many Ladies and Gentlewomen of that City to see the
Canons Lemman to be so impudent as to take the wall of them, and informed her
of a great part of her incontinent life.

The Duchess immediately repaired to the Queen, and to Madam the Regent, and
repeated the story unto her, and they, without any form of process at all, did
send to seek out this ungracious Woman, who did not conceal her self from them;
for she had turned her shame and her infamy into a glory, to be the Mistress
of the house of so reverend, and so rich a Man; And being nothing dismayed, she
came without the least alteration of her Countenance to present her self before
the Ladies, who were so amazed at her Impudence, that on the sudden they knew
not what to say unto her. And after that Madam the Regent had made such
Demonstrations to her, that they would have fetched tears from the eyes of any
Woman that was of a modest understanding, she stood before them without the
least apprehension at all, and with an extreme confidence did say unto them, I
must beseech you, Ladies, to take care that my Honor may not be brought into
Question, for, God be praised, I have lived with Monseiur the Canon so well and
virtuously, that there is neither man nor woman living that can reprove me,
neither ought any one to think but that I live after the will of God; for it is
now full three years since the Canon has had any carnal knowledge of me, and
we do live as chastely, and in as great love, as two Angels, there being not
betwixt him and me, the least cross word, or contrariety of disposition; And
they who shall go about to part us shall commit a great sin; for the good Man
who is almost fourscore years of age will never endure to live without me, who
am my self five and forty years of age. You may conceive with your selves, that
these Ladies could not forbear to speak unto her, as she deserved, and what
were the Remonstrances which every one of them did make unto her, seeing her
obstinatenesse, which could not be molified by the words which they did speak
unto her, nor by the consideration of her own Age, nor by the presence of those
honorable personages. Wherefore to humble her they did send for the
Archdeacon, who did condemn her to ly in prison for the space of a whole year,
and to feed on nothing but bread and water. The Ladies also did send for her
Husband, who, after their good Exhortations, was contented to take her again,
after that her days of Penance were expired. But she finding her self to be a
prisoner, and that the Canon was resolved never any more to take her again, did
thank the Ladies that they had brought the Devil our of her by the head and
shoulders, and she had so great and perfect a contrition for her faults, that
her Husband, instead of staying the space of a whole your to take her again,
did demand her of the Archdeacon at the end of fifteen weeks, and ever
afterward they lived together in great love and friendship.

You may observe here (Ladies) how the chains of Saint Peter are by evil
persons converted into the chains of Satan, and are so hard to be dissolved,
that even the Sacraments which do cast forth Devils out of Men's Bodies, are by
them made the means that they continue longer in their Consciences; for the
better that things are, they are by being abused the occasions of greater
Dangers. Truly, said Oysilla, this Woman was too wanton and immoderate in her
desires, but it was punishment enough to appear before such Judges as the
Ladies whom you have named, for the look only of the Madam Regent was of that
Virtue, that there was no honest Woman but was almost afraid to stand before
her, and conceived her self most unworthy to appear in her presence. Those whom
she did smile upon did think with themsolves that they did merit some great
honor, knowing that she would not look upon any with a good will, but those
only who were virtuous Ladies. It had been better, said Hircan, that she had
stood in more fear of the blessed. Sa^^ament, the unworthy receiving whereof
without Faith and Love is eternal Damnation, than of the eyes of a Woman. I
promise you, said Parliament, those who are not inspired with the Grace of God,
do stand in greater fear of temporal than of spiritual punishments.
Nevertheless I do believe that this poor Creature was more chastised by her
sufferings in the Prison, and by the apprehension that she should never see the
Canon more, than for any remonstrance that either the Queen or the Lady Regent
made unto her. But you have forgot, said Simontault, the principal cause which
did induce her to return, unto her Husband, which was that the Canon was
fourscore years of age, and that her Husband was younger than she her self was:
And thus she cunningly took the best advantage of all things, and gained in all
her Markets; for had the Canon been but as young, you may be sure she would
never have abandoned him. The instructions and reproofs of the Ladies would
have been no more effectual than the Sacraments which she took. In my opinion,
said Nomerfide, howsoever, she did well in one thing, which was, that she did
not too hastily confess her offense, which should be confessed unto God alone,
and she did wisely that she spoke so little, and did not reveal her self before
all the World; for although it be true that she was faulty enough, yet should
she have lied and sworn unto the contrary, and there were no Man present to
have disproved her, even those lies and oaths would by some have been believed.
So it is, said Longaren, that a Sin (unless it be with difficulty) can never
be so concealed, but at one time or other it will be discovered, except when
God does cover it in those, who in their Love to him are repentant for it. And
what will you think of those, said Hircan, who have no sooner committed a
folly, but will presently reveal it to all the World? It seems to be very
strange to me, said Longaren, and it is a great sign that their Sin was very
pleasing to them, And as I have told you, He whose fins are not covered by the
Grace of God, cannot deny himself before men, and there are many who take
pleasure to speak of such things, and do make it their glory to publish their
vices, and others again are so foolish, that in thinking to conceal they do
accuse themselves.

They conceal themselves but very untowardly then, said Saffredant; but I pray
you, if you can give us any example of it, that you will take my place, and
declare it to us. Then listen to my Story, said Longaren.

A Gentlewoman giving an account of her own loves, and speaking of it in a
third Person, did unadvisedly declare her self.
The second Novell.
IN the time of King Francis the first, there was a Lady of Royal blood,
accompanied with Honor, Virtue, and Beauty, and who could deliver her mind
very elegantly, and with a great Grace, and she would also laugh as heartily,
when she heard any subject worthy of laughter. This Lady being in one of her
Country houses, all her Subjects and Neighbors did come to visit her, because
she was as well beloved, as any Woman possibly could be. Amongst others, there
came unto her, one afternoon, a Gentlewoman who understood that every one who
came unto her did account unto her one pretty story or another, to pass away
the time; wherefore she resolved with her self, that she would be found as
forward as the rest, and said unto her, Madam, I have a story to declare unto
you that will make you laugh, but you shall promise me not to declare it unto
any, and immediately she began to express her self. Madam, The story which I
shall exhibit to you, is very true upon my Conscience. It is, that there was a
married Gentlewoman, who lived very honestly with her Husband, although she was
but young, and he was very ancient. A Gentleman that was her Neighbor seeing
that she was married to that old Man, was very amorous of her, and did
solicit her many years together, but he never received any other answer from
her, but such as a wise and virtuous Woman ought to give. One day the Gentleman
thought with himself that if he could take her at advantage peradventure she
would not be so rigorous unto him, and having a long time in a great fear
debated with himself of the danger he should undergo to obtain his desires;
the Love which he did bear unto the Gen^lewoman did so take away all fear, that
he resolved with himself to seek out both the place and the occasion. He did
watch so narrowly, that one morning when the ancient Man (Husband to the young
Gentlewoman) was gone to some houses that he had in the Country, and was
departed from his Wife very early in the morning, because he would avoid the
extreme hear of the Day, he came into the House where the young Gentlewoman
was, whom he sound in bed and fast asleep, and observing that all the
Chambermaids were gone out of the Chamber (without having the apprehension to
make fast the door) he made have into the bed to her with his Boots and Spurs
on. The Gentlewoman awaking was as sorry and as much ashamed as possibly could
be, but whatsoever remonstances she could make, he took her by force, and told
her, that if she revealed that affair, he himself would disclose it to all the
World, and declare that she had sent for him on purpose. The young Gentlewoman
was so amazed at what he said, that she durst not cry out. Not long afterward
one of the Chambermaids came into the Chamber, whereupon the Gentleman hearing
her to come up the Stairs, did rise up so suddenly that he had not been
discovered but only by his Spur, which taking hold on the upper sheet, did
dragg it about the Chamber, insomuch that the poor young Gentlewoman having
nothing to cover her was left almost stark naked in the bed: And in speaking
those words, although she pretended to give an Account of another, yet she
could not take such heed to her tongue, but it blabbed forth. There was never
Woman more ashamed than my self, when I found that I was so naked. Immediately
the Lady who had listened very attentively to the Account she made without
laughing, could not forbear, at the last words she spoke, to say unto her, For
ought that I can perceive, you have good reason to relate this story, for it
properly belongs unto you. The poor Gentlewoman blushing did allege what ever
she could imagine to recover her Honor, but it was already flown away, and so
far that she could not recall it.

Ladies, I do persuade my self, that if it had been so unpleasing to her to
commit the Act as she represented, she would willingly have lost the memory of
it, and have taken no delight to have repeated it; But as I have said, Sin will
easily be discovered by it self, and sind eyes enough to disclose it, when it
is not covered with that coverture which David affirms does render a Man
blessed. In good earnest, said Emarsuite, this is one of the most notorious and
most ridiculous Fools that ever I heard of, to make others laugh at the expense
of her own follies. I find it nothing strange, said Parliament, that the word
should follow the deed, for it is more easy to speak than to do. What a
business do you make of it? said Guebron, What Sin had she committed? she was
fast afleep in her bed, and he did threaten her with Death and Shame. Lucretia,
who is so famous amongst you, would have done the like. It is true, said
Parliament, there is no Woman so pure and innocent who needs not to wear an
Apron: But when we take a great displeasure in the Act, We do also take as
great a displeasure to have it in our memory; but we find it was the pleasure
of this Gentlewoman to make others laugh at the follies she committed.
Neverthel^sse, said Nomerfide, It appears that this Woman was a good Woman,
because she had oftentimes been solicited by the Gentleman, and yet would
never consent unto him, insomuch that the Gentleman was constrained to assist
himself with force and threatenings to deceive her. How? said Parliament, do you
think that a Lady may be excused for losing her Honor, when she does let it go
after the second or the third denial? There would be then many virtuous Women
which are now esteemed to be clean contrary. For we see sufficiently every day,
that there are Women who do a long time refuse and put off those whom in their
hearts they do desire; Some for fear of their Honor, others that more ardently
they may be followed and loved, and more highly be esteemed. Wherefore if you
speak indeed of Virtue, you should make no reckoning of that Woman who does not
continue firm unto the end. Where is that Phoenix? said Saffredant, let us
know, and we shall extol that miracle in earnest. But what, said Dagou^in, if a
young man should for once or twice refuse a young Lady, would you not esteem
that to be a great Virtue? Truly, said Oysilla, if a young Man and in health
should continue to use that Virtue, I should esteem it as excellent and
glorious, as it is difficult to believe. But I have known one, said Dagoucin,
who has refused those pleaasures which all his Companions with greediness did
pursue. I must desire you, said Longaron, that you will take my place to
account unto us the particulars thereof, but withal remember, that we are here
all bound to speak the truth. I profess unto you, said Dagoucin, that I will
deliver it to you so clearly, that therein there shall be no color at all that
shall disguise it.

The notable Temperance and Chastity of a French Lord.
The third Novel.
IN the City of Paris there lived four young Maids, two whereof were Sisters,
and of so great a beauty, and youth, and such a fresh complexion, that they
were courted with multitudes of Suitors. A Gentleman whom the King who then
reigned had made Provost of Paris, observing his young Master the King to be of
age to desire such Company, did so manage his design amongst them all, that
every one of them believing they should be for the King, they all accorded to
that which the Provost desired, which was that on such a day they would come
altogether to a Feast to which he would invite his Master, and in the mean time
he did acquaint him with what he had done, who did like it very well. The King
also did impart it to two other great Personages of the Court, who did agree to
have their pennyworth in the Market with him. And looking for the fourth
Companion for the fourth Maid, there came in by accident a young Lord, a
courteous and most lovely Gentleman, and ten years younger than any of the
other three, he was also invited to the Banquet, and made an outward appearance
to be very willing to attend upon the King, although in his heart he had no
desire to be present at such a meeting; for on one side he had newly married a
beautiful Wife, who was the Mother of two lovely Infants with which he was very
much contented, and they lived together in such peace and unity, that he would
not for any thing that his Wife should entertain the least suspicion of him; On
the other side he was a perfect Servant to one of the fairest Ladies who were
at that time in France, whom so much he loved, and so highly esteemed, that all
others did appear but imperfect and deformed to him, insomuch that at the
beginning of his youth (before he was married) it was impossible to persuade
him to see or frequent the Company of any other Lady how beautiful so ever she
were, and took far more pleasure to see her, and perfectly to love her, than in
all the delight whatsoever it were, that he could receive from any other.

This young Lord came to his Wife, and acquainted her with the enterprise which
the King had undertaken, assuring her that for his part he had rather die than
accomplish what he had promised; For as when he was in choler there was no man
living that durst assault him, so, without some great occasion that did provoke
him, he had rather die himself than commit a murder, if his Honor had not
constrained him to it. In the like manner, without an extreme force of Love
which begets blindness in virtuous men, he had rather die than defile his
marriage bed by a depraved appetite to another, which was the cause that his
wife did so much respect and love him, observing so stayed an honesty to dwell
in such a tenderness of youth. And she demanding of him how he could excuse
himself, seeing that Princes oftentimes are much incensed against those men who
do not praise and follow that which they themselves do love, he made answer,
That a wise Man has always a sickness or a Journey in his sleeve to assist
himself with, at the time of great necessity. Wherefore some four or five days
before I am to go, I am determined to counterfeit my self to be very sick, in
which excuse the sadness of your countenance will much advantage me.

Behold, said his Wife, a good and a holy Hypocrisy; I will not fail to put on
the saddest and most disconsolate look that possibly I can; for they who can
avoid the offense of God and the anger of their Prince, are said to be happy
Creatures. Accordingly as they determined they performed, and the King was very
sad to understand by the Wife the sickness of her Husband, which lasted but a
little, for by reason of the intervention of some great affairs, the King did
forget his pleasure to follow his Duty in the Government of the Kingdom, and
departed out of Paris; And one day afterward having in his memory the design
which was not put in practice, did say unto the young Prince, What fools were
we to go so soon out of Paris, without seeing the four Maids, who (as it was
assured me) were the fairest in my Kingdom? The young Prince being then present
made answer, I am very glad of it that you did fail, for during my sickness I
had a great fear that I alone should lose my part in the adventure, having
spoke those words the King did never suspect the dissimulation of the young
Signior, who afterward was more beloved by his Wife than he was before.

Parliament did immediately begin to laugh, and could not forbear from speaking,
And she might have loved him yet better, if he had made this refusal for the
love of her alone, but in what manner soever it was, the Gentleman was
commendable enough. It seems to me, said Hircan, it is no great praise for a
Man to preserve his Chastity for the love which he does bear unto his Wife, for
there are so many reasons for it, that in a manner he is constrained to do it.
First of all, God does command him. Secondly, his oath does oblige him. And
lastly, Nature, which is satisfied, is not so subject either to temptation or
desire, as is necessity. But the free love whish a Man does bear unto his
Mistress, of whom he receives no delight at all, nor other contentment but to
see her, and to speak unto her, and, instead of good words from her, does
oftentimes receive a churlish answer, when this Love is so loyal and firm, that
for no adventure whatsoever can arrive, it can be changed, I say this is
Chastity not only praiseworthy but miraculous. It is no miracle at all, said
Oysilla, for where the heart does resolve and devote it self, there is nothing
impossible to the body. Not to the bodies, said Hircan, which are already
angelized. I speak not of those, said Oysilla, who by the Grace of God are
altogether transformed into him, but of those which we see here on earth
amongst Men, and if you please but to take notice of them, you shall find that
those who have devoted all their heart and all their affections to attain unto
the perfection of sciences, have not only forgotten the pleasure of the flesh,
but even those things which are most necessary for the sustenance of life, as
to eat and to drink, for so long as the Soul is active within the Body, the
flesh does remain as it were insensible. And from hence it comes to pass that
those who love beautiful and virtuous Ladies, do receive such a full
contentment of Spirit to behold them, and to hear them speak, that the flesh is
as it were appeased, and taken off from all the heat of her desires. And those
who cannot feel those contentments are sensual and carnal, and, being
overburthened with the weight and frailty of their flesh, do not well know
whether they have in them a Soul or no.

But when the Body is subject to the Spirit, it is as it were insensible to the
imperfections of the flesh, insomuch that the earnest study of the Soul in the
strength of contemplation has rendered Men insensible. I have known a
Gentleman, who, to give a demonstration that he has loved a Lady more than any
other, has held his naked fingers in the flame of a Candle, his Companions
standing by, and looking steadfastly on the Lady he (not stirring his hand at
all) did burn his Fingers to the very Bone, yet nevertheless affirmed that he
was not sensible of any pain. In my opinion, said Guebron, the Devil whose
Martyr he was should have made a Saint Laurence of him, for there are some in
whom the fire of love is so great, that they will not fear that which is less
in violence. But if a Lady should have desired me to endure so much for her, I
should certainly have demanded some great recompense, or drawn off my fancy to
some other who would have been more merciful to me. You would then, said
Parliament, have your own will after that your Mistress had hers: like a
Gentleman at Valence in Spain, of whom a Commander who was a brave Soldier did
not long since give me an account. Madam, I beseech you, said Dagoucin, that
you will take my place, and be pleased to relate it to us, for I do presume it
is a good story. Ladies, said Parla^. hata, according to this Account, you
ought to look again a^ again, on that which you do refuse, and never thnd that
time without variation will be always the same, but knowing how subject the
present time is unto change, you would take order for the time to come.

A Gentleman being disdained for an Husband, did take upon him the orders of a
Gray Friar, by reason whereof his Sweetheart not long afterward did undergo
the same punishment.
The fourth Novel.
IN the City of Valence there was a Gentleman who for the space of five or six
years did love a Lady so absolutely, that during that time, neither the Honor
nor the Conscience of either of them was prejudiced, for it was his intention
to have her to his Wife, which seemed to their friends on both sides to be very
reasonable, for he was very handsome, rich, and descended of honorable
parentage, and did not rashly thrust himself into her service, but first of all
did acquaint her with it, and did understand her intention, which was that she
gladly did accord that he should be her Husband: And this (as I have said) was
carried on by their friends on both sides, who having met together for this
effect did think very well of the Marriage, and the rather, because as they
thought the young Gentlewoman her self did seem to have a good desire to it.

But afterward, whether she thought to find a better Husband, or to dissemble
the Love which she did bear unto him, or whether she conceived that the
greatest contentment was in a single life, the Marriage day was deferred, and
the Company that were assembled to see the accomplishment thereof were
constrained to depart not without a great grief that they could not put a good
conclusion to it, knowing that the parties on both sides were before so well
agreed. But above all the poor Gentleman was extremely discontented, who had
more patiently carried his affliction, if he could have found that the fault
proceeded from her kindred, and not from her self. But understanding the truth,
the knowledge whereof did cause in him a grief as strong almost as death it
self; without speaking to his Sweetheart, or any one else, he did withdraw
himself into his own House, and having given order for the management of his
affairs, he did repair into a solitary place, where he endeavored with himself
to forget that unprofitable love, and did entirely convert it into the love of
our Savior Jesus Christ, to which not long afterward he did altogether oblige
himself.

During this time of his retirement he received not the least news either from
the Gentlewoman whom he had loved, or from any of her friends, wherefore he
resolved with himself, since he was disappointed of that life which of all
others he conceived to be the most happy, to choose and take that life upon him
which was the most austere, and the most unpleasing to him that he could
imagine. In this sad resolution, which may be truly called a despair, he did
go to enter himself into a religious house, which was a Monastery of the order
of Saint Francis. It was not far from the place where many of his friends had
their habitations, who understanding of his despair, did the utmost of their
endeavors to divert him from his melancholy resolution, but they found it to
be so strongly grounded in his heart, that it was impossible to dissuade him
from it. Nevertheless understanding from whence the occasion of his Malady did
proceed, they concluded to look out some redress, and repaired to her who was
the original of his sudden Devotion; who was possessed with such a sorrow and
an amazement at the news thereof (thinking that her refusal for a short time
would conduce only to give her a more sure experience of his love, and not for
ever to lose him, of which she saw the danger too apparent) that she immediately
did send a Letter to him to give him the assurance of her love, and to desire
him to return to take possession of her heart which was entirely his own.

This Letter being delivered by one of her friends with all the remonstrances
of affection that could possibly be expressed, was received and read by the
Gentleman Friar, with so sad a Countenance, and accompanied with so many sighs
and tears, that it seems he would have both burned it, and drowned it at once.
He gave no other answer to it, but desired the Messenger to acquaint the
Gentlewoman, that the mortifying of his Passion did cost him ^o deer, that it
had taken from him both the desire to live, and the fear to die. Wherefore he
desired her who was the occasion of it, that she would let him enjoy a quiet
misery, and since she would not content him in the passion of his grand
desires, that she would not torment him now, when he was dispossessed of them,
but content her self with what already she had done, for which he could find no
other remedy than to choose so sharp a life, and a continual penitence which
might cause him to forger his sorrow and her unkindnesse, and by so many fasts
and disciplines so to humble and chastise his Body, that the memory of Death
only should be his most Sovereign Consolation, wherefore above all things he
did beseech her, that he might hear no more tidings of her, for only the
remembrance of her Name was a Purgatory insupportable unto him. The Gentleman
returned with this sad answer, and made a report thereof unto her, who could
not understand it without a grief incredible. But Love (who would not suffer
her heart to fail until the last extremity) did put it into her fancy to make a
sudden trial, if her sight and her words could prevail more upon him than her
Letters. Wherefore taking her Father, and her nearest friends along with her,
she repaired to the Monastery where he had his residence, having first examined
all her Boxes and her Glasses for those things which might make her look most
beautiful, and persuading her self, if she could be but admitted to that
happiness as but to see him once, and speak unto him, it were impossible but
the fire which had so long a residence in his heart should grow into a flame as
strong as ever.

In this confidence she entered into the Monastery at the end of Vespers, and
sent unto the Gentleman desiring him that he would be pleased to give a friend
of his a visit in the Chapel within the Cloister. He who did not know who it
was that did send for him, did make have to go unto the greatest and most
dangerous battle in which he ever did fight; He did look so pale and
spiritlesse that she did hardly know him, nevertheless being accompanied with
a grace no less amiable than before, Love did enforce her to stretch forth her
Arms thinking to embrace him, but the compassion which she had to see him in
that estate did so surround and invade her heart, that swouning away she did
fall unto the Ground.

The poor Gentleman who had taken upon him the habit of Religion, observing it,
and being not destitute of Brotherly Charity, did raise her up, and did bring
her to a seat in the Chapel: And he himself having no less need of succor,
did dissemble his passion, fortifying his heart in the love of God against all
the temptations with which she could assault it; insomuch that when he beheld
her, he did seem not to know who it was, or what her desires were. She having
recovered her self from her dyings away, did begin a little to hold up her
head, and did look upon him with such fair, and withal such affecting eyes,
that they were able to make a rock to relent, and having made a little pause,
she did express her self unto him in that studdied language which she
conceived most effectual to withdraw him from the place wherein he was, to
which he did give the most virtuous answers that were possible for him to
return. But the poor Gentleman at last perceiving that his heart began to
soften into compassion at the abundance of those tears which rained down from
her fair eyes (as one that saw Love that hard-hearted little Archer to level at
his heart again, and make a new and a more deadly wound with his Golden Arrow)
did betake himself to his best refuge, his Heels, and as fast as possbly he
could he did fly at once both from Love, and his late Mistress, and being
resolved to live no more under their Tyranny, he found he had no other way to
overcome them but by flight.

When he had locked himself in his Chamber, being unwilling she should depart
from him without knowing his resolution, he did write unto her two or three
words in Spanish, the substance whereof I have found to be so significant that
I will not render them to you in French, because I will not diminish the
gracefulness which they do carry with them in the Spanish Tongue. He did send
them by a little Novice newly entered into the Monastery, who did find her still
remaining in the Chapel, and transported with such an extremity of despair,
that if it had been lawful for her to make her self a Frieresse, she would
have still continued there. But perusing the Paper which contained these words
Volunto don venesti anima mi qui en las tristas vides es la mia, considering
with her self, that she was abandoned of all hope, she concluded it was her
safest way ^o believe his Counsel and the Counsel of her friends, and returning
to her house she did lead a life as melancholy, as he did live an austere one
in the House and Habit of Religion.

Ladies, you do here observe what vengeance this Gentleman did take on the
coyness of his Mistress, who thinking to make a further trial of him did
throw him into the bottom of despair, insomuch that when she was willing she
could never recover him. Truly, said Nomerfide, I am even sorry at the heart
that he did not abandon the formality of his Habit to espouse her. I do believe
that it would have proved a lawful and a happy marriage. I protest unto you,
said Simontault, I do suppose that he did very wisely in it, for he who does
well consider with himself the burden of Marriage, will find it to be more
troublesome by far than an austere Religion; And he who was so much weakened
with disciplines and fastings, was afraid to take upon him such a change which
should continue all his life. In my opinion, said Hircan, she committed a great
wrong to so feeble a man to tempt him unto marriage, which is a task great
enough for the strongest man in the World; but if she had propounded a
discourse unto him of Love, without any other obligation but of Affection,
there was no Cord in that which might not be broken, nor knot which might not
be untyed; And seeing to take him out of Purgatory she would put him into Hell,
I do affirm that he had great reason to refuse her. In good earnest, said
Emarsuite, there are too many, who thinking to do better than all others, do
oftentimes worse, and clean contrary to that which they thought to have done.
You make me to remember, said Guebron, the Story of an old Woman much to this
purpose, who in her Devotions did clean contrary to what she intended,
whereupon there did arise a great tumult in the Church of Saint John at Lions.
I must desire you, said Parliament, that you would lake my place, and give us
the Account. My Account, said Guebron, shall not be so long, nor so pitiful as
was that which Parliament related.

The simplicity of an ancient Woman who presented a lighted Candle to Saint
John of Lions, and fastened it to the Forehead of a Soldier who was fallen
asleep on one of the Sepulchers, and what ensued thereupon.
The fifth Novel.
NEar unto the Church of St. John at Lions there was a very dark Chapel, and
before it a Sepulcher made of Stone, on the top whereof there was cut the
proportions of great personages, and round about the Sepulcher were the
pourtraicts of many Men who were pourtayed sitting in their Armor. A Soldier
one day walking in the Church in the time of Summer when it was extremely hot,
being weary with travel, had a great desire to sit down and sleep, and
observing the Chapel to be both dark and cool, did resolve with himself to
take a nap at the Sepulcher, and sat down amongst those of his fraternity who
were pourtrayed sleeping in their Armor. It came to pass, that a good old
Woman who was very devout did come unto the Sepulcher when the Soldier was
fast asleep, and after she had said her Devotions, holding a Candle in her
Hand, she would have fastened it to the Sepulcher, and finding the Man who was
asleep to be next unto her, she did put it to his Brow to have it stick there,
but the wax would not cleave fast to that stone, the poor old Woman thinking
the coldness of the Image to be the occasion of it, did begin to heat his Brow
with her Candle, that it might take hold and stick more fast unto it, but the
Image who was not insensible began aloud to cry out, whereat the poor Woman was
much amazed, and in a greater fear than was the Soldier did cry our, a
Miracle, a Miracle, insomuch that all those who were in the Church did run out
unto them. Some made have unto the Belfry to ring the Bells, others to behold
the miracle. The good Woman who for fear did run away as fast as ever she
could, did bring many along with her to behold the complaining Image, who was
removed and gon^ before she came, which gave a just occasion to many to laugh,
but some of the Priests could not be so contented, but determined with
themselves to pick some profit out of it, by crying up the miracle, and giving
a more reverend estimation to the Sepulcher.

You ought therefore, Ladies, to take heed to what Saints you do devote your
Candels. Is it not a strange thing, said Hircan, that on whatsoever Subject
they do employ themselves, Women do always evil. Is it ill done, said
Nomerfide, to carry Candles unto Sepulchers? Yes, said Hircan, when they set
the foreheads of Men on fire with them, for no Good Act can properly be said to
be Good, if it be attended with Evil. Was not a little Candle a goodly present
(besides) which she brought to offer to God? God regards not, said Oysilla, the
value of the present, but the heart of him who does present it. It may be that
poor Woman had a greater love to God than those who do offer great torches, for
(as the Gospel affirms) she gave out of her Necessity. But I believe not,
said Saffredant, that God who is the Sovereign wisdom is pleased with the
foolishness of Women; for although it is true that simplicity is acceptable to
him, yet I do find in the Scripture, that he does despise the Ignorant, and
therefore he does command us to be simple and innocent as Doves, but withal to
be wise as Serpents. For my self, said Oysilla, I do not believe her to be
ignorant, who, her knees on the Ground, and her Candle lighted in her hand,
does make her confession to her Sovereign Lord, acknowledging her own
vileness, and that she deserves nothing but damnation, and craving of him
repentance, pardon, and grace, and the gift of everlasting life. I would to
God, said Dagoucin, that every Woman did understand her self as well as you,
but I am afraid that several poor Creatures of your Sex have not your
intentions. Oysilla made answer to him. Those who know least how to speak, are
those who oftentimes have the greatest knowledge of the Love and the Will of
God. Wherefore we ought not to judge any but our selves. Emarsuite laughing
said unto her. It was no strange thing for her to put a poor Soldier into a
fright who was asleep. Women of as low condition as her self, have put great
Princes into as great a fear without putting any fire to their Foreheads. I do
believe, said Dagoucin, that you have some story concerning it, which you have
a desire to relate unto us; wherefore (if you please) take my place. My story
shall not be long, said Emarsuite, and if I can represent it to you aright, it
will not give you an occasion to weep.

A merry Account which happened to the King and Queen of Navarre.
The sixth Novel.
IN that year wherein Monsieur Vendosm did espouse the Princess of Navarr,
having at Vendosme feasted the King and the Queen, their Father and Mother,
they departed from thence into Gyen with them, and passing by the house of a
Gentleman where were many fair and young Ladies, they danced so long one
afternoon, that the Duke of Vendosme and the Princess being both weary, did
retire into their Chamber, and their clothes being on, they did lie down upon
the bed and slept, the doors and the Windows being shut, and none of their
Servants in the room with them. After they had slept about one hour, they heard
the Door open, and the Duke drawing the Curtain, did put forth his head to see
who it was, thinking it was some of his familiar friends who would take him on
his Bed with his Princess: But he observed a Chambermaid who seemed to be very
old to enter into his Chamber, and to come directly toward the Bed, but the
curtain being drawn she could not discern by reason of the obscurity of the
Chamber who they were, but seeing two on the Bed lying close to one another,
she began to cry out, O wicked Slut, and infamous as thou art, I have a long
time suspected thee to be such as I find thee now to be; but because I had not
sufficient proof of it, I was loath to acquaint my Lady with it, but now I have
found out thy villainy I am resolved not to conceal it one minute: And thou
Apostate Villain, who have pulled by thy lust so great a shame upon this house,
as to undo that poor Girl that is on the Bed, if it were not that I had the
fear of God before my eyes, I would tear thee to pieces there where thou art.
Up, and be gone, In the Names of all the Devils in Hell, Up, and be gone. What,
will there never be any shame in you?

Monsieur de Vendosme, and Madam the Princess, to listen longer to this
discourse, did put their faces one as close unto the other as possibly they
could, that they might not be discovered, laughing so heartily that they were
not able to speak one word: Wherefore the Chambermaid seeing that by her
threatenings she could not make them stir nor rise from the Bed, did approach
more near unto them, and was resolved to draw them off either by the head or
heels; But when she found as well by their Habit as by their Countenances, that
they were not those whom she suspected, and perceived who they were, she
trembled down upon her knees before them, and besought them to pardon the great
offense she had committed in disturbing their Rest. Monsieur de Vendosme being
not contented to know so little, did immediately rise from the bed, and did
request the old Maid to tell him who they were that she did take them for,
which she refused to declare, but in the end, the Duke having sworn unto her
that he would not reveal it unto any, she did acquaint him, that it was a young
Gentlewoman in the House, of whom a Protonotary was very amorous, and whom a
long time she had narrowly watched, hoping to withdraw her Mistress the Lady of
the House from imposing such a Confidence in a Man who would have brought such
a dishonor upon her. Having spoke those words, she departed, and made fast the
door, and left the Prince and Princess together as she found them, where they
continued an hour laughing at the accident that had befallen them; and although
that afterward they related to diverse personages of Honor this Story, yet
they would never name the persons whom it did concern.

Ladies, you may here observe how a good: old Woman thinking to do a piece of
Justice, did declare that unto strange Princes, which none of the same House
wherein she lived did once suspect. I do believe, said Parliament, I can tell in
what House it was, and who was the Protonotary, for he has been of some
Authority heretofore in the House of Ladies, where when he could not obtain the
favor of the Mistress, he would not fail to procure the love of some one of
her Maids, but now he is known to be a man of good parts? and of good
Reputation. Wherefore do you speak, said Hircan, that he is now known to be a
Man of good parts; for in that lay the Act for which he did esteem himself to
be a man before. Parliament made answer to him, I do perceive very well that you
know both the Disease, and the Patient, and if there should be need of Excuses,
you would not fail to be his Advocate. Howsoever, for my part, he should never
sail in my Boat, who did so ill conduct his own, that even the Chambermaids
themselves must take notice of what was done. Do you think, said Nomerfide,
that Men after they have arrived to the end of their Desires, do take care who
knows it? You may believe, that if there were none who either did or could
speak of it, yet they would make it known of themselves. Hircan in choler
replied unto her, It is not requisite that. Men should speak all that which they
know. She blushing, did make answer, You say well, for otherwise they might
speak something which peradventure would tend but little to their Honor. I
have often heard you speak, said Simontault, that Men take delight to speak
Evil of Women, and I am confident that you rank me in that number; Wherefore,
believe me, I have a great desire to speak well of them, that I might not be
mistaken by the whole Sex for a Detractor. I give you my place, said Emarsuite,
requesting you so much to force your Jnclinations and your Nature, as to speak
something in our Honor. Immediately Simontault began to say, It is no wonder,
(Ladies) nor any News at all, to hear of your virtuous Deeds, which cannot but
proceed from the many virtuous personages of your Sex who are accomplished with
all perfections. Amongst many others, there is one Example in my memory, which
me thinks ought not to be concealed, but rather to he recorded in Letters of
gold, that it might be a president unto Women, and an admiration unto Men, by
beholding that in that frail Sex which is most repugnant unto frailty; it is
the Occasion which does cause me to relate what I have heard spoken by Captain
Robernall, and by diverse of his Company.

The Extreme Love and Austerity of a Woman in a strange Land.
The seventh Novell.
RObernall making a Voyage on the Sea to the Isse of Canada, being Governor of
that Fleet by the Commandment of the King his Master, he resolved to continue
in the said Island, if the Air of the Country had been healthful, and to build
there Towns and Castles. In which he made so good a beginning, that to be
satisfied in the fruitfulness of the place, and to inhabit it with Christians,
he took with him diverse sorts of Artists, amongst whom there was one so wicked,
and barbarously cruel, that he betrayed his own Master, and did bring him in
great danger to be taken by the Inhabitants of the Country; But it pleased God
that his Enterprise was discovered, and Captain Robernall received no prejudice
at all, who commanded the miscinevous Traitor to be apprehended, resolving to
bring him unto punishment, according to his deserts. You are to understand that
he had contrived the plot with the Inhabitants against the knowledge of his
Wife, who having followed her Husband thorough the perils of the Sea, would not
abandon him until death; but with her tears, and her petitions, she so
prevailed with the Captain and all the Company, that in Compassion of her, and
in regard of the good services which she had done, he did grant her her
request, but upon a condition, that both she and her Husband should be left in
a little Island in the Sea, inhabited only by wild Beasts, and to take that with
them which should be necessary for their sustenance, and to defend themselves.
This wretched Husband, and his poor Wife finding themselves alone, and in a
wilderness of sorrows, having none but cruel wild Beasts to keep them company,
had their recourse unto God alone, who had been always the hope, and the
assurance of that desolate Woman, who, as one who had all her comfort in him,
did take along with her, for the Instruction and nourishment of her Soul, and
for all her comfort and her Refuge, the New Testament, in which incessantly she
did read. The Extremity of Winter approaching, she did take pains with her
Husband to build a little House, the Lions, and other wild Beasts approaching
to devour them, but her Husband with his Harquebuse, and she with great stones,
did so well defend themselves, that not only the Beasts, nor the Birds durst
adventure to come near them, but oftentimes they would kill those which were
good to eat, and with such flesh and herbs that the Country did bring forth,
they did live a certain time, when their bread failed them. But her Husband
could not long endure that nourishment, and by reason of the abundance of the
cold water which he drank, he was so blown up with a Dropsy, that in a short
time he deceased, having none to assist him, or to comfort him, but his Wife,
who was both his Physician and his Confessor, and having given him the best
Comforts she could administer, he departed with joy from that Desert unto
Paradise. And the poor Woman being left alone, did bury him in the ground not
far from her house as well as possibly she could; but the Beasts had
immediately the sent of him, and smelling to the Grave, they did digg with
their paws to find out, and feed upon the Carcass, but the poor woman did shoot
at them out of her little house, and did drive them away with the Harquebuse,
using her endeavor that the flesh of her Husband might not have such a
Sepulcher. And thus living with her body the life of a Beast, and in her Soul
the life of an Angel, she passed away her time in reading, contemplation, and
in prayers, having a contented, and a joyful spirit in a lean and a consumed
body. But God, who never does forsake those in their distress who do put their
trust in him, and who in the greatest despair does make his mercy and his power
to be most remarkable, did not permit, that the Virtue with which he had endued
that Woman should be concealed from Men, but that it should be manifested to
his glory. Wherefore at the end of a certain time, one of the ships belonging
to the French Fleet passing before that Island, the people who were above the
Decks did observe a Woman, waving with her hand her Apron over her head, and
making a sign unto them, whereupon the Master of the ship immediately called to
mind those two whom they had left upon that Island, and determined with himself
to go unto them, and to see how God had disposed of them.

The poor Woman seeing the ship to make up unto her, and to draw near unto the
shore, did come down into the Beach, where they took her in, and departed.
Having praised God for her unexpected preservation, she showed them where her
little house did stand in the Island, and did inform them what was her miserable
Diet during the time of her melancholy abode there; which had been altogether
incredible to the Seamen, but that they knew that God is as able to nourish his
People in the Wilderness, as with the best Diet in the greatest Palace of the
World. And when on their return they had caused the fidelity and the
perseverance of the said Woman to be made known, both in the City, and at the
Court, she was received with great Honor by all the Ladies, who of their own
accord did send their Children to her to teach them to work with the Needle,
and to Read, and Write; And by that honest endeavor she gained sufficiently
wherewith to live all the remainder of her life, having no other desire but to
exhort every one to the love of God, and to a safe considence in him,
propounding for an example the great Mercy which he had vouchsafed unto her.

Ladies, you cannot now deny but that I have abundantly extolled those virtues
with which God has endued you, which are so much the greater, as the Subject
is the weaker. We are not sorry (said Oysilla) that you praise the Graces of
God in us; for to speak the truth, all Virtues do proceed from him. And in
this we must make no distinction, for we are builded up of the same materials,
and Woman is of the workmanship of God as well as Man. It is neither one nor
the other that by their desires or endeavors can do any more than plant, It is
God only that does give the increase. If you have read the Scripture advisedly,
said Saffredant, you shall find that Saint Paul says, It is Paul that
planteth, and Apollo that waters, but you shall never read that Women did put
their hands to the Work of God. You would follow, said Parliament, the opinion
and practice of some evil Men, who will make use of, and wrest some place of
the Scripture for themselves, and will leave out that which does make against
them. If you had read the Epistles of Saint Paul throughout, you would find
that he commends himself to some good Women who had labored with him in the
Work of the Gospel. Howsoever it be, said Longaren, that Woman was worthy of
great praise, as well for the Love which she did bear unto her Husband, for
whom she did put her life in jeopardy, as the faith which she had in God, who
as we find in the story did not forsake her. As to the first I believe, said
Emarsuite, that there is no Woman present here, who would not willingly do as
much to save the life of her Husband. I do delieve, said Parliament, that there
are Husbands who are such beasts, that those Women who live with them cannot
think it strange to live with their like. Emarsuite supposing that she was
included in that number could not forbear from speaking to her, And if those
beasts do not bite, their company is more pleasant than the Company of those
Men, who are so choleric that they are not to be endured. But I will follow my
discourse, and will affirm that if my Husband were in such danger, I would die
before I would forsake him. Take heed, said Nomerfide, that you do not love him
so well, that too much love does not deceive both your self and him; for there
is a moderation to be had in all things, and oftentimes Love being not rightly
understood does beget hate. I do believe, said Simontault, you had not
proceeded so far in this discourse, unless you had a a desire to confirm what
you have spoken by some President: And therefore if you have any Account to
that purpose, I give you my voice to relate it. Well then, said Nomerfide,
according to my Custom, I will make it both short and merry; for I will not
enlarge it unto tediousness, but so deliver it unto you, that you shall find as
much mirth to understand it, as I shall to represent it to you; It is briefly
thus.

A Woman caused her Husband to eat Cantharides, to delight her self the more
with him in the wanton exercise of Love, on which he thought he should have
dyed.
The eighth Novell.
IN the City of Pau in Bearn, there lived an Apothecary called Master Estienne,
who had espoused a virtuous Woman, a good Houswife, and beautiful enough to
give him content. But as he did make taste of diverse Druggs, so he did
oftentimes of diverse Women, to enable himself the better to discourse of all
Complexions, whereat his Wife was so much tormented, that she lost all
patience; for he made no reckoning of her, but only in Ember weeks for penance.
One day this Apothecary being in his shop, and his Wife close behind the Arras,
where she did conceal her self, the better to listen to what he said, there
came unto him one of his Gossips, a Woman of the City, and troubled with the
same disease as was his Wife, and sighing to the Apothecary, she said unto him,
Woe is me my Friend, I am the most unfortunate woman in the world: for I do love
my Husband as I do love my self, and do think on nothing else but to serve him
and obey him; but all my labor is but lost, for he loves the most wicked, the
most deformed, and the most nasty Slut in all the City, better than he loves
me, I do therefore pray you my good Neighbor, if you have in your Shop any
Drugg that may serve to change his complexion, that you would let me have it;
for I am not well used by him; and I assure you when I am able, I will give you
to the uttermost of my power for it.

The Apothecary having a great desire to comfort her, did say unto her, That he
had a powder, which if she did put it into something boiled or roasted, and so
give it unto her Husband, it would make him to give her the best and fullest
contentment in the world. The poor woman, desirous to see that Miracle, did ask
of him, What it was? and if it were of so easy a price that she was able to
purchase it? He represented to her, that it was of no great value, it was only
the powder of Cantharides, of which he had great store in his shop; and before
she did go away, she constrained him to prepare, and weigh out some of that
powder for her, and she took with her so much as he knew would serve to do the
business, for which she afterward did pay him, and thanked him many times
very heartily for it; for her Husband, who was a strong and an able bodied Man,
and did not take too much of it, did not find himself the worse for it, and she
did find him the better. The wife of the Apothecary, who understood all this
discourse, did think with her self that she stood altogether in as much need of
the receipt as her companion. And observing the place where her Husband did put
the powder that was left, she resolved that she would make use of it her self,
when ever she found opportunity, which within three or four days afterward
she did, her Husband desiring her to make him some good pottage, (for he was
troubled with a great cold in his Stomach) she told him, that something roasted
would do better, and be more profitable, wherefore he commanded her to go
presently to the Market, and to buy something to roast, and to take Cinnamon and
Sugar out of the Shop to put into the Sauce: which she did accordingly, and did
not forget the remainder of the powder which he did give to her Companion, and
did put it in without regard either of Ounce, Weight, or measure. Her Husband
did feed on the roast meat which she had prepared, and found it very good, and
not long afterward he found the heat and the effect of it, which he thought to
qualify with his Wife, which was not possible for him to do, for the heat
within him and the instigation was so extraordinary, that he did not know on
which side to turn him. He did bear his Wife down that she had poisoned him,
and was very importunate to know of her what she had put in his Roastmeat. She
confessed the truth unto him, and withal assured him, that she had as much
need of that Receipt as the Wife of his Companion. The poor Apothecary could
not beat her for the wrong she had done him, he was at that time in so great an
extremity, but commanded her to go out of his sight, and sent for the
Apothecary of the Queen of Navarr, to desire him that he would take the pains
to give him a visit, who gave him all the cooling Receipts that were effectual
for his recovery.

In a short time he was well mended, and the Queens Apothecary did reprehend
him very sharply for his rashness, that he was so unwise to counsel another to
take those druggs which he would not use himself, and that the good Woman his
Wife had done no more than what she ought to do, especially seeing the great
desire which she had to make him love her. Whereupon the poor Man was enforced
to overcome his folly with patience, and to acknowledge that God justly
punished him, to make that mockery fall upon himself which he had prepared for
another.

Ladies, in my Judgment the Love of this Wife was as indiscreet as it was
great. Do you call that, said Hircan, Love to her Husband, to make him suffer
torment, in a fond hope that she might receive some pleasure from him? I do
believe, said Longaren, that she had no other intention than to recover her
Husbands love, which she conceived, if not to be altogether lost, yet certainly
to be gone astray; for to obtain such a Commodity there is nothing which Women
will refuse to do. So it is, said Guebron, that whatsoever the occasion be, a
Woman ought not to give any thing unto her Husband either to eat or to drink,
which she knows not as well by her own experience, as friends of good
judgment, whether it be hurtful or no; But Ignorance ought to be excused, and
this Woman is excusable both for the passion which of all is most blinding,
that is Love, and for the person most blinded, which is a Woman, who has
seldom judgment enough to manage with discretion any great Act. Guebron,
said Oysilla, you do not now follow your commendable custom, which is to render
your self agreeable to your Companions, for I am confident there are Women who
have patiently endured both love and jealousy, which is an Act difficult
enough. Yes, said Hircan, and pleasantly too, for those Women who are most wise
do take as much pleasure to laugh at the follies of their Husbands, as their
Husbands take pleasure secretly to deceive them. And if you will give me the
place before that Madam Oysilla shall put a period to this days Account, I will
relate a story to you, and done so lately, that there is not one here present,
who does not know both the Husband and the Wife. Begin then, said Nomerfide.
Hircan laughing said unto them.

An Italian suffered himself to be cajoled by his Chambermaid, who caused, that
instead of her Servant, her Mistress should take her Husband bolting.
The ninth Novel.
IN the Castle of Doz in Bigorre there dwelled a Servant of the Kings, who was
called Charles the Italian, who had espoused a virtuous woman, and of a good
Estate, who having brought him many Children, did grow old, and he was none of
the youngest himself, and lived with her in great peace and love. It is true
enough, that sometimes he would talk familiarly unto his Chambermaids, at which
the good woman would not put on the least appearance of discontent, but gave
them all the scope they could desire, when she knew them to be most private
together in the house. One day she hired a Servant, who was a wise and a
handsome Girl, to whom she related the complexion and disposition of her
Husband, and her own; and assured her, that if she were a Slut her Husband
would never endure her, but turn her out of doors immediately. The Chambermaid,
therefore, to continue in a good esteem in the service of her Mistress, did
resolve with her self to follow her business roundly, and to be neat and
careful, and to give no ear to the allurements of her Master, who, though
oftentimes he did hold her in Discourse, and enticed her unto wantonness, yet
she would make no reckoning of him, but would acquaint her Mistress with all
his flatteries and promises. As they passed away their time in the Legend of
his follies, one day this Chambermaid bolted in the back Chamber, having on her
head a long hood, after the fashion of that Country, which is made like a
Kerchief, but only that this covers the shoulders, and all the body behind.
Her Master seeing her in this habit, did come unto her, and solicited her with
much importunity; but she, who would rather die than give consent unto him, did
make an appearance to yield to his desires, and demanded leave to go first
forth, and see if her Mistress were busy about any thing, to the end that
they might not be both surprised, which her Master did agree unto, and she
besought him in her absence to put her Hood on his head, and to bolt, that her
Mistress might always hear the noise of the Bolter. This joyfully he
performed, hoping to enjoy that which he demanded. The Chambermaid, who was not
of a melancholic humor, did run unto her Mistress, and said unto her, Come
and see your good Husband, whom I have taught to bolt, to acquit my self of
him. His Wife made all the have she could to behold this new Chambermaid, and
seeing the long Hood on her Husbands head, and the Bolter in his hands, she did
begin to laugh so heartily, and so to clap her hands, that she had much to do
to speak unto him, In good time Honest Maid! What wages shall I give you a
month for your good service? The Husband hearing the voice of his Wife, and
finding he was betrayed, did throw on the ground that which he carried on his
head, and what he held in his hands, to run after the Chambermaid, calling her
Whore a thousand times. And if his Wife had not interposed her self, and
skreened betwixt his passion, and the Chambermaids honest mirth, he had paid
her with his cudgel; But she appeased him to the content of every one, and
after that time they lived together without the least complaint.

Ladies, What think you of this good woman? Did she not do wisely to pass away
her time in mirth, at the pastimes of her Husband? It was no pastime to her
Husband, said Saffredant, to have failed in his Enterprise. I do believe, said
Emarsuite, that he took more pleasure to laugh afterward with his Wife, than
being threescore years of age to play the wanton with his Chambermaid. It would
have been no little perplexity to me, said Simontault, to be taken by my Wife
with such a Kerchief on my head. I have heard it spoken, said Parliament, that
many years are not passed, since your Wife was very like to have taken you in
almost such another habiliment, how strange soever you do seem to make of it,
and that she has lived a discontented life ever since. Content your self with
the fortunes of your own house, said Simontault, without taking thanklesse
pains in seeking after mine. Howsoever, I dare assure you, that my Wife has no
cause at all to complain of me; and although I were such as you report me to
be, yet she could never have the means to perceive it, by reason of the
numerous urgency of so many businesses, which do take up all her employment.
Women of Honor, such as she is, said Longaren, do need no other business, nor
desire any other thing, but only the love of their Husbands, which only can
content them; but they who seek after a Bestial contentment, will never find it
where Honesty does command them. Do you, said Simontault, call it Bestial
contentment, for a woman to desire that of her Husband which does belong unto
her? Longaren made answer to him, I will maintain, that a chaste woman, having
her heart filled with true Love, is more satisfied by being entirely beloved,
than with all the pleasures that the body can desire. I am of your opinion,
said Dagoucin, though the Gallants that be here present, will neither
understand it, nor confess it; for I do verily believe, that if a reciprocal
love does not content a woman, one Musband will never content her; for, not
living according to the honest love of women, she must be possessed with the
insatiable desires of a Beast. Truly, said Oysilla, you do put me in mind of a
great Lady, and most honorably married, who not living in that honest love,
became more sensual than Swine, and more outrageous than Lions. I must entreat
you, Madam, ( said Saffredant) to put an end to the Accounts of this Day, that
you will relate unto us the the Story of it. I cannot do it, said Oysilla, for
two reasons, the first, by reason of the great length of it, and the other
because it is not of our time, although it has been recited by a very credible
Author; And we have sworn to one another to insert nothing into these Novels
which has been written by others. It is true, said Parliament, and I do believe
that I have read it; but because it has been written in old French, and so
long ago that I am almost confident that neither Man nor Woman here present,
besides us two have ever seen it or heard it spoken of, it may well pass for a
Novelty. On that assurance all the Company did entreat her to relate it,
without any respect to the length thereof, because they might yet continue
where they were a full hour before that Vespers did begin. Oysilla therefore at
their request did thus begin.

The Excellent History of the outrageous incontinence of a Duchess, which was
the occasion of her death, as also of the Deaths of two perfect Lovers.
The tenth Novel.
IN the Duchy of Burgundy there lived a Duke who was a most courteous and a
most gallant Prince, and was espoused to a Lady whole beauty so highly did
content him, that he seemed almost to forget the greatness of his condition,
out of a tender regard to please her only, which affection, to outward
appearance, she did reciprocally return.

There was in the Dukes Palace a young Gentleman, accomplished with all the
perfections that could be desired in a Man. He was generally beloved by all,
but especially by the Duke, who had brought him up from his Infancy to attend
upon him next unto his Person, and seeing him so well conditioned, he did love
him most entirely, and gave him the charge of all those affairs which his age
was of a capacity to manage.

The Duchess, who had not the heart of a Woman, nor of a virtuous Princess,
did not content her self with the love which the Duke her Husband did bear unto
her, nor with the good use which she received from him, but oftentimes with too
friendly an eye did look upon this Gentleman, whom she found so agreeable unto
her fancy, that she loved him beyond all reason, and a great trouble it was
unto her, to discover her affection to him, which every minute she endeavored
to do; but for all the temptation of her smiles, for all her sighs, and
passionate regards, he did not seem to understand her: for the young Gentleman,
who altogether studied Virtue, in whose School he was brought up, did not
apprehend the vice of that Lady, which she had so small an occasion to put in
practice: insomuch that the glances, and allurements of this foolish Lady, did
bring unto her no other fruit, but a furious Despair. And this Despair did one
day so overcome her, that forgetting her Sex, and that she was a Woman who
ought to be entreated, and to refuse the Entreaty, a Princess that ought to be
adored, and to disdain her Idolaters, she assumed the boldness of a
transported Woman, to discharge that passion which was insupportable: For her
Husband being gone to his Council, who were assembled for the management of the
great affairs of State, at which this Gentleman, by reason of the inexperience
of his Youth, was not permitted to assist, she made a sign unto him that he
should come unto her, which he did, thinking she had some business wherein to
employ his service; but she leaning on his Arm, as a Lady weary of too much
ease, did take him aside by himself to walk with her alone in the Gallery,
where she said unto him, I do much wonder at you, that being so young, so
lovely, and full of all Graces, and withal being brought up, and living in my
Court, where are so fair a number of young Ladies, that yet you have never been
in love, nor a servant to any of them. And looking on him with the most
gracious eye that possibly she could, she held her peace, to give him leave to
answer. Madam (said he) If I were worthy that your Highness could vouchsafe to
descend so low as to look on me, it would be no occasion of wonder in you, to
observe a man so unworthy as my self, to present his service to a Lady, and to
receive nothing but the disgrace of a repulse. The Duchess hearing his wise
reply, did love him better than before, and did swear unto him, that there was
not a Lady in her Court that should not think her self too much honored in
such a Servant, and assured him that he might well make a trial of it, for
without all question it would fall out unto his honor.

The young Gentleman all this while did hold his eyes down toward the Ground,
not daring to behold her looks, which carried with them heat enough to make the
Ice to melt. As he was about to excuse himself, the Duke sent for the Duchess
to the Council Table, about some business which did concern her, whither she
did go in obedience to his Commands; but she was very sorry that she was
enforced to lose the opportunity to follow the Cause which she had so well
begun to lay open. But the Gentleman seemed not to understand one word what she
had said unto him; whereat she was so perplexed, and troubled, that she knew
not to what to impute the cause of her affliction, but only to the sottish fear
with which she found the Gentleman to be too much abused; Not long afterward,
observing with her self that the Gentleman was so dull that he would not
understand her language, she resolved to regard neither fear not shame, but
plainly to declare her mind unto him, assuring her self, That a beauty so
powerful as her own, could not but be well entertained, but she desired rather
to have had the honor to be entreatted by him; nevertheless, so violent was
her love, that she laid her Honor aside to satisfy her pleasure. And having
tempted him diverse ways to work him up to her own height, and to find his
defires answerable to her own, finding no answer from him that promised the
least hope, she took him one day by the steeve: and said unto him, that she had
a business or great privacy and importance to declare unto him. The Gentleman,
with such reverence and humility as was due unto her, did go along with her
into a deep by Window, to which place she had called him; And looking about
her, when she found that none of her Chamber could descry her, she began with a
trembling voice betwixt Desire and Fear to continue unto him the subject of her
first discourse, reproving him that he had not yet made choice of any Lady in
her Court, assuring him, that whatsoever she was, and in whatsoever degree, she
would assist him in the obtaining of her favor.

The Gentleman being as much amazed as tormented with the importunities of the
Duchess, did make answer to her, Madam, I have so stour a heart, that if I
were once refused of any, I should never again enjoy my self in this World, and
I am so inconsiderable a thing, that there is not a Lady in your Court but
scorns to accept of my service. The Duchess blushing, and thinking that she
had pressed him so much upon it, that he was half overcome, did swear unto him,
that if he thought well of it, she knew that the greatest Lady of the Court,
none excepted, would entertain him with great joy, and that he should receive
an absolute contentment by it. Alas Madam (said he) It cannot be, that any Lady
in your Court should be so unfortunately blinded as to accept me to be her
Servant. The Duchess perceiving that he would not apprehend her, did begin in
some manner to discover her passion to him, and by reason of the fear she had
of the virtue of the Gentleman, she did speak unto him by the way of
interrogation, and said. If Fortune had so much favored you, that it was I my
self that do bear this great good will unto you, what will you say? The
Gentleman who thought he dreamed; and that such a word could not proceed from
the Duchess, did speak unto her with his knees upon the Ground, Madam, since
God has given me the grace to have had your favor, and the favor of the Duke
my Master, I do conceive my self to be the most happy man in the World, for it
was the recompense which I desired for my faithful service, as being obliged
more than any other to lose my life for the service of either of you, being
confident Madam, that the love which you do bear to my Lord the Duke is
accompanied with such a Chastity and greatness, that not only my self, who am
but a Worm of the Earth, but the greatest Prince, and the most excellent man
that can be found in the World, can never infringe the Union betwixt the Duke
my Master, and your self: And for my self he has brought me up from my
Infancy, and made me to be such as I am; Wherefore he has neither Wife, nor
Daughter, nor Sister, nor Mother, for whom I would not rather die than nourish
a thought which shall misbecome a loyal and a faithful Servant. The Duchess
would not permit him to pass any further, but finding that she was in danger
to receive from him a dishonorable denial, she did suddenly break off this
discourse, and said unto him. O obstinate and glorious Fool! who is she who
does entreat thee? You think by reason of your beauty to be beloved by flies in
the Air, but if you had been so presumptuous to have addressed your self to me,
I should have made it apparent to you, that I neither do, nor can love you,
nor will love any other but my Husband. And the discourse which often times I
have had with you has served me only to pass away my time, and to dive into
your thoughts to make my self merry with them, as I use to do with foolish
Lovers.

Madam (said the Gentleman) I both did, and do believe the words you speak. She
without hearing any word more, did immediately repair into her Chamber, and
observing that she was attended with many Ladies, she entered into her Cabinet,
and made so great a lamentation, that it cannot well be represented; for, on
the one side the disappointment in her love did bring upon her a mortal Grief;
and on the other, the Indignation and Despite against her self to have motioned
so fond an enterprise to him, who so wisely answered her Importunities, did put
her into such a fury, that sometimes she was resolved to commit a murder upon
her self, sometimes again she would live to be revenged on him, whom she held
to be her most mortal Enemy.

After she had a long time wept by her self, she counterfeited her self to be
sick, because she would not be at Supper with the Duke, at which the Gentleman
did ordinarily serve. The Duke, who loved his Wife better than he loved
himself, did go to visit her: But she, the better to arrive unto the end at
which she aimed, did say unto him, that she was great with Child, which caused
a rheum to fall upon her eyes, and did put her to great pain. In this manner
there passed three or four days, wherein the Duchess kept her bed, so sad
and melancholy, that the Duke conceived that something else besides her great
Belly, was the occasion of her sickness, which caused him the fourth night to
come to bed unto her, that he might better be informed of the nature of her
Disease; wherefore making as much of her as possibly he could, and perceiving
that she continually did sigh, he said unto her, Sweetheart, You know that I
do bear so much love unto you, as I do to the preservation of my own life, and
that if your life should fail, mine could not long continue; Wherefore, if you
will improve my health and recover your own, tell me, I pray you, what is the
Cause which does make you so much to sigh almost without intermission; for I
believe that such a Malady cannot proceed only from your great Belly.

The Duchess perceiving her Husband to be so kind unto her, as that she could
not have desired him to be more, thinking that now was the time to revenge her
self on the denying Gentleman, she embraced the Duke, and beginning to weep
abundantly, she said unto him, Alas! my Lord, The greatest grief which I have
is, to see you deceived by those, who are so much obliged to maintain your
Honor, and your welfare. The Duke understanding those word^, had a great
desire to know by whom it was she spoke them, and with much importunity did
entreat her without fear to declare unto him all the Truth. She having made
many denyals, the better to color her pretense, did at the last say unto him,
I do not wonder much if Strangers make War on Princes, when those who are most
obliged to them do enterprise so wicked a Deed, that the loss of Goods is
nothing in comparison of it. Sir, I will tell you the Gentleman, (and speaking
those words, she gave him the name of him whom she hated;) He (said she) being
nourished by your own hand, advanced, and treated more like a kinsman, or a
Son, than a Servant, has dared to undertake so cruel, and so wretched an
enterprise, as to procure the loss of the honor of your Wife, in which
consists the honor of your House, and of your Children. And although, for a
long time, he has made many covert Invitations of Allurement, tending to the
Accomplishment of his wicked Design, yet my heart, which has regarded none but
your self, would understand nothing at all, until that at the last he declared
himself by his words. To which I returned such an answer, as my heart and my
chastity did command me; Nevertheless, I have ever since born such a hatred to
him, that I cannot endure to look on him, which is the cause that I have kept
my Chamber, and lost the happiness of your Company, beseeching you that you
will no longer keep any such Servant near unto your Person. For after so great
a crime, he fearing that I may acquaint you with it, may yet commit a greater.
Sir, I have here given you the cause of my affliction, which seems to me to be
so just, that it is worthy you should give a sudden redress unto it.

The Duke, who loved his Wife, and (according to her accusation) did find her
to be much injured, and himself also to be interested in it, and on the other
side loved his Servant, of whose fidelity he had so great experience, that he
could hardly believe this Fable to be a truth, was in a great perplexity, and
being filled with choler and amazement, did command his Servant not to appear
in his presence, but for a certain time to withdraw himself from the Court. The
Gentleman, being altogether ignorant of the occasion, was as much grieved as
possibly could be, being conscious to himself that his uprightness and
fidelity did deserve a far better construction. And being well assured of his
loyalty, and demeanor, he sent one of his Companions to speak unto the Duke,
and to present his Letter to him, most humbly beseeching him, that if by any
false instigation he was removed from his presence, he would be pleased to
suspend his Judgment, until he had been examined, and the truth of the
accusation had been understood, and that he would then find that he had not
given him the least occasion of offense.

The Duke, reading the Letter, did a little rebate the edge of his fury, and
privately sent for him to come into his Chamber to him; the Gentleman being
come, he looked upon him with a furious countenance, and said. I never thought
that the care I taken to bring you up from your infancy as my own Child, should
be turned into a repentance to have so highly advanced you, Since you have
endeavored to bring that upon me, which would be more prejudicial to me than
the loss of my life, and fortunes, in seeking by corrupting the Honor of her,
who is half of my self, to render my House, and my posterlty infamous
throughout all ages; You may well conceive that such an injury does leave such
an impression in my heart, that if it were not for the doubt I entertain,
whether the report be true or no, you had been before this in the bottom of the
Sea, and had in secret received a punishment for that offense which secretly
you would have committed against me. The Gentleman was not much amazed at his
words, for his innocence did cause him to speak with confidence unto him; and
did beseech him that he would be pleased to tell him who was his Accuser, for
such words (said he) ought rather to be justified by the Lance, than by the
tongue. Your Accuser (said the Duke) does bear no other Arms but her own
Chastity, for I assure you, that no other Woman but my own Wife did disclose it
to me, and withal has besought me to take vengeance on you. The poor Gentleman
observing the great malice of the Lady, would not altogether accuse her, but
said unto him, Sir, Madam the Duchess may say what she pleases, and what
already she has spoken, you do know far better than my self, but believe me
Sir, I did never see her out of your company but once, or twice, at the most,
at which time she did not express her self in many words unto me. God has
endued you with as much Judgment, as any Prince that I do know in
Christendom, wherefore, Sir, I beseech you to tell me, if you did ever observe
in me the least Countenance which might beget the least suspicion, for Love is
a Fire which cannot so long he concealed, but it will be sometimes discovered
by those who languish in the same malady. I beseech you Sir, that you would
believe two things in me, the one is, that I am so loyal to you, that if your
Wife were the most beautiful, and the most accomplished Lady in the World, yet
Love should never so much overcome me, as to stain my honor and my fidelity;
the other is, that if she were not your Wife, yet of all the Women which I have
seen, she is that Lady of whom I should be the least amorous, and there are
besides her in your Court many other Ladies on whom more readily I could fix my
fancy.

The Duke began to soften himself into a mercy having heard these words of
truth, and said unto him, I do believe what you have represented to me,
wherefore continue your place in your attendance on me, as you have been
accustomed; for I assure you that if I shall find the truth to be on your side,
I shall love you yet better than ever I have done; and if I shall find to the
contrary, Know that your life does ly in my hands. The Gentleman did humbly
thank him, and did submit himself to all punishment, if he were found guilty.
The Duchess perceiving the Gentleman to continue still in the service of the
Duke, as he was accustomed to do, could not endure it with patience, but said
unto her Husband, It would be no great matter (Sir) if you were poisoned;
because you have more confidence in your mortal Enemies, than in your friends.
He replied, Sweetheart, Torment not your self concerning that affair; for if I
can find that to be true which you have spoken, I do assure you that he shall
not be alive four and twenty hours: but he has sworn so much unto me to the
contrary, (and I my self besides could never perceive any thing by him) that,
without great proof, I cannot believe any thing unto the contrary. In good
truth (Sir) said she, the goodness of your Nature does render his Iniquity the
greater. Would you have a greater proof, than to see a Man of his Condition to
profess love, and to make no noise thereof: You may believe Sir, that amongst
so many Ladies in my Court, so young a Fellow as he is would have found out a
Mistress for himself, were it not for the high Enterprise, that does
altogether take up his fancy, to be a servant unto me; for there was never any
young Man that lived in such a Court as yours, so solitary as this young Man:
neither would he be so, if he had not his heart fixed in so high a place, that
he did content himself only with some vain hope; and because you do entertain a
belief, that he does conceal nothing from you, I must beseech you to put him to
his Oath, to know if he be in love with any one, or no. For if he be in love
with any other, I am content that you do believe him, if not, you may assure
your self that I do speak the Truth.

The Duke did much approve the reasons of his Lady, and walking into the fields
did take the Gentleman along with him, to whom he said, My Wife does still
continue in her opinion, and does allege unto me such reason for it, that it
does cause in me a great suspicion against you; which is, she wonders much that
you being so young, and affable, were never yet in love, as much as can be
known, which makes me to conceive that you nourish that ambitious love of which
she does accuse you, the hope whereof does render you so contented, and does
fill you with so vain a joy, that you cannot think of any other woman; wherefore
I do entreat you, as a Friend, and command you, as your Master, to tell me
plainly, if you are, or ever have been, in love, or no. The poor Gentleman,
although he would have delayed to give an answer to this unexpected
Interrogatory, and would have excused his affection, which, that no other might
find it out, he had laid up in the very center of his heart, was now
constrained, to satisfy the great Jealousy of the Duke his Master, to swear
unto him, That it is true enough that he was in love with a Lady, whose
perfection was such, that the beauty of the Duchess, and of all the Ladies in
her Court, was but foulness and deformity unto her; but he did beseech him,
that he may not be enforced to give unto him her Name, for the obligation
betwixt him and his Sweetheart was such, that who first of them did declare
their love, should absolutely dissolve it. The Duke did promise that he would
press him no more unto it, and was as much contented with the satisfaction
which he had given him, that he did countenance, and advance him more than
before, which the Duchess did very well observe, and finding there was more
than an accustomed privacy betwixt the Duke her Husband, and the Gentleman, she
did use her utmost endeavor to understand the occasion of it, which the Duke
could not be persuaded to reveal unto her, whereupon her fruitful vengeance did
beget another jealousy, and she besought the Duke to command the Gentleman to
impart unto him the name of that Sweetheart of his, assuring him that it was a
mere invention, and the best way he could contrive to gain credit to his words,
but if he would not name who it was whom he esteemed to be so beautiful, he was
the most foolish Prince in the World if he did believe what he professed.

The poor Duke, whose opinion his Wife turned, now on this side, and now on
that, as she her self pleased, did take the poor Gentleman to walk the other
turn with him in the Fields again, where he told him that he was in a far
greater perplexity than before, for he much doubted that he made him but an
excuse to keep him off from finding out the truth, which did torment him more
than ever. Therefore like a Prince he mingled his Authorities with his
entreaties, and did desire and command him to declare unto him, who it was whom
so much he loved. The poor Gentleman did beseech him that he would be mindful
of his promise, and not enforce him to commit so great fault against her whom
so entirely he affected, as now to break his promise which for a long time he
had so faithfully observed, and to lose in one minute that secrecy, which for
seven years and more he had kept locked up in a religious safety, affirming
that he had rather suffer death, than do such a wrong to her who was so
faithful unto him. The Duke perceiving he would not acquaint him who it was,
did enter into so strong a jealousy, that with a furious countenance he did
say unto him, Take your choice of two things, either plainly to tell me who it
is whom you do love above all the World, or to depart presently into
banishment out of the lands of my Authority, upon this penalty, that if I find
you here eight days after this, I will undoubtedly put you to some cruel death.
If ever grief did possess the heart of a loyal Servant, it now did seize upon
the heart of this Gentleman, who might well say Angustiae sunt mihi Vndique for
finding on the one side that if he should speak the truth, he should lose his
Mistress, if it should come unto her knowledge, because he had failed in his
promise, and on the other side, if he should not confess it, he should be
banished from the Country in which he was brought up, and where his Mistress
lived, and never should have the means to see her again, he was so oppressed
with sorrow, that a cold sweat did seize upon him, as it does on one who
overcome by the extremity of grief, does find the last minute of his life
approaching. The Duke looking upon him, and perceiving how much his countenance
did change, did Judge (whatsoever he pretended to the contrary) that he had no
other Mistress but only his Wife, which was the reason (because on the sudden
he could not think on the name of any other) he did endure that passion.
Wherefore he did speak very churlishly unto him. If that which you have
represented to me were true, you would not find such a difficulty in it as to
declare unto me her name, but I believe the guilt of your offense does secretly
torment you. The Gentleman being much provoked with these words, and enforced
also by the love which he did bear unto the Duke, did determine with himself to
speak the truth, being consident that his Master was a Man so full of Virtue,
that he would not for any thing reveal the secret: Wherefore kneeling down
before him with hands joined, which he did lift up unto him, he said; Sir, The
obligation which I do bear unto you is such, that it does prevail upon me more
than any fear of Death, for I do see you deluded by such a fancy and false
opinion of me, that I am determined to confess that, which no torment could
draw from me, beseeching you for the honor of God, to swear unto me upon the
faith of a Prince, and of a Christian, that you will never reveal the secret,
which (since you are so pleased) I am constrained to speak unto you.

The Duke immediately by all the Oaths that he could devise, did oblige
himself unto him, that he would never discover the least notion thereof to any
Creature in the world, neither by word, deed, nor countenance. The Gentleman
holding himself assured on the multiplied Oaths of so virtuous a Prince, did
begin to lay the foundation of his misfortune to come, in confessing to him,
Sir, It is now seven years, since having known your Niece to be a Widow, I
have endeavored to obtain her favor; And because I was not of a birth great
enough to espouse her, I was contented that she was pleased to acknowledge me
for her Servant; And God has hitherto permitted, that our Love has been so
wisely managed, that neither Man or Woman, but only She, and my self, has
known any thing of it, unless it be You, into whose hands I do commit my Life,
and Honor, beseeching you that you would keep it private, and to have Madam
your Niece in no less esteem than heretofore: for I do believe, that under
Heaven there is not a more accomplished, or a chaster Creature. Who was a glad
Man now? It was the Duke; for knowing the incomparable Beauty of his Niece, he
did not doubt, but that she was more agreeable to him than his Wife; but being
not able to collect how so great a Mystery could be carried without a Second,
he did entreat him to acquaint him, how he could come to the sight of her. The
Gentleman thereupon did declare unto him, That the Chamber of his Niece did
butt forth into the Garden, and on that night when he was to wait upon her, the
little door of the Garden was left open, through which he came, and walked on
foot, until he heard a little Dog bark, which the young Lady his Niece had
left on purpose in the Garden when all her Women were gone out of it, and that
on the barking of that Dog, being presently admitted, he had the happiness to
discourse with her all that night, and at parting they would agree upon the
night when he was to return again, wherein, without making any dilatory
excuses, they would never fail to meet.

The Duke, who was the most curious Man in the World, and who in his Youth knew
wisely enough how to carry his Loves, as well to satisfy his suspicion, as to
understand the particulars of so strange a story, did entreat him to take him
along with him the next time that he did address himself unto her, and to give
him then not the respects of a Master, but of a Companion. The Gentleman,
seeing the Duke did so press him, did accord unto it, of which the Duke was
more glad, than if he had gained a Kingdom; and dissembling that he would he
for a hight or two in his Wardrobe, did cause two horses to be made ready, the
one for himself, and the other for the Gentleman, and they traveled far that
evening to arrive at his Nieces house. The Gentleman caused the Duke to enter
into the Garden at the little Door, and desired him, that entering into the
house, he would be pleased to stay behind the skreen, where he might perceive
if he had spoke the truth unto him, or nor.

They were no sooner entered into the Garden, but immediately a little Dog did
bark, and the Gentleman did go directly toward the house, and the young Lady
did not fail to meet him in the way; and having saluted, and unbraced him, she
said unto him, That she was afraid he had been sick, it was so long since she
last saw him; and speaking those words, they entered into the House, and the
Duke privately did follow them in the dark, for there was no light in the Room,
and understanding the whole Discourse of their chaste love, he was satisfied
beyond his desires, and made no long stay there; for the Gentleman told the
Lady, that he was constrained to return sooner than he was accustomed to do,
because that morning the Duke did intend very early to go on hunting, and of
necessity he must attend upon him.

The Lady, who loved honor more than pleasure, would not stay him, for the
greatest thing which she esteemed in her chaste and honest love, was that it was
kept secret from the observation of the World. Much about one of the clock in
the morning the Gentleman departed, and the Duke undiscovered by the young Lady
did go out before him, and they took horse, and returned from whence they
came, and oftentimes in the way the Duke did swear unto the Gentleman, that he
had rather die a thousand times, than reveal the Mystery of his Love, and he
afterward did so much respect him, and did put such a confidence in him, that
there was none in all the Court that was in greater favor. The Duchess was
much incensed at it, and continued her complaints against the Gentleman. But
the Duke did forbid her to speak any more unto him concerning that Subject, for
he was thoroughly satisfied with the truth thereof, and said, that he was so
contented thereat, that he did believe the Lady whom he loved was more amiable
than her self. That word did leave such an impression, and did so deeply wound
her heart, that she fell into a malady greater than before, The Duke did daily
resort unto her to visit her, and to comfort her, but it was impossible,
unless he would disclose unto her who that Lady was who was so much beloved;
And she so much importuned him to know who it was, that the Duke going out of
the Chamber did say unto her, if you will not let me be at quiet, I must depart
from you. Those words did increase the malady of the Duchess, who pretended
that she did feel her child to stir within her, at which the Duke was so glad,
that to manifest his love and joy he did go to bed to her.

And making use of that minute in which she found him most amorous of her, she
turned from him to the other side, and said unto him, Sir, since you bear no
love to me, nor to the Infant with which I go, let us perish both together.
And with those words she poured forth such an abundance of toars, and made such
a lamentation, that the Duke was much afraid that she would lose the fruit of
her Womb. Wherefore taking her in his Arms he desired her to acquaint him with
what she did desire, and assured her that he would conceal nothing from her. Ah
Sir, said she, and sobbed as she spoke, what hope have I that you will do any
thing for me that is difficult, when you deny me the most easy, and the most
reasonable request in the World, which is to tell me who is the Sweetheart of
the most ungrateful Servant you ever had? I did once believe that you and I had
but one heart: But now I find that you do use me as a stranger; for those
secrets which ought to be revealed unto me, are by you concealed and kept from
me, as if I were your greatest Enemy. Call Sir to mind, how many secrets, and
businesses of the greatest importances have you imparted to me, and which of
them have you ever understood that I have disclosed. You have made so great an
experience of my good will equal unto yours, that you ought not mistrust me,
for I am more yours than my own; And if peradventure you have taken an Oath
that you will not reveal the secret of the Gentleman to any, in acquainting me
with it you cannot break your Oath; for I neither am, nor can be any other than
your self. I have you in my heart, I do hold you in my arms, I carry your
Infant in my womb, in whom you live again, and yet I cannot enjoy your love, as
you have mine; but the more loyal and faithful I am to you, the more cruel and
perverse you are to me, that a thousand times a day I do desire by a sudden
Death, to deliver your Infant from such a Father, and my self from such a
Husband, which I hope shortly to perform; because I do find that you prefer an
unfaithful Servant before your Wife, and such a Wife as I am to you, and before
the life of a Mother, and to the fruit of her womb, which is so little regarded
by you, being not able to obtain that of you which I desire to know. Speaking
those words, she embraced, and kissed her Husband, wetting his face with her
tears, and breathed forth such sighs, that the poor Prince, who was afraid to
lose his Wife and his Child at once, did determine with himself to acquaint her
with the truth; but withal he did swear unto her, That if she revealed it to
any creature in the world, she should be sure to die, and by no other hand but
his own. To which she condiscended, and accepted of the punishment. Whereupon
the poor deceived Husband did account unto her all that he had seen, from the
beginning to the end; whereat she seemed to be very much contented, although
her heart was surprised with an intolerable anguish. Nevertheless, for fear of
the Duke, she did dissemble her passion as well as possibly she could.

Not long after the Duke made a great Feast at his Court, to which he invited
all the Ladies of the Country, and amongst others, his Niece, where Dinner
being ended, Dancing did begin, and every Lady did endeavor to set forth her
self in the best manner that she could; but the Duchess, who was tormented to
behold the great beauty, and the gracefulness of her Niece, could take no
Delight an all, much less could she forbear from making her spiteful fury to
appear; For after that Dancing was ended, having called all the Ladies
together, she caused them to sit down near unto her, and did begin to Discourse
unto them concerning the Affairs of Love; And observing that her Niece was
silent, and did speak nothing at all, she said unto her, with a heart inflamed
with Jealousy, And you my fair Niece, Is it possible that your Beauty can be
without either Friend or Servant? Madam, (she replied) My Beauty looks not
after such a purchase, for, since the Death of my Husband, I desire no other
Sweet-hearts; but only his children, with which I am well contented. Fair
Niece, Fair Niece, the Duchess replied to her in an extreme Indignation, Fair
Niece, Fair Niece. There is no Love so secret, but may be discovered, nor
little Dogs so well taught and brought up to the hand, whose Barking may not
be understood. Ladies, I leave it to you to imagine, how great a sorrow on
those words surprised the heart of the poor young Lady, finding a thing that
had been kept so close, to be so openly declared to her Dishonor. Her Honor so
carefully guarded, and so unfortunately lost, did greatly torment her, but most
of all did the strong suspicion she entertained, that her Friend had failed in
his promise; which she thought he never would have done, unless for the Love
of some Lady more beautiful than her self, to whom the extremity of his Love
did foolishly persuade to declare this effect.

Her Virtue nevertheless was so great, that for all this apprehension she made
no appearance of discontent, and smiling, did make answer, that she did not
understand the language of Beasts, and in this wise dissimulation her heart was
so overburthened with sorrow, that she was constrained to rise up, and passing
by the Chamber of the Duchess she entered into a Wardrop, where the Duke
walking in the Gallery did behold her to go in. When the poor Lady thought she
was in a place where none could either so or hear her, she did throw her self
upon the bed with so great a violence, that a damosel who was sat in a corner
of the room to sleep, was awakened at it, and did rise up to see who it might
be. But finding it was the Niece of the Duke, who thought she had been alone,
she durst not speak unto her, but gently listened to the complaint she made. The
poor Lady with a voice half dead did begin in these words to lament her self. O
unfortunate that I am, What are the words which I have heard? what an arrest of
death have I understood by them? What a sentence to condemn me have I received?
O thou the most beloved that ever was, Is this the reward of my chastity, and
of my honest and virtuous love? O my heart, why did thou make so dangerous a
choice, to take for the most loyal, the most unfaithful, for the most honest,
the most crafty, for the most secret, the loudest Detractor in the World. Woe is
me: Is it possible, that a thing hid from the Eyes of all Men, should be
revealed to Madam the Duchess. Alas poor little Dog, the only means of my
long and virtuous love, it is not thou that have discovered me, but he who has
a voice more barking than a Dog, and a heart more ungrateful than any beast. He
it is, who contrary to his oath and promise has revealed the happy life, which
without any prejudice to any, we have a long time lived. O my friend, my
friend, whose only love is entered into my heart, with whose life my own has
been woven, must it now come to pass, that in declaring you my mortal Enemy,
my Honor must be carried away by the winds, my body crumble into ashes, and my
Soul for ever depart to its last place of residence? What, was the beauty of
the Duchess so enchanting, that it has had the power to transform you, as
sometimes had that of Circe? Has she made you of virtuous, to become vicious,
of good, wicked, of a Man, a Beast, a cruel Beast. O my Friend, my Friend,
although you have failed in your promise made to me, yet I will keep my promise
made to you, which is, that I will never see you again after the divulgation of
our Love, and being no longer able to live without your presence, I do
willingly accord to the extreme sorrow which I feel, and for which I will
provide no remedy, neither by Reason, nor Physic, for Death only shall put an
end to it, which shall be more pleasant to me, than to continue in the World
without a Friend, without Honor, and without Contentment. Neither Death, nor
the War has deprived me of my Friend; neither Lust, nor Rage have taken from
me my Honor; neither Deviation, nor Demerit of my own, has made me to lose my
Contentment: but the cruelty of treachery, which has caused the most obliged
of all Men to become the most ungrateful. Alas! Madam the Duchess, What
pleasure was it unto you, when by mockery you did upbraid me with my little
Dog? Go on as you have begun, and continue to delight your self with that
happiness, which does belong to me alone. You make your sport at her, who by
wisely concealing, and who by virtuously loving, did promise to her self to be
exempted from all mockery. O how has this word contracted my heart? How has
it made me to look red with shame, and pale with jealousy? Woe is me, my heart,
my heart, I do feel you can hold out no longer, Love, unadvisedly or
treacherously made known, does consume you with Fire; Jealousy, and the Injury
you have received, do freez you with Ice, and with Grief and Indignation kills
you, not permitting the least consolation to arrive. Alas for thee, O my Soul!
who by too much adoring the Creature, have forgot the Creator. Thou must return
again into the hands of him, from whom vain Love has ravished thee. Take
Confidence, O my Soul, thou shall find God a better Father, than thou have
found him a Friend, for whom thou so often have forgot God. O my God, my
Creator, who art the true and only Friend, by whose Grace the love which I have
born unto my Friend has been stained with no Vice, unless by too much loving
him, I beseech thee of thy infinite mercy to receive the Soul, and Spirit of
her, who does truly repent that she has so much disobeyed thy first, and most
just Commandment. And for the merit of him whose Love is incomprehensible, be
pleased to excuse that fault, which too much love has caused me to commit; for
in Thee alone I have perfect Confidence: And adieu my false Friend, whose Name,
without the Effect, has broken my Heart.

Having spoke those words, she did fall down from the Bed upon the Ground, and
her color waxed pale, and her lips blew; and an universal coldness seized on
every part of her Body. At that instant the Gentleman who did love her came
into the hall, and seeing the Duchess dancing with the other Ladies, looked
every where up and down where his Mistress was, and not finding her, he did
repair into the Chamber of the Duchess, near unto which he found the Duke
walking in the Gallery, who, conjecturing what his thoughts were, did whisper
him in the ear, and said, Your Sweetheart is gone into yonder Wardrobe, I am
afraid she is not well. The Gentleman demanded of him, that he would be pleased
to give him leave to wait upon her, to which the Duke was easily entreated. As
soon as he was entered into the Wardrobe, he found that she was even ready to
breath forth the last breath of her life, and falling down on his knees, he
embraced her, and said unto her, O my dear Love, How do you do? What, will you
forsake me? The poor Lady hearing the voice which so well she knew, did begin a
little to recover her color, and opening her eyes, she looked steadfastly on
him who was the occasion of her Death. But so looking on him, Love and Despite
did so violently increase upon her, that with a pitiful sigh she rendered her
Soul to God. The Gentleman, more dead than she that was dead, did demand of the
Damosel, How that Extremity seized upon her? who all along did account unto him
the words which she had heard her speak; whereupon he immediately perceived,
that the Duke had revealed the Secret to the Duchess, and was transported
with so great a fury, that, embracing the Body of his Sweetheart, he did along
time bedew it with his tears, and at last said, Woe is me! the most treacherous,
most wicked, and the most unfortunate Man in the world. How is it come to pass
that the punishment of my Treason is not fallen on my self, but on her who is
innocent? O why did Heaven spare me? Why did not Thunder check my Tongue in
that hour, when I first revealed our most secret, and most virtuous Love? Why
did not the Earth open her self? Why did it not devour this unadvised Breaker
of his Faith? Be thou punished, O my tongue, as was the tongue of the rich
Glutton in Hell: O my heart, be thou perpetually torn in pieces by Eagles, as
was the heart of Titius. O Dear Sweetheart! the most unfortunate misfortune of
all misfortunes is befallen me. Thinking to have preserved you, I have lost
you; thinking to see you live a long time with content, I embrace you
discontented, and dead. O thou the most loyal, and the most faithful Woman
that ever was, I shall by all be condemned to be the most inconstant, disloyal,
and the most unfaithful man in the world. I might complain of the Duke, in
whose promise I so much trusted, hoping by that to give a longer continuance to
our happy life, but alas I might know, that no man could keep my secret better
than my self. The Duke had more reason to impart it unto his Wife, than I to
impart it unto him. I can accuse none but my self of the greatest disloyalty
that ever was committed by a Lover, I had better by far be thrown into the
River, accordingly as the Duke did threaten, that thou my dear friend might
be preserved alive, and I gloriously might have died in observing the laws
which true love commands, but breaking them I remain alive, and thou who most
perfectly did love art dead. Thy heart so pure and undefiled, could not without
death endure to understand the Vice which was in me your friend. O my God,
wherefore did thou create me a Man, having a love so light, and a heart so
ignorant? Why did not thou rather create me a little dog, who so faithfully
did know to serve his Mistress. Alas little Dog, the joy which thy barking
brought unto me is now turned into perpetual mourning, because by my means
another was admitted to hear thy voice. But so it is dear friend, that neither
the Love of the Duchess, nor of any Woman in the World has caused me to
change my affections, although she oftentimes has importuned me to it. But
ignorance overcame me, thinking for ever to preserve your Love; but this
ignorance cannot excuse me, for I have revealed the secret of my friend, I have
falsified my promise, which is the only cause that I see you dead before my
eyes. Shall death be less cruel to me than to your self; who only for Love
have put an end to your innocent life? I must believe, shall I believe that
death will not vouchsafe to touch my unfaithful and accursed heart, for a
dishonorable life, and the memory of my loss through my own default, is more
insupportable than ten thousand deaths. Woe is me my friend! If any one either
through malice ^r misfortune had been so cruel as to kill you, I should readily
have put my hand upon my Sword to have revenged you: It is no reason therefore
that I should pardon the murderer who was the occasion of your death, and by a
more unrighteous act than to have killed you with a Sword. If I knew any more
wicked Executioner than my self, I would desire him to see Justice performed on
your treacherous friend. O Love! By the ignorance of loving I have offended
thee, and wilt not thou relieve me as thou did her, who inviolately did keep
all thy Laws. Is it nor reason that by the like honest means I do end my life?
It is, and most reasonable it is that it be done by my own hand, and since with
my tears I have bathed your face, and with my Tongue I have required pardon of
you, nothing now remains but that with my own hand I do render my body like
unto yours, and that my Soul do follow wheresoever yours is gone before me,
knowing that a virtuous and an honest love can have no end, either in this
world, or in the World to come. And immediately rising from the body, as a man
transported, and out of his sense, he drew his Sword, and fixing the pummel of
it against the Wall, and the point of it against his Breast, he with great
violence did drive it quite through his body, and falling down he took his
Sweetheart in his arms, and did kiss and imbace her with such affection, that
he seemed to be more surprised by love than by death. The Damosel observing him
to draw his Sword, did immediately run forth to cry out for help. The Duke
hearing the cry, and doubting some sad accident had befallen those whom he most
entirely loved, was the first that came into the Wardrop, and beholding this
lamentable spectacle he endeavored to take off the Gentleman from the body of
the dead Lady, if it were possible to save him, but he held his Sweetheart so
fast in his arms, that he could not sever him from her with all the strength he
had, until he was quite dead himself. Nevertheless, understanding that the
Duke did speak unto him, and demanded who was the occasion of it, he did lift
up his head, and looking furiously upon him, he made answer, Your Tongue (Sir,)
and my own, and bowing down his head again, he immediately dyed, his face being
close joined to that of his Friends.

The Duke desiring to be thoroughly informed with all the particulars of this
Tragedy, did command the Damosel to declare at large unto him, whatsoever she
had seen or heard, which she did, all along, without sparing any thing;
whereupon the Duke perceiving that he was the Original of all this Evil, did
throw himself upon the two dead Lovers, and with great Lamentation, craving
pardon of them for his offense, he oftentimes did kiss them, and rising from
them in a fury, he drew out the sword from the dead body of the Gentleman, And
as a wild Boar being wounded by a Lance does run with resistlesse violence at
him who made the thrust, so the Duke did address himself to her who had
wounded him quite through his Soul. He found her, dancing in the Hall, and more
frolic by far than she was accustomed to be, conceiving that in some measure
she had revenged her self upon the Niece of the Duke. In the middle of the
Dance the Duke did lay hold on her, and said unto her, you promised not to
reveal the Secret upon the forfeit of your life; And your life shall answer for
your trespass, and speaking those words, he took her by her Headgeer, and
sheathed the sword in her Body, at which all the Company were so amazed, that
they conceived the Duke was bereaved of his Senses.

Having thus put a violent period to the Life of his Duchess, he called
together his Friends, and his Servants, and did declare unto them the
lamentable, and most virtuous story of his Niece, and the great Injury that his
Wife had done her, which caused many tears in all the standers by. The Duke
afterward commanded, that his Wife should be buried in an Abbey which he had
founded, and caused a fair Sepulcher to be builded, where the bodies of his
Niece, and of the Gentleman were interred together, and an Epitaph was laid
upon the Monument, declaring the History of their loves, and their Tragical
Deaths. The Duke afterward did undertake a Voyage against the Turks, and God
so prospered him, that he achieved great honors, and gained large Revenues.
And on his Return finding his eldest Son able to manage the Government of his
Estate, he did put on the habit of Religion, in the same Abbey where his Wife
and the two Lovers were buried, where devoutly he passed away the Remainder of
his life.

Ladies, this is the History which you have entreated me to declare unto you,
and which I perceive by your eyes that you have not received without
compassion; From hence methinks we ought to take an Example, to have a care not
to fix too much our affections on men; For how honest and virtuous soever the
love may seem to be in the beginning; yet for the most part it goes off with an
unpleasing Farewell. And moreover you may read, that Saint Paul would not that
married people should set altogether their affections on one another; for by
how much the more our hearts are engaged in a terrestrial Love, by so much the
less they are addicted to the Love of Heaven, and spiritual things, and the
more noble, and the more virtuous the Love is, the more difficult it is to
break the bonds. And this (Ladies) does excite me to entreat you, that every
hour you would demand of God his Holy Spirit, that your hearts may be inflamed
on his Love, and that you may find no difficulty in the hour of Death, to
forsake that which too much in the world you loved. If their love was so
virtuous said Hircan, as you describe it, what was the reason, that it was kept
so secret. Because ( said Parliament) the malice of Men is such, they will not
believe that a great Love, as such as this was, can ever be joined with
honesty, for they judge of virtuous Men and Women according to their own
passions, and for that occasion it is requisite, that if a virtuous Woman does
please to entertain a virtuous Friend, she must discourse secetly with him if
she intends to discourse long with him, for the Honor of a woman is as apt to
be disputed on, for loving according to the Laws of Virtue, as to the unruly
instructions of Vice; for we judge not but only according to appearance. You say
something indeed, said Guebron, but when the secret comes to be revealed, we
judge not oftentimes so bad as there is occasion for. I do confess it in some
cases, said Longaren, and therefore the best course is not to love at all. We
will appeal from that Sentence, said Dagoucin, for if we thought Ladies were
without love, we could wish our selves without life: We understand that they
only live to be beloved, and although it sometimes does fall out, that they do
miss of this love, yet hope does sustain them, and does cause them to perform
a hundred thousand honorable actions until old age does change their honest
desires into more sanctified resolutions. They who would deprive us of the Love
of Women, must take Arms and Honor from Men, and make them all Merchants, and
instead of acts of Chivalry must make it their only business to heap up
riches. If it were not then for Women, said Hircan, you will say that we were
miserable and wretched, as if Men had no hearts but what Women do give unto
them. But I am of a contrary opinion, and do believe that there is nothing
which does more abate the heart of Man than too much to love Women, and to
frequent their conversation. And for that occasion it is, that the Hebrews were
forbid to go unto the wars, in that year wherein they were married, for fear
that the love of the Wife should draw him from those dangers which there he is
bound to undergo. For my own part, said Saffredant, I find no great reason in
that Law, for there is nothing that can make a Man sooner to go out of his
House than to be married, for the Wars without doors are always more grateful
and more tolerable than that within, and I do believe that to give a desire to
men to travel into foreign Countries, and not slothfully to amuse themselves at
their own fires, they ought to marry. It is true, said Emarsuite, that marriage
does take from them all care of their own houses, for being married they trust
altogether to their Wives, and they think on nothing themselves, but on the
purchase of Honor, being confident that their Wives at home will take care
enough for their profit. In whatsoever sense you will render it, said
Saffredant, I am very glad that you are of my opinion. But all this while, said
Parliament, you discourse not of that which is most considerable, which is, why
the Gentleman which was the occasion of this most unhappy accident, did not die
of mere sorrow as well as the young Gentlewoman who was innocent. Nomerfide
made answer to her, It is because that women do love better and more faithfully
than Men. No, said Simontault, It is because the jealousy and the desire of
Women do make them believe that which they have no reason to believe, and the
Wisdom of Men does direct them to seek after the Truth only, which being
rightly understood does show the greatness of their hearts, as is apparent by
this Gentleman, who having understood that he was the occasion of the death of
his Sweetheart, did make it remarkable how much he did love her, without
sparing his own life. Howsoever, said Emarsuite, she died for true love, for
her faithful and loyal heart could not endure to be so unexpectedly betrayed.
It was not Love but Jealousy, said Simontault, which would give no place to
reason; and because she did believe that Evil to be in her friend, which indeed
was not as she thought it was, her death was constrained by an excess of
grief, for it lay not in her power to help it; but the death of her friend was
voluntary and of his own accord, after he knew the injury he had done her. The
Love must needs be great, said Nomerfide, which caused so great a sorrow. You
need not fear at all, said Hircan, that you will ever die of that Fever. And
as much I dare undertake for you ( said Nomerfide) you will never kill your
self after you have known your offense. Parliament, doubting their debate might
prove to her expense, did, smiling, say unto them, It is enough that two
already have been dead for Love, let Love let you two alone; And (hark,) this
is the last time that the Bell rings in to Vespers, Will you go, or no?
Speaking those words, the Company all did rise, and did repair to the Evening
Song, not forgetting in their good prayers the souls of true Lovers, for which
the Monks of their own accord did sing their Hymn De profundis: And afterward
as long as Supper did continue, they had no other discourse, but of Madam Du
Verger, and having for a pretty while passed away their time in such
Conference, they did all retire into their Chambers, and did put an End to the
Accounts of the seventh day.

The End of the seventh Journall.
The Eighth Days Iournal of the Novells of the Queen of NAVARRE.
The Preface.
THe Morning being come, they sent to understand in what a readiness their
Bridge was, and understood that within two or three days it would be finished,
which did nothing please some of the Company, who from their hearts desired
that the Work would last longer, that the contentment might contitinue which
they received in that happy company; And seeing they had but two or three days
at most, they were resolved not to lose that time, and desired Madam Oysilla to
administer unto them the Spiritual pasture of their Souls, as she had been
accustomed to do, which accordingly she did, and held them longer than was
usual; for before that they departed one from another, she desired to put an
end to her readings on Saint John, in which she did so well acquit her self,
that it seemed ^he Holy Ghost full of Love and Sweetness did speak by her
Mouth. And all of them being inflamed with that Holy fire, did repair to hear
high Mass; After Dinner, talking together on the Journal of the Day before,
they began to distrust, that on this day they were not so well able to
discharge their tasks; wherefore, the better to prepare themselves, they did
every one retire into their own Chambers, until the hour came that they were
to go from their Chamber into the Fields, to deliver one by one their accounts
there upon the green carpets of the grass, where already they found that the
Monks were come, and, behind the neighboring hedge, had taken their places in
the expectation of them. When every one of them were sat, It was demanded
amongst them, Who should begin? Saffredant said, You have given me the honor
to begin two Journals; It appears to me that we should wrong the Ladies, if one
of them should not begin this. Madam Oysilla replied, we are like then to stay
long enough, for ought that I can see, before we can agree upon the person; for
my part (said Dagoucin) if the question had been propounded to me, I should
have given my voice again to Saffredant; And I (said Nomerfide) should have
given mine to Parliament; for I am so much accustomed to obey, that I know not
how to command; All the Company did agree to what Nomerfide did say, and
Parliament did thus begin, Ladies, Our Accounts hitherto delivered, have been so
full of gravity, that I could wish the Accounts of this day might be as full of
delight, to which they all gave consent, and Parliament did begin.

THE NOVELLS Of Queen MARGARET.
A woman being sick, and at the point of death, did grow into such a passion
seeing her Husband did kiss her Chambermaid, that by the Extremity of her Rage
she was restored to her health.
The first Novel of the Eighth days Account.
IN the City of Amboise there lived a Sadler whose name was Borihaudier, who
was Sadler to the Queen of Navarre; He was a Man, of whose Nature if one might
judge by the complexion of his face, that he was a greater Servant to Bacchus,
than to the Priests of Diana. He had espoused a Woman of good fortunes, and
good reputation, and who governed her Family, and Children very discreetly,
whereat her Husband was much contented. One day it was told him that his Wife
was fallen very sick on the sudden, and was in great danger of Death, whereat
he seemed to be as sorrowful as possibly a man might be, and in great
diligence did make have to her relief, he found her in that desperate
condition, that she had more need of the Priest to confess her, than of the
Physician to cure her, and therefore he made for her the greatest lamentation
in the world; And the better to represent it, he spoke faintly, and with a
hollow accent in the throat, as did the dying woman his Wife, and that Painter
must be a good workman, who could lively set forth the sadness of his look and
countenance. After that he had done her all the services that possibly he
could, she commanded that a Crucifex should be brought unto her; which the good
man perceiving, he did cast himself upon the bed, and thinking his Wife past
all hopes of Recovery, he cried out, and fumbling with his tongue, did
expostulate, O God! what shall I do, I shall lose my poor Wife, what shall
become of me wretched and unhappy man? with diverse other complaints. At the
last, when he perceived that there was no body in the Chamber but his dying
Wife, and a young Chambermaid, beautiful enough, and in good liking, he called
her softly to him, and said unto her, Sweetheart, I am even dying my self, to
see thy Mistress to be a dying Woman, I know not well what to say, or what to
do, but only to recommend my self to thee, and to desire thee to take care of
my house and Children: Here, take the keys which are hanging by my side, and
look well to my Household, for I shall not be able to look after them any more.

The poor Girl being touched with compassion to hear those words, did comfort
him what she could, and did beseech him that he would not fall into so great a
Despair; for if she must lose her Mistress, she hoped she should not lose her
good Master also. He made answer to her, Sweetheart, it is impossible, for I
find my self to be but a dying Man. See how the cold sweat stands upon my Brow,
put your Cheek unto mine, and your Lip to my Lip, And speaking those words, he
did thrust his hand into her Breast, whereat the Maid begun to make some
difficulty, but he desired her to put away all fear, for if she hoped for his
recovery, she must come nearer to him, and with those words he did take her in
his Arms, and did throw her on the bed. His Wife who had no other Company but
the Crucifix, and the Holy water, and had not spoken in two days before, did
begin with her weak voice to cry out as loud as possibly she could. Ah Ha! what
do you do? I am not dead as yet; and threatening them with her hand, she said
unto them, You wicked Creatures, I am not yet dead.

Her Husband and the Chambermaid hearing of her voice, did immediately rise,
but she was so extremely incensed against them, that her choler consumed all
the moisture of her Catarrhe, by the abundance whereof she before ratled in the
throat, and not colud speak a word, but now she did give them all the
opprobrious terms that possibly she could devise. And from that minute she
began to recover, and perpetually afterward did reproach her Husband for the
little love he did bear unto her.

By this Ladies you may observe the Hypocrifie of Men, and that for a little
pleasure they will forget all the pains and the sorrows that their Wives
endure. What will you say, said Hircan, if he heard it spoken, that is was the
only remedy that his Wife could possibly have for her recovery, for seeing that
by his good usage he could not mend her, he would make an experience if the
contrary could do any good upon her, of which it appears he made an excellent
proof; And I do much wonder that you being a Woman should be so unadvised as to
declare against the Condition of your Sex who amend more by spite than love.
Without all doubt, said Longaren, such a despite would cause me not only to
come out of my Bed, but of my Grave also to be revenged on such a Husband. What
wrong, said Saffredant, did he do her, to comfort himself a little, after he
thought that she was dead, For it is known well enough that the bond of
Matrimony does continue no longer than life, and the knot is then untyed. But
how untyed? said Oysilla, the obligation of the Oath is of no effect any more,
but a good heart would always preserve the obligation of love. He had quickly
enough laid aside his mourning, who could not attend until his Wife had passed
away her last breath.

But that which I find most strange, said Nomerfide, is that seeing both death
and the Cross before his eyes, he could obey the Temptation to offend God. A
goodly reason, said Simontault, you would not wonder then to see a folly
committed, provided it were far from the Church or the Church yard. Nomerfide
made answer, You may be as prodigal of your mocks as you will, but so it is
that the meditation of death will cool the heart how young soever it be. I
should be of your opinion, said Dagoucin, if I had not heard the contrary
spoken to a Princess. If you will account the Story unto us, said Parliament, I
will give you my voice. Whereupon Dagoucin began in this manner.

The continual Repentance of a Nun having lost the Flower of her Virginity
neither by force or love.
The second Novel.
IN one of the best Cities of the Kingdom of France next unto Paris, there was
an Hospital richly founded, that is to say with a Covent of fifteen or sixteen
religious Nuns, and in another part of ^he house not far from it, there was a
Prior and seven or eight Monks who every day said the Service, as the Nuns did
only their Pater-nofters, and the Hours of our Lady, because they were to be
employed in the attendance of those who were sick. There dyed one day a poor
man, where all the Religious women assembled themselves, and having used all
the Remedies that possibly they could for the Recovery of his health, they sent
for one of the Monks to confess him; and because they did observe that he did
grow weaker and weaker, they did give him the Unction, and not long afterward
he became speechless: But because he was a long time passing away, and did
make as though he did hear, although he could not speak, every one of the Nuns
did endeavor to give him the best exhortations that possibly they could, in
which good work they so long continued, that at the last they were all weary,
for seeing that night approached, and that he was long a dying, they did go to
bed one after another, and none stayed to attend the hour of his departure, or
to bury, his Body being dead, but one of the youngest Nuns, and one of the
Monks, whom she feared more than the Prior himself, or any other, by reason of
the great austerity which he used, as well in his conversation as his words,
who when they had a pretty while cried JESUS in the ear of the poor Man, they
knew for certain that he was dead, wherefore these two without any other
assistance did put him into the Grave.

Exercising this last work of Charity, the Religious Man began to discourse of
the misery of this life, and of the happiness and the glory of the life to
come, and in this devout discourse they did continue till Midnight. The poor
young Nun did lend a most attentive ear to his devout exhortations, and looked
on him, the tears trickling down her eyes, in which he took so great a
pleasure, that talking to her of the life to come, he did begin to embrace her,
as if he had a great desire to carry her at that instant in his arms directly
unto Paradise. The poor Girl listening to his Discourse, and esteeming him to be
the most devout, and the uprightest man in all the Priory, durst not refuse
him, which the wicked Monk observing, in talking to her of God, did perform the
work which the Devil on the sudden had put into his heart; (for before there
was never the least motion of any love betwixt them) The Monk assured her, that
a Secret Sin was not punished; and that two persons not bound in Matrimony
could not offend, when no Scandal did arise from thence; and therefore to avoid
all danger of Scandal, he advised her, that she should confess her self unto
none but unto him; And thus they departed, and she going first out of doors,
passing by the Chapel of our Lady, did go in to say her Devotions as she was
accustomed to do, but when she began to say, Virgo Maria, she remembered that
she had lost that Title of Virginity, without force, or love, but only by a
sottish fear; whereupon she did begin to weep so abundantly, as if she would
have melted her self all into water. The Monk did hear her sighs and
complaints, and doubting of her conversion by which he might have lost his
pleasure, did dissuade her from it, and said unto her, That if she was troubled
in Conscience for what she had done, she should confess her self unto him. The
foolish Nun thinking to satisfy God, did confess her self unto him, who gave
her no other penitence, but did swear unto her, That she did not sin at all to
love him, and that a little holy water could wash away the stain of such a
venial Trespass. She trusting in him more than in God, at the end of a certain
time did return to him again to obey him in what he desired; insomuch that she
was great with Child, whereat she was so extremely sorrowful, that she desired
the Prioresse not to suffer that Monk to come again into the Monastery, knowing
that he was so subtle, and so serpentine, that he would prevail upon her to
believe what he pleased. The Prioresse and the Prior who did agree very well
together, did both mock at her, and told her that she was big enough to defend
her self from a Man. At the last in a great consternation of mind, and stung
with the remorse of Conscience, she demanded leave of them to go to Rome, for
she thought that if she could but confess her Sin at the feet of the Pope, she
should recover her virginity. To this desire both the Prior and the Prioress
did very readily agree, for they had rather that (against the Rule) she should
be a Pilgrim, than continue a Recluse, and in so troubled a condition of mind;
Wherefore fearing that her despair would cause her to reveal the life which
they did lead in that Monastery, they gave her money to satisfy for the
charges of her Journey. But God so pleased, that being at Lions, one Evening
after Vespers in Saint John's Church, where Madam the Duchess of Alencon, who
has been since Queen of Navarr, did walk in private to exercise her Devotions,
with three or four of her Women who were on their Knees before the Crucifix,
she heard some body to go up the stairs, and by the light of the Lamp did
perceive that it was a Nun, And the better to listen to her Devotions, she did
retire her self to the Corner of the Altar. The Nun who thought she was alone,
kneeled down, and beating her self with her hand on the Breast in the
manifestation of her contrition for her fault, did weep so abundantly, that it
was pity to see her, and with her hands lifted up repeated only these words, O
my God have mercy upon me a Sinner. The Duchess, the better to understand who
she was, did come more near, and said unto her, My Friend, what are you? whence
do you come? and who brought you to this place? The poor Nun who did not know
her, did make answer, Woe is me (my friend) my misfortune is so great that I
have no recourse but unto God only, whom I do beseech to vouchsafe unto me the
means that I may speak to Madam the Duchess of Alencon, for to her alone will
I declare my business, being confident that if there be any redress for such a
miserable Creature as my self, she will grant it to me. Friend (said the
Duchess to her) you may speak as confidently unto me as unto her, I am one of
her gratest friends. Pardon me (said the Nun) none but her self only shall
understand my secret. Whereupon the Duchess said unto her, that she might
speak freely, for she had found her whom she demanded. The poor Nun did
prostrate her self at her feet, and having wept a long time, she gave her the
whole account of what already I have expressed unto you, whereupon the
Duchess did comfort her so well, that exhorting her to repentance for her
misdeed, she took from her quite the resolution of going to Rome, and sent her
back to the Prioresse, with a strict charge to entertain her, and with Letters
to the Bishop of that place to take order for the expulsion of that scandalous
Monk, who having abused the Body of the Nun, did afterward most petulantly
upbraid her, and caused her to depart the Covent.

I received this Acount from the Duchess her self, by which (Ladies) you may
understand, that the Rule of Nomerfide is not proper to all sorts of Persons;
for these two both touching aed burying the dead were nevertheless at the same
time touched and overcome with infirmities.

This was an invention, said Hircan, which I believe was never practiced
before, to speak of death, and at the same instant to do the works of life. It
is not, said Oysilla, any work of life to sin, for we all know well enough that
sin produces death. You may believe, said Sassredant, that at that time
neither the Monk nor the Nun had the least thought of that Divinity, but as the
Daughters of Lot, having made their Father drunk, did think by that means to
preserve human Nature, so this Monk and the Nun would repair that which death
had destroyed by making of a new Body. Therefore I cannot but reflect again
upon the tears of tho Nun, who always wept, and always returned to the cause of
her weeping. I have seen too many of those, said Hircan, who at the same time
bewailed their sins, and yet kept their pleasures. I do much doubt, said
Parliament, by whom you do speak those words, wherefore it seems to me that
their laughter has lasted long enough, it would be now time that weeping
should begin. Hold your peace, said Hircan, The Tragedy is not yet finished
which does begin with laughter. But to change the Subject of our discourse,
said Parliament, it seems to me that Dagoucin has wandered from our first
determination, which was that the Accounts of this day should be all pleasant,
and this has been a sad one.

You made a motion, said Dagoucin, that we should not forget to give an Account
of the greatest follies, and in that I am sure I have not failed; but to hear
one that is more pleasant, I do give my voice to Nomerfide, hoping that she
will mend my fault. She made answer, I have an Account ready for you, and one
which is worthy to follow yours, for it speaks of Religious persons, and of
death also. Give ear unto it if you please.

The End of the Accounts of the Novels of the late Queen of Navarr, which are
all that can be recovered of them
A Table of the Summary of the Novells of the Queen of Navarre.
The first Journal.
AN Advocats Wife of Alencon had two Friends, one of them for pleasure, and the
other for profit; she caused that man of her two Lovers to be slain, who first
discovered her wanton life, for which murder she begged pardon, both for her
self, and for her sagitive Husband, who afterward to save a sum of money did
repair to a Negromancer, and their Enterprise was discovered, and punished,
Novel 1. Fol. 1. The chaste and lamentable Death of the Wife of one of the
Mule-keepers of the Queen of Navarre, Nov. 2. f. 11. A King of Naples abusing
the Wife of a young Gentlewoman, did at last wear the horn himself, Nov. 3. f.
15. The rash Enterprise of a Gentleman to encounter with a Princess, and the
shame and disgrace which he received, Nov. 4. f. 22. A Ferry-woman escaped from
two Friars who would have forced her, and did deport her self so wisely, that
their sin was discovered to all the world, Nov. 5. f. 30. The subtilty of a
woman who showed her friend a way to escape, when her Husband, who had but one
eye, thought to have surprised them, Nov. 6. f. 34. A Merchant of Paris
deceived the Mother of his Sweetheart, to conceal their fault, Nov. 7. f. 37.
A certain man having lain with his own Wife, instead of his Chambermaid, did
send his Neighbor to her, who made him a Cuckold without his Wives knowledge,
Nov. 8. f. 40. The sad death of a Gentleman in love, having received comfort
too late from her whom he loved, Nov. 9. f. 47. The Loves of Amadour and
Florinda, in which are contained many subtilties, and Inventions, and the most
commendable chastity of Florinda, Nov. 10. f. 52.
The Second Journal.
The petulant Discourses of a Friar in his Easter-Sermons at Amboise, Nov. 1.
f. 93. The Incontinence of a Duke, and his Impudence to arrive at his Designs,
with his just punishment, Nov. 2. f. 97. A Captain of the Galleys under the
shadow of Devotion, did fall in love with a Lady, and what insued thereon,
Nov. 3. f. 106. The subtilty of a Lover, who under the pretense of the right
Friend, did reap from a Lady of Millan the fruits of what so long he had
desired, Nov. 4. f. 117. A Lady of the Court seeing her self disdained by her
Husband, who made love elsewhere, did revenge her self by the like practice,
Nov. 5. f. 125. A Lady of Millan approved the Courage, and the Resolution of
her Friend, whereupon she afterward loved him with all her heart, Nov. 6. f.
141. King Francis showed his generous resolution to Count William, who would
have killed the King, Nov. 7. f. 148. A fair young Lady made trial of the
fidelity of a young Scholar, before she would admit him to entrench too far
upon her honor, Nov. 8. f. 152. Two Lovers despairing to be married, did enter
themselves into two Religions houses, the Man into a Covent of Saint Francis,
and the Female into the Nunnery of Saint Clare, Nov. 9. f. 159. A Gentleman
suddenly cured of the malady of Love, finding his rigorous Lady in the arms of
her Horseman, Nov. 10. f. 169.
The Third Journal.
The wonderful and honest love betwixt a Lady of honorable birth, and a
Bastard; and the check which the Queen gave unto their Marriage, with the wise
answer of the young Lady to the Queen, Nov. 1. f. 174. A Friar, a great
Reformer of the times, under the shadow of Religion, did use all temptations
and endeavors to seduce a fair Nun, and his deceits at last were discovered,
Nov. 2. f. 198. Three Murders committed in one house, on the persons of the
Lord, the Lady, and their Child, by the wickedness of a Friar, Nov. 3. f. 212.
The gentile Invention of a Gentleman to manifest his love to the Queen of
Spain, and what insued thereupon, Nov. 4. f. 221. The subtle Invention of a
great Prince, to delight himself with the fair Wife of (...) vocate of Paris,
Nov. 5. f. 230. The pleasant discourse of a great Lord to play the wanton with
a Lady of Pampelona, Nov. 6. f. 236. The rashness of a foolish Secretary who
solicited to Lust the Wife of his Companion; by which he received great
Disgrace, Nov. 7. f. 254. A Secretary thought to coz^en one, who cozened him,
and what was the event thereof, Nov. 8. f. 257. A Labourer of the Village,
whose Wife was too familiar with the Curate, did permit himself to be easily
deceived, Nov. 9. f. 261. The wonderful Example of humane Frailty in a Lady,
who to conceal her honor, did fall from one Evil into a greater, Nov. 10. f.
264.
The Fourth Journal.
The Execrable cruelty of a Friar to enjoy his detestable Lust, and the
punishment which he justly suffered, Nov. 1. f. 272. The punishment more cruel
than Death, commanded by a Husband to be inflicted on his Wife, whom he had
taken in adultery, Nov. 2. f. 279. The abomination of an Incestuous Priest, who
under the pretense of a holy life did impregnat his own Sister, and the
blasphemies that were contrived to conceal their sin, and the punishment which
ensued thereupon, Nov. 3. f. 285. Two Friars too curious to listen, to what did
not belong unto them, were struck into so great a fear, that they thought they
should have dyed, Nov. 4. f. 290. The happy Industry which a wise Husband used
to divert the love which his Wife did bear unto a Friar, Nov. 5. f. 295. A
President of Grenoble being advertised of the dissolute Inclinations of his
Wife, did provide such a remedy that his honor was not interested, and he
himself revenged, Nov. 6. f. 305. The wisdom of a Wife to withdraw her Husband
from a fond Love which did torment him, Nov. 7. f. 311. The memorable Charity
of a Woman of Tours to her Husband taken in Incontinence, Nov. 8. f. 316. A
good Invention to drive away an Evil Spirit, Nov. 9. f. 318. A Lord caused his
Brother-in-law to be killed, not knowing the alliance, Nov. 10. f. 322.
The Fifth Journal.
The strange and new penance given by a Friar Confessor to a young Lady. N. 1.
f. 331. The Continence of a young Gentlewoman, against the obstinate and
amorous suit of one of the greatest Lords in France, and the happy success
which the young Gentlewoman obtained, Nov. 2. f. 335. The Hypocrisy of a Lady
at Court was discovered by the ill Carriage of her Love, which she thought to
have concealed, Nov. 3. f. 346. Two Lovers who closely did enjoy their loves,
and the happy issue that did attend them, Nov. 4. f. 357. A Husband pretending
to chastise his Chambermaid, deceived the simplicity of his Wife, Nov. 5. f.
365. A Friar who in his Sermon made it a great crime for Men to beat their
Wives, Nov. 6. f. 371. A Gentleman of Percha wrongfully suspecting the love of
his Friend to his Wife, did provoke him to put in practice the Cause of his
suspicion, Nov. 7. f. 373. Two Friars on the first night of a marriage did one
after another usurp the place of the Bridegoom, for which they were soundly
punished, Nov. 8. f. 360. The subtilty and incontinence of a Countess to have
secretly her pleasure from several Gentlemen, and how she was discovered, Nov.
9. f. 383. A Gentleman being newly let blood, did too familiarly and
excessively enjoy his Mistress, which was the occasion of his death, and of
hers also, Nov. 10. f. 390.
The Sixth days Journal.
The persidiousnesse and great cruelty of an Italian Duke, Nov. 1. f. 395. The
nasty Breakfast prepared by an Apothecaries Boy for an Advocate and a
Gentleman, Nov. 2. f. 400 The personal diligence of a Prince to divert the
affections of an importunate Lover, Nov. 3. f. 405. A Gentlewoman of so good a
disposition, that seeing her Husband to kiss her Chambermaid did nothing else
but laugh, and would never give any other reason, but that only she laughed at
his shadow. Nov. 4. f. 414. The Cunning of a Spanish Woman to defraud the
Friars of the last Testament of her Husband; Nov. 5. f. 417. A Friar
Fraudulently married another Friar, who was his Companion, to a young
Gentlewoman, for which they were both punished, Nov. 6. f. 420. A ridiculous
Account of my Lord who did wear a Ladies Glove on his Habiliments, Nov. 7. f.
427. A Lady of the Court did pleasantly revenge her self of a Gentleman who did
bear love unto her, Nov. 8. f. 431. A Gentleman thinking in private to kiss
one of the Chamhermaids of his Wife, was discovered and surprised by her, Nov.
9. f. 435. A Citizens Wife of Paris did forsake her Husband a rich Merchant to
follow a Chanter, and ^^unterfeiting her self dead, she caused herself to be
buried. Nov. 10. f. 442.
The Seventh Journal.
The wonderful and most uncontrolled affection of a bold but beautiful
Burgundian Gentlewoman to a Canon of Autun, Nov. 1. f. 449. A Gentlewoman
repeating an Account of her own loves, speaking in the third person, did by
misregard declare her self, Nov. 2. f. 458. The notable Chastity of a great
Lord in France, Nov. 3. f. 461. A Gentleman being disdained by a Gentlewoman to
be her Husband, did turn Friar, and put on the habit of Religion, for which she
afterward repenting, did put on the Habit of a Nun, Nov. 4. f. 466. The
simplicity of an old Woman, who presented a burning Candle of Wax to Saint John
of Lions, and did stick it on the brow of a Soldier as he was sleeping at the
Sepulcher, and what was the issue that did attend it, Nov. 5. f. 472. A
ridiculous Account that happened to the King and Queen of Navarr. Nov. 6. f.
474. The extreme love and severity of life of a French woman in a Foreign land,
Nov. 7. f. 477. A Woman made her Husband to eat Cantharides to receive from him
due and desired benevolence, by which he thought he should have dyed, Nov. 8.
f. 482. An Italian suffered himself to be cozened by his Chambermaid, who
caused his Wife to find him bolting in a Woman's habit instead of a Maid, Nov.
9. f. 486. The excellent History, and the relation of the Incontinence of a
Duchess, which was the cause of her death, and of the death of two most
absolute Lovers, Nov. 10. f. 489.
The eighth Journal.
A Woman at the point of death, seeing her Husband to kiss ber Chambermaid,
did grow so extremely passionate that it was the sudden cause of her recovery,
Nov. 1. f. 520. The continual repentance of a Nun for having lost her
virginity, without Force or Love. Nov. 2. f. 523.
The End of the Table.
FINIS.

