A Sacred Panegyric, OR A SERMON OF THANKSGIVING, Preached to the two Houses
of Parliament, His Excellency the Earl of Essex, the Lord Major, Court of
Aldermen, and Common Council o^ the City of LONDON, the Reverend Assembly of
Divines, and Commissioners from the Church of Scotland.

Upon occasion of their Solemn Feasting, to testify their thankfullnes to God,
and union and concord one with another, after so many Designs to divide them,
and thereby ruin the Kingdom, January 18. 1643.

By Stephen Marshall, B. D. Minister of Gods Word at Finching-field in Essex.

Published by Order of the Lords and Commons.

PSALM 133. 1.

Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in
unity.

Psalm 144. 15, Happy is that People that is in such a case: Yea, happy is
that People, whose God is the Lord.

London, Printed for Stephen Bowtell, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
sign of the Bible in Popes-head-alley. 1644.

TO THE ^^IGHT HONORABLE he Lords and Commons Assembled (...)n Parliament; His
Excellency the Earl of Essex, with the rest of the Noble and Worthy
Commanders: The Right Honorable the Lord Major, the Court of Aldermen, and
Common Council of the City of London: The Reverend Assembly of Divines: The
Honorable and Reverend Commissioners from the Church of SCOTLAND.
THis work was too high for me, but as its now done by so weak an hand, is
too low, for so many judicious eyes with any favorable respect to look down
to: But (...) own Children, though less beautiful, we can behold with
(...)ve; and even stoop to take them by the hand, that we may hold and lead
them, that cannot go or stand by themselves: (...)ch a weakling is this, that
is now before you, the defects (...)d weaknesses whereof, I acknowledge are
mine, but the (...)rth is Gods, and yours; to him I humbly present it, for
(...) blessing; and to you, for your acceptance and help, that may better go
abroad; whilst all shall know, that it is (...)rs more then mine, and therefore
to be disposed of rather by you, then by my self. By your Command, (for so I
interpret all your requests to me) it was Preached, and is now Published; and
this with the more boldness, because with some confidence, that it will pass
the better without others censure, because it has already passed your scrutiny
with allowance and acceptance. But whatever the lot of it in that kind shall
be, it will be abundant satisfaction to me, if the main end be attained by it,
which by you and me was intended in it; viz: the help of our selves and all,
the more to adore the infinite wisdom, and power, and goodness of our God,
who can make light to shine out of darkness; discords intended 2 Cor. 4. 6.
by enemies, to make up our more harmonious consent, and divisions of tongues
that scatter the builders of Babel, Genesis 11. Acts 2.
to help up the more compact building of his Church. He once turned the day of
his peoples griefs and fears to the Ester 8. ult. 9. 1.
quite contrary, so that they had then joy and gladness, a Feast, and a good
day, insomuch that many of the people of the Land became Jews for the fear of
the Jews fell upon them. Now he that has wrought for us the like turn of
things, be pleased in mercy to work a greater turn in all our Enemies hearts,
that so now and ever, our Lord Jesus may appear to be the wonderful
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, whilst thus, the Prince of
his Peoples Peace: So prays,

His and Your most Unworthy Servant. STEPHEN MARSHALL.

THE PREFACE to the Sermon.
RIght Honorable and Beloved in the Lord, this day is a day purposely set
apart for feasting; and it is like one of the Lords feasts, Lev. 23. 2.
where you have a feast and a holy Convocation: And you are first met here to
feast your Esa. 25. 6.
souls with the fat things of Gods house, with a feast of fat things full of
marrow, and wine on the lees well refined: and afterward to feast your bodies,
with the fat things of the land, and the sea, both plenty and dainty. But if
you please you may first feast your eyes; do but behold the face of this
Assembly, I dare say it will be one of the excellentest feasts that ever your
eyes were refreshed with: Here in this Assembly you may first see the two
Houses of Parliament, the Honorable Lords and Commons, after thus many years
wrestling with extreme difficulties, in their endeavoring to preserve an undone
Kingdom, and to purge and reform a backsliding and a polluted Church, you
may behold them still not only preserved from so many treacherous designs,
secret treasons, and open violences, but as resolved as ever cheerfully to go
on with this great work, which God has put into their hands. Here you may
also see his Excellency (my most honored Lord) the General of all our forces
by land; and near him that other noble Lord, the Commander of our forces by
Sea; and with them abundance of noble and resolute Commanders al of them with
their faces like unto Lions, who after, so many terrible battles, and
abundance of difficulties, and charging in the face of so many thousand deaths,
are all of them still preserved, and not a hair of their heads fallen to the
ground. Here also you may behold the Representative body of the City of London,
the Lord Mayor, the Court of Aldermen, the Common Council, the Militia, and in
them the face and affection of this glorious City; This City, which under God
has hitherto had the honor of being the greatest means of the salvation of
the whole kingdom; and after the expense of millions of treasure, and
thousands of their lives, still as faithful and resolute to live and die in
the cause of God as ever heretofore. Here you may likewise see a Reverend
Assembly of grave and learned Divines, who daily wait upon the Angel in the
Mount, to receive from him the lively Oracles, and the pattern of Gods house,
to present unto you. All these are of our own Nation; and with them you may
see the Honorable, reverend, and learned Commissioners of the Church of
Scotland; and in them behold the wisdom and affection of their whole Church
and Nation, willing to live and dye with us. All these you may behold in one
view; and which is more, you may behold them all of one heart, and one mind,
after so many plots and conspiracies to divide them one from another, and
thereby to ruin them all: And which is yet more, you may see them all met
together this day on purpose, both to praise God for this union, and to rejoice
in it, and to hold it out to all the world, and thereby to testify, that as
one man they will live and dye together in this common cause of God, of our
Lord Jesus Christ his Church, and these three Kingdoms. O beloved! how
beautiful is the face of this Assembly? Verily I may say of it, as it was said
of Solomon's throne, That the like was not to be seen in any other Nation; I
question where ever the like Assembly was seen this thousand years upon the
face of the earth: Me thinks I may call this Assembly The host of Genesis 32. 2.
God; I could call this place Mahanaim; and I believe there are many in the
Assembly who could say as old Jacob did, when he had seen his son Joseph's
face, Let me now dye, because I have seen this Assembly, and that it is yet
thus with our unworthy England: and for my own part, I profess I am almost
like the Queen of Sheba, when she had seen the Court of Solomon, that she had
no spirit left in her, and could presently send you away, and command all of
you not to weep to day, nor to mourn, but to go home, and eat the fat, and
drink the sweet, and send portions to them for whom nothing is prepared; I
should in the joy of my heart say this presently, but that I have first some
banqueting stuff for your souls, such as God has brought to my hand, to set
before you for your inward refreshing; the ground whereof you shall find, if
you please to turn to the first of the Chronicles the twelfth Chapt* and the
three last verses.

1 Chronicles. 12. 38, 39, 40. All these came with a perfect heart to Hebron, to
make David King over all Israel; and all the rest also of Israel were of one
heart to make David King: And there they were with David three days, eating
and drinking for their brethren had prepared for them. Moreover, they that were
nigh them, even unto Issachar, and Zebulun, and Naphtali, brought bread on
asses, and on Especially these la^t ^^o^^s.
camels and on mules, and on oxen, and meat, meal, cakes of figs, and
bunches of raisins, and wine, and oil, and sheep abundantly; for there was
joyin Israel.
I Labored to find out a Text, which might every way be suitable to the
occasion of this our present Sui^^ (...)sse of the T^xt t^ the occa^i^n. P^^.
25. 11.
meeting, because a word spoken in season is like apples of gold in pictures of
silver; a Sermon suited to the circumstance of time, place, persons, and
occasion, is not only more acceptable, but more useful: And truly I think
the Lord has brought to hand one of the most parallel portions in the whole
Bible; for if you please but to look into it, and into the whole Chapter upon
which this depends, you shall find, First, they were doing the same thing,
that is, rejoicing abundantly: Secondly, expressing their joy the same way, in
feasting, eating, and drinking: Thirdly, you shall find the same manner of
persons, that is, the heads of all their Tribes, the Nobles, the Commons, the
Soldiery, the Ministry; you shall find them, fourthly, met on the like
occasion, because their hearts were united in one, and that in the way to
obtain a blessed peace to a kingdom, which had been long wasted with a Civil
war: Fifthly, you shall find also, that the persons who met here, were the
same which had adhered to the right side, to the cause which God did own and
bless; and sixthly, who the longer their wars continued grew stronger and
stronger, and their enemies grew weaker and weaker; you shall find all these
met upon the same occasion, upon a business of the highest consequence, all of
them feasting; and seventhly, at the charge of their brothren, in whose
precincts their solemn meeting was. Look but into the chapter, and you will see
all these; Look but into this Assembly, and you may behold them all in this
Church. But it may be you will say, We want a David, to make the parallel
full; we want a David to be with us, a King who might concur with us, and we
with him in the same business; I confess indeed, that in the literal sense God
has not yet made us so blessed, the Sons of Belial have stolen away both
his Majesty's Person, and affection from us, but even that is the thing which
we contend for, that we might recover him out of their hands; the expense of
all our treasure, and all our blood has bin to that end that he might have the
wicked removed from his throne, that as another David, he might rule over us
in 2 Samuel 23. 3. 4.
the fear of God, that he might be as the light of the morning when the Sun
arises, even a morning without clouds: And as we have in our Covenant solemnly
sworn (so much as in us lies) to preserve and maintain his person and
authority, in the defense of Liberty and Religion, so if God have any delight
in him, and to do us good by him, he will in the end incline his heart unto
such Counsels, that he shall come home, and make this parallel full, and even
be the light of our Israel, and the breath of our Nostrills: But in the mean
time, we do not want a David to suit this David in the Text, we have here the
true David, of whom that David was in this very thing a Type, that is, the Lord
Jesus Christ, whom we are endeavoring to set upon his throne, that he might
be Lord and King in his Israel, over his Church, amongst us: And as David's
person, and Kingdom, were but types of our Lord Christ and his Kingdom; so
this great joy and unanimity of heart, which met in all these at David's
Coronation in Hebron, was but a type of that rejoicing and gladness of heart,
which should be among the Nations, when there should be the like concurrence
of the Nobles, and Commons, and Princes, and Ministers, and Citizens, with one
heart, to set up the Lord Christ, to be Lord and King over them: All Learned
Men know this to be true, and therefore by this time I believe, you see that my
Text is most suitable to our Meeting, and withal the scope of it so plain
before you, that I need not spend any more time in the clearing of it, but
shall hasten to some matter of Instruction; Because (though I conceive your
Feast for your bodies will be long) I would not willingly make the Sermon so
long, as to have it tedious to you; and before I come to the maine Lesson which
I shall insist upon, I would entreat you to Some general Observations out of
this whole Chapter.
look a little back into the whole Chapter, where you will find David's case,
and our present condition, in many things to be exceedingly alike, and in it
find much to encourage and comfort you in your saddest exigence; be pleased
when you are at home to read over this Chapter seriously, and you will find
such observations as these: First, That David when he was persecuted by Saul
unjustly, did not only take up Arms for his own defense, but many Verse. 1.
to 23.
of the choicest men of the Tribes did join with him, and adventure their
lives in his defense; yea, and his Adherents increased, till his Army grew to
be like an Host of God; and all this while King Saul was alive, and David but a
private man, and one that had sworn Allegiance to him:

You will in this Chapter find also, that although David 17, 18, 19, 20, etc.
and his adherents in the defense of his innocent righteous Cause, were
oftentimes brought very low, to a dead low ebb, yet in the end, God brought
all about again; and David's party grew stronger and stronger, and their
malignant Enemies grew weaker and weaker.

You will find also in this Chapter, That such as did adhere to David in his
low condition, (when the Lord had tried and humbled them all) found to their
comfort in the end, that they were no losers by it; They afterward being made
his Worthies, his Counselors, and Princes. Compare the first part of this
Chapter, with 2 Samuel 23. 8. ad finem.


And this, That in the end God opened the eyes of many of those who were most
malignant and opposite, not only to see the righteousness of David's Cause, but
their hearts came cordially to join with him.

And this also, that among all the Nobles, and Princes, and Verse 29. Verse 32.
Rulers, and Leaders; the more godly, the more wise, the more cordial any were
to David's Cause, the greater power they had, and the more their brethren were
at their command.

This also you will find, that no cost, danger pains or difficulties, Ver. 15.
20. etc.
were ever stuck at by them whose hearts were rightly affected to David's Cause.
This Chapter compared with 2 Samuel 23.


And this also you may observe, That God gave to David's helpers such courage
and strength, that oftentimes ten of them could chase a thousand and an hundred
put ten thousand to flight.

These, and many more such things as these (which would be very profitable for
our meditation, in these our distressed times) you may find in reading this
Chapter; but I am resolved to confine my self to two Observations; the one
shall be from that, which was the matter of their joy at this time; the other
from the manner of expressing their joy; The matter of their joy, you have in
these words, that they were of one heart, and one mind, to set David to be
their King; The manner of expressing their joy was this, they were eating, and
drinking, and feasting, at the cost of all the Tribes in whose precincts their
meeting was; Those of Zebulon, and Napthali, and Issachar, did in abundance
expend their Oxen, and Sheep, and Wine, and Oil, and all the delicates, to
refresh their Brethren; for the Army was I think no less then two or three
hundred thousand of them, who upon this occasion were come together: from these
two, I shall endeavor to handle these two Lessons. The first is,

That it is the greatest matter and cause of joy that can be to any People, to
find a concurrence of Nobles, and Commons, Obs. 1. The maine Doctrine. No
greater mattter of joy to any people, then to find a concurrence of hearts, to
set up David to be their King.
and Soldiers, and Citizens, and Divines, to set up David for their King; such
an union and concurrence is a matter of the greatest joy in all the World.
Secondly,

That this joy springing from such a concurrence to set up David to be their
King, may very lawfully, and comely be expressed in feasting, eating, and
drinking.

I begin with the first of these, That it is a matter of the greatest joy in
all the World, that can be to any people, to find 2.
such a concurrence as there was in this Chapter, to set up David to be their
King: Where first we must inquire, what is here intended by setting up David to
be their King: Know therefore (beloved) that David is to be considered two
ways, he stands in a twofold relation, even in this his Coronation: The first
is Typical; the second is Political; Typical, and so David is Christ:
Political, and so Explained in two Branches.
David is intended by God to be the pattern of a good King, the pattern and
the Copy that all true Kings should write after; and both these are so plain,
I dare say I might give you twenty several places of Scripture for proof of
both the branches: First, David was a type of Christ; Christ is ordinarily
called David; you will not find any one person (who Ezekiel. 34. 23: 37: 24. Esaias
9 67: 55. 3: Ier. 30 9: Psalm 8. 9:
was a type of Christ) by whose name Christ is expressly called in his kingly
office, but only David* I will give them David their King; upon the throne of
David he shall sit: so David in the typical relation is Christ. Then in the
political relation, the Lord in tended him the pattern of a good King, and
therefore you shall find that all the Kings that for four or five hundred
years did succeed in Israel and Judah, when the Lord came to give any one
their testimony, who they were, how near they came to the Standard, this is
the rule by which he judged of them; Such an one walked in the way of David; 1
King 14 8: 2 King. 14. 3: 16, 2: 18, 3; 22, 2: 15, 3, 11: 2 Ch, 28, 29. 2: 34 2.
such an one did that which was right in Gods sight as David; such an one did
well; but not with such a heart as David; such an one walked not in the ways
of David; such an ones heart was not like unto David's: so that David was in all
intended by God to be the pattern o^ a good King

Now this first Lesson thus opened. I must therefore divide into two branches:
the first is, That there can be no greater matter of joy and rejoicing to any
people in the world, then to find a concurrence of First David is Christ, and
hence,

The greatest j^y to any Na^ion, to find such a concurrence to set up the
Kingdom of C^^ist.


heart in the Nobles, and Princes, and Soldiers, and Ministers, and the heads
of their Tribes, to set up the Lord Jesus Christ to be the King of the Church
among them: that shall be the first. The second is this, That there can be no
greater joy to a nation for aniething that concerns this present life, then to
find concurrence of hearts in these Nobles, and those that are named in the
chapter to set up a David; that it, to have the Prince that should rule over
them like into David. In these two things God willing) I shall spend the most
of this time, the other part of the Text I shall only point at.

For the first, That to find such a concurrence to set up the Lord Christ to
be King; is a matter of the greatest joy and rejoicing Proved by the type.
in the world: You may see it first, in the (...): Secondly, in Gods promise:
Thirdly, in the Church^s performance. First, you shall see it in the Type, in
David bringing up the 2 Samuel 8 12 ad finem:
Arc 2 Samuel 6. 12, first, he called all his Parliament together and the
Convocation of the Ministers also, and there they consulted to go and bring up
the Ark of God from Kiriath-jearim (which Ark of God was a Type of the Lord
Jesus Christ) they all agree to bring it up to set it in his own place, in a
better state then formerly it had been, for the glory of it, and the welfare of
the Church: Now when they concurred in this action, you shall find that David
and all the house of Israel played before the Lord on all manner of instrument,
on Harps and Psalteries, on Timbrels and on Cornets and on Cimbals, with
shouting and sound of Trumpets, and the King himself being clothed with a
linne Ephod danced with all his might, and gloried in his dancing, though we
know Michal his wife despiled him for it, as if he had played the fool; and
all this because they so well agreed in bringing the Arc, and setting it up in
his place, in the Tabernacle that David had pitched for it, which was nothing
in effect, but the setting up the Lord Jesus Christ, both God and man, to be
acknowledged as Lord and King in the midst of the Church. So likewise when
Solomon had builded the Temple, in 1 King. 8. when the Arc was to be set upon
the Table in the 1 King 8:
holy of holiest, which was properly the type of setting the Lord Jesus Christ
upon the throne of Majesty on high, at the right hand of God, and so to be
Lord and Ruler over the Church. when there was a concurrence of the Princes and
Nobles, who joined with him to do this, there was such a holy feast made, that
Solomon for his share spent twenty thousand Oxen, and a matter of an hundred
and twenty thousand sheep in sacrifices: and after all this holy feasting upon
sacrifices, he and all Israel with him held a feast, from the entering in of
Hamath unto the river of Egypt before the Lord, seven days, and seven days,
even fourteen days; and then all the people departed home to their houses,
joifull and glad of heart for all this goodness of the Lord Jehovah, in giving
them the Lord Jesus Christ to reign over them. See this likewise promised that
it should and ought to be so: and for this though I might 2 By Gods promise
that it should be so. Esaias 9. 3: 6 7,
name many Scriptures, I will satisfy my self with two: the one is in the
ninth of Esaias and the beginning of it, The Lord there spoke of a very sad
affliction which the church should lie under, very uncomfortable times they
should live in, but yet he says that there should be joy, they should joy
before him like the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice who divide a spoil. You
all know that Soldiers when they are sacking a rich Town, every one filling
not only their Knapsacks, but loading their horses and wagons with rich
spoil: and contrymen when they have gathered-in all their harvest, if ever
they are merry it is then: Now the Lord promises such a joy to his afflicted
Church, which should be like the joy of harvest, and the dividing the the
spoil, upon what occasion was that think you? You shall find at the 6. verse*
or unto us a Child is borne, to us a Son is given, on whose shoulders the
Government shall be laid, who shall be set upon the Throne of David his
Father, to order and rule it; that is, the Lord Jesus Christ shall be exalted
to be their King, and then shall the People joy before him, like the joy in
harvest, so likewise in the 9. of Zachary ver. 9. rejoice greatly O Daughters
of Zion, shout for joy O Daughter of Jerusalem; what is the matter? Behold thy
Zach, 9, 9:
King comes to thee, and if you mark it, when Christ first came to them in
that place, he came poor and meek, riding upon an Ass, yea, to be hanged
upon the Cross to be crucified; but yet afterward Math, 21; 5:
it follows, that his Dominion should be from Sea to Sea, and from the River
to the end of the Earth; This entertaining of Christ their King, should make
them rejoice greatly, and shout for joy. See also one or two evidences for the
performance of it, what infinite By experiences showing it both being so; Acts
8, 8,
joy there has bin at the setting of Christ on his throne: In Act. 8: when the
City of Samaria (which before had been besotted with superstition and Idolatry,
and all kind of beastlines of that kind) upon Philips preaching Jesus Christ
among them, had submitted to him, and received him for Lord and King it is
said, there was great joy thoughout the City; but especially out of the book of
Revelation. I could give you many evidences, Rev, 4. per t^t: 7, 9, etc. 11,
15, 15* 3:
be pleased to turn to one only, Chapter 19. from the first verse to the
eight, where you will find a Panegyric celebrated with great joy, by a great
multitude of people, a great voice from the throne calling upon them; to
praising and rejoicing; and all this great multitude cried Halelujah,
Salvation, glory and honor unto the Lord our God, let us rejoice and be glad;
and again they said Halelujah, and again and again Halelujah making it the foot
of the Song; what was the occasions whereby the Lamb was to be married, and his
wife had made her self ready, the new Jerusalem was coming down from Heaven;
Jew and Gentile to be made one Church: Antichrist the Beast and fals-Prophet to
be destroyed, and Christ Jesus to be gladly received as Lord and King: For the
Lord God omnipotent reigns.

But to make it yet more plain, you know that joy is, acquiescentia Ladovecns
vives.
voluntatis in bono sibi congruenti, a pleasure or delight from some good thing
we possess or certainly expect, which breeds satisfaction in the will and
pleasure in the sensitive soul, upon the delating the heart in the breast,
when the object and faculty-suits one another, as the Cup and Cover; which
while it is only comtemplated or meditated upon; is after a sort made perfect,
and accordingly the soul united unto it; or while expected upon strong and
unerring grounds, the soul comtortably and cheerfully works for the
accomplishment of our desire; but when its possessed the good really present
and united to us, when we have it face to face, then is the heart satisfied
indeed. ^^m 12, 12,
Now I shall fhew you (God willing that the setting up of Jesus Christ after
their manner, is the most excellent, suitable, congruous good that which will
and may most satisfy and dilate the heart of any thing else whatever.

And to this I shall demonstrate these two things:

First, that the setting up of Christ to be King is the greatest, the most
desirable good that ever can betide any Nation.

Secondly, that the Concurrence of the Nobles and Commons, and Soldiers, and
Ministers, and Citizens to this work, their concurrence I say in this work, is
the most glorious, the most aimiable, the most desirable means of attaining
this great good that any soul can wish; and if both these be manifested, that
the one is the greatest, and the other the most desirable means to attain it;
where these two things meet there must needs be matter of great joy.

For proof of the first, I desire you but to compare it with all those things
which make any Nation happy in their Prince or Because Chris^s government is
the greatest g^oa t^ any Nations being
Government, and I doubt not but you will see, that the sitting up of Christ to
be King does infinitely go beyond them all; And in this comparison I will
confine my self to four things.

The glory and honor that comes to that Nation, where Christ is set up to be
their Lord and King; the glory that thereby The greatest hon^ur to a people:
by comes to a Nation, you know is the thing which makes a people rejoice in
their King, when their King is an Ornament to them: The Kingdoms and Princes
who lived round about Solomon; accounted it no dishonor to them, to be
Solomon's Tributaries and Servants; because he was such an accomplished
excellent man: Hyram the wealthy King of Tyrus wrote a Letter to him, wherein
he calls himself his Servant and says, because the Lord loved his People, he
set up thee to be King over them. To 2 Crom, 2, 11:
have a King who is such a glory to a Nation, that (when any of the People
shall be named in any foreign place) the strangers shall say; O they are
happy in their Prince. Or as the Queen of Sheba or (...) and his People, Happy
are thy men, happy are these thy Subjects 2 Chronicles, 9, 7, 8*
and Servants, which (...) continually before thee because God loven Israel to
establesh him for ever, therefore made he thee King over them; this is a glory
to a Nation.

Now think I beseech you, whether there can be any glory like to this to have
the Son of God; the second person in the Trinity made man, now exalted to the
Throne of Majesty's on high, to whom the Angels and Archangels, and all the
most of Heaven do stoop, and all the Creatures did bow the knee before him,
whether (I say) can there be any glory to a people like unto this, to have this
Lord Christ set up to be their King?

2. Consider the advantage that comes to a State and people governed 2
Bringing all advantages to his oubjects, 2 Samuel; ^^, 24,
by him, the infinite gain and happiness of all his Subjects under him, David
bid them all weep for Saul, because he clothed them all in scariet; with
other delights and put Ornaments of gold upon them, they might grow rich under
him. But let me tell you, it is only the Lord Jesus Christ and his Government
that makes a Nation or a People furnished with an all sufficiency of all
things, As

First, in the things of this life; Christ has all things delivered into 1 For
this present life:
his hands, the Father has given them all up unto him, and H^e gives them to
whom he pleases, and his Kingdom has the promise of this life as well as that
which is to come.

So that if Gold, or Silver, or Wealth, or ease. or pleasure, or liberty, or
any of these things be good for them the Subjects of Christ must needs enjoy
it from their beloved King: but these are scarce worth the naming; The Glory of
Christ's Government to his People stands in this, that the makes their souls
their best part, their Spirituall-part, their 2 And above all for their souls
here and for ever.
Eternal part; he makes their souls I say, infinitely happy in being a King
over them, which no other Government reaches to, no not in any degree, further
then it is in subordination to Christ, and ends in him; but now where Christ
is set up to be King, he gives his Subjects such things as these:

The pardon and forgiveness of all their sins; the blood of Jesus John 1* 7*
Rev* 1. 5, Esa, 60: 21: Romans 8: 14: 15* 16: 17: Heb. 2: 12.
Christ their King, wherein they are all washed cleanses them from all their
sins, so that not a man of them shall ever be called to an account before God
for any thing they have done against him, He makes all of them righteous, the
Lord says to him, thy people shall be all righteous He does adopt them all to
be His children; all His subjects are His children, yea coheires; yea they are
all His brethren, they may all enjoy communion with his Father, and with
himself, and with his holy 1 John 1, 3 Rev, 1, 6, 5, 10: Rev, 22. 5: 1 John,
5: 14:
Spirit; all his Kingdom is his Court, all his subjects his Courtiers, they
may all as his Favorites stand before him, and see his face, they may all
present their supplications to him for themselves and others, with assurance to
be heard and answered in all things according to his will: in one word, he is
such a King who makes all his Subjects to be Kings; there is not one of all
those where he is set up to be Lord and King over; but he makes them all to be
Kings and Priests to God his Father: It is in fires, in beginning and degree
here in this world, but afterward shall to all eternity be manifested and
made good of them all in the highest heavens; where when they have overcome,
they shall fit Re, 3. 21,
down with him on his throne, as he has sat down upon his Fathers Throne. Now
(brethren) so far as the soul is more excellent then the body, so far as
heaven is above earth, as grace is above gold, and silver, or dross, as
eternity is above a moment, so much more excellent are the advantages that
Christ Jesus gives to his subjects, then any that can be received from any
other Prince in the world: now the happiness of the soul is so excellent, and
so desirable to all men, that you know, that the very heathen by the light of
nature did account this the greatest happiness of all to any state, to have
Religion Socrates, Plato, Plutarch, Cicero. etc: Minor Zalincus Solon nu^^^
etc. Cicero li: 1. quin Tuscul; et de natura deorum lib: 1, Plutarch adversus
colorem:
on set up, which was for their souls happiness as they conceived. It is
observable, that you can hardly meet with one Philosopher, or any one Lawgiver
among all the Heathen, who did not make Religion (which was for the worship of
their gods, and the welfare of their souls) to be the prime work of all: yea,
so sacred a thing it was among them, that cul^us deorum, the worship of their
gods, was the principal care and charge of their Princes, who therefore were
their chief Priests: and that so universally, as Tullie says there is no
Nation so barbarous but you will find Religion chiefly regarded: and Plutarch
writing to an Atheist, tells him that possibly he may find some Cities without
learning and some without wealth, and some without a well framed Government,
but should never find any without Temples, Altars, the worship of their gods,
and consequently of the care of their souls welfare. True it is indeed, these
poor blind wretches groped after the welfare of their souls to no purpose,
because they knew not God: but worshiped Devils instead of God: but yet thus
much we learn from it, that in their judgments which c^n procure the eternal
happiness of man's immortal soul, is the greatest gain the greatest
advantage of all other; and therefore because the setting up of Jesus Christ to
be Lord and 3 Safety from enemies.
King, is alsufficient for this* what greater good can come to any people.

A third privilege of Christ's being set up as King, is the safety of his
people; let a Prince be never so wise, so good and loving to his subjects; let
them be never so happy in him, yet if they want power to defend his Kingdom
from violence of other States, both he and they may soon prove miserable; as we
see in all the flourishing Empires of the World in times past, another Prince
has violently come and spoiled all: But now where the Lord Christ is set up to
be a King: I need not in this Assembly tell you what strength they have,
Salvation is prepared Esaias 26. Zach: 2: 5: John 19, 11: Mat: 28. Psalm, 68, 1:
for walls and Bulwarks, he himself is a wall of fire round about, so that no
enemies shall dare come nigh to them; there enemies have none of them any power
but what Christ himself has given them. All power is his both in heaven and
in the earth, if he speak but the word all his enemies are overthrown, let God
arise (speaking of Christ) Psalm. 68. let God arise, and his enemies shall be
scattered, they fly as the dust before the wind, as the wax before the fire, as
stubble before the flame, so do his enemies fall if Christ will but appear
against them. In one word, by him were all things Created, by him they are
upheld, and subject, and all things disposed of according to his pleasure; and
therefore under his shadow, under his Col: 1 16: 17: 4 Perpe^^ity of all their
happiness:
protection they may quietly rest, and none can hurt them.

And lastly add one more, that this King lives for ever, and reigns for ever;
make him once a King over a people, and he will ever be a King; They who are
once his Subjects, will ever be his Subjects; yea, and while they are under his
government, his government shall grow more glorious, more vict^^ious; of the
increase of his Government and Peace, there shall be no end; be shall sit upon
the Throne of David his Father, to order it, and establish it; the Lord has
spoken it, and it must be so. 2 Concurrence of the weal of a people to set up
Christ, the most excellent and desirable means. 1 As such a concurrence is a
sign of Gods leve to that people:


I hope this is now clear, that the setting up of Christ to be Lord and King,
is the greatest happiness that can beside any Nation.

The second is, that such a concurrence to find Princes, Nobles, Captains,
etc. (for all these are in my Text*) to find the heads of all the Tribes thus
concurring to do it, is the most glorious, amiable and desirable means for
effecting this work, which to make plain, I beseech you to consider it two
ways

First, look upon it, as it is signum, what this concurrence holds forth as
its a sign.

Secondly, as causa look upon in that which it works for the effecting of it.

First, as it is a sign, and so it expresses, first the greatest love and
favor of God to that people; never did the Lord from Heaven express to any
Nation, a greater token of his owning that Nation and People, then when he
makes such a concurrence in their Princes, and Nobles. and Leaders, to set up
the Lord Christ to be their King; of God in the Prophecy of Jeremiah and
Zephaniah, that he would them one heart and one way, all of them should agree
in one to serve him and subject to him with one consent.

This made David so ravished in his spirit, when there was such a Ier, 33. 35:
Zep. 3 9: 1 Chronicles, 29, 10:
union and unanimity in his Princes and Nobles, to join with in preparing for
the Temple; Who am I Lord? and what i^ my people that we should be able to
offer thus willingly after this sort? now therefore O Lord, we thank and bless
thy glorious Name for it: and argues it there, as one of the greatest pledges
of Gods accepting them, that there should be such a concurrence in such a
work.

Secondly, it is also the greatest sign that can be of a peoples love to
Christ, and of the greatest glory which they can possibly put upon him 1 Their*
love to Christ, Esaias 49. 7, 60, 3, 10 11, 55 5. 2, 2:
to be such a willing people to set him up upon his Throne. This was promised
as the great glory of Christ's Kingdom, that Kings and Princes should bring his
Children upon their shoulders; that they should bring their own glory, and lay
it and then Scepters at his feet; be nursing Fathers unto his Church; that
whole Nations should flow in unto him: and certainly its the greatest
expression they can make, and the greatest glory which the Lord can receive
from poor men to have the Heads of a people thus oind to set up Christ upon
his Throne: It was much more glorious to David to be crowned after this manner,
then to have conquerred them by his Sword, and for Solomon to have all the
Kings about him to offer themselves, to be his Servants out of that inward
reverence and love they bore unto him, then to have subdued them as Joshua did
the Kings of Canaan: and even so is it here, it is a great exaltation of Christ's
glory to find whole States thus willing to submit unto him.

Thus it does it as signum. 2 Book upon it ut causa, as it works toward 2 As a
cause working it, Psa 17 2 27.
the effecting of it: Nothing which men can do carries such an energie as this
joint consent does, and that 3. several ways.

First such a public concurrence of all these, is a mavelous engagement of
that people to adhere to the Lord without sliding back.

When David had sworn unto the Lord to find out a place for the Lord, an
habitation for the mighty God of Jacob, he would give no sleep to his eyes,
nor slumber to his eye lids, until he had done what he could to effect it. So
when they have sworn a Covenant, and their Princes and Rulers, and all of them
join together with such an unanimous consent, it averreth and holds out to
the world their full and unchanged resolution to spend, and to be spent, and to
do all that ever they are able for the promoting of this work; Now this
ingageing of a Nation to the Lord is an infinite means of effecting it, and
ingaeth the Lord to swear to them, as he did to David in the like Psalm. 132. 11.
case.

Secondly, this concurrence in the Princes and Leaders of the 2
people is a marvelous means to draw all the people on as one man without any
opposition, when they that are their Leaders do thus go before them, there is
a notable example in this Text of the Tirbe of Issachar. v. 32. of the rest of
the tribes it is said how many there came; of some Tribes 10 thousand, of some
20. thousand, of some 40. thousand but of the Tribe of Issachar, it is not said
how many came, but only 200. that were the Leaders and Lords of that Tribe with
perfect heart, and the Text adds, all their Brethren were at their command,
all the whole Tribe; If the Tribe of Issachar were 40. 50. 100. thousand, set
but the 200. Leaders right, and they carry all the rest right infallibly whether
they will or no: And you all know by experience the infinite power Leaders have
to carry the people to any thing, be it good or evil; Jeroboam and his Princes
may lead the people to worship golden calves, Joash and his 1 Kings 12. 28. 2 Chronicles. 23. 28.
Princes may draw the people to forsake God; And again Jehosaphat, Hezechiel,
Josiah, and their Princes and Rulers may draw the people of the Lord into a
Covenant to serve the Lord. That is the second way to effect it, by leading the
people to submit unto Christ also.

Thirdly, this unity and concurrence of heart and spirit, does infinitely daunt
and dampe the spirit of their Enemies who would hinder the work, neither is
any thing such a terror to those that would destroy and hinder the setting up
of Christ, as to see an unity and concurrence of heart and hand of those that
are the prime Leading men to carry on the work: This is notably set forth in
the Book of Nehemiah, when Tobias and Sanballat, and the rest of them had
tried all their wits to devide and scare them, Nehemiah 6.
and yet saw, they went on with the work, that they would build, though they
built with the sword in one hand and a Trewell in the other, and though they
wrought both night and day, and that some slept whilst others waked, and on
they would go the Rulers and Heads being the forwardest of all, when the
enemy saw that, the Text says, they were extremely cast down, because they
saw the work was wrought by the hand of God: So that enemies fail in their
spirits, when they see without changing the Nobles and Leaders are resoluedly
set to carry on this work, That Christ shall be set up for Lord and King.

And thus Beloved I have cleared the first Branch of this observation: That the
greatest joy that can be to any people is to see such a concurrence of heart,
to have the Lord Christ set up for Lord and King.

For the Application of it I shall insist only upon two things.

First, what infinite cause have all we that are here gathered together, to
bless the Lord for this day, for this very day, and all these days wherein we
now live: I confess Beloved, I discern there are Use 1. Of thanksgiving: thus
being our present condition.
very many with whom you shall never talk, but they are complaining of the
miserableness of our days, oh the times are miserable! what glorious times
had we three or four years, or five or seven years ago, for then they had
trading, plenty, and ease, and every one could sit under his own vine, and his
fig tree, no adversary nor evil occurrent, and now they hear of nothing but
wars, and blood, and exhausting of treasure, and loss of their children and
kindred, and plundering their goods every where, so that there is nothing but
complaining amongst a world of people, as if our days were most miserable: Now
Beloved, give me leave to speak my thoughts freely, I will set aside my Text,
and the matter I am in hand with, and yet I will cofidently affirm, that our
days now are better then they were seven years ago: Because it is better to
see the Lord executing Judgment, then to see men working wickedness, and to
behold a people lie wallowing in their blood, rather then apostating from God,
and embracing of Idolatry, and superstition, and banishing of the Lord Christ
from amongst them: Set the work of this Text aside, and the days are not so
miserable now, as they were then, but take this in, which I am handling, and I
will here (in the wisest and greatest Auditory that any man in this Age has
preached unto) not fear to say, that since England was England, since any
Book was written concerning England, never was their that cause of joy and
rejoyceing as there is this very day in England: Was there ever a Parliament in
England known, which laid the cause of Christ and Religion so to heart as this
Parliament has done; Did ever any Parliament till now with David, swear as in
the 132. Psalm, That they will never give rest to their eyes, nor slumber to
their eyelids, till they have found out a place to set the Ark of Christ upon,
to set up Christ for their King, Did ever Parliament call such an Assembly of
Divines and make them by solemn Vow, or Oath engage themselves to present
nothing to them, but what should be (to their best understanding) the very will
of the Lord God; was there ever Parliament and Nobility, and Ministers, and
Citizens, and so many ten thousands of all sorts in England till now, who did
join in such a Covenant, yea, the two Nations together, that they will to
their uttermost, endeavor the Reformation of Religion, in the purity of it,
and preservation of it according to Gods Word; Did ever (when heretofore
England has been engaged in war and blood) the City of London, the rest of
the Tribes, the Godly Party throughout England, so willingly exhaust
themselves, only that Christ might be set up, and willingly, saying every day
to the Lord God, Lord take all, so Christ may be but King; Did ever any of you
read it to be thus with England till now? My heart is toward the Governors
of England, which thus willingly offer themselves, and I cannot but tell you,
that I think you should all do as David and the Nobles did, when they fetched
up the Ark of God from Kiriath-Jearim: And I the father instance in it, because
their case and ours were very like, for there the Ark had been in Captivity
amongst the Philistines, and when it was brought out of Captivity* and placed
at Kiriath-Jearim, ^it was but in Confinio Philisti^^^um, near the border of
the Philistines, whither when Gods people went to worship, they went in danger,
they were subject to the incursions of the Philistines, and therefore it is
said, all Is^^el mourned after the Lord, that is, They could never go to
Worship, but they went in fear of some mischief, but now when David and the
Nobles join together, to bring up the Ark of God, and to set it in a fit place
for the glory of it, they all danced and skipped for joy, and King David the
most joyful Dauncer among them. Though Michal scoffed at him; and if this be
to be vile (says he) I will be more vile then thus: I will dance again
before the Lord: Thus should we do. When Jehoiada the high Priest on a
sudden brought out young King Joash, when the people thought they should have
always lain under the Tyranny of Athalyah, and never seen a Prince more of
David's race, when such an unexpected favor was bestowed upon them, how did
they shout and joy? Thus should our souls do; Honorable and Beloved, had you
ever more cause of joy? Verily, if there be any in this Assembly, that thinks
not this a sufficient retribution and satisfaction for all his Twentieth Part,
for all his Contributions, for all his Payments, and Hazards, if he think
himself not well appayed to see the Lord doing all this, I say he is blind, I
say his heart is not right with God, he has no share in this present
business: But to the rest of you, who know the glory and excellency of this
work which the Lord God is doing amongst us, I beseech you rejoice in it, and
go your ways, and eat the fat, and drink the sweet, praise the Lord for all
the good he is doing to this our Israel, and now that the walls are setting up,
do as they did in Nehemiahs days, when they had built them, they shouted and
rejoiced, so that the noise was Nehem. 8. 20.
heard, I know not how many miles off: so let all England Cry, that our blood,
our Armies, our Poverty, our Millions wherein we are engaged, are all
abundantly repayed in this, That there is such a Concurrence to set up the Lord
Christ upon his Throne, to be Lord and King over this our Israel.

And then Secondly, Let me exhort you all, to go on in this Work, which you
have set your hearts and hands unto; And 2. Exhortation to Proceed on in this
work.
wherein the Lord has mercifully Carried you on thus far, and let me be bold
first to speak to you, Right Honorable, the Lords and Commons of the
Parliament of England, we have infinite cause all To the Parl.
of us, every day to bless God for your unwearied labors, that thus you stick
to it night and day, and are not discouraged; But go on still, I beseech you,
make England a happy Nation, and though many have disserted you, be not
dismayed, I tell you their names shall be written in the Dust, when yours shall
be written in letters of Gold, and the Generations to come shall say, That
these Glorious walls of Jerusalem were built in a troublesome time, these
foundations of Gods house were laid, and the building reared up in times of
Calamity, but blessed be God, for such Lords for such Commons, which would not
be taken off; Carry on the work still, leave not a ragge that belongs to
Popery, lay not a bit of the Lords building with any thing that belongs to
Antichrist, or Antichrists stuff, but away with all of it, root and branch,
head and tail, throw it out of the Kingdom, and resolve not to leave, till
you can say, Now Christ is set upon his Throne, and England is subdued to him,
and the Good Lord carry you on to do so. And you my Righ Honorable To his
Excellence, and the rest of the Commanders.
and Excellent Lord, and the rest of the Noble Commanders that are engaged in
this service, let me speak a word unto you, I acknowledge what cause England
has to bless God; I hope your hearts believe, how dear your labors are unto
all that love God, and your unwearied pains, which you take, how they are
presented at Gods throne every day, go you on, Noble and Resolute Commanders,
go on and fight the Battles of the Lord Jesus Christ, for so I will not now
fear to call them, for although indeed at the first, the enemy did so disguise
their enterprises, that nothing clearly appeared, but only that you were
compelled to take up Arms for the defense of your Liberties, and to bring
Rebels and Traitors to condign punnishment, but now they have engaged all the
Antichristian world so far, that all Christendom, except the Malignants in
England, do now see, that the question in England is, whether Christ or
Antichrist shall be Lord or King, all in the world, I say again, except our
Malignants see it; the Protestants owning the one, and the Papists and
Popish-affected the other, as their cause. Go on therefore courageously, never
can you lay out your blood in such a quarrel, Christ shed all his blood to
save you from hell, venture all yours to set up him upon his throne, that you
may be made happy under him, that you may preserve your Liberties and Laws,
and preserve us out of the hands of them who would destroy all: And you
likewise Reverend Fathers and To the Assembly of Divines.
Brethren, you the Assembly of Divines, and the Reverend and honorable
Commissioners of the Church of Scotland joined with them for the effecting of
this work, go you on I beseech you, wait upon God, humble your selves for
former pollutions, endeavor to see the pattern of the Lords house, that you
may hold out the true description of the Lambs wife, that England may be in
love with it, that you may have in due time the glory and praise of being
Masierbuilders in this great work of God: And thou Right Honorable and
welbeloved City of London of whom I utterly want To the City of London.
words when I would speak, go on, and be a pattern to all the Cities in the
world, as thou art this day in expending all for thy Glorious King the Lord
Christ, whom thou have thus far owned, and whom thou love, the Lord has
given thee great weatlh and estate, grudge not still to lay it out in his
cause, if he had took it an other way, thou would have been contented, if
fire had burnt it, if pestilence had wasted thy inhabitants, if famine or
plunder, or any thing, thou would have been contented; but now though there
go pound after pound, and thousand after thousand, and Regiment after
Regiment, when it is for the Lord Christ, and purity of Religion which the
enemy would deprive thee of together with thy civil Liberties* never could it
go so honorably, so nobly for his glory, and thy own comfort: Go on
therefore I beseech you all, and carry on the work, and for your encouragement
remember and observe how the Lord your God goes Encouragements thereunto.
before you, observe him in all his goings, how he watches over you every day,
no weapon can prosper, that is forged against you, no tongue arises up in
Judgment against you, but the Lord condemns it, every one that pleads against
you the Lord pleads against him, and though Esaias 54. 17.
you loose many of your Noblest and wisest men, the Lord supplies all to you,
if you had all the Intelligence in the world, I know not how you should have
things discovered to you, so as the Lord has discovered them, so that if you
have Rain one day, you have sunshine another, and sometimes both of them
mingled together, And although as yet this day of our visitation is like that
day in Zachary, Neither dark nor light, but between them both, in the evening
you shall have light abundantly, Zach. 14. 6, 7:
attend therefore upon the work, and resolve (the Lord assisting you) never to
give over, till you have set up David* to be Helps and means to effect this
all: taken out of this Chap.
your King, that is, Christ upon his Throne and for your help in it, I will
commend to you certain quallifications, which you shall find in this very
Chapter, amongst them that came thus to set up David to be King.

I shall name you six or seven of them, but I will insist only upon one of
them.

1. Look into the Chapter, and you shall find that they were many of them
wisemen, that knew the times, and what belonged 1 VVisdome. verse. 32.
to every one of their duties labor for that, you have a Promise, That God
will grant wisdom to those that seek it. Secoondly, They were skillfull men
every one of them, able to do that 2 Skill. verse. 2. 33. 35, 36.
which belonged to his place: Do not you undertake any thing but what God has
fitted you for. Thirdly, They were Courageous men, their faces were like Lions,
they abhorred 3 Courage. verse 8, 21:
any danger, when it was in David's cause; labor for such a spirit; say as
Nehemiah did, should such a man as I fly, no not to save my life; fly when I
am engaged for Christ. Fourthly, 4 Love. verse. 18.
They had a Spirit of Love, infinite love to David, and his Cause, you shall
find, when some of those that David most suspected, came unto him when he was
at a very low ebb, he asked them whether they came friendly and heartily, they
answered presently, thine we are, David, Peace be unto thee, etc. So say, thine
we are, Lord Christ, thine we are, peace be to thy Cause; oh come with Love,
that is the greatest means of all, it is the band of Perfection, and the only
way to build up the Church of Christ: I will, says Paul, 1 Cor. 12, ule.
show you a more excellent way, and that is Love, a more excellent way then
coming with interpretation of Tongues a more excellent way then Prophesying, the
most excellent of all others they came with infinite readiness of spirit, so
ready, that no man should need Reddinesse of mind. v. 24.
to call, go ye, and go ye, but let us go, every one striving which should
be first. Another (which indeed was a great one) was singleness of heart,
sincerity, no man driving any work or design of Verse. 33. 38. 6. Singleness
of Heart.
his own; verily, the doing of that, the looking of self ends has been the way
of them who have built up Antichrists Kingdom, but an abhorred thing among
them that build up Christ's Kingdom, they desire no other reward, but only to
see Christ on his throne; set up that, and you give them Peace enough, Gold
enough, Honor enough, you give them enough of all, so the work may be done,
for which they are employed, all these are in that Chapter.

But the greatest of all is that which I would more fully speak of, and commend
unto you, even the Concord and unity of heart, and 7. And above all, Unity and
Concord.
unity of mind, of Spirit, free from devisions and dissentions among
themselves, so my Text says, All these came with one heart, and one mind, and
again, all of them with one perfect heart, to set up David to be their King:
This I would commend to you, as the greatest means of all the rest, beloved,
there is innumerable arguments for the persuading of you to it, it is the work
of this day, you are this day met together to praise God for it, and therefore
it will be very seasonable for me to commend it to you.

1. This unity of heart, and concurrence of spirit to this work, is the
beautifullest thing in all the world* behold how comely a thing it is for
brethren to dwell together in unity, nothing more beautiful Psalm. 133. 1.
then unity and concord in a good work: All that write of beauty, say, that
Symotry is the best part of it, to have a sweet joining of spirits and hearts
together to set up Christ's Kingdom is the loveliest thing in the world.

2ly, It is vtile as well as jucundum, strong as well as lovely, it is The
strongest and most effectual means.
the greatest means of safety in all the World to have union and concord among
them that are engaged in Christ's cause, an Arch is the strongest building, and
a circle the strongest Figure, because in both each part supports and
strengthens one another in truth, it is the greatest means of safety to any
weak people: It is well observed by one, that a few despised Jews when they
are but of one Hester. 8. 11.
heart and one mind, resolved every man to stand close to other for their
lives, they have strength enough against their enemies of 127 Provinces, that
they dare not stir against them, yea it strikes terror into their enemies, when
they see how resolutely and boldly they will stand out in it; so when the Lords
people, they that own Christ's Cause are, as Solomon says, the Church of Christ
is terrible like an army with Banners, with their Banners displaied and well
ordered; there is no strength of enemies able to stand before them: and it is
observed of France, that if it do not combat it self, all the world cannot
conquer it: and Tacitus observed it long since, that the Romans had never
conquered England, if their petty Princes had not been divided among
themselves; and some Historians show, how that all the times, when England was
conquered by the Romans, Dum pugnent singuli vincuntur universi.
Saxons, Normans, it was always caused by the divisions that were among
themselves; O therefore I beseech you, since this unity and concord is such a
strength, labor to be all of one heart, and all of one mind in this Work.

And there are three things before your eyes, which may extremely whet up your
spirits to it: the one is the practice of your adversaries; Motives to unity
and concord. 1. First from the example of the enemy. Psalm. 83. 6. 7. 26.
do but mark what combinations they make, The Tabernacles of Edom and the
Ishmalites, of Moab and the Hagarens, Gebal and Ammon, and Amalech, the
Philistims, and they that dwell at Tire, Ashur joined with them, and the
children of Lot, all of them in one; Look upon them in Ireland, in England, you
shall see them bound by Oaths, by Covenants, you shall see them sending into
France, offering offensive and defensive leagues to Antichristian people: so
they will but join to come and help to ruin us; shall there be this care
among them to destroy us, and shall not we be united?

Secondly, you see, and this days work sets it before your eyes, 2. From their
endeavors to to divide us.
what infinite endeavors they use to oppose all our union, if the City and
Parliament be united, if the two Houses be united, if England and Scotland be
united, what extreme endeavors are used, what stone is not rolled, what sort
of men is not attempted, what Profession soever they be of, be they Jesuits,
be they Friars, be they Priests, be they Professors, be they such as they call
Puritanes, they try them all, to see if they can but divide the City from
Parliament, the Houses one from another, the English from the Scots, what would
they not buy it at? Hoc Illiacus velit and magno mercentur Atridae, millions of
gold would they give to effect it.

Thirdly, consider their greatest hope, and our greatest danger is in our
divisions: A Diamond (they say) is easily cut with its own dust, and a House
is then most like to fall, when all the joints of it begin to part one from
another: unity and concord among brethren, are well compared to the bars of a
Castle, not easily broken, and while they remain firm, give safety Prove. 18.
19.
and security, but when they are once broken, they will hardly be made whole:
they are also fitly compared to a Cable roap, which will not easily break, but
if once cut asunder, its hard to tie a knot upon it again. I beseech you
therefore, you honorable Lords, and Nobles, and Commons, you Reverend Divines,
you Valiant Soldiers, you worthy Citizens. I know you cannot in all things be
all of one mind, but in what you can, be all of one heart, though you cannot
in all things be of one mind; let confusion and division belong to them that
build Babel; let there be no noise heard at the rearing of the Lords Temple.

Next to the guilt of our sins, I fear nothing so much as our divisions, 3.
From the danger of divisions.
but could we first be reconciled to our God by faith, in the blood of Christ,
and be firmly united together, and set all our shoulders as one man to this
work, our enemies designs would all fail, and the work of God would prosper
in our hands; I will conclude this first Branch with that Council of the
Apostle, Phil. 2. 1. If there be therefore any Consolations in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies,
fulfill my joy; that Phil. 2. 1, 2.
ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and of one mind.
And with that 1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I beseech you brethren, by the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, 1* Cor. 1. 10.
and that there be no division among you, but that you be perfectly joined
together, in the same mind, and in the same judgment, and whereto we have
attained, let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same thing.

And so much for the first Branch of the matter of their joy; they met together
to set up David to be King, that is, David as he was a Type of our Lord Jesus
Christ, whom we are endeavoring to Exalt upon his Throne. The time commands me
to be very short in the other Branch, and I may very well, for if the Lord
should not prosper us in this, that we should not Ioyn togethee to set up
Christ, in vain shall we attempt the other; and if the Lord bless this work
in our hands; this will either in due time bring about the other, or infallibly
supply the defect of it, and make us happy without it.

Briefly, the Lesson from it is this: That such a concurrence (as is
aforementioned) to set up a Prince in this Commonweal, like to David, 2.
Branch. A great happiness in a good King. Proved by Scripture.
is a matter of great joy and rejoicing.

I shall according to promise be very brief in it: had not the time prevented,
I would have produced and opened unto you diverse examples out of the Scripture,
of the great content and joy which has bin, where there has met a concurrence
of the Nobles and Leaders of the people, 1 Cor. 29. 21. 1 King. 1. 4^. 2 King.
11. 17 etc. Nehem. 12. 4. 3 And from the relation between a King and his
people. Judge. 11. 87. 1 King 2. 43. Esaias 49. 23. People happy in a good King.
Job 29. 16. Judge. 5. 7 2 Samuel 21. 12. Lament. 4. 20. Eccles. 10. 16. Dan. 4.
21.* 2 Samuel 18. 3. Prove. 24. 21. 2 Pet. 2. 16. 1 Chronicles. 12. 18. Tit. 3. 1. Act.
4. 19. Romans 13. 1. 2 1 Kin. 21. 23. Ezra. 10. 1 Timothy 2. 12. 2 Chronicles. 15. 12.
Lev. 19. 15. Romans 13. 34. 1 Timothy 2. 2. Job 29. 16. Neh. 5. 1. etc. Miserable in
a bad King.
to set up a good Magistrate over them; viz. in David, in Solomon, in Ioash, in
Nehemiahs, and diverse others, where when good Governors and Governments have
been set up, the people have infinitely rejoiced; But you will understand it fully,
by that time I have but a little showed you the relation, betwixt a Prince and
his people; he is their Head, their Lord, their Father, they are his children,
he is (so the Scripture calls it) to be the light of their eyes, the breath of
their nostrils a kind of Fountain to derive all good to them; this he is ex
Officio; and therefore it follows, that the goodness, or illness of Princes,
is not to themselves alone, but all their people do share with them, either in
blessedness, or in misery, according as the Prince is in goodness, or in
badnesse: Let the Prince be a good man, a David, he is then like unto
Nebuchadnezzars tree, which he saw in his vision, that had meat for all, the
fruit thereof much, and boughs for birds to make their nests in, and shelter
for all beasts, that they might dwell under it; that is, affording relief and
comfort to all: He is the light of the eyes to his people, the breath of their
nostrils, he is worth 10000. of them: And to such an one, the people do most
joyfully (as they ought to do) yield reverence, (even the greatest next unto
God) and allegiance to their person, and authority, subjection and obedience to
their Laws, maintenance out of their own estates, and furnish them with
counsel, and all manner of Prayer, cheerfully as they ought to do; because
under such a Prince, religion is preserved, if it be corrupt, it is purged,
reformed, justice is administered without partiality, good men are encouraged,
Peace is procured, and preserved; Trades are likewise enriched; Learning, and
all such like promoted, the Poor are relieved, all made happy: can you wonder
then, that where there is a concurrence to have such an one set up, there is
great Joy: on the other side, let the Prince be either weak and foolish, or
wicked, and ungodly, riotous and luxurious, let him be cruel and tyrannical,
O how miserable are that people under him? how great is the darkness, where
the light is turned into darkness? how miserable is the body, where the very
Organs of their breathing, the breath of their nostrils comes to be corrupted,
or taken from them? how miserable are they, when the very Fountain, that should
afford them comfort is Poisoned? such a Prince is like to Jeroboam, ^ King. 26.
16
that compels the people to sin and misery; like unto the Dragon who when he
fell from heaven, drew the very Stars from heaven to the ground with him;
like to great Cedars which when they fall, Revel. 12. 4.
break all the woods that are round about them; thus by their Prince are a
people made happy or miserable, and so Solomon expresses it in his
Ecclesiastes, Happy art thou O Land, if they Prince be thus, Miserable art thou
O Land, if thy Prince be thus; must you not then Eccles. 10. 16, 17.
count it a matter of great joy, to have a good King set up to rule over you?

I add secondly, that this is a greater matter of joy, when the Nobles, the
Parliament, the leading men of the City and Tribes concur 2.
to have such a one, both because that is the most likely means to Such a
concurrence a great means to effect it. 2 King 11. 4. etc. Or supply the want
of it.
obtain it, God promising his blessings to such endeavors; and they likewise
having some beams of Gods authority put upon them, may by their Council and
Example, make the Prince to be good, and enable him to carry out the public
good; or if that cannot be attained, (through Gods mercy) by their means,
there may be a supply of what is wanting in him to make the people happy,
though they fail of it in the other; I shall make a brief application of this
second Branch, and so pass over it.

First, if to have a David to be our King, is such a blessedness? Application.
1. They are therefore cursed who hinder this.
then how cursed, and ten thousand times cursed are they who endeavor for ever
to rob us of that happiness: who as they would rob us of Christ, the greatest
happiness for our souls, so they would for ever deprive us, of having any hope
to be blessed under a Prince, that should be like unto David; who have rent off
the person, and the affection of our Sovereign from us; who endeavor to
instill principles of cruelty into his breast, against us, and foment them in
him, who have provoked him to raise Arms to destroy his Nobles, and Commons,
and Divines, and this most honored City, and even all who have been most
faithful, have put him into Arms to ruin us; and when we but stand up for our
own defense, represent us to him as Traitors, and Rebels, because we will not
give up our Throats to be cut by them, at their pleasure, and our goods to be
wholly possessed by them; If I had all Rhetoric, it would yet be short of
speaking of these men, what they do deserve. I can more fitly compare them to
none, then to the Jews long since in England, who (before they were banished
hence) threw bags of poison into the fountains and wells, that the people were
to drink of, and so endeavored to poison them all. Accursed men there are who
labor to make the breach so wide, that we should never hope to sit under the
shadow of our Prince, with any hope and confidence; who would rather have our
streets run with our blood, and venture their own too, then that we should
have a Prince like unto David, that is, Just, ruling in the fear of the Lord,
to be like the morning light, and the morning without clouds when the sun
arises: I suppose none of these men are here present, and I love not to speak
much of absent men, but only tell you, what cause we have (as to curse them)
so to bless, the Lord God, who hitherto has delivered us out of their hands,
and let the Lord, the righteous Lord, be judge between us and them.

The other use of it is, to you, Honorable, Reverend and beloved, who next
unto the setting up of Christ, have hitherto indeavored 2. Exhortation to
endeavor after this happiness.
by your Petitions, your Remonstrances, your Supplications, and by all means
possible, so rescue our Sovereign out of their hands, that not only there might
be a right understanding betwixt us and Him, but that He might in truth reign
over us as David, and His Throne made like unto David's; I humbly pray you, go
on in these endeavors, that if the Lord see it good, it may be so; if He will
have it otherwise, we shall have the more comfort, what ever betides us, in the
unfeignednesse of our desires, and endeavors after it.

If you demand what hope is there of it; or what further means may Means how to
effect it.
we use for the attaining of it? I shall speak only as a Divine, in commending
these three things: The first is; Be all of you humbled before God for your own
sins, and for all the sins that England lies guilty of; for though we are ready
enough to impute it to such and such that are about Him; or it may be to some
Principles of His own, believe it (Beloved) what Solomon says of the change of
Princes; Prove. 28. 2.
For the iniquity of a Land, many are the Princes of it: so for the iniquity of
the Land, it is thus with us this day; and that is in truth the greatest cause
of it; the Lord could blow all this over presently, and certainly, would, if
he were but reconciled to England; David did one Act, which cost a matter of
three score and ten thousand men's lives in a few days, a vainglorious act, in
numbering the people; but if you mark the Text, it says, That Israel had
provoked God to wrath, and 2 Samuel 24. 1.
then God let Satan loose upon David, to move him to that vile act, and the
Lord did but take that as an occasion; and so when the Lord had an intent to
destroy the men of Shichem, who had set up Abimelech to be their King, is said,
The Lord sent an evil spirit between ^udg. 9. 23, ^6, 57.
Abimelech and them, that they might devour and tear one another; Why was it?
even for the wickedness that the people as well as their King had been guilty
of; so then, if ever you would have your Prince restored as a David, to be a
blessing to you, labor all to be humbled every one for the iniquity of his own
heart and life, and for all the prodigious wickednesses that this Kingdom
stands guilty of.

Secondly, Commend him to the Lords working upon his heart, by your daily
prayers: The Kings heart (says Solomon) is in the hand 2. P^o. 21. 1.
of the Lord, as the rivers of water, he turns it which way he pleases;
meaning plainly, there is no way in the world to alter the spirit of a Prince,
but only by the work of God, and God can do it in a moment: Esau came against
his Brother with four hundred armed men, full of deadly rage, resolving to
destroy him; Jacob spent a night in prayer, on a sudden God turned Esau's
heart, that he fell upon his brothers neck, and kissed him, as if he had been
the dearest brother in the world to him; And had the King forty thousand of the
bravest soldiers under heaven, were all our Armies dissolved, were our Gates
opened, were they marching in with a resolution to plunder our Cities, to
ravish our wives, and make our City flow with blood, if the Lord did but speak
the word, their hearts would be turned presently, therefore do as Nehemiah did,
when he was to deal with a King, Nehem. ^.
that was of a nature rugged enough, when he was to go to him, he first made
his prayer to God, and the Lord turned the heart of the King toward him; do as
the good people did in the Psalm, beg of God that the King might hear: Save
Lord, Let the King hear us Psalm. 20. ult.
when we call; commend it to the Lord, and the Lord can bring it about easily.

Thirdly, especially you that are in great place, that are the Lords and
Commons, our Senators, if ever you would have it well, you must do your utmost
to remove all the wicked from his Throne, and in stead of them, you must
endeavor to have men of wisdom and godliness placed about him; this must be
done, if you will hope for a blessing in Gods way; Take away (says Solomon)
the dross from the Prove. 25. 4.
silver, then there shall come forth a vessel for the refiner, a choice
vessel, fit for an honorable use; but otherwise let him make up a vessel of
dross and silver together, who will regard it? So (says he) Take away the
wicked from the King, and his Throne is established in righteousness; And
certainly, if wicked men be pests and plagues, in what part of the Land soever
they are found, they are much more so, when they are found in the Courts of
Princes; Labor therefore to remove them, and to set others in their room:
Solomon says excellently in that place of the Proverbs, For the iniquity of
the Land, Prove. 28. 2.
many are the Princes of it; then it follows, But by a man of understanding
and knowledge, the State thereof shall be prolonged; I think he means it not
only of a wise Prince, but he means this; that as the wicked men corrupts their
Princes, draws them to dissoluteness, tyranny, etc. and so to ruin them and
the Land: So grave and good Counselors, prudent men about him, are great means
to prolong the tranquillity of it: I could show you by examples how, not only
wise and good Princes, wise and good Statesmen, but even women (as some of
them have been the ruin of many Princes; so by the seasonable advice of women)
Princes and Cities have been preserved: you know the wise advice of Abigail
kept David from 1 Samuel 25. 1.
shedding innocent blood. And there was a poor woman in the City 2 Samuel 20.
of Abel, who by speaking to Ioab, delivered all the City; and Solomon tells
you, in the ninth of Ecclesiastes, of a poor, wise, good man, who delivered a
small City, when a great King came against it, with Eccles. 9. 13.
a great Army; I beseech you therefore let it be in your endeavors, to get
such about him; I hope you imagine not that I would have such set about Him for
their own preferments or gain, no, no, the man that aims at such things, will
never be good for any thing; he who once sets up Mammon to be his God, is not
fit to serve either God or his Prince, or Church or State; but I speak of men
of integrity and faithfulness, of goodness, who will trample all under their
feet; so that Christ might reign, and that a Kingdom might be made happy; such
men set about a Prince, may make a King like David, and preserve him such a
one, if he be so; and so (right honorable) have I done with the first part of
my Text, The matter of their joy; the concurrence of them, to set up David to
be their King.

I should now have come to the second, The manner of expressing 2. Obs. ^uch
joy may be expressed by feasting.
their joy, which was by feasting; you will have enough of that anon: All that I
shall say shall be, to persuade you to take heed that you have not too much of
it; I have not time to handle it, otherwise I could have showed you, How Gods
people used on such occasions as these, to have feasting and rejoicing: But I
must confess our days are such in regard of the manifold distresses, that
this Kingdom and poor Ireland are wrapped in, that were it not upon such an
occasion as this feast is, I should say to all Feasters as Vriah said to David,
when he would have him go home to his wife, The Arc (said he) and Israel, and
my Lord Ioab, and all lie in the open field, and shall I go home to be merry
with my wife, as the Lord lives I will not do it? so I would say else to all
Feasters, Is Ireland undon? and so many Counties in the Kingdom in that
distress, are there so many hundreds, so many thousands that lived heretofore
like Nobles, like Gentlemen, who now have hardly bread to put into their
bellies, and can thou find money and cost in needless and Prodigal
feasting? this I should else have said; But I confess (beloved) to my poor
observation, Never was there a feast upon a better occasion among us, nor for a
better end, then the Feast of this day; not upon a better occasion, that when
the enemy did endeavor to ruin us, by our division, that this should be made
an occasion of our feasting and rejoicing together; and for such an end, that
whereas they would feign blow it over all the Kingdom, over all the world, that
we are rent and divided a sunder, the Lords from Commons, and both Houses from
the City, etc. we purposely Feast to praise God, and tell all the world there
is no such matter; that we are all one, of one heart, and one mind; that our
eating and drinking should speak this out, that all the world should hear it;
It is a blessed opportunity, and the Lord guided them who ever first persuaded
to it; I only pray you (Lords and Gentlemen) in your Feasting, do only what
becomes a Feast, which follows a holy Convocation, a day of rejoicing in the
Lord; and therefore in it, observe these few Rules. Remember, (first) God must
be regarded, Rules for Feasting.
banish not Christ out of your Company; let there be no carriage at your Table
which may grieve him, and make him say, This Room I delight not to be in;
Remember all the Feasts of Gods people in the Old Testament, they were
Sacrifices, or Feasts which were accompanied with Sacrifices, yea the very
heathen counted them prophan men, who would offer to make a feast of that, that
was not first offered to their gods, hereby to make it blessed to them; So do
you eat and drink as in the presence of the Lord, that you may praise the Name
of the Lord, who has showed this mercy to you; do as the little birds, who
take not one drop, but they lift up their heads to heaven, as if they would
tell all the world, whence they received their food; so do you acknowledge the
Lord, give him his glory and his praise; let there be no uncomely carriage
among you; I should justly be blamed if I should think you needed any
persuasion to keep you from drinking healths, from riot and excess; I know
you abhor it, but I beg that none of your servants, nor attendants may do it,
that nothing may be done which would grieve the Lord.

Secondly, let the maine end of your feasting be Symbolum and vinculum
charitatis, a pledge and bond to show, and more, to make you all one, of one
heart, and one mind; that you may pledge one another in such a Cup, as may not
only speak you all to be one, but may attain the very end, for which this
feast is made, more to engage you in this Common cause. That this Feast, may be
as a Feast, which (I think) Lucian speaks of it, where a poor wronged man
made a Feast of an Ox, and every one who tasted of his meat, did thereby
engage himself to live and dye with that poor man to recover his right, in
somewhat that he was wronged in; and so let this engage your Spirits, that now
you have eaten and drunk of their Cup, that Your and their Spirits, and
Prayers, and Hearts, and Purses shall be all one; O if this might be the
carriage of it, this day would be a blessed day.

There is one thing more, that must not be forgotten, you must in such
feastings as these, Remember the poor, for whom nothing is provided; 3.
always did Gods people make at their feasts collections or contributions in
Hester, in Nehemiah, etc. Go your ways and eat and Hester 9. Nehem. 8.
drink, and remember them, for whom nothing is provided; and the very heathens
upon such occasions would send portions at their Festival times to the poor
and needy. And for that very end I confess I was in hope that at such a great
meeting as this is, there would have been some public contribution and
collection, that there being so many poor brethren in the Town, plundered, and
undone, and distressed, our feasting might have given them a refreshing also;
but it did not appear fit (as I am informed) to the wisdom of this Noble
City, when they had invited the Honorable Houses of Parliament and others, to
refresh the poor at the cost of their ghests, but what is to be done for the
poor, they will do it at their own proper costs and charges, I know they will
not forget them; but I beseech you all not to omit this duty upon this
Festival day; though there be no Basins at the door, before you sleep, find
some Basin or other, find some poor, to whom you may do somewhat, that they
may know that your hearts have remembered the afflicted in this day, wherein God
has refreshed you: and so much for this time.

FINIS.

