(...) The Country Shepherd that searce sees a Man
In six or seven days, but hills and dales,
For ought I know may know as much of Pan,
As he that sits composing hours tales.
Neither do I think all men castawayes that are not of my mind;

Nor will I think all damned that will not come
To worship at my Mountains; though I know
Each Molehill seems a Mountain unto some;
And every Cock will on his Mountain crow.
For neither on this Mountain, nor on that,
Nor yet on yonder Molehill, will I build
A Church upon; but only on that flat
And lowest valley in my Grandsirs field:
And if Mr. Envy object anything, I will give no other answer but this: What I
have written, I have written.

But there be some have gotten mighty skill
To hide the devil, though they never could
Endeavor to resist him with their will,
And to displace him durst not be so bold,
Because they think it is in vain to try:
They think he is strong, and so he is indeed;
No hold so strong to prove our misery,
As for to think we cannot quite be freed:
For if we think he is strong, and there is none stronger,
This very thought will prove our woes prolonger.
Let him alone, says one, and let him dwell
In his fools paradise, he will know no better:
For there be some have lived so long in Hell,
Think there is no place can yield them comforts greater.
Quere.
Proud Cobbler do not suite beyond thy Last.
Who taught thee this? Art thou more wiser grown
Then all thy Teachers living gone and past,
Whose walkings true humility have shown?
Answer.
Truly I cannot think amiss of thee;
As for thy speech, I will not much contrary:
Let others think even what they list of me,
I will not much from this thy compass vary:
If I should say contrary unto this,
My conscience then would give my tongue the lie,
And at this folly every Boy would hiss;
Yea, even the stones on which I walk would cry.
What shall we think of all our Fathers old,
Which now are dead, and gone, and in the Dust?
How shall we with presumption be so bold
To say, Their souls are perished in their Rust;
Their hopes are lost, they lived in ignorance,
In Monasteriall buildings spent their times;
Whose superstitious pipings made them dance
All in a mist among the cloudy rimes?
I should be sorry for to speak or think
Amiss of any one that does endeavor
To walk with God; for they and we do drink
All of one Cup; and why shall any sever
What God has joined? Our souls and theirs together
Shall meet in God, even in the Sea of love;
For God is love, respecting one and either:
His noble ways all humble souls approve;
But lofty souls prefer their own good thinking
Before his noblewayes, and humble Stations,
And scorn the Troughes appointed for Lambs drinkings,
And to the Wolvish nature have Relations.
God was a God, and is from age to age,
In infancy, in childhood, and in youth;
And he has aged men that can presage,
And in all ages used them for his mouth.
He speaks to us, and we regard him not;
He passes by, and we cannot perceive him;
His lively breathings we have soon forgot,
And with our breathings we would fain deceive him.
And how can we in conscience speak or think,
That our forefathers were but cast-awayes?
This bitter potion yet could never sink
Into my Breast; nor will I speak the praise
Of any one that vomits up his Gall
Against our Grandsires, honest-hearted men,
That built us goodly Churches, more then all;
Few will do now adays as they did then:
They loved our Nation well that built us these;
And in contempt of scorn they set up Crosses,
And took no thought to please or to displease,
But underneath that Banner bore their losses.
To Shepherds, Heardsmen, and to them that use
The Threshers Flayl, he has and does appear;
Vine-dressers, Ploughmen, he did never refuse;
The Beggar as the King, to him is near:
Our times are in his hand, our barren days,
In which we think our selves too old to bear,
When Hairs grow white, and human strength decays,
He to a flame the Widows coal shall rear.
Old Israel shall be his strength again,
And both their Bones in Canaan Land shall rest
Although in Egypt they as yet remain,
And with Taskmasters mightily oppressed;
Yet out of Egypt God has called his Son:
Although it is good in youth to bear the yoke.
God has his time, and when the Glass is run,
The evil nature will in Jordan choke.
But now we talk as men, and bandy words,
As men throw Fire-bals with an intent
To burn up all; or with our fourbish'd Swords,
To cut down all opposers of content:
And right or wrong, we fight for victory,
When truth lies low and trampled on with feet,
Our squint-eyed love is seen apparently
With only How do ye? As the common greet.
This as a Porch for Introduction stands,
To entertain all comers of good will;
I pass not if some come with bloody hands,
Or with intent to murder or to kill:
Yet let them walk within my Porch a while,
And view what I Have portray'd in every corner,
Such contemplations may produce a smile,
And may effect some goodness in a scorner;
The very pavements will declare and tell,
Love travels here and there; for she leaves signs,
Where ere she comes, her footsteps are known well;
She her reproofs with sweetness enterlines;
But had you eyes to see within the vail,
Or could you draw the curtain, and behold
Love in her simple beauty, 'twould assail
And move your dry affections seven fold:
In the mean time walk here, and contemplate
A while of love; for strife grows out of date.
But,
Reader, art thou a Reader? Then I write
To thee, that never tookst degree in Schools;
And be not angry if I do invite
Thee to a Feast, even to a Feast of Fools:
For Fools by nature, are, in my esteem,
To be preferred above the common sort
Of learned Knaves, whose gravity may seem
To pass along for honest men in sport:
But let them pass in sport: But when I saw
Some throwing Firebrarnds among the Thatch
Where poor Folks dwell, I did discern the Paw
And Cloven-footed Beast began to catch;
Then I began to view them Tooth and Nail,
Comparing Teeth with Teeth and Eyes with Eyes;
Then somewhat doubting lest my skill should fail,
My own experience fell to underprize:
Then fell to viewing of my Lambs again,
And over-view'd my Sheep, and well observing
How they their qualities do still retain,
And from their nature very seldom swerving:
Heed these like Lambs, quoth I, that come thus armed,
With Tooth and Nail to bite and to destroy?
For very few can pass by them unharm'd,
Or else deluded by some base decoy.
It Is well for us, and happy, may I say,
Are we that live in such a knowing age,
That we are able for to show the way
Unto our rumbling Shepherds, though they rage:
Yea, we have found, and have discerned in part
A far more excellent and lovely way
Then ever yet was faund by humane Art,
Though they went seeking a whole Summers day:
And now it is almost natural to us
To know our Shepherds voice, from others pratings;
For no decoy can imitate him thus,
To follow to the death in imitatings.
Well then, I think it is no Heresy
To mingle souls with kisses, when we find
Lifeblood run through the Veins, and can epsy
Nature rejoice to elevate the mind.
For as the Face does answer, when the Face
Makes signs to speak, and cannot choose but speak,
And understands full well the secret trace
Of overcharged minds that needs must break;
And when we see by nature every thing
is glad to see his likeness, and desires
For to produce his likeness, when the spring
And streams of love sends forth uncooling fires:
Even so it is in the lofty soaring soul
That-slees beyond the raging waves, and Sees,
A Bed of Roses where she means to roll
And will not stay in regions that do freeze:
And as the earth sends forth her rich increase,
And earthly minds rejoice in earthly things;
So multiplying souls will never cease,
Till they enclose eternity with wings.
Blush then, ye mortals, ah! Why will you die?
How can you live on these decaying pleasures?
Your life is hid, alas, you cannot spy
Nothing but emblems of some future treasures;
No substances, but shadows: Why do you you stand
Here all the day? Are you not hired yet?
Look yonder, Sirs, why don't ye see the hand
That points to working ere the Sun be set?
Must all our time be spent in taking care,
In looking after Asses? Can you see
No further then the manger of your fare?
Will nothing with your poor conceits agree,
But Oxford Husks? Will words your bellies fill?
Or can you like Camelions live by air?
Will knowledge from the Eastern wind distill?
Or Eagles feed on fancies of despair?
Eagles have eyes, and they can see afar;
And Moles have eyes, but undermine the earth:
But it is poor Music, stops at every jar;
But humble souls nere want some holy mirth.
Marsh his mickle Monument.
THe Shepherds Boy perceives the Winter gone,
And being loath to loose his precious time,
Looks out, and sees the lovely spring come on,
Joyful to take the season in the prime,
Begs liberty of Pan for half a day,
To recreate him, with his fellow Swayns;
A place appointed for disport and play,
Where they right kindly each one entertain;
Whose country kindness, friendly complements,
Was, Welcome Tom, and John, and Ned, and Will,
Harry, and Phil, and Ralph, with fair intents,
Near to a Wood, sat down beneath a Hill,
In Countrey-Gray, and Russet comely Weeds,
With Sheep-Hooks in their hands, engraven fine,
And at their Girdles stuck their Oaten Reeds,
And every one a bush of Eglantine,
Under a spreading Tree made Arbor wise;
Nature and Art did sympathize together
To keep out Sol; yet Sol did ways devise,
And with his rays did force a passage thither:
But mark how soon the Milk-maids miss their mates,
Their loving Mates are gone to merry making,
With watery Eyes Sicely, and Doll relates.
Their sorrows, and of sorrows each partaking;
Fair Isabel and Dinah range the field,
Where they might see the frisking Lambs at play;
The Shepherdesses at the last beheld
Them as some strangers who had lost their way,
Saying, Ho come hither, for we know your minds;
We know you seek the Shepherds Lads; I Will tell
You where to find them; for ye are our friends
And fellow servants, and we love you well;
It Is our desire you run to Sisse and Doll,
And bid them bring their Cates, the best they can,
And weel be ready, or within a call,
For to accommodate you. Then they ran
And brought the news: The Milkmaids they provide
Their Curds and Cream, Fresh-Cheese, and other cheer,
Custands and Cheese-Cakes of the best beside,
A Pasted wall well filled with good red Deer;
They quickly dress themselves in Milk-white sleeves,
Kercheifs, and Aprons, Hand-Cuffes Laced and Purl'd,
And without asking fairly took their leaves,
As if intending for another world;
Like nimble Does, they trace the flowery plains;
The Shepherdesses met them on the Green,
And making haste, for want of time complains,
Lest over-late they should in love be seen;
As if composed of love, and overjoyed
To see their Mates, came rudely rushing in:
The Shepherds were with better mirth employed;
Yet to comply, at least they do begin,
Welcome, sweet friends, kind Dorothy and Sisse,
And Isabella fair, and all the rest,
You Shepherdesses help to work our bliss,
As by your coming have right well expressed;
Come, sit you down, and weel partake with you
Of your choice dainties, since it is your will;
And what is ours we freely will bestow,
And for our friendship you may claim itstill.
The Maidens they present their dishes fine,
Rudely, yet sweetly; for it was their love;
On natures Carpet, saying, Come and dine,
Our true affections did this voyage move
To come and seek you: Now we know your haunt,
Weel visit you sometimes, against your will
There Is something sure in you that does enchant,
That made us follow you unto this Hill,
Each Shepherd had his Bottle by his side,
Full of good Liquor, some of every sort,
Cider and Perry, Beer well Clarified,
And Bottle-Ale, that gave a good report,
Wine, and Metheaglin of the British making;
Excess consists not in variety;
The sober usage sets no heads on aching;
For there was Nectar always standing by.
When all were set in order in the place,
One of the Shepherds Lads, they called him Harry,
A sober youth, stepped up, and he said Grace,
And with much gravity himself did carry.
The GRACE.
THou All in all, thou only God of Love,
That in all Creatures every where do move:
Thou God of life, and of immortal Being,
Thou only Seer, come, and help our seeing:
Sweetness it self, yet flowing to each creature,
Making partakers of thy lovely nature,
Inflame our minds, now we are come together,
And with thy breathing, bid us welcome hither;
That we may see thee in these outward things,
And elevated with immortal Wings,
May fly beyond our selfnesse, and forget
That arm of Flesh that does support us yet,
And come and view thee at a higher Table,
And feeding on these breakings may be able
In thine own language for to talk of thee,
And in thy noble ways to walk with thee:
Refresh our spirits with thy living food,
And with thy wisdom, our eternal good;
That we thy goodness and thy sweetness may
Declare in this our everlasting day.
Friends, now you see your cheer; fall to, I pray,
And let us be merry; we are servants all
To mighty Pan; he is able to defray
Far greater charge, and will, when time does fall;
For he has flocks upon a thousand Hills;
And on the plains has Herds of Cattle store;
His Corn and Wine each Grange and Village fills,
He Is always giving, yet is never poor;
And at noon times when we are at repast,
He walks among us kindly in the Hall,
And bids us eat, and drink, and make no waste;
Be cheerful, friends, for ye are welcome all.
We have a day, another day in chase,
Wherein weel bid our Neighbors Swayns to bring
The Lasses of the Plains, who with sweet Grace
Can play upon the Violet and sing:
And there is a Damsel I have heard some tell,
Can play upon the Lute exactly, and can raise
The mind of all the hearers with a spell
Which to the soul another soul conveyes:
This I have heard, and I believe in part,
That Aerie notes do steal away the sense,
And secretly conveyes another heart,
Who in admiring of some excellence,
Soars up aloft, filled with extreme desire,
To reach up to the center still does hover,
And fain would close; draws near, and would draw nigher,
Till with eternity all covered over:
Forget^ing things below, is well content
To press unto the mark, that mighty prize;
And swallowed up in life and ravishment,
Drowned with delight. looks up with fixed eyes
Unto the Hills, not daring to look down
Upon the empty pleasures that do bring
Fears, losses, and amazements leaden Crown,
Whose best adorning is the Serpents sting:
Such Music I have often desired to hear,
Though I disdain not for to hear a Song,
Even of the meanest Swayn, if he does steer
His course the lowly valleys all along.
In the mean time I Will drink to honest Sisse,
To Dorothy and Isabella kind,
I should be sorry any here to miss;
And to the Shepherdesses there behind;
You sit as if you had no skill in love,
Or if faint-hearted, do digress from kind;
We ^hepherds are disposed for to rove
With random words sometimes, to show our mind:
Think not our minds are altogether vain,
And full of folly, cause we let our tongues
To speak to you like men; or entertain
A mind to work your prejudice or wrongs:
Yet know, that we are men, and love like men;
We eat, and drink, and sleep, like other creatures;
For you to love, and we not love again,
Were altogether to forget our natures:
We live like men, and we do love our like;
Like in affection is the strongest tie;
Who that denies, at natures Law does strike;
For like rejoices when his like stands by:
This is in Pan our noble Master, who
Is much delighted when he does behold
Fair Innocence ranging to and fro
Amongst the Lambs and Kidlings of our fold:
The greatest Joy he does and can express,
Is to behold his flocks and herds to flourish:
But when he does behold them in distress,
He blames the Shepherds, that are slack to nourish
The tender Lambs committed to their charge,
Who at their will may lead them where they list,
But are contented they should run at large,
Which if they would but whistle with their fist,
Or if loves eccho's were but sometimes heard,
To pierce the Hills and Valleys where they wander,
A check of love would make them so afear'd,
Twere needless for a dog to be commander:
And if a Shepherd shall for virtues cause
Despise his fellow, then me thinks I see
A Devil that's incarnate; for his Claws
And cloven Feet are manifest to me,
Oh then, my soul, take heed thou come not there,
Where such ill spirits haunt; for where they dance,
The circle of their foul enchants appear,
And of Pans nature show their ignorance:
Into their secrets let not my soul come;
Avaunt, you Gypsies, fickle fortune tellers,
Go dance the round where you find better room,
In younder Meadow with the fairy dwellers,
Where Screetch-Owls and the dismal Satyrs haunt,
Inventing mischief foul; malignant spirits,
Croaking ill luck, like Envies blast, that daunt,
Where malcontents infernal dales inherits:
Though we are men, and live and die as men;
Yet we have thoughts that slay beyond the spears,
Transcendent thoughts, that knows both where and when
To flee away, beyond the common fears,
When in a hubbub all the world appears,
And the foundations fail, and mountains tremble,
As if the Clouds would fall about their ears;
Our spirits then we presently assemble
For they have wings to bear us to a place
Beyond the raging waves, wherewith a song
Of exultation, misty clouds do chase
Away those vapors that our sight does wrong.
Will. Stay Brother, stay, you go beyond your bounds;
You speak to men and women that do carry
More flesh then spirit; such high things confounds
The memory of weaklings; lets not vary;
Speak in our Language, for we understand
Our mother tongue, with that we travel far;
Lets not forget that we have flocks at hand,
And too rich Pasture may our Kidlings mar:
We know thou art and have bin long in love,
And ere't be long we trust thou shal't obtain
Thy strong desire, and we do well approve,
And hope thy longing will not be in vain;
Thy sweet affections can no way miscarry:
Thou art but young, take heed, soar not too high;
But stay with us a while, good honest Harry,
And in a lower style thy measures try;
Come, sing a song, and we will bear a part
In joy and sorrow, and we will express
Our best affections; and each loving heart,
I dare be bold to say, does think no less.

Harry. Then tune your Pipes (sweet friends) and I Will begin,
And set your strings unto a lowly strain;
Yea, all of you that in Loves bands have bin,
And bear a part with me, a rural Swayn:
For now I sing of Love, but I want words
For to express the things my mind affords.

The Argument of the Song.
THe longing soul stirs up her holy fires,
And in a Song sends forth her strong-desires
To her most dear and best beloved Christ,
Whose sweet society she long has miss't.
The Song.
O Thou the fairest, fair without compare,
Whose kind embraces passing pleasing are,
Whose unctions sweet, from head to feet,
Oredows thy comely parts,
Eustaming minds, and making joyful hearts;
And for the sent of odours spent,
And rare composed smell,
The fairest Virgins love thee passing well.
Vouchsafe to cover these black spots of mine;
With these same white and spotless robes of thine,
And then though I deformed lie,
And black; I shall appear
A comely Virgin in thine eye, and dear.
Sore sick of love, unapt to move;
Oh let thy gentle hand
Reach forth thy comforts, or I cannot stand.
Oh when will thou transport me to that place,
Where no disturbance shall prevent thy grace;
Where fill of love oreflowings prove?
That we may there enjoy,
In that sweet bed of love, without annoy:
For when I mind thy kisses kind,
When first in love we fell,
That now me thinks thy absence proves a Hell.
If thou defire to see me yet alive,
Make haste, and see how I for breath do strive:
Oh come away, make no delay,
And sow thy precious seed;
For nothing else our sweet delight will breed:
Big swollen with grief, there is no relief
Can wipe my weepings dry:
Oh come, and give me children else I die.
For unto me thou art more lovely far,
Then any beauties to my senses are:
And wheresoere thy shinings are,
And thy image I epsy,
Me think it is (...) to mine eye:
^
^
Yea then, even then, would I take part with thee.
For though, (...), I have enforced bin
To yield unto that (...) betraying sin,
(...) field from friends exiled
When, I (...) alone,
(...) came none;
(...) safety most,
Al^^ poor (...) I sude
Strong (...) and shares, that hands and jeet do bind.
If I have (...) on ary wight,
Or ought (...) my chief ^^light,
Siace first that (...) did wound my heart,
That none but thee can ^^re;
Then in (...) let me still endure:
Yea, let me ^e exiled from thee,
And never see thy face,
If in my heart thou miss the chiefest place.
And yet methinks I wish my self no harms,
Were I in Hell inclused in thine Arms;
Less cause of fear, more comforts there,
Then in Heavens flying fame;
For they might pass, but thou art still the same,
These empty things have flying wings,
The soaring soul flees higher;
Thou art the center of her chief defire.
For yesternight, when I was half a sleep,
Me thought I saw thee walking on the deep,
Whose comely feet, the waves did greet
With friendly threatenings kind;
Thy steps a deep impression left behind:
The raging waves, that erst while raves,
When thou in love do chide,
With trembling silence thy rebukes abide.
If it be thee, Lord, bid me come apace:
I know it is thee, thy words oreflow with grace;
Then, sink or swim, I Will go to him,
A sea of love I see:
If I be drowned, I care not, I Will to thee.
Oh it is my choice, it is David's voice;
My soul is knit to thine:
A strangers voice was never so divine.
Prove me, my dear, and try if thou can find
If my affections be not to thy mind:
If I withstand, thy sweet command,
Then let me bear the blame,
And in thy love put me to public shame:
Or if it is meet, first show the shect
Where Virgin thoughts did lie,
And thou shall see the sign of chastity.
Ralph. Do thou want words, sweet friend? Why now I see
Thou can comply as well as any man:
Do think equivocation may pass free,
And be well taken? We thy words can scan:
Say what thou will, we know thee: If thou hide
Thy self within a Wood, weel thee descry;
Though in a Grove of Woods thou would abide,
Yet we will trace thee in a Sympathy,
And we can walk with thee within thy cloud,
Whose Pearl-like dew drops words of sweet desire.
My genius tells me, sure thou art not proud,
Although thy humble breathings do aspire
To speak in lofty words; yet we profess
Though thou comply, we love thee nere the less.

Harry. It Is true indeed and I acknowledge it,
I do comply, and so I think I may;
And I account it manners, and it is fit,
In friendly terms to grant and to gainsay:
But he whose friendship is but complement,
And only complementall, I count base;
That course is quite without my element,
From me such thoughts I quite away do chase:
I love my friend that is my friend indeed,
And he shall know my inmost secrecies;
The choicest Cates on which my soul does feed,
That does support me in my miseries,
I will not spare, but freely will impart
The treasure of my soul, and where it is hid,
The wants and the aboundings of my heart,
My faults for which I have bin soundly chid;
My hopes, and fears, my joys and discontents,
My nakedness, my shame; I will discover
My vildnesse, and the joyful ornaments,
I will not hide from thee, my friend, my lover.

Will. Thanks, Harry, we have born our parts with thee,
But thou have born the burden of thy Song;
I would thy soul from anguish were as free
As I could wish: I trust thou shall ere long
Receive thy hearts desire; but stay a while,
With patience wait; but prithee set no time;
The Pilgrims chat does longsome way beguile,
And loves transgressions none does count a crime.
Only beware of this, do not reveal
Loves secrets on thy life, as yesterday
A friend of ours; but stay, I will conceal
His name, for fear he run the more astray:
For on a day, and it is not long ago,
I heard him tune an Oaten-pipe so well,
That if I should account him for a foe,
And should his folly to the Milk-maids tell,
He would forget his musi^k, and neglect
His little flock committed to his charge,
And with a near conceit of disrespect,
Despair, the bounds of folly would enlarge.

John. No, Brother, stay, be silent for a while,
We have a rule that is left by noble Pan,
A principle that hangs upon the file,
That Is legible to read for every man;
And for memorial stands upon record.
Let all your things, sweet friends, be done in love;
You are my friends, and I can well afford:
My name which all your Shepherds well approve,
Shall be imposed upon you; My commands
Are far from being grievous unto those
Whose sweet affections well inclined stands,
And I no other burden do impose.
Loves yoke is casie and the burden light,
Sweet is the yoke, no bitterness at all,
No slavish fearful toil that does affright;
Therein's no danger for to stand or fall.

Ralph. Now we perceive right well the very cause
Thou love to sit alone upon these Hills,
Not with intent to nullify the Laws
And liberty of Shepherds with thy will;
For all the liberty that we enjoy,
Consists in this, if Love but once command,
We are content and willing to obey
No Shepherd on these Downs will it withstand.
If any Shepherds Lad presume to break
The Law of Love of purpose, and shall tell
Her secrecies, and shall account them weak
They such a one will presently expel;
To their society he shall not come;
The very Milk-maids will begin to hiss,
Yea, such a fellow shall not have a crum
Of any dainties, no not of a kiss:
His Curds and Cream that he was wont to have
At noon times in the Dairey, when the heat
Of Summer made him kindness for to crave,
Though much he needed not for to entreat;
He with the Hindes shall stand and cool his feet,
Beg for a favor, and receive a flout.
The poorest Kitchin-maid that he does meet,
When time shall serve, will make him stand without.
And is not he well served, that shall disclose
The secrets of his friend, to do him harm,
When his chief trust he does in him repose,
With many friendly walkings arm in arm?
When promises of constant loving hearts,
Viewing wherein his strength and weakness lies,
Against the very course of Love imparts
To friend and foe his inmost secrecies?
Now, honest William, do not hold us long,
But prithee tell the subject of this Song.

Will. Well, then in sober sadness I will tell
The subject of his Song, though I may miss
For to express the words he framed so well;
But, to my best remembrance, it was this.

The SONG.
COme, you sweet affections all
View the place of Pan 's abiding,
And you Shepherds great and small,
Bring your stocks to his residing:
Shepherdesses of the Plains
Bring your instruments well stringed;
You whose Virgin breasts retains
Darts that flew from Heaven winged.
Noble hearts, of Heavens choice,
Bring your flames of sacred firing;
You that can express by voice,
Raptures of divine inspiring;
Bring your Lutes, and let us hear,
And we will your measures follow;
Weel the burden help to hear,
By the guidance of Apollo.
Hand in hand, and heart in heart,
We will tread our pacing measures;
Like affections none can part,
Twinning arms, nere-ending pleasures:
Those whom Heavens hand has joined,
Who will dare to put a sunder?
Can Heavens darlings be unkind?
That would be a mighty wonder.
Natures bounds who can forget?
It Is Pan 's nature to be loving;
He the waves their bounds has set,
Their presumption still reproving:
But Pan 's nature overflows
Lofty Hills, and brings them under;
In the Sea they stand in Rows
Mollifi'd and rent in sunder.
In his name we will rejoice,
In his nature we will wander;
Through the deserts are our choice,
Where compelled by no Commander:
We can no commands they,
Though they (...) with strong persuading;
Nature taught as to gainsay
And (...) the wills ineading.
But methinks Thear a voice
From the (...) of safe assuring,
Who in safety do (...)
Yet in bonds themselves inuring:
But another veice rass'd by,
Freely (...) in my hearing,
He, come forth, my Dove, and bie
Thee to a place of better cheering.
New the (...) Winter's past,
Ha^, and Snow, and Weather beatings,
(...) Sol away has chaste,
Though with sweet and fair intreatings;
Shadows (...), and get you hence,
Come ^o more to hurt our seeing;
To thy nothingnesse, from whence
Thou dericest all thy being.
Now the lovely Spring is come,
And each Bird in safety sings,
Counting every place their home,
Where their Airy-wings them brings.
Sweet affections they flee high,
Far above all dying, being,
Almost to eternity,
From the hands o^ Fowlers freeing.
Yesternight T^past alone,
By the light of Luna 's shining,
Purposely to hear a Song,
I perceived the friendly twining
Of the Trees and Bushes kind,
Who most friendly kiss't each other;
Arm i^ Arm their Branches twined,
Like the child that hugs the mother,
Passing further by a Dale,
Full of thoughts and sweet conceivings,
There I heard a Nightingale,
Whose sweet mirth was sense bereavings:
Oh, thought I, if Songs of night
Be so joyful in our hearing;
Ravi^ments of greater might
Will be seen at Sun's appearing;
Now the gladsome Sun does rise,
And the Earth in her best dressing;
And each Bird does memorize,
Pan 's great acts, and might expressing,
How he has destroyed quite
Welves, and Foxes, Bears, and Lions,
And delivered by his might,
The distressed Lambs of Sion 's.
Now rejoice, thou little Hill,
Little in thine estimation;
Thou shall be beloved still,
And a Crown of exaltation
Shall be given unto thee,
Who art Pan 's delight and pleasure;
Thou, ab thou, art only she
Unto whom he brings his treasure.
All his living Springs abide
In thy Breast, thou Queen of Nations;
And from thee they do divide
Into streams, whose elevations
Soon descending to the plains,
Where each Shepherds Boy resorteth,
Which their thirsty soul sustains,
Where our Lambs and Kidlings sporteth.
Yet I heard, not long ago,
Shrewd reports of Shepherds striving
For a Well whose springs did flow
With sweet streams of soul reviving;
The contention grew so hot,
Almost unto Daggers drawing;
But the anger was forget,
By Pan 's wisdom over-awing.
We are called by thy name,
Oh thou mighty Pan, whose dwelling
Is beyond the common fame,
All our Shepherds far excelling:
For from thee they do derive
All their wisdom how to order,
And their tender flocks to drive,
Till they come to Canaan 's border.
Like an Ointment powered forth,
Whose sweet sent enflames the senses,
Or^^n^ o^our of great worth,
Purchased with great expenses;
Right so precious for to hear,
Is thy name, and sweetly sounds;
And from Hills and Dales do rear
Echoes that thy fame resoundeth?
Every Shepherds Boy that walks
All along these Downs and Mountains,
Of his bounty always talks:
The Other day by yonder Fountains,
Sat each lovely Shepherdess
Singing Songs, and Music playing,
Each one in her Virgins dress,
With Love's ornaments arraying.
These were the words, but I will tell you more:
Upon a day when all alone he sat
Under a Hill, upon his head he wore
A kind of Wreath, well wrought, and delicate,
With dainty Flowers, that well I cannot name;
As Roses, Violets, Hearts-ease, Columbines,
The tender Lilly, Tulips of great fame,
Wall-Flowers, and Honey-Suckles, that entwines;
Sweet-Marjoram, and Sweet-Bryer, Cowslips, Marigolds,
Primroses, pretty Dazies, Jilly-Flowers,
The Hollyoak in doubles manifolds,
And many more, brought in by April showers,
There wanted nothing but the Lawrell-Bay;
Me thought it did become the Lad so well,
That in affection I am bold to say,
Most Lads upon these Downs he did excel.
But to be brief, I crept upon all four,
And secretly, unseen, I came so near him;
'Twas ten to one I came in such an hour,
When he began to sing, to over-hear him,
Upon his Pipe he played and sweetly sing:
I hearkened to his tunes with great delight:
Then in a rage his Pipe away he flung:
Yet all this while I kept me from his sight.
All this I speak, that so I might remove
The prejudice that I perceive remains
Within your Breasts, the dwelling place of love,
Who with delight Pan's precepts entertains:
For we are servants unto noble Pan,
And have and do observe his nature well,
His no^le kindness unto every man,
With love he uses only to compel:
This is his nature, and it is no shame
To imitate his nature with desire;
Not only to be called by his name,
But to a further neernesse to aspire;
Not only for to love his likeness sweet,
When with delight we view those gladsome beams;
But with his nature one another greet,
And from that nature send forth lovely streams,
As streams of mercy, and of suffering long,
Patient in waiting, seeking every hour
To win with love, without compulsion strong,
And without fury hear what others say.
And now, sweet friends, you that desire to hear
The matter of his Song, I pray draw near.
The SONG.
Come near affections,
And help with thy directions,
To sing this Song of love;
And we together,
Will take a part of either,
The same more light will prove:
For now dismayed I sit, and make my moan,
And I am searfull
It will prove direful,
A burden heavy for to bear alone:
Twill break my heart, I think, that thou bear none.
And now I wonder
To hear some speak like Thunder,
Love's darlings for to awe,
And to affright them,
As if they would endite them,
And give Love's bounds a Law:
Love, that so deep and past their ouring wounds:
But love is boundless,
Her Law is groundless:
Love cannot be contained in humane bounds,
Nor will we yield to them on such small grounds.
For though we languish,
And live a while in anguish,
We know Love shall prevail;
Love's sweet conceivings
Are no abortive heavings,
Our minds for to assail:
No pleasant baits can us allure again:
For we are carried,
Our minds are married
To things above the common reach of men:
Oh Arm of Flesh, how weak will thou he then!
But yet we wander,
Unseen of each by-stander,
In uncouth ways;
These desert places,
W^hardly ken the traces
Of sheep that strayes:
We wander up and down, and pass the springs,
And see no creature
Of form and feature,
That we can love as these despised things;
And we well know that same has flying wings.
But obthe dearest,
In my affection nearest;
My heart death sail to tell,
How I have loved,
Since first my mind approved
The virtue that does dwell
Within that breast that swells with things divine;
From whose out-flowings,
These tender growings
Refresh the sense, as with inspiring Wine,
And in these rays the deity does shine.
I heard one talking,
As I alone was walking
On yonder lovely Plain,
With words of scorning,
Rich minder, but poor adorning,
Love's honor for to stain:
But I will hold it for a point of faith,
The worst transgressions,
In Love's expressions,
The Law of Love, which is as strong as death,
Commands to hide, as long as there is breath.
I Will stay and rest me,
Thy sweetness has possessed me,
And I have faith in this;
Thou will not fail me,
Though long delays may quail me,
And I much joy may miss:
The thirsty soul, alas, brooks no delay;
And time comes flying,
There Is no denying,
There Is no entreats will make him for to stay:
Bald time farewell, for ever and a day.
My mind reposes,
As on a bed of Roses,
Although sometimes I find
Some contradiction,
Which may prove but a fiction
For to oresway my mind:
But when I overlook those lovely Hills
With heart uprising,
And highly prizing
That influence that Hills and Valleys fills,
Right sweetly then my swaying passion stills.
Friends, now you see the nobleness of love,
That consters all things to the better part,
And is content and willing to remove
All blocks and rubs that sweet affection thwart;
Malignant nature, and revengefull spleen
Sends quite a swimming in the ragefull waves
Of black confusion never to be seen,
To blast our good intentions with their braves;
But there is a friend that keeps by yonder Plains,
That drives his flock so near the Hazlewoods,
That to my knowledge mighty loss sustains;
And very lately I have understood
By some of his acquaintance, not unknown
To some of us here present, that his loss
Is extraordinary, that he is grown
Unto a melancholy humor, and so cross,
That he will scarce admit society
With any friends that come in loving sort
For to advise, but says they come to spy,
That so they may his weaknesses report:
But I dare say, not any one that is here
Can take delight to view his moody fits,
But as a matter that concerns them near;
Abhors the seat where Scorn and Envy sits;
For we were always better taught I Am sure,
And see our Master's practice every day:
A noble president he gives for to inure,
Nature compels our wills for to obey.
Oh Sacred streams of Heavens influence
Divine inspiring, How can we forget
The spring of thy divine intelligence,
That every day our barren soil does wet,
And makes our coast of desert places spring
With various sweets, and flowers of the prime?
Forsaken and despised Valleys sing
With rich abounding plenty in our clime,
By the still waters glyding through the Plains;
Contentedly we sit and spend our hours,
Wherewith supply of Pastures green sustains,
And every day refresh with dews and showers
The heritage of thrice adored Pan,
Which makes them bring forth twins when they do come
From Washing: Where the streams of love began,
The time of love a rich increase sends home.
But stay a while, I purpose to relate
The matter of his loss whereof I spoke,
That so we may his case commiserate,
And sympathizing his, our sorrows make;
He shall be namelesse at this time, least I
Should add unto his sorrows; for I swear
I would not do him the least injury,
Though I might gain the fleece his flock does wear:
But to be brief, our Master set him forth
With Sheep-hook in his hand, and with a flock
Of Kids and Lambs, that were of mighty worth,
Which after he had led beyond the Rock
That stands beneath that high aspiring Hill,
Which you may view with your perspective Glass,
A mighty Wood the upland grounds does fill,
And by that Wood he every day did pass:
In handsome order for a while he kept
His pretty Lambs, and fed them with great care;
But so it was, one afternoon he slept,
Out comes a Woolf, and too and fro did stare;
But when he saw no creature to resist
His hungry madness, he began to catch
At Kids and Lambs, but by good hap he miss't
The principal, yet other two did snatch,
And worried them, and killed, and sucked their blood,
And drew them to the Wood that was so nigh;
The flock the while without resistance stood
Amazed, yet did neither bleat nor cry.
But yet, thus much I dare be bold to say,
Had he but bin awak't, and bin aware,
He would have fought, and made a bloody fray;
For two or three of them he would not care:
But so it was, the young man he began
To rouse himself, and looking all about,
He saw his flock were fled, and then he ran
To bring them in again, and made no doubt
Of any loss, because he saw so many
That did present themselves unto his view,
Thought all was well, yet neither there was any
Appearance; whereupon he fearlesse grew:
Well, that passed on, and then it was not long,
But there befell another loss was worse;
For on a day when he was gone among
The western Lads, as 'twas sometimes his course,
To go a merry making, and to leave
Hisslock along the Hedge-rows safely feeding,
At least he thought them safe, nor did conceive
The least suspect of such like danger breeding:
When he was gone out of the Wood, there comes
A fell devouring Beast, a furious Bore,
His Tusks stood out, and at the mouth he fomes,
And running on, some half a dozen tore;
And of the Lambs made such a heavy wrack,
That 't was a wonder to behold the spoil,
How he their flesh did tear, and bones did crack;
But having filled his paunch, did back recoyl.
The flocks were all dispersed among the Briars,
Who fled for Shelter to the Thorny Hedge;
At last runs forth a Bear, and quickly tires,
And worried half a score, and took their pledge;
But all this while the Shepherd did forget
His flock, that in despair ran to and fro;
But he amongst his boon companions set
His resolution, yet he would not go.
Ah silly Lambs, resistlesse in your harms,
Wasted and spoiled, yet show no discontent:
Spoiled of all, yet nere assuming arms,
Can you subsist in this your element?
Content to live, contented for to die,
Content in wants, contented to enjoy
A greater store, content in misery:
Is this your nature never to be coy?
Wonder in nature, nature without art,
Infused nature, far beyond all teaching;
No creature else this nature can impart;
It Is Foxes nature to be still ont-reaching:
The furious Lion, Lions does beget,
And some men say their strength lies in their eyes;
What ere he sees; he is bold thereon to set;
On noble things he dares to make a prize:
The raving Woolf has always Woolvish tricks;
He has a voice, and by that voice does call
Unto his fellows, which their ears up pricks,
And other creatures quickly bring in thrall:
Where Woolfs prevail, no mercy is expected;
It is their nature, and who ever saw
Them change their nature, or could be corrected,
To bring them in subjection to a law?
The Bear begets his like, the she does bring
Forth a rude lump that is quite without a form;
She licks it over till a formal thing
Appears in sight, then furiously does storm;
If any one presume to touch her young,
And rob her of her whelps she loves most dearly,
Shall quickly know she will put up no such wrong;
She Will follow to the quick, and touch them nearly.
Boars beget Boars, and Swine have filthy natures,
And have their sustenance from filthy things;
And of their like they do produce more creatures,
No Beast but that, so many young ones brings:
Washed nere so clear, they will wallow in the mire;
Drink till th y'r drunk, and sometimes burst withal:
When Horses drink, they will modestly retire;
No other creature we may Swinish call.
But this digression helps not my intent;
The Shepherd he looks out, and sees his flock,
Some lost, some spoiled, some torn, and deadly rent;
Then presently he ran into the Rock,
With an intent to cast himself away,
Down to the depth, almost as low as Hell:
But so it fell, the Rock did prove his stay,
And in amaz upon the Rock he fell;
And lying in despair, half on, half over,
At last came to himself, and looked about him,
And sees the Rook, and does the deep discover,
All danger sees, within him and without him,
Lifts up his eyes unto the bending Hills,
Half dead and lost, ashamed of his hope,
His former vain and spacious hopes distills,
And brings their spirits to a narrow scope.
Ah, whither shall I flee, for to escape
The hand of Pan my master; if I fall
Down to the deep, there I may see his shape;
Were I in Holl I Would hearken to his call.
Ah, I have often heard his lovely voice,
How he persuades with sweetness every day;
Leaves all men free, and puts them to their choice,
To yield him free obedience, or gainsay:
He nere provokes to anger any one,
Nor does discourage those he entertains
Into his service: Those that will be gon^,
And will not serve, they the most loss sustains.
And after many sad complaints were spent,
He was resolved to return to Pan;
But I believe, right sure, the ^ad was shent,
For the other day, I met him pale and wan;
And then because I saw him discontented,
I sung this Song, that I before invented.
The SONG.
WEll met my friend, me thinks I long to hear,
How it has fared with thee, this many a year;
Why art thou strange to him, that is thy friend,
And turned about with every blast of wind?
Me thinks thou look with sorrow in thy face;
And I would joy, if that might purchase grace:
But if thy grief from outward objects spring,
Then it is my woe, to hear so harsh a thing.
For there is no cure to ease thee of thy pain,
No outward Pillars can thy soul sustain;
Thy soul's divine, and it is no common hand
That can support thee in this foreign Land.
Return, return, and lay these words to heart,
Let not self love over-sway thy noble part:
What would thou have, or what can thou require?
With humble words subscribe thy hearts desire.
Is there no soul to sympathize with thine?
Why in thy breast do thou thy grief confine,
Quite from thy friends, as if they were thine own,
And none but thine, unfit for to be known?
Know, thou have friends, and they are friends indeed,
That Is pressed to help, at every time of need,
That stands unmoved, though storms of grief arise,
And as their own accounts thy miseries.
It Is not a blast of misconceived wrong,
Nor evil nature of a venomed tongue;
Malignant words, nor sly deln ling charms,
Cannot unloose their friendly twining arms.
Huge floods of Water cannot quench this fire;
Showers of contentious strivings may conspire,
But over past revivings, are soon seen;
Rainbows appear that is blew, that is red, and green:
A sacred sign that Heavens rage is past,
He takes no pleasure, for to spoil and w^st:
Dispairing soul look up, the sky is clear,
The floods are past, the Olive boughs appear.
Art thou a stranger only on our coast,
And do not know of that which men talk most?
Do thou not know, the soul must pass the fire,
And then attain the end of her desire?
The Husbandman that sows his precious seed,
With patient waiting is full well agreed
To stay his time, and sleeps, and wakes, and sees
His crop comes for ward daily by degrees.
Fair Innocence desires not to be hid;
The crafty mind is fearful to be chid
No cloak of zeal for covering she does strive;
Fair Innocence on every ground will thrive.
No barren soil seems barren in her eye.
That which most seers carclesly cast by.
Unfruitful fields, with Briars overgrowe:
In her esteem are firtest to be sown.
Things quite despised in the worlds esteem;
Things l^sse then nothing to the Senses seem:
But that men see, they see with their own eyes;
But Heaven discerns their foolish fallacies.
And shall we think our waiting overlong,
And that Heavens hand ore-sways things to our wrong
Oh, no dear soul, thou shall ere long receive
Refreshings sweet; let vapors take their leave.
Do thou not know that Fortunes fickle wheel,
With foolish favors to and fro does reel:
Bears some aloft on wings of flying fame,
And on a trice their glory turns to shame?
Even so it is with every thing below,
That Is underneath the Suns fair shining show;
His peircing rays gives light to every plant;
But growing low, their vigor quickly want.
The Marygold sends forth its spreading flower,
Whilst lovely Sun displayes his quickening power;
But having run his circuit to the West,
Their Curtains close, and sadly take their rest.
The sweetest flowers in May, and joyful June,
When every Bird chants forth some pretty tune:
I think it is pity such sweet flowers should die,
And pretty Birds should cease their melody.
When I perseive the gladsome spring come on,
And chilling cold of Winter blasts are gone;
And Earth is clothed in her best array,
As if intending to keep Holiday:
Oh then I look, and weigh with heavy cheer,
What changes come to pass within a year:
In little time the flowery fields grow gray;
When gray turns white, expect not long to stay.
Cease pretty Birds, forgo your sugared notes;
The pleasant Hills and Valleys change their coats;
The dainty flowers gained with great expense,
Are stinking ripe, and foully mar the sense.
The fairest beauty ever mortal saw,
Who like the Loadstone, humane eyes does draw;
When living breath does cease, she is laid by,
And is no more an object to the eye.
Ah dying glory, now I see thy face;
The time, the persons, and the lovely place:
I see, I see thou live amongst the graves,
And times best champions are but golden slaves.
As little Riv'lets run from every Spring,
And to the River all their treasure bring;
Then all in one, runs freely to the main,
And from the Ocean nere returns again.
The mother Earth is ready to embrace,
And entertainment gives to all her race:
She huggs her children sweetly in her Arms,
With mutual kisses, fearlesse of all harms.
Tom. Well fare thy heart, my friend, and friend to all,
And foe to none, me thinks I do admire
This charity that comes at every call,
And from distressed friends did nere retire.
Thou art so like our noble master, who
With patience bears, and waits for our return;
And in our wandering, wheresoever go,
And almost lost; is sad when we do mourn.
And now I wonder thou can imitate
So well our masters goodness, and art changed
Into his likeness: Thou that wast of late
Quite from the ways of Pan almost estranged*
Now I persuade my self, thy flook and thee
Have kept so long upon these flowery plains,
That thou some vision manifest did see,
Such lovely light (me thinks) thy breast retains:
And thus I thought, there is something in the wind,
That makes the Lad thus lovely in our sight:
His intercourse with Pan; for when I mind
Things past and gone, yet living in the light;
And when I call to mind the near relation
He has to us, and we to one another,
It brings me to a higher contemplation;
Nor will, ^or dare, nor can we such things smother:
So far am I from being envious
To see thy flock to prosper in thy keeping,
That I rejoice thy flock increases thus:
And I often think of thee awake, and sleeping;
Yea, in my dreams, me thinks, sometimes I see
Our master Pan and thee converse together;
And then me thought these words he spoke to thee,
Go fetch thy flock, and bring them up all hither,
And let me see those Lambs of my desire;
For I am pleased well to see thy care;
I see thy heart's upright, and love entire,
And I consider what thy watchings are;
I weigh thy pains, and how thou break'st thy sleep,
To keep thy flocks in frosty winter nights,
And in the heat of summer thou do keep
Them from the wicked vermin that affrights;
Yea. I have often heard thy Songs of night,
When I passed by the Sheep-coats undiscerned;
In such like breathings, I take great delight,
And to my joy thou have contentment learned:
Thou art contented, if it Hail or Snow;
For any weather thou art well provided,
And clothed with content, what wind ereblow;
Content and thee are seldom times divided.
In blustering storms and tempests, flashing fire,
Of thunder, and of lightning, I have known
Thee sit and sing; then for a while retire,
Until the storm be past, and over-blown.
This was my dream, and when I did awake,
My thoughts were then the same, and so are still,
And would a greater matter undertake,
Then I will speak of, that I may fulfill
My former promise, when with hand in hand,
And heart in heart, we passed along the Hills,
We thought we had the Mountains at command,
And could remove them quite against their will:
But when we saw our weakness, we began
For to be think how far we were unable
To undertake what never any man
But Pan himself, that is only imitable:
Bold resolutions then again we made,
When we went to descry what pastures lay,
Where we found Giants ready to invade,
And kept our Southern Shepherds at a bay;
They stopped the passages, where we were wont
To lead our flocks to water, and the Well
Was anciently in every man's account
To be our masters; and the old men tell,
They have Records to show it was a gift,
Of Pans donation many years ago;
And albeit, they make a dogged shift,
To keep them from it, where they will or no;
Yet we do purpose er't be long to try
A title with them, and to make them show
By what authority they do deny
Our flocks their Water, and our Grass do mow:
But let us cease our chat a little while,
And sing a Song our time for to beguile.

The SONG.
I Wonder most,
That some do boast
Of their great roast,
Yet still are lank and lean;
^is lean as rakes,
Souls food forsakes.
And pleasures takes
Amongst the beasts unclean,
Who wanting wings to fly so bie,
The Eagles food cannot epsy.
Some toy^ and sweat,
And t^^ Air does beat,
To ge^^ (...) meat;
The (...) have some feeding:
^
(...) her fair,
She ^^st repair
(...) former breeding.
Po^r soul thou want^st the Eagie cye,
The Lamb like nature to epsy.
The Dove like eye,
Rate chastity,
Does ^a^^awry,
If ^^c her ma^e be missing:
And there is no wight
^^ees in her sight,
Can work delight,
She br^^ks not others kissing.
P^r so^d thou can not rest epsy,
B^^ause thou want^st the Dove like eye.
Then come and see
All you that be
Or bond or free:
Ho, cery soul that flies,
And a^n would rest
Within that breast
Where souls are blessed,
And to your being bies.
The thirsty soul brooks no delay;
You that have wings make haste away.
Come noble hearts.
That act your parts
With roy all darte,
And ^^afts of deadly woundings:
Ride on and hie,
Victoriously;
Let Arrows fly,
Unto your foes confoundings.
As long as they do breathing lie,
Ply them with darts of Amity.
Come David play
A roundelay;
Thy music may
These furious fiends send packing;
And for loves sake,
A circle make,
And save our stake,
For we of love are lacking;
For wicked Saul is hard to please,
Thy music only can give case.
I have a friend
That stays behind,
Sticks in my mind;
I pity his mistaking:
He is so blind,
He cannot find
The Lamb like kind;
But with the Wolves partaking.
Our Sheep and Lambs he does detest,
And loves the Woolvish nature best.
Come hither Grace,
Stay here a space,
And view the face
Of yonder Bride preparing:
Her noble dress
She does express
In humbleness,
And meekness for her wearing.
Sweet soul, such ornament, indeed,
Is fittest for thy marriage weed.
The souls desires,
Vncooling fires.
Short breath aspires;
Ah, who can case her longings.
Thy husband he,
That loves thee,
Will set thee free
From other lovers wrongings.
The bed of love that is kept unseen
With Curtains drawn, is fresh and green.
Hence evil eye
That comst to spy
Our (...)
Our (...) do not touch.
(...) not near,
(...) fear,
^,
(...) grutch:
(...) ^sares that transcend
B^yon thy thoughts that never end.
Here Is lovely seed,
That Is sown indeed,
In souls agreed,
Partaking of that nature:
And thence does spring
That noble thing
That light does bring,
The firstborn of each creature.
Then Faith and Hope are glad to spy,
Their sister dear, fair Charity.
Harry. Your charity I love and do commend,
And in my mind you do a great deal better;
And often I think it is better to offend
In over-giving, then to be a debtor.

Ned. It is your bounty, yet I pray you know,
Fair Charity has eyes, and can discern;
She is not blind, nor hood-winkt goes, I trow,
To judge of colors is not far to learn;
She can distinguish colors when she sees,
Or white, or black, or green, or blue, or yellow;
Knows well that light and darkness disagrees,
And good to evil will not be a fellow.
To say, that white is black, or black is white;
Or for to say, that darkness does excel,
And shall esteem it far above the light,
I dare be bold to say, He sees not well:
For when I see a man reel to and fro,
And make Indentures in the Kings highway,
That is a drunkard, and I think him so;
To speak what I do see, I think I may:
Such revell-rout was kept a month agone,
Amongst the Northern Lads that met together,
That staggering ripe they passed one by one,
Well lined they thought to keep away the weather;
As blind as beetles and I heard some say,
That one of them that is sick, will scarce recover;
That domineered and swore his wits away,
In a dry ditch, as he was passing over,
Fell down and slept till morning, when the Sun
Began to rise; and when he saw 'twas day,
Looked out to find his bottle, which had run,
And that beyond the bridge, quite empty lay;
And when he saw his bottle, he was glad,
And 'gan to poize it, being dry as dust;
But having found its lightness, grew so sad,
That to the River for to drink he must,
A cooler fittest for such roaring Boys,
Such boisterous fellows, that can never tell
When it is sufficient, but good things destroys;
'Twere a good riddance, such were packt to hell.
The world's so full of swearers and blasphemers,
Of knaves and rascals, cheaters and deceivers,
Of busybodies, and vain foolish dreamers,
Blood-suckers, and oppressing life-bereavers,
That I do wonder Heaven can forbear,
To rain down slames, and tempests of consuming
Upon such wretches, as do daily dare
With a high hand Heavens vengeance with presuming.

Harry. I will not wish that any friend of mine
Should be too forward for to censure those
Whom they may think are faulty, or repine,
And others failings to the world disclose:
Failings, said I? our master is content
To pass by more then failings in us all;
Gross evil^ daring, bold, and impudent,
With patience bears offenders great and small;
Knows men are men, and whilst we are but men,
Men of the earth, whose minds are full of folly,
Winks at small faults; out ru^s us now and then,
Yet knows our hearts are vain and much unholy:
Our days of ignorance, and unknowing times,
Does pass by him in silence unregarded;
Our want of skill esteems not as crimes,
Nor sends a servant going unrewarded:
But now it is time, since we have seen so long
His going forth and coming in, before us;
How day by day he comes our flocks among,
And in our wants is willing for to store us:
It Is good to mark his ways, his lovely ways,
His comely steps, when he is passing by;
And being past, mark but his lovely rays
Is left behind, discerned with half an eye:
Yea, wheresoere we go, or run, or ride,
We may discern his footsteps every where:
Trace all the Hills, and Dales, and Valleys wide,
And who can lay, His footsteps are not here?
In low despised Valleys, I have seen
His lovely steps, and pacings he did go,
Where to my thinking he had never beeh,
Where weather-beaten Reeds shook to and fro:
And when I saw his footsteps, I was glad,
Thought I, Our Lord and Master is not far:
I that before, oppressed in mind, and sad,
He came upon me ere I was aware,
And in amaze, I looked, and beheld him,
'Twixt joy and fear; but love was most prevailing:
And when he saw my love, it so compelled him
To stay with me a while, for all my failing;
He thus began to say, What do thou here?
What do thou here, my friend, and servant, whom
I have betrusted with a flock right dear?
Why do thou thus far from thy Kidlings come?
I gave thee Kids and Lambs, and bid thee stay
By yonder Downs, the fittest place for feeding:
Now tell me why thou art gone so far away,
And to my order gave no better heeding?
My answer was at hand, and not to seek,
For Love compelled me for to answer mildly;
For there was cause enough I should be meek,
Cause my behavior had bin sometimes wildly.
I answered thus, Sweet Sir be not offended,
I came to seek two Lambs that went astray,
When yesterday I purposed, and intended
To bring them to the fold in cool of day:
But having told my Lambs, and missing twayn,
I left the other feed^ng for a while,
Making no question, but with little pain,
To find them quickly near to yonder style
I passed along beneath the seven Hills,
Something inquiring of my fellow wayns,
If they had seen my Lambs to pass the Rills,
That run along the Valleys in the Plains:
And they made answer they have lost their own,
And more then two, or three, or half a dozen
Were strayed away from them, and they were shown
A skin or two, by some that meant to cozen:
We saw them not, the Woolf per^aps has caught them;
For all these coasts are pestered every where
With raving Woolfs and Foxes, which do watch them,
And put us daily in a trembling fear.
Well, I was answered, yet I would not leave,
But sought them still, where I observed thy treading
In every Valley, and I did conceive,
And 't was my mind to trace thee in thy leading:
And now I am come hither to this Dale,
Oregrown with Flags, and Sedge, and bruised Reeds,
And weeping ripe I wander in this Vale:
And now I spy my Lambs. --.

Ned. Now cease thy speech (sweet friend) I know thy mind,
Thy sweet rebukes I am content to bear;
Sure thou have learned of Pan for to be kind,
Now for my sake (good heart) this Favor wear:
Take it, and wear it, and remember me,
It is a token of my love to thee.

Phil. Do You hear my friend, Me thinks it is a shame
You should neglect your flocks, and stand contending;
Such trivial talkings much deserves blame,
Your vain discourse, me thinks, should have some ending;
Do you not see the Sun does now begin
For to decline unto the West, Southwest?
Is this the way our Masters love to win?
Or can you think this is your place of rest?
And do you think you shall even now enjoy
An everlasting day here in these Bowers?
How are your thoughts dispersed at every toy?
I trust they are not fled beyond your powers,
But that you may recall and bring them home
To things of more importance, then bare words,
For fear of after-claps, let us not rome,
This mighty field more fit discourse affords,
Then dreams, and songs, and music, words of course,
Such frothy fancies, precious hours spending;
And albeit, some spend their hours worse,
In bitter railing, and in vain contending;
Yet we must know our Master gave us leave,
For to make merry for a while; but when
We overrun our time, we may conceive
He will deny us when we ask again.
My sentence is, Sure you have drunk too much,
For you begin to talk of Talents, and
Of high conceivings; few had ever such.
I see your wits does in a stagger stand;
I see your Nectar do begin to fail,
You Will want supply I doubt within this hour;
Your windy words will hardly bear up sail,
Your sweet discourse I fear will end with sour:
Words are but wind, and you may tell us stories,
And sing us songs of Shepherds boys a playing,
Of Milkmaides, and the Shepherdesses glories,
Your folly and simplicity bewraying:
It ill beseems your gravity to spend
Your precious time in toys not worth the hearing;
Do You think our noble Master will commend
This vain expense to every ones appearing?

Harry. If this be vildnesse Phil, I Will yet declare
My vildnesse more, and will be yet more humble.
I tell thee Phil, I neither fear nor care,
Though in the dust my glory fall and tumble:
I say, My glory, and what ere I call
Mine, or what comes from my foolish nature;
My glorious outsides I disclaim them all,
And now my longing is for the --
All that is mine, my words, my deeds, my skill,
My understanding, riches and my wealth,
My love, my joy, and envy, and my will,
My strength, my fee^le comforts, and my health:
If I have aimed to purchase a good name,
Honor or good repute, I here disclaim it;
I would not be beholding unto fame,
To blaze my praise, nor once presume to name it.
All that is mine, my books of curious arts,
My best esteem, my glory, and my crown,
And whatsoere my Gipsie-minde imparts
To me or mine, lo here I lay them down;
Judge them that can or will, to fires flame,
Then cast their ashes in the Northern wind,
And let them sly to my eternal shame,
And to the lowest region be confined;
Or let them lie amongst those black records,
Even where the rabble of confused things
Does make a mighty Library of words,
Where lying fame, a foolish requiem sings:
For I have heard a noise but I confess;
I have bin bent to yield to more then reason,
When empty things great matters do express;
But I had rather hear a word in season:
We have reprovers plenty now adays,
And every Shepherds boy will be a teacher:
The mind of man is still affecting praise,
And minding victory, is an out-reacher.
Knowledge abounds, they say, and it is their glory
That they can argue stoutly, pro and con,
And can declare, or else they would be sorry,
How we should guide our flocks, and bring them on,
Sometimes upon the Plains, in heat of day;
Sometimes unto the Hills, in moyster weather;
And oftentimes their elders will gainsay;
But their own flocks neglecting altogether;
And that's the folly of our Southern Lads,
That are so hot, and eager set for fame;
And up and down these Pastures daily gads,
And can their looks and words, so finely frame,
That they presume they are able to direct
The oldest Shepherds ranging on these downs;
Quick-sighted to epsy the least neglect:
Experienced fathers they set down for clowns,
As if they were the only Seers, who
Are able to discern a storm come flying;
And in their own imagination grow
Mighty, all dangers to each one descrying,
When they perhaps, where ere they came nere saw
Our noble Master Pan in any place,
Nor yet his shape, whose sweet aspect does draw
Like unto like, his lovely steps to trace;
For had they ever bin with Pan, and seen
His comely steps, and walking to and fro
Among these little Hills and Meadows green,
And in the Valleys, where he often does go:
Had they but marked and well observed his words
And gracious speeches dropping like the dew;
Could they but read the Letters in Records,
Not writ in stone, but flesh that is bleeding new,
That never can be raced out again
With all the skill of Hells poor weak intrusion:
For those that run apace, may read it plain,
And never can be broken to confusion:
Could they but mark his low humility,
How he contentedly does condescend
Unto the lowest Swayn that passes by,
And Innocence al ways does defend,
And has an ear as ready for to hear,
The faltring tongue, unready to declare
His out ward wrong, or inward cause of fear;
And can discern how great his pressures are:
And now I wonder much, that any man
That does frequent these Downs with observation,
Should be so vain and ignorant of Pan,
And bear a mind so full of ostentation.
Stoop lof^y minds, and learn to imitate
The mind of Pan our Master, whose forbearing
Is wonderful for to commiserate,
Much moved to pity, not enured to daring:
He kills not with his looks, and furious eye;
The eye of love, not envy, is his killing;
He knows our strength, and weakness can discry,
Takes notice of perverseness and good willing;
He needs not any one to bring him news
Of what is done amongst the herds and flocks;
His watchful eye discerns, and over-views,
And he their inmost passages unlocks,
And unawares he comes amongst our folds,
Sometimes unseen, without our notice taking,
And now and then, with sweet discourse he holds
Matter enough to keep our senses waking:
But there is some Lads upon the Eastern dales,
That scorn the plain simplicity of Pan,
Using his words, as poor despised tales,
As on a time with vapouring one began
To teach our ancient Shepherds, who full long
Have kept their stocks in order and good plight,
And have converst with noble Pan among,
The most experienced Shepherds with delight;
And all the Lads that will not yield to lead
Their flocks along the way, that they would have them,
They do reprove with scorn, and words of dread,
And tell them plain, It Is not their Pipes will save them;
Them, and their flocks must perish every one,
For Disk, and Tom, and Will, and Ralph, and Harry,
Who with their flocks to West, Southwest have gone;
They dare be bold to say, They Will all miscarry:
But noble Shepherds, let me ask you when
You spoke with Pan our Master: Did he tell
That you, and none but you, the only men,
Must bear his name, and like wise bear the Bell?
Well, if you will have it, take it, if you may;
Yet know our Master bears not such a spirit:
And for his goodness, I Will be bold to say
Our Master Pan will no man dis-inherit:
Is he your Master? is he not as well
The Master of us all? if we obey him,
He Is well contented we should stay and dwell
within his house; I trust you will not gainsay him.
Is wisdom yours? and will you thus confine
Her piercing rays within your narrow bounds?
Can you withhold her sparkling beams to shine
Upon these outcast, low, despised grounds?
Now I perceive rightwel, were in your powers,
You would exclude these watery marish places,
And shut them quite beyond these walks of ours,
Without discerning of the Shepherds traces:
As if our Master did abominate,
Or with an eye of scorn did overlook
The watery Plains, and inconsiderate,
To the aspiring Hills himself betook.

John. Now I perceive, and I will tell thee plain
What I conceived of thee full long ago,
That thy too humble flagging wing would stain
The Shepherds glory, and I find it so.
A Shepherd and a Soldier must be stout,
Undaunted courage should the mind possess:
Heroic daring boldness brings about
Brave enterprises, this thou will confess.
Where is the glory and the brave renown
You might atchieve? do you think to purchase fame?
Can you expect to get the wreathed Crown
By such poor things that some will scorn to name?
Read the Records, and see if thou can find
Amongst the Shepherds glories, any one
Ere purchased honor with so poor a mind;
Faith if thou can indeed, then I Will have done:
I Will say no more, go on, and ride apace
The silly Ass will bear through thick and thin:
If by humility thou purchase grace,
Let brazen gates flee open and let thee in;
Let every Shepherds Boy take up his Pipe,
And play and sing in this thy happy hour;
Let Shepherdesses when the Palms are ripe
Bring boughs and sweets to strew within thy bower;
Yea, we will make the very pavements tell:
And to declare the stories of our love,
Those over-trodden places where we dwell
Shall be engraved so firm, that none shall move:
If paved with love the groundwork do appear,
How glorious then shall our adonrings be?
Loves noble buildings will be far more clear,
Transparent brightness we in all shall see,
Composed of love the groundwork and the frame,
Inside and outside so compact together,
No Dart of envy can impair the same:
Eternity outshines decaying weather.

Will. Ned, fill a cup of Nectar, and let us drink
A health to Phil. in way of thankfulness,
And we will no more of thy unkindnesse think,
Nor take revenge, although thou did transgress:
Yet pray thee have a care, transgress no more,
Nor evil no man if thou can forbear;
For many evils make a mighty score,
Two evils bound together we may fear.
Now blessed be Pan, that taught us for to know
What is in Man, and how he is inclined,
How mighty in himself he still would grow,
And always strong in his good thinking mind.
Shall I do well when I perhaps may see
A Madman throwing firebrarnds, and stamp and swear,
Cause he is mad, go kill him, for to free
My self from dangers, where no dangers are?
Or if I see a drunkard reeling ripe
(Though not with Wine) should throw him in a ditch
And drown him quite, sure 'twould my conscience gripe:
And I should think some Fury did bewitch
My feeble mind. I Would rather shun the Ass
That kicks he cares not what, nor where nor whom,
I Will blame the Riders madness made him pass
Beyond his warrant; he is the veriest Mome.
Come, drink a Round, and each one bare his knee,
And after we have drunk, we will sing a Song.

Ralph. We are content and willingly agree:
But pray thee William do not hold us long.

The SONG.
DRaw not near,
Unless it may appear
you are bent
With intent
To lay down
The honor of your wreathed Crown;
And nakedly be seen.
He that comes
To gather up the crumbs
That do fall
In that Hall
Where the Feast
And many a welcome guest
Beyond themselves have been:
'Twill certainly be known,
If you bring ought your own,
Love does scorn
Upon the wings of any to be born:
No treasure bring,
Nor any mighty thing,
Her love to gain;
For wealth she holds in high disdain.
Then strive no more,
Strive no more:
Stand by despair,
Thou can not fly
Nor yet come nigh
Unto that Mansion fair.
You spirits that attend
Upon the souls that send
Up their sighs
And their cries
From the deep;
And in your bottels keep
The tears of weeping eyes:
In charity affright
These wanderers in the night,
That do haunt
And enchaunt
For their ends,
Disguised like some Fairy Feinds,
And in their Circles rise:
Oh chase those Feinds away
That spoil our Lambs each day;
Bring to light
These crafty Gypsies manifest indite;
Make their graves
In everlasting waves,
And let your cries
Add blasting to their memories:
Let Loves fire,
Sacred ire,
Consume their piles;
And Heavens blast
Their ashes cast
To unrecall'd Exiles.
Harry. You said my Brother William was shame-fac'd,
But now I see you are deceived quite,
And we all see his company has graced
Us every one; his sweetness does invite
To honor him with what respect we may:
Lets bid the Shepherdesses bring their Flowers,
And when we meet on the next Holy Day,
Some shall make Garlands, and some strew the Bowers;
Then in the midst of all the Shepherds, we
Will lift him up above his fellow-Swains,
And set him in a place that all may see
That Wreathe of Fame that better things contains;
For he is worthy, and we will express
Our love to him, for he is kind to all,
And there is no Shepherds Lad but will confess
More then I Will speak: but whatsoever befall,
Before't be long we will find a time to meet,
And spend a day amongst our Western Boys,
Then with a fit or two of mirth we will greet,
And feed their fancies with some pleasing noise:
But let us be very wary I advise,
Touch not their Gods so high in their esteeming;
Nor in a thought their Deities despise,
But honor them in silence, and in seeming;
For we well know you are not much to learn,
That they have mighty Holds to which they fly
In their distress, which we that can discern,
May see their feeble strength with half an eye.
But fellow Shepherds hearken, and I Will tell
A pretty story of some Western Blades
That went a roving by the Fairies Well,
Who lay a sleeping by the Fancies shades,
And run upon them ere they were aware:
But one that was more watchful then the rest,
Began to rouse with more then common care,
Gave the Alarm which Gypsy Fortune blessed,
And with undaunted courage 'gan to speak,
With Qui va la? in English, Who goes there?
Who answered thus, A Friend, though poor and weak,
That came from far, and goes he cares not where.
Then come to us, said he, and we will dance
A Round or two; for we desire to deal
With such, and with no other, if perchance
We find such friends as can our minds conceal,
Then call your Crew, said he, and bring your Cates,
For we intend to taste of what we find;
Do not forget but bring your female Mates,
For it is reported you and they are kind.
He had no sooner spoke, but up he called
A pretty Crew of nimble footed Spirits,
Who with a Circle hand in hand Impall'd
Them in the midst; then with their choice delights
Presented them; and they were well content
To be confined with pleasing violence,
Still giving heed unto their merriment:
A Damsel then with modest impudence
Stepped up, and she began to play and sing,
With raptures of transcending pleasing Strains;
Some fragments of her Song I here do bring,
Which with delight my memory retains.

The SONG.
Come you whose minds are free,
And can with us agree
To walk along with we;
Vn^armed shall you be;
And hand in hand we will dance a round
In any place where we find ground.
No place we find amiss,
But can enjoy our bliss,
And can as freely kiss
Heavens hand where ere it is;
For every where where ere we go,
We find a friend, and none's a foe.
When stormy Winters blasts,
And darksome Clouds orecasts,
We have a day that lasts,
Whose brightness never wastes:
Let rain, or shine, or hail, or snow,
Our shelter we full well do know.
Come bring your nimble feet,
And let us the Measures greet,
Hard measure will prove sweet,
And we dare boldly meet:
The raging Lion we can tame,
And make him hang his tail with shame.
No Tiger, Wolf, nor Bear,
That does destroy and tear,
Can us possess with fear,
Though we their raging hear:
Their roarings vanish in the air,
Th'arr feeble things to work despair.
We travel far and wide,
We are to no place tide,
Where ere we do abide,
We care not if men chide:
For harmless we do pass along,
And do no living creature wrong.
If we have list to eat,
We take no care for meat,
No creature we entreat,
No labor makes us sweat;
We in abundance are content,
And are well pleased when store is spent.
The place whereon we rest,
We always think it best,
Our minds are so possessed,
Repinings we detest.
^n every place and every thing,
We can behold contentment spring.
Then if we stand or fall,
Our danger is but small,
Our beings all in all,
This we our refuge call:
Then sink, or swim, or live, or dye,
We pass our days contentedly.
We pass along unseen,
Ore Hills and Meadows green
No creature yet has been,
To view our honored Queen:
But if they come to gaze and spy,
We strike them blind, and lead them by.
We wish no creature ill,
Nor mean to learn the skill,
To poison or to kill,
Nor never had a will
To learn the art of cutting throats,
For we have learned better notes.
Fair Innocence rare
Is the best clothes we wear,
We take no further care,
Though we seem poor and bare:
So long as we go void of blame,
Though we go naked it is no shame.
So having danced, and sung, and played a while,
The hearers spirits being lifted up,
The music ceast; then with a pleasing smile
She with some Nectar filled an Acorn cup,
And drank a Round to every one apart,
And then began a pause, but 'twas but short,
Till pleasing slumber overwhelmed each heart,
Then with strong sleep each one began to snort.
And now it is past my skill for to relate
How long they slept; but this I dare be bold,
When they awaked their sweets were out of date,
And they were in their dumps as I was told;
There mirth was gone, the Fairies they were fled,
The lovely Crew were vanished out of sight,
Then all-amort no^ more with fancy fed,
Could not contain themselves but wept outright.
Tom. But it is reported of some standers by,
That marked and viewed the passages of things,
That some of them of purpose came to try,
When in the midst of all their revellings,
If they could steal away their Gods; but see
How they were served, for by the law of like,
The Gods that in their own esteem were free,
And none durst touch, much less presume to strike,
In their presumption ran so far astray,
That they did lose themselves thus in a maze;
It is no marvel they have lost their way,
When every fancy makes them stand and gaze:
For it is writ, and I remember well
The words, I Am sure they were not writ in vain,
The Gods with whom my lovely people dwell,
In any case revile not with disdain.

Ralph. But Tom, me thinks they did but hardly deal,
That they presumed their Gods away to steal;
For when all is lost, and men their loss bewail,
With threatening speech to ask them what they ail.

Tom. To steal away their Gods? now cease thy chat,
Peace Ralph, and take advisement ere thou speak;
Be not too nimble, for I Will tell thee what,
That Is a hard task, and men I know are weak;
It Is not the hand of man can steal away
A God adored living in the mind:
Or true or false, a Deity bears sway,
Affording help to each one in a kind;
But it is the Finger of a Higher hand,
Who with a touch can bring away the soul,
And make it better Objects understand,
And past the power of humanes to control.

Ned. Their Gods; what Gods? Is there a God beside
The Shepherds God? and are they Gods indeed?
Some wooden Gods I trow, whose painted pride
Nere stirs to help a Shepherd in his need,
Who has no eyes to see when danger's near,
Nor ears to hear our sad complaints and groans,
Nor hands to help to ease us of our fear,
Nor hearts moved to remorse with all our moans;
No tongues to speak divinely, or direct
The Shepherds of the Valleys how to keep
Their flocks in comely order, and select
The lovely Lambs quite from the scabbed Sheep;
No feet to walk, that we may imitate
Their lovely steps in freedom and delight;
No living motion that might elevate,
But lumpish Melancholy that affrights.

Ralph. But Ned, I pray thee speak no longer now
Of these uplandish Gods, for fear they blast us,
If I can choose, I Will not come near I vow,
For why? some Planets have great power to waste us:
Let Us leave that subject; now I call to mind,
Upon a time when thee and I went forth,
And drove our flocks together, seeming kind,
With savoury words which showed of mickle worth;
We wandered up and down from place to place,
Up mighty Hills, then all along the Dales,
Much time we spent; then for a little space
We sat us down and told some merry tales:
But mark the mischief, I that had good store,
And plenty in my Bag, and Bottle full,
Some evil Beast had found, and Scrip had tore,
And up and down the Hedge-rows did them pull;
And see thy kindness, thou had plenty still,
And I in want and hungry hunger bites,
Then thou went by as one that had no skill
Nor knowledge of our loving Masters rites,
Thou had forgot I think how he does set
Himself for an example, and does bid
Us learn of him, what hinderance, or let,
His ways of imitation are not hid.
My household servants, and my Shepherds who
I put in trust with all my flocks, have learned
For to be kind to all, both friend and foe,
And by that sign the difference is discerned,
If they have learned of others, or of me:
If they have learned of me, they will be kind
To one another, all things shall be free:
Their very hearts are open to their friend:
Has he two Coats, and see his friend go bare?
Naked and destitute, of clothing cold;
His fairest russet garment he will not spare,
Were better then his best a thousand fold.
And he that has provision in his Scrip.
And will deny a Shepherd in his need,
And in contempt, begin to hang the lip,
And of his plenty will not let him feed:
Let him be banished quite beyond the Plains,
And be confined within some narrow bounds,
Until such time that he a sense retains,
And so does feel a Shepherds wants and wounds.
For I have traveled far, and never knew,
Nor never heard of any Shepherd yet,
That ever came where love of kindness grew,
That could, or did, those noble Plants forget.

Ralph. But Brother Will, reports do go of thee,
And it is known to some that is here among us,
That thy expressions have been far more free
With some Companions; prithee do not wrong us.
Why should thou hide from us thy loveliest strains?
Thy Song of Sorrow, prithee come and sing it,
I know thy breast diviner things contains;
Thy Harp hangs by, I wonder thou wilt not string it;
For the other day, as I was passing by,
I heard thee sing; but though I crafty were,
Thou did perceive my craft, when I did lie
Behind a Bush, thy lovely strains to hear.
Make us partakers of thy mirth and moans,
We are thy friends, thy welfare is our joy;
Will thou relate thy sorrows to the stones
That have no ears, nor wit for to be coy?
We know thy nature, we can simpathize
With thee, although thou fall as low as Hell;
And in the lowest Region memorize,
Light in the depth of darkness with a Spell;
Out of the Flint we can produce a fire,
And water too, for to refresh the sense;
If from thy self thou should^st a while retire,
We have a Spell will bring thee back from thence:
And it is in vain for thee to stand aloof,
For we will bring thee forward with a witness;
And though I think thy breast is envy proof,
Thy humble station shows thy noble fitness.

Will. And there is reports, and some reports are true,
That thou have store of Pictures, pray thee tell;
I am thy friend, and I have very few,
Yet I have learned and can distinguish well;
Yea, I have skill in Physiognomy,
And by thy looks I can perceive thy heart;
Show me thy Palm, I Will read thy destiny,
If not in full, yet I Will be bold in part.

Tom. Art thou a Fortune Tellers, Brother Will?
I pray thee tell my fortune if thou can,
For I have heard thou have got pretty skill
In Palmestry; I honor such a man.

Will. Fortune does favor Fools, wise men are poor,
The poor are humble, humble fears no frowns;
Proud sturdy Beggars beg from door to door;
Fierce hunger cares nor fears to break stone-wals:
Stone-wals are strong, and yet they are but stones
Compact of slime, unsensible of sense,
They cannot cry if one should break their bones,
Nor humane Charms produce one tears expense:
I see thy heart now at thy fingers ends,
And I perceive a Pearl stands in thy eye;
Thy hands are full of crosses, that portends
Thou must be beaten to humility.
And thou love Pictures well, then hear me speak;
I care not for thy coin, if thou had more;
Thou think you are strong, but I perceive thee weak;
Had thou Pans Picture, thou would nere be poor.
Show me thy foot, or give me but the length,
Or show the Circle where thy foot did stand,
I dare be bold I Will show where lies thy strength,
And name the Planet that does countermand:
If any one should shoot an Arrow here
Amongst us all, I dare be bold to tell
From whence it came, if once the shaft appear:
Let me but handle it, and view it well,
If I do'nt tell if it be Jonathans,
Or other shafts that came from Esaus Bow,
Or from the private arm of any man's,
I Will pawn my credit I will plainly show:
Yea, I can tell if he that shot the same
Had ever been with David in the Plain:
For mingled souls will manifest the flame
Of pure affections, always in the main.
And thou love Women too too well I hear;
A woman is thy Master, thus 't was told
Among the Shepherds lately; and I fear
'T will prove a certain blemish; for I hold
A woman should be silent, and submit,
And not presume to teach, that should be learning:
Discretion is content to stay at home, and sit
To hear her Husbands words of more concerning.
What should a woman know, but for to learn
To know her Husband from another man?
That knowledge is sufficient to discern,
This depth of understanding pray thee skan.

Harry. But now in sober-sadnesse, Brother Will,
Let Us lay by jesting; tell me thy conceiving:
What do thou think of our uplandish Phil?
And speak thy mind, all by-respects out leaving:
Thy hidden language I well understand,
I know thou speak^st more languages then one,
Thy speech bewraies thou'st matter at command.
I know thou walk'st not on these Downs alone,
I know what company thou do frequent;
Him whom thou love is our chief delight;
Then love him still, it is not my intent
To seek for to deprive thee of thy right:
We are not jealous, for it is our desire,
That every Shepherd that does trace these Hills,
In conversation would draw something nigher;
I dare be bold 'twould much augment their skils.

Will. Thy servant Brother; and it is my joy,
To be employed by thee in any thing:
If thou command, thou shall not find me coy
In any service might contentment bring
To thee or thine: do thou but speak the word,
I Will show my readiness to give content:
If I deny, then put it on Record,
If thou don't find me more then complement;
Tres humble service in the low'st degree
I will perform, nothing shall come amiss,
Such vildnesse is no bondage unto me;
For it is my joy the feet of love to kiss.
And I abhor his folly, that does utter
Words of despite against our growing friends,
For to my grief sometimes I Have heard him mutter
Words which did seem to work his private ends;
Though like an Angel he sometimes has seemed
To me, and to my friends; and in my soul
I honored him, and mightily esteemed
His words as Oracles, without control:
But when I heard him utter words of scorn
Against better then himself, I blessed me than,
And sometimes crossed my self as one forlorn;
And speaking in my self, I thus began.
Oh All in all, if thou be'st All in all,
Where is thy glory? will thou take delight
To blast the fame of our increasings small?
And with thy splendor do thou use to fright
The poor, despised, weather-beaten Crew,
That at thy feet lie gasping now for breath?
It Is nothing but thy breathing can renew;
Life, without thee, in my account, is death:
Will thou take part with them that do disclaim
Thy nature, and thy name? it is far from we
For to approve of such, whose only aim
Is to advance themselves, not minding thee:
Can thou take part with them that do despise
Thy silly wandering flock, that strayes for feeding?
Can thou delight in them that do devise
A way to nourish Wolves, and Foxes breeding?
Let Wolves take part with Wolves, let Foxes lie
In wait for to deceive, their nature showing.
Sheep will be Sheep, let foolish Envy try
If they can make them change with overcrowing.
And if I perish, let me perish, Lord,
With thy despised ones, that bear about
Thine honorable marks, and can afford
To bear the scornings of the Rabble-rout.
When I say rabble, Lord, I do not mean
Cobblers and Tinkers; for they are to me
Better then silken Doctors spruce and clean,
That never heard, nor never learned of thee:
But Rhetorician raylers that can prate,
As much of thee, as any man alive;
Yet in their in-most thoughts abominate,
And at thy being secretly contrive:
Yea, those I mean, that will as soon take part
With scorners and despisers, as with those
That fear thy name, and can deride by Art;
And upright hearted most of all oppose.

Tom. Art thou a Roundhead, Will? me thinks thou speak'^
As if thou lov'dst the cause; I pray thee tell:
But be thou sure of this, the bread thou break'st
Shall be set on thy Table, ill or well.

Will. If by the name of Roundhead, thou do mean
The humble minded; then I am content
To sit amongst those Beasts thou count'st unclean:
And I shall think my time more nobly spent,
Then If I sat amongst the painted crew
Of party-colours, that those daughters were,
Whose offspring from the Prince of darkness grew:
Such foolish brats that Edoms daughters bear;
Who, though they be such daughters that can change
To every color, green, and Maiden-blush,
And daily with the country daughters range,
And marry with a Ring made of a Rush;
Yet I had rather glean among the sheaves
With Moabitish Ruth, then fill my sith
With straw and stubble, or Egyptian leaves,
Or of their harvest gather in the tithe.
That name I know was given in despite
Of Christian minds, and those that did protest
Against th'opposers of the lovely light;
Who both good life and doctrine do detest:
And in that sense, I glory for to bear
The name of Roundhead, though I will confess,
I much unworthy to my self appear,
To undergo reproach, or more, or less:
And it is my shame I am not gone so far
As to despise the shame, my glory's small;
Yet I will glory, and I will not mar
My joy in this light, darkness for to call:
I will not, nor I dare not for my life
Against Professors speak, be what they will;
With the upright minded I will cease from strife,
That walk with God in any way that is still.
But those that do disturb the common good
With factious clamours, far be it from me
To think them wise, or godly; I nere stood
To plead their cause, from that I will be free:
And if I err in what I speak or write,
It Is out of charity, and it is my love:
Oh let me perish if I work despite
Unto the voice of the poor Turtle Dove.
And now, O Lord, confound and lay full low,
The vain imaginations of the man,
That does despise thy people; let him know
That he has spoken proudly now and than.
Me thinks there is in me a sweet respect,
That in my soul I give to every wight;
Yea, every soul, I say, not every Sect,
In whom I see a spark of lovely light:
Let him be Spaniard, Turk, or Indian black,
So that he be no Infidel, denying
The principles of Nature; nor does lack
Humanity, to manage his complying:
When I see Justice, and sweet Mercy kind,
With rich imbracings, kissing one another
In any one; me thinks, if I were blind,
Yet I might well discern him for my brother.
But oh, when cruel Justice stands alone,
To cut down all offenders, then think I,
This is the Devils picture engraved in stone,
That scorns a Mediators simpathy.

Tom. But Will, thou wast relating to'ther day
What loss our friend sustained, he that dwells
Upon the Eastern plains; for I heard say,
He all the Shepherds of the West excels
In wisdom, and in wealth: for from the East
Promotion comes; the Star that guides the soul
Was there first seen; those Orient Pearls are best,
Whose sparkling rays black darkness does control.

Will. I tell thee Tom, the man was mighty rich,
And full of goods, his Barns well filled with grain;
His Oxen strong to labor, few had such,
And daily wealth came in with little pain.
But on a time it fell, the rascal rout,
The worst of all the people, made a prize
Of his substance; how came it about?
For to relate I am not yet so wise:
We marked the pass^ges, and discontent,
That we expect^d daily to ensue,
In exp^ctation of some sad event
Or desp^ration shortly would accrue:
Bu^ oh, I am not able to express
The sweet^esse of his carriage; For instead
Of foul despair, he took with joyfulnesse,
The spoiling of those goods where Vipers bred.

Tom. The spoiling of his goods, that is no great thing;
Do thou not know as yet, there is in man
A kind of self-conceitednesse does spring
Afresh in him, cre since his fall began?
Do thou not know, that man affecting fame
Will venture life and limb that he may live
In humane hearts; and in his mind does frame
Models of mighty Mountains, to arrive?
Even at the highest pitch of happiness; for why,
Men are so animated by their Priests,
They presently attain eternity,
Whose acclamations prove but Had-I-wists.

Will. Be patient Tom: let moderation guide
Both thee and I: do in thy conscience think
That thou do well, this speaking, to deride
The zealous hearted? it shall never sink
Into my breast, that he that is content
To leave his life, his liberty, and being,
And is content, to live in banishment,
Quite from the means of any mortal seeing,
In zeal to God, on purpose to obey
His Makers will; me thinks that man does see
Beyond himself: What felf-nesse can thou say
Remains, but may with charity agree?
I Will tell thee what even I my self have known:
Some friends of mine whose plenty did excel,
And had they stayed in England, might have grown
Rich, and in plenty might have lived full well.
But mark their zeal, they quite forsook their means,
For to enjoy the freedom of their minds,
The staff on which the worldly minded leans,
Although in that none satisfaction finds:
And lived by Pease, at morning, noon, and night,
Better contented in that poor condition
Then they were wont; and found more sweet delight
In that hard fare, then in their full fruition:
Me thinks I cannot entertain a thought
Of prejudice against such real thinkings;
For I have weighed those Arguments some brought
To prove them simple no-things; others winkings
And silence gave consent: This was my thought,
I tell thee what I thought, my thoughts are mine;
And in so saying yet I have not sought
To make thee think amiss of thoughts Divine.
All zealous burning hearts that talk with God,
And are inflamed with his lovely being,
And are contented to endure the rod
Of his chastizements for their further freeing,
I willingly will bear; and I will bear
Their contradictions too, and their revilings,
And it shall be my glory for to rear
A monument to all; my self exilings:
I will not care what men do think of me;
Praists I value much-what like the wind,
I am content Fames trumpet should blow free;
I hope it shall not much disturb my mind
Though some speak evil, yet they cannot tell
So much as I can of my self relate.
I know more evil by a mighty deal,
Even by my self, then all the world can prate:
But let them prate, I take no other care,
I Will fight with them in love, come if they dare.

Ned. Well answered Will: Me thinks thy words do favor
As thou had been with Joshua, sure thou have;
It Is my rejoicing thou have found that favor,
Me thinks thy words well relish in my taste;
For it is my joy where ere I come to hear
Men speak with good affection, it is a grace
That seldom in our Gown-men do appear,
Whose want of wisdom over-clouds the face:
For lovely wisdom makes the face to shine,
And secretly infuseth in the minds
Of the beholders that which does entwine,
And with inthralling violence it binds,
And makes the soul to say with strong desiring,
When it beholds the glory to express,
Such fervent love, with lowly breath aspiring,
Oh, that I were like thee in lowliness:
Oh, that I could, even in the dust lie down,
Me thinks that low condition is the best,
Then I should quite forget a mortals frown,
Then with the Worms, sure I should find some rest;
For there is a glory sure amongst the Worms.
Companions in the dust, whose intercourse
With one another in preventing storms,
And low condition never fears divorce:
For the other day, as I was passing by,
In yonder lowly Valley, there I saw
Our Masters picture to the life, whose eye
Did every eye in that large Valley draw:
Three thousand souls at once, as I suppose,
Of purpose came to view, and every one;
Yea, I dare say, that every one of those
Said in his heart, He looks on me alone;
And so said all that stood, or far, or near,
Or either side, or just before the place,
The fixed eye to each one did appear,
As if it were set our Vains to outface:
Look you on that, it looked on you likewise,
And so said all, It looks on me, and me:
And in each heart from thence forth did arise
More noble thoughts then all the world can see.

Ralph. Will, there is a friend would very fain come in,
And see our Master Jesus, but I fear
He Is over-lofty minded to begin
To stoop so low, and curious too I hear.

Will. Would thou see Jesus, friend? thou art not able
For to behold him in humility,
Thy countenance does render thee unstable;
For every Shepherd says thou come to spy:
Could thou but view him in his lowliness,
Sitting amongst the children of delight,
And speaking in their language, thou would confess
Thou never did behold a better sight:
Thou art too mighty friend in my conceiving,
Thy countenance does give thou art too rich,
Thy speech bewrayes, thou have a heart deceiving;
For too much learning does thy soul bewitch:
Thou can not stoop so low, it is my fear,
For thou grow'st stiff with age, gray-hairs grow on:
Old in the evil nature who can bear?
A burden to thy friends to think upon,
Age in extremes frozen in thy words:
Words without life, a life without consent:
Rugged unto thy friends, upon Records:
All love sometimes in way of complement.

Ralph. But Brother Ned thy countenance does give,
And I with pity, view thee now and than:
Sometimes me thinks the life that thou do live
Cannot be called life; for when I scan
Thy visage, and thy looks, how pale thy cheeks,
Thy gloating eyes, thy pendant hairy brow,
Thy griming teeth that scanty covering seeks,
Shows that lip-labor thou do best allow.
Love from teeth outward, such as thou have learned
Among the Western Shepherds hide-bound crew,
That love, but in the tongue that is soon discerned,
A hollow voice a hol low heart does show.

Will. The humble soul discerns the voice right well
Of her beloved; half a word from him
Is better then ten thousand tales some tell,
From brainsick minds, that in their puddle swim;
For she does know the voice of him that speaks
Out of the abundance of Librarious treasure,
And she has eyes to see the hands that breaks
Souls food, and gives it by weight and measure;
For the other day when two or three of us
Were sadly walking to the Eastern Plains;
Discoursing (pro and con) it chanced thus,
Even in the midst of our condoling vains,
A noble Shepherd passing on the way,
And hearing our discourse, drew near, and went
A long with us, and none of us could say
What man he was, nor what was his intent;
But albeit, our journey was not great;
Our feet were faint, our eyesight that was dim,
Our hearts did burn, and pine for want of meat,
Yet well content to go along with him:
But to be brief, we came unto the place
Where we intended for to stay all night;
Then we persuaded him in any case,
To stay with us until the morning light.
Well, then he stard, and when we sat at meat,
Our spirits well-nigh spent, he took the bread
And blessed it, and brake, and gave to eat,
Which after we had tasted, and had fed,
Our spirits werereviv'd; our foolish eyes
That had been held on poor decaying things,
Far better objects wishly now diseries,
And glorious things to our remembrance brings:
And then we know full well it was the voice
Of our Beloved, once set down for lost,
Our hope almost ashamed of our choice,
And on the waves of strong temptations tossed:
But never man that ever spoke with tongue,
Spoke like this man; for he brake bread indeed,
No giddifying Darnell bread, to wrong
The eaters brain; 'twas made of holy seed.

John. Speak like a Christian Ned, me thinks thy driving
Is over furious: Why do drive fo fast?
A gentle softly pace is best for thriving:
We have a Proverb too, Much haste makes waste.
Provoking urging words, does ill become
The servants of that household whereof we
Are glad to be partakers; though there is some
Disdain a servant in that houle to be:
But he that is content to sit and hear,
And is content to learn the simple plainness
Wherein the Shepherds glory does appear,
And are content to lay aside their vainness,
Shall view another nature with delight;
Yea, such a glory fixed by wisedoms shining,
To animate spectatours with their sight,
To come and see with hearts in hearts intwining;
For albeit we do disdain to bear
The name of cowards for we will resist,
And will the Woolfs and Fox-like nature tear,
And will not stand on terms of had I wist:
Yet we have learned of our Master that
Which nere will be forgotten, and can do
That which our Southern Shepherds make much chat,
And though they talk, are loath to undergo;
To recompense to man evil deeds
For evil doings, if a Shepherd rail,
Use him with kind respect; such noble seeds
Will certainly find rooting, seldom fail:
Nor can a Shepherd that has gone so far,
And has attained this degree in learning,
For every small and trivial matter jar,
And fight with those that are of less discerning,
As if they lived by fighting, and would make
A trade of wars; and those that shall persuade them
To leave that course of life, they always take
For foreign enemies that would invade them:
As for example, twenty days ago,
When half a dozen Shepherds in their walkings,
And meditations walking to and fro;
When in the midst of their sincerest talkings,
There passed by three Captains of the West,
That lived by fighting. We, as we were taught,
Saluted them with (vobis pax) that is best;
And they replied, Your words must pass for naught:
You Rogues, quoth they, our livings is by war,
And do you wish us peace, for to undo us?
Do You wish for that, which our contents would mar?
A worse condition cannot come unto us.
But give me leave to speak a word or two
Of my conceiving, now it comes to mind,
It Is possible for one to fain to do
Such glotious things, that humane eyes will blind:
Do thou not see how skillful some are grown,
To play the Christians on the worldly stage?
What glorious outsides to the world are shown,
By some that are a great deal under age?
Have we not seen a Woolvish nature wear
A Sheep-skin for his covering, closely hiding
His ears, and teeth, that is always bent to tear;
Yet with the Sheep and Lamb, are always siding?
Do thou not know, my friend, me thinks it is plain,
That humane creatures are for imitation?
And he that spoke it, did not speak in vain;
Neither in manner, nor in limitation,
Do as you see me do: You see my doings
Is for your imitation, follow me,
Observe the steps I take, and all my goings,
For I can walk on raging waves you see.
Come learn of me, my friends, and I will teach you
The way of thriving, you that would be rich,
No cunning crafty dealer shall out-reach you,
No School-play Engines can the mind bewitch;
But you that follow, and would learn indeed,
Be well advised, leave your selves behind,
Of such great luggage there is now no need,
For you must be content with what you find:
But, oh my friends, look for no better fare
Then I your Captain. We shall meet with those
With venomed tongues, and brazen face will dare
For to affront, and venture to oppose,
Through many turnings, and through windings strange,
Even through the deeps I pass, and so must you;
Yea, you must wait as I did for your change:
No other way I can, nor will allow;
The way is mine, the eye of flesh is blind,
Her prudent ones by seeking for the door;
Their eyes are held, alas, they cannot find,
No entrance there, because they are not poor.
Thou art too great to enter in this way,
Too rich, and full, thou have no need of me;
The glorious Arm of flesh is all thy stay;
These with thy understanding best agree:
Could thou but be content to go along
Into the horrid death, and be content
The mortified souls to sit among,
Accounting that thy chiefest element;
And could thou be content to stay with me
The time appointed in that darksome night,
Until the day star do arise to thee,
And give good heed my Word, to follow right,
And be content to speak it from thy heart,
Lord, I will follow thee where ere thou go,
Nor death, nor hell, shall my affections part,
I will not leave thee when thou art at lowest:
Let airy birds flee to their foolish nests,
Let crafty foxes run to holes for hiding;
But our affections flies, and never rests,
And cannot find a place for our abiding,
Until it find thee for to pitch upon.
Thou art the body, Eagles they have wings,
To flee from foolish shadows, and be gone:
They cannot rest on these decaying things,
They see, they see, for Eagles they have eyes;
They see another nature is preparing,
Quite through the vapors of contentments flies,
And will not stay to see these pleasures sharing.

Ralph. But Tom, I know thy skill has greatly failed
In laying spirits; yet I know thy skill
Is great in raising spirits, that prevailed,
And raised a storm that overturned a mill:
And I remember well, thou shewd'st thy art,
To lay the spirit with thy conjuration;
But yet the devil did so play his part,
In black confusion, that by Wills relation,
It blew down arms of Trees, and one great Oak,
That by relation stood three hundred years:
Till thou wast forced deeply to invoke
Our Masters aid with grievous bitter tears:
At last our Master came, and chid the wind,
And hushed the storm, that presently obeyed,
The evil spirit he in chains did bind,
'T was well for thee thou gott'st such speedy aid.
And I remember what our Master spoke,
Rebuking thee for thy presumption bold;
And many a tear I wasted for thy sake,
For I perceived right well, thy heart grew cold:
Would thou presume to meddle with that Book
Of which I gave thee charge full long ago
No not to touch, much less therein to look?
Now thou may see thy strength that fails thee so;
Now thou may see how weak thou art indeed,
Had I not come in quickly to thy aid,
Hearing thee cry, but loath to see thee bleed;
And with my wisdom and my skill soon laid
That evil spirit, sure thou had been torn
In little pieces less then nothing; and
Each little piece a monument of scorn
To every evil eye in view might stand.

John. Thou art too cruel Ned in my conceiving,
For the other night I in my meditation,
I thought on thee, and of thy harsh bereaving
The little Bird of her sweet generation:
Thou take away the Nest, and Birds, and all,
Thou took'st away the Dam, that few would do;
Me thinks it seemed to me unnatural,
And thou some penalty must undergo;
Me thinks it were sufficient for to take
The little Birds, and let the Dam go free,
And not to act the devils part, to make
The soul a prey unto thy cruelty.

Will. You worst of men, lay down your Shepherds Crooks,
The Ensigns of your honor, come resign them,
Retire a while, and live among the Rooks,
And in your circles study to confine them:
Go prattle with the daws, for we have seen
Enough to make us loath you, and your coats;
It Is not your country Gray will make us ween
You simple-honest, you must change your notes:
Our Masters servants now begin to learn
To know, and can distinguish words and words;
But words are wind, they are able to discern
What sollid substance frothy words affords.
Now you may sit, and talk, and tell us tales,
What other Shepherds said, and what they did:
But what do you who answers to your calls,
For underneath your coats there is rapine hid:
Now you may pawn your Sheep-hooks if you will,
And throw away your Pipes, or if you please,
Make music to the Woolves, for they have skill
To dance after your Piping for their ease.
You tell us of your pains, and watchings often,
When we are in our folds securely sleeping,
And with such rubs as these, you work, and soften,
Our sheepish nature of your care in keeping:
If you take care, are you not well rewarded?
Are you not clothed with the finest Wool?
Though you forget your flock, none more regarded,
And though they pine, you have your bellies full;
And yet you say, It fares with us poor hearts,
Even as with Carriers Horses, who must bear,
And do expect no pity for our parts,
Till underneath the weight we sinking are.

Ned. What art thou angry John? do thou do well,
For to express thy passion in this sort?
I preethee be advised, for I can tell,
It Is good for to be cautious of report;
For some reports be false, though some be true,
And some will out of envy utter forth
Their very spleenish nature, and there is few
Attain to moderation of much worth.
When I pass by a Shepherd that does wear
An honest russet-coat, I do comply,
And do him fitting reverence, for I swear,
With any reason I cannot deny,
To give him good respect, at least in show,
That wears the coat of gravity; though he
Wears underneath his hood a brazen brow,
And is not what he should, or ought to be;
For orders sake, I show him good respect:
For thus I think, he is good, or should be so,
He Is foreman of a flock that should direct,
His Masters sheep the steps that they should go;
But it is thy zeal, I cannot blame thee much;
And yet our Master says, Lay down your Arms,
Put up your Swords, I have no need of such,
I have no thought to work you humane harms,
I am for peace, I have no mind to fight,
My Shepherds must not strive, my sheep are quiet,
There Is nothing in their nature to affright,
Their wantonness did nere intend to riot:
Perhaps the Lambs will run at barley break,
And wantonly will frisk it on the Downs,
For to express their joyfulnesse: But speak,
If you ere saw a sheep use killing frowns;
Perhaps they will break the Hedges for to find
Out better pasture, sometimes spoil the corn,
And yet not well contented in their mind,
Wander in desert places, till forlorn:
But let that pass, let us learn for to forgive,
And to forget unkindnesse, and let us press
Unto a further pitch, till we arive
Even at the lowest cell of humbleness;
And there let us sit and sing under that shade,
Where Envy cannot peep to mar our pleasures,
The arbor that of old our Master made,
And therein takes delight to lay his treasures.

Will. Ah Brother Ned, have thou no better learnd,
Then thus to reverence foolish painted clothes?
Thine eye I Am sure has better things discerned,
I dare be bold, such things thy judgment lothes.
A Cobbler is a Christian, will thou look
Upon his servile clothes with high disdain?
That Is not Gods eye I Am sure, and who can brook,
Ah, who can bear this base indignity!
Christ did not with his Rabby Doctors sit,
So much to hear them, as for to oppose
Their vanity, and their great want of wit,
With an intent his treasure to disclose:
Where is the Scribe, the crafty scribbling Scribe,
The Worlds disputer, rhetorician railer,
Boasting their great descent of Levies Tribe,
And in the Arm of flesh is aprevailer?
Leave offering to this Idol, now my friends,
Must we be always children, always learning
Of them that Preach themselves for their base ends,
For bread and cheese, and pocket up their earnings?
But now because my word, perhaps may fright thee,
I Will sing a Song a little to delight thee.

The Song.
You that mindlesse
Of unkindnesle,
Sit and sing away your hours,
In the Season
When fair Reason
Sits amongst the lovely flowers,
Where Birds singing,
Music bringing
To the Arbor of delight,
With such fitness,
With a witness,
Our Hobgoblins does affright.
Natures chearing,
Voices clearing,
Come and help us bear a part.
Ease our longing
Of Arts wronging.
Nature far surpasses Art.
Nature's springing
Helps our singing,
Give us natures wings to fly,
That will cheer us,
And twill bear us
Almost to eternity.
View the paving
Where no waving
Nor shadow of a change;
No appearing
Of base fearing
Can on the Meadows range.
View these building,
And the guilding,
And the noble Wreathes of Fame:
View the stories
And the glories,
Of Loves never dying name.
Mark the Traces
And the Graces,
Mark the shoes the soul does wear:
Sweet affections,
Rare perfections,
In her steps there does appear.
Mark the talkings
And the walkings
Of the lovely soul divine:
To the Center
At adventure
She wholly does incline.
Where espying
In her flying
Far above the common Spears,
Lovely beings,
Glorious seeings,
Which the longing soul uprears:
Who aspiring
With desiring,
Both in nature and in name.
Though estranged,
Would be changed,
For to be the very same.
If I should use plain terms, and call thee thief,
I think I should not wrong thee; for I think
Thou have deceived the gods, and to be brief,
Without equivocation, by this drink
I Will speak my mind; thus I conceive of thee,
That thou have got admittance to the place
Where thou Heavens flames of sweet content did see,
And being sped of such a noble grace,
Stole from the Altar in the heat of day,
Fire in thy Vessel, and in Embers hid it:
And now it is manifest thou do assay,
To blaze it as thine own, but we have spied it.
Will. Now where is your charity? I see you shoot
At random now: If Jonathan were here,
I dare be bold I Would know him by his foot;
His Shafts of love would fly beyond us there;
But now I see th^art married to thy mind:
Thy Freedom is but Bondage: I could wish
That thou would never marry; for I find
In troubled waters thou delight'st to fish.
Ah Will! it is well with thee, that sitst among
Thy fellow-Shepherds, playing in the shade,
Wh^l^t we are pestered with a fearful throng
Of men of Mars that all our Coasts invade,
That spoil our mirth, and hinder all our joys,
Our scattered flocks amazing with their noise.
Come, we are friends, let us lay by discontent,
And let us sing. --

The SONG.
AS of late
In Babylon we sat,
By the waves
Whose stout braves
Were enraged,
As if they had presaged
Our ruin out of hand.
Then to mind
I called thee right kind
Sion bright,
Whose fair light
Dazzling eye,
And Princely Majesty,
Still in our soul does stand,
With tears fresh bleeding new,
Our plants we did bedew;
And hung by
Our harps upon the watery Willows nigh.
Then they (to us forlorn)
Spoke in deriding scorn,
To grieve us more:
We hear you have some Songs in store;
Then tune a string,
Come and sing;
We fain would hear
What Music words
Your soul affords,
This heavy weight to bear.
Ah, how should we
Our strings set to agree,
Or make choice
Of a voice
For to sound,
That echoes might rebound
Jehovah's living fame,
In a land
Where folly does command
With delight,
In despite,
To oresway
And in confusion lay
Poor Sions lovely frame?
But in these woes if I
Where ere I come deny
And forget
Thee and thy silver drops that wet,
And distills
Down to the little hills
And forlorn allies,
And fills with Songs despised valleys:
Let my skill
Fail for to fulfill
Her task intended:
For to allay that furious fray
From hellish fumes ascended.
All my joys
^^alue but as toys:
If I miss
Thee my bliss;
If I prize
Not thy rich dignities
Above my dying fame;
Let my tongue
In silence keep among
Those that lie
Long lad by
In the graves,
Where dismal bonds enslaves
Unto a breathless name:
Dear Sion, my delight,
If I thy building slight,
Or if I
Do not thy ashes dignifie,
Let mine eyes
Be filled with salt supplies,
And brinish weeping,
And blinded with eternal sleeping.
Griefs renew,
When I view
Thy waste buildings;
Yea it is my woe,
To see the so
Deface thy noble gildings.
Edom he,
Though he our kinsman be,
On that day
Did display
Much despite,
As if he took delight
To view our sore distress;
For relief,
They added to our grief,
Using words
Worse then swords,
With rude cries,
And in their master-prize,
Their madness did express.
These buildings raze, said they,
And in the dust them lay,
And pull down
The glory of her peerly Crown;
For ever blast the fame
Of Sions foolish name,
And make it die,
And in eternal silence lie.
See, O Lord,
And record
Their cursed joying,
And bear the noise
These furies raise,
In Sions walls destroying.
Babels pride,
Displayed both far and wide:
Though she is seen
As a Queen,
Sitting where
She says she has no fear
For ever to behold
Mourning strange,
Or dismal face of change,
To affright
With their sight,
Or betray
Unto a gloomy day,
Who dares be so bold?
But there is a blessed friend,
That does our Cause defend,
Whose strong hand
Shall lay thy Towers level with the sand:
Yea, happy sure is he,
That so rewards thee,
And serves thee thus,
With such despite as thou have served us.
Yea, thrice blessed,
That detest
Those brats of thine,
And dash them all
In pieces small,
Against the Rock Divine.
Ned. Why how now, Will, what walking all alone
Without the bounds of our communicating?
Are thy thoughts boundless? will thou needs be gone,
And fly beyond us in thy contemplating?
Shall flying thoughts be valued? do thou think
They Will pass for current still among the wise?
Do think all is blind that at thy follies wink?
No, no, we see thy foolish enterprise:
Thou would be boundless fain; I know thy aim,
Thou aimst at things too far beyond thy reach;
The Labyrinth thou walkst in does proclaim,
Thou do thy Conscience on the tenters stretch.
Thou seemst regardlesse both of friend and fo:
Sad melancholy musings, cloudy mists,
Encloseth thee wherever thou do go,
And thy conceivings are on Had I wists.
Thy thoughts do much resemble, to my mind,
The Asses thoughts, that turns away his eyes,
And will not see the Wolf that stands behind,
With open mouth, awaiting for his Prize.
Put off thy Vizard, that we may behold
Thee in thy selfnesse: Why should thou appear
More lovely then thou art a thousand fold?
It casts a luster that my eyes does blear,
Had I not known thee, I and many more
Had been deceived by this false gloss of thine:
But I have seen thee sometimes heretofore
To pull it off and on, to make thee fine.
Faith I confess it does become thee well,
If it were natural, it is lovely, and 'twill draw
The hearts of the beholders: But I Will tell
Thee what I think, and what I Am sure I saw.

Will. Ah, brother Ned, my sadness grows of this,
Because I see so little God in thee:
For I account it more then common bliss,
In any man these gladsome beams to see:
But when I s^e these beams of discontent,
Breathing revenge for every slight offense;
And when I see thee vomit spleen, and vent
Thy own conceivings loathsome to my sense;
I stop my nose, the senses of my soul
I shut against these vapors that arise.
Nor friend nor fo shall give mine ear control;
For I have weighed thy foolish fallacies:
Within my Balance I have weighed thy words,
And I have found them lighter then the wind,
And I perceive no better things accords
With thee then vanity in gross entwinde.

SONG.
ALl you that are for Salem bound,
Hye boys, haste away,
For fear our ships should be aground;
There Is no safety in delay:
For Time and Tide will stay for none,
Hey ^o, loath to part:
Now time does serve, we must be gone;
Each one bring away his heart.
Methinks I hear our Master call,
Ho Boys, come aboard:
The time does pass, the Tide does fall;
Hear friends, give the word.
Come horst np Sails, and bear amain,
Fair wind, gentle gale:
Let none of you your courage stain,
Here Is wind enough to fill our Sail.
There Is no fit place to harbor here,
Hard rocks, no remorse;
No shelter on these coasts appear;
Blind guides steer our course:
Mighty hills on every side,
Valleys deep, as low as bell.
The raging waves who can abde?
And for to still them who can tell?
Thus we with resolution armed,
Come life, come death;
Patience makes us pass unharm'd,
Once lost, out of breath.
If we be lost, the Sea will save;
Cheer boys, here is a prize:
We Seamen must not fear a wave,
That Is a shame that we despise.
For we well know that we shall meet
Proud blades that will not fail,
And us with lofty speeches greet;
Ho friends, strike your Sail:
But we have learned for to resist;
No Colors we will fear.
There is no pleading Had I wist,
Nor yet no place of hiding here.
Lo yonder comes the roaring crew,
Come boy, danger's near:
Our courage we must now renew;
Stand by, foolish fear.
Avaunt you foul tormenting charms,
here is help enough at hand:
Come noble hearts, stand to your Arms,
a greater force we must withstand.
N^^ (...) ^ear our Master speak;
(...), be advised:
(...) lgement is but weak;
(...) come disguis^d.
Yet you may know them by their feet.
Dr^^^^ (...), clear your sight:
For this ^^ll cup of Nectar sweet
will make a searsull Coward fight.
(...) we fear their cursed noise?
Charge boys, do not spare.
Me things their roarings are but toys:
stand to it, cast off Care.
So long as we stand charged with Love
who dares to assault?
Their bold presumption well we prove;
if they be wounded, it is their fault.
Bear up your Ensign in their view;
sh^^t Sirs, spare no cost:
Among^ them wounding Arrows strew;
(...) are not lost:
Perhaps they may reflect again,
(...), bleeding Souls:
Then who can heal these wounded men?
gentle breasts their grief condoles.
Stand to it boldly, noble herts,
'ward their charge again:
You see they send us poisoned Darts,
reward them for their pain;
And send them double two for one;
Loves shaftes wound deep:
Discharge again and they will be gone,
or in their woundings fall a sleep.
Alas, when will these troubles cease.
weak souls, feeble strength;
That we the harbor of our peace
might see at the length?
Ah now our Ship begins to sink,
help hands, spare no cost:
We must of greater sorrows drink,
alas our Ankors hold is lost.
Oh Master wake, arise, and save,
we perish if thou stay:
We fear the Sea will be our grave,
thou can these waves allay:
Thou can rebuke the roaring Seas,
furious tempests thou can still:
If thou but chide, the wind obeyes,
and stands submissive to thy will.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Shepherds boy, with low and sad aspect,
as if overcome with passion, looks about him,
And for a while does seemingly neglect
his straggling flock within him and without him:
Then recollecting his dispersed powers,
who almost lost in Silence, passes by
All discontents, resolves to spend his hours
in things more serious, and his pipe does try,
Invites the scattered Flock to hear a Song,
and by the name of (Woman) comprehends
The humble soul fair Rachel weeping long;
And then digressing from his matter, spends
Much of his time in wandering weariness;
Sometimes aloft, sometimes in low despair,
Some observations high he does express;
Though he may seem sometimes to beat the air:
Of the five Senses speaks sometimes in brief.
These in a silly cloud are mixed together;
The single eye discerns which are the chief,
And can distinguish when he speaks of either.
After long seeking, weeping Rachel's found;
Her griefs are known, her childrens loss cuts deep;
In telling of their names, her griefs abound:
Order nor Method in this Song does keep.
The SONG.
DEarest Darlings of the plains,
place of Souls residing;
You that listen to the Swains
by the rivers gliding:
Come and hearken to a Pipe
that plays out of Season;
For my oaten reed's not ripe,
yet it harpes on reason.
Come, I Will tell you of a Song
that I heard one singing,
Full of woe and passion strong,
heart and hands a wringing.
It Is a woman's voice, said I;
this I said in thinking;
For I saw no creature nigh,
but some birds a drinking,
Lifting up their little bills
to their great Creator,
They had quickly drunk their fills,
then to the Theator,
Flew about the worlds great stage,
every thing possessing,
At their holdnesse none did rage,
they no law transgressing:
None presumed for to ask
them of their abiding,
They did still perform their task,
feared not Masters chiding.
Whereso'ere they set their Feet,
in their estimation.
'Twas their own, and not unmeet
to their reputation.
Then me thought I heard a quire
of these airie Creatures,
Moved much with strong desire
to behold their features;
Much rejoicing for to hear
how they praised their Maker,
Oh, thought I, might I draw near,
to be their partaker.
Pressing something nigh the place
where they congregated,
They thought I had come to chase,
and been animated
For to hurt them in their joy;
but I had no intention
For to work their least annoy;
fight was their prevention.
I regardlesse for a while,
went aside to wander
In the desert many a mile,
where was no by-stander:
Then to work my thoughts were set,
and my mind a flying;
Matter plenty to entreat,
objects new descrying.
Sometimes Castles in the air
I would fain be building;
Something still will cross the hair,
and mar all the guilding.
Restless thoughts my mind possessed,
high imaginations;
Still there thrust in many a guest,
working molestations.
Sometimes almost in despair,
at the conscience chiding;
Then, thought I, I will repair
to my former biding:
But the thoughts of my return
to my former station,
Made my inward parts to burn,
with a great vexation.
Oh, thought I, must I forfo
my acquaintance loving?
All those friends that I love so,
kind respects to moving?
Shall I part with my two eyes,
lovely things descrying,
To be guided by such Spies,
into weakness prying?
I that have been apt to think
no man's seeing better
Then mine own, I now must wink
and become a debtor,
To be guided and be led
by some sower leader,
And so think my self well sped
with harsh Lecture-Reader.
Ah, those dainty Music words
that I often hearing;
That such sweet delights affords
to the Senses chearing:
Must I now forgo to hear
these delightful voices?
Ravishments that charm the ea^
humane sense rejoices.
Must I now endure a wrong?
ah, how shall I bear it!
Blows and smitings with the tongue,
I do greatly fear it.
I that have been apt to give
blows and evil speeches
Two for one, now must I strive
to come with kind beseeches?
I could nere abide to see
any man more prouder
Then my self, nor any he
in his defense speak louder.
Oh how sensible of wrong,
quick in opprehension
To conceive offenses strong,
scorning reprehension!
How unapt am I to learn
lovely moderation,
And unable to discern
snares of tribulation
That lie hidden underneath
leaves of painted pleasure,
Broods of Serpents that do breath
blastings out of measure?
How have I been over-joyed
at delicious smellings?
And how quickly am annoyed
at corru^ted swellings?
Flower that but for a day
have no longer lasting,
And to morrow thrown away,
to the dunghill casting.
As I wandered all along,
then I called to minding
The distressed woman's song,
some occasion finding
To return and seek the place
of her po^r abiding,
And to know her piteous case,
and cause of woe betiding.
Back again, the row thick and thi^,
then amazed standing,
^iewing which way to begin;
for 'twas no demanding:
I might ask the lofty hills,
but their high disdaining
Showed it much against their will^,
to their honors staining.
Then I came into a plain
full of water gallings,
Willing for to entertain
and to hear my calling^.
Stay a little, and I Will tell,
by familiar speakings,
How to sinde her in her Cell,
furnished with heart-breaking^.
For I see thy troubled mind,
and I am a witness
Of thy sorrows in a kind:
yet thy much unfitness
Makes me doubt thou will not bear
what I say unto thee:
If thou can, then stand, and hear,
and mark what I do show thee.
If thou go beyond that hill
that stands over looking,
Thou shall hear an Echo s^rill,
which though hardly brooking.
And yet further for thy sake,
I will tell thee plainly,
Thou must pass a mighty Lake,
else thy travell's vainly.
Something backward for to yield
to such hard directions,
I began to view a field
worthy of inspections,
Where some tracings I espide,
willing for to follow;
But the bushes much did hide
places deep and hollow.
Passing over hills and dales,
now behold a wonder,
Storms arose, and mighty gales,
flames, and fearful thunder.
Mountains moving to the plains,
hills to garden-alleys,
As if fill^d with dancing vains,
came to hug the valleys.
I much wondering in my mind,
'gan to ask, What ail you,
That you thus digress from kind?
does your pillars fail you,
That you stagger as they would
on the Sea be sailing?
How can you forgo your hold,
and thus show your failing?
But this wonder overpast,
then steps forth a Notion,
Telling me these hills were placed
subject unto Motion:
Pan had weighed them in his fist,
and has found their lightness,
And oresways them as he list,
in their vain uprightness.
From this mountain overturned
by that mighty Mover,
Fora further view, I turned,
and ^gan to discover
Tr^^ps of Eagles, whose quick sight
some rich prize dis^rying,
From the mountains took their flight,
none their way denying.
'Twas a body, as I thought,
to my best discerning,
Which great Pan from heaven brought,
much to our concerning:
Very precious to behold,
and it was good for feeding;
Though long kill^d, it was not cold,
for 'twas fresh a bleeding.
To this Body all resort,
with ma^h sweet devotion,
None presumed to extort,
there was no Commotion.
'Twas no custom for to strive
for the greatest measure;
None was seeking to deprive
other of his treasure.
For there was enough for all:
be that had but little,
He the same might plenty call:
be whose part was mickle,
Had enough, and had no more,
he had nothing over.
Sweet contentment is a store
which but few discover.
For 'twas reached them by the hand
of that mighty Giver,
Depths of treasures at command,
old, yet ever liver;
Always drawing, yet nere dry;
old, but not decaying;
Flowing forth abundantly
streams that is never staying.
Having viewed and laid to heart
in my meditations,
Counting it a Noble part
of my consolations;
Then unto the powers Divine
I sent up a heaving,
Saying, Thou art all, and all is thine,
quite my self outleaving.
Then methought I saw a hand
be^kning to come hither;
Then I did amazed stand:
Lord, quoth I, ah whither,
Whither must I go to find
that poor soul distressed,
That does much oppress my mind,
as if interessed?
There she sits with weeping cheer,
for she is very nigh thee;
Blubbered ore with many a tear,
she will still outcry thee.
All the comforts thou can bring,
will not ease her sorrow:
Little Rivolets will spring
to a flood to morrow.
Then inventing words of Art,
seeking to persuade her;
Painted words that case no smart,
more in passion made her.
All my Rhetoric was vain,
for there was no hearing;
She was deaf to entertain
any words of chearing.
Then I prayed her to relate
what might be the matter,
That I might commiserate;
for I scorned to flatter.
Oh, said she, then give an ear,
and I Will make relation:
You that have an ear to hear,
hear my sad Narration.
For it is the saddest thing
ere befell a Woman;
Sorrows now afresh do spring;
and I tell thee no Man
That ere yet my eye beheld,
to ease my distraction,
Could bring words, nor reason yield
to my Satisfaction:
For I am a Woman lost
in my apprehension,
On the Waves of Sorrow tossed;
and it is my intention
To stay here, and wail and weep
all my days remaining;
In this field I mean to keep,
of my loss complaining.
I have lost my Children dear:
ab my loss is greater
Then I am able for to bear;
pray be no Intreater
To persuade me, for I feel
Sorrows that must kill me,
Peircing worse then rods of steel,
they with terrors fill me.
They that were my hearts delight,
when I did behold them,
Are departed from my sight,
and I could not hold them:
All of them are fled and gone,
and they are no longer
Gone, and I am left alone,
wanting life prolonger.
Oh that beavens would agree
to repair my Losses,
That it once again might be
as before those crosses;
When encompassed with the light
round about my dwelling,
I had Joy and sweet delight,
ghastly thoughts expelling,
Where is Love, that lovely Child
of divine begetting,
Lovely pure and undefiled
Plant of heavens Setting?
When I saw thee in my Hall,
Joy and thee together,
My Attendance were not small;
all came flocking thither.
Patience, where art thou become?
will my house not hold thee?
I cannot see thee in my room.
I have often told thee,
With entreating for to stay,
and with mighty wooing,
Saying, If thou part away
'twill be my undooing.
Ah my dear Long-suffering now,
whither art thou flying?
Did thou weary of me grow?
have forgot complying?
Have thou suffered overlong?
could thou bear no longer?
Did my hreath thy breathing wrong?
was my weakness stronger?
Joy, my sweet and lovely guest,
art thou grown a stranger
To my woeful throbbing breast?
was there any danger
In thy stay? If thou had stayed,
were my rude embraces
In such wanton guise arrayed,
to be thy disgraces?
Oh how far am I from peace,
as if unacquainted?
How can I expect increase,
when my Courage fainted,
And so careless was to seek
peace, and to pursue it;
Rough to kiss her dainty Cheek,
now too late I rue it?
Now the thing is come to pass
way my expectation;
For I feared long, alas,
some such alteration.
When I thought my footing fast,
on a hill unmoving,
At an instant came a blast,
such couceits reproving.
Gentleness, I thee conceived
when I was but little;
Twins within my womb perceived,
but my strength was brittle:
When they came unto the birth,
weakness it prevailed;
Gentleness, as cold as earth,
wanting breath, soon failed.
Goodness, I was mighty sick
when I did conceive thee;
And the time when I grew quick,
when I did perceive thee
To begin to stir and rise,
though much pain enduring,
Yet my soul did still comprise
hopes of more assuring.
Oh how wary then was I
of undecent moving!
Stirring violence laid by,
gadding disapproving.
Fearful lest I should let slip
seed of such a nature;
Heedfull lest my feet should trip,
and lose so sweet a creature.
Ah my sweet companion, Faith,
when I call to minding,
I still think thy whispering says,
There Is no hope of finding.
When we walked hand in hand
on that Sea of trouble,
Foul despair, devouring sand,
made my sorrows double.
Ah those deadly whirling deeps,
merciless bereavings,
Boundless bounds, nor measure keeps,
gulfs of deep deceivings;
Cruel Mercy, raging Love,
waves of sad destroying;
Overwhelmings which do move
foams of shame, annoying.
We that once had thoughts to fly
far beyond the mountains,
Almost to Eternity,
where the living Founains
Issue forth abundantly,
mighty Rivers making:
Joyful streams, whose rich supply
thirsty desert slaking.
All these high transcending things,
common sense outreaching,
All aloof on Eagles wings
we our compass fetching,
Quite beyond these vapors flew,
mystie clouds oretopping,
And the sweetest breathings drew,
for 'twas Sions dropping.
I that had such free access
to those inmost beings,
Which I will not now express,
lest some crafty Seeings,
And then speaking in the air
might produce a wonder;
Pride, that sits in scorners chair,
should my thoughts bring under.
Here Is a blessed prospect, said I,
still mine eye beholding;
Might it stay continually,
such high things unfolding:
I should quite forget my carth,
at the Suns exhaling,
T'raptures of diviner Mirth
willingly enthralling.
Oh condition mighty Sweet,
might I still enjoy thee!
But the heavens thought unmeet
for to overcloy me
With these Dainties, least I should
surfeit in my pleasure,
And my Nakedness unfold,
and disery their treasure.
Meekness, I shall never forget
with what kind entreating,
When of purpose one was set
with foul words and threatening,
For to urge thee with disdain
and with words of scorning,
Thy reglyings did contain
things of rich adorning.
Ah thy words and sweet replies,
from divine infusing,
Showed there were in thee supplies,
far beyond self choosing:
Heavens breath of cooling Fire,
flames of rage allaying;
Nature of a blessed Sire,
influence convaying.
Not like Hellish rage, that swells
mighty, like a Monster:
Fire, whose infernal Spells
will all things Misconsier,
Turning to an evil sense
things of good intention,
Blasting under fair pretense,
growing things prevention.
Dick. I Have sent thee half a dozen Songs,
that thou may tune them; prithee do thy best,
And I Will forgive the six or seven wrongs
that thou did me in earnest and in jest.
I know thy Art does far exceed my skill,
yet it is but Natures handmaid that must wait:
And so it shall though it be against thy will,
it is good sometimes to set our reckoning strait.
Thou know thou owe to me a great deal more,
thou owe me for a Pipe thou took'st away,
And twenty things besides stands on thy score,
and more I doubt then thou ere mean to pay:
Thou ow'st to me thy self, and all that's thine,
Thy Scrip is mine, also thy dainty Sling;
Thy Sheephook and thy Tarbox both are mine,
I taught thy Dog to carry and bring.
Well, what I say, I think thou will confess;
Let thee and I observe old Harry's Law,
And then I Am sure we shall not much transgress;
some observations we from thence may draw.
Thou know how once a friend of mine and thine
was served by Jeffe, of whom my Conscience says.
His meaning did to honest things incline,
though ill acquainted with our masters ways:
Who being in distress, and wandering long
upon the Western Plains, sat down a while
Under a Hawthorne, and tuned a Song;
the Country Shepherds thought him some exile;
Who to this comfort freely did present
their Bottles and their baggs in friendly wise,
And bad him eat, and drink, and be content,
and showed him kindness in the country guise:
But oh, alas, with pity be it spoke,
when he had eat, and drank, and sat a while,
He looking wildly, into passion broke,
the Country Shepherds fell for to revile;
And in these words to my best observation,
he uttered forth a kind of indignation.

SONG.
GEt you gone from me,
Ye Ravens of the valleys;
I would fain be free,
Pray keep you with your kind:
I have meat to eat
Exceds your homely feeding.
Till I do entreat,
Let me possess my mind:
In this my silent musing
I am best content;
For I do frequent
Yonder valleys choosing,
Lofty hills refusing;
What I seek I find.
BUt Dick, let thee and I always have an eye unto the Star that never leads
out of the way of Humility, which will serve as the Mathematical Compass, for
Travelers, when they pass through the unknown Land, whose inhabitants speaks a
strange Language; but they knowing still where they are, and having an eye to
their guide that never deceives them, pass through all difficulties of the
confused Wilderness: And though perhaps often meet with Scratching Brambles
that catch hold, and get now and then a Fleece, tacitly speaking, Stay with
us; and though you have passed over the great River, yet there is a great many
Rivoletts and Foordes to pass over, which will be a hindrance before you set
down your rest.

And sir Dick, I Will tell thee how one of our Northern Shepherds the other neght
(for it was in the night) was served with a Pooke, as thou know there be
many in the North.

As the poor man sat watching his Flock, and yet something given to hearken to
Novelties, there passed by one like a Shepherd well accoutred, and tells him,
That if he would go along with him, he would direct him to exceeding good
pasture. And this being in the Night of his understanding, he follows the Man
up Hills, and down Dales, through thick and thin, and fetches a mighty
compass; and they traveled all night, (like horses in a Mill blindfold) till
they came to the place where they began: Then perceiving the delusion, he began
to draw back; for the spell was at an end, for it was not God spell but devil
spell.

But he having formerly observed the Nature of our Master, saw plain enough
that it was but a Delusion: for our Master is no deceiver, neither does he use
any Ambiguous words to cause us to doubt; but says, This is the way, walk in
it.

And I tell thee Dick, his way is the way of Charity; for there is never a
Pooke in the world can be Charitable, for it is against their nature.

But it is natural to our Master to go about doing good: And thou shall do
well to observe the difference; The one is a Calumniatour of all good actions
and endeavors; the other construes all good endeavors to the best, and is so
far from vilifying the Country Shepherd in his Dialect that cannot speak
Grammar; that as in the water face answers to face, he answers according to
the mind, and not to the words of the speaker.

Well then Dicke, thou know that all men are Imitaters; and I would not have
thee Imitate the Pooke, or, Will with a Wispe, whose false fire keeps no
constant station; but skips up and down, and rather blindes, then gives light
to the simple.

Well Dicke, I know thou understandest my language, and as yet I could never
hear thee put a tune to any Sirens Song: but as like rejoices to see its
like, and thy spirit that I love, knows the meaning of my spirit well, that I
need not instruct thee any further, but i will tell thee more of my mind Shortly.

But Dicke, I am now at a stand, unless thou can help me at a dead lift; for
I cannot tell how to tune the Song of many minds: For I tell thee I have been
often amongst the zealous hearted, and I have heard them all sing Severally; And
to my thinking, all of them agree in this, To magnify the great name of Pan;
For that is the Subject of all their Songs, though I confess I have heard a
great noise against Independents, as If Independency had no relation nor
dependancy upon God, nor no part in David, of whom I I will give thee my reason
or opinion, without ryme, (think thee what thou will) That they in their
spirits have smelt such a savor of thy holy anointing, which has such an
Adamantick: drawing, that makes them thus violently to run after Christ; I it
is the Common Song -- Master, we well follow thee whereseever thou go; Of
these I could instance in particulars; But I leave that for a second part.

Vale.
Something on the Lords Prayer.
WE whose conception, Matter, and our being,
Are the out-flowings of a noble Nature;
Immortal Seed infused with agreeing,
And sweet consenting, has produced a Creature,
Old things are past, and now we do behold
New things appearing daily in our sight,
Substantial living breathings manyfold,
By which we say (Our Father) as by right:
Father of Spirits; Oh how glad are we
To call upon thee by the Name of Father?
We are thy offspring, lo we flee to thee,
And like the Eagles, to thy body gather.
Sweetness it self thy Name does so import;
We are thy Children, and thy sons by birth:
We will not speak of thee by bare report,
For our affections are not on the Earth.
Thou art our Father, and we will hang on thee;
We Will take no thought, for thou do still provide;
We Will take no care, in thee we shall live free;
We have no helper in the earth beside,
Father, we need not ask thee where thou dwell,
But we will come and see, if thou give leave:
Then bid us come the way that thou compellest
By hand of Love, which never did deceive.
We know where thou do dwell, and where thou art;
in low humility thou do delight,
There are thy heavens, there thou do impart
Those noble uisions, ravishing the sight.
Father, show us thy Glory we desire; (...)
We fallen would see thy Glory i^hen gieep,
Where panting Souls short breathings do aspire,
and the Records of thy embracings keep.
Now Hallowed be thy sweet and precious Name:
Thy nature and thy Name are highly prized;
With Songs of praise we will declare the same,
Yea, with new songs which Nature has devised.
We cannot choose but tell thy noble praise;
Thy prattling babes in time may learn to speak;
Yea, we will spread our garments in thy ways,
And goodly branches we will cut and break:
We Will strew thy ways with songs, and bring thee home
Unto thy dwelling, and thy place of rest:
We Will bring thee to thy temple, then we will come,
And sit, and hear thy wisdom which is best;
For thou art mighty in humility,
Therein thy greatness most of all appears;
Mighty in doing good, a Majesty
To which our Spirits most of all endeareth.
Great is thy Name, and thou have given strength
Unto thy little ones for to declare it:
If we should hold our peace, the stones at length
Would melt and cry; they could not long forbear it.
Oh let thy Kingdom come, we long for that,
That thou might reign and rule among the Nations,
And that those daring walls may fall down flat,
That do include such strange abominations:
With scepter of thy Love so oversway
That brood of Giants that as yet possess
The goodly hills, thy captives lead away,
In chains of Love their fury to suppress.
Though Scepter of thy Kingdom do compel,
Yet such compulsion we are glad to bear;
To bear thy yoke we are contented well,
and thy commands not grievous do appear.
Thy Kingdom comes, and we are well content
To wait upon thy will and thy command:
If we should live out of this Element,
Then we should perish quickly out of hand.
What is thy will, we will: Weel'e not repine
to see thy will effected; but desire
It may be done in all that is called thine,
In all affections low, or raised higher.
Naught comes amiss to us, for we have learned
To be content withal things that befall us;
In every thing we can and have discerned
Thy hand of providence for to impale us.
Give us (in this our day) our living Bread,
The childrens bread for whom it is provided,
That we may live thy life, let us be fed,
As thou wast wont, let it be still divided;
For every eye of Faith looks up to thee
For satisfying food and thou suppliest
Their biting wants with blessings rich and free,
Come all that will, for thou no soul deniest.
This is the staff on which we will always leave,
And by this staff we past through Iordans flood;
The staff of youth, and in our Age we mean
To make it all our stay and chiefest good.
If with this bread thou wilt feed our fainting soul,
And satisfy with life our Souls desire;
If thou our names wilt in thy Book inroul,
To wear thy clothing and thy known attire;
If thou will cloth our spirits in that white,
That perfect white, and righteous robes divine;
If with thy spirit thou will ours unite,
That it may never be at odds with thine:
Then thou shall be our everlasting stay,
Weel seek no other fortress to Secure us;
In thee we will hide our selves in heat of day
And in the night thy presence shall secure us.
Father, we are in debt, and cannot pay,
Unless thou make us able, we shall perish;
Forgive our debts, that we in freedom may
Recover strength, and our conceptions cherish.
We are indebted, and engaged to yield
Perfect obedience, by thy law of love;
But when we wander in this mighty field,
Seeking our selves, lost better things above.
But as we are indebted, we have those,
That are in debt to us, which daily wrong us,
Which constantly with might and maine oppose
Our best endeavors; yet they live among us:
Those we forgive, and give them meat to eat,
And drink to drink, and fain would overcome
Their evil with our Good: but they still threat
To work our utter ruin all and some.
In all our Wants, Lord keep us from despair;
For thou art rich, and in thy house is store,
And we believe we shall not lose a hair;
Give us even as thou will, or less, or more:
Only into temptation lead us not,
To leave us to our Selfnesse: from that Evil
Deliver us, and let us not be forgot
In hellish grave, to perish with the Devil;
For those that lie in grave, and stinking ripe,
They have nor tongues nor will to speak thy praise;
Hell hugs them fast, the feel no dismal gripe;
They have no heart nor power themselves to raise:
The living, Oh the living, that partake
Of thy sweet life, they, they, have tongves to tell,
And of thy wonders true Relation make,
How they have past the deeps in heaven and hell;
Through deep temptation, They have past along,
Accounting it their Joy, because they saw
Thy leading hand, which never directed wrong,
And from those deeps can sweet contentment draw;
For well we know, the mighty Kingdoms thine,
And of thy Kindome there shall be no end,
Though other Kings and Princes do repine,
Yet with thy Scepter thou willt make them bend,
And bring their Crowns and lay them at thy feet,
And lay aside their Honor, when they see
How apt their weak foundations are to fleet,
And how thy Kingdom is from changes free:
And now, though other powers oversway'd
And overlorded us besides thy power;
Yet by thy power we will not be dismayed.
Although they come in troops for to devour,
Because there is a glory that out-shines
The proud, fantastic, foolish, painted glory
Of earthly spirits, that still undermines
To make thy power but an empty story.
In every Age unto Eternity,
Thy Kingdom, Power, and Glory, is made known.
Though over-clouded in a Mystery,
To carnal view the beauty not showen;
Yet we have seen it in the Wilderness,
In low despised valleys; therefore we,
What we have seen and heard we will confess,
whilst we have being and our life in thee.
A concluding SONG.
NOw let our praises
Be unto him that raises
Our minds from thrall,
That mighty Giver,
Of life, yet ever Liver,
Who by his Call,
And sweet and lovely voice does bring to light
That which lay hidden,
And guests are bidden,
To feast of things right sweet he does invite,
Where we may eat and drink with great delight.
He has prepared,
No delicates are spared,
For his great Feast;
And he is able
For to prepare a table
For every guest,
Even in the barren wildernessed lands,
There where no Water
Nor dewes do scatter,
But parcht with heat, and dry consuming Sands;
There, even there, his furnished Table stands.
In all our walkings,
And our poor childish tal kings,
If thou draw near,
Our hearts with burning
Shall mitigate our mourning;
Thy presence dear
Shall make our Water pleasant wine to be:
The bread that is broken
Sall be a token,
And we shall know that it is thee, even thee,
Thy hands and feet are manifest to see.
Come you, beloved,
That have my words approved,
And drink your fill,
That nights of Sorrow
May be forgot to Morrow,
For comforts still.
Drink and be drunken, best beloved Friends;
Cast out your fearing,
Here Is time of chearing;
This goodly Fountain streams of plenty Sends,
And on forsaken valleys down descends.
Avaunt Imposters,
Stand back Fantastic boasters,
And cease your suit:
It Is vain persuading,
No more of your invading,
We Will not dispute
What you can say of your beloved Peer;
For our beloved
Is best approved
To be the fairest and the loveliest deer;
The very thoughts of him our soul does cheer,
Then vain despairing,
Flee hence, and cease thy daring,
And mighty show;
And leave thy prying,
Our liberty of denying;
Take this to know,
The Eagles way no man can understands,
his way in flying
Is past descrying;
His noble sight at foggy Mists never stands,
But through the clouds a speedy way commands.
Come, noble hearted,
Within whose breasts are darted
Joves Arrows keen,
Whose deep Impressions,
And wounds that want expressions,
Are to be seen:
The eye, the eye that lovely piercing eye,
Content and willing
With Loves sweet killing;
In life and death it is no Misery,
in loves sweet bonds and chains to live and die.
Rejoice ye valleys
And overtrodden allies,
The time is near,
Though disrespected,
And seemingly neglected;
It shall appear;
God is as mighty in the lowest plains,
where reeds are Shaken,
despised, forsaken,
Forlorn, and lost, as yet no hope retains;
There, even there, his mighty presence reigns.
Why stand ye gazing,
With doubtful hearts amazing,
And lift up eyes?
Sweet Friends, your longing
And strong conceits come thronging,
With doubts arise:
Return, return, sweet friends, and wait a while;
Your too much loving
Things apt to moving,
May prove a snare the senses to beguile;
This lovely Flesh must suffer an exile.
Now the remainings
Of these our souls sustainings,
So rich in taste;
Those precious leavings
Of plentiful receivings,
Let us not waste:
Let Us gather up the breakings, and behold
How Pans increasins,
and secret blessings,
Shall fill more baskets full then can be told:
His treasuere's full of all things new and old,
FINIS.

