A BRIEF Commentary OR EXPOSITION Upon the Prophecy of OBADIAH, TOGETHER With
useful Notes delivered in sundry Sermons preached in the Church of St. James
Garlick-Hith LONDON.

By EDWARD MARBURY, the then Pastor of the said Church.

Psalm. 101. Ver. 1. My song shall be of Mercy and Judgment; unto thee O Lord,
will I sing.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for George Calvert and are to be sold at
the Sign of the Halfe-Moone in Watling-street near Pauls-stump. 1649.

To my worthy friends the Citizens and Inhabitants of the Parish of St. James
Garlickhith London, all the blessings of this life, and that which is to come.
I Have not without good cause inscribed this Commentary unto you. First, those
Sermons were Preached amongst you: Secondly, some of you have heretofore, often
importuned the publication of this, and some others of my Labors: Thirdly you
were my First fruits, and therefore the First Commencement of my Labors in
this kind does properly belong to you. As then it is justly Dedicated unto you,
so I desire it may have your favorable acceptance, and pass under the Convoy
of your worthy names. I have by me an Exposition of three other of the the
Small Prophets, viz. Habakuk, Zephanie, and Haggai, which together with this,
are Licensed, and intended for the Press; but the charge of Printing being
great; and the number of Buyers of Books in these times (if we may believe the
Stationers) very small; I thought fit to send forth this as Joshua did the
Spies, to see, what encouragement the rest may happily find to follow after
it. I am of Saint Austins mind, who accounted nothing his own, but what he
did communicate, and professed himself to be of that number, qui scribunt
proficiendo, and scribendo proficiunt, that write what they have learned, and
learn more by writing: and if the grain be good, it is fitter for the Market
then for the Garner: What entertainment this will find there, I know not; for
mine own part, I have taken the Council of the Wise, neither to praise, nor
dispraise my own doings; the one he says is vanity, the other folly; others
will be ready enough to save me that pains, to whose uncertain censure I
submit my self to stand or fall before them.

Yet thus much I will make bold to say for my self, that I have done little or
nothing herein without consulting the best Authors both Ancient and Modern, to
which I have added that light, which God by his Spirit reveals in my
understanding, to discern what his will is, and to suggest what I shall French
in his Church; as the Be gathers H^ny, and storeth her Hive out of several
sorts of Flowers for the Common-good: so have I out of these Collected and
Gathered sundry Honey-Combes of truth, for the use and benefit of the Public.

All my desire is, to do all the good I can, and to that end my Tong^e being
suspended for some time, I have taken this opportunity to supply the defect
thereof by my Pen. I am loath to lose our Crown of rejoicing in the day of the
Lord.

Animae servatae, the saving of Souls will procure us a better Garland at the
coming of Christ, then Cives servati, the saving of Citizens did the Ancient
Romans. That is the only mark we aim at, and (if we be light and not smoke
in the Church of Christ) the only Subject and Matter of all our Preaching and
Writing; And the saving of your Souls a part of that bounden duty and debt,
which by the just bond of thankfulness I owe unto you, especially; Testis est
mihi Deus quomodo cupiam vos omnes in visceribus Jesu Christi, God is my
witness how much I have desired the good of you all in the bowels of Jesus
Christ: and if I have not been able to do for you what I would, yet that I
have desired and endeavored it what I could, may deserve acceptance, or at the
least will satisfy my own Conscience. In a word, to see the welfare and
happiness of you and yours, how much will it revive his heart? who professes
himself

You affectionate Friend and Servant in the Lord, EDW. MARBVRY

A COMMENTARY OR EXPOSITION Upon the PROPHECY of Obadiah.
VERSE I. The Vision of OBADIAH.
THis short prophecy calls to my remembrance the words of David concerning
God: with the pure thou will show thy self pure, and with the froward thou will
show thy self froward v. 27. For thou will save the afflicted people: Psalm.
18.26.
but wilt bring down high looks. For in the former part of this prophecy God
thundereth with the terrors of his judgments: in the latter part we hear the
whisper and still voice of his mercy.

2 Things set consideration a work at First: 1. The title which shows 1.
Whose. 2. What.
2. The Prophecy it self.


1. Whose, Obadiah. Whether this were the proper name of a man, or a notation
only, to express the calling of him that wrote this prophecy, we may doubt;
for Abad, servus, a servant: and Jah, Dominus, a Lord, may denote this prophet
in his function a servant of the Lord; and so are all the ministers of the
word, in a special service, concerning the building up of the house of God.

That which Lyranus says to be the judgment of most Ecclesiastical writers,
that this was the same Obadiah that was steward of king Ahabs house, 1 Reg.
18.4.
and hid the prophets in the cave, and fed them with bread and water, and was
contemporary with Elias: that how great authors soever it has, is so clearly
confuted in the words of this prophecy, that we resolve against it.

For the prophecit; it mentions the taking of Jerusalem was 800 years after
Ahab.

It is likely that it was the proper name of the prophet; and Dorotheus
thinks him the same that lived in Ahabs time, which cannot be, as I have
showed.

It must suffice us that we know this prophecy to have been ever received in
the Canon of the Church.

Melit^ in his epistle to Onesimus, Eusebius. 4.25.
naming the books of Canonical Scripture, does name one book of the twelve
prophets, whereof this is one: And I never read the authority of this prophecy
doubted of in any age of the church: he was one of those holy men, 2 Pet. 2.
who wrote and spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

The maid that came to the door when Peter knocked, Act. 2.14.
knew him by his voice; and surely the Majesty and weight that is in the
Canonical Scriptures, does declare them to be the voice of God which wants
in all the Apocryphal Assuments, as a reader diligently exercised in the
Scriptures may easily discern.

These holy writings addressed to the perpetual light of the Church, are spare
in their inscriptions.

Who wrote the books of Joshua, Judges, Ruth, Samuel, Kings, Chronicles, Ester?

They are written, they are ours, the wisdom of God is seen in them, the grace
of God is confirmed by them, the church of God ever received them, the Spirit
of God testifies of them, and God in all ages has been glorified by them.

The church of Rome does attribute to the church a power of authorizing books
of Scripture, and makes the Churches authority the warrant for the authorizing
thereof.

S. Aug. allows the Church the reputation of a witness, Contra Faust. 33.6.
but not the power of authority herein: for he says,

Platonis, Aristotelis, Ciceronis libros unde noverint homines, quod ipsorum
sint, nisi temporum sibi succedentium contestatione continua? therefore that
these books were the Canon of scripture, the testimony of all ages in their
successions does maintain, but this testimony does not give them authority, but
witnesses the authority given them by the Spirit of God.

We find that even the authority of holy scriptures has been denied by
Heretics.

Sadducaei nullas Scripturas recipiebant nisi quinq. libros Mosis.
Simon prophetas minime curandos dixit, Iren. 1.20
quia a mundi fabricatoribus angelis Prophetias acceperunt.
Saturninus totum vetus test. repudiebat.
Ptolemaitae libros Mosis. Epiph. Haer 33.
Nicolaitae et Gnostici, librum Psalmorum.
Anabapt. Cant. Salomonis: Et lib. Job.
Porphyrius scripsit volumen Cont lib. Danielis.
The New Testament has had many enemies: the children of darkness have ever
made war against light.

We are better taught; and seeing the Holy Ghost has not satisfied us from
whence this our prophet came, but has only given us his name and his
prophecy, this contenteth us. The vessel was but of earth which brought us
this treasure; and if we have lost the vessel, and kept the treasure.

The messenger was a man like us: the message was the Lords: if the messenger
be gone, and the message do yet remain, the matter is not great.

Let us glorify God for his Saints, whom God has used as instruments of our
good, and praise him for all his prophets, and holy men by whom these heavenly
oracles were received from him, and communicated to the church.

The son of Sirach. Ecclus. 4.
Let us now commend the famous men in old time, by whom the Lord has gotten
great glory; let the people speak of their wisdom, and the congregation of
their praise. Of this there is a double use.

1 That we that do Legere, read, may learn, Degere Sanctorum vitas, to live the
lives of saints, and do the church of God all the good service we can. 2 That
God may be honored in Sa^ictis in the saints, as saint Jerome says, Honoramus
servos, ut honor servorum redundet ad Dominum. This is the honor of God, and
this is the praise of this prophet Obadiah, whosoever he was, he lives in this
prophecy, to preach the will of God to you here present, and to let you know
both the justice of God against the enemies of his church, and his mercy to his
own beloved people.
For as the Apostle does say of Abels faith, and by it, he being dead yet
speaks: Heb. 11.4
so may we say of this and all other penmen of holy Scripture, that by these
works of theirs, though they be dead, yet they do now speak in the church of
God.

Avel spoke two ways: for there was

1 Vox sanguinis, a voice of blood which cried for judgment; Genesis 4.10. Heb.
11.4.
and 2 Vox fidei, a voice of faith, which is example for imitation.
Thus all Ecclesiastical writers do speak, and we in our studies do confer
with dead men, and take light from them.

That is the reason that the elect of God do not arise to their full reward
before the resurrection of all flesh, because their works do follow them in
order as they are done, and their light goes not out by night, Death does not
quench their candle.

Thus the ancient fathers of the Church have left living monuments of their
holy learning, and we come after them, and enter upon their labors.

They are unthankful and spightfull that despise their names, and refuse their
testimonies which they have given to the truth, and blemish their memory, as if
they were unworthy to be named in our sermons, or to their judgments to be
held in any estimation.

It is the only way for a man gloriously to outlive himself to be the
instrument of doing good to the church of God when he is gone hence, and is no
more seen: Blessed is that servant whom his Master when he comes shall find
so doing.

2. What? The Vision.

Some have confounded these two terms, Vision and Prophecy, as both
expressing the same act of Prophetical vocation.

I find three of these titles used together. Now the acts of David the King,
first and last, 1 Ch^on. 29 29.
behold they are written in the book of Samuel the Seer, and in the book of
Nathan the Prophet, and in the book of Gad the Seer;

Where, though our English Translation do use the same word for Samuel and Gad,
calling them both Seers: the Hebrew distinguishes them; and a learned
Professor of Divinity does read in verbis Samnelis inspicientis, the Inspector;
Dr. Hum^. Decor-Interpret. lib. 3.
Nathan Prophetae, the Prophet; Gad videntis, the Seer.

I do not take these to be three distinct Offices, but three parts of the same
Office. For,

1. Such must be Videntes Seers, God must open their eyes, that they may see
what the will of God is.

Balaam being to prophecy at the request of Balak against Israel, begins
thus, Balaam the son of Beor has said, the man whose eyes are open, has said,
Number. 24.3


He has said which heard the words of God, which saw the Vision of the
Almighty, who had his eyes shut, but now open.

Therefore they must be videntes, Seers; for if the blind do lead the blind,
you know where to find them both.

2. Such must be inspicientes, inspectors; and that both in regard of the
suggestion, that it be no humane fantasy, no satannicall illusion, but a
divine and spiritual revelation.

As also in regard of the thing suggested, that they may rightly inform
themselves in the will of God, and so far as God reveals it (...) that they
may boldly say and maintain, Sic dicit Dominus, thus says the Lord.

3. Thus prepared they may be Prophets, that is, the Publishers of this will of
God to them to whom they be sent.

So that Vision and Inspection belong to preparation; prophecy to execution of
that Office; from whence, Docemur, we are taught

1. Doctrine.

The faithful minister of the word of God must receive his information and
instructions from the Spirit of God before he preach or prophecy.

We are ambassadors and messengers from God, and the warrant of our calling is
our mission; the Apostle says, How shall he preach except he be sent? for
mission imports fit instructions in the errand.

God has laid blame upon them that run unsent, and no man puts himself in
that employment but he that was sent as was Aaron.

The Son of God himself was sent, and when he came to do the will of him that
sent him, he says Lex tua Scripta est in cord meo. he professes to Nicodemus,

Verily, verily I say unto thee, We speak that we know, and testify that we
have seen. John 3.11
And the Baptist says, I saw and bare record. Christ gives this account to
his Father in his holy Prayer, I have given them the word which thou gave me.
John 1 34
For so saint Peter admonishes, If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles
of God: John. 17.8
If any man minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives, 1 Pet.
4.11
that God in all things may be glorified:

If any man build upon this foundation of Jesus Christ, either timber, hay or
stubble, the fire of Gods spirit will soon consume it.

If we build gold or silver, this fire will try and refine it.

Surely this vision was not oculare, but mentale, a divine revelation of the
will of God: the eye is the most noble of the senses, and the most sure of the
object; therefore he in the Comedy says,

Oculatus testis unus pluris est faciendus quam auriti december.
S. John. That which we have seen with our eyes that declare we unto you.
The understanding is the eye of the soul, and that sees much more perfectly
then the eye of the body: for as the Poet says,

Fallunt nos oculi vagique sensus,
Vt turris prope quae quadrata surgit
Detritis procul angulis rotetur.
The distance of the object: and the debility of the organe can make the sight
of the eye fallible: but intellectus rectus, a right understanding takes sight
from the spirit of God which searches all things, etiam arcana Dei, even the
hidden things of God.

Therefore the Apostle desiring to fit Timothy for this holy calling
admonishes him of his duty, and says,

Consider what I say, 2 Timothy 2 7
and the Lord give thee understanding in all things.

But false prophets had their visions and did boast of their revelations, and
came as boldly amongst the people with Sic dicit Dominus, thus says the Lord,
as any true prophet of the Lord did.

Satan will so transform himself into an angel of light, 2 Cor. 11.14.
that you cannot know him from one of Gods holy angels easily, and he will
carry the Metamorphosis so cunningly, that if it were possible he would deceive
the very elect of God.

Simon Magus called himself the great power of God.

Celsus inscribeth his oration for Paganism, Vera oration, a true oration,

Manichaeus calls himself Manichaeus Apostolus Jesu Christi, the Apostle of
Jesus Christ: and says, Haec sunt salubria verba de font perenni.

Chrysostom. says that the Macedonian Heretics did say, Nos recta fide
incedimus.

Saint. Aug. Nullus error se audet extollere, ad congregandas sibi tur bas
imperitorum, qui non Christiani nominis velamenta conquirat.

Faustus says, Salus quam Christus promisit, apud me est; Cont. Fau. Lib. 13.
C. 14.
ego dabo.

Therefore that the hearers may be able to distinguish inter verum, and
verisimile, that which is true and truth like, and as the Apostle bids to
try the spirits whether they be of God or no,

That we may beware of false Prophets, and know them from such as receive their
instructions for their message from God, observe these notes of difference.

1. Is, Lawful calling. We read of no true Prophet but he had a mission, as
before. Heb. 5.5.
Christ took not this honor upon him to be the great Angel of the Covenant,
but was sent by his Father.

But false Prophets run and are not sent, God sends none such on his errands
into his Church.

But this is not so easily discovered, because none do make more show of
lawful calling then the false Prophets do.

2. The application of the prophecy is a clearer sign; Jer. 14.14.
for the Apostle says

He that prophesies, 1 Cor. 14.3.
speaks to men edification, exhortation, comfort.

This edification is building up of the Church of God; false Prophets seek the
pulling down of Gods Church, and the diverting of men from all good ways, they
seek to hinder the course of the Gospel, and to discourage the hearts of them
that fear God.

Here a false Prophet may have a true prophecy tending to the good of the
Church, and the prophecy is to be received, and the Prophet refused, John 11 50
as Caiphas prophesied; Expedit ut unus moriatur, it is meet one dye; and
Balaam prophesied truly, yet was he a false Prophet.

3. By observing the aim and end of these Prophets: for such as prophecy
aright, do say with Christ, non quaero gloriam meam, I seek not my own glory;
But false Prophets seek either filthy gain, or they seek their own vain glory;
the Apostle says, They seek not, Romans 16.18.
they serve not the Lord, but their own bellies.

4. God himself gives this note of difference in the event of their prophecies;

When a prophet speaks in the Name of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 18.22.
if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord
has not spoken, but the prophet has spoken it presumptuously.

And the name of a vision given to prophecy does declare the certainty of the
event; for it is a thing so revealed to the prophet as if he saw it with his
eye.

5. The persons of the prophets and their carriage does detect them: for if
they be men sanctified, aad fitted with eminent graces for that service, the
graces of God do testify of them: for God does send none, but with all fit
preparations for the execution of so great an office.

2 This title of vision does give us assurance of all that follows in this
prophecy; for God revealed it, and the prophet saw it.

Therefore so many of you as desire to receive any good from the interpretation
of this prophecy, remember that it is a vision and therefore bring your eyes
with you to this place, not the eyes of your body only, but the spiritual eyes
of your understanding, and pray with David, Vt videam mirabilia tua. Lord, open
thou mine eyes that I may see thy wonders: Christ in opening the eyes of the
blind who had lost their sight, and in giving sight unto them that were born
blind, did declare himself so to be more then man, that his enemies could not
tell how to deny his Godhead.

He works a greater wonder every day in his spiritual illuminations of men's
understandings, by which the ignorant and simple do learn knowledge, and poor
men receive the gospel, and as the Apostle says, grace, rich in faith: and are
declared heirs of that kingdom which he has promised to them that love him.
James 2.5


Obadiah verse 1. Thus says the Lord concerning Edom.

2. The prophecy follows: this has two parts.

1. Against Edom verse. 1. to 16. 2. For the Israel of God, 17. to the end.
The title of the first part is my text, Thus says the Lord concerning Edom.
Consider here 1. The subject of the prophecy, Edom. 2. The author of it,
Dici^ Dominus, Thus says Lord.


1. Of the subject, Edom.

Isaac had two sons by Reb^^^a, Esaw and Jacob. Esau was called Edom, the
reason of that name is thus given; Jacob had made red pottage, and when Esaw
came from the field hungry and faint, he said to his brother Jacob,

Feed me, (...) pray thee, with that red, with that red pottage, Genesis 25.30.
for I am faint. Therefore was his name called Edom because he so affected that
red color, being himself also red and very hairy.

This name does maintain the memory of a quarrel; for he bought that red
pottage dear enough with the: sale of his birthright.

Esau and Jacob are a figure of the Church of God, and the Synagogue of Satan;
for they strove in the womb of their mother, so that Rebeeca wondered at it,
saying, v. 12.
If it be so, why a^^ I thus?

The blessing how soever usurped by ^sau be longs to Jacob, and when Jacob
has his right, Esau is angry.

From this natural Antipathy between these two brethren, and the grudge that
the elder should serve the younger;

From the sentence of this difference, which was, I have loved Jacob, and I
have hated Esau: there was ever mutual war and hatred between Israel and Edom:
in their succeeding posterities: for the posterity of Esau did increase both in
number and wealth and grew both many and strong.

Thus does the world gather riches and strength and armeth it self against the
Church of God, and therefore the Church is called Militant.

Concerning Edom is this part of the Prophecy, declaring both Gods quarrel
against them, and his judgment threatened.

We may take notice here of one point by the way, Edom is a mighty people, a
strong and rich nation, able to molest the Lords Israel, that God from heaven
undertaketh the quarrel of his Church.

Do you not see that they whom God hates may have riches and honor and
strength, and may increase, and grow into multitudes? how comes it then to
pass that so many in the world do measure the love and favor of God by these
outward things, as one flattered his Prince?

O nimium dilecte, deo tibi militat ether. What though their oxen be strong to
labor? what though their sheep bring forth thousands, and though they have the
fruits of the womb, of the herb, and purchase lands donec non si^ locus, till
there be no room? what though they have power and high places? all this had
Edom, whom God hated; and does not our Savior make it an hard thing for the
rich to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven?

Outward things are the gifts of God, and he does not value them at so high a
rate as we do; He does not care if his enemies have them.

His own Son when he took upon him our flesh, had none of them more then for
necessity; and his Apostle persuades us, if we have food and raiment to be
therewith content.

For there be snares in these outward things, and if God give not a blessing
with them, they be the rods of God to scourge the sons of men, and great
impediments to godly life.

There is an Holy use may be made of them, but they are not our happiness,
seeing they whom God hates may have them in a greater abundance then those
whom God loves best.

2. The author of the Prophecy.

Thus says the Lord.

This is the assurance of the truth of all that follows in this Prophecy,
and it is the ground of our faith to believe what is here revealed: it is no
passionate motion in the heart and affections of the Prophet against Edom, but
it is the word of the Lord.

These be the bounds that are set to the Prophets and Holy ministers of the
Lord, we may go no further then the word of the Lord. Christ himself says
often, The word which thou gave me, I gave them.

And Balaam did his office and calling right when he told the king of Moab, Lo,
I am come unto thee, Number. 22. v. 38.
have I any power to say any thing? the word that God puts in my mouth, that
shall I speak.

Must I not take heed to speak what the Lord has put in my mouth? 23 12.


All that the Lord speaks, that must I do. v. 26. Cap. 24.12.


And Balaam said unto Balak, Spoke I not to thy messengers saying, If Balak
would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the
commandment of the Lord, to do either good or bad of mine own mind, but what
the Lord says, that will I speak.

When God designed Jeremie to the office of a Prophet, who did fear to
undertake that great employment, God said to him,

Say not, I am a child: Jer. 17.
for thou shall go to all that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee
shall thou speak.

When our Savior sent forth his disciples, he so limited them,

Teach them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, Mat. 20.20


And accordingly Saint Paul does profess,

First of all I delivered unto you, 1 Cor. 15.3
that which I also received.

Thus does the Apostle again profess, being accused of the Jews,

I obtained help of God, and continue unto this day, Act. 26.22.
Witnessing unto to small and great, saying no other things then those which
the prophets and Moses did say should come.

1. This limitation we find in the titles of our office: for we are the Lords
workmen, and we must do his work, not our own: the Lords builders, he provideth
the materials, we work not by great, but day-work.

We are the Lords Messengers and Ambassadors, we may not digress from our
instructions, the messenger of the Lord must speak the Lords message.

2. This is necessary in respect of those to whom we are sent, for the seeling
of their faith: so the Apostle has declared it;

And my speech and my preaching was not in the entising words of man's wisdom, 1
Cor. 2.4.
but in the demonstration of the Spirit and power:

That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of
God.

But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery.

There is nothing that gives faith firm footing but the word of God.

That is the Lords fan which purges away the chaff and trash from the good
corn.

That is the bread of our fathers house: words of men's brains be the husks that
the prodigal gathered up in his famine.

That is the two edged sword, that divides between the bone and the marrow,
that is the medicine that searches the soars and diseases of the inward man.

Humane wisdom put into the best words is but as a wooden dagger, it may dry
beat, it will never kill the body of sin; it is an unguent, it corrodeth not.

3. Great is the danger of those that shall speak any thing but the word of God
to Gods people, or shall conceal any thing of that which is given them to speak.

So God says to Jeremiah,

Thou therefore trusse up thy loi^s, Jer. 1.17.
arise and speak unto them, all that I command thee; be not afraid of their
faces, lest I destroy thee before them.

And to Ezekiel. Eze. 3.18.
If thou sound not the trumpet, nor give warning to the wicked man of his
wicked way, his blood will I ^^^pire al thy hand.

This is not our own trumpet, but the Lords; ours gives an uncertain sound,
the Lords trumpet awaketh men to the battle.

From hence both the Minister and the people have their lessons.

1. The Minister.

We are taught to exercise our selves in the Holy studies of the word of God,
that we may be able ^o divide the word of God aright, that we may wifely
understand the word of God, to be able to minister the word of God in due
season.

The ignorant and unlearned man is no ^it man for this employment: to such
says God, Because thou have refused knowledge, Hos. 4 6,
I will also refuse thee: thou shall be no priest to me.

For why should any dare to intrude himself into this great service to teach
others in the Word, seeing himself untaught? for the priests lips should
preserve knowledge: and the people must seek the law at their mouth. Mal. 2.32


Does any man send a lame man of his errand, or put his message into the mouth
of a dumb man. We are the Lords messengers.

Does any man set an unskilful man to build, that knows not how to use his
tools? we are the Lords builders.

Does any man set an unexperienced man to take charge of his sheep? we are the
Lords shepherds of his flock.

Jeroboam took the right way to destroy true Religion, and to set up Idolatry:
He made of the lowest of the people priests of the high places: whosoever would
he consecrated him, 1 Reg. 13.33.44.
and he became one of the priests of the high places.

And this thing became sin to the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to
destroy it from off the face of the earth.

Surely such ministers though they have the outward calling of the Church, yet
do they want the inward calling of God, and being darkness, they possess the
place of light, and they are blind leaders of the blind, as Christ calls
them.

Two sorts of ministers are here excluded.

1. Those that know not what the Lord says, and therefore use the Holy calling
of the Ministry, but as a means for their maintenance, without care or
conscience of feeding the flock of Christ: and woe is to them because they
preach not the Gospel: they usurp the wool and milk of the flock, and have no
right to the inheritance of God, that is the tithes of the People. 2. Those who
know not, understand not the word of the Lord, yet trusting to their own
natural parts do boldly step up and usurp the chair of Moses, and are
imperitorum magistri, teachers of the unlearned, before they have been
peritorum discipuli, Scholars of the learned. And these are the more dangerous
of the two: better an unpreaching Minister that reads the Word of God
distinctly, then an ignorant preacher, that presumes ex puris naturalibus,
from his pure Naturalls to deal with those things which are too high and deep
for him.
2. Ministers are taught their great duty of faithfulness, of which the
Apostle says.

Moreover it is required of stewards that a man be found faithful.

He must say, 1 Cor. 4 2.
Thus says the Lord. That is,

He must say 1. Quod dicit Dominus, What the Lord says is the truth. 2. Omne
quod dicit, All that, all the truth. 3. Quomodo dicit. In the same manner, Thus.


1. For we may not go from our instructions to speak of our selves any thing,
but we must first receive from the Lord, and then we must speak that.

It was Nathans error when David did open to him his purpose for building of
the Lords house, that before he had understood the will of God therein, he
encouraged him, saying, Do all that is in thy heart: and therefore he was sent
again to him to unsay it.

2. Neither may we suppress any thing of that which is put into our mouths:
Act 4.20.
the Apostle says, We cannot but speak those things which we have seen and
heard.

And Saint Paul says to the Elders of Ephesus, I take you to record this day,
Acts 20.26, 27.
that I am pure from the blood of all men: for I have concealed nothing, but
have revealed to you all the counsel of God.

For surely as God told Ezekiel, It is as much as our salvation is worth, to leave
any part of Gods revealed will in Scripture untaught.

3. Neither may we change the manner of Gods speakings: for there is a form of
Doctrine delivered to us, and there is a form of words; we must not only say,
This, but Thus says the Lord.

For so Saint Peter admonishes, If any man speak, 1 Pet. 4.11.
let him speak as the oracles of God. Not mingling humane. fancies with divine
Doctrines: not mingling words of humane wisdom with Holy exhortations: not
mingling our own spirit of contradiction, with our confutations of the
adversary: not mingling any of our own spirit of bitterness and passions with
our just reprehensions of sin, drawing against Satan and sin no other sword but
the sword of the Spirit; which is the word of God.

Thus shall we be unto God the sweet savor of Christ, 2 Cor. 2. i 3.
in them that are saved.

We shall meet with many discouragements in this our office, and we shall lose
a great deal of labor; but so did our Master, it is his complaint:

Though never any were so sufficient for this service as he was; Isa 49.4. v. 1.
1. For his calling, The Lord has called me from the womb, from the bowels of
my mother has he made mention of my name. 2. For his fitting to that calling,
v. 2.
He has made my mouth like a sharp sword in the shadow of his hand has he hid
me, and made me a polished shaft.


Yet he complains. Then I said, I have labored in vain, v. 4.
I have spent my strength for naught, and in vain.

Yet his comfort was, Yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work, or
my reward, with my God.

Thus says the Lord does so restrain the minister of the word to the word of
God, that it is not lawful to mention the names either of the ancient Fathers
of the Church, or of any Heathen writers in our sermons.

A point touched somewhat to the quick by a great and learned Divine even upon
this text in print.

To which my moderate and just answer is,

1. That as there is authoritas Scripturae, the authority of Scripture which is
the ground of faith; so there must be testimoniu^^ Ecclesiae the witness of
the Church, as Vincent. Lirinensis well advises, Cap. 2.


Quia Scripturam Sacram non uno eodumque sensu universi accepterunt. And in
this case not having Antiquitatem ministrantem, universal consent, and we are
put to it to search out, what the most learned, and most sincere Divines in all
ages have taught concerning this point; and here there is a necessity of
consulting and declaring the constant judgment of the Church for the Testimony
to the Truth.

2. In all points of doctrine it gives a great assurance to our hearers of our
faithfulness, if we declare our selves to be such as feed our hearers with the
same Bread of Life which our fathers before us did break to their children.

3. Whereas it is surmised that these citations of fathers be but a pride of
our feeding, and a vain boast of our learning:

It were more charitable to think, 1. That our humility is such, that we are
not ashamed to profess by whom we learn any thing. 2. That we have so unworthy
an opinion of our own judgments, that we choose rather to apply the learned
judgments of those that have gone before us, then our own.


And who can deny but that our Preaching out of them is with the warrant of our
Text. Sic dicit Dominus, Thus says the Lord, if the Lord spoke by them to his
Church?

For the use of Heathen writers, I only say with S. Aug.

Omnis scientia in g^nere bonorum est.
In arundine sterili potest una pendere.
Truth is the language of God, and if ignorant men, wicked men, Devils do speak
truth, we may quote and write them, and we may say truly, Sic dicit Dominus,
Thus says the Lord.

The prophecy of wicked Balaam and of Caiaphas was the word of the Lord; and
the confession of devils testifying of Christ, is a good confession, there is
no wrong done to the word, Qui non est contra me, mecum est. He that is not
against me, is with me.

2. The hearers lesson.

You are all taught to receive this wholesome doctrine which the Minister
preaches from the mouth of the Lord.

It is not you that speak, says Christ; he that has ears to hear must hear,
Quod Spiritus dicit, what the spirit speaks.

When we tell the house of Jacob of their sins, this is the word of the Lord.

When we say unto you going in an evil way as Lot to the Sodomites, Do not so
wickedly, Do not say, Duru^ est hic sermo. he rayled to day against swearing,
or against drunkenness, etc. I will tell you how you shall receive both
comfort and great profit by our Ministry; and the word is given to profit
withal. Mich. 2.7.


Do not my words do good to him that walks uprightly? recto judicio: rectis
moribus.

I will give you a fair example.

Israel said to Moses, Go thou now near, Deu. 5 27.28.
and hear all that the Lord our God shall say, and speak thou unto us all that
the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we will hear it, and do it.

God took it well, and said to Moses, I have heard the voice of this people,
they have well said, all that they have spoken.

We must tell you, that the Word of the Lord which he sends forth in our
Ministry, shall not return to him empty; it shall finish the thing for which
it was sent.

Therefore take you heed how you hear, and consider what we say: hide the Word
that we Preach in your hearts, that you sin not against God.

If we do our duty he that hears us and receives us, receives Jesus Christ
that sent us, and in these earthen vessels rich treasures are brought unto him.

He that refuses us and our Ministry, refuses him that sent us; and the Word
of the Lord which we bring to them, will prove a rod correction to chastise
them, and although they feel not the pain presently, it will be owing to them
till affliction or Death assault them, and then they will remember the Word of
the Lord with much horror.

Obadiah v. 1. We have heard a rumor from the Lord and an Ambassador is sent
among the Heathen. Arise ye, and let us arise against her in battle.

We are now come to the Prophecy it self, which holds to the end of the
sixteenth verse: The parts whereof are four.

1. The judgment intended against Edom, v. 1.2. 2. All the hopes of Edom
despaired, v. 3.4.5.6.7.8.9. 3. The cause provoking God to this severe process
against them, v. 10.11.12.13.14. 4. Gods revenge upon them, v. 15.16.
1. In the judgment intended, observe 1. The discovery thereof. 2. The effect
of it


1. In the discovery, observe 1. By whom it was discovered. 2. How, two ways,
1. By a rumor from the Lord. 2. By Ambassadors.



1. To whom this threatened judgment was discovered, we have heard. We, that
is, the prophets of the Lord; for although Obadiah writ this present Prophecy,
yet was not this judgment only revealed to him, but to many more of the Holy
Prophets; for so says the Prophet Amos,

Surely the Lord will do nothing, but he reveals his secret to his servants
the prophets, not unto one only, but to more.

And so fully was this revealed to Jeremiah, Amos 3.7.
that he does prophecy even in the same words against Edom, but under the name
of Bozrah, which was the name of a Principal city in Edom, as appears Gen,
36.33. the words of the Prophecy are these.

I have sworn by my self, says the Lord, that Bozrah shall become a
desolation, Jer. 49.13.
a reproach, a waste, and a curse, and all the cities thereof shall be
perpetual wastes.

I have heard a rumor from the Lord, an Ambassador is sent to the Heathen,
saying, Gather ye together, and come against her, etc. The margents of the
Bibles refer you to that place.

The Lord gave great charge to Israel concerning Edom, Deuteronomy. 23.7
Thou shall not abhor an Edomite, for he is thy brother.

Yet because the Edomite was ever an enemy to Israel, God revealed his
judgment against them to many of his Prophets.

Balain^ foretold their subjection to Israel, And Edom shall be a possession,
Seir also shall be a possession for his enemies, and Israel shall do valiantly.
Number 24.18.19.
Out of Jacob shall be come that shall have Dominion, and shall destroy him
that remains of that city.

The Psalmist prays for their punishment, Psa. 137.7.
Remember, O Lord the children of Edom.

It had not been lawful for the Prophet to have provoked the justice of God
against Edom, unless God had revealed his purpose of judgment intended
against them, to him.

For David's imprecations be all Prophecies.

The burden of Dumah, that is of Idumaea. Isa. 21.11.


He calls unto me out of Seir, Watchman, what was in the night? etc.

The sword of the Lord is filled with blood: Isa 34.6.
it is made fat with fatness* etc. for the Lord has a sacrifice in Bozrah,
and a great slaughter in the land of Idumaea.

Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of Edom, Lament 4.
that dwell in the land of Vz, the cup also shall pass through unto thee:
thou shall be drunken and shall make thy self naked.

As to the young man, Rejoice, O young man, Iron. q. d. Make thee merry whilst
thou may, for thou art like to have sorrow and care enough.

Amos also foretold as much.

Thus says the Lord. Amos. 1.11.
For three transgressions and for four I will not turn away the punishment
thereof, because he did pursue his brother with the sword, and did cast off all
pity and did tear perpetually, and kept his wrath for ever.

Which causes are after in this prophecy alleged.

But I will send fire upon Teman, which shall devour the palaces of Bozrah.

Thus says the Lord God, Ezech. Cap. 25.12.
because that Edom has dealt against the house of Judah by taking vengeance;
and has revenged himself upon them I v. 13. will also stretch out my hand upon
Edom, and I will cut off man and beast from it, and I will make it desolate
from Teman, and they of Dedan shall fall by the sword.

And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel, and
they shall do in Edom according to mine anger, and according to my fury, and
they shall know my vengeance, says the Lord.

Son of man, set thy face against mount Seir, Cap. 35.2.
and prophecy against it,

And say unto it, Thus says the Lord God, Behold, O mount Seir, I am against
thee, and I will stretch out my hand against thee, and I will make thee most
desolate, etc.

I may say now as the messengers sent to bring Michaias to King Ahab said, but
in a Contrary, 1 Reg. 22.13.
Behold the words of the Prophets declare evil unto Edom with one mouth.

And now you see what reason this Prophet has to say, We have heard, for God
has revealed this threatened judgment to his servants the Prophets, and with
one mouth they declare it. From whence we are taught.



Hos. 13.14
The word is gone out of my mouth, it shall not return empty, but it shall
finish the thing for which it is sons, repentance is hid from mine eyes.

God is not as man that he should repent; he has sworn in his wrath they shall
not enter into his rest* and

The Lord has sworn and will not repent.

have hated Esau.

Sin is folly, sinners are fools; bray a fool in a mortar, yet will not his
foolishness depart from him; therefore they are under the rods and scorpions
of wrath, and cannot avoid the same.

3. From the faithfulness of his Prophets, for the Prophets of the Lord that
threaten these judgments from his mouth shall not be found liars: seeing their
Prophecies are no self-given notions, but inspirations of his spirit, which is
the Spirit of truth.

You know how Jonah was troubled to be a messenger of judgment to Nineveh,
when he was persuaded that God would show them mercy, and so his Prophecy fall
to the ground: he could rather have looked on to see the utter destruction of
Nineveh, then that his Prophecy should be found unperformed, therefore he went
another way at first, and would not come to Nineveh, and when he had
prophesied, he went out of the city, and there expected the event of his
Prophecy; and was angry that it succeeded not.

Quer. We find that in that example God changed, and repented him of the evil
which he had threatened against Nineveh, how then do we say, that the
judgments of God against the wicked be unreversable?

And God saw their works, Ion^h 3.10.
that they turned from their evil way, and God repented of the evil that he had
said he would do unto them: and he did it not.

Sol. To this we answer, That Gods repentance was no change of his mind, or
any alteration of his counsel or decree, but a deferring of the execution of
his judgment.

The change was in Nineveh, and the repentance was in them; they humbled
themselves before God, and they both did the works of mortification, and they
also believed God: Cap. 3.5.
this was not a justifying faith, which is Credere in Deum; to believe in God,
but an historical, which is Credere Deo, to believe God.

And God would have his Church see; that if Ahab humble himself, and go in
sackcloth; if Nineveh give over evil works, and repent them of their sins, he
will turn from the fierceness of his wrath, all to encourage repentance. But
Jonah was a true Prophet of Gods judgment, their repentance was not
poenitentia non poenitenda, a repentance not to be repented of: for they
resumed their evil ways: and Nahum does renew the threatenings of Jonah, and
declares the Lords judgments against Nineveh.

For the repentance of the wicked is but for a season, and as it is temporary,
so it removes judgment for a time; but they returning to their sins, he
returns also to the execution of his intended punishment.

So Ahab was forborne for a time upon his humiliation, but he escaped not the
hand of judgment: for God cannot lie.

His Prophets speak sure words, as the Apostle says, We have a more sure word
of Prophecy, 2 Pet. 1.19
to which you do well if you take heed as to a light, etc.

Que. When Abraham had heard the decree of God against the transgressing
cities, did not he know that Gods decrees of judgment were immutable? how then
did he solicit God for the reversing of the same? did he well in so doing?

Sol. Abraham's plea does clear this point; for upon the first notice from God,
of his intended judgment, he pleads for Sodom, not to turn away the wrath
from the ungodly there: but he says, Will thou also destroy the righteous with
the wicked? etc. Genesis 18.13


The care of Abraham was for the place and for the persons of the righteous; he
does not solicit God for the wicked there.

Again, to pray for the ungodly and wicked to divert judgment from them when
God has revealed his displeasure against them, is not unlawful.

1. Because Christian charity hops all things, believes all things. 2.
Because many of Gods judgments are temporal, and his anger against the sons
of men continues not long, so that we may hope, that either God may divert the
evil, or mitigate the same, or give patience to bear it, or sanctify the
chastisement, ad dignam emandationem, for their amendment, for only the Lord
knows who are his.
When Saul was rejected, and Samuel was the messenger of that heavy judgment,
1 Samuel 15.35.
yet Samuel did not cease mourning for Saul until the day of his death.

That is the most effectual manner of praying, even that which the Holy Ghost
uses in us, with sighs and groans: Plus fletu quam afflain. Thus when Abraham
saw Ishmael cast out for a scorner and persecutour of Isaac, yet he prayed, O
that Ishmael might live in thy sight. And God said, I have heard thee also
concerning him, somewhat is obtained. Therefore let us still be praying for all
men.

Especially seeing God does not make us of his counsel so far as to declare to
us whom he accepts, and whom he rejects.

From this lesson of the certainty of the judgments of God upon the wicked,
certain, whether we consider the nature of God without change, or the weakness
of man without any possibility of resisting; or the nature of the reprobate
without any ability of repenting, We are taught,

1. To rest in the decree of God; let us know, that he cannot deny himself; and
therefore though wrath go not out from the Lord presently, and although his
judgment is delayed, yet let us resolve that upon the wicked he will rain
snares, and he will break the impenitent with rods of iron.

He was an hundred and twenty: years preaching to the old world, and they
repented not, so long was he ere he would pluck his hand out of his bosom: yet
at last he smote the World with a great slaughter, and drowned all but eight
persons.

Two Errors do grow in us, if we do not wisely weigh this doctrine.

1. An Error in judgment.

These things have thou done, and I kept silence: Psa. 10.21
thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self. as Aug.

Deum quia non pateris ultorem, vis habere participem. quia malefacta tua
placent tibi, tu putas etiam ea placere mihi.

2. An Error in manners.

Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, Eccles. 8.11.
therefore the hearts of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.

For indeed what makes men to walk so unconscionably on earth, blaspheming the
sacred name of the highest Majesty, polluting his holy Sabbaths, making their
belly, their penny, their pleasure their God; but this corrupt opinion of Gods
either not seeing or not caring* or pardoning of sins, the presuming on his
mercy, not knowing this, that the judgments of God, howsoever deferred, will
surely light where they are threatened

Therefore let every man in hearing and reading of the word of God, observe his
own sins, how they are threatened, and let him know that he has no way nor
means but by his serious repentance to escape that judgment.

1. Let us take heed of dallying with the Almighty God, for be not deceived,
God is not mocked; they that think to find him when they list, know not that
there is a time when he will be found, and they that neglect that time, do lose
their season of him. 2. But especially let men take heed of abusing his
patience, and making that a motive to, and a strength of sin: for Laesa
patientia fit furor, patience abused turns to fury; when men sin against the
mercy of God, they spill the medicine that should heal them; they cut the bough
that they stood on; for it is that which keeps our heads above water, and
stands in the gap. 3. To conclude, let men take heed of falling so far from
God, as to make a covenant with death, and an agreement with hell; that is to
make peace with Satan; for this bed, the Prophet says, is too short, and this
covering is too narrow to cover us.
We are taught here not to repine at the present prosperity of the wicked.

This has much disquieted very godly persons; David confesses it to have
unrested him, and his foot had almost slipped. Psalm. 73.


It made some wise men among the heathen doubt. An sit providentia, whether
there be a providence; and no humane wisdom can maintain providence, because
bonis malefit, good men suffer.

There is a parting of the red sea, and then it will appear who be Israelites,
and who be Egyptians.

What if it last prosperous all their life long? at the parting of the soul
and body Lazarus and the rich man shall feel a change; therefore grudge not
the wicked their pleasures of sin for a season.

2. By what means this intelligence of the judgment against Edom was given:
the means are two.

1. By a rumor from the Lord. 2. By the Ambassadors sent from the Heathen.
1. The rumor from the Lord.

Jeremiah uses the same word, the Interlin. auditum audivimus a cum Domino.
Jer 49.14.


His meaning is as before is expressed, that God has put this prophecy in the
mouth of many of his Prophets, so that it is not a particular instinct by
revelation to some one, but a rumor, that is a general opening of the same
filling the mouths of many, which declares the consent of the Prophets in this
Prophecy.

Dare sonum certum, give a certain sound, when they all agree together as one
man in the ministry thereof.

The messenger that came from Michaiah to bring him to the two Kings
Jehoshaphat and Ahab, thought he had used a great argument to persuade Michaiah
to Prophecy good success to that intended expedition against Ramoth-Gilead, 1
Reg. 22.13.
saying,

Behold now the words of the prophets declare good unto the King, with one
mouth; let thy word, I pray thee, be like the word of one of one of them, etc.

These false prophets all joined together to flatter that expedition: God
reveals the secret hereof by Michaiah, there was an evil spirit offered his
service to God, saying,

I will go forth, and I will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his
prophets. And God said, Thou shall persuade him, and prevail also.

The Prophets and Ministers of God do consent in their message; and Satan that
studieth the ruin of the Church does his best to make his false prophets agree
all in a tale, to make the fairer show of Truth, that he may deceive many.

It is one of the great objections of the Papists against our Religion, that it
cannot be the Truth of God, because we Ministers do not agree in the Preaching
thereof.

To whom we answer, That the Church of England in all points both of Religion,
and Discipline, is as a city which is at unity within it self: if some
particular Persons in the Ministry leave the way of the Church and go in their
own way, that is no fault of the Church, but the Schism of Private men.

Such, as they are discovered, so are they restrained and separated from the
rest: to Room then Parcius ista viris tamen objicionda memento, Personal
oppositions do not fasten imputation upon any entire Church of God.

And we say to the Roman Church,

Novimus et qui to, etc. For we have good evidence even from their own
wrightings, that the Church of Rome has in later times dissented from those
Tenets, which in former times it has maintained; not in matters of light
moment, but in the main points of Christian Religion.

1. For the books of Canonical Scripture, the learned of former times did
refuse all those books which we call Apocryphal as well as we; yet the
Counsel of Trent has since placed them in the Canon, and given them equal
authority with the Canonical Scriptures 2. For the sufficiency, their own
best learned have heretofore acknowledged the same as much as we. 3. The vulgar
translation has been by their learned refused, the original preserved. 4. For
the conception of the Virgin Mary without sin, it is not yet determined in the
Church, but contradictories are allowed. 5. The distinction of Mortal and
Venial sins. 6. The Doctrines of merit, of super-erogation, of the seven
Sacraments, of Transubstantiation, of Purgatory, of praying to Saints,
worshipping of images, Indulgencies, Popes supremacy, all refused.
Therefore let them no longer charge us with differences; our Church does
maintain one Truth in all these things, with the former Church of Rome, against
this that now is.

Therefore let us observe the settled doctrine of the Church in which we live,
and receive that against the perverse oppositions of all schismatic coiners
of new Doctrines, and that is the safest way for us to walk in, for this rumor
Domini is no rumor of the Lord.

auditus a Domino, heard from the Lord, whence we are taught to distinguish
between the rumors which we hear from men, and those rumors which we hear
from the Lord; let us judge them by the word of God, and let us learn of the
Church, the Spouse of Christ, who best discerns these spiritual things,
because they are deposited with it, and the Spirit of God is with it, and
abides with it for ever.

How holy Scriptures must be interpreted.

Let every man put his own particular fancies and humors to silence, and as
the Apostle says, let us receive with meekness the word of God, and let it be
graffed in us.

For the word of the Lord endures for ever, that is like him that gave it,
without variableness, there is in it no shadow of change.

It was David's rest, Audiam quid loquatur Deus, I will hear what the Lord
speaks.

And that we may hear this rumor of the Lord profitably, The word is given to
profit withal. let me show you who they be that receive the word of God
profitably; these namely who 1. Receive it in their understanding. 2. in their
judgment.


1. In their understanding, knowing what the Lord speaks in his Word, for the
Word is the revelation of the good will of God.

To this is necessary 1. A preparation to this understanding. 2. An use of the
means.


For the preparation of our understanding, two things are necessary as Saint
Paul speaks.

1. Be not conformed to this world: this world is our enemy, Romans 11.1.
we must shake off all acquaintance with it: it is the serpents fair fruit,
wherewith he tempts us, he sets the eye and the heart a lusting, and
fills us with the pride of life.

Christ first separated his disciples from the world, then he fitted them to
his service.

They deceive themselves that think they may embrace true religion, and the
world too, following the vanities of fashion, and surfeiting in the pleasures
of life: for Godliness and vanity cannot dwell together: and the god of this
world blinds the eye of the understanding that they which love the world,
cannot love God; and the secrets of the Lord are revealed to none but such as
love and fear God.

2. Be ye transformed by the renewing of the mind: that is, be ye new
Creatures, casting off the old man which is corrupt: for this new wine must be
put in new casks.

We must sing a new song, Canticum novum, novus homo a new man, none else can
sing it: therefore David desired Cor novum a new heart, and spiritum rectum a
right spirit: it is the only new fashion as in many of ours, to renew the old
fashion, the image of God stamped in us in our Creation, which is decayed and
repaired anew by the image of the new Adam who came to restore us.

2. A use of the means, which are,

1. Delight in reading of the word; give attendance to reading; 1 Timothy 4.15.
what though thou understand not what thou read? no more did the Eunuch: but
God sent Philip to him: he was in the way of illumination.

Idle and wanton books take up too much of our time from the reading of Gods
book: rumor populi, a rumor of the people takes us from reading this rumor
Domim, this rumor of the Lord.

Yet these things are written for our use; and only these things make the man
of God wise to salvation.

2. Meditation, for that helps the understanding, and lays up what we read,
in the memory, that we may know where to have it again when we have need of it.

It is said of Mary, Lu^k. 251
that she kept all these sayings in her heart.

The wise son of Sirach says well,

The inner parts of a fool are like a broken vessel, Ecclus. 21 14.
and he will hold no knowledge as long as he lives. Truly the cause of all our
sins and frailties is want of meditation in the Word, want of keeping it in our
heart we see in our selves, how we are affected here in hearing of the Word of
God; if we did meditate on it, we should have the same affections still.

3. Hear the Word preached, for this is Gods ordinance for the saving of souls;
Nehem. 8.
Ezra had a pulpit of wood made him, he stood up, be read the law, and gave the
sense, and all the people wept when they heard the wonderful things of the Law.

But it is said, All the people were attentive, both man women, yet he preached
not by the glass, but from morning till midday.

And Paul preached from evening till midnight; for it pleases God by the
foolishnes of preaching, to save those that believe.

Be swift to hea^.

4. Meditation is necessary also after hearing the word in the public
Ministry: for the Minister speaking to a mixed auditory, if he divides the
word aright, he has a portion for every hearer, milk for some, stronger meat
for others; some have need of information in things unknown; some of comfort,
some of resolution in doubes, some of confutation of errors, some of chiding
some have need to have their dullness spurred, others their deadness
quickened, others their weakness strengthened, others their young and hopeful
beginings, encoraged, others their zeaks enflamed.

5. Conference is another good means to increase our knowlodge; for one man's
memory may help another, so one man's understanding may be more clear then
another: for as we are many members of one body, so have we many graces
bestowed upon us to make us useful and helpful one to another.

Conference one with another, especially with our minister, does call to mind
that which might else have slipped away from us; and the very purpose of
conference does add a desire to learn by the Word, that we may rather teach
then be taught.

2. We must receive the Word of God in our judgment. This is the wisdom that
teaches us to make use of it: for knowledge is not for it self, but for use;
we shall know whether we have wisely heard the Word by two things.

1. By the increase of our faith. 2. By our new obedience.
1. By the increase of our faith: for faith comes from the saving hearing of
Gods Word; the Word is not the power of God to salvation, but only where it
begets faith.

The Word never profits where it is not mixed with faith in them that hear it.

So soon as Satan shook the faith of Evah, Heb. 4.2.
and made her, doubt of the Word of God, the Word had lost the power of God in
her to preserve her.

2. By our obedience: many boast of their knowledge; the Apostle says, He that
does think he knows any thing, that is proud of his knowledge, and loves his
knowledge for it self, knows nothing yet as he ought to know.

For in religion he knows no more then he practices.

What is it for a man to get a clear and good glass, and to behold his face in
it, and to forget presently what his form is? such are the knowers of the Word,
as Saint James says, that are not doers of the same.

And what profit is it to us to know our Masters will and not to do it, but the
gain of many stripes?

rumor Domini, a rumor of the Lord.

There is great cause of fear when God does give out what his judgments shall
be, and how he will punish, for his word is like the sword of Saul,

It never returned empty from the blood of the slain.

We have no particular prophecies that do point out our nation, as this and
many more did point out Edom for judgment, 2 Samuel 1.12.
but yet we must not neglect the voice of God; for

As faith lays hold on the general pro mises of God to his Church, and
applies particular examples in Scripture, to the building of us up in comfort:

So fear lays hold on the general threatenings of Gods judgments, and
applies them to the begetting and increasing of terror.

So that when you shall hereafter see what sins Edom committed, we shall
perceive how those sins provoked Gods anger, and how severely God threatened
them, you may say, Auditum audivi a Domino, We have heard a rumor from the
Lord: that if the land we live in, or we that live in this land, be guilty of
these sins, we have no quietus est, no discharge against these plagues; for
these two go together,

Come out of her my people, that you be not partakers of her sins, and receive
not of her plagues.

The drunkard may see in Noah and Lot who sinned but once that way, how God did
punish that sin. Miriams sin resisting Moses.

The adulterer may see in David, that God spares not his own beloved children,
he makes their sins smart upon them.

But the examples of his judgments upon the reprobate are full of terror:
Cain, and Saul, and Judas, Korah and his company.

This is rumor Domini, The Scripture deals plainly with us to tell the Church
these things, ne veniant in locum tormenti, that they come not into the place
of torment.



Many of these do too much discomfort and deject themselves, about giving
themselves over, as if they were vessels of wrath or deemed to destruction.

Satan uses fiery darts to such, and by all means tempts such to despair;
he says unto them, Non est tibi salus in Deo tuo, there is no safety for thee
in thy God.

Therefore to such I say, Take heed, and examine well the suggestion, hearken
diligently si rumor sit a Domino, if it be a rumor from the Lord.

Satan labors most against our faith, for that is the victory by which we
overcome the World.

Christ told Peter, Satan has desired to winnowe thee: he knew which way he
bent his strength: Orav ine deficeret fides tua, Luke 22.32.
I have prayed that thy faith fail not:

Our own fear is another great enemy to our peace; for when we do consider our
selves, and how weak our faith is, we do presently apply to our selves all the
judgments of God.

Yet this is rumor a Domino, a rumor from the Lord.

The Lord has delight in this broken heart, he will repair and build up the
breaches thereof; the ground that is thus broken up is fittest for the
immortal feed of his Word, and of his Grace to be sown in it, to bear fruit.

What a woeful case was David in when his foot had almost slipped, when he feared
that God would no more be entreated, and hearkened to the rumor of his
conscience, till God who is greater then the conscience refreshed him with his
sweet consolations.

And saint Paul hearkening to the rumor of his conscience, cries out, O
wrethed man that I am, who shall deliver me, etc. but the sweet and comfortable
voice of joy is heard in the tabernacles of the righteous: as there,

Thanks be unto God through our Lord Jesus, etc.

Therefore as he says, When you hear of wars, and rumors of wars, be not
afraid; that is, fear not servilely nor dispairingly, for the end is not yet.

Obadiah v. 1. An ambassador is sent amongst the Heathen: Arise ye, and let us
arise against her in battle.

2. Means of the intelligence, An ambassador is sent amongst the Heathen, This
is rumor populi, a rumor of the people: for commonly rumor of war does go
before war, seeing the preparation of war cannot be concealed.

Concerning this Ambassador the learned Expositours of this Prophecy are not
well agreed.

Some think he is some Prophet of the Lord sent to stir up a war between Edom
and other Nations.

Others that one Nation does by Ambassadors stir up another against Edom.

The 70 read (...) whereupon some understand that God sent his Angel to provoke
this war.

The point material is agreed on by all, that God has an hand in this
judgment, and he uses the nations for a rod to scourge Edom.

This rumor of war is terror Domini, the terror of the Lord; And it stirs
up and awaketh those that are in danger, to look to themselves, which does show
that this judgment threatened against Edom shall not surprise them suddenly,
they have warning to stand upon their guard, and to arm themselves against
invasion.

This is therefore declared as I conceive to show the careless security of
Edom, that would take no warning, for that is expressed in the prophecy of Isaiah
in the burden of Dumah, contempt and scorn of their warning; for he calls
unto me out of Seir, Watchman, what was in the night? Watchman, what was in the
night?

As deriding the Prophet, who had foretold their night of calamity which should
put out their candle, and leave them darkling.

For if the voice of the Prophets will not move them, how will they take it
when they shall hear the nations sending Ambassadors, one to another to
confederate against them?

But the wicked are despisers, they will take no warning.

The old world made a scorn of Noah's preaching and building, and thereby
vexing his righteous soul, even to the day that the flood came and swept them
all away. They of Sodom, even the sons in law of Lot, when he warned them of
the wrath to come, did despise the warning.

Yet God to make their judgment more heavy when it comes, and to make their
scorn more inexcusable, threatens them with the rumor first, before be
smites them.

The pride and vanity of these times, the drunkenness and profaneness, the
contentions, and all the clamorous and loud voyced sins which over-grow into
excess; they do all arise from the contempt of the word of God, and from a
negligence in observing the course of Gods justice in the punishing of these
sins, and from a scornful undervaluing of those Ambassadors whom God does
send into the world to reconcile the world to himself.

The Apostle says, We as Ambassadors from God do beseech you.

But the Ministers of Gods word have very harsh welcome in the World, for the
profane despise them all, and will not hear their message: the precise will
hear but some of them, they despise others; they that be for Paul, will not
hear Apollo; and they that be for Peter, will hear neither Paul, nor Apollo,
nor Jesus Christ himself.

But consider, Ambassadors are not sent but upon serious occasions: this is
such; to awake and stir us up against our common enemies, the Flesh, the World,
and the Devil, and to tell us of our great danger.

For we shall not fight against Flesh and Blood only, but against Powers, and
Principalities: if we despise the noise of this rumor, these enemies may take
us at advantage.

Edom would take no warning; no more will they whom God has delivered over to
the guidance of their own lusts.

2. The effect of the message and rumor being the judgment it self. 1
Judicium. 2. effectum Judicij. Numb. 24.18.


Arise ye, and let us arise against her in battle.

When I compare these words with those of Balaams prophecy,

Edom shall be a possession, Seir also shall be a possession for his enemies,
and Israel shall do valiantly.

Out of Jacob shall he come that shall have dominion, and shall destroy him
that remains of that city:

I find here from whence the Ambassador comes; even from the house of Jacob;
And Israel shall stir up the Heathen against Edom, and Israel shall have
dominion over them. This appears in Ezekiels prophecy,

And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom, Eze. 25 14
by the hand of my people Israel, and they shall do in Edom according to my
anger and according to my fury, and they shall know my vengeance, says the
Lord God.

So the people of God shall stir up the Heathen Nations against Edom.

From whence we do learn these lessons.

1. That all wars are ordered by God. 2. That God punishes one evil man by the
hand of another, and so one evil Nation. 3. That war is one of Gods punishments
by which he chasteneth men for sin. 4. That the people of God may lawfully make
war.
1. Doctrine. All wars are ordered by God.

It is the word of the Lord that these Nations shall come together in War
against Edom.

The horse is prepared for the day of battle, Pt. 21.31.
but the victory is of the Lord.

He teaches my hands to fight, Psa. 144.1.
and my fingers to battle.

Melchisedech says to Abraham after his victory in the rescue of Lot,

Blessed be the most high God, Genesis 14.20.
which has delivered thine enemies into thy hand.

When Israel prevailed against Benjamin for abusing the Levites concubine,
Judge. 20.35. Jud. 7.20.
it is said, The Lord smote Benjamin before Israel.

Gedeons cry was, The sword of the Lord and of Gedeon.

The reason hereof is in sight. psa. 113.6
for he abaseth himself to behold things in heaven and in earth. Dominus
exercituum, the Lord of Hosts.


The uses follow.

pro. 20.18. pro. 24.6.


By counsel wars must be enterprised.

By wise counsel thou shall make thy war prosperous.

If Jehoshaphat join with Ahab against Ramoth in Gelead, he shall speed
accordingly.

The sword of the Lord first, then of Gideon.

to our strength: neither must we neglect the means, presuming on the defense
of God.

1. Not trust our own strength: for some trust in Charets, and some in horses,
as Benhadah did in the multitude of his men, so great, that the land against
which he fought; was not enough to give every one of the^ an handful.

Put David says, A king is not saved by the multitude of an host, psa. 33.17.
neither is the mighty man delivered by much strength: an horse is a vain help.

2. It is another extreme to cast all upon God and not to use the means: first
the sword of the Lord, and then with it the sword of Gedeon.

Joah, encouraging the people when he had divided his army, part against the
Syrians, and part against Ammon,

Be of good courage, and let us play the men, for our people, 2 Samuel 10.12.
and for the cities of our God, and the Lord do that which seems him good.

It was David's resolution,

I will not be afraid of ten thousand of the people that should beset me round
about: Arise O Lord, save me, my God: Psalm, 3.6.
for thou smitest all mine enemies upon the cheek bone.



1. Before the War, and in the War to join prayers with our prepatations and
our attempts: for God declared in the Wars of Israel with Amalck, that Moses
praying on the hill with Aaron and Hur, and Joshua fighting below in the
valley, Exodus, 17.
were both of them the forces of God.

And that prayers were the better fighting, for when Moses ceased praying,
Amalek prevailed.

2. After the War we are taught to whom to attribute the victory and good
success of the War; that is to give the glory thereof to the Lord, and so say
with David, The right hand of the Lord has done valiantly: the right hand of
the Lord brings mighty things to pass.

So the daughter of Jephta came out with timbrels, to meet her father, and
confessed to her father, Judge. 11.36.
The Lord has taken vengeance for thee of thine enemies, even of the chldren
of Ammon.

Yet may we not herein smother the well deserving prowess and valor of
valiant Commanders and soldiers, but give them their due honor; so even, the
women meet Saul, returning from the slaughter of the Philistines, and they
answered one another in their song, saying, Saul has killed his thousands and
David his ten thousands. 1 Samuel 18 7.


Israel says to the Heathen, Arise ye, and let us arise, making use of the
power and strength of the Heathen against Edom, we are taught, that God does
use one evil man, and one evil Nation to punish another.

The Lord did smite the Moabites by the Ammonites, and took from them some part
of their land.

Chedorlaomer makes war against other kings, and takes away their substance.

The Midiani^^ were their own Conquerours, The Lord set every ones sword
against his fellow there wont all the host.

The children of Israel did call the Heathen here to them, Jud. 7.22.
they joined in one war against Edom; as if at this day Princes of the Popish
Religion should join themselves with a Protestant Prince, to maintain him in
his Kingdom against the Emperor the Popes eldest son.

Is not this setting Egytians against Egyptians, and defending the Church by
the enemies of the Church?



What does more declare his absolute Sovereignty then his Power to whip and
scourge the enemies of his Church by one another of them, which is to make
Satan cast out Satan.

This shows that Satan's kingdom is subordinate to the Kingdom of God; there
is but one Kingdom of which it may be truly said, Et Imperijs ejus non est
finis, There is no end of his Kingdom.

Christ shall one day make this good, when he shall have put down all his
enemies; for then he shall deliver up the Kingdom to God.

In the mean time the subjects of Satan's kingdom are the vassalls of God, and
Satan himself shall be and is at his command to be the rod of God for
execution of his wrath where he pleases.



They may cry a confederacy, and give one another the right hand of fellowship
for a time, but if God be not the knot of their union, all other respects will
come short of settling a constant concurrency.

We see this clearly in the vicissititudes of confederacies and wars amongst
the enemies of true Religion: temporal respects make their leagues; temporal
respects do again dissolve them.

The Uses of this point.

David almost slip, when he saw the prosperity of the ungodly, and compared it
with the main and great troubles of the Church?

For seeing God does make this use of them to be his sword, marvel not, that
he keeps his sword by his side, that he keeps it in a sheath, that he
keeps it bright.

And David says,

Deliver my soul from the wicked which in thy sword: that is one cause why God
rewards the wicked with some temporal favors, Psa. 17.13.
because he makes use of them to punish his enemies: this is fully expressed.

For thus says the Lord to the Prophet.

Son of man, Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel caused his army to serve a great
service against Tyrus.

Every head was made bald, and every shoulder was peeled, Ezech. 29 18.19
yet had he no mages, nor the army for Tyrus, that served against it: therefore
thus says the Lord God,

Behold, I will give the land of Egypt into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of
Babylon, and he shall take her multitudes, and take her spoils, and take her
prey, and it shall be the wages for his army.

This may satisfy us, that we grieve not at the prosperous estate of the
wicked, for God has use of them, and he will not let them serve him for
nothing.

The elect of God have fairer hopes, let them stay their stomach, and let them
wait the Lords leisure.



The wicked know not what they do when they fight the battles of the Lord; yet
God does put such metal into them, that they do most valiantly perform his
will.

A full example hereof is.

The word of the Lord to Zedekiah king of Judah by his prophet Jeremiah. Jer.
37.8.


The Chaldaeans shall come again, and fight against this city, and take it, and
burn it with fire.

Thus faith the Lord, deceive not your selves, saying, The Chaldeans shall
depart from us; for they shall not depart.

For though ye had smitten the whole army of the Chaldeans that fight against
you, and there remained but wounded men amongst them, yet should they rise up,
every man in his tent, and burn this city with fire.

This must needs be the hand of the Lord, and therefore the glory must be given
to God only: the means are weak, but the Lord is strong; he alone must be
exalted; and all the glory of victory must be ascribed to him.

The Church may use the help of the Heathen and of Idolaters in the Lords
battles, for they are the sword of the Lord as you have heard.

Israel and the Heathen do come together, though the godly do use the help of
the wicked to execute the will of God upon Gods enemies, yet they must be very
careful, not to join with them in their wickedness and idolatry.

We may use the help of Papists for the maintenance of the Lords cause, but we
must take heed that we fall not into the sin of Israel. Psalm. 106.35.


They were mingled with the Heathen, and learned their Wickedness, and served
their idols, which were their ruin.

Let us not make the covenant with them that Ruth the Moabitesse made with
Naomi,

Thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God. Ruth 1.16


The third Doctrine.

War is one of the punishments wherewith God does punish his enemies.

And I will bring a sword upon you that shall avenge the quarrel of my
Covenant. Levit. 26.25. Ezech. 14.21.


It is one of the four sore judgments, as God himself does call it: and it is
first named; used to cut off man and beast.

When Israel was by the favor of God put into possession of the promised land,
they sinned against God in contempt of Religion, in idolatry, theft and
whoredom;

For which God punished them with war; for the Aramites, Philistines,
Midianites, Moabites, Canaanites, and Ammonites fought against them, and
opposed them three years, as appears in the book of Judges.

The misery of war is great, as Moses does express it.

They shall not regard the person of the old, nor have compassion of the young,
they shall eat the fruit of thy cattle, Deuteronomy. 28.50.51.
they shall consume the profit of thy land, they shall besiege thee within thy
walls, they shall drive thee to eat thy children, the fruit of thy body during
the siege and straightness wherewith they shall compass thee in thy cities.

Ezech. 5.16.17.


The reason hereof is, because they that make no conscience of their duty to
God, nor of obedience to his Word, have put themselves out of Gods protection,
and he is become their enemy: The protection of God is the fence of the vine,
if that hedge be once broken up, not only the foxes will come in and devour
the grapes, but the wild boar will also come in, and root it up.

Nullum animal morosius, so Nullum animal ferocius: O says David, Let me not
fall into the hand of man.

Let men fall softly and easily when they fall into thy hands, so shall thou
fall gently into their hands, for God is love, and the merciful man shall not
want mercy.

But as in the natural body sometimes it is wholesome to open a vein and let
out blood: so it is in the body politic, the sword must sometimes draw blood
to parge the body of noxious and offensive humors.

And wheresoever this punishment lights as Medicinal, it amendeth many
faults, where it lights as a judgment of indignation it cutteth off evil
doers from the face of the earth.

The uses of this doctrine follow.

Arise ye and let us arise against them in battle.

You know who is at this time thus endangered, even some of the branches of
that vine under which we sit.

The forward free and cheerful offerings of your hands have testified your
good affections to that rightful cause; let lifting up of your hands secute
that free opening of them; that is, let your prayers sight for them, and give
God no rest till he has settled Peace in these walls, and prosperity within
these palaces.

Surely they shall prosper that love it: for our brethren and companions sake
the worshippers of the same God, the professour^ of the same faith with us, let
us wish them now prosperity, for the house of Gods sake, which they seek to
enlarge and advance; let us seek and study to do them good.

filij pacis, children of peace born and brought up in times of peace: the
prophecy of Zechariah is fulfilled in our land.

We have old men and Women dwelling in our towns, even men with slaves in their
hands for very age, Zech. 8.4.5.
and the streets of our cities and towns full of boys and girls playing in the
streets thereof.

And that promise of God to the obedient is performed in us, I will, end po^^^
in the land, Levt. 26.6
and ye shall sleep, and none shall make you afraid, and the sword shall not go
through your land.

The happy days of the long reign of Queen Elizabeth of everlasting memory,
the mother of our Peace, were crowned with peace, and she left a legacy of
peace in the Commonwealth in her succession.

Our Solomon her heir has maintained peace under his happy government, both at
home and abroad.

What Nation is there now under heaven, which says, Arise ye, and let us arise
against England in battle.

We may say, this is the Lords doing, Psalm. 46.9.
and we must give him the glory of it; for as David says, He makes wars to
cease, he breaks the Bow, and cutteth the Spear in sunder, and burns the
Chariots in the fire.

The Use. Be still and know, that I am God, I will be exalted in the earth.

take heed ye bite not one another, lest ye be devoured one of another.

Better it were we had wars abroad, then that we should fight one with another
of us at home by uncivil contentions, by fraudulent and cunning underminings,
by slanderous and lying calumniations, or by any other uncharitable means of
molestation to breed unjust war^ amongst our selves.

For by this cursed crosnesse, we do provoke God to draw his sword against us.

Augustus Caesar.

Then were swords turned into sithes, and spears into ploughshares, and so the
noise of our redemption, and the sound of the Gospel went over all the world.

We see that those years of peace have made learning and arts flourish in our
land; and for the light of religion, it never shined clearer then now, and the
light thereof still increases.

Let us know that now God has so fenced in his Vine in our Land, and bestowed
such cost on it: he looks that it should bring forth grapes, not fair and
spreading branches only, not large and green leaves, not shows and semblances
and seemings of godliness, but grapes not labruseas, not sour grapes.

But fructus dignos poenitentia, fruits worthy of repentance; These be the best
presents we can make to God, the best ensigns of our peace.

Otherwise the calamities of peace will fall on us worse then those of war,
idleness, wantonness, fullness of bread, drunkenness, and all the worms of
prosperity which will destroy our vine.

Ieremih says, Arise ye, stirring up others to battle, and adds, we will
arise. I conclude



For a defensive war nature provideth, for that is no more but se tueri, to
defend himself.

But this is an offensive war against Edom their enemy, and this is lawful.

The Land of promise, though given so many years before to the sons of Sem,
in the line of Jacob, yet was possessed by the sons of Cham, of whose son
Canaan took name, and Israel came into the possession of that Land by the sword.

They had Gods own warrant for it, Deuteronomy. 7.2.
When the Lord brings thee into the Land whither thou go to possess it,
and shall root out many Nations before thee, then thou shall smite them, thou
shall utterly destroy them, etc.

Yea, he does not only allow of a just war, but David says, He teaches my
hands to fight.

Moses from God, Psa. 8.34. Number. 25.17.
says to Israel, vex the Midianites and smite them.

1. Because, as I taught before, war is one of the judgments of God, one of the
arrows of his quiver, one of his rods wherewith he does chasten the wicked,
therefore the faithful may and must arise when they are called forth into
battle.

In such a case it was said, Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord
negligently; Curse ye Meroz, curse ye Meroz says the Angel of the Lord, Jer.
48.10.
Curse ye the inhabitants thereof bitterly, because they came not to the help
of the Lord, Judge. 5.23.
to the help of the Lord against the mighty.

There it is called helping the Lord, because men be the hands of execution in
these lawful wars, by whom God does punish his enemies; and because God is
helped in those that are by just means maintained.

Vengeance is mine, so that the Lord is called Lord of hosts, and just Wars are
called The battles of the Lord; they that sight in such wars, God covers
their heads in the day of battle.

The wars of Israel against Amalek were offensive, they were the Lords
vengeance against Amalek for smiting the hindermost and weakest of them in
their passage to the promised land.

This war against Edom was such, as it follows Gods revenge upon Edom for
their cruelty toward Israel.

John Baptist and asked, What shall we do? he did not bid them leave the
profession of arms, but only said to them,

Do violence to no man, accuse no man falsely, Luke 3.13.
and be content with your wages.

Wherein he required of them fair wars without injury to any; for none but
unjust violence is there forbidden.

And we shall find in the catalogue of the faithful, Gedeon, Heb. 11.32.33.
Barak, Samson, Jephthah, David, which through faith subdued kingdoms, etc.

The Uses follow.

Seeing the faithful may make lawful Wars;



1. It is a lawful war to preserve our right against them that invade it, as
was ours in eighty eight against the Spaniard then our enemy, who prepared
himself for the invasion of this Kingdom.

2. The Judges of Israel did redeem Israel from their oppressors that had
invaded them, and redeemed their own right.

So Abraham made a just war against those that had wronged the king of Sodom,
and took Lot prisoner.

3. To chasten and destroy the common enemies of intercourse and trade between
Nation and Nation; such is the seawar intended against the Pirates and
sea-theeves that hinder the trade of Nations by their Piracies: wasps and
drones that rob the hives of painful bees.

4. To defend confederate Nations from the oppression of their enemy; for so
Joshuah will not suffer the Ammonite to vex and wrong the Gibeonites, because
the oath of God is between them.

Thus for the common peace it is lawful for Christians to confederate with
Turks and Infidels, for Protestants to make leagues of peace and civil society
with Papists, Catholics with Heretics.

And when the league goes no further then the just defense of them in their
rights, we may borrow and lend help each to other.

For the common love of humanity teaches us to do as we would be done to;
Chron. 12 18
and the Apostle bids, as much as in us, to have peace with all men.

But to assist Infidels and Heretics in their unjust wars, it is utterly
unlawful; so Jehoshaphat joined with Ahab against Ramoth in Gilead, and the
Prophet of the Lord reproved him for it.

And Jehu the son of Hanani the Seer went out to meet him, Chron. 19.2.
and said to King Jehoshaphat, Would thou help the wicked, and love them that
hate the Lord; therefore for this thing is the wrath of the Lord upon thee.

If the league between the godly and ungodly Nations have these bonds, 1. To
assure one another against injury from each other. 2. To defend each others
rights, without prejudice of Religion. 3. To maintain commerce between them.


I see no cause why it may not be lawful for Christians and Infidels to
confederate.

1. For defense against injury of others; if the Ox of an Infidel, or his
Ass should fall into a pit, ought I not to show him mercy in his beast, and to
save him if I can? shall I do this to his beast, and shall I not do it to him?

If thieves would rob him, shall I pass by and see him rifled, and shall I not
give him aid? what duty one, man owes to another, that does one Nation owe to
another; this is preservation of Justice, suum cuique.

2. For binding our selves not to do Infidels any hurt unjustly, it is the Law
of God; we must not only abstain from robbing them, but we must preserve their
right; we may not take away from them their lives, their wives, their goods, or
any thing of theirs; we may promise interchangably to do them no wrong.

3. For commerce; P^rk cont. aur. in 2. Praecept.
some of our late Divines affirm it unlawful to sell to Infidels, or
Heretics, any commodity which they may abuse to any idolatrous use.

For example, to sell the Papists Wax, because they make Candles thereof,
which they do use in their false worship of God: so Frankincense cloth, etc.
this is made a breach of the second commandment.

Put this rule is too strict and unwarrantable: for what providence can prevent
abuse of all the commodities that any Land affords.

We sell wheat, of which they may make their Wafer-gods: we exchange gold with
some of them, they may gild their Images with it. Some of them send us in Wine,
which is much abused to drunkenness: and silks of all sorts, which is abused
to pridc, etc. This is Nimia sapientia, nimia justicia, to be overwise,
over-just.



That peace which rusteth the armor, and despises the soldier, and disuseth
Arms, is dangerous; it weakeneth the hands and hearts of men of action, it
disableth the Commonwealth, it provokes the adversary to assault, and puts
all into hazard.

As John bids the soldiers to be content with their pay, so he allows
them a pay, and imposes the charge of their mainnance upon the Commonwealth.

Let not daring and worthy spirits complain, as Themistocles did, that they
are like to the Platanes in a storm, men fly under them for shelter; in fair
weather, vellicant, pluck off their leaves.



When Hezekiah saw that Senacherib was come to fight against Jerusalem, he said
to his Commanders and soldiers.

Be strong and courageous, fear not, nor be afraid for the King of Ashur, 2 Chronicles. 32 7.
neither for all the multitude that is with him, for there is more with us,
then with him; with him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God
for to help us, and fight our battles.

So Nehemiah encouraged the people against Tobiah and Sanballat, when they came
to hinder the building of the walls of Jerusalem.

Be not afraid of them, remember the great Lord, and the fearful, and fight
for your brethren, your sons and your daughters, your wives and your houses.
There be that have said, that true Religion does make men cowards, and
destroys fortitude and true valor. It is not so.

1. Because true Religion does settle the conscience in the goodness of the
cause, which the Heathen did not respect. 2. True Religion casts us upon the
protection of Almighty God, which also the Heathen regarded not, but trusted to
them that were no gods.
Therefore let us say to our soldiers in the wars of God, as we read it said
by the Officers to the people by the commandment of Moses,

What man is there that is fearful and fainthearted? Deuteronomy. 20.8
let him go and return to his house, lest his brethrens heart do faint, as his
heart faints.

For it was a base and unkingly answer that Ahab sent Benhadad who said, Thy
silver and thy gold is mine, thy women and thy fair children are mine: He
answered,

Mylord king, according to thy saying, I am thine, and all that I have.

They that put their trust in the Lord, do not fear what man can do unto them.

stratagems of war.

So Ioshuah may lie in wait and come against Ai, Josh. 8.2.
on the back side of the City.

So Abraham may divide his company, Genesis 14.15. Jud. 20.29.
and smight the enemy in the night, when he attempteth the res^ue of Lot.

So the Israelites may use advice to draw the men of Gibea out of their City,
and so take advantage against them unawares.



When thou go out with an host against thine enemy, Deu 23.9.
then keep thy self from every wicked thing.

The Lord thy God walk^th in the midst of the Camp to deliver thee, and to give
thee thine enemies before thee, therefore let thine host be holy, that he see
no filthy thing in thee, and turn away from thee.

Amongst the Heathen it was wont to be said, that the Camp was the School of
virtue, much more ought it to be so amongst Christians; for there is a terror
of death, and we know that immediat^y after death comes judgment.

How ought men to sanctify themselves, and to repent them of their sins, and
to purge their hearts from all wickedness, that serve under Almighty God in
his battles?

God has threatened,

If you will not obey me, nor do all these Commandments, Levit. 26.14.17.
I will set my face against you, and ye shall fall before your enemies, and
they that hate you shall reign over you, and ye shall fly when none pursues
you.

Surely such are of he forlorn hope, that come not to serve the living God;
therefore the strongest army is of them that are religious, and make conscience
of doing any wicked thing to displease God.

and for this cause pay n^ tribute; Romans 13.
Give unto Caesar that that is Caesar's. God has given our lawful Princes an
interest in our goods for the common good; and the Apostle alleges this cause
of tribute and subsidy to our Princes.

For they are Gods Ministers appointed for this very thing, that is, to execute
wrath upon them that do evil, and to defend their own right.



This was the ruin of Laish.

The children of Dan sent five men who came to Laish, and behold the people
that were therein dwelt careless, Judge. 18.7.
after the manner of the Zidonians, quiet and secure.

This gave encouragement to the children of Dan to assault them.



Matthew. 5.39.
Resist not evil: if one smile thee on one cheek, turn the other: if one sue
thee for thy coat, give him thy cloak



If I have spoken evil, Joh. 8.22.23.
bear witness of the evil, but if well, why smitest thou me?

This then is spoken by our Savior to forbid private revenge, that no man
should be the judge of his own wrong, but should bear it with patience.

It is Saint Augustines answer, Obedientia istanon in ostentatione corporis
est, sed in preparatione cordis.

And he says, Non maxillam tantum obtulit, sed totum corpus dedit figendum
cruci.

And he adds, Quanto melius et respondit vera placatus, et ad perferenda
graviora paratus est,

He could have withdrawn his cheek from the smiter, Lam. 3 30
but he would fulfill the Prophecy.

He gives his cheek to him that smites him, he is filled with reproaches.

Private revenge Christ forbids us; Christ did not take it against his
adversary that smote him; he reproved it in Peter, he amended the maim that he
made, and healed his smiter.

But war is a public revenge, and the Magistrate bears the sword to that
purpose to execute revenge upon evil doers.

Vengeance is Gods, and where he commits the trust of execution thereof, as
he does to the Magistrate, there it is lawful.

This clears many other like objections, as that, Qui gladio ferit, Lam. 11.
gladio peribit, He that smites with the sword, shall perish by the sword: we
must recompense to no man evil for evil.

For all this is meant of our revenge; but the revenge of the Magistrate is the
vengeance of God, because he is Gods Minister.

Isay foretold that in the time of the Gospel, Isa. 2.4.
they shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into
pruning hooks; nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall
they learn war any more.



1. That this was a sign of the coming of the Messiah into the World; he was
born in a time of cessation from wars, when the Roman Monarchy had leisure to
leavie a taxation by the Poll; so when David had rest, then he thought of
numbering his People. 2. That this was fulfilled in the spiritual Peace and
Unity of the Church, collected now out of all nations of the World, Jew and
Gentile made one. 3. That this is the proper effect of the Gospel, where it was
embraced faithfully, to make Peace.
Under the name of Edom, we may understand all the enemies of the Truth of God
and Christian Religion: such as are Schismatics and Heretics, who
understanding not the mystery of Godliness, and Peace, do set their wits
against the Church, to corrupt the Truth therein deposited and professed, or to
disturb the quiet professors thereof.

1. Heretics.

These are our brethren by outward profession, 1. Heretics.
calling themselves Christians; but they see that we have gotten the
birthright, and the blessing from them, and therefore they hate us, and are
comforted against us, to destroy us.

The Church is Gods Israel, the children of the Promise, filij regni, filij
thalami, filij lucis: children of the kingdom, of the Bridechamber and of the
light.

The Ambassadors that are sent to stir up to war against those, be the
Ministers of the Word of God; for to this purpose we are sent forth to confirm
the brethren against those, to reconcile these to God: And we are commanded to
arise against these in battle.

The war and so the weapons with which we fight against these are not carnal,
but spiritual; the clear light of the Gospel which is the power of God to
salvation to them that believe, and the Truth of God which is strong, and
prevails against them that believe not.

It is time for us to join together as one man in battle against these:

Especially the Papists, whose Religion is ambition, whose piety is worldly
policy, whose zeal is combustion, whose faith is fury, who hide the Word of
Light in the darkness of an unknown tongue, to keep the people ignorant, that
they may not know Gods right hand from his left, to emplunge them in the flames
of their imagined Purgatory, that they may be well paid to release them thence.

They mingle the sacrament of Baptism with their own inventions which they
make acquivalent in virtue to the power of Gods ordinance.

The mangle the sacrament of the Lords supper by robbing the people of one half
thereof taking the cup from them.

They disable the sacrifice of Christ's sufficient satisfaction for sin, by
addition of humane merits of erogation, and super erogation.

They weaken the sole intercession of Christ by intrusion of more Mediators,
Angels, the Mother of our Lord, and Saints.

They shorten the free and full grace of God, which Christ himself from Heaven,
told Paul was sufficient by their lying doctrine of Free Will.

They flatter and abett some by their doctrine of indulgencies, which
attributes to the Pope power of pardoning sins past and to come.

They dishonor the holy sufficient Word of God, by acqui-ballancing with the
same humane Traditions and false Legends.

They destroy true and saving faith, by their false doctrine of implicit
faith, teaching that is enough to believe as the Church believes, not
declaring what the Church believes, and upon what ground their faith is built.

They maintain flat Idolatry, by teaching the worshipping of Images, and
praying to Saints.

And for the power which they give to the Pope against God in dispensing with
the breach of his Covenants, in coining new Articles of faith, in defining the
interpretation of Scriptures, in usurping authority over temporal Princes, to
enthrone and to dethrone at pleasure, to arm their natural subjects against
them; to animate Incendiaries, to abett treasons, to blow up States.

All these things, and many more call upon us, take arms and join our strengths
against this Edom, this red and hairy, and bloody enemy, whose mercies are
cruel.

The best weapon against this Kingdom of darkness is the Light of Truth; the
more we carry this Light about us, the more will the ignorant amongst them know
how they are abused and misled: For our war is spiritual, not against their
Persons, but against their Heresies.

2. Schismatics.

These also call us brethren, but they break the Unity and Uniformity of the
Church.

All the children of Peace must arise against these in battle: this also is a
spiritual war, and the sword of the spirit must be drawn, and used against
these to cut them off, as Saint Paul wishes, I would they were cut off that
trouble you,

Or if the Word of God cannot prevail with them, to convert them to peace.

The discipline of the Church, which Saint Paul calls his rod, must be used
against them, to cut them off from our congregations.

The Apostle calls them Leaven, and says, that a little leaven soureth the
whole lump.

So do Schismatics; for a few of them do corrupt many, and divert them from
the congregations whereof they are members, and distaste the established
Ministry to them, and set them in opposition to Authority, and at last tempt
them to separation.

Mr. Perkins upon the Article of the Holy Catholic Church, does learnedly
handle this point.



That our Assemblies are full of grievous blots and enormities.

He answers,

1. Either in Doctrine, 2. Or in manners.


1. Defects in Doctrine, 1. Either Errors praeter fundamentum, besides the
foundation. 2. Or contra fund, mentum, against the foundation.


He maintains that our Church of England does teach no Doctrine against the
foundation of Christian Religion.

2. For corruption in manners, he declares, that it cannot make a Church no
Church, but an imperfect Church: therefore Christ commands to hear them which
preach well, and live ill, as the Scribes and Pharisees which sit in Moses
chair.

England does hold Christ in word, but denies him in deed.



Denial of Christ, is Either in judgment. Or in fact.


To deny Christ in judgment, which obstinacy is against the foundation, and
makes a Christian no Christian.

To deny Christ in fact only, shows us to be weak and imperfect in our
profession of the Gospel; and the best of Gods servants cannot keep out of this
rank, because it is impossible for them that carry a body of sin, who do the
evil that they would not, to hold conformity of life and conversation with
their knowledge and good desires.

And truly the authors or the actors of chisme, do show much uncharitableness
in their separation from our Church; for the Apostles rule is, Be not unequally
yoked with Infidels: What concord has Christ with Belial? 2 Cor. 6.14.
What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols?

Wherefore come out from among them, and separate your selves, says the Lord.

And do they judge their brethren to be Infidels, the sons of Belial,
Idolaters, that they do separate from us?

Again, the same Apostle says,

If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to the wholesome words of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 6, 3.
and to the Doctrine which is according to godliness, from such separate your
selves.

Can any lay this to the charge of our Church, that we offend in this kind? It
is true, that nothing is more easy then to accuse, but men and Devils cannot
prove this against our Church.

The Church of the Jews in the times immediately after Christ's Ascension was
the Church of God; neither did Christ forsake that Church in his time, nor the
Apostles after him.

But when certain men heardened and disobeyed, Acts 12.9.
speaking evil of the way of God, Saint Paul departed from them, and separated
from them, and separated the Disciples of Ephesus; from certain Schismatiques
he separated, but not from the Church.

Therefore arise against such in battle, detect them to public authority seek
their amendment, or if that cannot be compassed, prosecute the ridding them out
of the Church, for those Edomites do not love the welfare of our Jerusalem, and
they will not know those things which belong to peace, The way of peace they
have not known.

Under the name and title of Edom, we may understand the whole Kingdom of
Satan; and Israel the Church of God stirred up by the ambassadors, the
Ministers of God, to arise against it in battle.

For this, is our life called a Warfare, because we fight against Satan the
professed enemy of the Church, and against all his forces.

Both his outward forces in the world And his inward forces. Corpus peccati,
the body of sin.
The holy Apostle Saint Paul knowing the danger of the elect, does not only
awake us to fight, and gives us his own example, so fighting not as one
beats the air:

But he prescribes us to a fit armor, Ephesians. 6.19. etc.
and teaches us how to put it on, that we may be able to defend our selves,
and to resist Satan.

This is no power of our own, but our strength in the Lord, and in the power of
his might.

3. To come nearer home, as God told Rebecca, when Jacob and Esau were yet in
her womb there striving; Genesis 25.23.
there be two Nations in thy womb: so Saint Paul will tell you that there is in
every regenerate man two opposite forces;

The flesh and the spirit, and rhese strive; the spirit has God put into us to
rule, the flesh rebelleth against the spirit.

Therefore to will is present with us, but we are not able to do to good that
we would; yea, he confesses that he cannot do the good that he would, and that
he does the evil that he would not.

The spirit of God is Gods Ambassador, calling upon our spirits to arise
against the flesh in battle; and that is the true use of all Doctrines of
mortification, and of godly life, to strengthen the spirit against the flesh,
to weaken the power of the body of sin. And for this Saint Paul did bring his
body in subjection; for such is the nature of this fight, that the more we
resist our natural and sensual desires, the more we advance the force of our
spirits against our flesh.

And it a most glorious conquest for any servant of God to overcome himself.

Obadiah verse 2. Behold, I have made thee small among the Heathen: thou art
greatly despised.


2. The effect of this judgment.

1. From God. I have made thee small, etc. 2. From God and man. Thou art
greatly despised.
1. From God. Three circumstances aggravate the judgment.

1. Edom is made small. 2. Made small among the Nations. 3. I have done it.
2. From God and man. 2. Circumstances.

1. Thou art despised. 2. Thou art despised greatly,
Before I handle these parts, two things offer themselves to consideration,
which make easy way unto the understanding of the Prophecy.

1. The preface to this Prophecy. Behold. 2. The phrase thereof.
1. The Preface. Behold.

Whereby he opens the eyes of the Idumaeans, to look into their future
estate; it is a word much used in holy Scripture, and ever makes way to some
worthy and considerable matter; here the Lord would have the Idumaeans take
notice of the judgment and wrath to come.

Not that they should repent them of their sins, and turn to God, for God
hated them, and set his face against them, and they had hearts that they could
not repent: but hence we learn,

Ezekiel must prophecy to those that will not receive him.

And thou shall speak my words unto them, Ezekiel. 2.7.
whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, for they are most
rebellious.

He gives a reason before;

Yet they shall know that there has been a Prophet amongst them.

God will have the ungodly know that he has tendered to them the means of
escape from his judgments by the ministry of his word, that they may have
nothing to plead for themselves in the day of judgment, that they may see, and
perceive, and confess that their perdition comes from themselves.

From whence we conclude, that to the reprobate all the means of grace are
altogether ineffectual to salvation; the light that is in them is darkness,
their knowledge swells them; their faith is presumption, their fear is
despair, their joy is carnal, their hope temporal. Their mind and conscience
is defiled: abominable, Tit. 1.15.
and disobedient, and to every good work, reprobate.

Of this justice of God against the reprobate, I can give no other account,
then that which the Apostle does yield;

He has compassion on whom he will, Romans 9 18
and whom he will he hardens.

Or if we would hear the same from the Son of God himself. To them it is not
given. And, even so O Father, Matthew. 13.11. Matthew. 11.26.
because thy good pleasure was such.

So he says, Behold, to them whose eyes in his justice he has shut; and he
says hear, to such whose ears in justice he has stopped, and he gives
warning of his judgments to them whom he hates, as in my Text.

O Lord, how unsearchable are thy judgments, and thy ways past sinding out!



The Elect of God shall find many impediments, and shall feel a great
reluctation of the flesh against the Spirit, let not such be faint-hearted, but
let them so fight, not as they that beat the air: and let them so run that they
may obtain.

2. The phrase of this prophecy of judgment is,

I have made thee small, Mal. 1.3, 4
thou art greatly despised.

For God says, That is done already, which yet is not executed.

But consider the ground laid in the beginning, Thus says the Lord,

The Lord to whom all time is present, and whose decrees give present
resolution of all things, though he suspend the execution thereof.

But it was not long before this commination was fulfilled upon Edom.

I hated Esau, and laid his mountains and his heritage waste for the dragons of
the wilderness.

Whereas Edom says, We are impoverished, but we will return and build the
desolate places:

Thus says the Lord of hosts, They shall build, but I will throw down; and
they shall call them, The border of wickedness, and the people against whom
God shall have indignation for ever.

Concerning the fulfilling of this prophecy, it was long ere it was perfectly
accomplished; for this was the work of sundry Nations, to effect the judgment
he^e denounced.

For, first they were wasted by the Chaldeans and carried into captivity; yet
it is clear that they returned many of them back again: then was it fulfilled
that is spoken before.

An Ambassador is sent amongst the Heathen, Arise ye: for first the Heathen
arise.

Then in the time of the Machabees.

Judas fought against the children of Esau in Idumeaa, 1 Match. 5.3.
at Arabatine, because they besieged Israel, and he gave them a great overthrow
and abated their courage, and took their spoils.

And again after this,

The Idumaeans having gotten into their hands the most commodious holds, 2 Mac
10.15, 16.
etc.

Then they that were with Machabaeus, made supplication and besought God that
he would be their helper, and so they run with violence upon the strong holds
of the Idumaeans:

And assaulting them strongly, they wanne the holds, and kept off all that
fought upon the wall, and killed no fewer then twenty thousand.

There was an escape then of nine thousand who had taken a strong castle: these
many of them by corruption of money made an escape, which cost the blood of
more then twenty thousand.

And so was fulfilled that other part of this prophecy, We also will arise
against her in battle.

Yet did not the Idumaeans sink, for they recovered strength, Josephus de bello
Jud. lib. 4. c. 6.
and did vex the city Jerusalem, and came against it with a great Army, being
by letters, and by a set oration of one called Jesus, entreated first to help
their brethren the Jews, then to lay down arms, and not to fight against them.

They brake into Jerusalem in the night with fury of war: Cap. 7.
and he says,

Templum redundavit sanguine:

Octo millia et quingentos mortuos dies invenit, 12 Millia nobelium periere ab
Idumaea trucidata after the destruction of Jerusalem, Lib 5. c. 1. Lib. 7. c. 28
and the dispersion of the Jews that remained of that cruel Massacre, wherein
the Conqueror left no cruelty undone; he says,

Horum furoris aemuli etiam Idumaei fuere: illi enim sceleratissimi peremptis
pontificibus, ne qua pars conservaretur pietatis in Deum, totum quod ex
Civitatis facie supererat abscidere.

Thus the Jews that remained after all these bloody wars dispersed, and do yet
continue in dispersion: but with promise of being recalled before the end of
the World: but the Edomites are now perished from the face of the earth, no
mention of their names is left in the World, no promise of their restitution,
so that this Prophecy is at last fulfilled, and has been many years
accomplished; so long was it before the performance hereof, and Judgment began
at Gods house; yet in the end it was executed in their final ruin upon the
earth.

This text calls all this done; for no length of time could evacuate the
Truth of God herein, which teaches us to look assuredly for all these things
which God has said shall come to pass; especially, The fall of Antichrist,
The calling of the Jews, The resurrection of the dead, The last judgment, and
everlasting Life.

Let us come now to the parts of this Text.

1. The effects of this judgment from God.

1. Edom must be made small.

Edom or Esau, though he lost the first blessing after he had sold his
birthright, yet he obtained a blessing of his father.

Behold thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, Gen 27.39 40.
and of the dew of Heaven from above.

And by thy sword thou shall live, and shall serve thy brother, and it shall
come to pass when thou shall have the dominion, that thou shall break his yoke
from off thy neck.

This blessing was a Prophecy of the greatness of Edom whose increase was such,
that Moses does rehearse that he was fain to depart from his brother Jacob and
dwell in Seir.

For their riches were more then that they could dwell together, Genesis 36.7.
and the land wherein they were strangers could not bear them, because of their
cattle:

They had many Dukes and Kings of Edom, Verse 31.
before there reigned any king over the children of Israel.

So that in greatness they out-stripped Jacob.

This greatness continued seven hundred year after the prophecy of Isaac till
Daniels time.

And he put garrisons in Edom: thorowout all Edom put he garrisons, 2 Samuel 8.15.
and all they of Edom became David's servants.

There God made them small.

Again, Amaziah king of Judah prevailed against them: he slew of Edom in the
valley of Salt ten thousand, 2 Reg. 14.7.
and took Selah by war. This made them small.

They suffered many changes, yet this is noted of them, that 1. They were
grown often very great, yet still God made them small. 2. That they were great
before Jacob, and continued so after Jacobs posterity were gone into
dispersion. 3. That now their memory is so extinguished on earth, that their
posterity is not known.


Let no man measure the favors of God by the access of his possession, by the
territories of his dominion, by the multitude of his men, by the force of his
strength: God gave all these things to Esau whom he hated.

Rather let men fortunate and prosperous in their ways, who have the desires
of their hearts satisfied, and whose paths be anointed with butter, suspect
that God has set them in slippery places. Vivunt inter laquies.

Let them know that their fullness does come of Gods open hand, aperit and
implet: and let them know that The Lord gives and the Lord takes away, and
therefore let them take out both Saint Paul's lessons:

I have learned how to abound, and how to want.

We are not to seek in our own times of examples of smalnes turned into
greatness, and of greatness again made small.

It is a judgment that David complained of, Thou have lifted me up, and cast me
down: how much more peace have they in their bosoms, that were ever small,
then they who having risen above others, are stooped beneath themselves, and
laid so low, that the foot of pride treads on them: down stout heart; there
is no perpetuity in things temporal.

Great Edom is made small, rough and boisterous Edom, that carries all by
strong hand, is made meek and tame.

2. Made small amongst the Heathen.

These were numbered among the Heathen, and amongst them they were great, they
separated from the Church of God, like the sons of sober and religious parents
that turn gallants and roarers; and amongst these they shine awhile; amongst
these Edom was made small.

Abraham had an Ishmael that was cast out among the Heathen.

Isaac had an Esau that put himself in amongst them; all the sons of Jacob were
Patriarchs, great Fathers of the Church.

Esau, where he rose to glory and greatness, there he sunk into smalnesse; the
eyes that saw him in his shining, saw him eclipsed.

3. God has done this; there be few that look so high when they are down, but
they do rather complain of evil fortune, or of some great wrong done to them
here below, failing of means, disertion of friends, or injustice in superiors.
The Heathen look to second causes, and to natural agents, they consider not
that it is God who lifts up, and casts down.

But God takes it upon himself, and would have Edom know that this is Dextra
Iehovae, the right hand of the Lord.

Others look high at first, and upon every degree of downfall, do charge God
with hard measure, and murmr at his uneven hand, as if he had not done them
right; which as Job says, is to charge God foolishly.

But let men take it how they will, God is the Author of the rising and falling
of the sons of men, of their growth and withering; can God hate, and his hatred
sit idle and look on? as his love is operative, so is his hatred: such is his
love, that all things work together for the best to them whom he has called;
Saint Augustine adds, etiam peccata, even their sins; another, etiam adversa
their adversary; and such is his hatred that all things work contrary to the
ruin of them whom he hates; etiam prosperitas, even their prosperity, for the
prosperity of fools does destroy them.

2. This judgment is aggravated by two circumstances, from God and man.

1. Thou art despised. 2. Greatly despised.
1. Despised.

The children of Edom had two great temptations to swell them, that is riches
and power; these they insolently abused, to oppression of their neighbors.
God, who powers contempt upon Princes, covered them with contempt: This is the
severest vengeance that pride fears; Edom that was highest and bore rule over
the Nations, and lived by the sword, is now made small; after this fall
follows contempt.

God has said it, They that despise me, shall be despised.

2. Despised greatly.

Pride will have a fall, it never falls lower here on earth, then when it
falls into great contempt,

1. Of God, that he turns away from them, or sets his face against them.

2. Of man, and that

1. When the Prophets of the Lord do set their faces against them, as in this
case.

Son of man, set thy face against Mount Seir, Ezekiel. 35.2
and prophecy against it; it is no small matter to have the Messengers of God
against us, which do carry his sure word of prophecy; for they speak from the
mouth of the Lord, and where they denounce the judgment of God against
impenitent sinners, whosoevers sins they retain, they are retained.

2. When the Lord has expressed his hatred, and pronounced his judgment, the
Church of God despises their power, and derideth their malice, saying, Thou O
God see it, for thou beholdest ungodliness and wrong to take the matter into
thy hand.

3. This makes it a great and full contempt, when they that served them, shall
be Lords over them, and their sword can no longer help them; so is Edom
despised among the Heathen; this is great contempt to have the contempt of God
and man.

You see their punishment.

These points of Doctrine do follow by just consequence.

1. That Gods enemies, though for a time they prosper and thrive in the world,
yet they shall by little be at last consumed.

The whole course of holy story runs very clear this way.

Cain, a runnagate, and many learned do think, after killed by Lamech.

Ishmael, every man's sword against him. Exodus 14.28. 2 Reg. 20.37


Pharaoh drowned in the red sea.

Senacherio slain by his own sons.

Haman hanged on his own gallows, H^st. 4 9.
which the Poet calls Art perire sua.

Nebuchadnezar turned beast. Dan. 4 30.


The Jews have Christ's blood on them and their children.

Herod eaten with worms. Act. 12.23


Judas went to his own place.

But in the execution of judgment, God does not all at once always.

Moses tells Israel, Deuteronomy. 7.21
God will root out these Nations before thee by little and little; Thou must
not consume them at once.

As Amos prophecieth. Amos 4.9
1. Blasting and mildew, then the Palmerworme, then the Pestilence, then the
sword, and at last as Sodom and Gomorrah.

So he destroyed Egypt with ten plagues, one succeeding another; he does not
empty his quiver all at once: so here are two points considerable.

1. He does destroy them. 2. Not all at once, but by little and little.
1. 2 These. 6 7
The reason why he does destroy them.

It is a righteous thing with God to render tribulation to them that trouble
you.

2. Psalm. 136.15.
When he makes inquisition for blood, he remembers the complaint of the poor.
His mercy endures for ever.

3. The enemies of the Church are Gods enemies. Exurget Deus and dissipentur
inimici sui, let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered. Out of the mouth
of babes and sucklings have thou ordained strength, because of thine enemies,
that thou may still the enemy, and avenger.

The Use.

1. It teaches us to exercise our patience in all afflictions as Christ says,
Romans 5.3. Rev. 14.12
Fear not them that can kill the body, etc. Patience brings forth experience,
and experience hope. Here is the patience of the Saints.



O Lord God the avenger, O God the avenger, Ps. 94 1.
show thy self clearly.

Dearly beloved avenge not your selves.

Romans 12.
and of thanksgiving to God, when the ungodly fall. The feast of Purim was kept
with joy for the fall of Haman, and the delivery of the Church.

There is great joy at the fall of Babylon.

Hest 9 17. Rev. 19.
to hear that the Lord Jesus comethwith thousands of his Angels; he will render
vengeance unto them with flaming fire, and punish them with everlasting
perdition, from the presence of the Lord, 2 These. 1.6, 7, 8.
and from the glory of his power.

Gather together on heaps O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces;
hearken all ye of far Countries, gird your selves, Isa. 8.9, 10.
and ye shall be broken in pieces; take counsel together, yet shall it be
brought to naught; pronounce a decree, yet shall it not stand; for God is with
us.

So let all thine enemies perish O Lord, but they that love him shall be as the
Sun when he rises in his might. Jud. 5.31.


2. But this is not done all at once, God does judge the wicked by little and
little ofttimes. The reason is.

suffer ye the tares to grow till the harvest. When the harvest is yellow, then
he puts in the sickle; and tarrieth, as David says,

Till their abominable wickedness be found worthy to be punished.

If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small. Prove. 24.10.


Therefore God said he wou^d not cast out before Israel any of the Nations that
Joshuah left, Jud. 2.20.
That through them he might prove Israel, whither they will keep the way of the
Lord to walk therein, or not.

wicked, and given them time for it; and because they will not repent, he does
whet his sword, and he prepares instruments of death.


This is our common fault, when any one offends us, that we strait fall to
cursing, wishing the pox and the plague, the vengeance and curse of God upon
them.

If our fury had the managing of Gods vengeance, who should live? take heed of
provoking the patience of God: that justice that thou do awake by thy
curses, owes thee a punishment for thy impatience and uncharitableness.

2. We are taught that the reward of pride is fall and contempt.

So David faith, thou Will bring down high looks: no sooner does God make the
great ones of the world small, but they are greatly despised.

It needs no proof where examples of great falls do fall so thick as they have
done on this side the Alps within these few years.

Never ran the stream and current of Suitours more strong to rising, and
growing, and grown greatness, then it ran away from the fall thereof, and
sought another channel.

And they that flattered these in their spring, and tendered them service, and
made them their gods in their fair weather, in their fall of leaf forsake them,
and then humble petitions turn to scornful libels.

I may say of our times truly, as Hecuba, Non unquam tulit

Documenta fors majora, Sen. Tio^s
quam fragili loco starent superbi.

Thus men lay by the walls the ladders that they climb by, and like those
people, of whom Boemus writes, they bless the rising, but curse the setting
Sun.

Every man seeks the face of the Ruler; so again, low hedges are trodden on.

This is the language of this Prophecy, and Edom is one example hereof: this
point is thoroughly pressed afterward.

Therefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.

There is a natural evil eye, which beholds the prosperity of rising men
with much envy; that eye is glad of the fall of great ones; observe the text
how soon it follows, I have made thee small.

Thou art greatly despised; so soon does contempt follow after a fall.

Let Edom be Satan, and let God bind him in chains, and give us faith to
resist and overcome him; how do we despise him, and scorn him disarmed?

Let the world be Edom, and let God declare the vanity and casualty that is in
all these things that Satan tempts men withal, and we shall see the servants
of God will despise it, and use it as though they used it not.

Let a man's own corruptions be the Edom, the lusts of the flesh that fight
against the soul, that make a man forget his piety to God, his charity to his
brother; but let God by his word reveal to us the body of sin, and by his law
humble us under the mighty hand of God: we shall despise and contemn the
desires of our heart, and we shall say, I will go and return to my first love,
for then I was better then now.

This making small is ruin to the ungodly, it is medicine to the just; the
narrow gate that leads to life, is easily entered by them whom God has made
small in their own eyes, and estimation of themselves.

Christ made himself of no reputation, not only ad sacrificium, to a sacrifice;
but ad exemplum, to an example, that we might walk as he walked.

Small threads will pass through a Needles eye, great cables are too big; God
resists the proud; a small womb contains us, a small tomb burieth us; and
never does the favor of God shine more on us, or the attending service of
Angels more minister unto us, then when the world despises our low growth, and
our contentment with our daily bread; there is much difference between those
that be humiles, humble, and those that be humiliati, humbled and between those
that be Humiliati ad vindictam, humbled to punishment, and those that be
humiliati ad medicinam humbled to medicine.

This prophecy is full for it, that God resists the proud, and pride shall
have a fall; and after the fall, follows contempt.

And what reward have they of all those things?

v. 3. The pride of thy heart has deceived thee, thou that dwell in the
clefts of the rock, whose habitation is high, that says in his heart who shall
bring me down to the ground?

Though thou exalt thy self as an Eagle, and though thou set thy nest among the
stars, thence will I bring thee down says the Lord.


2. Now he foretells how all the hopes of the children of Edom are dispersed.

1. They had hope in their own pride, ver. 3. 2. In the safety of their
situation, v. 3, 4, 5, 6. 3. In the strength and assurance of their
confederates, v. 7 4. In the wisdom, v. 8. 5. In the strength of their own
men, v. 9.
For the first, The pride of thy heart has deceived thee.

Thou did think better of thy self then there was cause.

Self-opinion is the bane of all virtue; for by it men become their own
flatterers, and build castles in the air, it is tumor cordis, the swelling of
the heart; this is of the world, and one of that cursed Trinity which undoes
the world,

The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, 3 John
2.16.


The cunning Serpent breathed this poison in our first Parents; for when Eva
heard him say, Similes eritis Deo, you shall be like unto God, she soon ate of
the forbidden fruit, and gave of the same to Adam.

Pride swells the heart, that it is not capable of grace, it fills it full
of it self, and leaves no room for Christ in that Inn.

Therefore one says to a proud man, Deus praesto est largiri sapientiam, sed
tu non habes ubi eam recipias.

Pride is contray to humility, for humility is not only virtue, but vas
virtutum, the receptacle of virtue; God gives grace to the humble; but pride,
like the woman that had filled all her vessels with oil, and at last vas
defuit, there wanted a vessel, it so fills the heart with the oil of
self-flattery, that there is no room left, no vessel to receive any grace.

It fills the firkins up to the brim.

Whatsoever good parts are in a man of woman, pride spoils all, and turns them
into vice, as one long ago truly and facetely rimed, Si tibi gratia, si
sapientia, formaque detur,
Inquinat omnia sola superbia si comitetur.


This is esteemed the Queen of vices, Isa. 8 2.1.
woe to the crown of pride.

It is one of the late repentances of the damned, beholding the happiness of
the just, and feeling the misery of their damdation.

What has our pride profited us? or what good has riches with our vaunting
brought us? Wisd. 5.


Satan is called a Prince ruling in the air, the god of this world, and that
Leviathan, who is a King over all the children of pride.

This vice opposes God, and transgresses and trespasseth the Majesty of God;
it began to all the other sins, it infected glorious Angels, and turned them
into Devils.

One observes that pride is no Recusant, it will come to Church; a man that
lives in the light of Religion, and has any moral goodness in him, will lay
down his covetousness, gluttony, luxury, idleness, envy, anger, for Service
time; but the proud person will bring pride to Church along with him: Two men
went up to the Temple to pray, one a proud Pharisee.

Pride mingleth it self with our best actions, and claims share with God, in
many of our good works.

It also fills us with contempt of our neighbor, not as that Publican non ut
alii not as other men; Edom lived by his sword, and awed men with his power,
and this did fill his heart with Pride.

Riches unsanctified make men proud, so Jack becomes a Gentleman, and
Mechanicals find some false pedegrees to enable them, or purchase places of
eminency, to put them before their betters: power unsanctified, makes men
boisterous, and heavy to the poor.

Learning unsanctified, and the very knowledge of Religion does breed pride,
and that makes contention, for pride is the root of Schism and Heresy.

This turns faith into presumption in some professors of Religion, but it
turns it into contention in others; in others into separation: in the
p^^phane, it breeds contempt of God and of his word.

Wisdom, knowledge, honor, riches, power with humility, no pride to corrupt
them, they are the ornaments of life, and the faculties of virtue, and the
factors of grace and the fear of God.

It is a good saying of Hugode Sancto Victore. Superbia mihi Deum aufert,
Invidia proximum, Ira meipsum, Pride depriveth me of God, envy of m^
neighbor, anger of my self.

Behold his soul which is lifted or puffed up in him, Hab. 2 4.
is not upright in him, but the just shall live by faith.

Pride in the wicked takes room and place of faith, for as faith in the Elect
does lay hold on all the gracious promises of God, which do concern this life
and a better:

So pride in the wicked makes them believe that they are worthy of all favors
of the time, and of all temporal graces; therefore the Prophet sets them in
opposition.

Therefore God begins to tax this people of their pride, teaching us, that
Pride is abominable to God.

Here we are compassed with a cloud of witnesses: It was pride that cast down
the Angels; that deceived Eva: that made Cain a murderer: Lamech a boaster:
Nimrod a hunter: Ishmael a scorner: Edom an oppressor, etc.

And the Pharisee that could put off the aspersion of other sins extorsion,
injustice, adultery, he could not add pride; of this every one has a share.

Diogenes wanted not his part, as Plato taxed him most justly; for it is so
insinuating a vice, as that they which labor most to express humility, cannot
but take some pride, even in that.

This pride of Edom deceived Edom.

Faith builds upon a rock, no storm can shake it, it is fortified by the
prayer of Christ, I have prayed that thy faith may not fail: Pride builds on
sand, the foundation is false, every wash and wave that beats on it, shakes it
and ruins it.

There is no creature that comes into the world more naked, and more disarmed,
then man does; yet none so proud, and therefore none so promising to it self as
man is: for as one says,

Colligit de vite spinas, pro uvis tribulos, for out of the good blessings of
God, he makes matter of self-opinion, and false glory.

This is a monstrous birth, Ex bono malum. Lumen quod in te est tenebrae sunt:
when thou think thy self more happy then others, and go in this transport
far, at last thou see that thou have been thine own impostour.

It is a good saying of Saint Gregory, That he that boasts, and is proud of
any of Gods gifts, se interficit medicamine, the medicine that should heal,
kills him.

That which all this while supported the glory of Edom, which was Edoms pride,
proves Edoms ruin, it has deceived him.

The Doctrines of the Church of Rome do maintain this pride of the heart,
therefore they are deceit full: for 1. They say we have Freewill to do good. 2.
They teach that a man in this life may fulfill the whole Law of God. 3. They
teach that a man may be justified before God by the merit of his works. 4. That
a man may overdo the Law, and do works of supererrogation, which may increase
the treasure of the Church, and may help out them that come short in good
works, by mending their store.


All these doctrines seem to maintain the pride of the heart, and to give flesh
wherein to rejoice: against which we oppose the doctrines of humility.

5. That the Sacraments do confer grace ex opere operato, and therefore
whosoever is made partaker of them, has the grace whereof they be seals.

First, So in Baptism, they affirm that original sin is quite done away, so
that infants baptized are certainly saved; and such as depart the world without
Baptism, are separated from the sight of God.

Whosoever receives their Sacrament of the Altar, does verily and really, and
carnally feed on the same body of Jesus Christ that was born of the Virgin
Mary, and suffered death upon the Cross.

Secondly, Neither do they only attribute this virtue to the Sacraments which
Christ ordained in his Church; but unto those five which they have since added,
and aequi-ballanced with the holy Ordinances of God.

1. For their Sacrament of Penance, they hold that the grace of Baptism may be
finally lost; and so to recover man again from that downfall, they have devised
this Sacrament. This is Trent divinity. Sess. 14. cap 1. Si in regeneratis
omnibus gratitudo erga Deum esset ut justiciam in Baptismo ipsius gracia and
beneficio susceptam tuerentur, non fuisset opus aliud sacramentum instituere.

But because this serves not, Penance does come in; for how else should they
bring in their Auricular Confession, by which they dive into men's hearts, and
their imposed power by which they dive into men's purses for satisfaction? And
this concludes with Ego te absolvo, I absolve thee; which does wash them as
clean from all sins past, as if they had never sinned.

2. For the Sacrament of Marriage, they do that but a little honor, save only
in belying it to be a Sacrament, and pronouncing Anathema to all that do deny
it to be a Sacrament ordained by God himself in Paradise.

First, But neither do they make it the means to convey any spiritual grace
which is the chief use of a Sacrament: but only make it a bare sign of the
conjunction between Christ and his Church. Secondly, Neither do they leave it
at large for all persons, but curse those that allow it to Priests. Thirdly,
Neither do they honor the state of Matrimony with equal honor to Virginity,
but pronounce Anathema to them that prefer it before Virginity.
3. For the Sacrament of Orders they make the Priest some amends, for therein
he has a Sacrament which the Lay partake not in to this they attribute the
power of Absolution the power of Binding, the power of turning bread into the
body of Christ; the power of conferring grace.

4. For Confirmation, that is another help to Baptism to relieve the
imperfection of Christ's Ordinance, Novam grati^m tribuit.

5. For Extreme Unction; as the Sacrament of Baptism is sacramentum
intr^euntium, the Sacrament of entrance; so this is sacramentum exeuntium, of
going out; this makes expeditiorem ad Coelum viam, a quick way to heaven; and
is to be administered in articulo mortis, the point of death, and it carries the
soul to heaven directly.

May we not behold the pride of the Church of Rome in all these, how they have
taken to their own hands the keys of David; they open and no man shuts,
they shut and no man opens.

It is in the power of the Priest to give, it is in the power of the people to
take salvation; and I do not see any great need of Jesus Christ in these
doctrines.

Neither can I find that they have left him any absolute, but only given him a
dependent power over them, that he cannot save without them.

Surely all this pride deceives them that put trust therein: for,

1. Against Freewill We oppose,

In Adam we all die, in Christ made alive. 1 Cor. 15.12.
And that this stretches to a corporal, spiritual and eternal death; here
the same Apostle, Ephesians. 2.2.
We are by nature children of wrath.

Saint Paul was a vessel of election, he had the spirit of God, he received the
office of his Apostleship immediately from God; yet he says, The good that I
would do, I do not; Romans 7.15.
the evil that I would not do, I do; whence is thence this Freewill?

2. Against the fulfilling of the Law of God in this life, Eccles. 7.20.
There is not a just man upon earth, who does good and sins not; and he that
breaks the least of the Commandments is guilty of all; James 3.2. Prove.
24.16.
that is, he is found a transgressor, legis, of the Law. But in multis
offendimus omnes, in many things we al offend. Justus cadit Septies.

3. Against Merit of works. Christ says,

They that have done all that is commanded, Luke 17.7 etc.
have done but their duty; servi inutiles, unprofitable servants.

And what proportion is there, finiti ad infinitum, of the finite to the
infinite? the works of men be finite, the glory of God is infinite.

All our righteousness is like defiled clothes. Isa. 94.6.


4, Against Supererogation.

That pride deceives them; for there is nothing to be done in obedience, or in
love to God, which is not commanded in his law, that requires all the soul,
and all the mind, and all the strength of both these; he that can find any
thing more to do, and can do it, may supererogate.

5. Concerning their Sacraments.

They dishonor Baptism and make it of no account, when they teach that the
grace of Baptism may be lost, and devise three Sacraments to help it.

Confirmation to strengthen it. Penance to renew it. Extreme Unction to perfect
it.
We acknowledge God powerful in his own Ordinance; we hold that the Grace
given to the Elect in Baptism is sealed and imprinteth an indelible character.

Confirmation is no more but a watering of the Plants which the ordinance of
God has grassed. Penance is no more but a stirring up of the grace given in
baptism: extreme unction is of no necessity, it was a temporal practice in
those times when the gift of healing was in the Church; instead whereof we have
prayers both in private and in public Congregations. The Grace of Baptism we
hold sufficient for the whole life to sanctify it, and in the Elect of God it
is not, it cannot be lost.

The true Sacrament of Confirmation is the Lords Supper, for that represents
to us the body that was broken for us, and the blood that cleanses us from all
our sins; that is often repeated to call us to repentance and to strengthen our
Faith.

If we flatter our selves, that the act of receiving does sanctify us, that is
a deceiving of our own hearts; for the flesh profits nothing, it is the
spirit that quickens.

We know that it may be eaten to condemnation; if there were carnal presence
of Christ, none could eat of it but he must be joined so with Christ as he
could not perish.

Lastly, for the Sacrament of orders, they deceive themselves in the pride of
their hearts, thinking that God has given them the Kingdom of Grace, and of
glory to bestow where they will.

We are the Ministers of God, sent forth as Gods Ambassadors, to carry his
pardon to such as are penitent: the pardon does set forth who are capable of
it; we are the Ministers of God to make tender of the means of Grace to such as
are capable of them.

We cannot make a man capable either of Grace or Salvation; yet none can have
either but by our Ministry: except God will show his Prerogative and say, Ecce
ego creabo rem novam in terra. Behold I create a new thing upon earth.

Humility deals truly with us: for it I be humble, I am content with that I
have, and think it more then I deserve.

I do not envy either greater graces in others, or higher places; for I know
mine own weck^dnesse, and my sins are ever before me: and therefore I think it
happy with me, and acknowledge it a great mercy, that I am not consumed.

I do not glory in mine own knowledge, but with Agur the son of Jakeh, I say,
and confess, Surely I am more brutish then any man, and have not the
understanding of a man: Prove. 30.2, 3.
I have neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy.

I do not glory in mine own righteousness, but looking to mine heart within,
and into my ways without, I say with Saint Paul, of Sinners I am chief.

An humble man has this advantage of a proud man, for he cannot fall, his
estate may grow both higher and fuller, but his heart keeps one point of
elevation, and is fixed at that; he never graspe^h for wind to hold it, he
hunteth not after opinion, he does not flatter himself with vain hopes.

Well may an humble man suffer from others, but he will keep so good a watch
upon his own heart, that that shall never deceive him by any information of
self-wisdome.

But I commend a Virtue that but half keeps a living man in the earth, says
the gallant; true, but as the root is deep embosomed of the earth which makes
the Free bear a storm the better.

But this keeps men from putting forth themselves, where they may exercise
their other virtues. I but it joyeth all well-affected, that Church and Common
wealth abounds so in choice, that there is no need of me.

And those whom pride puts forth have an evil edition.

2. Their next confidence was in the siituation of their dwelling, resembled to
an Eagles building her nest in the clefts of a rock on high. So there meets to
make up their confidence, strength and height of dwelling.

That is their confidence, and that is dispersed in the fourth verse,

Thence will I bring thee down says the Lord.

This opinion of the strength of an impregnable habitation has deceived many.

After David had reigned seven years in Hebron, The King and his men went to
Jerusalem to the Jebusites the inhabitants of the land, 2 Samuel 5.6.
which spoke unto David saying, except thou take away the blind and the lame,
thou shall not come in thither, Thinking David cannot come hither.

The Hebrews have made a figurative construction of these words, namely that
the Jebusites did preserve two Images, the one of Isaac, who was blind, the
other of Jacob, who was lame, these two Isaac and Jacob made a Covenant with
Abimilech, in which League they comprehended the Iebusites; therefore the
league must be broken, which was made with Isaac and Jacob, if they did come
thither to remove the Iebusites.

But this is vain and fabulous.

The true meaning is, that the Iebusites did think their hold so strong, that
so long as there were any men therein, (though blind and lame) they would be
able to defend the place against David.

But that hope was dispaired; for ver 9. David dwelt in that Fort, and called
it the City of David, etc.

The like Example we have of Babylon.

Here her in her ruff and in the pride of her heart, Thou have said in thy
heart, Isa. 14.13:
I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my throne among the stars of God: I
will sit also upon the mount of the Congregation, in the sides of the North:

I will ascend above the heights of the clouds.
I will be like the most high.
Which pride of heart smarted in them; for it follows, yet thou shall be
brought down to Hell, to the sides of the pit.

I deny not but this is literally to be understood of Babylon; Dr. Reyn^^. on
Obed.
but it troubles me that any learned man of our days should charge so many
great judgments as have applied this, to the (...) of the Angels with
unskilful application thereof. I know,

The learned and gravest judgments have gone that way, as far as we have any
thing written of the fall of Angels.

And men of yesterday do not well to impute unskifulnesse, to such expert
Scribes.

But in the posthumous writings of great learned men, the publisher may shuffle
in some of his own brann amongst their Wheat.

For understand this either literally of Babylon, or allegorically of the
Angels that fell, either of them thought their dwellings impregnable, and
therefore safe.

Jerusalem called the joy of the whole earth, was compassed so with mountains,
that the prophet to express the safety of the Church, resembles it to
Jerusalem.

As the mountains are about Jerusalem, Psa. 125 2
so is the Lord round about his people, etc.

They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount-Sion. ver. 2.


Yet we know how it was destroyed.

David was gone far that way in presuming upon the safety of his person, and
state;

Dixi, nunquam movebor. I said I shall not be removed, thou Lord of thy
goodness have made my mountain so strong.

All which examples and all experience, meets in one point of Doctrine, that
it is a vain confidence to trust in the strength of our state and dwelling on
earth.

A full proof of this truth we find in the example of the Philistims Garrison,
for

Between the passages, by which Jonathan sought to go over to the Philistims
Garrison, there was a sharp rock on the one side, 1 Samuel 14.4.
and a sharp rock on the other side.

Yet Jonathan climbed up on his hands and on his feet, ver. 13.
and his Armor-bearer after him, and they fell before Jonathan, etc.

The reason of this is given by God himself, I will bring thee down says the
Lord.

The Lord takes on him to bring down high looks, and whosoever be the
instrument and means of their overthrow, it is the Lords doing.

In this very example in my Text, God claims the glory of Edoms ruin; for
the Prophet asks who it is that comes from Edom, and why his garments be
red? It is answered, I have trod the wine press alone* Isa. 63.1.
there was not one with me.

Which prophecy looks two ways* both to the destruction of Edom in the
letter, which God assumeth to himself as his own work.

And specially to the kingdom of Satan, which Christ in the blood of his
passion did alone conquer.

We had a fair example hereof in Eighty eight; the invincible Armado of Spain,
then our enemy, now our reconciled friend, came forth in the strength of ships
and Ordnance, and men, and promised themselves the conquest of this Land: they
said we will rejoice and divide Sichem, and meet out the valey of S^ccoth. God
gave us victory, and declared that no strength prevails against the Lord.

Therefore let no man trust in the strength of his dwelling: we have an Island
encompassed and moted about with the Sea, walled in with sands and rocks, and
shelves, which makes the passage to us full of dangers, and is a great
security to our land; yet have the Romans, the Danes, and the Normans conquered
this land.

Therefore our trust is not in the strength of our dwellings, but God is our
rock; on the clifts of this rock we dwell safe, so that Faith, and not
presumption do build our neast. To him if we address our prayers, to him if we
give the Sacrifices of praise, if to him we perform the duties of obedience,
who can harm us? God of his goodness has made our mountain so strong that we
need not fear what man can do against us.

The trust of Edom was vain, and the vanity thereof is described in the
miserable wast that was made therein.

Ver. 5. If theieves come to thee, if robbers by night (how art thou cut off?)
would they not have stolen till they had enought? If the Grape-gatherers come
to thee, would they not leave thee some Grapes?

V. 6. How are the things of Esau searched out? How are his hid things sought
up?


The words do express the full ruin of Edom, for all his strong habitation.

Thieves that rob an house by night, do not carry away all; and they that
gather Crapes nearly, the Law requires to leave some clusters for the poor,
the fatherless, and the Widow.

But in the sacking of Edom, Lev. 19.10
there should be a carrying away of all in sight, and a curious search for all
hidden things; there should be nothing left.

Neither men nor goods should be concealed, but the eye of search should find
them out all.

There should neither be a satiety in their enemies, nor a compassion; neither
fullness, nor pity should exempt any from spoil.

That makes the Prophet so patheticall, that he interposeth this admiration,
How art thou cut off?

In the Prophecy of Jeremiah, it is added for an interpretation of this Text,

I have made Esau bare, I have uncovered his secret places, and he shall not be
able to hide himself; his seed is spoiled, Jer. 49.10.
and his brethren and his neighbors, and he is not.

This is not to be understood so as if the Nation and name of Edom should cease
for ever upon this vastation, but for a time; for they were again to build, and
were again to pluck down, as Malachy prophesied.

But in the end there should be nothing left of Edom, his very name should be
forgotten upon earth even as it is at this day; for who can say this is the
seed of Esau?

From hence. 1. We are taught that where God comes to the spoil, there is no
secret and close receptacle, either for the persons or for the wealth and
treasures of men, but he will search it out and lay it open; their bellies be
full of hid treasures, those bellies will he rip up, and into those secret
parts, shall his search penetrate, nothing shall be safe from it.

As in the fury of the wars of the Jews, we read that some of the Jews
having no other means left to preserve something to relieve their wans,
swallowed certain pieces of gold to keep them from the hand of the enemy, which
coming to the ears of the Roman soldiers, they ripped up many of the Jews
bellies to seek for gold.

Edom dwelt in Mount Seir amongst the rocks, and many of their dwellings were
in rooms hewed out of the hard stone, yet all their secret cabines were
searched and spoiled.

Ishboseth is not safe on his bed, nor Ehud, in his Parlour, Whither shall I
fly from his presence? says David.

God himself has spoken to this purpose, I will slay the last of them with the
sword, Amos 9.1.
he that flies shall not fly away, and he that escapes of them shall not be
delivered.

Though they dig into hell, thence shall my hand take them; though they climb
up to heaven, Ver. 2.
thence shall my hand bring them down.

And though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, Ver. 3.
I will search and take them out thence; and though they may be hid from my
sight in the bottom of the sea, Ver. 4.
or go into captivity thence will I command the sword and it shall slay them,
and I will set mine eyes upon them for evil, and not for good.

Those searchers of Edom be of Gods sending, and they are his privy search, he
will bring to light things hidden in darkness.

Use.

Trust not to the secret treasures of ungodliness, not to the goods thou have
said up for many years to come; there is nothing so secret but shall be laid
open.

Gods search is not like Labans; he searched all the places but where Rahel
sat; but God leaves no place unsought.

If the secret store escape, fures, persodiunt and furantur. Yet there is tinea
and arugo, the moath and the rust, and if nothing else, Tempus edax rerum; time
the consumer of all things.

For so says the Wiseman, there is a time to gather, and a time to scatter.

Let us not be too much in love with these things that we possess here; we
know that when our Augustus Caesar began his reign here over us, all
neighboring and remote Nations offered him peace, and he accepted it, and
turned all our swords into sights; I need not speak figuratively.

Much armor was turned into Utensils for domestical uses, and then there was
no noise abroad of hostility, even then in the peaceful time of the Church and
Commonwealth, the religion of Rome stirred up certain searchers, that dug
into the bowels of the earth, and their hunger after Protestant blood, brake
through strong walls, and there heaped up such instruments of massacre, as
would have searched our hidden things.

Those thieves would never have had enough, those Grape-gatherers would have
left never a cluster to relieve the poor Church; thy would have rooted up Vine
and all, and have laid the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts desert and waste.

These were Papists, the ministers of hell, this was Religion falsely so
called, the zeal of furies; such thieves lurk in many several corners of the
land; such Grape-gatherers hide themselves under the shade of our vine; let all
that love the peace of Jurusalem take heed of them; our houses, closets nay our
sellars are not safe from them; they will seek out our hidden things, if they
can take advantage against us.

Against this Edom let us bend our forces; and the idolatry and superstition,
and ignorance, and imposture of that Religion, let us search out and detect.

It is his Majesty's express command, that in every parish the sworn men do
search for Recusants, that forsake all our Churches, and for our own
malecontent Professors that love any Church better then their own.

He would separate the clean from the vile, and the peaceable from the
factious, Edom from Israel; for we hold nothing in safety, we can hide nothing
out of sight, so long as those searchers and underminers be abroad; the peace
and honor and safety of the Church is their prey they hunt after.

2. We are taught, what a fearful thing it is to fall into the hands of the
living God; when he plucketh his hand out of his bosom, he smites home, as he
says,

Affliction shall not arise the second time; he calls himself in his Law, a
jealous God, his jealousy burns like fire.

He can give Edom high and strong mountains for his habitation, he can give him
the fat of the earth, and the dew of heaven, and let him multiply on the earth
exceedingly, he can forbear him in his wickedness and cruelty for a long time.

But when he comes to execute judgment, his right hand will find out all his
enemies, he will not leave a place or corner unsearched, but he will cut off
head and tail, branch and root, in one day, for his hand is not shortened, but
is stretched out still.

Why then does the pride of our hearts deceive us flattering us that all shall
be well with us, though we walk in the lusts of our own hearts; though pride
disguise us in our clothing, though gluttony fill us up to the throats, though
drunkenness stagger us, and our oaths and blasphemies fly up as high as heaven;

Has God forgotten to be righteous, and is his judgment seat turned all to
mercy, that we dare him with our crying sins, and awake his vengeance with our
abominable impieties?

Can we sin the sins of Edom, and not smart with their punishment? he has a
curious and searching eye, he has looked upon our works, he has set our sins
before him, our secret sins in the sight of his countenance.

First, his eye searches out the sins of men then his right hand searches out
all his enemies; if he be angry, yea but a little, blessed are all they that
put their trust in him.

They shall say one to another, Come and see what desolations he has made in
the earth: and as it is in my text, How are they cut off! but peace shall be
upon Israel.

3. Out of the manner of speech and phrase of this Prophecy against Edom, I
observe the use that all ages of the Church must make of the examples of Gods
judgments upon other persons, and Nations before us, recorded in Scripture or
in story registered, for the benefit of after times. For, 1. He interposeth this
clause of admiration, How art thou cut off! As declaring and admirable
judgment to be executed upon them, enough to strike all that see it, or hear
of it with fear. 2. By a comparison of dissimilitudes he shows that Thieves
and Vine-robbers shall be merciful men in comparison of them that shall fight
the Lords battails against Edom. For they shall leave somewhat behind them,
these wasting depopulators of Edom shall leave nothing. 3. He says not
categorically and positively the things of Esau are searched out, his hid
things are sought up; but in a more patheticall language of amplification, by
way of question, How are the things of Esau, searched out! and resuming the
matter but with addition and amplification, How are his hid thing sought up?


Which questions do put it upon us to take the judgment of God upon Edom into
a serious consideration.

It is a question amongst great learned Divines of former ages which was the
greatest miracle that ever Christ wrought whilst he lived upon earth.

St. Jerome answers, some think the raising of Lazarus: others the giving
sight to the blind: others the voice that was heard at his Baptism: others his
transfiguration: but he for his own judgment, he thinks that the whipping of
men that bought and sold in the Temple, twice by him performed, was the
greatest of all his miracles.

For that a man so weak in his own person, so despised of men, so opposed by
the Merchants of the Temple, should play Rex in the Temple, and should there
execute judgment, and subdue the hearts of so many men, who thought they did
well, and had some color to defend what they did. And that they should without
resistance suffer the lash, and abandon the place.

St. Origin does admire this miracle of his justice, as declaring him to be
God, as David says. God is known by executing judgment, Quo domantur hominum
ingenia, Whereby the wits of men are subdued.

Therefore when the Judgments of God are preached, let men fear. The
doctrines of Paul were soft and gentle, when he spoke of righteousness, and
temperance; but when he spoke of the Judgment to come, Felix trembled, but it
is probably thought, that that last doctrine of judgment to come, put him into
that quaking and shaking fit, and made the earth to quake within him.

Therefore the Prophet David having showed what search God makes for sin,
adds, Psa. 50.22


Now consider this, you that forget God least I tear you in pieces and there
be none to deliver.

His judgments are over all the earth, it is a meditation for the Sabbath, it
is proper for the day.

And David says, Thou have made me glad through thy work. Psa. 92.4.
One of his works is of judgment.

When the wicked spring as grass, Ver. 7. Ver. 9.
and when all the workers of iniquity flourish, it is that they shall be
destroyed for ever.

For lo thine enemies O Lord, lo thine enemies shall perish, all the workers
of iniquity shall be scattered.

This is matter of comfort for the Church of God, it is joy in the tabernacles
of the righteous; for they say the right hand of the Lord, brings mighty
things to pass.

It serves also to mingle some trembling with their joy, and some fear with
their faith, to keep it from overgrowing to presumption; therefore the Elect of
God upon consideration of the severe judgments of God, do feel in themselves
a renewed fear of the Majesty of God, which humbles them as Habacuk confesses.

When I heard, my helly trembled, my lights quivered at the voice, rottenness
entered into my bones, and I trembled in my self, that I might rest in the day
of trouble. Hab 3 16.


This is the sweet fruit of that consideration, for it prepares rest for the
souls of them that fear the Lord.

Therefore let fortunes and times delicate minions, the daughters of ease, and
plenty, which study nothing but trim and bravery, and wast the precious
moments of time, which should be spent in the contrite repentance of their
sins, in the curious dress of their bodies,

Let them read the judgment of God upon the daughters of Sion; see how fine
they were, and how God threatening them with the scab with discovery of their
nakedness, Isa 3.16.
with stink, with baldness, with devesting, with sackcloth.

Let the drunkards of our time, hear what God threatened Ephraim, Isa 28.3.
The Crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim shall be trod under foot.

Let the Schismatical resisters of authority, which despise Moses their King,
Number. 1^.1
and Aaron their Priest, and think much to be subject to the Ordinances which
are set down, remember Miriam the sister of Moses, who resisting Moses, was
punished with a Leprosy and though Aaron besought God for her, could not be
healed till she had been shut out of the Camp seven days.

Read and study holy Scriptures; whatsoever is there written, is for our
learning; our God is the same, and his years fail not; he has the same eye
that once he had, to find out sinners: he has the same hatred that once he had
to sin, he has the same Justice that once he had to censure it, and the same
right hand to execute his wrath.

All Scriptures will tell you that he does it severely; his sword is sharp, and
his arm is strong: O Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

Ver. 7. All the men of thy confederacy, have brought thee even to the border:
The men that were at peace with thee have deceived thee, and prevailed against
thee: They that eat thy bread, have laid a wound under thee, There is no
understanding in them.


The third confidence of Edom diappointed.

This point is Rhetorically amplified, 1. In the persons in whom Edom trusted,
2. In the failing of them.


The persons are called: 1. Men of their confederacy, such as had entered into
League with them, saying your friends shall be our friends, your enemies shall
be our enemies, we will engage our strength mutually with you, we will seek our
good in the common good of both; as in the Proverbs, one purse, one Army. 2.
The men that were at peace with her, that had promised them love from
themselves, and all offices of humanity. 3. They that eat thy bread: Such as
did communicate with them in the necessities of life, as Judas did with Christ,
Commensales convivae, Table Guests.


Their failing is also amplified.

1. They have brought thee even to the border that is, whilst Edom trusted to
their help, they came forth of their strong holds to meet with their enemies,
in the borders of their territories, who but for their trust in them, might
have been more safe in their own Fortresses. For trusting to their help, whom
they found perfidious, they left their habitations, and strong Castles empty to
keep the enemy from coming upon their borders: whilst their false friends
expose them to invasion, and their gates to direption, in their absence.
Relinquentes and prodentes.

Thus they gave their enemies advantage against them to keep them from
returning again into their strong holds.

2. They have deceived thee, and prevailed against thee. For they that were
trusted as friends to Edom, betrayed them to their enemies, and fought against
them, and prevailed.

3. They have laid a wound under thee, that is, they have secretly conveied
under thee an instrument to wound thee; therefore others read posuerunt
insidias subter te. Declaring how cunningly their false friends had concealed
their malice, and how dangerously they had laid their plot, for the overthrow
of Edom, so near as under them, even to blow them up. Like our Powder Traitors;
for they laid wounds under the Parliament House, instruments and means to
wound and to destroy all.

And therefore he concludes of Edom, There is no understanding in him, that is
Edom was blinded, and be fooled with this vain confidence, to trust in the
perfidious friendship of their false friends.

From this place these Doctrines arise.

1. It was Edoms sin against the first Commandment to put confidence in man,
and therefore God punishes them by those whom they trusted. From whence
arises this Doctrine,

That God punishes one sin by another: The sin of injury and oppression of
Israel, by the sin of false confidence in men.

2. Consider against whom Edom offended, even against Israel their brother; for
was not Esau Jacobs brother? therefore God punishes their perfidiousnesse to
their brother, with the perfidiousnesse of their friends to them. From whence
we conclude,

That God requiteth the wicked with the same measure which they have meated to
others.

3. Whereas the friends and confederates of Edom, turn enemies and Traitors to
them, we conclude, that

There can be no true peace, nor bonds of love between wicked men.

4. From all these Antecedents we may conclude, that those who trust in men,
have no understanding.

1. Doctrine, God punishes one sin by another.

Edom first sinned against the second Table of the Law, in wrong and violence,
and then he sinned in vain confidence in man, against the first Table, and God
by this severe sin punished the first.

It is the manner of Satan, after a speeding temptation to one sin, to suggest
another to hide, or to defend and bear up the other, our lying comes in to
conceal fraud, as in the case of Ananias and Saphira.

And so cursing and swearing come in to maintain the credit of a lie, as in
Peter's denial of his Master.

So there needs a great many lies to maintain one, if interrogatories do press
the Liar far.

If it were no more but so, that one sin does drive us into another, even in
this consideration, one sin does punish another, because the more sin is
committed, the more punishment is deserved; but this is much more, that sin
is punished with sin.

Thus Edom first breaks the second Table of the Law, in doing wrong to his
brother, and fearing that this will one day cost blows, he sins another sin
against the first Table, and forsakes the confidence in God, and puts his
trust in men, which turns to his utter ruin and destruction.

So even the Saints of God fall, as David; for his adultery began to defile
him, and then he stained himself with the blood of his wel-deserving and
faithful Subject; this is the Plot of David, in the matter of Vriah.

The reason why sin should be the punishment of sin, is because nature being
once corrupted, and grace withdrawn, we are, then prone to those defections
from God, which do more and more corrupt us. And that is a great punishment, S.
Paul clearly shows it in the degrees thereof.

1. When they knew God, Lam. 1.21
they glorified him not as God 2. They were not thankful. 3. They became
vain. 4. Their foolish heart was darkened.
Thus did they run out of one sin into another, and at last.

Therefore God gave them up to uncleanness, Ver. 24. Ver. 26.
through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between
themselves, for this cause God gave them up to vile affections, God gave them
up to a reprobate mind, Ver. 28.
to do those things which are not convenient.

Sin in the heart is a fire in the bosom; Prove 6.27.
Can a man take fire in his bosomed, and his clothes not be burnt? Can a man go
upon ^ot coals an his feet not be burnt?

St. Gregory has a good description of sins.

1. Some are simple in themselves sins, such is every thought, word and, work
against the Law. 2. Some sins are causes of more sins, as surfeiting and
fullness causes luxury and uncleanness of the flesh. 3. Other sins are the
punishment of former sins, as in my Text. Edom his former sin is punished by a
latter. 4. Other sins are the punishment of former sins, and the causes of
latter, as in David,
His idleness was punished by his Adultery, and that Adultery was the cause of
murder.

But here is a Quaere.



To this our answer is, that sin may be considered two ways.

2. As it is in the effect thereof the just punishment of man.
God is not the author of sin as it is a pollution, but being committed, God in
the even course of his justice turns it into punishment of man.

And man is punished says Thomas Aquinas three ways.

1. In praecedentibus, because God withdraws his preserving grace from a
sinner, and makes the means of his preservation ineffectuall.

For to the just he faith, I will not leave thee nor forsake thee; but to the
reprobate he shuts up their eyes, ne videant he stops their ears ne
audiant: he hardens their hearts and leaves them to their own corruptions to
be wrought upon.

2. In concemitantibus; these are either.

1. Inward, the pollution of the heart. 2. Outward, in the calamities of life.
3. In subsequentibus: that is the unrest of the conscience, and distraction of
the mind.

Excellent and full to this purpose is the example of the Prodigal; for 1. God
withdrew his grace from him, and left him to take his vicious and luxurious
courses in the world till he had spent all and was cast forth. 2. God punished
him in his mind, by giving him over for a time to the pollution of sin; he
outwardly punished him with contempt and beggary and famine. 3. He punished him
in his Conscience with the remorse of his sin which wrought with him so
effectually that he repented him of his sin and returned to his Father; so this
punishment was not ad amandationem, but ad emendationem.


Et que paena fuit facta est medecina. Thus sin in the Elect may be the
punishment of sin to their great good, and the recovery of them again to God;
as in David's example, and in the example of Peter.

But the reprobate are forsaken of grace, polluted in their minds, and
tormented in their consciences, and feel crosses and afflictions in the flesh,
and these be rods of their own making, wherewith God scourges them, sending
the Angel of Satan to buffet them.

The most dangerous and damnable estate is, of those who when they have sinned,
do not love the word of God, which should restore them; like those froward sick
persons, that refuse the physic that should heal them.

The word of God is plain-dealing, and tells every one of his faults, and
reveals to them the justice of God.

When men begin to take exceptions at the Word, and quarrel with the food and
medicine of life, and to say, Durus est hic sermo, this is an hard saying, then
sin grows an heavy punishment to them, and works their destruction.

hear what the spirit speaks to the Churches: let them not consult with
flesh and blood, but let them order their ways according to the word of God.

Let no burden seem so heavy to them, as the weight of their own sins.

Let no annoyance seem so stenching as the turpitude and pollution of their own
sins.

And then Come unto me ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you.

Come to me, you that are defiled and polluted with your manifold corruptions,
and I will wash you clean in my blood, says the Redeemer of men.

When our sins have broken our hearts, and made us contrite, and the smart of
them has made us weary of them, then shall we see them fastened to the Cross
of Christ, and the grace of God will be sufficient for us.

Edom dealt perfidiously and treacherously with Israel; therefore their
confederates and professed friends deal so with them.

It is Christ's rule of Justice.

With what measure you meet, M^t. 7.2 2
it shall be measured to you again, proved.

Woe to thee that spoylest, Isa, 33.1.
and wast not spoiled, and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not
treacherously with thee; when thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be
spoiled, and when thou shall make an end to deal treacherously, they shall
deal treacherously with thee.

It is the threatening of God.

Ye shall not afflict the widow or fatherless child: Ex. 22.1^2
if thou afflict them in any wise, and they cry at all unto me, I will surely
hear their voice,

And my wrath shall wake hot, and I will kill you with the sword, and your
wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless.

David smarted in this kind.

He defiled the wife of his faithful servant Vriah, Absolon his son defiled
his fathers Concubines in the sight of all Israel.

Cain feared this judgment so soon as he had killed his brother Abel; Genesis 4 14
for he said presently, it shall come to pass, that every one that finds me
shall slay me.

Adoni-Bezek confessed this justice of retaliation executed on him, for they took
him, and cut off his thumbs and great toes, and he said,

Threescore and ten Kings having their thumbs and toes cut off, gathered their
meat at my table; Ver. 23. Jude 1.6.
as I have done, God has requited me

So says God to the Chaldeans,

Because thou have spoiled many Nations, Heb 2.8.
all the remnant of the people shall spoil thee.

And God made this judgment good against Amalek, for they sought to destroy
Israel, and God by Israel destroyed them.

Samuel said to Agag their King.

As thy sword has made women childlesse, so shall thy mother be childlesse
among other women; 1 Samuel 1.5 33.
so he hewed him in pieces before the Lord.

Ahab slew Naboth, and himself was slain. 1 King. 21.19.
Jezabel shed Naboths blood; Thus says the Lord, In the place where dogs
licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick even thy blood also. The dogs shall
eat Jezabel by the walls of Iezreel. As Solomon threatens,

They shall eat the fruit of their own way, Prove. 1.31.
and be filled with their own devises.

The Apostle calls this righteousness in God;

It is a righteous thing with God, 2 These. 1.6
to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you.

The word is decomposite, (...), and signifies a retribution contrary to them,
that in the same they shall be Patients wherein they have been Agents.

From this fountain of justice comes that Law judicial, Ex. 21.24.
an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth: which Law Christ did not abrogate but
interpret, and put it into the power of the Magistrate where it ought to be,
taking it away from private persons.



Let the Adulterer hear Job. If my heart have been deceived by a woman, or if
I have laid wait at the door of my neighbor, let my wife grind to another,
Job 31.9, 10.
and let other men bow down upon her.

Let the cruel oppressor of his brethren, look to be oppressed in himself, or
in his posterity.

If the daughter of Babel oppress, Blessed shall he be, Psa. 137.8.
that rewards thee as thou have served us.

It it Gods own word. He that honors me, him will I honor; but he that
despises me, shall be despised.



Here has been much confederacy between Edom and other Nations, they were men
of Peace they did eat and drink together, yet even those turned perfidious to
Edom, and betrayed him.

Christ in his legacy of Peace said, pacem meam do vobis non sicut mundus dat.
Job 14 27
My peace I give unto you, not as the world gives. For,

Either it is pax adulationis the Peace of Adulation, of which David says,
Ol^um peccatoris non confringet capat meum. Ravennas note is that in all
Sacrifices to God salt was used, for God cannot be flattered; when we say the
most we can of him, we come short. Adulatio quam similis est amicitiae, non
imitatur tantum, sed praecedit.

Poor men have the advantage of the rich in this, for who flattereth them?
Sinners say we need not this waste; why should we bestow it on them that cannot
requite us? We will save it, and give it to them which are mighty.

2. Or it is pax malae confederationis, the peace of evil confederacy, such as
is between Thieves, we will all have one purse; these be as old Jacob said of
Simeon and Levi, fratres in malo brothers in evil, St. Aug. calls this ne
fariam amicitiam, a wicked friendship; into their secret, let not my soul come.

These tares bind themselves in bundles for the fire.

3. Pax simulationis a dissembling peace, when men hide malice under a show of
Peace; that they may sub amici fallere nomen, that they deceive under show of
friendship, so ^udas kisseth, and betrayeth, Amasa entreats and stabbeth.

4. Pax temporalis, a temporal peace, when men maintain love, and friendship,
and exchange great gifts and tender love and service to serve a turn. So men
set up the Ladders that they clime by as high as they can; but when their turn
is served, they lay them along upon the ground.

This is the peace which the world gives, and there is no true friendship in
it, Pro. 17.17.
for a friend loves at all times.

Nec ullis divulsus querimoniis
Suprema citius solvit amor die.
True peace is like the dew of Hermon, none but the Elect of God have it.

My Peace I give to you. it is not like the light of the Sun that shines on
good and bad.

This is like the light that shined on Gos^en when all Egypt else was in
palpable darkness.

This is like the precious oil powered on Aarons head, and running down to the
skirts of his raiment, Psa. 133.2 3.
for there the Lord Commanded the blessing and life for ever more.

Aristotle held that friendship contracted either by pleasure or profit could
not hold; for the cement and glue that should tie them together, is but weak;
this continuation is but hujus ad hoc, of this to that.

But the union of the faithful is hujus in hoc, of this in that. For they be
incorporate in one body; and they are made members of Christ and members one of
another, one flesh, one body.

We see men in their greatness followed, and served, and petitioned, observed,
and presented, with choicest and richest gifts; if we see them decline in
favor, or power, we see them forsaken of their servants.

We see young prodigals frequented with company, courted with complements,
feasted and swelled with all delights; but when the fountain of this friendship
is drawn dry, and the means fail, who calls those men friends, or seeks
their conversation?

This yet appears more plainly in the Idumeans of Rome, that have long
persecuted the true Church of God; for though they have labored ever since the
first corruption of the Church, to maintain their Heretical opinions, yet
could they never be at any perfect peace amongst themselves.

And this ofter our Church may boldly make to them, that there is no Tenet in
our Religion we maintain against them, but we will renounce it, if we do not
find it averred by some one, or most of eminent learning amongst themselves.

And because it will take up too much time to give instance in all particulars
of our difference from the Trent Church, For a taste let me refer so many as
are desirous of better satisfaction, to read that learned proof of this truth
in the Reverend Dean of Glocesters third book of the Church, at the end of it,
where he names the agreement of our church with their best learned, in points,
wherein the Jesuits at this day accuse us of Heresy.

Rome was like Nebuchadnezzars image, the height of it was 60 cubits, and the
breadth was but 6; that is without any proportion; for never could they make
the parts of it symmetricall.

Therefore, first we are comforted against all the enemies of our Religion,
their strength may be great, and their malice greater; but they cannot unite
themselves with the bond of true Peace, and the God of peace is not their
tutelary God.

In the damnable conspiracy of the Powder-traytors, God by one of themselves
diverted the Treason.

I deny not but Turks have had many great prevailings against Christians,
Papists against Protestants, and their confederates have held fast with them.

So had Moab and Ammon, Geball, the Assirians, Philistines, the Chaldeans
against Israel.

But God found a time to consume these Nations by their own strength, and their
own confederates were the ruin of them.

We have heard that war is one of the sore judgments wherewith God scourges
offenders.

At this time a great part of the Protestant Church is hostilly attempted with
war; we have many of our countrymen, noble, generous, and valiant volunteers
engaged in that cause.

I hope we shall do a charitable Christian duty to God and them, to pray God to
cover their heads in the day of battle, to beseech him whom Job calls the
preserver of men, to save them from all evil. Thou Lord preservest man and
beast; do thou save them: let their eye have its desire upon their enemies. And
for our selves, we say,

O Lord be gracious unto us: we have waited for thee: be thou their arm every
morning, Isa. 33.2.
our Salvation also in the time of trouble. God is called Lord of Hoasts, and
so he can master his enemies; the stars in their courses by their influences:
the Elements, fire, as in Sodom; air, as in the Pestilence in David's time,
water, as in the deluge; earth as in Corahs transgression, to smite sinners.

He can punish man by Frogs, by Flies, by Lice, by Grassehoppers, and such
like armies of his.

Yet he chose to destroy the army of the Midianites by themselves, rather then
by any other means;

The Lord set every man's sword against his fellow, throughout all the host.
Jud. 7.22.


He could have employed other executioners, to have done vengeance upon
blaspheming Senacherib King of Assyria, but he would show that no bonds of
society, or nature can hold them together, whom God has not joined.

Therefore it came to pass as he was worshipping in the house of Nis^ock his
God, Isa. 37.38.
that Adrameleck and Sharezer his sons smote him with a sword.

2. We are therefore taught to unite our selves in the Lord by the bonds of ^ue
love; for all other bonds will be like the new cords wherewith Sampson was
tied, break in sunder, and we shall cast them from us.

The great friendship that is made by bribes cannot be sincere; for 1. The
receiver of them knows that his love is a dear penny worth to his friend; it
is not a gift but a perquisite, and therefore he cannot call it sure. 2. The
giver knows his money, and not his love made the friend; and if this
friendship bear him out of the hands of justice, his conscience will still tell
him, that his money, not his innocence acquitted him, if this friendship prefer
him, his conscience within him will say that his money, not his worthiness,
has advanced him.


Therefore the frienship thus made is not sincere.

But they whom Religion and the fear of God does unite, are of one heart, and
of one soul; here is no lack of any thing, Acts 4.32
if any of them may supply it; the wounded man shall have both the oil and
wine of the Samaritane out of his vessels, and the help of his hand, and of his
beast, and of his word and of his purse.

Our Savior Christ says, Go thou and do the like.

How can we say we are neighbors, when we are so far from healing our
brethrens wounds, that we rather set them into a fresh bleeding, and open them
wider; we rather make more in the whole and sound flesh; we rather take away
their oil and wine, and beast and money wherewith they should help themselves;
and instead of putting them into an house, we take their houses over their
heads, and expose them to storms.

The God of peace sanctify us throughout, that his peace may knit us together
in him.



Here on earth we do much value the wisdom and judgment of man, by his choice
of adherence and dependence; and we judge them unwise that address themselves
to such, as cannot either support them as they are, or put them on farther.

But the word of the Lord says, there is no understanding in Edom to trust in
man; and the Psalmist, Non relinquat hominem; he advises,

Trust not in Princes, nor in any son of man, for there is no help in him; God
goes farther in my text, there is treason in him; subducet auxilium super
inducet exitium.

He will bring thee to thy uttermost borders, and there he will leave thee.

Jun. reads, Cujus vulneris non erit intelligentia, as pointing out so great a
plague upon Edom, ut ipsam nequeat men's humana comprehendere, nedum curare art
and intelligentia.

Joannes Draconites reads the text thus, Ante proderis hostibus quam
animadvertas.

But the sense is easy, God censureth them for fools, that put their trust in
man.

For God himself says, they commit two great evils, They forsake God the
Fountain of living waters, Jer. 2.13.
and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns that can hold no water.

The Philistims trusted in their great Champion Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.10.
and they desied the ho^st of Israel, and despised David; the Aramites sent
Israel word, that the dust of their land should not be enough to give every one
of their Army an handful. 1 Reg. 20.10.


The reason of this folly, is, the god of this world has blinded the eyes of
them that believe not; 2 Cor. 4.4.
for Satan works strongly in the children of disobedience; he has strong
illusions for them, to make them believe lies.

They that trust in lying vanity, says Jonah, do forsake their own mercy.

It is a lying vanity to trust the false gods of the Heathen. Deuteronomy. 32.38.
God upbraideth the Apostate Jews so, Let them rise up and help you, let them
be a refuge.

It is a lying vanity to trust in any confederacy against God: It is Gods woe,

Woe to the rebellious children that take counsel, but not of me, that cover
with a covering, but not of my spirit, Isa. 33.1.
that they may add sin unto sin.

That walk to go down into Egypt, (and have not asked at my mouth) to
strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of
Egypt.

Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your shame, and the trust in the
shadow of Egypt your confusion.

He declares this folly in the next chapter.

Now the Egyptians are men, and not God, and their horses flesh, and not
spirit; when the Lord shall stretch out his hand, Isa. 31.3.
he that helps shall fall, and he that is helped shall fall down, and they
all shall fail together.

This shows want of faith, when we trust in the vain help of friends.

It is true, that we must use all good means to further Gods providence; but we
must not put any trust in these means; there may be help by them, there is no
help in them.

David sets these two in opposition, and declares the differing success of
them.

Some trust in chariots, and some in horses, Ps. 20, 7, 8.
but we will remember the name of our Lord.

They are brought down and fallen, but we are risen, and stand upright.

Is it not folly for man to run himself upon the curse of God? God has said
it, Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and
withdraws his heart from the Lord. Jer. 17.


The Poets, the Prophets of the Heathen, can tell us what ill success the
Giants of the earth had, which their confederacy against the gods.

Non est consilium contra Dominum. The Use of this point is

Let us all labor and pray for understanding.

1. To know the impotencie of the creature, that we may not trust to it. 2. To
know the omnipotency of our Creator, that we may not oppose it, but seek our
rest under that shadow.
This will change our vain confidence into a strong faith; and faith is a
shield in all our wars.

VERSE 8. Shall I not in that day (says the Lord) even destroy the wisemen out
of Edom, and understanding out of the mount of Esau.


Their fourth hope despaired.

Edom.

In this paslage consider we 1. The judgment upon Edom, Destruam sapientes, I
will destroy the wise men. 2. The assurance, Dicit Dominus, says the Lord. 3.
The time, in that day.


1. Concerning the judgment, we are taught that humane wisdom and counsels
without God, are no fense for a State.

Here is the mother disease of humane nature; Eva heard that wisdom was to be
gotten by eating the forbidden fruit, and she aspired in the pride of her heart
to be like God, knowing good and evil; ever since, man has much affected
wisdom; therefore God, who has revealed the true wisdom to his Church, has
ever professed himself an enemy to the wisdom of this world: it has two
titles, inimicitiae apud Deum, and stultitiae, enmity and folly.

The true and saving wisdom is Christ, he is made unto us of God wisdom; and
his word is sufficient to make the man of God wise unto salvation. Eccl 9, 14


There was a little City and few men within it; and there came a great King
against it, and besieged it, and built a bulwark against it.

Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the
City.

This little City is the Church of God, the few men in it, be the little flock
of Gods chosen; the enemy that assaulteth it is Satan, the Prince of darkness,
the god of this world.

The poor wise man in it is Jesus Christ, the Carpenter, the son of poor Mary,
of whom the Scribes and Priests said, Is not this the Carpenter? he by his
wisdom saved his Church.

This wisdom directs to the whole Armor, and teaches how to fit it to us,
that we may be able to resist Satan, Ephesians. 6.

But the wisdom that is of the world, that studieth how to carry things on
without God, sometimes against God, for God is not in all their ways, and this
was ever a broken reed, it does both deceive and wound him that leans on it;
For,

The wisdom of the flesh cannot be Subject to the Law of God, Romans 8.7.
yet it striveth in vain; For

There is no wisdom, nor understanding, Prove, 21.10.
nor counsel against the Lord, for it is written, Job 5.13. He takes the wise
in their own craftiness. 1 Cor 3.19


1. The reason is given by the Prophet.

Yet he also is wise, meaning there the wisdom of direction, Jsa. 31.2.
and counsel, for that belongs to him only; the wisdom of obedience and
sequence is that which we most seek.

Therefore God resists and destroys all those that usurp his wisdom, but
take counsel and not of him; Jsa. 30.1,
and cover with a covering, but not of his spirit; that is, seek protection and
coverture against evils, but not consulting his spirit, who alone claims
right in that title to be custos hominum, the preserver of men.

2. God has chosen the foolish things of the world to destroy the wise, the
reason is given. 1 Cor. 1.^7


That no flesh should glory in his presence; ver. 19.
God is the only subject of glory properly in himself; we give it to him in our
Lords Prayer. Tuum est regnum, potentia and gloria. Thine is Kingdom, etc.

He is a jealous God, he has sworn that he will not give his glory ^oany
creature; wisdom is one of his glories, 1 Cor. 1.25
For The foolishnes of God is wiser then men. And for this cause God will
destroy the wise men of Edom: both their persons, and their wisdom, as he did
Achitophel the Oracle of those times, he defeated him, for he turned his wisdom
into folly, and left him not wisdom enough to save himself from the halter.

Edoms example let us learn not to trust to humane wisdom, flattering our
selves, that we can do any thing without God; for even the wicked when they
oppress the Church, and hurt the Saints, do it not without the counsel and
wisdom of God: so he says before, thus says the Lord, an Ambassador is sent
to the Nations. Arise ye against him in battle.

It is God that makes their confederates forsake Edom, and the men of their
peace be the sword of God drawn out against Esau.

Reviling Rabshakeh the General of Senacheribs forces against Jerusalem, Isa.
36.10.
could say, and he said truly, And am I now come up without the Lord, against
this Land? The Lord said unto me, go up against this Land. For God stirred them
up, and animated them to fight his battails against Israel.

The wisdom of the world is not worth the seeking, because it may be lost and
taken from us, the wisdom of God which is from above, God gives to his
chosen, and he cannot take it away from us, because the gifts and calling of
God are without repentance.

But the wise men of the world, when they have most cause to use their wisdom,
then it fails them, like the Sea-mans cunning in a violent storm, it is gone
says David.

The wisdom of God in man, is ever at the best in the greatest tempest of
danger and sense of sin.

The Disciples when they are brought before Kings and Rulers are promised, Dabo
vobis sapientiam I will give you wisdom; and further, Dabitur illa hora; it
shall be given in that hour.

Steven at the hour of his death not distracted with the fury of them that
stoned him, dyed calling upon God, calling on him for them that killed him.

God takes away wisdom from them that know not how to use it. Such as are wise
to do evil, but to do good have no understanding.

Wisdom in an ungodly man is armata nequitia, armed wickedness; and therefore
David prays against it, let not their wicked imagination prosper.

It was David's wisdom, Audiam quid loquaturin me Deus, I will hear what the
Lord will say. For he will speak to our hearts peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.
He will uphold us with his counsel; the fear of the Lord is the beginning of
our wisdom.

2. The Assurance. Thus says the Lord.

For the trust in wisdom is so confident, that the holy Prophet, though he had
called his prophecy his Vision, and though he had begun his whole Prophecy with
Thus says the Lord, yet the more to assure the events threatened, he resumeth
this authority.

1. He brings in God himself despersing their first hope, I have made thee
small, the pride of thy heart has deceived thee. 2. In their second hope,
which was in the strength of their habitation, he brings in God speaking to
Edom, I will bring thee down says the Lord. 3. Now again in this third hope of
theirs, in the wisdom of their wise men, two things do meet in this verse to
fortify the assurance. 1. The authority of him that says and does those
things, Thus says the Lord. 2. His appeal to them, for he does not say I will
destroy the wise men out of Edom: but he appealeth to their own hearts, saying,
Shall I not destroy them, q. d. Do you think that I will be overreached by
your wise men? No, they shall not have wit enough to save themselves, much
less to save you. For I will destroy them.

Which peremptory declaration of the will of him who is judge of all the world,
does leave no place for evasion; for the Psalmist says of him, that He does
whatsover he will in heaven and in earth, and in all deep places.

By virtue of this certain word of God we do gather this assurance against all
the enemies of the Church in all ages thereof; for he has said it by the mouth
of Job;

How often is the Candle of the wicked put out? Job 21.17.
And how often comes their destruction upon them? God distributeth sorrows in
his anger.

What though the execution of this wrath be deferred? he adds,

God lays up his iniquity for his children, that is the punishment of his
iniquity; ver. 19.
as there is a decree against them in the counsel of God, and word against
them, declaring the decree of God, so dies erit, there shall be a time.

3, The time in that day.

Our days and times be all in the hand of God, and they be hid in his own
power, who in his secret wisdom has appointed them; when that day should come,
he has not yet revealed to Edom in this Prophecy.

God is so patient and long-suffering that he does not punish presently; for
vengeance is his, he may take his time when he will, and no man can resist him.

The point here considerable is, That God in his secret wisdom, has designed
a particular day for every execution of his will; yea the Scripture goes so
far as to the hour: even to a moment, the least fraction of time.

This declares that the wisdom of the world and of flesh has but its time;
there is a period fixed, wherein it must detertermine.

Ahitophels counsels went for Oracles till this day, then God turned his wisdom
into folly and destruction.

So God threatened Jerusalem with a day in which the Lord would take away from
them the mighty men, Isa 3.2
and the men of war, the judge and the Prophet, the prudent and the ancient.

This he does two ways;

One by turning all their knowledge into ignorance, and their wisdom into
folly.

Another, by destroying their persons, either by his sore judgments, or by
leading into captivity; here both are threatened; for he will destroy both
prudentes, wise men, and prudentiam, their wisdom in that day.

This may remember us of that great day of which St. Paul preached to the
Athenians, Act. 17.31
that God had appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness,
by that man which he has appointed.

For as the day of Jerusalem, and the day of Edom, and the time of Gods
particular judgments is set and fixed; so is the day of the last judgment, in
which every man shall give an account to God of himself, and all our works
shall come to judgment.

What manner of men then ought we to be, expecting this day, and providing for
it?

This Doctrine of the set day of particular execution of Gods threatened wrath
against sinners, does teach

1. Holy patience in waiting the Lords leisure, and as the Apostle admonishes

Cast not away therefore your confidence,

For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye may
receive the promise. Heb. 10 35 36, 37.


For a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry.

And blessed is he that endures to the end.

This living under the rod of the ungodly, and this beholding the prosperity of
the wicked does much disquiet even the Saints of God on earth: as is the
example of David we see.

Therefore we have need of patience, to sweeten the sorrows of life to us, and
to clear our eyes, that we may not mourn as men without hope.

2. It teaches faith; for the same Author says, Ver. 38
Now the just shall live by faith; for he that has promised is faithful, and
no word of his shall fall to the ground unfulfilled.

Faith comes by hearing; let us then use it as the best remedy against the
oppressions of the ungodly, to be swift to hear the word of God; that we may
get the shield of faith to bear off all the darts of Satan: so David in that
disquiet went to the house of God; there he was taught the end of those
oppressors.

3. It teaches holiness; for seeing the wrath of God from heaven is revealed
against the enemies of the Church; there is no safety but in the Church of God,
and that is the Congregation of Saints, these are safe in that day, he hides
such under his wings, his faithfulness and truth is their shield and buckler.

There shall no evil happen to them, neither shall any plague come nigh their
dwelling.

So long as we make conscience of our words, and thoughts, and ways, and
labor our sanctification, and strive against sin, we need not fear in the evil
day: holiness is our door mark, and our forehead mark, the destroying Angel
shall pass over.

VERSE. 9. And thy mighty men, O Teman, shall be dismayed, to the end that
every one of the mount of Esau may be cut off by slaughter.


5. Their last hope is in the strength of their own mighty men: this is
addressed to Teman.

Which word as it signifies the coast to which the Idumaeans lay from
Jerusalem: i.e. the east; so it is the name of one of the Nephews of Esau, Genesis
36.11
whose posterity inhabited a part of Arabia, called also by his name.

He was the eldest son of Eliphaz, the eldest son of Esau; and under his name
here the whole Nation of the Idumaeans is threatened.

And as the hope the Idumaeans had in the wisdom of their wise men, fails
them, for they have trusted to false friends, and all their providence for
their safety miscarrieth:

So shall they fail in the hope that they have in their own strong men, for
they shall not be able to preserve them from a final destruction, even so
great that every one of the mount of Esau shall be cut off by slaughter.

Excellently is their judgment set forth; for their confederates shall turn
perfidious to them abroad, and their strong men at home shall be dismayed.

Two things make wars advantagable to a Commonwealth, Consilium and fortitudo,
counsel and strength: in the former verse God befools their wisdom; in this he
enfeebles their strength.

The reason is, he has decreed that every one of the mount of Esau shall be
destroyed.

And when God turns enemy, neither head nor hand, neither wisdom nor force
can resist him; David and his sling shall discomfit Goliath and his armor, his
sword and spear, and admired strength.

The two little flocks of Israel, the great armies of the Aramites.

It is worth our noting, that God working by means, and directing our
operations so, even in this work of overthrow threatened to Edom, does destroy
them by disabling to them all the means of their safety, as before he turns
the hearts of their friends against them.

He destroys the wisdom of their wise men, and now he takes away all heart
and courage from their strong men.

To teach us that all the outward means of safety are not sufficient to keep us
from ruin, except the Lord be on our side.

Therefore we pray, Hallowed be thy name.

Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done. And we acknowledge,

Thine is the Kingdom, power and glory.

And this enforces upon us the law of the first Table to have no other gods
but one; to give him outward worship, to sanctify his Sabbath, not to abuse
his name.

And this fills us with faith, saying, Credo in Deum Patrem omnipotentem, I
believe in God, etc.

For as David says, Domine quis similis tibi, Lord who is like to thee?

There is no wisdom or strength, not that which is in the god of this world,
the Prince that rules in the air, but it is a beam of the heavenly light; can
God suffer any of his own gifts to be abused against him, to turn edge and
point against the author of them?

There is a time when God winketh at the outrage of the ungodly, for the
exercising of the patience of his servants; but when he intends a cutting off
by slaughter of his enemies, in that day the Lord will be known to be God.

These things are written for our sakes; for the enemies of our Church are here
threatened to be cut off by slaughter, even Antichrist the man of sin, who
sits in the place of God as God, and is worshipped, whom God shall scatter
with the breath of his mouth, that is, by the power of his word preached; and
we have comfort against him, that neither his wit nor his force shall prevail
against us.

We have two examples which I hope no time will ever forget to praise God for,
till the second coming of Jesus Christ.

The power of Antichrist was defeated in 88. when the Pope gave away the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland to the King of Spain, who sent his Invincible
Armado hither, not as a Challenger, but as a Conqueror to take possession of
these Lands.

They had special revelations to assure their victory, and the prayers of the
Popish Church were all in arms against us.

But as it is in my text, their mighty men were dismayed, their strong Ships
either sunk in the sea, or well beaten, or constrained to fly, because God
meant to cut them off by slaughter, and the power of Spain so weakened, and the
coffers of their treasure so emptied, that nothing was more welcome to them
then the news of peace with England.

The wisdom of Rome had no better success in the year 1605. for when some
men of blood, the sons of Belial, had laid a plot for the destruction of the
whole Church and Commonwealth then in Parliament, by powder:

We cannot deny but the Serpent put his best wits to the rack, to stamp a
devise with his own image and superscription; never was there nequitia
ingeniosior, a more witty wickedness, then to bring so many precious lives to
the mercy of one excutioner who had nothing to do but to put fire to the train.

Yet in the very act of preparation, and the night before the intended
execution, God put fire to his own train laid for them, and discovered things
hidden in darkness, and cast them into the pit which he had dug for them;
and their wit and policy proved hanging and quartering to the conspirators;
and declared the Papist our secret enemies, such whom we must carefully look
to; for if by strength or wit he can destroy the state of the Church and
Commonwealth, the mercies of his heart are so cruel, that we can expect no
favor.

That is now the cause why his Majesty intending a Parliament, does require so
strict a survey of the land for the detection of all Popish Recusants, as now
is both by the Ecclesiastical and Civil Magistrate urged.

For they have given us fair warning, that if they can do any thing by wit or
force, they will abate nothing thereof to the prejudice of this Church. But as
the confounding of the wisdom of Edom, and the disabling the strength of Edom
did forerun their fall: so our faith is, that Antichrist, Gods enemy and ours,
has now but a short time; and every one of the mount of Esau of the City built
upon the hills shall be cut off by slaughter.

The pride of their own hearts, who think they have the keys of heaven and of
hell: not only Peter's keys, but David's also; who bear the world in hand, that
they can save or condemn, shall deceive them.

The rock of their habitation shall prove to them like an undefenced City.

Their confederates, and men of their peace, that eat bread with them, shall
turn edge against them.

Their wise men shall fail them, and their Triple-crown and the temporal power
of their Hierarchy shall be disabled; we have the word of God for it, The man
of sin must be destroyed. Even so let all thine enemies perish O Lord. Amen
Amen.

VERSE. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 10 For thy violence against thy brother Jacob,
shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut off for ever.

11. In the day that thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that the
strangers carried away captive his forces, and forreiners entered into his
gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, even thou wast as one of them.

12. But thou should not have looked on the day of thy brother, in the day
that he became a stranger, neither should thou have rejoiced over the
children of Judah, in the day of their destruction, neither should thou have
spoken proudly in the day of their distress.

13. Thou should not have entered into the gate of my people in the day of
their calamity, yea thou should not have looked on their affliction, in the
day of their calamity, nor have laid hands on their substance in the day of
their calamity.

14. Neither should thou have stood in the cross way, to cut off those of
his which did escape, neither should thou have delivered those of his that
did remain in the day of distress.


3. The cause provoking God to this severe process against Edom;

This is set down, 1. In general terms, v. 10. violence against their brother.
2. In a particular description, v. 11, 12.13, 14.


1. The general term is, violence, or as the old reading was, Cruelty; and
the word here used does express all injury.

Either done by strong hand or force. Or done by subtilty and cunning.
In the particulars of their cruelty, there is,

1. Their confederacy with the enemies of their brother Jacob, ver. 11. this is
cruelty of combination, stabant ex opposito, they were rather for the enemies
of Jacob then for their brother, as David says; They take the contrary part,
they were as one of them.

By the strangers that carried away the forces of Jacob captive, and the
forraigners that entered into his gates, and cast lots upon Icrusalem, are meant
the Caldeans, which refers us to the story of those times.

Therefore he brought upon them the King of the Chaldeans, who slew their young
men with the Sword, 2 Chr. 36.17, 18, 19.
in the house of their Sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man, or
maiden, old man or him that stooped for age, he gave them all into his hand.

There was direption of the Sanctuary, robbing the Treasury of the King,
burning the house of God, and deporation of the residue into Captivity.

In that day Edom was as one of them; For then as the Psalmist sath.

In the day of Icrusalem, they cried, Raze it, Raze it, even to the foundation
thereof. Psa. 137.7


2. They are charged with the cruelty of their eye, and that twice, ver. 12.
But thou should not have looked on the day of thy brother, in the day that
he became a stranger. Again,

Ver. 13. Thou should not have looked on their affliction, in the day of
their calamity.

3. They are charged with cruelty of heart, ver. 12. Neither should thou
have rejoiced over the children of Judah, in the day of their destruction.

The heart is the seat of affections, they joy'd in the sorrow of Edom.

4. They are charged with the cruelty of the tongue, ver. 12. Neither should
thou have spoken proudly in the day of their distresses.

5 With the cruelty of their hands, violent actions against their brother.

Ver. 13. Thou should not have entered into the gate of my people, in the day
of their calamity,

Nor have laid hand on their substance, in the day of their calamity.

Ver. 14 Neither should thou have stood in the cross way, to cut off those
of his that did escape.

Neither should thou have delivered these of his that did remain, in the
day of distress.

Which charge them with four cruelties, 1 Invasion of their Cities. 2
Direption of their goods. 3 Insidiation, lying in wait for them, 4
Depopulation, not sparing the residue.


We have seen the sin of Edom in the total cruelty against their brother
Jacob.

We summed up the particulars, and find that God had just cause to enter into
judgment with Edom, and to execute upon them his fierce wrath.

The sin was breach of the Law, and a trespass against the second Table;
against Jacob, that is the posterity of Jacob their brother.

And here I note that especially two Commandments of the second Table are
broken.

1. Thou shall do no Murder. 2. Thou shall not steal.
For what part of their cruelty touches the life of Jacob, is a breach of the
First.

What touches his estate, and goods, is a breach of the latter Commandment.

And this example may serve for a Commentary upon those two Commandments,
teaching how they are broken; for Edom is a very full example of transgression.

1. In the cruelty of combination, they that join with others that seek the
life of man, are murderers, not accessaries, but principals; so did Edom, for
he was even as they.

Saul, after Paul, a blessed Apostle, does charge the murder of Stephen upon
himself, because as here, he was of the other side, and sat by and kept the
clothes of them that stoned him.

It is a fleshing of men in cruelty to associate in blood, and to communicate
with the blood-thirsty; we see it after in Saul, he was a principal Actor, and
got Commission to persecute and went about breathing threatenings against the
Church.

And as it is in the Law of Murder, so it is in the Law of Theft; for every
association with Thieves, and Robbers, is the breach of that Commandment, and
Edom brake both these Laws, for they were even as they that robbed Israel, and
sought their life, though they commenced not the war against their brother
Jacob, yet they joined wit them that did, and so they are pares culpa, alike in
fault.

Iehoshaphat aiding of Ahab,

Would thou help the wicked, and love them that hate the Lord? 2 Chr. 19.2^
Therefore there is wrath upon thee before the Lord.

Do not think that all the blame shall light upon the authors of evil, Pro.
30.20.
Do not wipe thy mouth with the Harlot in the Proverbs, and say, I have done no
wickedness; for all society with sinners in their sins is forbidden, the
Apostle is very precise herein.

If any man obey not our word, 2 These. 3.14.
note that man, and have no company with him.

The manifest breakers of the Law, are dispisers of the word; With such eat
not; God says that such as converse with them, be as they, that is equally
culpable.

Upon this evidence we find the Church of Rome guilty of the Powder Treason; it
was secretly animated and abetted by them, and they prayed for the success
thereof.

2. The cruelty of the eye, this is twice here urged, ver. 12. v. 13. For the
eye of humanity does abhor the sight of Murder.

To look on, and behold the wrongs done to our brethren in their life or goods,
is murder, and theft; Hagar was so tender, that when her son Ismael was ready
to perish for want of water, she cast the child under one of the shrubs;

And she went and sat her down over against him a good Way off, Gem, 20.15,
16. 2 Samuel 20.12.
as it were a Bow-shoot; for she said, let me not see the death of the child.

The sight of Amasa murdered, and weltring in his blood in the way was a stop
in the way of Joabs Soldiers, and all the people stood still.

It was a grievous sight, and troubled soldiers, men used to acts and sights
of death; for Amasa was a worthy Captain.

They looked on in condolement, not in rejoicing.

It is reported that after the Massacre of the Protestants in France, on the
Bartholmew-night following, the Queene-Mother with many others went out to
behold the dead carcasses, and having caused the body of the Noble Admiral of
France to be hanged upon a Gibbet, they went out of the City to feed their eyes
with that spectacle.

God will one day require the blood of those men, at the hands of all those
whose cruel eyes delighted in that spectacle.

For thou should not have looked on thy brother in the day of his affliction
with cruel eyes;

With compassionate eyes we may; so it is foretold of the Elect, They shall see
him whom they have pierced, and shall mourn for him. Zech. 12.20.


So Mary and John saw Christ Crucified; and Christ invited to that sight: have
ye no regard all ye that pass by? see if there be any sorrow like to my sorrow.

But when the ungodly of the earth perish, there is joy, as the Wiseman says.
It is one of the comforts of the Church, against the enemies thereof.

And they shall go forth, Isa. 66.24.
and look upon the carcasses of the men that have transgressed against me, for
their worm shall not dye, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they shall
be an abhorring to all flesh.

And David says, Psa. 92.11
Mine eye also shall see my desire upon mine enemies.

These be special executions of wrath upon the ungodly; but the general rule
of charity does convince that eye of cruelty which beholds the blood of man
with joy, shed on the earth; and the law of piety does sind that man guilty of
marther, that looks on, whilst an Egyptian smites an Israelite, which Moses
could not endure to see, for as Seneca, Oculi augent dolorem, the eye
increases sorrow.

He slew the Egyptian and hid him in the sand. Exodus 2.12


This is no example for imitation, for lookers on to become gamesters of a
sudden: How justifyable that fact of Moses was, I will not now dispute; the
point is, Moses could not look on and see wrong done to an Hebrew.

It is a cruel eye that can see a neighbor suffer injury in his person or in
his goods, and will pass by and not give him help.

It is a cruel ear that will suffer a neighbor to be scandalized in his good
name, and will not open a mouth to defend him.

If thine eye so offend thee, Christ advises thee to pull it out and cast it
from thee.

When Pilate had caused Christ to be cruelly whipped, he brought him forth to
the people, to shame him openly, saying, Ecce hom^ behold the man, hoping that
their eyes satisfied with that lamentable sight of his stripes, would have
cried, enough, let him go.

But this gave their eye a new appetite to see more, and they cried out, Pro 3^
17
Crucify him, Crucify him. Those eyes that hunger thus, Let the curses of
Agur the son of Jakeh fall on them, Let the Ravens of the valley pick them out,
and let the young Eagle eat them.

3. The cruelty of the heart. They rejoice over the children of Judah in the
day of their destruction.

This also is murder, to joy in the destruction of our brethren though we put
neither hand nor counsel to it.

This evidence does pronounce the Church of Rome guilty of that murder in the
cruel Massacre of Paris under Charles the ninth, before mentioned, wherein by a
cunning pretense of friendship there were destroyed 30000 Protestants.

For after the Massacre there was a solemn Procession throughout the City; and
that this was the joy of the whole Church of Rome, we may avouch it from the
testimony of the head of the Church. For Gregory 13 hearing of it, caused all
the Ordnance of his Castle of St. Angello to be shot off in token of joy, and a
Mass to be sung in St. Lucies Church, for honor of the exploit.

And the Parliament of Paris enacted it, that in honor thereof, every year on
St. Bartholmews day should a solemn Procession be observed through the City of
Paris.

The Cardinal also of Lorrain in a public Oration magnified the fact, and
caused Monuments thereof to be erected.

Far be it them from us, who carry the names of Christians to rejoice at the
sufferings of our brethren, for this is murder; Let Roman Christians teach
Turks and Indians, and Massagets to be barbarous, let their mercies be cruel:
for so would they have joyed if their Powder Treason had sped.

But as dear brethren let us put on the bowels of compassion and love and
tenderness.

Let not us rejoice in the ruin of their persons, that are executed for
heinous prevarications of the Laws of the kingdom, but rather gush out rivers
of waters for them that keep not the Law.

The punishment of sin is the joy, but the destruction of the person of the
sinner is the grief of all them that fear God.

The heart is a Principal in murder; for out of the heart comes murder, and
an evil eye to look upon it.

It proceeds from a corrupt and cruel heart, when we pass by and regard not
the afflictions of our brethren to relieve them, as the Samaritan did, but when
we rejoice over them as Edom here did, and make our selves merry with their
sins, or their punishments, our hearts are murderers of our brethren; and when
he comes that will one day make inquisition for blood, he will remember the
complaint of the poor.

The God of our Salvation is called the God of mercies, and the father of all
consolation; If we be sons of this Father, Be you merciful as your heavenly
Father is merciful; love as brethren, comfort the heavy-hearted: strengthen
the weak, bring him that wandreth into the way, and let not thy brothers blood
cry from the earth for vengeance against thee. There is vox sanguinis, a voice
of blood; and He that planted the ear, shall he not hear?

It covered the old world with waters, the earth is filled with cruelty, it was
vox sanguinis that cried, and the heavens heard the earth, and the windows of
heaven opened, to let fall judgment and vengeance upon it.

The joy that the Jews had at the death of Christ, what sorrow has it cost
them ever since? they have gone like Cain with a mark upon them, stigmatized
and branded as murderers, and they are scattered upon the face of the earth;
1600 years almost deportation have they endured; and who cries now, it is time
for the Lord to have mercy upon Sion?

The author of the three conversions of England, writes a congratulatory
Epistle to the Catholics in England, rejoicing at the timely quiet death of
Queen Elizabeth, in a full age, full of days and full of honor, and tells
them that they have as much cause of joy, as ever the Christians had in the
Primitive times for the death of the bloody and cruel Emperors.

This candle of the wicked was soon put out, for ere that Epistle could come to
them, our gracious King was Proclaimed the heir of her Crowns and of her
Faith.

4. They are charged with the cruelty of the tongue, verse 12.

Neither should thou have spoken proudly in the day of their distress.

This is another kind of breach of the Law, non occides thou shall not kill; to
speak proudly, or as the Original does express it, to make the mouth great,
or wide, against our brethren in their distress.

For they animated the persecutors of their brethren in the day of Jerusalem,
Psa. 137.
and said raze raze it, even to the foundations thereof.

They opened their mouth wide in cruelty, or as Ezekiel speaks for them,

Moab and Seir did say, Behold the house of Judah is like unto all the heathen.
Ezekiel. 25 8
i.e. God takes no more care for them, then for any other people.

It is one of the provocations wherewith God was provoked against Edom;

Because thou have said these two Nations and these two Countries shall be
mine, Ez. 35.10.
and we will possess it: though the Lord was there.

He accuses them of Anger and Envy against those two Nations i.e. Israel and
Judah; so called because the Land was divided in Jeroboams time into two
kingdoms.

Anger and envy, are by our Savior declared to be murder, and the tongue is
called by David a sharp sword, the poison of Aspes is under their lips: it is
the bow out of which they shoot for arrows bitter words.

Thou have loved all the words that may do hurt, Verba be verbera.

Venite percutiamus eum lingua, Jer. 18.18. Jam. 3.5, 6.
Come let us smite them with the tongue, said the enemies of Jeremy; and Saint
James says there is ignis in Lingua, a fire in the Tongue; Behold how great a
matter a little fire kindles.

The tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity; so is the Tongue amongst the
Members, that it defiles the whole body, and it sets on fire the course of
nature, and it is set on fire of hell.

It is an un^uly evil full of deadly poison.

There is that speaks like the purcings of a Sword.

1. In their anger they spoke cruelly, Pro. 12.18
instigating their enemies to destroy them.

2. In their pride they spoke insolently, expressing their inward joy at their
ruin, by speeches of scorn and disdain, and of triumph over them.

The Jews are a fearful example of this in their process against Christ,
for they cruelly said, Crucify him, Crucify him, not him but Barabbas.

If thou let him go thou art not Caesar's friend.

And after tauntingly, when he was upon the Cross, to him, he saved others,
let him save himself; to his Father, Let him now save him, if he will have him.

Which how dear it cost them, let their own tongues repeat their judgment:
Sanguis ejus super nos, and filios nostros, his blood be upon us, and upon our
children; it was so ever since, and as God wrote the cruelty of Amaleck in a
Book, and vowed never to forget.

So even unto this day, he remembers what that Amalek did to Israel; the
desolation of their City, and Temple, the glory, and pride, and praise of the
earth: their miserable dispersion to this day, is a certain testimony of Gods
unappeased displeasure to them.

Sarah saw Ishmael working; he does not say she heard him; peradventure it was
but a scornful or proud look that she observed; but it is understood that he
scoffed him with some words of disdain, that he should be the young-Master,
and heir of the house.

And this provoked Sarah, to solicit his casting out of the house; and the
Apostle does call it persecution, and a kind of murder.

Beloved, do you know? that cursing is murder? do you know that bitter and
scornful slandring, which touches the good name of a brother, is murder? do
you know that every word you speak to animate and encourage any against a
brother, is murder? do you know that those reviling speeches which anger
venteth, in your common scoldings, and reproachful railings one upon another,
and that secret and private whispers, wherewith you deprave one another be
murder?

Saint James teaches you, Jam. 4.11.
That he that speaks evil of his brother, and judges his brother, speaks
evil of the Law, and judges the Law;

That is, he declares himself to be above the Law, and takes upon him to
judge; for he that judges the Law, and thinks that the law of God does not
bind him to obedience, he is not a doer of the law but a judge.

Christ says, he that says to his brother, satue, thou fool, is obnoxious to
hell fire.

Let us all judge our selves by this Law, and we shall find, that we had need
to take heed to our ways, that we offend not with our tongue; it is no easy
work to govern the tongue, it asks care, and caution; David himself must
take heed.

That was the lesson Pambus found so hard, that it was enough to take up his
whole life. And in our anger and fury we do little think upon it, that

By our words we shall he judged, by our words we shall be condemned; and if of
every idle word we shall give an account to God, how much rather of every angry
word, of every lying word, of every spightfull, and scornful word, every
cruel and bloody word, of every profane and blasphemous word.

This is commonly the revenge of the poor, for when they have no other way to
right themselves against injuries, they fall to cursing and imprecations.

Saint James tells you, Jam. 1, 26.
If a man among you seems religious, and bridleth not his tongue, he deceives
his own heart, this man's religion is in vain.

And again, Jam. 3.2.
If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able to bridle
the whole body.

It is a Masterpiece ^o ^^^eene the tongue.

What man is he that desires life, and loves many days, Psa. 24.12 13.
that he may see good? Keep thy tongue from evil.

But of all kind of evil speaking against our brother, this sin of Edom, to
sharpen an enemy against our brother in the day of his sorrow and distress,
this opening of the mouth wide against him to insult over him in his calamity,
is most barbarous and unchristian.

Yet I deny not but that God gives matter of joy to his Church, when he
destroys the enemies thereof, and it may be sometimes lawful to open our
mouths wide in the praise of God for the destruction of the ungodly; as I
find joy in the Camp of Israel for the devouring of proud and cruel Pharaoh
and his Armies in the Rea-Sea.

Then Moses taught them a Song, Exo 15.
not only of thanksgiving unto God, but of insultation over those enemies,
wherein they said.

Pharaohs Chariots, and his Host has he cast into the Sea, his chosen
Captains also are drowned in the Red Sea, The depths have covered them, he
sanke into the bottom as a stone.

The horse and his Rider has he thrown into the Sea.

This was the first Song, that we do read of in holy Scripture, the ancientest
Song that is extant in the world upon record;

And therefore it is a Type of the jubilation of the Saints in heaven for the
destruction of the Beast and it said, that they.

Sing the Song of Moses the servant of God; Rev. 15.3.
for there was more cause of joy in the whole Church, for the fall of the
Beast, then Israel had for the fall of King Pharaoh, for indeed that of Israel
was but a type of this.

But Moses was warrant enough for the one, and the same spirit which directed
Moses shall authorize the other.

Yet here is a dangerous way, and exceeding slippery, and wonderful
circumspection must be used, and David's caution. I said I will take heed that I
offend not in my tongue; for Christ has put a duty upon us, which in his
Evangelicall law to (...) and (...) to speak well, and do well.



1 They are opposite to God himself when they oppugn the Church of God, or
any member of that Church for Gods sake, this is Gods quarrel.



There is a double respect to be had to enemies, 1 As they are men. 2 As they
are enemies.


This ground being laid, these conclusions do result concerning this point.

1 That no man ought to rejoice at the ruin and destruction of a man, as he is
a man; for this is a natural tie that binds us one to another, and Religion
does not unbind the bonds of nature; rather it is religatio, and tyeth them
much faster.

The reason is, for though the Image of God in which man was created were much
defaced in the fall of man, yet was it not wholly extinguished, for the image
of the Trinity is an indelible character, it cannot be wholly lost, not in the
reprobate, I may add not in the damned, for even they also are the workmanship
of God.

Therefore as they are the creatures of God, we do owe them love and pity, in
honor of the Image of God in them, and ought not rejoice to to see the
blemishes of Gods Image.

So the Samaritane showed kindness to the Jew that fell among Thieves,
although as the woman of Samaria said, they converse not together.

And so Jacob cursed the cruel fury of his sons, for destroying the
Shechemites, though Aliens from Israel, and usurping their land.

And so God hating both the Moabite and the Edomite, yet he avenged the cause
of them, against the King of Moab, saying,

For three transgressions of Moab, Amos 2.1.
and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because he burnt
the bones of the King of Edom into lime.

But I will send a fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the Palaces of Kerioth.

And to go lower, when the rich man in hellfire saw Abraham afar off, and
besought him for help, he answered him by that loving compellation; Son thou
in thy life time, etc. hell would not take that from him but that he was
Abraham's son according to the flesh.

And whilst we live here we ought much rather to do all offices of humanity to
our enemies, because they are men, and because only God knows who are his,
and they may be converted, and come into the Vineyard at the last hour.

2 As they are enemies;

1 We consider them as Gods enemies, so we hate them, not their persons, but
their vices, for that as Augustine defines, it is odium perfectum, a perfect
hatred; and indeed it is the hatred that God bears to his enemies; For the
wrath of God from heaven is revealed against the unrighteousness and
ungodliness of men, not against their persons, they are his workmanship, and
carry his Image in some sort, though much disfigured, but against the
unrighteousness and ungodliness of men, by which their persons do stand
obnoxious to his displeasure.

And thus I find the Saints of God have insulted over the wicked, as Israel
over Pharaoh, and the Gileadites over the children of Ammon, Romans 1.18.
not rejoicing in the destruction of Gods creatures, but of Gods enemies, and
wishing with Deborah and Bareck. So let all all thine enemies perish O Lord.

This is no mo^e but an applauding of the judgment of God, and a celebration of
his justice; and of this we have examples, both in the Militant, and in the
Triumphant Church.

1 In the Militant; Babylon where the Israel of God were captives, and
despightfully entreated, and where they hung up their Harpes, and were
scornefully and sarcasmatically required to sing one of the songs of Sion is
thus insulted over.

O daughter of Babylon, who art to be wasted, Romans 1, 18
happy shall he be that rewards thee as thou have served us.

Happy shall he be, Psa. 137.8.
that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the stones.

Lift ye up a Banner upon the high mountains, Isa. 13 2.
exalt the voice unto them, shake the hand.

I have commanded my sanctified ones, Jer. 50.2.
I have also called my mighty ones for my anger.

Declare ye among the Nations, and publish, and set up a Standard, publish, and
conceal not; say Babylon is taken, Bell is confounded, Merodach is broken in
pieces, etc.

In the triumphant Church.

Rejoice over her thou heaven, Rev. 18.20.
And ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for God has avenged yea on her.

Yet I will not conceal from you, that many learned expositors of the
Revelation, do understand this Text of the Militant Church.

But no doubt the Saints judging the world in the last day do rejoice against
the world, in the execution of Gods just judgment upon them; for they are then
entered into their masters joy, and all tears are wiped from their eyes.

Thus then it is lawful, when God has executed his judgment upon his enemies
for all the friends of God to insult over them, and to lift up their voice and
hand against them; for this is part of the punishment of Gods enemies, they
that despise me shall be despised.

This is the last perpetual shame that shall evermore continue upon them, the
just reward of their bold presumption, who durst advance themselves against God.

2. We must consider the wicked as our enemies, and this way we must be tender
how we insult over them in this life, because we do not know whether their
destruction here be their full punishment or no.

1. Because God sometimes chasteneth with temporal judgments, that he may
forbear eternal, and sometimes he punishes rather ad dignam emendationem,
then ad amandationem, and by that temporal punishment does as by some sharp
Physic restore them to health.

It is the voice of Gods Church,

Rejoice not against me O mine enemy, Micha 7, 8
when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a
light unto me.

I will bear the indignation of the Lord because I have sinned against him.

2 Because this opening of the mouth, and insulting over the adversities of
men, is one of the practices of the ungodly; they use as David says, to say,
Where is now their God?

So insolently did proud Senacherib insult over the Cities that he had subdued.

Where is the King of Hamath, Isa. 37.13.
and of Arphad, and the King of the City of Sepharvaim, Heva and Iuah.

With them is the Chair of the scornful.

Rather should we commit our cause to God, and comfort our selves in his
justice, and say no more, when we suffer, then the son of Jeboida said, when
Joash for getting his fathers love to him, put him to death, The Lord look
upon it, and requite it. 2 Chr. 24.22.


And when we see that God has executed his judgment on out behalf, let us
give God the honor, due unto his equal justice, with joy therein.

Yet I love the example of Israel when in the cause of wrong, done in Benjamin
to the Levite in his Concubine, they by Gods appointment destroyed the most of
that Tribe, when they had so done,

The people came to the House of God, and ahode there till even before God, and
lift up their voices and wept sore. Jud. 21.2.


4. They are charged with cruelty of hands.

1. Invasion of their City.

Ver. 13. Thou should not have entered into the Gate of my people in the day
of their calamity.

This Edom did, to behold the calamity of Jacob, not to help, but as it after
follows, to rob him; for the Idumeans joined with the Caldeans in the
Invasion of the City, and were as they, and entered in by the gate with them.

It was a double calamity to Israel, to behold their brother Edom Confederates
with their enemies, and Auxiliaries to them in their wars.

This brings Edom into the former charge of cruelty of combination, and
makes them equally culpable with the Caldeans, with whom they joined in
society of war against Israel.

2. Of direption of their goods.

Ver. 13. Neither should thou have laid hand on their, substance in the day
of their calamity.

This charge them with Theft against that Commandment, Thou shall not
steal; For not only secret stealth is therein forbidden, but all depraedation
by violent and unjust war.

As a Pirat told Alexander, I am accounted a Pirate, because I rob in a small
Ship, but thou because thou robbest in great Fleets art esteemed a great
Captain.

Thom. Aquinas. Prohibentur nocumenta quae inferuntur factor; and it extends
says Borhanus, ad quam libet alienae rei usurpationem.

And therefore when a company of pilling and pirting offenders, were carrying a
These to the Gallows, Demosthenes said, Parvum furem a majoribus duci, the
lesser Thief to be led by the greater.

This sin is so near bordering upon the sin of Murder, as sometimes, and
even in this case in my Text, it is both Theft and Murder too; for to take
away life is Murder, and to take away the necessaries by which life is
sustained, is theft, and murder too, and therefore the Apocryphal Author of
the Book called Ecclesiasticus avoucheth a Canonical truth, saying, He that
takes away his neighbors living, slays him: and he that defraudeth the
labourer of his hire is a blood shedder. Eccl. 34.22.


He gave the reason in the former Verse.

The bread of the needy is their life, Ver. 2.
he that defraudeth them thereof is a man of blood.

When Abraham heard that his brother Lot was taken Captive, Genesis 14.
and that the four Kings bad taken all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah, and
all their victuals:

He armed them of his own household, and set upon the enemy by night, and
brought back all the goods; he reskued Lot, and his women and people.

Melchizedech blessed him therefore, and said,

Blessed be the most high God, which has delivered thine enemies into thine
hand.

Here God punished theft and prey; yet he that reads the story shall find
that the quarrel of the assailant was for rebellion against him. Ver. 4.


Twelve years they served Chedarlaomer, but in the thirteenth they rebelled.

This fact of Abraham, thus blessed by Melchisedech, thus prospered by God
himself, does declare the subjection of these Kingdoms to Chedarlaomer, to
have been oppression, and their Rebellion a just prosecution of their liberty;
and therefore the war of Abraham a just war.

And God gave the robbed their goods again.

The Law of God which says, Non Furaberis, Thou shall not steal, does declare
that there is meum and tuum, mine and thine, in the things of this world, and
that God has not left an Anabaptisticall community of all those things on
earth, and a parity of interest in all men to all things; for then there would
be no theft, seeing whatsoever any man did sease on was his own.

This was no new Heresy, but a reviving of the old, of them that called
themselves Apostolici, mentioned by Saint Augustine, Haeres 40.
who in imitation of the Apostles, would have all things common.

True, that in those beginnings of Christ's Church, when the number of
Christians were yet but small, it was a voluntary, not a compulsary
communication of goods that was then, and for a small time used, as a
fortifying of themselves against the common adversary.

But there was no Law but of their own piety and charity that did impose this
as a duty upon them; so that Ananias and Saphira were not punished with sudden
death for detaining a part of the price of the field which they sold, for they
might have withheld all: but they were punished for lying to the Holy Ghost,
bringing but a part, and affirming that they brought all.

For Peter says to Ananias, After it was sold, Acts 5.4.
was it not in thine own power?

Yet in that communication it was not lawful for every man to take what he
would; Acts 5 35.
but the Apostles distributed to every one according to their need.

Surely if Edom and the Chaldeans had had as good right to the City of
Jerusalem, and to the goods therein as Israel had, God had not laid this for an
evidence against Edom, that he laid hand on their substance.

God is Lord of all, and he has given the earth to the sons of men, yet not in
common, nor in equal distribution.

Here the rich and poor meet together, Pro. 22.^.
and the Lord is maker of them both.

The Apostle learnt how to abound, and how to want; and God gives to the rich
things necessary in possession, as to owners thereof during his pleasure; he
gives them things superfluous, that their cup may run over to the relief of
others, as to his stewards put in trust, to see that their brethren want not.

And there be two virtues commended in holy Scripture which make men
Proprietaries in the things of this world, that is,

Justitia qua suum cuique tribuis, Justice whereby thou give to every one his
own.

Misericordia qua tuum, and mercy whereby thou give of thine own.

The Use of this point is, Let every one know his own, and not lay hand on the
substance of his brother; Ephesians 4 28.
and let him that stole, steal no more, but let him labor, not all for
himself, but that he may give to him that needs: that the poor may grow up
with him, as he did with Job, and that none perish for want of meat and
clothing.

Godliness must be joined with contentment, the law does not only bind the
hand, non furaberis, thou shall not steal; but it binds the heart too, non
concupisces, thou shall not cover, not his house, not his ground, not his wife,
not his servant, not any thing of his.

There be many ways of theft, I am limited to that of violent taking away of
our neighburs substance, for that only is here named and judged, and that is
either directly by invasion, or secretly practiced by oppression.

Oppression like other sins, puts on the habit of virtue, and passes for
good husbandry; but all stopping of the Wels whereof Isacc and his cattle should
drink, is oppression and theft: and whatsoever is saved from the poor by it, is
the treasure of wickedness: and the wise man tells us, Prove. 10.2.
The treasures of wickedness profit nothing; we shall see it clearer when we
come to Gods revenge upon Edom, for laying hand upon his brothers substance.

3, They are charged with insidiation for life, Neither should thou have
stood in the crosse-way to cut off those that did escape. Verse 14.


Edom divided himself against Israel, some entering the City to rob and spoil
their goods, and to destroy them that abode there, others attended without the
City, to cut off them, who to save their lives did escape out of the City.

The Chaldeans that came from far to invade Jerusalem, were not so well
acquainted with the ways and passages for escape near to the City, as the
Edomites their brethren and neighbors were; therefore that cruel office they
take upon them to declare their full malice to Jacob, and to make up a complete
destruction.

The history of those times, does make this plain.

And the City was broken up, 2 Reg. 25. v. 4.
and all the men of war fled by night, by the way of the gate, between two
walls, which is by the Kings garden; now the Chaldees were against the City
round about, and the King went the way toward the plain.

At that time the Edomite knowing the secret ways, mingled himself with the
Chaldees to cut off such as escaped.

In this passage note,



1. When you hear of these things, thank God for the peace of the Common wealth
in which you live, and reckon it amongst the great blessings of God that you
are borne in a time of peace, and live in peace every one under his own Vine,
and under his own Fig Tree, every one enjoying the comforts of life without the
noise of invasion, no leading into captivity, and no complaining in our
streets. 2. Let us also think of the woeful calamity of that part of the Church
wherein we have so great a part, so much of the best blood of this Land and
Crown in danger of this cruelty; and if either our persons or purses, or our
prayers to God may relieve them, let us not spare to comfort their distresses,
as we would desire in like extremity to be comforted our selves. 3. Let us
learn to abhor the bloody religion of the scarlet Strumpet of Rome, that
maintains and abetteth these quarrels, and kindles those coals in
Christendom, which threaten conflagration. 4. Let us observe all them that
make contention, and move the hearts of their brethren to schism to alienate
their affections from the peace of the Church; lest this sire which begins
but amongst thorns and brambles, inflame the Cedars of our Libanus.
Judah and Jerusalem, and search the cause thereof.

Surely at the commandment of the Lord came this upon Judah, 2 Reg. 24.3, 4.
to remove them out of his sight, for the sins of Manasseh according to all
that he did.

And also for the innocent blood that he shed (for he filled Jerusalem with
innocent blood) which the Lord would not pardon.

Have not we provoked the God of mercies to awake his justice against our Land?
Did ever pride put on more forms of costly vanity, and shameless disguise,
then our eyes behold?

Did drunkenness ever waste and consume more of the necessaries of life which
many poor Christians want then now?

Were the Prophets and Ministers of the Word, rebuking the vices of the times,
less hearkened to then in our days?

Was there ever a more curious search into men's estates and lands, or more
advantage taken, or more new inventions to get wealth, then we have heard of?

Was the Church at any time more rent with Schisms, and maimed by defections
and separations, and the faithful Ministers more opposed with contradictions,
and depraved by unjust calumniations by those that usurp the appearance of
great professors then now?

Did knowledge ever swel and puff men up more then now?

The times are foul, and the crimes thereof are clamorous; why then should not
we expect Iudahs punishment, that live in Iudahs sins?

O sin no more lest some worse evil fall on thee.

1. Let us break off these sins by repentance, and seek the Lord whilst he may
be found, and seeing the light of his countenance shines on us, let us walk
worthy of this light. 2. Let us serve the Lord in fear, and pray to God that
the thoughts of our heart, which are only evil continually, may be forgiven
us. 3. Let us receive with meekness the word of truth, and suffer it to be
graffed in us, that we may bring forth no longer our own sins with the fruits
of evil works, but the fruits of the word. 4. Let us pray that God would pass
by our offenses, and establish us with grace, and pluck up sin within us, that
root of bitterness which brings forth corrupt fruits of disobedience, that
God would continue upon us the light of his countenance. 5. Let us not flatter
our selves and say, none of these things shall come upon us, because we have so
long enjoyed the favors of God; for Judah, where God put his Sanctuary, and
Sion where he made himself a dwelling, was not spared. The righteous Judge of
the world is not such a one as we, though he hold his peace a while; our
provocations may make him whet his sword, and prepare against us instruments of
death.
Observe the cruelty of the Edomite, he not only joyneth in open hostility, but
in secret insidiation, to cut off all, root and branch all in a day; he is
implacable.

Such is the hatred of the Romish Church to ours; did we not see it in the
attempt in 88 for Invasion and possession? did we not see the heart of
Antichrist in the Powder Treason plotted to a perfect and full destruction.

Surely David had cause to pray to God, let me not fall into the hands of man?

This is further declared in the next circumstance, Neither should thou have
delivered those of his that remained in the day of distress.

4 Depopulation.

For if any remained, whom neither the Invasion had met with in the City, nor
the insidiation without, those the Edomite found out, and delivered into the
hands of their enemies.

Of those some fell off to the enemy, others were carried away captives, others
of the poorer sort were left in the Land to serve the enemy there to be
Vine-dressers, and Husbandmen.

This is called sweeping with a Besome, and wiping as one wipeth a dish.

Two things do aggravate this cruelty of Edom: 1. against thy brother Jacob.

For a Turk to oppress a Christian, an Infidel a Believer, is but a
trespass against humanity; for Hebrews to strive, and one Christian to afflict
another, wounds Religion also.

The Papist calls himself a Christian, and pretends great love to Christ;
he is our unnatural brother, and he casts us out by excommunication, he
hates us in our affliction: yet he says, let the Lord be glorified.

But for us to wound and smite one another of us; Protestant against
Protestant; this is seven spirits worse then the former.

Brethren by Nation, brethren by Religion should live as brethren by nature;
live as brethren, and our father will be angry if we do not, and the God of
peace will fight against us.

2. Another circumstance of time is much urged, and it makes weight; for when
was Edom so bloody? you shall see that in the time, and you will say with
Solomon, that the mercies of the wicked are cruel.

Verse 11. In the day that strangers carried away captive his forces, and
forreiners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem.

Ver. 12. In the day that thy brother became a stranger, in the day of their
destruction, in the day of distress.

Verse 13. Thrice named in the day of their calamity.

Verse 14. In the day of distress.

1. Observe in this how their cruelty is aggravated by the time, the wofullest
time that ever Jerusalem had, called therefore the day of Jerusalem; when all
things conspired to make their sorrow full, then in the anguish and fit of
their mortal disease, then did Edom arm, his eye, his tongue, his heart, his
hand, and join all those with the enemy against his brother.

2. Observe that God takes notice not only what we do one against another; but
when, for he will set these things in order before thee, for the God of mercy
cannot abide cruelty.

To strengthen the hand of affliction, and to put more weight to the burdens
of them that be overcharged, this is bloody cruelty: as

To oppress the poor is always abominable to God, but to oppress him in his
tender and orphane infancy, or in his feeble and decrepid age doubleth the
offense.

To hinder the willing labourer from his labor at all times, it is a crying
sin, and they are men of blood that do so; but in times of dearth, or in times
of his greatest expense, to deprive him of his labor, or his pay, this God
considers, for he knows whereof we are al made; and he observes our
carriage toward one another of us.

VERSE. 15, 16. For the day of the Lord is near upon all the heathen: as thou
have done it shall be done to thee, thy reward shall return upon thine own head.

16. For as ye have drunk upon my holy mountain: so shall all the heathen drink
continually, yea they shall drink, and they shall swallow down, and they shall
be as though they had not been.


This is the fourth part of this Section containing Gods revenge upon Edom
which is before threatened, particularly against Edom.

Ver. 2. Behold I have made thee small among the heathen, thou art greatly
despised.

And after further declared it, despeiring all the hopes of Edom.

1. The pride of their heart, 2. The strength of their confederacy, 3. The
strength of their situation, 4. The hope of their wise men, 5. They hope in
their own strong men.
Yet further, Ver. 10. He says, Shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut
off for ever.

But now as Edom was not alone in that sin, but joined with others, so are they
all joined together in the punishment.

The words are somewhat obscure,

For the day of the Lord, he means the day of vengeance, to repay the
violence done to his own people, called the day of the Lord, because God will
show himself, who has lain concealed as it were all this while, and been a
looker on, whilst his people did suffer punishment for their sins.

The time of Ierusalems chastisement was called the day of Jerusalem, because
their sins deserved that day to come upon them; but the day of the heathen is
here called the day of the Lord, because now God does, awake, as one out of
sleep, and shows himself clearly to his enemies.

This day the Prophet tells them is now at hand, and near to them.

This is near upon all the heathen.

Not only upon Edom, but upon all those with whom Edom joined himself against
the people of God.

The Prophet Jeremy foretelling this day, Jer. 25.
names the heathen upon whom the wrath of the Lord was to come.

And the judgment is, eye for eye, tooth for tooth. Lex talionis, wherein he
tells her, As thou have done, it shall be done to thee, etc.

And after Metaphorically he expresses the retaliation.

As thou have drunk upon my holy mountain; hereof we observe, the change of the
manner of speech that is here used; we shall clear the Text from that
difficulty that has distracted interpreters, so that they have failed in the
right meaning of these words.

For whereas before the Prophet speaks to Edom, here he brings in God
himself speaking to Jerusalem, comforting them, in the declaration of his just
judgment against her enemies; for he says to Jacob,

As thou have drunk upon my holy mountains, so shall all the heathen drink
continually.

By the Metaphor of drinking, which is referred to that which is called the cup
of the Lords indignation, of which David says,

In the hand of the Lord there is a cup, the Wine is red, etc.

By this figure then, the cup of affliction is understood: the phrase was used
after by our Savior, Let this cup pass from me; again, If thou will not let
it pass but that I must drink thereof, thy will be done.

We use that phrase to drink of the cup of God. So the threatening runs in
this sense that as the people of God upon Gods holy mountain have drunk of the
cup of Gods wrath, and have had their draught thereof, which was but for a
time: So shall all the heathen drink, and their judgment shall not have end:
they shall drink continually, there shall be no end of their affliction: they
shall swallow down the wrath of the Lord, until they be utterly destroyed, for
they shall be as though they had not been.

In which words is contained, 1. A judgment against the Heathen. 2. A
consolation to the Church.


In the judgment observe, 1. The certainty thereof, the day is set. 2. The
propinquity of it, it is near. 3. The extent of it, to all the heathen. 4. The
equity of it, as thou have done. 5. The certainty of it, they shall drink,
etc. 6. The duration of it, continually.


In the comfort note, 1. He speaks of it as of a judgment past and gone, at
ye have drunk thereof. 2. He calls their dwelling, though thus punished, My
Holy Mountain. 3. He reveals to them his severe vengeance against their
enemies.


1. Of the judgment, 2. Of the certainty.
The Lord has set down and decreed a day for vengeance; threatenings of woe at
large do move but little, but when the punishment is denounced, and the day set
for the execution thereof, this cannot but pierce and draw blood. And being
here called the day of the Lord, that is, a day designed by the Lord for this
execution, it is more quick and penetrating.

There is no sin which is committed on earth, but God has both made a Law
against it to forbid the doing of it, and he has declared his judgment
against it; yet has he given us the light of his word, or the light of the
Law, which his finger wrote in our hearts, to declare it to us, and he has
given us time also to repent and amend it, and he is patient and long-suffering
in his expectation of our amendment.

But where it is not amended, he does set down a day for the execution of his
just judgment, for he will not, he cannot suffer his truth to fail,

His patience and mercy will take their day first, and his justice will also
have her day.

Saint James advertizeth us,

Let patience have her perfect work. Jer. 1.^.


We have a fair example of God for this; For he will not let the work of his
patience be unperfect, he will forbear us till the very day of his justice
designed for punishment.

Though all the masters of Assemblies, all the Ministers of the word be
continually striking at this nail, we cannot drive it into the head; to make
men believe that God has set a day for punishment of all our sins.

The promise of grace to the penitent does so comfort us generally, that we
hope we shall have time enough to put off that day by our repentance; and then
again we often take that for repentance which is not it. For it is not enough
to remember our sins with a God forgive me; Repentance is a putting off of
sin, an hatred of it, and a change of life and manners; every sorrow is not
such.

But were it that this day were thought upon with that fear and trembling that
is due to it; it would put sin out of countenance, and the sinner out of hope.

The sinner that believes not this, does make God a liar, whose word of truth
has revealed the certainty of this day to us.

2. It armeth the lusts of the flesh against the soul; for who is he that
lives without fear, that will bridle his affections, or stop the swift current
of nature in himself, but runs into sin as an horse rusheth into the
battle.

But when we do consider upon every sin that we commit, that the day of the
Lord shall declare it, the day of the Lord shall punish it; this makes us
afraid of our secret sins for fear of shame, and of all sins for fear of
punishment.

The certainty that this day will come, the uncertainty when it will come, is
the greatest motive to hasten repentance, that may be.

2. The Propinquity, it is near.

If our Consciences be convinced of the certainty of this day, and the
judgment thereof; Satan's next allusion is to flatter us that it is afar
off, and shall not come yet, and there will be time enough to repent us of our
sin.

If we tell you indefinitely that it is near, yet you may hope not so near
but that we may prevent it.

For the Apostle has told his brethren long-agoe, of the last day, The end of
all things is at hand. But it is 1600 years since, 1 Pet. 4.7.
and where is the promise of his coming?

But let not that comfort thee in sin; for even that day is near, seeing time
is nothing to eternity; but thy day wherein God shall visit thy sins with his
judgments, may be much sooner.

If we had Commission to tell you it is but forty days, and the next day is
the day of the Lord as Jonah did; peradventure it would warn you; but we have
no Commission to say it is so; it is a good proof that it is near, when none
can promise that this very day shall not be it.

Yet we see there were some that took the day of their death near themselves,
cras moriemur: yet they made evil use of it, Edamus, bibamus, as the Epicure
Dum vivimus, ^rvamus.

For the sensual and carnal man makes that evil use of his near end, to
live more sensually. Post mortem nulla voluptas.

In every particular man's case St. John does admonish us all well; Now also is
the Axe laid to the root of the Tree.

I learn a parable of Christ.

Do but consider thine own field, and see the Com that grows upon it, and
observe if it be not white, and ready for the fickle; observe thine own ways
and works, and see if they do not tell that the day of the Lord cannot be far
off.

There be that put this day far off from them, that is by flattering themselves
in their sins; they make themselves believe that they shall not yet come to
punishment.

Repentance only lengtheneth this day, and suffers it not to approach to us.

Such an one fears not in die malo, in the evil day.

3. The extent of this judgment, over all the Heathen.

Meaning he^e all those that have joined together in war against the Jews,
See Jer. 25.

Here is a Quaerie.

Did not God stir them up against Jerusalem? In this Prophecy he declares,
how Jerusalem was chastened by the Heathen; and does not the Holy story say,
Surely at the commandment of the Lord came this upon Judah. 2 King. 24.3.


Judah well deserved this punishment, and God justly inflicted it, and the
heathen were the rod of God, wherewith he chastened Judah; yet this execution
done upon Judah by the heathen, was impious in them; for they made war
against Gods Church, and sought the ruin of Religion; it was covetous, they
robbed Jerusalem, it was cruel, they delighted in the blood of the Lords
people, it was proud they insulted over them.

It is true that these heathen do not go without God to invade Judah; true,
that he sent them to punish the transgressions of his people; true, that they
are the rod and sword of God; for so David confessed, that God bade Shimei to
curse him.

The Lord has said unto him curse David. 2 Samuel 16.10.


As in the Creation God separated the waters from the face of the earth, and
called the gathering together of the waters. Seas; yet David says, God has
set them their bounds, which they cannot pass nor return to cover the earth;
Yet they would cover the earth.

Surely the wicked are resembled to the Sea, in every consideration: the Church
may be compared to the dry land, God holds the wicked in, that they cannot
droune this dry land; yet this they would do, for there is a natural antipathy
in the heathen to the Church of God.

When the Church sins, God opens a gap and lets his Sea break in; he
suffers the wicked to scourge the Church when it defaulteth; for both their
sakes, that he may execute his judgment upon both; and as Augustine says,
Vtitur Deus malis b^^^.

In the story of the Judges, we read how the Concubine of Micah the Levite was
abused to death in Gibeah, which being complained of to the rest of the Tribes
by the Levite; they sent unto Benjamin to deliver up to them those men of
Belial that had done the villainy, Jud. 20.13.
that they might put away the evil from Israel, But Benjamin would not hear
their Brethren, but prepared to put themselves in Arms; and to go out to
battle against the children of Israel.

The children of Israel arose and went to the house of God, ver. 18.
and asked counsel of God and said, which of us shall go up first to the
battle against the children of Benjamin?

And the Lord said, Judah shall go up first. They went, and Benjamin destroyed
that day two and twenty thousand men.

The children of Israel went up and wept before the Lord until even, and asked
counsel of the Lord, saying, ver. 23.
Shall I go up in battle against the children of Benjamin my brother?

And the Lord said, go up against him.

They did so the second day, and the children of Benjamin destroyed of Israel
eighteen thousand men.

Here was nothing done without consulting of God, God bade them go, and yet
they prospered not; yea they lost in all forty thousand men.

There is no clear expression in this story to declare why God punished Israel
with this great effusion of blood.

Plain it is that Gods. purpose was to punish Israel, and first the Tribe of
Judah; but the Text shows,

1. That the cause of this war was a just provocation; there was villainy done
in Israel. 2. That the end of this war was godly, for it was to remove evil
from Israel. 3. That they did nothing herein without Gods express warrant; for
they began to take counsel of the Lord.
Yet before God would revenge the fault of the Benjamites upon them, by
Benjamin he punished the Tribe of Judah first, and then the rest of the Tribes
with loss of so many men, and effusion of so much blood.

And I must tell you that I find not the reason thereof expressed.

It may be that the Holy Ghost has suppressed it, that we might rest in the
fear of God, and not search further: it is enough for us to know what God
does, and not why? for as Augustine says, Iudicia Dei occulta esse possunt,
injusta non possunt esse, Gods judgments may be secret, but never unjust,

And we must be very tender how we call God to account for what he does; for
God is whatsoever his will is, of which we must not seek to know more then is
revealed; for that is prying into the Arc, and costeth death, God is
accomptable to none for what he does.

The third day he gave Israel a full victory against Benjamin; by Benjamin He
first scourged Israel, and by Israel he after destroyed Benjamin, and left of
them but six hundred men.

So may we say of this example in my Text, God uses the heathen to scourge his
Church, and after destroys the heathen in his just, but secret judgment.

Yet let me tell you what some learned judgments have conceived of that great
example of justice in that story of Israel and Benjamin.

Rabbi Levi says that Israel might provoke God at first, because they came to
God to ask who should go first against Benjamin, and did trust to their own
strength; and did not beseech God to give them victory.

Rabbi Kimchi says it was because that Israel had suffered Idolatry in Dan,
and had never taken the cause of God to heart, to ask counsel of God against
them i^^ but now in a private injury done to a Levite they were provoked and
sought revenge.

3. Others conceive that this was the cause, They came too slightly to God at
first, for they did only bluntly enquire who should go first against Benjamin?
Not whether they should go or not? Not enquiring by what way he meant to punish
their brother.

But the second time they went up to the Lord, they wept till even, and then
they asked counsel. Shall I go up again in battle against my brother. Yet
even then being commanded to go, they lost eighteen thousand men.

True, but they came not the second time with that preparation which became
them, that would sight the Lords battails, to remove evil out of Israel; for
the third day they mended all; Then all the children of Israel and all the
people went up, and came unto the house of God and wept, ver. 26.
and sat there before the Lord, and fasted that day until even, and offered
burat offerings, and peace offerings before the Lord.

Then they enquired of the Lord, for there was the Arc, and there was Phineas
the son of Eleazer the s^nne of Aar^n standing.

And they said, shall I yet go again to battle against the children of
Benjamin my brother, or shall I cease? And then God promised them victory.

It may be that they offended in the two first days in their preparation; they
were not enough humbled before the Lord, or in the manner of their consultation
with God.

But I must tell you plainly, all these are the conjectures of some learned
judgments concerning this question, God has left no account to us of his
proceedings therein.

Neither has he done the like in the example in my Text, why he punishes all
the heathen for smiting Jerusalem, seeing himself set them a work.



This is one of Gods strange works that he does upon earth; he foretells one
of them by his Prophet Habakuk and says;

Behold ye among the beathen, and wonder marvellously; for I will work a work
in your days, Hab. 1.5.
which you will not believe though it be told you, and what is that?

For lo, I raise up the Caldeans that bitter and hasty Nation, which shall
march through the breadth of the Land, to possess the dwelling places that are
not theirs.

They are terrible and dreadful; their judgment and their diguity shall
proceed of themselves.

Their horses also are swifter then the Leopards, and are more fierce then the
evening wolves, etc.

These are sent of God, and they prevail, and when they have done, they thank
their own god for the victory.

But the Church is comforted against them.

O Lord, thou have ordained them for judgment, thou have established them for
correction. Therefore the example of Israel having overcome Benjamin in the
former story is excellent; for when they had conquered their brother, they did
not say in triumph, we have prevailed, nor bragged of their victory; But the
people having fulfilled the will of God in that war;

Came to the house of God, Jud. 21.2.
and abode there till even before God, and lift up their voices and wept sore.

They were sorry that God had used their sword and arm to their brother.

4 The equity of this judgment.

As thou have done, it shall be done to thee: thy reward shall return upon
thine own head. ver. 15.


The law of nature written in our hearts, is, Do as thou would be done to.

For Aristotle's abrasa tabula is not true Divinity.

Seeing the heathen will not do this, the justice of God puts it upon them.

They shall be done to as they do.

Of this point see before,

5 The Contents of this judgment.

They shall drink; yea, they shall drink and swallow down, and they shall be
as though they had not been.

The old heathen had a fashion of capital punishment by death, to give the
offender a potion of poison to drink.

The Prophet here speaks of the punishment of Edom, and the Heathen in that
very phrase, alluding to that of David;

Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible
tempest; Psa. 11.6. Psa. 63.
that shall be the portion of their cup.

And, Thou have showed thy people hard things: thou have made us to drink of
the wine of astonishment; this is the Cup that David speaks of.

For in the hand of the Lord there is a Cup, and the wine i^ red: it is full of
mixture, Psa. 75.8.
and he pours out of the same; but the dregs thereof all the wicked of the
earth shall wring them out, and drink them.

Wine immoderately drunken, does set the body on fire, it infatuateth the
brain, it makes the parts of the body useless, that neither head, nor hand,
nor foot can do their several offices.

Drunkenness is such a disabling to man, that God has chosen to express the
severity of his wrath, in the similitude of drunkenness; and the Prophet
Jeremie has used the very phrases thereof upon like occasion.

Take the wine of this cup of my fury at my hand, and cause all the Nations to
whom I send thee, to drink it. Jer. 25.15.


16. And they shall drink and be moved and be mad. Yet more fully;

27. Drink ye and be drunken, and spue and fall, and rise no more.

Let drunkards behold themselves in this glass, and see how loathsome and how
dangerous a sin they sin.

Every cup they drink immoderately, is a cup of Gods wrath: every Health they
drink drunkenly is a disease even unto death; drunkenness makes men the
emblems of Gods indignation; the very Images and pictures of divine vengeance.

In this phrase God often in Scripture does express his judgment, and his
fury and vengeance against evil doers. Therefore,

Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess.

I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God that you would do no more so; if
any of you have by occasion been overtaken with that Epidemicall and popular
fault, do no more so wickedly, sin not against your own bodies; Morbus est; its
a disease, sin not against your good name, it is a foul blemish to be called a
drunkard; they that are so, are very impatient of that name.

Sin not against Gods creatures, they were given us for use and service: not
that we abusing them, should become servants to them, and be overcome of them.

Sin not against your brethren by evil example, or by tempting them to this
sin.

Above all, God forbid that you should do this great wickedness and so sin
against your God.

You see he can and and will set you a drinking off his cup, and he will make
you doffe it as you call it; and do him right to drink all, even to the bottom
till you fall and rise no more, till as my Text says,

You be as though you had not been.

The phrase of my Text has carried me thus far out of my way, but I must do
so, if I will meet with drunkards, for they are so brain-crased, that they
cannot keep the right way.

I return to the contents of this judgment, thus expressed in the phrase of
drinking.

Th^se Nations have filled the cup of affliction full for Jerusalem, and
Jerusalem has drunk deep thereof; now God will change the object of his fury,
he will take away his cup from the Church, and he will give it to her enemies,
as Isaiah has sweetly and fully declared it to the great grief of the
Nations, the great joy of the Church.

21, Hear thou afflicted and drunken but not with wine.

22. Thus says the Lord, and thy God that pleads the cause of his people:
Behold I have taken out of thy hand the cup of trembling, the dregs of the cup
of my fury; thou shall no more drink it again.

23. But I will put it into the hand of them that afflict thee, which have said
to thy soul, bow down that we may go over, and thou have laid thy body as the
ground, and as the street to them that went over.

This calls to my remembrance the word of the Apostle St. Peter;

For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God; 1 Pe^,
4.17.
and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the
Gospel of God?

When God sent destroyers into Jerusalem, their commission was, Ezekiel. 9.6.


Slay utterly old and young, both maids, and little children, and women. It
follows,

And begin at my Sanctuary.

The first cruelty that was executed on earth, that is upon record, was upon
just Abel, and the first death we read of, was a violent death.

The first that suffered in Sodom any notable affliction, was righteous Lot.

For he lived in much tribulation, vexed with the filthy conversation of the
wicked. ^ Pet. 2.7.


For that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing, and hearing, vexed his
righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds.

After that cruel execution done upon our Savior Christ by the Jews and
Romans, God sent his judgments abroad into the world, but he began at his own
Sanctuary; the first that suffered was Steven, then James the brother of John;
the Apostles all but one suffered martyrdom; the Church lived in persecution,
then God punished the Jews by the Romans, and after that the Romans lost
their Monarchy.

The difference of their drinking was:

1. The Church drinks first, and tastes of the cup of wrath, as Christ said
to the sons of Zebedee;

Ye shall drink of the cup whereof I drink, and be baptized with the Baptism
that I am baptized withal.

They drink some of the uppermost of the cup.

2. God punished them for a time, but he took not his mercy utterly from them.

The Church have an end of their afflictions; but the next point declares the
severity of God against the enemy Nations.

5. The duration: Continually.

This sometimes holds in temporal afflictions; if Gods curse be upon Canaan,
Israel shall have their Land, and they shall have charge to root them out, and
to destroy them utterly.

God remembers what Amalek did to Israel The Lord has sworn that he will
have war with Amalek from generation to generation.

The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance
of them from the earth.

These carry their destruction about them; for evil shall slay the wicked;
malum culpae, the evil of sin, that infecteth them, shall be malum poenae, to
punish and torment them.

The reason hereof is, for where God once hates, he ever hates.

He has once said, I have hated Esau: let the blessing of his father feed him
with the fat of the earth, let his habitation be in the rock, let his neighbor
Nations make leagues and confederation with him, let him have all the purchase
of his sword for a time; the right hand of God shall find him out, and not
leave smiting him till he be utterly destroyed; so he is threatened before.

His very hidden things shall be sought out, the decrees of God be like himself
without variableness or shadow of change.

God has ever given great way to the intercessions of his Saints; they have so
far prevailed, that Abraham praying for Sodom, gave over asking before God
gave over yielding to his Petition.

God has showed much favor to evil places for some few righteou^ persons
sakes, that have been there.

But when he comes to execute judgment once upon a place, he says three times
in one chapt Though Noah, Ezech. 14.
Daniel and Job were in that place, they should deliver but their own souls by
their righteousness, but they should deliver neither son nor daughter.

Therefore the word of God is not sent in the Ministry of his servants to
convert reprobates; that cannot be, they cannot be converted; and if God had
revealed to us whom he hates, we might save a labor of preaching to them in
hope of their conversion.

But the use of preaching and prayer is, for such as are already in the Church,
to confirm the brethren, and to build them up further for those sheep which
are without, to bring them to the fold; for Christ says, he has other sheep
which are not yet of his fold, and them he must bring to it.

And when you read of so many added to the Church, it was not out of the number
of reprobates, but out of the number of Gods chosen, who were before uncalled.

This is a secret which God concealeth within the closet of his own wisdom;
The Lord knows who are his.

Let the elect of God rest in this: if the wicked of the earth that live in all
kind of ungodliness be in the decree of his election, they cannot miscarry,
though they hold out as the thief did, till they come to the cross to die.

Therefore let us despair of no man's salvation amongst us.

But if the decree of Gods hatred be settled upon them, there is no hope; for
Christ the remedy of sin undertaketh for no more then the Father has given to
him.

These howsoever they prosper on earth in things temporal, they have drank a
draught of deadly wine, that ever rises up in them, and upbraideth them; for
God has spoken, it. Nulla pax impio, there is no peace to the wicked.

But he is like the raging of the unquiet sea, ever foming out mire and dirt,
for a reprobate man dare not trust God.

2. But if we come to the after reckoning in the day of judgment, there can be
no end of the woe of them whom God hates; their worm of conscience never
dies, their fire of torment never is quenched.

There have been some whom Saint Augustine does call Misericordes illos, that
have believed and affirmed, 1. Some of them that the damned Devils, and all
after some long time of sharp punishment, shall be received into favor; De
civ. 21.17.
these make hell but a Purgatory. 2. Others say, True, that they shall be
damned to everlasting pains but Donabit eas Deus precibus and intercessionibus
sanctorum suorum. Cap. 18.



The illusion that deceives them is this:

Non credendum est tunc amissuros sanctos viscera misericordiae, cum fuerint
plenissimae ac perfectissimae sanctitatis: at qui tunc orabant pro inimicis,
quando ipsi sine peccato non erant, tunc non orent pro supplicibus suis, quando
nullum caeperint habere peccatum.

And supposing that the Saints will pray to God for them, he infers.

An vero Deus tunc eos non exaudiet, tot and tales filios suos, quando in tanta
eorum sanctitate, nullum inveniet orationis impedimentum?

This is further urged,

For when we say the Scripture does tell us that God will everlastingly punish
the wicked; and David says, He will not suffer his truth to fail;

They answer, that all those threatenings of Scripture are to be understood in
veritate severitatis, in respect of the evil desert of the wicked but not in
veritate miserationis; for that must at last have honor above all his works.

Further they plead.

God has never more plainly and positively declared his will concerning the
eternal destruction of the reprobate then he did by his Prophet Jonah, declare
the destruction of Niniveh; it is but forty days, and without any condition,
Ninive destruetur.

Except we allow mental reservation, mendacem non possumus dicere Deum, and
tamen non factum est.

The truth was in this, pronunciavit eos dignos haec pati.

Their inference is, Si tunc pepercit eis Deus quando Prophetam suum
contristaturus erat parcendo; quanto magis tunc parcet miserabilius
supplicantibus quando, ut parcat omnes sancti ejus orabunt?

They add the saying of the Apostle: God has concluded all under sin that he
might show mercy unto all.

To the first, and therein to both Saint Augustine does fully answer, that if
we deny everlasting death, we may as well deny life everlasting; for we have
the same ground for both, the same direct word of God.

Aut utrumque cum fine diuturnum, Cap. 23.
aut utrumque sine fine perpetuum.

To the second, he denies that which is presumed, that the Saints will pray
for the damned; here we pray for all, because we know not who be elect, who be
reprobate; but when God has revealed his will concerning these, cessat oration,
praying cease, and the voice of the elect is, fiat voluntas tua, thy will be
done.

Yea, the Saints shall judge the world then; and those bowels of humane
commiseration which they had on earth, are put off; they now hate where God
hates, and judge where God judges, and rejoice against them whom God
condemns.

And for the example of Niniveh, his answer is full, and sappie, Evertuntur
peccatores duobus modis.

1. Sicut Sodomitae, ut pro peccatis suis homines punian^ur. 2. Sicut
Ninivitae, ut ipsa horum peccata poenitendo destruantur; there was the mistake
of Jonah, for that was the City which God threatened and destroyed.
Eversa est Ninive quae mala erat, and bona aedificata est quae non erat.
Stantibus maenibus, perditis moribus.

To the last Argument from the words of the Apostle, he has concluded all
under sin, that he might have mercy on all.

He bids them there read the whole text, they shall there see quos omnes
intelligit, nempe eos omnes de quibus loquebatur; that is, both Jews and
Gentiles, not comprehending the whole of both: but only vasa misericordiae in
both, the vessels of mercy; and the very course of the Text cleereth it to be
so meant.

Therefore the revealed will of God has settled this perpetuity of woe upon the
ungodly: They shall drink, and they shall drink continually.

The justice of this proceeding against the ungodly is taken from the merit of
sin, which being committed against an infinite Majesty, must needs be also
infinite: now the person guilty being finite, cannot bear a punishment
infinite in the weight of it, and therefore it must be infinite in durance to
eternity.

Again, the hater of God repaieth vengeance which is deserved, at least with
the same measure wherewith his love gives rewards undeserved; but the love of
God gives eternal life, therefore the ha^red of God cannot give less then
eternal death. This shows you the reason of those earnest exhortations, To
work out your salvation, to make your calling and election sure; he means in
your own faith, for so long as a man lives in fear of this eternal
judgment, and sees no way to escape it; his soul is among Lions, even the
roaring Lion and all his whelps: it is in the keeping of the spirit of
bondage, his sins lie so heavy upon him that he cannot look up.

2 The comfort employed and expressed;

1. He speaks of the judgment on Israel, as already past and over; as ye
have drunk. 2. He calls Jerusalem, though thus wasted and made desolate, My
holy Mountain. 3. He graciously reveals to his Church his just revenge upon
his enemies.
1. As ye have drunk, that is when as ye have drunk of this Cup of affliction,
then God shall take it from you; which does yield this comfortable Doctrine,

That though the Church of God do live for a time under the Cross, God will
not leave it so for ever.

minister to his Church, to heal the soars and diseases thereof.

Time i^^ in Plutarch, Apoph.
seeing the people very disorderly (...).

But Physic is not given perpetually, it cease when the disease is removed;
God knows the use of the rod to be necessary for a time; so the Church
confesses;

For when thy judgments are in the Earth, Isa. 26.9.
the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness.

When they have taken out that lesson God cease to afflict.

God is sharp in these visitations; Ioh has not leisure to swallow his
spittle. Job 7.19. Psa. 30.5.


Yet he endures but a while in his anger; Weeping may abide for the evening,
but joy comes in the morning.

For a little time have I forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I
gather thee; for a moment in mine anger I bid my face from thee, for a little
season, but with everlasting mercy, have I had compassion on thee;

1. The cause of Gods favor eftsoons shining on the Church, after affliction,
is to let them see that his quarrel is not to the persons, but the sins of
men; for no sooner do men repent of their sins, but God also repents of his
judgments.

He is a father; and a tender father does not love the smart, but seeks the
amendment of his son; and God himself in the smiting of his Church, is first
weary, and he complains first.

Why should you be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more, the whole
head is sick, and the whole heart faint.

From the soul of the foot, even to the head, there is no soundness in it,
but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying soars, etcl

Thus God suffers in the passions of his children, and all our stripes ache
upon him.

Yet he is a God that loves not iniquity, and therefore when he laid upon his
dea^ely beloved son the iniquity of us all, the Apostle said, He spared not
his own Son, but gave hin unto death.

2. He will not suffer his Church to live always forsaken under the Cross, in
respect of his servants, and that for four reasons;

1. Afflictions do work upon them so, that it breeds in them contrition and
sorrow for their sin: and a broken and contrite spirit God cannot refuse, he
will not discourage the contrite and sorrowful, but will have them to know
that their groanings and sighs, come up even into his ears; He puts all
their tears in his bottle.

2. Afflictions do turn the children of God into prayers and supplications,
and he will not neglect them that pray to him, that they may see the power and
virtue of prayer, that upon all occasions they may prostrate their hearts
before God in prayer.

God has said of the just man: He shall call upon me in trouble, Psa. 91.15
Hos 5.15.
and I will hear him; yes, I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him
and glorify him; in their afflictions they will seek me diligently.

In the house of bondage he heard Israel. Exo. 3.7.


Then the Lord said I have surely seen the trouble of my people, which are in
Egypt, and have heard their cry; St James says,

If any man among you be afflicted, let him pray.

If that were not our comfort when all remedies fail us, we were most unhappy:
for we can never be shut up so, but we may send our prayers from us to heaven,
to plead our cause in the name of Jesus Christ.

3 Sharp afflictions may be a strong temptation to make the children of God
doubt of the love of God; It was not lawful for them in the judicial Law to
be immoderate in correction.

A trespasser might have forty stripes given him, but not more, lest if he
should exceed, and beat him above these with many stripes, Deu. 25.3
then thy brother should seem vile unto thee.

God will not overdoe in his chastenings of his Church, to prevent this danger,
lest his servant should think himself lost in the favor of God; We see how
David was put to it in this kind.

When his soar ran, and ceased not, his soul refused comfort: yea, once he
complained.

My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? yea, he thought upon God, and was
troubled.

Therefore God does carry a favorable hand in his afflictions, to prevent the
despair of his children; for he knows whereof we be made.

4. Sharp afflictions may be an occasion to harden the heart of man, and make
himful away from God to sin; and that reason is given by the holy Psalmist.

For the rod of the wicked: shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous, Psa.
125.2.
lest the righteous put forth their bands to iniquity.

Indeed some that have been well taught, and do understand well, and have lived
in some measure of good life, and walked conscionably, when God has tried them
with wants, have fallen into snares, and embraced temptations.

Magnum pauperies opprobrium jubes quidvis and facere, and pati, vircutisqu^;
vi^m deserit arduae.

Shifts, frauds, secret stealths, borrowings without means, or hope of
repayment, etc.

The wise son of Iakeh prayed to God; Give me not poverty, lest I be poor and
steal, Pro. 30.9.
and take the name of my God in vain.

Extremity of pain in sickness and soarenesse, is a great temptation: two
great lights in the Church of God were ecclipsed by it; Job the example of
patience, fell into bitter cursings of the do of his birth: so did holy Jeremy
the Lords Prophet.

To these respects God is tender, and suffers not his chosen to be temp^^d
above their strength, but does give issue to their temptations.

Yet sometimes he suffers his Elect to see their own weakness, by some
fall, that when he puts to his helping hand, they may be more wary to keep a
better watch upon their hearts.



It is David's suite to God; Let them not say we have prevailed.

When Saul and Jonathan were dead, David lamented them with great lamentation.

The beauty of Israel is slain upon the high places, how are the mighty
f^llon. 2 Samuel 1.19, 20.


T^ll is not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Ashkelon, lest the
daughters of the Philistines rejoice: lest the daughters of the uncir^^^tised
triumph.

For this adds to the ungodliness of the wicked, they grow proud upon it.

Let not their wicked imagination prosper, les^ they grow too proud.

David does pray so earnestly;

Quicken me O Lord for thy names sake; Ps. 143.11.
for thy righteousness sake bring my soul out of trouble.

The ungodly Jews and Romans, standing by the Cross of Christ, did speak
contemptibly of God, and took his name in vain in derision of his son.

It is the manner of the ungodly to blaspheme, if once they prevail against
the Church; then the God they serve is thought unable to protect them, and the
Religion that they profess is scandalized for untruth.

These be great reasons why God does not forsake his Church in affliction, but
gives them a heavenly issue out of them.

This point teaches its own use; for it serves both to;

1. Inform; 2 Convince; 3 Exhort; 4 Rebuke.
1 Information.

This is a sure and infallible rule, That whom God once loves he ever loves,
as he says, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee; for the gifts and
calling of God are without repentance; his love is himself, and he cannot deny
himself, he has given us to his son; Romans 8, 35
and of them that thou have given me, says he, I have lost none: and no man
can take them out of my hand. What shall separate us from the love of God in
Christ Jesus? he names the greatest miseries of life.

Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword?

Nay, in all these things we are more then conquerors, Cant. 2.4.
through him that loved us.

The love of God to his Church is a banner over it.

2 Conviction.

This Doctrine convinces the Heathen, who deny that there is a any Providence;
because the best men drink deepest of the cup of affliction, which makes the
profane say, It is in vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have
kept his Ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of
Hosts? Mal. 3.14.
True, that they who make conscience of their ways, are despised, their soul
is filled with the scorn of the proud.

True, Ver. 25.
that they that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt God are
delivered; but the Elect say, for thy sake we are killed all the day long.

Yet the comfort that the just have in their affliction, does assure that
verily there is a reward for the righteous, doubtless there is a God that
judges the earth.

And though for a time the wicked insult over the just, the day will come when
they shall see their ruin.

3. Exhortation.

surely God is good to Israel.

But in the furnace seven times heated, in the den of Lions, in the belly of
the Whale, in the valley of the shadow of death, they that then trust in the
Lord, they declare their faith more then victorious.

In sickness and smart, and pains of the body, in want and misery, those that
then say to God, Thou art my Rock and my Fortress, my strong hold, and the God
of my Salvation: though thou kill me, I will trust in thee;

These are more then conquerors by faith; for they do not only conquer fear,
and all the temptations to despair, but they do advance instead thereof, joy
in the Holy Ghost, rejoicing in tribulations, and giving thanks to God for all
their sorrows.

for tribulation bri^geth forth patience, and patience must have a perfect
work to hold out to the end; by our patience we possess our souls; for the
impatient man is not his own man; impatience is like drunkenness, it so
staggereth our reason, and drowneth our understanding in the deluge of passion
and perturbation, that our tongue speaks, our heart thinks, our hand
works things that in the next casme we have cause to repent.

3. Affliction is Cos orationis, the whetstone of prayer, it turns us all
into; ^rayer, as I have taught, and makes us call upon him who is, Deus
liberator, God our deliverer.

4 Affliction is Cos obedientia, the whetstone of obedience; so now I keep thy
Commandments says David, Quia bonum est me affligi, because it is good for me
to have been afflicted, I have gotten that good by it.

5. It teaches us commiseration of the sorrows of our brethren, and fills us
with comforts wherewith we comfort them, according as we have received comfort
our selves in our sorrows.

So when we visit one another in sickness, if we have had either some other,
or some like pains our selves, we tell them how we found ease; so the Apostle
says,

Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercy,
and God of comfort, 2 Cor. 1.2.
who comfort us in all tribulations, that we may be able to comfort them
which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted
of God.

For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also
abounds by Christ.

4. Rebuke.

This doctrine chideth those that can, receive good at the hands of God, and
not evil, who upon every affliction, fall out with God, and murmr at his
visitations, and doubt of his favor as if temporal ease and prosperity were
the measure of his love.

There is a root of bitterness in us and the best of Gods Saints have declared
themselves to be but men in this trial; afflictions are too strong for us, we
cannot well endure pain, we cry to our Surgeon, Toll quia urit, take it
away, it paineth me, the plaster paineth us; he tells us, Non tollam quia
sanat, I will not, because I would cure you: we see that this pain is soon
over; God continues but a while in his anger; this is the only Purgatory of
the Elect and this sire is but for our dross, and this medicine is but for our
disease.

2. He calls Jerusalem though thus wasted and overthrown, My Holy Mountain
David says, He loved the Gates of Sion more then ill the habitations of Jacob.

God said of it, Here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein.

The former doctrine declares that God did not mean to cast off his people
for ever; and the next words, ver. 17. promise restoration.

Two things had met on this Mountain, to corrupt it and unsanctifie it.

1. The grievous and crying sins of the people of God, provoking wrath. 2.
The barbarous cruelty of the enemies of the Church, executing wrath.
These made no difference, between holy and unholy, but first robbed and
pillaged the Sanctuary, and carried away the treasures and utensils, the
ornaments of the Temple, and all that might yield them any profit, and then put
fire to that admirable pile of the curiousest structure for art and cost that
ever the bright eye of heaven looked upon.

I cannot but stay your thoughts upon the way, to consider with me what
desolations sin may make upon the earth.

Here is blood spilt in Jerusalem the holy City, no respect of the gray hairs,
no compassion of the fairest Virgins, no tenderness either to newborn, or
unborne children.

Here is deportation of others in numerous multitudes into Captivity, to become
Vassals to thy proud Conqueror the Assyrian Monarch.

Here is the City of God demolisht, the very ring and jewel of the jewel of the
world, the Psalmist calls it; The joy of the whole earth; here is the Temple,
the rich Diamond of that ring, the place wherein God was served, and offerings
were burnt therein to his name, that now made an Holocust and Burnt-offering it
self, and sending forth lambentes sydera flammas, flames ascerding to the
stars.

The specious, spacious Courts of that house, Gods own enclosure, and all the
holy mountain, the glebe-land of the Church, laid common.

The land emptied of her native inhabitants, save some few reserved to be the
drudges of the Caldeans, to plough their grounds, and to dress their vines.

Beloved, a greater example of the provocation of sin, or the execution of
justice no time, not all the Books of time have ever showed.

And what shall we say? has sin lost the sting that it had wont to carry, or
has God lost his seeling, that we should equal that City in sins, and not
expect equal vengeance?

Every man shunnes it, to be a Prophet of ill news, and men had rather exhort,
then correct: If we come with the rod which Paul threatened, we may chance
bansel it our selves.

Sinners be too bold to be under the check of Gods Ministers, but there is one
a loft, that says, But I will reprove thee, and set in order before thee the
things that thou have done.

The comfort yet is, that this Mountain of Sion, though thus punished, is
called Gods mountain still; God vouchsafes to own it, and call it his; the
enemies thereof have gotten the possession of it, yet God will not lose the
right of his inheritance there, for he means to build up again what the
enemy has destroyed, and return again those whom the enemy has carried away
captives, as the next Section declares fully.

Let the brethren of Schism and Separation lay this to heart, who full from
the communion of the Church of England, pretending the great corruptions that
be, some in the doctrine, but most in the Discipline thereof.

Is Sion the Mountain of the Lord still, although both sin and vengeance
have left it desolate? Did Christ call the Temple his fathers house, when the
ungodly prophaners of it had made it a den of thieves?

I dare not say now, though that Mountain of the Lord, and the place whre Gods
honor did sometimes dwell, and wherein God took delight, has almost endured
sixteen hundred years desolation, and is now the cage of unclean birds,
inhabited by Turks and Saracens, and for the profit of both, by Popish
Idolators, which make prize of Pilgrims resorting to visit the places
sometimes hallowed by the presence of Christ and his Mother, and his holy
servants; I dare not say that God has lost his interest therein, or resigned
all his right thereto.

Nullum tempus occurrit regi. I remember the Prophecy of Zachary.

But it shall be one day, Zac. 4.7, 8
which shall be known to the Lord, nor day, nor night, but it shall come to
pass, that at evening time it shall be light.

And it shall be in that day that living waters shall go out from Jerusalem.

A Prophecy not yet fulfilled; for though Interpreters do commonly attribute
this to the coming of Christ in the flesh, and the light of the Gospel,
beginning at Jerusalem, and shining over all the world, the words of the Text
do directly confute that exposition: for this prophecy is determined to the
evening time, that is to the latter end of the world, and Christ came in the
fullness of time.

And at the coming of Christ in the flesh, it was not as here is said, Nor day,
nor night, for then Lux magna orta est: the sun of righteousness arose in
our hemisphere, the very night was lighted to the shepherds with an
extraordinary clarity.

And such a light shone in Jerusalem, as not only lighted them, but it was a
light to lighten the Gentiles, it shone to the East upon the Magi there, and
all the ends of the world soon saw the salvation of their God.

Therefore, I conclude that this prophecy is to be fulfilled toward the end of
the world, when God shall call again his people from far, and his dispersed
from the ends of the earth.

When the fullness of the Gentiles is come in, then shall God call again his
people, and remember the oath that he swear unto Abraham, and the sure mercies
of David. Then shall he set his name again in Jerusalem, and displant the
intruders upon his possession, and settle his habitation once again upon the
Holy mountain at the end of the world.

Yet I do not affirm that there shall be again a Commonwealth of the Jews, or
a distinction of Tribes, as heretofore, that wall of partition is taken down,
and the bond of Christian Religion shall be the bond of peace, and God has
said it. Tros Tyrius ve, mihi nullo discrimine agetur. Both Jew and Gentile,
all shall be alike.

But God has laid such claim to this mountain, and professed so much love to
it, that I dare not believe that he can forget it for ever, but that when the
time, the appointed time shall come, he will have mercy upon Sion, and will
pity the ruins and dust thereof^^^.

But when here Sion is called Mons sanctus meus, my Holy mountain: here is a
quaere how any place can be called Holy, and what kind of holiness it is,
which is ascribed to any place.

Surely if it be Sanctus quia meus, what place is it where God is not, he is in
the valley of the shadow of death: he is present over men in the nethermost
hell.

But God is said to sanctify some places here on earth, because he is present
there.

1. Secundum specialem curam, in respect of his special care and protection.
2. Secundum specialem cultum, in respect of his special Worship.
Jerusalem was the place which God took into his special protection, and where
he placed his special worship; for the Lord God was well known in Sion; at
Salem was his Tabernacle, and his dwelling in Sion.

1. And for the special care that he had of that place, He loved the gates of
Sion more, etc.

And though the earth was the Lords, and all that therein is, yet of Sion he
said, here do I dwell: I have a delight herein.

And this Spiritualis cura, Spiritual care, so sanctified that place that when
Israel had polluted the worship of God, and Heathen came in upon Gods
inheritance, and defiled his Sanctuary, yet ceased not that place to be Holy;
not by any inherent holiness as the Roman Church suggesteth, but only secundum
specialem curam, because it was not yet out of Gods special protection; and
only thus it is holy at this day.

2. Propter specialem cultum, for his special worship; when any place is
dedicate to Gods worship, and separate from common use, it is an holy place,
and God vouchsafes there specialem praesentiam, a special presence. For I am
not of Mr. Calvin's mind who says, Templa non sunt propria Dei habitacula, unde
aurem propius admoveat. For God has a special interest in those places which
are separate to his special worship, and the very place is fearful to them that
have any sense of Religion; and as Damascen says, plus participat gratiae and
operationis Dei, they partake more of the powerful operation of God.

For why is Heaven the Throne of God more then the earth, but because God does
there more express his glory, then he does here.

And for the interest that God has in those consecrated places, consider Gods
challenge in my Text, Sion though in the Land of the Chaldeans, is the Mount of
God.

Churches and Lands once given to God, do remain his for ever; for unless God
shall manifestly reveal his resignation to man, what man on earth has any
assignment from him of his right.

Beloved, we have power to give to God of his own, but we have no power on
earth for revocation, when it is once Sacred, and God has enclosed it, no man
can lay it common.

But the fat of the Church has fed so many of all degrees in this Land to that
grouth and strength, that this Doctrine is a Paradox, and we are but laughed at
when we plead the right of God to things sacred.

For if Sacrilege be a sin, what rank of men in this or our neighbor
kingdom does not live in sin and by sin?

The Mount of Sion is challenged here to be the holy Mountain of God, in whose
hand soever the possession thereof be, and all that invade the right of God in
things sacred shall hear him complain, Prove. 20.25.
Ye have robbed me; and though they make it strange, and ask wherein have we
robbed thee? Solomon will tell them, It is a snare for a man to devour that
which is Sanctified, and after the vows to enquire.

3. It is a great favor of God to his Church to reveal to them his will
concerning both their own short punishment, and the long affliction of their
enemies.

For themselves, they shall see in this revelation, that God will not give then
over utterly; and affliction does never show intolerable when we can look
beyond it, and see fair weather after it.

This had need be preached to the Church of God, to keep them from fainting in
their patience, from falling into sin.

David confessed, Ps 27.13.
I had fainted unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the
Land of the living.

The Prophet having given us his own example, does also give us his good
counsel;

Wait on the Lord, the of good courage, Ver. 14.
and he shall strengthen thy heart; wait I say on the Lord.

You see the use of this doctrine is to put mettle into us that we be not cast
down with the present sense of Gods judgment, but that we courageously do
bear them, and patiently expect our deliverance from them. Of this before.

2. It is a comfort and joy, to the Church to know that God will execute their
judgments upon their enemies, and pass the cup of his wrath from them to
those that hate them.

1. Because it stops the way to an high and grievous sin, which is
murmuring against God; let every man suspect himself for this; for Gods own
Israel did often fall this way; But when God reveals to us his purpose we
cannot find fault: though we feel where judgment begins we know where it
shall end. 2. It allayeth all thoughts of revenge on them that trouble and
persecute us; for to what purpose should we fret our selves at the instruments
of Gods vengeance, when we know the end of these men, how God has set them in
slippery places, and that he will take the matter into his own hand to revenge
it?
And this is a necessary Doctrine for us, because the pursuit of private
revenge is one of the crying sins of the time. We have poor men that to molest
a neighbor will swear the peace against them to put them in bonds; when it is
to be feared that it is rather revenge then fear that makes them swear, and
this upon a little cooling of blood appears clearly.

Just Laws are made to do men right against wrongs; we must go to Judges as
children to their Father, to seek Justice in charity, not in the spirit of
revenge. God has declared himself to be Deus ultionum a God of revenge, and
has promised to judge our cause; let us commit the matter to him, and give our
souls rest possessing them with patience.

Israel shall see their cup that they have but tasted, drunk up and swallowed
down of their enemies: the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Mine eye shall see my desire upon mine enemies. Ps 92.11.


David makes this use of this point,

By this I know that thou favourest me, Ps. 41.12.
because mine enemy does not triumph over me.

For it is a good sign of Gods love to his Church, that he suffers not the
ungodly to insult over them.

And for the enemies of the Church, they may have victory, they cannot have a
triumph; for the cup of wrath is no sooner taken from the Church, but it is
presently given to her enemies to pledge them, as the Prophet says:

When thou have done spoiling, thou shall be spoiled, the drink shall not pall
in the cup.

You see that David made that use of the fall and punishment of his enemy, only
to rejoice in the Lord, and his favor, and not to insult over his enemy; for
the wise man advises,

Rejoice not when thine enemy falls, Prove. 24.17, 18.
and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth:

Lest the Lord see it, and it displease him, and he turn away his wrath from
him.

Thy patience does heap coals of fire on the head of thine enemy; and thy
favorable forbearance of him, in triumphing over him, holds the cup still to
his mouth.

We cannot do our enemy a greater pleasure, then to be glad at his afflictions,
for God sees it and abateth his displeasure against him, but we may rejoice
safely and boldly in the love and favor of God to us.

VERSE. 17. But upon Mount Sion shall be deliverance, and there shall be
holiness, and the house of Jacob shall possess their possessions.


The second part of the Prophecy, containing the comfort of the Church against
all her enemies, ad finem Capitis, to the end of the chapter.

1. A promise of restitution of them to their own, ver, 17. 2. Of victory
against their enemies, ver. 18, 19, 20. 3. The means ordained for this, ver.
21.
1. Of their restitution of their own.

Mount Sion literally does signify the seed of Jacob, the whole Nation of the
Jews; taking name from the most eminent part of their Kingdom, as Mount Sion
denotes Esau and his issue; this shall be delivered from the captivity of
Babylon; that is the deliverance here promised.

And the holiness here mentioned, is the renewing of the people by repentance
and new obedience to the pure worship of God; and then the house of Jacob shall
recover the possessions which the army of the Chaldeans took from them.

Allegorically and typically, this Prophecy does foretell the deliverance of
the Church from all the enemies thereof in the end of the world, which shall be
performed by the spirit of sanctification fitting them to the same.

That the Church shall not always be under the rod of correction, we have
formerly declared.

1. The point now considerable, is, what our God requires of us, even
holiness. 2. That God performs his mercy of deliverance first, that after he
may sanctify us to himself.
1. That God requires holiness of us; He has showed thee O man, what is
good, and what the Lord requires of thee; Mic. 6.8.
surely to do justice, and to love mercy, and to humble thy self to walk with
thy God, this is holiness.

This is no earthly wisdom, which is carnal, sensual and devilish; it is the
wisdom which is from above, and therefore, He has showed thee O man.

Holiness is not learned in the School of nature, nor to be seen by the light
of reason; it is the inward light of the spirit of God that enlightneth our
darkness, which opens to man the way of good life, not moral and civil
only, but religious and spiritual, which teaches justice mingled with mercy,
both built upon a good foundation of humility, and these not as before men, but
as in a walk with God himself.

For such as these God keeps a book of remembrance as the Prophet says,

Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, Mal. 3.16.
and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written
before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name.

And they shall be mine says the Lord, in that day when I make up my jewels
(or special treasure) and I will spare them as a man spares his own son that
serves him. Ver. 17.


What can a man desire more of God, then to be esteemed amongst his jewels and
precious treasure? such are the holy? and what trouble can it be to them to be
despised of the world, and cast out of them, when God shall take them in as his
jewels and treasure? God himself gives holiness in precept, and gives the
reason in that injunction, Be ye holy, for I am holy.

And Saint John says, that every man that has hope of eternal life, 1 Pet
1.16 ex Lev. 21.44. 1 John 3.3.
purifieth himself, even as he is pure.

So that Gods holiness is the motive that must induce us, and the president
and pattern that must conduce us to holiness.

1. The motive, because he being holy; nothing ungodly and unclean may approach
him, therefore all the legal purifications and sanctifyings of the poople,
before any special worship and service of God, were types of that holiness
which must fit us for Gods service; because without holiness no man shall see
God.

Again because the favors which we desire from God be holy; and Christ says,
Nolite dare quod sanctum est canibus, give not that which is holy to dogs;
surely he will not do so himself.

2. It must be our pattern and example, because holiness is never accepted but
where it has three properties, as it has in God.

1. That it be sincere, and not in hypocrisy; there is a sin of hypocrites,
and there is a portion with hypocrites; false holiness is like ^^^^^erfeit gold,
it will not go for pay, it is high treason ag^^^^ God to counterfeit his Image
and superscription; for holiness is the Image of our God stamped in us in our
creation; therefore hell is called the portion of hypocrites. 2. That it be
total; holiness in the face, and outward gesture proceeding from holiness in
the heart and inward affections: holiness of the tongue, that it speak not
lewdly, falsely, or profanely; holiness of operation, that we do nothing but
what becomes the Saints of God. Holiness at Church, and holiness at home;
holiness in our private conversations, and in our private retirings, that is
in the whole man, in the whole time of his life, and in all places. 3. That it
be guided with knowledge, for the ignorant holiness of the Church of Rome
which is implicit, and knows not what it does, is the sacrifice of fools:
like the Athenians worship directed to an unknown God.
This is the way to come again to our own possessions, and to cast out that
strong man armed that has led us into captivity; this is the old way, and the
good way to the new Jerusalem.

Many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, they be
enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is damnation, whose belly is their
god, and whose delight is in their shame, which mind earthly things.

But our conversation must be in heaven; an holy conversation is an heavenly
conversation, and makes heaven upon earth.

And if we be risen with Christ, to this conversation, then we seek those
things which are above, and not those things which are beneath.

It must therefore be our care to look to those things which hinder holiness,
and to keep good watch upon our life that none of those things do corrupt us.

These are as the Apostle does enumerate them.

1. The lusts of the flesh. 2. The lust of the eye. 3. The pride of life.
1. Carnal desires do make us unholy, not only fornication and adultery which
do make the members of Christ the members of an harlot, of which sin the
Apostle says, that adulterers and fornicators God will judge.

But carnality also in our affections, laboring more for the body then for the
soul, for the flesh to ful-fill the lusts thereof: studying meat and drink for
the belly, stuff and fashions for the garments, more then to please God in the
exercise of Religion, and duties of charity and piety; carnality also in the
very service of God, of which the Apostle also speaks; for while one says, I
am of Paul, another I am of Apollo, are ye not carnal? for the truth of God
and the wisdom of God is valued not in it self, but in respect of persons.

And so that those be the greatest pretenders to holiness, that pretend most
of the spirit, unawares do serve the flesh, and are men in Religion carnal,
yet think they do God good service.

2. The lust of the eye is another great enemy to holiness, for that coveteth
an evil covetousness; how easily is flesh and blood carried away from God
with the wings of worldly desires?

I would I were as well housed, as well placed, as well landed, as well
friended, as well monied as such and such are.

Who wishes I would I were as holy as the Prophets and Apostles were? when we
must needs dye, Balaam would wish his later end like theirs.

3. The pride of life, affecting place and Court above others, trim and rich
bravery beyond others, power and authority over others: these things do corrupt
Religion and make us unholy; and all these things do perish in the use of them.

There be two things which make the life of man proof against these darts of
Satan.

1. Godliness that fixes our hearts on God, and fastneth our trust on him,
which gives us assurance that we shall never want things sufficient for us,
and therefore fear not to lose by it, if we bestow our time and strength and
means in his service. 2. Contentedness, which respects rather a supply of
wants, then a fullness to look upon: considering that of all that we have in
possession, no more is truly ours then what serves for use, and that is
little; and seeing we brought nothing with us, and we leave all, but what our
wants have spent behind us; let a little content us, lest much do distract us
from the service of our God, or corrupt our holiness.
2. This teaches to embrace all the good means by which holiness may be
preserved and increased in us: that is,

1. Diligent hearing the Word of God, upon which must attend 1. Private
meditation. 2. Conference.


This is not the service of God it self, but a candle lighting us the way to
the worship of God; David says, Verbum tuum Lucer^a pedibus meis; thy word is
a Lantern to my feet.

And they are much deceived, that think they have sanctified a Sabbath to the
Lord, if they have only heard sermons, and meditated, and conferred on them.

That is neither opus d^ei, nor opus loci, the work of the day nor place: all
this is but receiving from God.

The worship of God must have somewhat from us to God, to which preaching does
direct us, therefore we must add,

2. Our worship of God which chiefly does consist in, 1 Thanksgiving. 2 Prayer.


Thanks for the graces of God already bestowed, prayer for the continuance, and
increase of them: this is the worship which is immediately directed by Christ
to himself, and for himself only, that is, for his glory.

And in this the Holy Ghost helps our infirmities, for being the greatest
duty of Christian worship, we cannot without great help perform it, and great
help we have, the whole Trinity joining with us.

The Holy Ghost in conceiving and uttering our prayers, and putting life into
them.

The Son in carrying them up to the Father.

And the Father in receiving of them.

Pray continually, in all things give thanks. 2. God performs this mercy of
deliverance to his Church, first, and then there shall be holiness; God is
ever before hand, and he would have us know that our holiness is rather a
fruit and effect of his deliverance, then a cause of it, procuring or meriting
it.

And so the Lords deliverance of us is a free, as well as a full favor, it is
no wages for our work, as the Church of Rome does not only erroniously, but
blasphemously teach.

So does Zachary confess; ut liberati a manibus inimicorum, festiamus ei; that
being delivered from the hands of our enemies, etc. not us servientes
liberemur, not that s^rving we should be delivered: ut liberandi serviamus: but
he does all his favors for us; to win us to his service.

The Church of God was punished for not serving of him as it should, and now it
is restored to her own possessions, that it may serve him hereafter in
holiness.



But now being made free from sin, Romans 6.22.
and become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life.

1 Delivered and made free from sin. 2 Then our fruit unto holiness, 3 And
then everlasting life.
1 This deliverance, a motive to holiness: 2 This holiness, a fruit of our
deliverance: 3 This Everlasting life, a reward of our holiness.
It is a great sign that God is not with us, when his favors do corrupt us,
as when our knowledge does beget in us spiritual pride, and our riches and
temporal preferments, bring forth carnal pride: when the many affairs of the
world do make us neglect the Church service, or break Gods Sabbath which ought
to be religiously consecrated to Gods worship; and when any temporal
happiness does work in us any relaxation of the service of God, for the true
sanctification of all these does consist in this, that we do make them motives
and provocations to holiness.

Israel to his possessions, does not say then shall be outward peace and
prosperity, and wealth, and ease: but then there shall be holiness, as the
proper fruit of Gods favors: for peace, and health, and plenty, may be lost
again, but holiness cannot be lost, because that is a work of the Holy Ghost
in us which cannot perish, for that spirit shall abide in the Church for ever.

Israel shall see that their unholinesse was their sin, God restoring them
they shall make conscience of sinning any more, least some worse judgment
overtake them.

For God does promise to restore Religion, and his holyworship, which is the
only safety of his people, which whilst they formerly corrupted, they brought
upon themselves deportation, ruin upon their City, and fire upon the Sanctuary
of God.

You see all the earnestness of holy Scripture to persuade us to holiness
does aim at our own safety, and God for our own good persuades it: for what
good will our holiness do him? or what do we hurt him, if we be unrighteousse?
our well-doing extends not to him, to add any thing to him; our il-doing is
no prejudice to him: the benefit of our holiness redoundeth to our selves, and
thy word that teaches it, is given to profit us withal.

God give us all grace to make a right and profitable use thereof to his glory,
Amen.

VERSE 18. And the House of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a
flame and the house of Esau for stub^l^: and they shall kindle in them, and
devour them, and there shall not be any remaining of the house of Esau, for
the Lord has spoken it.

19. And they of the South shall possess the Mount of Esau, and they of the
plain; The Philistines, and they shall possess the fuldes of Ephraim, and the
fulds of Samaria, and Benjamin shall p^ssesse Gilead.

20. And the Captivity of this Host of the Children of Israel shall possess
that of the Canaanites, even unto Zarephah, and the Captivity of Jerusalem,
which is in Sepharad, shall possess the Cities of the South.


2. Their victories.

These are expressed two ways:

1 In the conquest of their enemies: 2 In the dilatation of their kingdom, by
taking in their possessions.
The Kingdom of Israel in Ieroboams time, was divided into two Kingdoms,
Judah and Israel, and the Kingdom of Judah is here called the house of Jacob;
the kingdom of Israel is called the house of Joseph, and these two are
promised this victory.

There were also two Captivities.

The Israelites were carried away captives by Salmanazar: Judah by
Nebuchadnezar: God promises that fire shall go out from those, to consume Esau
utterly, till there be none of them remaining.

He promises them also victory over the Philistines their ancient enemies, so
that Ephraines portion shall come again to them, and Samaria, wherein the King
of Assyria having removed the Inhabitants thereof, and led them Captives into
his land, and settled Assyrians in the possessions of their land, that shall be
recovered from them.

And Benjamin confining upon enemies, should have quiet possession of Gilead.

This victory, with the extent of their Kingdom here promised, does show, that
the people after their return shall have more room, more glory and power then
they had before their deportation.

From whence these comfortable Doctrines do arise.

1 That the afflictions of the Church do turn to their greater good. 2 That
God punishes the enemies of his Church even by those against whom they have
prevailed. 3 That the Church has good warrant to settle their faith in this
assurance, for the Lord has spoken it.
1. The afflictions of the Church turn to their greater good.

And here a double benefit is expressed.

1 Spiritual good, he will endue them with holiness 1 Of restitution. 2 Of
Dilatation.
2 A Temporal.
1 Of the spiritual good So David said, It is good for me that I was
afflicted, for now I learn thy Statutes; afflictions have their good uses, for
though afflictions for the time seem grievous in the bearing thereof; yet they
serve,

1. To take down the heart, and to humble men under the mighty hand of God;
for the afflicted man cannot but like the Mariners in the Ship with Jonah,
being in a storm, search for whose sake the storm arises.

When Manasseth was carried Captive into Babel, and there put in chains, he
soon found where the fault was, and he fell to confession and prayers,
humiliavit se valde. 2 Chro. 33.12.


The Church of God under the cross; said,

Let us search and try our ways, and turn to the Lord. Lam. 3.4.
In health, liberty, plenty, ease, we find something else to do, we have no
leisure to search our ways, therefore God lays his rod upon us; and when the
smart of affliction does make us weary of the world, and puts us out of the
way of our delights, then we can consider, and try our hearts within us, and
our ways without us.

As Peter when he begins to sink, can cry for help: and the Disciples in a
storm will awake their Master.

The heart must be first broken, and our stout stomach taken down before we
can enjoy the sweet fruits of liberty.

Behold his soul which is lifted up is not upright in him: Hab. 2.4.
Proud persons have crooked souls, they do not look up, but like the woman
that had the spirit of Infirmity, they are bent to the earth, to see how many
they can overtake.

But sickness, disgrace, imprisonment, will make our Bulls of Bashan as tame as
Lambs, and then a poor man's tale may be heard.

We have seen examples of great falls in our time, and in them that stand now,
and look up where they did sit, it is as easy a matter to behold as great a
change of their hearts, as of their fortunes.

Truly, so do men rise or fall indeed, as their heart rises or falls; for an
humble man keeps the same posture always, he knows how to abound, and how to
want, and no prosperity can soar him up higher, no adversity can cast him
lower then his pitch, for his heart is not exalted.

2. Afflictions do serve to breed in us a conscience and fear of sin, when
we see what smart it brings; as here, it turned Israel out of house and home,
it fired their City, and their holy Temple, and carried them away Captives to a
strange land, and fed them with the bitter bread of Banishment^ it filled their
souls with the despite of the wicked, and the reproach of the proud.

This affliction says unto them* Sin no more lest some worse thing fall upon
thee.

But who makes that use of sickness, imprisonment, disgrace, to cast it upon
the merit of his sin? that makes the hand of God so heavy upon us, and that
returns judgment so often to us. But here Israel is brought to holiness by
it, and let us mistrust our selves that we stand not in a state of grace with
God, except our affliction do mend us, and bring us to repentance of our sins,
and to holiness of life.

3. Afflictions do bring us to an awe and reverence of the worship of God, for
they do declare God to be just, and not to be dallied with he is whetting his
sword, whilst we are in our sins, he is bending his bow, and preparing
instruments of vengeance: he is still turning over the Book of remembrance,
wherein all our sins are recorded, and perusing the Inventory of his graces,
which we have received in vain, and of his gifts which we have abused, of his
Talents which we have misimployed, teaching us to fear him, and to sear all
our ways before him.

So David will be wiser hereafter: Against thee only have I sinned and done
this evil in thy sight.

These three, humility, conscience of sin, and of the Majesty of God, will
bring us to holiness of life, which is the way of peace, and it is good for
Israel to be afflicted to come to his.

2 The Church here was the better for this affliction that they sustained, even
in their temporal estate.

1. In the restitution of their possessions; for it is a rule of truth, though
it show a very great imperfection in our judgment, as great corrupion in our
affections.

Carendo magis quam fruendo, by waiting, rather then by enjoying, we come to
know the true worth of Gods savours.

And that carendo by wanting, not so much in an ante-want, as in a post-want.

In an Ante-want, when we rise from poverty to wealth, from baseness to
honor, from labor to ease: commonly as our good, so our blood arises; and it
is a great grace of God, if the rising of our fortunes, be not the sinking and
falling of our faith and obedience to God; For many in low estate have been
humble, whose pride in high estate have been importable: many in poverty have
had tender hearts, who in wealth have turned great oppressors of their
brethren; and many in labor have been content with a little, who in ease have
grown resty and idle.

But in a post-want, when men fall from wealth to poverty, from honor to the
dust, from ease to labor, then they can look back, and recompt the sweetness
of these outward favors. Holy Job has two whole Chapters,

In one he confesses his former estate, the fullness, and the power, and the
ease, and the glory thereof, he begins it with an optative.

O that I were as in months past, as in the days when God preserved me. Job
29.


When his candle shined upon my head, when by his light I walked through
darkness as I was in the days of my youth.

Few of us in health do feel the favor of God to us therein: few in wealth do
taste the sweetness of Gods open and giving hand: few content with their
portion.

But in sickness every little mittigation of our pain, is sweet, and we are
ready to fall on our knees before God to thank him for it.

In poverty, every alms given to us, thankfully received, and then if we were
as in months past, how much better would we use wealth.

For Job in the next Chapter does feel the change, and finds bitterness in
it, Job 30.
and he ends that Chapter: My harp is turned into mourning, and my Organs
into the voice of them that weed.

Therefore, when we once come to want that which we formerly have possessed, we
whose ambitious desires gave us no rest, either to be thankful for that we
had, or content with it, would desire no more then to be as in some months
before, that God would but light that candle again, and restore us to what we
have lost.

As in the spiritual state of the soul, David that neglected the day of his
salvation, which God gave him before his fall, and sold it for a little carnal
pleasure; when he came again to himself, he only prays,

Restore to me the joy of thy Salvation. Hos. 2.7.
And the Church revolting from God, remembers her self, and says,

I will go and return to my first husband, for then was it better with me then
now.

Therefore it is a great favor of God to his people, to restore them their
own possessions again, that they may be as in years past: for now they
having wanted them, do better know the favor of God then they did before in
the use of them.

They would have esteemed it a greater favor in their captivity, to have had
but some ease of their burdens, some liber^y to have eaten the fruits of
their labors, in great miseries every little breathing of ease is sweet and
comfortable: but here is a full restitution of them to their former possessions
promised.

2 But here is much more promised, even dilatation of their borders, they shall
have more then they had, they may call their place Rehoboth, as Isaac called
the Well when he had room to dig in. Genesis 26.21.


The Lord has an open and a filling hand, even in this also, Multiplicat
benefacere, here is Copiosa redemptio, copiosa restitutio.

For as it is another degree of favor to rise from restitution to dilatation:
so it may stand for a degree, that he enlarges their bounds out of the
possession of their enemies, and gives away their Land to his people.

Let no man charge God with injustice herein; for The earth is the Lords, and
all that therein is; he gives it where he will.

And Jesus Christ his Son, has promised the meek the inheritance of the earth;
for by right none but the Elect are true owners of the earth; the ungodly are
but intruders and usurpers thereof.

Thus much added to their own to make them more territory, and thus much taken
from their neighboring enemies the Edomites and the Philistims, and given to
them, makes them gainers by their loss: their banishment was a sowing in
tears, this is a reaping in joy.

David was so reasonable, that he only desired of God, saying,

Make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us, and the
years wherein we have seen evil. Ps. 90.15.


God is a more bountiful giver, for he makes his people glad; not only with
that which they lost, but with much more; he enpoverisheth their enemies to
enrich them, that they may take the labors of the people into their possession.

Job would have wished no more then to be as he was in some months past, Job v
2.10.
and God not only restores him what he formerly had, but he gives him twice
so much as he had before:

So the Lord blessed the latter end of Job more then his beginning: which Saint
Gregory does apply to the state of the Church in the last day, when they shall
receive full glory, both in their souls and bodies in his Kingdom.

For in things temporal this does not always hold, that God repaireth thus the
losses of his children, neither do they expect it for they have learned how to
want; but what wants in outward things, is restored to them in spiritual
graces; in the gifts of patience and contentedness, in thankfulness, and the
spirit of supplications.

for the house of Jacob shall be a flame, and the house of Joseph a fire.

Not ^^^^substant are into fire and flame, as a Papist might prove as well out
of this text, as he has the corporeal presence of Christ out of Hoc est corpus
meum, this is my body, but by way of similitute, and by reason of the effect
that shall follow; for they shall consume the house of Edom, whom God will make
as stubble for them easy to take fire.

It was Balaams Prophecy of the people of Israel then in distress. Number. 23.24.


Behold, the People shall rise up as a great Lion, and lift up himself (...) a
young Lion; he shall not lie down till he eat of the prey, and drink the blood
of the slain

Which was begun to be performed by Moses, continued by Joshuah, further
prosecuted by David, fully accomplished by Christ, Ps. ^10.1, 2
whom God made to rule in the midst of his enemies.

The Elect are built upon a rock in the sea of this world; all the men of war
that assault it, shall dash themselves in the end against this rock; Pro. 11.8.
so Solomon, The righteous escapes out of trouble, and the wicked comes in
his stead.

And again he says, Prove. 21.18.
The wicked shall be a ransom for the righteous, and the transgressor for the
upright.

The reason of this, is the equal law of Gods justice before mentioned, that as
it has been done by them, so it may be done to them, and that their reward may
fall upon them.

For he will avenge the blood of his servants, and yield vengeance to his
adversaries, Deuteronomy. 31.43.
but he will be favorable to his own Land, and be merciful to his own people.

Even this also must pass for a further degree of his love, to overthrow the
enemies of Israel by Israel; for not only this Prophet, but Balaam foretold it;
even this particular.

Seir shall be a possession for his enemies, and Israel shall do valiantly.
Number. 24.^8, 19.


Out of Jacob shall he come that shall have dominion, and shall destroy him
that remains of that City.

In Amoz God says, I will send fire upon Teman, which shall devour the
palaces of Bozrah; Amoz. 1.1, 2
here Obadiah shows what fire Amoz means; the house of Jacob shall be that
fire, and the house of Joseph that flame.

Both expounded in plain terms by the Prophet Ezechiel. Ezech. 25.24.


I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel and they
shall do in Edom according to mine anger, and according to my fury, and they
shall know my vengeance says the Lord.

And what God threatens the temporal and carnal enemies of his Church, the
same has he also threatened to the spiritual enemies thereof, The God of peace
shall tread Satan under your feet shortly. Romans 16.20


It had been enough for us if God h^^ trodden him under his own feet, but God
will cover his enemies with shame and grief, as well as smart and pain.

All the Elect have their part in this victory of the world, for he that
overcomes has this promise, such shall have power ever Nations, so that they
shall rule them with a rod of Iron, Rev. 2.26.
and as the vessels of a porter they shall be broken.

Which promise does assure the Church, that although here her enemies prevail
against her, yet her Spouse, whose power shall put down all rule and all
authority and power shall conquer for her, and she united to him by her faith,
shall by faith overcome all.

This admonishes u^,

1. Not to be troubled at the power and prevailings of the enemies of Gods
Church, though we see and hear evil news daily, that touches us to the quick,
and all them that love the peace of this Land, and the liberty of the Gospel;
for the Church of God, and the patrones of his truth are under the banner of
Gods love, and their latter end must be peace; let us by daily prayers command
them to the tutelary protection of God, and let him hear, vocem fidei, the
voice of faith, of those that fight his battles, and vocem sanguinis, the voice
of blood, of those that die in his quarrel.

2. It furnishes us with patince to tarry the good pleasure of God, for when
he shall arise, his enemies shall be scattered, and they that hate him shall
fall before him; he has promised his Church victory, and he will not suffer
his truth to fail: Excellently is this comfort expressed by the Prophet Isaiah.

And therefore will the Lord wait that he may be gracious unto you, and
therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you; for the Lord is
a God of judgment, Is. 30.18.
blessed are all they that wait for him.

For the people shall dwell in Sion at Jerusalem; Verse 19.
thou shall weep no more, he will be very gracious unto thee at the voice of
thy cry; when he shall hear is he will answer thee.

And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, Verse 20.
and the water of affliction, yet shall not thy Teachers be removed into a
corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy Teachers.

3. The assurance which the Church of God has in all this, The Lord has
spoken it.

They build sure that build upon the word of God; for heaven and earth shall
fail and perish, but no word of God shall be unfulfilled.

Ye have a sure word says the Apostle, for God has magnified his name, and
his word above all things. This is my comfort in mine afflictions; Thy Word
has quickened me.

Remember thy Word unto thy servant upon which thou bast caused me to hope. Ps.
119.50 Verse 49.


The best faith has many fears and terrors joined with it to shake it, and the
faithful do sometimes want the feeling of the favor of God: we are directed
here, like wise men, to let rather our understanding spiritually enlightened,
then informed by sense, govern us.

The natural man's understanding is wholly led and instructed by the outward
senses; and as they suggest, that apprehends; when the sense feels pain, the
understanding apprehends cause of fear and grief, and stirs the affections
that way.

But the spiritual man does not value Gods love by what the sense feels, but
by that which the Word of God suggesteth.

In pain the flesh smarteth, the sense complains, and Satan says, God has
forsaken thee: but the spiritual man says no, for Gods Word says, I will
never leave thee nor forsake thee.

Therefore in all afflictions the soul of man has no better remedy then to
resort to the Word, Thou art my hiding place and my shield; I hope in thy Word;
this is the poole of healing waters, Gods Bethesda for all infirmities: and he
has sent his Angels his Ministers to stir these waters, by exposition of the
Word, exhortation and consolation to heal the diseases of his Saints.

VERSE. 21. And Saviors shall come upon Mount Sion, to judge the Mount of
Esau, and the Kingdom shall be the Lords.


3. The means ordained for the performance of all this, Vid. dinis. supr. page
182.

Mount Sion here does signify the whole Church of God in the two houses of
Jacob and Joseph, as they are before distinguished, that is the two Kingdoms
of Judah and Israel, as they were divided under Rehoboam: for Mount Sion was at
first Caput imperii, the head of the Empire; the Saviors here mentioned are
those that God employed for the restablishment of the state of his Church: and
that

Either in the procuration thereof,

Or in the execution of the same.

First, In the procuration.

1. Cyrus King of Persia has the honor of the means of this favor: for God
stirred up the spirit of Cyrus King of Persia, Ezra 1 1 etc.
and he confesses that God, The Lord of heaven, gave him all the Kingdoms of
the earth, and charged him to build him an house at Jerusalem which is in
Judah, and therefore by Proclamation he gave a large Commission to this purpose.

2. The chief Fathers of Judah and Benjamin had the same motion from God to
undertake this design. Verse 5.


But Artaxerxes by a contrary Edict made this work to be given over. cap. 4.17.


3. Then God by the Prophecy of Haggai stirred up Zerubbabel and Joshua the son
of Iozedek to attempt the work.

This also was opposed, and Darius then King of Persia was solicited against
the Jews to hinder their building so.

4. Darius came in as a Savior, to help the people, and confirmed the Decree
of Cyrus, cap. 6.
according to that he found in the search of the Rolls, and the work went on,
and the house of God was finished, and dedicated.

5. Ezra moved Artaxerxes and prevailed, for a full grant both for the return
of the people out of captivity, and for the re-establishment of the worship of
God at Jerusalem.

6. Nehemiah mooveth Artaxerxes for the building again of the City of
Jerusalem, he prevails, and they go to work, and their enemies who by
scornful speeches and violent opposinges hindered their building, Nehem. 2.
lost their labor.

These be the Saviors, who by procuration did advance this work of God in his
Church,

2. By Execution, all these concurred.

1. Cyrus gave leave and means, so did Artaxerxes and Darius restoring them
the treasures of the Temple which Nebuchadnezzar had taken away, and arming
them with full Commission, for all the helps that might advance that work. 2.
The Prophets of the Lord encouraged the work, and Ezra the Scribe prayed and
wept and mediated with the Kings. 3. Zerubbabel Nehemiah and Joshua, and the
chief Fathers of the people labored to hasten the execution of that work, and
for this all these are called here Saviors, because God used them as his
instruments in his preservation of his Church giving them the honor of his own
proper appellation, for in the fitness of the word, and in the fullness of
sense, God only is properly, and by peculiar prerogative, capable of that great
title, as himself has laid claim to it.
I, Isa. 43.11. Ose. 13 4.
even I, and there is no Savior besides me. And he gave this title to his Son,
who thought it no robbery to be equal with God; for he shall save his people.

These Saviors shall come upon Mount Sion to judge the Mount of Esau.

By the Mount of Esau, Edom, or the Idumaeans, the posterity of Esau is
understood throughout this Prophecy, that people, who as you heard dealt so
cruelly with their brother Jacob in his posterity.

To judge this people, is to execute those jugements upon them, which God has
in this Prophecy threatened, and elsewhere as you have heard from other Prophets,
especially that of Balaam and of Ezechiel, for God spoiled Edom by his people
whom they preserved.

And the Kingdom shall be the Lords, that is, God will declare himself to be
King in the government and protection of his Church, and in the victorious
conquest of the enemies thereof; he will settle his Church and worship at
Jerusalem, as in former times; for then is God said to have the Kingdom, when
his word is a Law to his people to rule them, and when the people live in the
obedience and awe thereof;

As appears performed by them of the return from the captivity, who made a
Covenant with God, and sealed the same.

For we read that the children of Israel did assemble themselves with fasting
and sackcloth, Nehe. 9.15
and earth upon them.

They stood up in their place and read in the book of the law of the Lord their
God, one fourth part of the day, Ver. 3.
and another fourth part of the day they confessed, and worshipped the Lord
their God.

Note here, how hearing and worshipping are distinguished; they do hear first,
and thereby they learn to worship.

Then follows their commemoration of the great mercies of God to their
Fathers, which David calls Gods mercies of old, and his former mercies; they
do also to the praise of this mercy, confess the transgressions of their
Fathers.

Then they confess their own sins for which they were carried away captive,
they acknowledge the just judgment of God upon them.

cap. 10.

They entered into a Curse, and into an Oath, to walk in Gods law, Verse 29.
which was given by Moses, the servant of God, and to observe and do all the
Commandments of the Lord, and his judgments and statutes.

In particular they vowed,

Not to give nor take daughters to wife with strangers, which I understand to
be in respect of the difference of religion, Ver. 30.
because there can be no good marriage between Believers and Infidels, between
the sons of God and the daughters of men, between the sons of God and the
daughters of Belial, that was the same that first corrupted the old world, and
at last followed the flood; God is not acknowledged King where such marriages
are.

2. For observation of the Lords Sabbath they covenanted to keep it strictly,
and not to buy any thing of the people of the Land on that day; for where the
Sabbath is not kept, there God is not acknowledged King.

3. For forgiving of debts every seventh year, which was a Judicial
constitution, and did only bind them; yet the equity of that constitution
remains in the Church, that men should lend freely; and where there is no
ability of repayment extremity must not be used, if God be our King.

4. They charged themselves yearly every man with the third part of a Shekel
for the maintenance of the service of the house of God; for God is denied his
kingdom there, where his holy worship has not fit maintenance to support it,
from every person according to his ability; for they conclude, we will not
forsake the house of our God. Verse 39.


And this they vowed to perform.

1. In the maintenance of the material Temple. 2. In the just provision for the
Offerings of all sorts to be made unto God there. 3. In the true payment of
Tithes for the maintenance of the Levites that served at the Altar.
This was the sum of the Covenant which the people made with God, and bound
themselves by a Vow with a Curse to observe it, as the Apostle says, taking
God to record against their souls, if they observed it not, that the curse of
God might come upon them. And they sealed this Covenant to bind themselves the
more; yet was all this no more then they were bound before to do by the Law of
God; yet they vow to make the bond greater.

This is the literal and Historical Exposition of these words: the learned
Interpreters of this Prophecy have well conceived that this Prophet, this Seer,
did look further into the purpose of God for his Church; and they say that

Mount Sion does here also signify the whole Church of God, De civ. Dei l.
18.31.
all the world over.

Saint Augustine understands by Mount Sion the Church of the Jews, and by
Edom the Church of the Gentiles, and meeting with an ill translation, and not
understanding well the original, he perverteth the meaning of the Prophet, as
if the salvation of God should go out of Sion to the Edomites, whereas there is
a plain prophecy of judgment against Edom in particular: and therefore Edom
whom God did threaten to destroy utterly in this prophecy, cannot be a figure
of that part of the Church which was by the preaching of the Gospel to be
gathered together out of the Gentiles.

Lyranus gives another exposition; for by Sion he understands Jerusalem, by
the Saviors he understands S. Peter and S. Paul, and the chief of the
Apostles as he calls them; by the Mount of Esau, he understands Rome, and
by judging the Mount of Esau, he understandeh their application to Constantine
the first Christian Emperor, who settled Christianity in the Roman Empire.

And by the kingdom which shall be the Lords, he understands that Rome shall
be head of the Church; for that point of learning they can collect from all
texts, to make the Church of Rome the only true Church.

I like nothing in that exposition, but his resemblance of Rome to Esau, for
that does fit most properly; for they are the persecutors of Jacob, even of all
true worshippers; and God has promised them a destruction; The mouth of the
Lord has spoken it.

Master Calvin has a learned observation upon this place for understanding it
of the state of the Church under the Gospel; he says, that these Saviors here
spoken of, are but ministerial, and so this place points out the Messiah, to
whom these Saviors are subordinate.

For the expected Messiah is such a one, as by whom all the other Saviors are
sent, and for whom all others work, whom all others do serve, and observe.

And this is the extent of this prophecy, in the judgment of M. Calvin: Iunius
and Arias Montanus, that Christ shall leave in his Church his Apostles and
Ministers of the Gospel to show to men the way of salvation in such sort, a^
that the Kingdom of God shall be advanced in the Church, God ruling by his Word.

Others by Saviors on Mount Sion judging the Mount of Esau, understand the
last and final judgment, wherein the Saints shall judge the world, and then
the Kingdom shall be the Lords; of which S. Paul says,

He shall deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, when he has put
down all rule, and all authority and power.

I like those expositions that take the wings of a Dove, and fly to the
uttermost part of the text, and non relinquit locum surely this is Gods promise
to his Church, that it shall judge the world.

The parts of the Textare three.

1. A gracious promise to Mount Sion concerning it self, Servatores Saviors.
2. A further promise concerning their enemies: Iudicabunt Montem Esau, shall
judge the Mount of Esau. 3. The issue and effect of both: and regnum erit
Jehova, the Kingdom shall be the Lords.
1 Saviors shall come upon Mount Sion.



Which is thus proved.



If God should look downwards toward men, even to his Elect, who could stand in
his sight? he looks with pure eyes, and he found imperfection in his Angels.

Moses has cleared this point to this people of Israel: For thou art an holy
people to the Lord thy God: Deuteronomy. 7.6.7, 8.
the Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special people to himself, above
all people that are upon the face of the earth.

The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor chose you, because you were more
in number then any people, for ye were the fewest of all the people, but
because the Lord loved you.

From this fountain of his love did flow, all those streams that made glad the
City of the great King. as

Albeit they were few in number; yea, very few, and strangers in the Land: and
walked about from Nation to Nation, Psa. 105.12.
from one Kingdom to another people:

Yet suffered he no man to do them harm, but reproved even Kings for their
sakes; saying, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets n^ hor me.

Therefore let all afflicted consciences, which are overcharged with the
burden of their sins, Look up to th^se hills from whence their help comes,
Let them (...) Christ bids, Lift up their heads.

Let them chide themselves as David did; Why are thou cast down O my soul?
the remedy is, hope in God, Psa. 43.5.
he is the health of my countenance, and my God.

Faith and Fear work together: Faith does take up the decree of Election, and
the just is bold as a Lion.

Fear looks down upon the corruptions of nature and propension to sin, and
trembles under the mighty hand of God; and the more we fear, the faster hold
we lay, and the surer we tread on the steps of that ladder by which we scale
heaven.

Thereupon does the Apostle give this precept, Make your Calling and Election
sure; that is, having a strong faith of these; and then the many failings in
your obedience, your lapses and relapses into sin, may breed your grief, they
cannot bring forth despair.



Therefore God has revealed his decree to his Church, and sealed it with
gracious promises, for so Moses says to Israel.

Because he would keep the word which he had sworn unto your Fathers. Deuteronomy.
7.8.


This Oath as we do learn from old Zachary in his Bendictu^ has two branches.

One concerning God,

Another concerning his people.

The Oath which he swore to our father Abraham that he would give unto us, Luke
1, 73:
that we being delivered from the hands of our enemies might serve him without
fear, etc.

1. God binds himself by his Oath, to deliver his Church from their enemies.

2. The same Oath binds him to the procuration of his own service for us;
for only he must grant ut serviamus, that we may serve; by him we are liberati
delivered; for we cannot think a good thought without him.

In him we live and move; and Christ says, Sine me nihil potestis facere,
without me you can do nothing.

This promise of God to his Church he has sealed, by giving to us the spirit
of promise, which spirit he has dedosited in his Church, to abide with it for
ever; and he has given to all the Elect of God his Spirit, the earnest of his
Covenant: this spirit serves for a light in us to discern our salvation afar
off.

For a witness to testify to our spirits, that we are the sons of God.

And God is faithful, he will not suffer his truth to fail.

This also does settle the faith of the Elect in all the tribulations of life.
I am the son or daughter of God; I know it by the spirit which he has given
me, which leads my understanding into the way of truth, which converteth my
affections, and frames them to his love, which directs my ways and orders
them to his obedience: this spirit does teach me to lay hold on the promises of
grace, and to challenge my part in them: these promises do lift me up as high
as to the decree of my Election, and therefore I will not fear.

David goes farther; I am thine, O save me: for the interest that we have in
the love of God, does send us to him for salvation.



The providence of God works by means, even from amongst our selves, to
effect our preservation.

1. Because his immediate operations are full of terror, and therefore we
cannot so well endure them: therefore the people prayed Moses to speak to them,
and desired that God might speak no more to them.

The Angel that brought word to Mary, that she should conceive a Son by the
Holy Ghost, began his Message with Fear not.

The Angel that proclaimed the birth of Christ to the Shepherds, said to them,
Fear not.

We have so much cause to fear in respect of our own unworthiness, that if
God did not abate somewhat of the splendor of his glorious Majesty by the
employment of means familiar to us, we could not abide it.

2. God using weak means, to effect his will does magnify his own strength;
For his strength is made perfect through weakness.

Whereby we are taught

1. To content our selves with the means, in the wisdom of God ordained for
our preservation, not expecting miraculous and extraordinary subventions.

The rich man's brethren shall not have a Preacher come to them from the dead,
Luke 16.27. etc.
to give them warning that they come not to that place of torment where their
brother is.

They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.

God that sent his spirit on the Apostles, could have done so upon the whole
Church; and when the Eunuch was reading Isaiah in his Chariot, he could have
opened his understanding to have known what he had read, but he chose rather to
use the Ministry of an Apostle, and therefore he command Philip to join
himself to that Chariot, and by him he taught and baptized the Eunuch.

So was Cornelius directed to Peter, to be taught by him what he ought to do.
Act. 10.16.


And to the Apostle Christ says, qui vos audit, me audi, he that hears you
hears me. Lu. 10.16.


2. This teaches us, looking on the weak means which God ordains for the
good of his Church, not to rest in them, but beyond them to look to that high
wisdom and power by which those means are enabled, for the Church of Rome
has overshot that way.

John when an Angel talked with him, was ready to worship him, we are naturally
prone to give undue honor to the means, because we are more led by sense then
by faith.

But the faithful must walk by faith, not by sight; from this sensual and
carnal eye upon the means: the honor of God is given in the Church of Rome
to the Mother of our Lord, to Angels, to Saints, yea to very Images and
Pictures, and so Idolatry is committed.

Therefore Peter and John, after they had raised the Criple that lay at the
Porch of the Temple, finding the people amazed, and feating least and carnal
opinion might wrong the glory of God, pre^^n^^d any undue ascriptions to
themselves, and directed them where to fasten them;

Ye men and brethren, why marvel ye at this? or why look ye so earnestly on us,
Act. 3.12.
as though by our own power, or bolinesse, we had made that man walk; he
attributes this work to Jesus his name, through says in his name has made
this man strong.



This Title he gives to those temporal deliverers, who saved Israel from the
hand of their enemies; So O^hniel is called a Savior, and Ehud has the same
title.

And I shua was a Savior, Judge. 3 9. ves. 15.
he had even the name of Christ of whom he was a Type.

The Minister of the Gospel have this high title also given to them.

S. Paul to Timothy; So doing, thou shall save thy self, and those that hear
thee.

S. James, If any man err from the truth, and another convert him, let him
know that be shall save a soul from death, so the Layman may be a Savior too.

S. Jude derecting his Epistle to all at large that are sanctified by God the
Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called, admonishes them;

1. To build up themselves in the most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost,
etc. 2. And of some have compassion, making a difference.
And others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire. Jude 16.22.23. 1
Cor. 7.14


Also the Apostle says; The unbelieving husband, is sanctified by the wise,
and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband.

So Christ to his Apostles, whosoevea sins ye remit, they are remitted.

We do all know that all those be but the means by which God works, and yet
they are graced with the attributes and effect of him that uses them.

At ^his day God has left no other outward means of salvation but by our
Ministry, if we be not your Saviors, you cannot be saved: he that employeth us
in this great service, and honoreth us with his own Title, will both see, and
avenge the contempt of his Messengers.

The eye of the world is too much fixed on the earthen vessels, and regards
little the treasure that is sent therein.

Gods own people did offend that way, in neglect of Gods Prophers, who were
sent from God to them, and it lay heavy upon their consciences, and they felt
the sorrow and smart of it upon themselves and their children.

Ezra prays and consesseth.

We have forsaken thy Commandments which thou have commanded by thy servants
the Prophets. Ezra 9.10.11. Dan. 9.6 10.


Daniel prays and confesses.

Neither have we hearkened to thy servants the Prophets, which spoke in thy
name.

The great preserver of men, uses the Ministry of men for the salvation of his
people; to us has God committed the Ministry of reconciliation, as if God by
us did speak to his Church.

Your faith is begun in you by our Ministry, and we exhort you to increase
more and more, as you have received of us how you ought to walk, 1 These. 4. 1
1 These. 3.20.
and to please God; therefore,

Despise not prophesying;

The Grecions in St. Paul's time called preaching foolishness; but he says
that God by this foolishness of preaching saves ^uch as do believe.

The reason why God gives this honor to the means by which he works any
good to his Church, is;

To instruct us by his example to do the like; for thus it must be done to the
man whom the King will honor.

Haman thought these five things necessary to express the honor of a King,
done to a servant that he delighted in.

1. That he be clothed in royal apparel, such as the King uses to we are.
2. That he be set on the horse that the King rides on. 3. That the Crown
Royal be set upan his head. 4. That this be done to him by one of the Kings
most Noble Princes. 5. That be proclaim before him, that he is one whom the
King will honor.
The Apostles, and their successors have all this honor done to them.

1. That apparel which the King uses to we are is put upon them, for he
gives them his own attributes; he calls them Teachers and Pastors and
Saviors of his Church.

2. He sets them upon his own horse, for they ride upon the wings of the
wind; the wind is the Holy Ghost alae spiritus, the wings of the spirit, by
which it flies over the Church, be the two Testaments, which holy men wrote as
they were inspired;

They ride prosperously becausa of Truth, Meekness and Righteousness.

Propter veritatem quam pradicant, Psa. 45 4.
propter mansuetudinem qua pradicant: propter justitiam quam parturiunt

Thirdly the Kings Crown is set upon their heads: for the people of God whom
they teach and convert are their Crown.

For what is our hope or joy or crown of rejoicing? 1 These. 2.19.
Are not ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming?

4. This is put upon us by the most noble of all Gods Princes, even the son of
God himself who sends us abroad and says, Go unto all Nations.

5. He proclaims this, Sicut misit me Pater, sic ego mitto vos, as the father
sent me, so send I you; not only sending us forth to do his work, but in some
measure also to partake of his honor, as ambassadors of Princes are received
and esteemed honorably for their sakes whom they represent.

This the Apostle confessed to the praise of the Galatians, Gal. 4.14.
that they received him as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus.

God has left no other Saviors upon Mount Sion his Church, but his faithful
Ministers, therefore;

1. We are taught to make conscience of our holy employment, to be faithful in
it, that neither by our negligence in preaching, nor by unsound doctrine, nor
by our evil example, we become destroyers of our brethren; for we are all Gods
Ministers, and the Chaplains of Jesus Christ: who will call us to severe
account of the Talent which he has committed to our trust. 2. The people
committed to our pastoral charge, are taught where to seek salvation, and from
whom to require light.
The Colossians may call upon Archippus to look to his charge, and the Minister
Archippus may call upon them to walk in the light, saying; To you is this word
of salvation sent. Be swift to hear; again, take heed how you hear, and see
that ye be not hearers only, deceiving your own souls.

Thank God, that by men like your selves, he corrects the hearers, and comes
down to you, and preaches to you the way of salvation, and howsoever you
esteem of our persons, touch not our calling, for that is holy and heavenly.

2. To judge the Mount of Esau.

This part of the Promise does concern the enemies of Gods Church, and seeing
those Saviors shall not only have employment to preserve the Church, but they
shall also have power of judgment to destroy the enemies thereof: We are
taught,



The blood of Abel shall judge Cain, for it cries unto God out of the earth
against him, and Cain shall smart for that murder whilst he lives, and God
shall give another son for Abel whom Cain slew.

Israel is a full example; for being in the Land of Egypt in the house of
bondage, they had a promise to keep them in heart:

And the Nation to whom they shall be in bondage I will judge says God, Act.
7.7.
and after that they shall come forth and serve me in this place.

The Jews by reason of Hamans plot against them, were in great danger. It is
said,

The King and Haman sat down to drink, and the City of Shushan was perplexed.
Hest. 3 15.


But God tumed their mourning into a feast, and Haman died upon his own tree:
and the distressed Jews had one Holy day the more for that.

Zenacherib a troubler of Israel dyed a great many of deaths; for neither could
the privilege of the place, the Temple of his God, nor the service that he
came to do there, nor the god of the Temple protect him from death, and which
was most fearful and grievous to him, his own bowels rebelled against him,
and they to whom he had been the author of life, were the ministers of his
death; Adrameleeh and Sharezar his sons slew him with the sword.

For you have heard that though Judgment begin at the house of God, it does
not end there, so David;

Mark the godly, and behold the just., for the end of that man is peace,
whatsoever all the rest of his life be; and we truly say,

All is well that ends well.

Christ to his Disciples, Mat. 10.16.22.
Behold, I send you as Sheep in the midst of W^^^^, etc.

But he that endures to the end shall be saved.

The Apostle says, We are more then conquerors; Romans 8.37.
Conquerors overcome by force and strong hand, or some cunning stratagem; the
Saints overcome by patience, and weary their persecutors with their sufferings:
for

Vincit qui patitur. The reason of this happy end of the labors and sorrows of
the Church is,

1. That the narrow way to glory may be frequented; for who would put himself
to the rugged severity of a strict life, into the hatred of the world, to make
himself as the way of the street for the proud to go over him; if he did not
persuade himself, that his heavines should endure but for a night, and that he
should have joy in the morning?

No, there is not heaviness all night; for the serants of God do believe to
see the goodness of God in the land of the living.

And this is that same, Carmen in nocte, Song in the night that David speaks
of; Laetitia in tribulatione, joy in tribulation, as S^ Augustine does expound
it.

And thus does God comfort the Church often by taking away either perfidious
and unsound friends, that live in the Church to betray it: or by removing
corrupt and bribing retailers of preferments in Church and Commonwealth: or by
committing of cruel and unmercifull oppressions of their brethren, as bad at
the taskmasters of Egypt to lay b^rthens upon them to keep them down; this is
some refreshing to the Church of God to behold this just hand of God against
the ungodly of the earth, and it is earnest of that purging of his floare when
he will f^n away the wicked at the dust and chaff^ of the earth. For when the
wicked perish there is joy.

2. Another reason is because God will have the enemies of his Church know that
their power i^ borrowed, and he that lent it to them, can re^^^e it to
himself; and extinguish it in them at pleasure.

So Christ told Pilate that he could have no power against him, except he had
it from above, whereupon grows that consolation of the Church, fe^^ me thou
that (...) kill (...) body, and can go no fu^ther.

The wicked are compared in respect of their tumultuous rage, and the manifold
scourges of their wicked attempts against the Church to the raging of the sea;
the comparison does hold out thus far; God has set this sea bounds and the
proud waves may come thus far and no further; so has God limited the fury of
his enemies, and set them their non ultra no further.

The use which the Church makes of this experiment, is,

1. It takes away fear of outward enemies. Fear of man is a dangerous
preturbation, and such as endangereth faith, against which Christ gives his
Disciples warning: Let not your hearts be troubled nor fear.

Quid timet hominem homo in sinu dei positus? tu de illius sinu non cadere
potes quicquid ibi passus fueris ad salutem valebit non ad perniciem. Aug.


Scripture sets forth the power of the outward enemy in these and such like
phrases; there is rugitus Leonis, the roaring of the Lion; there is unguis
Leonis, the Lions paw; there is cornu Vnicornium, the horn of the Unicornes;
there is pes superbiae, the foot of pride; there is oculus nequam, an evil
eye; there is manus violenta, a violent hand, and iniquitas manuum, the
iniquity of the hands; os sepulchrum, the mouth an open sepulcher; and venenum
aspidum sub labiis, the poison of aspes under the lips.

The mercies of the wicked are cruel, but I will not fear what man can do
unto me.

Multos in summa pericula misit. Venturi timor ipse mali fortissin^^^ ille est
Qui promptus metunda pati. The fear of evil to come has endangered many; he
is the most valiant that is ready to suffer what is feared.

2. It tries our faith; Christ said to Peter, Cur times exigua fide praedites
when he so felt himself sinking in the waters, God promised I will not leave
thee nor forsake thee. Do we believe him? Dare we trust him? as Christ. Do you
believe in God? believe also in me.

2 My brethren, count it all joy when you fall into diverse temptations. Jam. 2.


Knowing this that the trying of your Faith works patience.

But let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire
wanting nothing. 1 Pet. 1 7.


That the trial of your Faith being much more precious, then of gold which
perishes, though it be tried with fire might be found unto praise and honor
and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ, etc.

3. This sets before our eyes the great appearance that our enemies shall
make before us, either in this world, when our eye shall have our desire on
them that hate us, or in the last day when the Saints shall judge the world;
which serves to admonish us with the Prophet, To commit our ways to the Lord,
and to trust in him, for he shall bring it to pass.

Excellent is the story of Elisha, whom the King of Syri^ sent an Army to take,
and they beset Dothan where he lodged; but Elisha prayed, and God smote the
whole Army with blindness, and he whom they sought offered himself to them to
be their guide, and he brought them into Samaria, and then God opened their
eyes, and they saw themselves in the hand and power of their enemies.

Thus does God blind the eyes of the enemies of his Church, and when there
malice is at the height, they find themselves set at the Bar to be judged by
his Saints; then Jacob shall judge the Mount of Esau.

Methinkes I see the great appearance of the boisterous Tyrants of the earth,
whose eyes did sparkle fire in the faces of Gods servants, whole tongue spoke
proud words, whose foot trod upon Gods Saints, whose hand spared them not,
whose countenance darted against them scorn and disdain, and whose swords
were made drunk in the blood of Gods Holy ones;

With what a fearful trembling, and horrible dread they come to this judgment
against their wills, where they shall see the Saints all in long white robes,
like a flock of sheep that come from the washing: in whose glorified faces they
shall behold their own shame and dishonor: in whose place and joy, they shall
behold the bloody persecution wherewith they have oppressed them in their life,
and in whose settled happiness they shall read their doom of eternal woe.

And as Saint Peter says: How shall the wicked and ungodly appear; there
needs no more evidence against them, bring them to judgment, and that sight
shall convince them,

3. The issue and effect of all; And the Kingdom shall be the Lords.

This is the proper fruit of our deliverance from the hands of our enemies,
that the Kingdom of God may be established on earth in Gods Church.

1. For so long as the enemies of God do tyrannize and fill all with their
gross actions; the face of the Church is covered, the Temples of God are
defiled, and demolished, the worship of God seeks private corners, and
shows not it self, the Saints of God fly from the Sword of Persecution,
wandering here and there, from one Nation to another people: and it is hard to
say where the Church of God is.

During the persecution under the cruel Emperors, till Constantine aross, and
restored the Kingdom to God, the Kingdom of God on earth was not abolished
quite, but it was in some sort invisible; not that it was then hidden from all
the faithful, as it was from the world; therefore concerning the
invisiblenesse of this Kingdom, we do affirm,

1. That though this Kingdom of God be so established on earth, that the ga^^^
of hell shall not prevails against it: because God gave to his son that asked
him, the he^^hen for his inheritance, and the utmost part of the earth for his
possession. And Christ promised to give the Holy Ghost to his Church to abide
with it for ever (...) ye^at sometimes the faithful may be so few in number,
and they so separated one from another, in the pursuit of their ow^^ s^^^ty,
that the world cannot easily discome the face of a Church.

This, some of the Church of Rome have confessed, affirming that about the time
of Christ's passion, and the dispersion of his Disciples, the^^ true faith
remained only in the blessed Virgin Mary.

But untruly^ (...) the Disciples, though they fled from the persecution of
that time, they fled not fro^^ the ^aith of Christ.

But was it not so in Eliahs time, when he knew of no more but himself alone,
that served the true God? yet God had knees that had never bowed to Baal, even
then.

2. We affirm that Satan's Kingdom may so far dilate it self in power and
spreading, that the external government of the Church may cease, the
succession of Bishops and Pastors may be interrupted, the Discipline of the
Church hindered, and the outward exercise of Gods Worship suspended; the sun
of righteousness may suffer eclipse, and thus much the Rhemists do confess, in
their notes upon 2 These. 2.2.

3. That which the common opinion does embrace for the Kingdom of God, may be
Satan's Kingdom, whose doctrine is poison, whose pastors are wolves in sheeps
clothing, whose children are bastards of the Strumpet of Babylon.

This appears in the Church story, for when Rom^ forsook her first Love, and
began to turn says into faction, and religion into carnal policy, to
establish a t^anscendent greatness on the face of the earth, and to tyrannize
over all that stood for the truth revealed in the word, then was the candle of
the Church put out so far as they could prevail, and the word of God the
light of our steps was taken away from the people.

Then did the faithful subjects of Gods Kingdom hide themselves from the
sword, and the fire, and the sundry persecutions which Rome devised to oppress
them: then their heresy past for truth commonly: their usurpers for lawful
Bishops: their mercenaries for Pastors: their legendes for Gospel, and they
boasted themselves the only true Church of God, and Spouse of Jesus Christ.

And when by the ministry of Dr. Lurher the Church began to lift up the head
again, and that one single man opposed the Pope: and was a burning and shining
Lamp, to whose light many daily resorted, we see that ever since that time the
Church has come more and more in sight, and grown both in number and strength.

Kings have been nursing Fathers, and Queens have been Nurses, and the Kingdom
of God has been gloriously advaanced on earth.

Then did England cast off the yoke of Rome, and God caused a light to shine in
darkness, and ever-since a face of the Church has appeared, gathering more
and more fresh beauty: and now we may say truly of our times, the light never
shone more clear in this Land then now it does; never more learning, and never
more communicated then now.

But beloved this will not serve our turn, God must have as well a rule of our
hearts, as of our ears, of our hands as of our heads.

Let us look to our example in my Text: when God had restored this people to
their land, they established his Kingdom.

With public Assemblies, with fasting and humbling of themselves before God,
with confession of sins, with weeping and mourning, with solemn Vows to
perform all the Commandments of God;

They spent their time not all in hearing, but in worshipping also of God.

They vowed not to make any marriages with such as were no professed subjects of
the Kingdom of God, such as was the marriage of Solomon with King Pharaohs
daughter.

They vowed to keep the Sabbath holily to the service of God, to deal
charitably with their poor brethren.

To honor God with their riches, setting apart a portion to maintain the
worship and public service of God.

And all this must we do if we will advance the Kingdom of God amongst us, not
only in outward profession, but in inward subjection.

You may know a true subject of Gods Kingdom by his walk, and by his pace; for
he walks,



shows, but requires truth in the inward parts.

He walks in righteousness, that is, in the obedience of the Second Table of
the Law, living in the practice and exercise of his knowledge, to the uttermost
of that measure of grace that is given to him, as it becomes the Saints.

For these know that they were therefore delivered from the hands of their
enemies that they might more freely attend the service of God, and the saving
of their own souls.

Amongst such as these God reigns and has put on his glorious apparel, and
is acknowledged God as their King.

Idolatry and false worship does unking and dethrone God, and trespasseth the
majesty of our King, swearing and blasphemy makes the name of God (which is
the safety of his subjects, for our help is in the name of the Lord) like to a
broken hedge.

Breach of the Sabbath, which is Gods holy day, is a trespass against his
moderate prerogative, claiming some part of our time for his public service
and the exercise of Religion.

Contempt of the word is a trespass against the Laws of this kingdom.

Injury in any kind to our brethren, is breach of peace amongst the subject of
this kingdom.

Gluttony, drunkenness, pride, be wastfull sins, and consume the outward
treasures thereof, and they also seem to quench the Spirit of God, and to kill
all good motions in our selves and others.

Let us remember our prayer, adveniat Regnum tuum, Let thy kingdom come; And
seeing God has graciously established a Church amongst us in peace, which he
has watered with early rain in the first coming thereof in this Land, and with
a later rain in the Government of two incomparable Princes, truly called
defenders of the Faith against Heresy and Schism.

Let the kingdom be the Lords, let our obedience to his Law bear witness of
our Faith: and let our peace, amongst our selves give testimony of our charity,
and let us walk all one way like the horses of Pharoahs chariot: let us all
fight as one man against sin and Satan, against the Devil and the Pope,
tanquam acces ordinata. For if the Lord be our King, we shall have cause to be
glad thereof. For

Blessed are the people that are in such a case, blessed are the people that
have the Lord for their God.

2. Let us look as far as we can by Saint Paul's prospective: there will be a
time when Christ our grand Captain shall overcome all his enemies, even death,
which is the last enemy; and then shall he deliver up the kingdom to God, even
his Father; then Israel shall have judged Esau, the Church the world*

Then Christ resigneth his office of a Mediator, and then God is all in all.
For then all his enemies shall be in prison in the chains of darkness; all his
Elect shall be fastened together, and united with Christ their head in glory;
God shall then have none to contest with him for sway and domination: his glory
shall then be great in the Salvation of his Church, and in the Victory of his
enemies.

Thus have I in a few months gone through this short but full and pithy
Prophecy of Obadiah; I know with what great comfort, light, and delight, in
mine own meditations, I hope not unprofitably for you.

If you desire many hours work in a few minutes of time, this is the Analysis
of it.

It was divided into two parts 1. Titulus, the Title, 2. Vaticinum, the
prophecy.


1. The Title showed, 1. Whose: Obadiah. 2. What.


1. Whose, Obadiah.

Doctr. God stirs up his servants the Prophets to give warning of the Anger
to come.

2. What: a Vision.



2. The Prophecy: this has two parts.

1. Against Edom, ad finem, ver. 16. 2. For the Church, ver. 17. ad finem.
In the first observe three things.

1. The subject of this Prophecy, Edom. 2. The suggestiorus of it, The Lord.
3. The Prophecy it self.
1. Of the subject, Edom.

I have hated Esau: yet he had all these.

2. Of the suggestour of the Prophecy. The Lord says thus:



3. The Prophecy, that has four parts.

1. The judgment intended against Edom, v. 1, 2. 2. The despair of all Edoms
hopes, ver. 3, ad 9. 3. The cause provoking God, ver. 10, ad 14. 4. Gods
revenge, ver. 15, 16.
1. The judgment intended contains*

1. The discovery. 2. The rumor it self. 3. The effect.
1. The discovery by a rumor from the Lord, an Ambassador sent among the
heathen.

dat sonum certum, gives a certain sound. rumor a Domino, a rumor from the
Lord; and because weak and distressed Consciences do often hear suggestions
of fear, they must examine the rumor, si a Domino if it be of the Lord.
2. The rumor was, that God would punish Edom by war.


3. The effect of this war, ver. 2.

1. From God. I have made thee small. 2. From man: Thou art greatly despised.
In both,



In the first: God makes small his enemies,

1. God casts down the proud.

thou art despised,

2. They that despise God, shall be despised.

2. The despair of all their hopes, five hopes.

1. In the pride of their own hearts. 2. In the safety of their dwelling, ver.
3, 4, 5, 6. 3. In the strength of their confederates, ver. 7. 4. In their
wisdom, ver. 8. 5. In the strength of their own men, ver. 9.
1. Hope in their own pride,

God resists the proud. Pride is an abominable sin in the sight of God, and
it deceives man.

2. Hope in the strength of their dwelling.

for the hidden things of Esau shall be searched and found out.

3. Hope in their confederates.

Edom in casting off their trust in God, is punished by their trusting in men.
Edom, shows, that there is not true peace between the ungodly.
4. Hope, in their wise men.



5. Hope in their strong men.



3. The cause provoking God to this severe prosecution of Edom.

1. Set down in general terms, ver. ^0. 2. In a particular description, ver.
11, 12, 13, 14.
1. In general, they are charged with cruelty to their brother Jacob.

2. In particular, they are charged

1. With cruelty of combination.



2 With the cruelty of the eye.



3. With the cruelty of the heart they rejoiced against their brethren.



4. With the cruelty of the tongue.



5. With cruelty of hands showed in these things.

1. Invasion of their City, 2. Direption of their goods. 3. Insidiation for
life. 4. Depopulation, not sparing the residue.


The Fourth part, Gods revengement.

This contains two things.

1. A judgment of God revealed against the ungodly. 2. A sweet consolation of
the Church.
In the Judgment I note six things.

1. The Certainty: the day set. 2. The Propinquity: near at hand. 3. The
extent: to all the Heathen. 4. The equity: as thou have done, etc. 5. The
Contents: they shall drink. 6. The duration: continually.








Though the judgment of God do begin at the House of God, the wicked shall not
go unpunished.

The judgment of the wicked and unmercifull,

2. The comfort of the Church.

1. He speaks of their judgment as past.



Sion though thus laid waste his holy Mountain.

Where God loves once, he loves ever; and though he afflicts, yet he loves
still.

3. He revealth to his Church their own deliverance, and the destruction of
their enemies,



The second part of the Prophecy

Containing the consolation of the Church against all her enemies, wherein
observe,

1. A promise of restitution to their own. 2. Of victory against their
enemies. 3. The means ordained for thi^.
1. In the promise of restitution.





2. The victories of their enemies.





The Church has good warrant to settle their faith in the assurance of this,
because the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.



1. Here is a promise of Saviors to them.



he does choose to make us instruments of his favor to one another; men
Saviors.



2. Here is a promise of victory to his Church, full victory; They shall judge
the mount of Esau.



3. The issue and effect of all.

The Kingdom shall be the Lords.



Thus have I drawn the the two breasts of this prophecy, and milked it to you:
v^nite ad mu^ctram: for it has two parts, Binos alit utere faetus.

1. Here is the Doctrine of Gods justice. 2. The Doctrine of his mercy.
I have done more; I have gathered the cream of this milk; for these
Doctrines which I have collected be Plos Lactis

I confess that I have studied this Prophecy with singular delight, which has
turned the pains I took in it into sweet and gracious recreations: for in this
short only Chapter of this Prophecy.

Here is a sweet meeting

1. Of the Majesty and authority in the sender, and fidelity in the Messenger.



Righteousness and peace have kissed each other.

Edom and the Heathen, and avenging the cause of Sion; Peace establishing the
Kingdom of God, in the restoration of his Church.

The Prophecy is like a seasonable March; it comes in like a Lion to end
Winter: it goes out like a Lamb, to bring in the cheerful Spring.

For it begins at Bella, horrida bella; it ends with Peace be within thy
borders, and plenteousnesse within thy Palaces.

In the Title of this Prophecy which is called, The Vision of Obadiah, I can
show you the best Book in my Study, and the light of all my Meditations: even
the Vision which God by his Spirit reveals in my understanding, to discern
what his will is, and to suggest what I shall preach in his Church.

Great are the helps of a plentiful Library to furnish us for this service;
but he that has not the help of Vision from him that gives eyes to the
blind, shall walk in the dark and not know whether he goweth: I may say with
S. John,

What I have seen and heard, that have I delivered unto you, and I have no more
to say of it, but I wish the good will of him that dwelt in the Bush, to second
his outward Ordinance of semination, with a blessing of increase; without
which, he that planteth is nothing: he that waters is nothing. To him let us
give the honor due to his name, and say:

Gloria Patri and Filio and Spiritui Sancto, Amen, Amen, Amen. FINIS.

