The Mariner's Delight, OR, The Seaman's SEVEN WIVES.
Being a pleasant new Song; showing how a Seaman called Anthony courted a young
Maid whose Name is Susan, in London: and (with great difficulty) gained her
affection; Notwithstanding he had seven Wives, all alive at that time: and at
last was discovered, to the great advantage and satisfaction of the Virtuous
Maid and all her Relations. From which every Woman, Widow and Maid may learn
how to be wary, and cautions in their Courting.

To the Tune of, Hail to the Myrtle Shades.


MY Dearest I must to the Sea; I Am come now to bid thee adieu:
But pray thee be constant to me, as I shall prove real, and true:
The Wind and the Storms may blow. and make a tempestuous Sea;
But (whithersoever I go my heart it remains with thee.
Dear Anthony, Susan replied, I love you with Soul, and with Life;
But (I Am sure) you are basely belie'd If you reckon to make me your Wife.
I Am told that you have a whole score of Sweethearts therefore it is in vain,
To think that you will make me a Whore, My credit to blemish, and stain.
He seemed as ore'helmed with care; And since by all that is good:
The Fowls that Fly in the Air; and Fishes that swim in the Flood
Before that he proved a false Lover To her that he had by the hands
No Water the Ocean should cover, nor green Grass grow on the Land.


Then Susan began to look grave, and sorry for doubting his Love
And modestly Pardon did crave; persuaded he real would prove.
Then after a Glass of Canary, and such as the house could afford
The Seaman could no longer tarry, but kissed her and straight went aboard.
Poor Susan (for Grief) she did cry, to think that her Sweetheart was gone,
And left her to sigh and to die in love and in sorrow alone.
But (thinking upon his returning) to languish she thought it in vain?
Therefore she left off her fond mourning, expecting to see him again.
But 'ere a Month was overpast, the hopes of her Marriage was gone,
And Sorrow her Face did o'recast, her Heart was as cold as a Stone,
A Maid that was with her acquainted informed her of Anthony's Life;
Her shame and disgrace she prevented, and kept her from being his Wife.
A wife in Virginia he had, and three more in England and Waile^;
In Holland a Phraw he did Wad, a couple he married in Cailes.
But Anthony brave he was brisk, and past for a Batchellor still;
And ready was for the next Frisk, and Women he had at his Will.
Then Maids that are honest and chaste, and you that are light (like the Wind
And Widows that still are confessed To be ever loving and kind
Learn wisdom from what I have told For words they are made but of Air
A Virtuous woman's worth Gold; and Men that are honest are rare.
Printed for J Conyers at the Raven in Duck-lain.


