Emmanuel: A THANKSGIVING-SERMON PREACHED To the Honorable House OF COMMONS
Upon their Solemn day of praising God for the victory obtained by the
Parliaments Forces in SOUTHVVALES. In the Church of Margarets Westminster, May
17. 1648.

By STEPHEN MARSHALL B. D. Minister of Gods Word at Finchingfield in Essex.

MICAH 4. 11, 12, 13. Now also many Nations are gathered against thee that say,
Let her be defiled, and let our eye look upon Zion.

But they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they his
counsel; for he shall gather them as the sheaves into the floor.

Arise and thresh O daughter of Zion.

Romans 8. 31. If God be with us, who can be against us?

London, Printed by R. C^tes for Stephen Bowtell at the sign of the Bihle in
Pope's Head Alley, 1648.

Die Mercurii, 17 Maii, 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Sir John Trevour do from
this House give Thanks to Mr. Marshall, for the great pains he took in his
Sermon he preached this day at Margarets Westminster before the House of
Commons, (it being a day of public Thanksgiving for the Victory obtained by
the Parliaments Forces in Southwales:) And that he be desired to Print his
Sermon, wherein he is to have the usual privilege in Printing thereof.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I do appoint Stephen Bowtell to Print my Sermon.

STEPHEN MARSHALL.



To the Honorable THE House of Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
IN obedience to your commands, I here humbly present to public view, what
you were pleased with ready affections lately to attend unto. In it is cleared
how vain the attempts of all men are against the people and Cause of God; and
these seasonable Mercies and Deliverances may help to confirm us in waiting for
the full accomplishment of all these promises. I confess for our unworthy
walking, and little improving many like Mercies, we continue still in a low
condition, and lie under many heavy pressures; our times are like that day in
Zach. 14. Neither clear nor dark, not day nor night, we are cast down, but not
forsaken of our God, no not Zach. 14. 6, 7. Jer. 51. 5.
though our land be filled with sin against the holy One of Israel, God sill
appears in the mount of our difficulties: Methinks this his gracious dealing
shows how willing he is yet to heal our backslidings, to take away our
iniquities, to do us good, and to preserve and establish us a people to
himself. O! that God would now in the end teach this Nation to leave struggling
one against another for a curse, and all to join together to wrestle with him
for a blessing, and seek him in his own Gospel-way. O! that God would persuade
such of this Nation who are engaged against the cause of God, to leave plotting
and contriving of Designs, which shall not prosper, and in stead thereof join
hands with those who desire to see the prosperity of Zion. And that all who are
engaged in this Cause of God, would labor to manage it in Gods own way; That
they would remember their Covenant, what they have sworn and promised; and by
his grace study to make it good, how abundantly should we find the fruits of
his loving kindnesses showred down upon us! That this may be the study and
endeavor of you all who represent the whole Commonalty of this Nation; is the
humble and earnest prayer of

Your humble Servant in Christ, STEPH^N MARSHALL.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable House of Commons at their Public
Thanksgiving, May 17. 1648.
Isaiah 8. 9, 10. Associate your selves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in
pieces, and give ear all ye of far Countries, gird yourselves, and ye shall be
broken in pieces, gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces, take
counsel together, and it shall come to naught, speak the word, and it shall
not stand, for God is with us.
THis Chapter does contain a threatening The Introduction, showing the parts
and scope of this whole chapter.
of two judgments; One against the Kingdoms of Syria, and the Kingdom of
Israel, or the ten Tribes, that is in the four first Verses, and the sum of
it is this, The Prophet had a young son, the Lord bids him, at the Circumcision
of his son, name him, Maher-shalal-hash-baz, which signifies, Make haste to the
spoil, make haste to the prey; and the Lord gives the reason of it, because
before that child should be able to call, my Father, my Mother, before he
should be able to say Dad or Mam, The riches of Damascus, and the spoil of
Samaria shall be taken away before the King of Assyria: and it came to pass
accordingly, for this Prophecy was about the third year of King Ahaz, and in
the fourth year, which was the year after, a great part of Israel was plundered
and spoiled, and the Kingdom 2 Kings 16. 2 Chronicles 28
of Syria was wholly broken. The second part of the chapter, begins at the
fifth verse, and that contains a threatening of judgment, against the Kingdom
of Judah; and in it there are four things remarkable: First,

Here is the cause of this terrible judgment, that God would bring upon the
Kingdom of Judah; Secondly, 1.


Here is laid down, the judgment it self, what it should be; Thirdly, 2.


Here is contained the deliverance of Gods people from 3.
the judgment; and, Fourthly,

Here is laid down the uses, that God would have made 4.
of all this.

The cause of the judgment you have laid down, in the sixth verse; Forasmuch
(says he) as this people refuses (or slights) the waters of Shiloah, which
run slowly, and rejoice in Rezin, and Remaliahs son, because of this, that is
in one word, because of their infidelity, because they did not rest upon the
Gospel promises made them in Immanuel, that salvation which he had promised
to come from the house of David, but slighted it because the house of David was
now low, and their neighbor Kingdoms of Syria and Israel were more pompous
and stately, then David's throne, therefore they regarded not the promises made
to it, but would be glad to be like those Kingdoms, who overtopt them; and
to this end they made a confederacy with the King of Assyria, that they might
be the better able to cope with Rezin the King of Syria, and Pekah son of
Remaliah the King of Israel: this the Prophet signifies in the words of
refusing the waters of Shiloah that run softly, and rejoicing in Rezin and
Remaliahs son. Shiloah was a little River which arose at the foot of Mount
Sion, whence ran flowly, and in a crooked channel, which some thinks it is
called the Dragons Well, Lapid. in locum.
Nehem. 2. 13. and this smooth stream was conveyed in some subterranean
channells into that pool mentioned, John 9. 7. and was thence by pipes conveyed
into the Kings Gardens and Orchards, and was of use to the whole City, yea and
Temple of Jerusalem: The same River of Shiloah is that which the Prophet
mentions, Psalm. 46. There is a River, the streams whereof make glad the City
of God, the holy place of the Tabernacle of the most High. By this River the
Lord shadows out the Kingdom of Sion and the house of David, which now was in
a mean and low estate, and therefore despised by those unbeleeving Jews; and it
is usual with the Prophets, by Rivers to signify the adjacent Provinces, Egypt
by Nilus, Babylon by Euphrates, etc. Now for this sin of their unbeleif, and
relying upon an arm of flesh the King of Assyria, was this judgment to come
upon them. Then, Secondly,

Here is the judgment which therefore shall come upon them; because that little
River of Shiloah, would 2.
not in their esteem do them good, would not comfort them, the Lord would
bring them waters, broad enough, foraine waters, such as they desired but
little for their good, he would bring the Assyrian upon them, he who they
trusted in to be their deliverer, should come in, and be their spoil; Now
therefore behold the Lord brings upon them the waters of the rivers strong
and many, even the King of Assyria and all his glory; and he shall come up over
all his channels, and go over all his banks, and he shall pass through Judah,
he shall overflow and go over; he shall reach even to the neck, and the
stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land Oh Emmanuel.

This terrible judgment is laid down in two comparisons: one of a great
river, or the sea, that had broke over all his banks, a flood should spread
over all their land, and reach up to the very neck; the other comparison is of
an Eagle or fowl of prey, he should come and spread his wings over the breadth
of the whole land; the whole land of Judea should at one time be overspread by
the mighty Army that Senacherib (whom they expected to be their Savior) should
bring upon them with a purpose to destroy them; and in the close of this
threatening, there is an elegant Apostrophe, he turns his speech to Christ, he
shall spread his wings over the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel; though it be
thy land and thy people, O Emmanuel, yet because of their unbelief all this
shall come upon them. This turning of his speech to Christ seems to be an
indignity to Christ, that his land, under the notion of his land should be
wasted by such a wicked King, but this appears to be added for two ends, one to
signify the certainty of the judgment, all that could possibly be pleaded,
why there should be any hope of keeping off the judgment was Emmanuels title
to this land, but it shall come though it be Emmanuels land; secondly, this is
added as a secret ground of comfort of deliverance, because it was the land of
Emmanuel, the land and people where Emmanuel was to be borne, and where he was
to reign, where he had and would have his fire and furnace, his seat and
habitation, therefore their faith may expect deliverance: these are the two
first parts of the Chapter; now my Text contains the third, which is the
deliverance which the Lord would give them notwithstanding their great
unworthiness; but before I come to that, let me name this one lesson, from the
other two parts, namely,

That it is ordinary with God, when his people do Observe.
forsake his promises, and trust to an arm of flesh, he makes that arm of
flesh to be their scourge, which they expected to be their helper; they had
nothing that they would trust to against these two neighboring Kingdoms, but
the power of the King of Assyria, and this King of Assyria shoud be their
scourge to beat and almost to break them in pieces: which is notably expressed
2 Chronicles. 28. 20, 21. Ahaz sent all the treasure he could rap and rend, thereby
to engage the King of Assyria. And Tilgath-Pilneser the King of Assyria came to
him, and distressed him, but strengthened him not, he helped him not: therefore

Let us learn, that when we do trust either to any Use.
nation, to any Army, or to any Council, and rely upon them, with
withdrawing our selves from the gracious promises of God, we take the ready
way to bring ruin and destruction upon our selves.

The third part of the Chapter, is that which I intend The Text opened.
by the Lords assistance to treat upon; and that is, the deliverance which the
Lord was pleased to promise this unworthy people in this 9, and 10. verses: for
the understanding whereof I would open two things; First,

The matter contained in these two verses: Secondly,

The manner, how the Lord is pleased to lay this down, and express it:

The matter of the two verses, contains these three Heads: First,

Here is a great conspiracy against the Church of God: Secondly,

Here is an eminent deliverance of the Church from this conspiracy: Thirdly,

Here is both the author of the deliverance, and the cause, why they should be
delivered.

The conspiracy against them, is laid down in these branches; First,

Here is the multitude of people, that were engaged in it, called, ye people,
and ye of far Countries; a great many of them: Secondly,

Here is their association, their meeting about their business; gather your
selves together, associate your selves 2.
ye people, come and meet: Thirdly,

Here is the Association of their Council; take counsel together; contribute
every one what you are able toward 3.
this design: Fourthly,

Here is their agreement in the Conclusion; Speak the word, set it positively
down, nemine contradicente, this 4.
is the business we will do, and carry it on as one man: then

Here is the preparation likewise of their Arms; Gird your selves, do not
only meet, and talk and agree, but 5.
arm, and march, and go on with your business; all this is the preparation
to the plot: Secondly,

Here is the defeat of this plot, and that is very notable, even the
dissipating of their counsels, the ruin 2.
of all their enterprises; Associate your selves, but ye shall be broken; gird
your selves, but ye shall be broken; take counsel, but it shall come to
naught; speak the word, set down your conclusion, that you will never part from,
yet all shall not stand, all shall be a vain thing, it shall not only not take
effect, but return upon your own heads, to your own ruin, ye shall be
broken in pieces: Thirdly,

Here is the Author of it, and in the Author the 3.
cause; for God is with us: the Hebrew is, for Emmanuel; gather your selves,
gird your selves, take counsel, speak the word, all shall come to naught, for
Emanuel; that is, for it is Emmanuels cause that you oppose, it is Emmanuels
people, that you fight against; it is Emmanuel who is the Leader, the General
of that Army, one that will out-wit you, and out-plot you, and out-fight you,
one for whom you are too few, and he alone will be too many for you, it is
against Christ, and you do but kick against the pricks; this is the matter of
these two verses: then, Secondly,

Note likewise the manner, how the Lord is pleased 2.
to lay this down; which is done by several rhetorical, and figurative
expressions: as First,

Here is an Apostophe; though the speech be intended 1.
to his people, yet the Lord turns himself to the Assyrians, who were coming
against them; Associate your selves, ye people, harken all ye of far Countries:
Secondly,

It is laid down in the way of an Irony, and of a Sarcasme, 2.
a bitter scoff, the Prophet sets down this whole business by way of contempt
of these enemies, that were engaged in the business; as if he should have
said thus, I know your devices, you have concluded what you will do against
Jerusalem, engage you will, well be doing, go on with your business, point
your rendezvous, carry your Troops and Regiments complete with you, take an
Oath of them all, resolve what you will do, try your skill, do your utmost, but
it will not hold, it will not do, you are too weak, you will be broken, you will be
dashed; Thus in a way of scorn the Lord is pleased to lay down this whole
business, and he chooses this manner of expressing of it, partly, that he
might thereby upbraid the confidence of the Enemy, who thought their business
was so sure, that no check, much less checkmate should ever be given them;
you think you are very sure of your business, you make no question of
carrying the day: and partly, in it he would express likewise, the holy
confidence of the Prophet, and with the Prophet of all the people of God, when
they have got a promise from God, that they can under the Lords protection,
securely look upon all the preparations that their enemies make against them;
for as it is the speech of God, so it is the speech of the Church, Immanuel,
God is with us, therefore do your worst against us, we fear you not: this I
take to be the sum and the meaning of the words; Now out of the words many
excellent instructions might be learned: I intend but one, though I shall
point at several others: as First,

From the conspiracy that was in all these people, thus associating their
persons, their counsels, their treasure, their arms, all for the ruin of the
Church, and people of God; we may observe the wonderful consent that is found
in the enemies of Zion, to ruin and destroy it: learn I say, Obser. 1. There is
a content and unity in the enemies of the Church in their opposition against
it.


That there is a Concord, Harmony, and Unity of Spirits, and endeavors in the
enemies of the Church, to bring ruin and destruction upon it. This is a truth
that I shall not need to prove, all the ages of the World have given sufficient
proof of it; Satan and his instruments have appeared in many shapes, sometime
in the shape of a Lion, sometimes of a great red Dragon, sometimes of a subtle
Fox, sometimes in the shape of an innocent Lamb; but what ever their shape
be, their purpose and work has ever been to make war against the woman and
her seed, to endeavor by all means possible, the ruin of the people of God,
pursuing it with deadly fury, and pouring out floods of malice and rage against
it. I know it could not be burdensome, if I should a little open the several
ways, that they have taken; The several ways how they attempt it.
some more spiritual, some more carnal. Some more spiritual, one while
indeavoring to corrupt their lives, by drawing them to wickedness: sometimes
to corrupt their faith, by drawing them to blasphemies or heresies: sometimes
to corrupt their worship, by tainting it with idolatry and superstition:
sometimes to break their union, by interrupting them with schisms and
divisions: at other times to interrupt and break their spiritual liberty, by
putting bonds and yokes upon them, contrary to the Word; and at other times by
outward means, by persecutions and open hostilities, by all the terrors, and
threats, whatsoever the hand, and tongue, and interest, and power of the
Devil, and all his instruments could ever bring to pass, they never have
ceased to endeavor by all possible means to destroy Immanuels people; this is
a known truth.

The true ground is only that inbred enmity and Reason. From their enmity
against it.
opposition that is in the heart of all the seed of the Serpent against the
seed of the woman, though no good reason at all, can be given why it should be
so, yet non Genesis 3. 15. Which preceeds from three causes.
amote, nec possum dicere quare; they do not love them, they hate them, they
must endeavor to destroy them; there is an enmity against them: but yet because
no hatred found amongst rational creatures, is without (at least) some
pretense of Reason, know ye that the Reason of their hatred, is grounded upon
such things as these; the one is,

That the Church of Christ, is a terrible plague and 1.
vexation to all the rest of the World; I say, there is not such a plague to
all the people of the world, as the Church of Christ is, and as Gods people
are, because the laws and rules by which they walk, do threaten nothing but
ruin and destruction, to all those that walk in other ways; other people in
the several ways they walk in, if you let them alone in their ways, they
will allow you to promise your self what you will in your ways, their
religions, and courses are good fellows one to another, they can bear with
them in their principles; but the people of God do hold out that, which must
be the only rule, and they tell all the world, that if they walk not
according to their rule only, they will be damned, and destroyed eternally,
and so they vex them; and therefore one notes well, that when Tiberius the
Emperor of Rome, having heard of the miracles of Christ, did propound to the
Senate of Rome, that Christ might be worshipped as a God, as well as their
other Gods were, the Senate upon serious consultation rejected it, because
(they said) if they entertained him, they must cast out all the rest, he would
suffer none to be God but himself; and therefore in stead of owning him to be
one of theirs, they persecuted him, and owned all the rest: So it is, the two
witnesses you read of, Revel. 11. vexed all the men that lived upon the earth,
by their Prophesies, all the servants of God by their rules, their faith, their
lives, their worship, etc. Throw fire and brimstone in the faces of others, and
therefore no wonder though they be so bitterly hated and opposed Again,
another ground is,

That which Jesus Christ expresses, he has chosen his 2.
people out of the World, as out of a base, vile, and unclean John 15. 19.
John 17. 14.
company, and upon his thus choosing, and calling, they in their whole
conversation and garb, do leave the rest of the world, as unclean, vile and
base; and there can be nothing so odious to a people as to be so left: If
there were some amongst our selves whose whole work and endeavor should be
to leave England, and carry away all that they have out of it, as from a base
people, and unworthy to be loved or dwells withal, and should seek their
welfare in another Country, it were enough to turn the heart of all the Nation
against them: this is the way of all Gods people, they cry down the glory of
the world; the pleasures of the world, the riches of the world, the honor and
pomp of the world, they cry all down as a base thing, and they profesle, to
lay up all their treasure elsewhere, and therefore the world cannot bear it:
then add in the last place,

That all that is excellent in the Church, is invisible and undiscernible by a
carn all eye; they have in them 3.
many things that will challenge respect and reverence, but they are not seen;
all the outside is poor, and base, and mean, and contemptible, unattended,
unhonoured; and for such a poor low sort of people to take so much upon them,
who have no worth in them, that others can discern, is intolerable, no marvel
that the world be against them; this made the two Witnesses so hated, Revel.
11. that though they were but two, and they also clothed in sackcloth, yet
they durst undertake to throw fire in the faces of all men, who lived upon
earth. Upon such grounds as these, there ever has been in the hearts of all
the enemies of the Church, an incessant endeavor, and an unanimous
confederacy, to ruin them, and destroy them; I note this but for these two ends
briefly; First,

That it may teach all the servants of Christ, all the people of God, what they
must look for in this world, Use 1. Therefore the the people of God, must look
for no quiet in this world.
while their lot is to live amongst worldly men; they must look for no other,
but plots, and conspiracies, and confederacies for their ruin; and let it not
be hard, It was so with the Lord himself, Quod erat Christus erimus
Christiani; What Christ was, we Christians must be; and it is enough, to be
like our Master, while he he lived upon earth, although he never did hurt
any, walked unblamably, pitied all, helped all that came to him, yet he was
not believed in his word, he was reproached in his life, hated in his person,
grieved in his Spirit, the whole way of the world went against him; and it must
and will be so with his servants, while there is a devil and a devilish
spirit in the world, the gates of hell will be working, in one kind or other,
Non semper saeviunt Nerones, sed nunquam cessat diabolus, there are not always
raging Neroes, but there are always devils and devilish men, every Abel shall
be sure of a Cain, and the Congregation of Christ's people must be opposed by
the association of Malignant enemies. But Secondly,

That which I would feign leave with you is this, even a use of wisdom; which
all the servants of God Use 2. Therefore they should unite for their own safety.
should learn, since there is such a confederacy and an harmony in the spirits
and endeavors of all the enemies of Gods people for their ruin; how should
this provoke all the servants of Christ to associate and unite themselves
together, for their mutual safety? certainly when Gebal, and Ammon, and
Amalek, and the Philistines, and they that dwell at Tire, Asher, and the
children of Lot, are all confederate against Gods people, it were a stark
madness for Ephraim then to bite Manasses, and Manasses to bite Ephraim, and
both these to devour Judah; O how uncomely, and unseasonable a thing is it, to
find the people of God divided one from another, and helping by their
jealousies, and divisions, the hurt and rain one of another, at that time when
there is one soul and spirit, possesses all their adversaries to destroy them;
how sad is it, that we cannot learn that wisdom of our adversaries? look
over all the world, and you shall find, that the generality of the world, are
all children of Babel, children of confusion, have several interests one from
another, can undermine one another, can fight one against another, yet they all
can and do convenire in hoc tertio, they all agree in this, that when there is
a business against the Church of God, they will all be one against it: Shall
not the servants of God join together for their safety? this duty of loving one
another our Savior presses upon Ephesians. 1. 4. John 13. Col. 3.
us by many arguments, we have one God, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, etc.
it was one of his last injunctions, Love one another, it is the band of
perfection, etc. yet all will not do it, our great enemy knows how open we lie
to him, when a spirit of division is got in; they that have read the stories of
the Church, are able to prove it, that next to Apostasy from God, the
divisions that have been found amongst Gods people, have been the greatest
means of their hurt and mischief; God in mercy teach us now to learn our duty;
sure I am, this exhortation was never more needful, and useful, then it is at
this day, and unto this nation, where there are found a people, a godly people,
for whom the Lord has done admirable things, greater then which he has not
done since he brought Israel out of Egypt, and now after God has done all this
for us, we are tantum non swallowed up, and should it prove so, it must lie
upon this, our divisions have undone us, when the Lord has prevented our
enemies, we have undermined one another, and been jealous one of another, and
hated one another, and that so bitterly that I have often with sorrow thought,
that in England this day, it is not much better, then it is in Turkey, in this
respect; they who write of the state of the Christians among the Turks, say
this of them, that their divisions are such one against another, and their
hatred so implacable, that they love the Turk better then they love one
another, and that the Turk makes use of them as his instruments, and informers
to ruin one another, and that if there were an Army of the one side able to
cope with an Army of the Turks, he that shall expect to have but one good wish
from the rest of the Christians to accompany them, would be utterly deceived;
which (says a learned observer) makes their bondage irrecoverable; Alas that
we should be so near if in England, that the divisions that are got in amongst
the servants of God, should make us like the Hieroglyphique of the Dragon and
the Lion, fighting one against another, when the Griffin hangs over them to
devour them both when they have weakened and wounded one another. This is our
present sad condition, God in mercy amend it; I have much ado to keep off from
further enlarging my complaint upon this woeful theme, because our divisions
(beside all other mischiefs which attend them,) hinder us from prising and
esteeming deliverances and the mercies which God bestows upon us, as in such a
deliverance and mercy as we meet to praise God for this day; many, yea many
honest and good men hardly know how to praise for it, when the instruments of
it are men from whom we are divided in our affections, lest possibly some such
respect should be offered them as we like not: and thus God is deprived of his
glory and we of our comfort. O the woeful fruits of our discord! Christ will
not bear these things at our hands, he will either make us one or none; I am
persuaded he will either make us lay down these oru divisions, or he will give
us up into their hands, who will make us agree in eating the bread of
affliction, and drinking the water of affliction, make us agree in one common
calamity with a witness. Pardon this digression (if it be one) which the
exigence of the times and our dangers, put me upon; I urge these things to stir
up your frequent prayers that God would be merciful unto us, that we might not
thus pull down our houses with our own hands. Thus from the first part, the
confederacy against the Church; the other I principally aim at, and that is,

The deliverance from it: where you have considerable Second and third part of
the Text, the Churches deliverance and the cause of it.
two things: First,

The deliverance it self; the breaking of all the counsels of their enemies,
and the turning of all upon their own heads: and Secondly,

The cause of it; and that is Immanuel, he is the worker of it.

Now though there be but one main lesson, that I purpose to handle, yet there
are three or four particulars, that I would hint and but little more then
name; one is, that although the Lord had brought these Assyrians upon his
people, and delivered his people into their hands, yet their rage, and cruelty,
and fury against his Church did move God to turn his hand upon them, though he
had employed them to afflict, and chastise his people:

That the more rage and fury is in the enemies of the Church, the sooner does
the Lord compassionate the Observe. 3. The rage and fury of the Churches enemies
hasten the Churches deliverance. Deuteronomy. 32.
miseries of his Church; there are very many examples of it, in the 32. Deuter.
I said I would scatter them, speaking of the rebellions of his people, which
had angered him; I said (says he) I would even scatter them into corners, I
would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men, were it not that I
fear the fury of their enemy, that he would exalt himself too much against
them: Senacherib is a famous instance of this, Esaias 10. God had stirred him up
to go against his people, to take the spoil of them, and to tread them down
as the mire in the streets: but Senacheribs rage grew higher, he would destroy
and utterly cut them off, he would do to Jerusalem as he had done to Samaria,
but even therefore did God compassionate his people, and ruin this proud
adversary: so likewise, Zach. 1. 14, 15, 16. etc. God was a little angry and
displeased with his people, and the enemies helped forward the affliction, but
therefore was God sore displeased with their enemies, and even therefore did he
return to Jerusalem with mercyes.

Thus you see God compassionates the misery of his people, the more the rage
and fury of the adversary is Application.
kindlled against them: And therefore (to apply this in a word or two) that
which is to many in these days, is a wonderful discouragement of heart, I
think rather should to be a ground of hope to us; I mean the extreme rage and
fury which appears in the spirits of most wicked men against such as fear God;
I believe there was never so much blood, nor wrath, rage, nor fury, in the
hearts of the enemies of Gods people as is this day to be found; they fear not
to speak it out, that not a man of them shall live in the Kingdom, when once
power comes into their hands; they hope the day is coming, and they make
account to do, as Pharaoh said he would do, when he followed the Israelites
into Exodus 15. 9.
the Red sea, I will now overtake them, my wrath shall be now satisfied to the
full upon them; now who knows but the Lord will do his people the more good
for this; as David said of Shimei, when he cursed him, and they would have had
him take off his head, No (says he) let him curse, it may be God will do me
good for his cursing of me; the more pride, and wrath there is in the hearts of
those, that think to tread his people down, the more will God lay their
insolency to his heart.

Again, you may observe here, with what scorn and Observe. 2. With what scorn
and contempt, God looks upon the preparations and forces of his Churches
eenemies.
contempt the Lord does speak of all the preparations of man against his
people; here was a mighty Army listed and rallied, gathered together, met at
their rendezvous, yea, come into the Kingdom, and made account to carry all
before them, but how disdainfully the Lord speaks of all their preparations;
Associate your selves, go your ways on, you think to do a great act, you
make account to carry all, but it will not do, it will not stand; poor
peoplel you reckon without your host; thus the Lord (as the prophet says) sits
in heaven, and laughs Ps. 22.
at them; he scorns all their preparations, that they make against his
servants: and truly the naming of it, should teach us to make the same use of
it, that Luther did, Application.
Surely (says he) if Jesus Christ sit in heaven and laugh at them, we should
be foolish on earth, to sit and cry for fear of them; for Christ well enough
knows what they can do, and what they shall do, let us never tremble at that
which Jesus Christ laughes at. Observe further,

That when the Lord does think upon deliverance for his afflicted people, it is
nothing of their worth, but only Observe. 3.
the interest of Immanuel, which prevails with God; here the Lord had stirred
up an enemy to come against them, and they came, and when they thought to do
great matters, the Lord would not let them, but would turn all upon their own
heads; and why? for Immanuel, Immanuel is interessed in it, not the worthiness
of Gods people, as he often says it; be it known to you, I do nothing of all
this for your sakes, be you ashamed and confounded, it is for my own names sake
which I work for; I regard the glory of my Son, Christ's interest will bring
deliverance, when the unworthines of the Church would rather call for
vengeance. It Is true, God dearly loves his people, they are to him as the apple
of his eye, Kingdoms and nations are nothing to him in comparison of his
people, but it is no worth in them, nothing of their own, which commends them
to him, they often lie in their blood which yet is a time of love to him, and
should he forbear healing and helping till their worthiness called for
deliverance it would, never come, it is that love wherewith he has loved them
in Immanuel, which Application.
brings all; therefore though we should be humbled and even tremble at the
thought of our present unworthines, yet should Gods people comfortably hope and
wait, that for Christ's interest in our present cause and work, deliverance
will come.

Before I come to the chief lesson, point at one more,

That when the greatest inundations of miseries do flow in upon the Church,
yet the Lord sets bounds to them, that they cannot go so far as the enemy
would: here the waters should come up to the chin, but yet not over head and
ears; the Lord often afflicts his people, but he will not give them up to a
total spoil, and desolation; all these things deserve to be handled more
fully, but the time will not allow it; I come now therefore to that only
lesson, that I intend more full to insist upon; and that is this,

Immanuel, our blessed Savior, does turn all the plots Observe. 5. The main
observation from the deliverance and the author of it.
and conspiracies, that are against his Church, upon the heads of the
contrivers, and makes them for the salvation, and deliverance of his people:
that is the lesson,

That all the associations, and plots that are against Gods people, Jesus
Christ does so order the matter, that Jesus Christ turns the most desperate
designs of his Churches enemies upon their own heads, etc.
in the result and event, they shall be all turned upon the heads of the
adversaries; and for the welfare of those that are his servants: there is no
one argument in the whole book of God more frequently repeated in various
instances, then this doctrine which I have propounded: that of Egypt, of
Sisera, of Senacherib, of Haman, of the conspiracy against Christ; and a
hundred others more, some relating to the Church in general, some relating to
particular godly men, in all of them the Lord has ever made it good, that the
mischief intended This cleared by five conclusions gathered out of the text.
against his people, turns upon the heads of the contrivers. But to make it a
little clear to you, I pray you note these four or five conclusions, which all
lie in my Text: First, 1.


That all the plots and conspiracies, that wicked men God and our Lord Jesus
Christ has a hand in contriving all the designs that are against his people.
have against the Church and people of God, Jesus Christ has a hand in the
contriving of them: here was Senacherib, he and his people had confederated and
associated in this plot: but God sent him, verse 7. Now therefore the
Conclusion. 1. Christ has a hand in contriving every plot that is against the
Church.
Lord brings upon them the King of Assyria: the Lord had determined how far
he should go, how he should spread over all the land, and his waters should
reach up to the neck: in the next Chapter but one, in the 10 Isa. God says of
him, I sent him against them, though he did not think so: So also in the 4. of
Micah, Many nations are gathered together against thee, etc. but it follows
presently, I gather them as sheaves; so in the famous case of the death of
Christ, Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Acts 4 26, 27, 28.
Gentiles and the people of Israel were gathered together against the Lord and
against his Christ, but it was to do what Gods hand and counsel had before
determined to be done. Secondly,

In this contrivement, Jesus Christ intends one thing, 2.
and the enemies intend another thing, each of them Christ intends one thing,
the enemy another thing.
working according to their own principles; that you have plain here, the
Assyrian comes in, his intent is to swallow up all, the Lords intent is, that
he himself and all his company shall be broken to pieces; thus Joseph's brethren
thought evil against him, but God meant good to him; thus Pharaoh intended the
extirpation of Israel, by that which God intended their propagation; Genesis 50.
20. Exodus 1. 12. Hester 3. 1. Micah 4. 12, 13.
thus Haman intended the ruin of Mordecai and all the Jews, when God intended
light and gladness and a good day to them; thus the nations Micah 4. intended
to tread down Zion, when God intended they themselves should be threshed out:
and a hundred examples more might be given, but I can only point at these
things. Thirdly,

That Jesus Christ does very frequently let the designs 3.
of the adversaries of his Church go on, with a great Christ often lets them
go on till they think to attain their end.
deal of success and prosperity, until they think themselves cock-sure of
the whole business: this you may see in the Text here, they came with such a
mighty Army, that they made no question of carrying all before them, made
account all was their own; thus Pharaoh went Exodus 15. 9. Hester. 10. 8, 9.
on till he was confident his wrath should be satisfied upon them, Exodus 15. So
Haman had got his decrees signed by the Kings letters, which by the law of
Persia was irrevocable; thus was Peter kept in prison until the very Acts 12.
7.
night before he should be executed: and so in abundance of other designs
against the Church you may see the like, though it is very true that sometimes
the Lord crushes them in the egg, and will not let them break out into
Serpents; yet very often (as we say in the Gunpowder-treason) there wanted
nothing, but to put the match to the powder, and the blow had been given; so
God lets the plots and contrivements of the enemies of his Church, go on,
until they make account that there be no way in the world to stop them, or to
prevent them; so that if Gods people be delivered, their souls must escape as
a bird out of the snare of the Fowler. The next conclusion is,

That when the enemies make account all is sure, that 4.
they question not, but the day is their own, then does Christ defeats them
when they think themselves most sure. Acts 20. 12 etc.
the Lord in some unexpected way, dash all their plots, bring them to nothing;
thus God defeated Pharaoh, Exodus 15. thus was Haman defeated, thus was the
conspiracy against Paul defeated, Acts. 26. a hundred instances might be given,
but I shall only open one similitude which God use to set down the manner of
the destruction of Nineveh, Nahum 1. 10. Nineveh was then the head of this
Assyrian Empire, and God expresses the ruin of Nineveh thus, when they are
folden together, like thorns, and when they are drunken like drunkards, then
shall they be devoured as stubble fully dried; that is, when their plots are
curiously weaved, and set so, that no man shall dare to touch them, no more
then he would touch a wreath of thorns; they have so contrived the business
that they would feign see the man that durst appear against them; They are
folded together as thorns, and when they are drunken like drunkards, that is,
they are drunken with pride and confidence of their success, they can hardly
speak or go, they are so drunken with confidence, when they are come thus to
the top, then shall they be devoured like dry stuble, some way or other fire
will be put to the thatch of the house, and set it a burning, and in a moment
all is gone off. Thus when the enemy is come in like a flood, the spirit of the
Lord lifts up a standard against him. Thus God delights to take his time, when
Esa ^9. 19.
they are at the highest, and fear the least, then God breaks their design;
the last conclusion is,

That when God breaks their designs, he delights to 5.
break themselves, not only to frustrate their designs, When Christ breaks
his enemies plots, he often breaks themselves also.
but to ruin them too, and deliver his people; so it is here, Associate your
selves, gather your selves, gird your selves, take counsel, but still you
shall be broken to pieces, ye shall be broken to pieces, ye shall be broken to
pieces, three times it is in one verse; all breaking to pieces, ruin and
destruction to them, and salvation, and deliverance to Gods people: Thus was it
to Pharaoh and his host, thus was it Exodus 1. 4. Judges 15. Judges 8. Psalm. 3.
11. Judge. 5 ult.
to Sisera and his army, thus was it to Oreb and Zeeb, who perished at Endor,
and became like dung upon the face of the earth, thus with Senacharib and his
great Army, thus with all the Nations who were gathered together to defile
Zion, and thus shall it be with all the enemies of the Church, so let all thine
enemies perish O Lord. Could the time permit me, I would a little further
instruct you, out of the word, in the several ways, how The several ways
how Christ delivers his Church and ruins their enemies.
Jesus Christ uses to affect this, which are all unexpected ways unto his
enemies; they are such as these,

Sometimes the Lord does make some diversion sor them; calls them off that they
cannot go on though they fully purposed it: 2 Kings 19. 7, 8. 1.
2 Kings 19 7, 8.


Sometimes the Lord does infatuate their counsels, that they go a simple way
to work in a business, 2.
that else might be carried easily, Esaias 19. Esa 19 20, 12.
20, 12.

Sometimes the Lord does breed divisions amongst themselves, that they who
thought to destroy Gods 3.
2 Chronicles 20.
people, help to destroy one another; 2. Chron. 20.

Sometimes the Lord strikes into them a spirit of 4.
terror, and amazement, that they do not know whence Esaias 13. 8.
it is, nor why it is, and yet their courage is wholly gone, and so God
threatened it should be both to Niniveh and Babylon, Esaias 13.

Sometimes the Lord stirs up other creatures to 5.
do it; the Wind, the Sun, the Stars, nay it may be Exodus 8* 9, 10.
the very insecta animalia, Exodus 8. 9, 10. the Rats and Mice, and Frogs, and
such poor creatures, and so delivers his people, as he did Jeremiah out of a
dungeon by rotten rags.

Sometimes the Lord Jesus does it, by his own immediate 6.
hand, as in my Text here; the hand of the Lord Esaias 9. 6. Esaias 3. 7.
does it as with devouring fire; So he did against Senacharib; the Angel of
God sent a plague, that in one night killed a matter of ninescore thousand: Esaias
9. 6. and Esaias 1. 3. 7.

Sometimes the Lord does it by giving mighty strength unto a handful of his
own people, to be able to tread 7.
down, and to break through huge hosts of them who made account to lick them
up, as the Ox should lick up a little fodder, Judges 1. Kings 20. there are
plentiful examples of all these; such ways as these does Jesus Christ delight
to turn the plots of all the enemies of the Church upon their own hands, and
for his peoples deliverance; the ground of it in one word, is this,

It all comes from that infinite love that Jesus Christ R^ason. From the tender
love and regard Jesus Christ bears to his people.
bears to his people; my Text has it, you must be broken to pieces, for
Immanuel; it is Immanuels land, it is Immanuels cause, it is Immanuels people:
the tender love that Christ bears to his people, is the cause of all this,
though they are altogether unworthy of it; With an everlasting love have I
loved thee, in Ier. 31. 3. therefore Ier. 31. 3. Esaias 43. 4.
with loving kindness will I thus draw thee; and in the 43. of Isaiah, Since
thou wast precious in mine eyes, (says God) that is, since I set my heart upon
thee, I will give men for thee, and people for thy life: the Lord cares not to
give a mighty Army of enemies for the ransom of them that are precious in his
eyes: and in another place, I Will make them of the Synagogue Revel. 3. 9.
of Satan, fall at thy feet, and they shall know that I have loved thee; for
their sakes is he Immanuel, for their sakes is al power in heaven and earth
committed to him, the Father judges no man, that is, the execution of all the
Sovereign authority of God; is now put into the Ioh 5. 22.
hands of Jesus Christ, for this very end, God has given Ephesians. 1. 21,
him to be the head over all things to the Church, they are all to be
subordinate for the good of the Church, his only work and design is the
welfare of his Church, upon the Church he has set his heart, the Church he
carries in his bosom, his Church he has writ upon the palms of his hands,
and the tablet of his breast, and he being furnished with all the power of
God, and all the wisdom of God, and all the righteousness of God, it can be
no otherwise but that all designs and plots that are against the Church must
be dashed and come to naught, according to that promise in the latter end of
the 54. of Isaiah, No weapon that is formed against Esaias 54. 17.
thee can prosper, but every tongue that rises up against thee in judgment
thou sholt condemn, this is the heritage of all Gods people, says the Lord:
these things I know you are not unacquainted with, I shall now wind it up with
an Application in two or three uses, and they are all of them such uses which
the Lord teaches his people to make of it, in this very Chapter; the first is,

A word of Caution, because all plots and conspiracies against the Church must
come to nothing, therefore say Use 1. Therefore let all men fear to have any
hand against Gods people.
you not, a confedracy with them that say a confederacy; this use of Prophet
makes of it in the 12. verse, as soon as the Lord had made this promise, He
presently with a strong hand instructs him not to walk in the way of that
people, saying, say not a confederacy with them, that say a confederacy, Verse
12.
that is, when others do either out of ill will against Gods people, or from
base fear, or any other principle whatever, associate themselves with the
churches enemies do not you join in that confederacy with them the same caution
I give you, let it be a watchword to all of you, to beware how you have your
hand in any design that is against the cause and people of God, for certainly
in it you can contrive nothing but your own ruin; Ahitophel was a wise man
and he would join with Absalon, possibly only out of policy, because he saw
Absalon was the rising star, and the people were discontented with David's
government, and factions were spread, and this man was like to carry it, and
what became of this wise man? God turned his counsel into foolishinesse, he
twisted a halter to hang himself, and that was all; Thou may by such plots
kindle a fire to burn thy own house, thou may furbish a sword to run into
thy own bosom, but all thy contrivements and joynings with them, how wise or
cunning so ever they are, must turn upon thy own head to thy ruin, if thou have
any thing to do with them; therefore as Pilates wife sent to him, have thou
nothing to do against that just man, so say I to you, have you nothing to do
against Gods Servants, it is a dangerous and a wretched thing to be engaged
against them, it is a wretched thing to carry the devil in ones brain, to be
plotting mischief, but to be unsuccessefull in attempts, yea to advance and do
good to them whom men would destroy, and themselves to perish for their labor,
this is miserable, many a man with Sampson would be content to perish upon
condition, that they whom they oppose might perish with them, but that cannot
be here, no plot will take, therefore let them alone, meddle not against those
men for whose sake God will be engaged against thee: this is one use, The
second is,

A use of comfort; because Immanuel was with his people, therefore says he,
Fear not their fear, be not dismayed, Use 3. Verse. 12, 13, 14. 17. Therefore
let Gods people stay upon Christ in all dark and difficult times.
sanctify you the Lord of hosts in your heart, he will be a sanctuary to you,
trust in him though he hide his face from the house of Israel; In many words
the Prophet here does animate and encourage the servants of God, in their
greatest confusions which can possibly lie upon them, not to let their faith in
Immanuel go, but bear themselves upon him in the midst of all difficulties;
This also would I a little press upon you, because the Lord is thus engaged,
and will order all things for the ruin of his enemies, and the good of his
servants, therefore in the midst of all our darknesses and difficulties, hold
your faith strong in Immanuels promises, which are many, hold you to them, and
fear not any fear of man; I confess, when in my weakness, I look upon the
condition of these three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, there is
not in reference to the people of God, a sadder spectacle upon earth, presented
to my eye; Clouds of confusion hang over all our heads, we may say of our
troubles, as Leah said, when she had a son born, she called him Gad, Behold
(said she) a troop comes; Troops of misery break out against us, and
threaten the people of God in all these three Kingdoms; the adversaries of the
cause that we have been engaged in, were never more, never so full of fury,
never so diligent, they are like unto the Frogs, that came out of the mouth of
the Dragon, and the false Prophet, and the Beast, that were to gather all the
Kings of the earth to battle against the Lamb, setting their confederacies,
and sending their Emissaries into every corner; into every corner of France, of
Holland, of England, and Scotland, and Ireland, where ever any confederacy may
be raised; and we at home are a most pitiful, divided, disjoynted people,
even we who have owned and joined in Gods cause, as if we were the children of
Cadmus, making it our work to thrust our swords into one another bowels; or
like the brethren of Ishmael, every man's sword is against us, and our sword
against them; so that when I look upon the difficulties, and dangers that do
inviron us, seriously I see no more probability of our withstanding the
invading ruin, then it is for a level of sand to withstand a Torrent of
water, that comes running upon it, I say thus it appears to me when I look
upon these things, with carnal eyes: I can then see no way, but the wofullest
confusion breaking in upon us, which a Kingdom can be plunged in, especially
that the godly party are even like to be given up for a spoil, and a prey; all
our foundations are out of joint, and our whole house seems falling; but what
then? Must we therefore sit down, and despair? No, for Immanuel, because of
Immanuel we may bear up our hearts still; and to encourage you, I pray you
carry home, these four or five meditations: First,

Know you for certain, that there is not one of all these businesses, not any
of these designs and plots that are in 1.
hand against us, but the best friend we have in heaven and earth, has
stirred them all; no man could offer at you, so much as a drawn Dagger, if
Jesus Christ did not draw it, and put it into his hand: and truly Gods people
need not fear any great hurt from any design that Jesus Christ has his hand
in; the clouds which Jesus Christ raises will all drop fatness, that is one,
Christ has contrived them all, and you may therefore look for good from them;
Secondly,

Know for certain that in the greatest rage and fury that ever is found
amongst wicked men, Immanuel has 2.
a negative voice; he is not only privy to all the counsels that are, but he
has a negative voice in them too: If he say nay, all their yeas are: not
worth a farthing, to advance their business; we use to say to the Papists,
that if a general council could be called in Christrendome, no good could be
expected from it, if the Pope be allowed to have a negative voice, for
certainly he will never pass any thing that shall be against the Church of
Rome: Jesus Christ has this negative voice; you may demand over whom has
Christ a negative voice? I tell you,

Over the Sun; he says to the Sun, do not shine; 1.
though the Sun be prepared as a Giant to run his race, if Job 7.
Christ do but say, do not shine, the Sun puts his head in a cloud. 2.


He has a negative voice over the Seas; if he say to the Seas, go not there,
the raging waves of the Sea cannot stir; it is an observation that Basil has
upon Egypt, that the land of Egypt lies lower then the red Sea, that the red
Sea, is higher then the land of Egypt, so that there is no reason can be given
why the red Sea does not drown all Egypt and swallow it up, every day, but
only the Lord does not give his voice to it; he has said to the waves of it,
Hitherto ye shall come, and here ye shall turn back up on a level ground;
yea run away from a lower ground, and when the waves roar, he but says,
peace, be still, and husheth them as a child.

Christ has a negative voice over the Devil; If 3.
the Devil would but go into a hog, and Christ say, no, you shall not go, he
cannot enter into a Swine.

He has a negative voice over all mortal men; in 4.
all their plots and conspiracies; If he say, it shall not stand, it is to no
purpose: certainly Beloved, we may bear up our hearts comfortably upon such
grounds as these; yea, Thirdly, as Christ contrives all, and has a negative
voice in all; so,

All these do but work his work: he is not only 3.
one of them, but they are all his Agents too; he has some work to do,
whatever it be wherein he imploys them, and though he let them work
according to their principles, yet they all work the work of the Lord, the
devils in hell work the work of Christ, as well as the Angels in heaven; the
Pope of Rome works the work of Christ, as well as a faithful Minister in a
Pulpit does; I mean not that they do it from right principles, or do it
according to rule, but de facto, they do nothing but what Christ will have
done, as the Jews and Romans did in crucifying Christ, when they hung him upon
the cross, they did nothing, but what the Lords counsel had determined to be
done before Acts 4. 28.
the foundations of the World were laid; Nay I add in the last place, to
strengthen you, that as they work all of them the Lords work; So

The Lords work and design is, the good of his Church, the calling, the
purging, the preserving, the building, and nourishing, 4.
and growth of the Church, is all the work that Jesus Christ has to do, when
that is done, the world ends, and he resignes up the Kingdom into his Fathers
hand; now certainly if we can believe all these things, may not our hearts rest
quiet? May not we (if we be engaged in a good cause, may not we I say) with
comfort and confidence, put it into the Lords hand, and let him do what he
will? I am persuaded the ground of all the diffidence and discouragement that
is found amongst the people of God this day, arises from their ignorance of the
interest of Jesus Christ in these public affairs, and I know also that to
those men that are but Politicians, and carry carnal and worldly designs of
their own, such a lesson as this can be of no use, nor stay to them, for Jesus
Christ is against them; but for those that have a spiritual eye, and would be
glad to have some prop to lean upon, this may stay and quiet their hearts; they
may comfortably set down this conclusion, their Adversary may have great power
and strength, but the Church has Immanuel; they have the wealth of the World,
the Church has the wealth of Immanuel, the wisdom, care and goodness of
Immanuel; they have the whole world to join with them, but we have Jesus Christ
with us, and that is more; non est consilium contra Dominum; there is no
counsel, nor strength against the Lord: therefore stay, and quiet your hearts
with these things, especially this might stay us against our fears of having
this tender plant of Reformation blasted and spoiled by the many enemies who
oppose it, it has been Christ's ordinary way to let his enemies set against his
work, when its but a tender plant, when in all likelihood it may be most
easily spoiled, and he orders it so purposely to make men see and know that
when they have vented their utmost rage, and done their worst, he will carry
it on in despite of them. I conclude this use in the Prophets words in this
place, Sanctify the Lord in your hearts, fear not men's fear, look to Christ,
even though he hide his face, one word spoken by him, can and will in due time
quiet all these stormy waves: and then Thirdly, with which I will end, This
lesson is applied here by the Prophet likewise,

For duty, therefore says he, Bind up the testimony, Use 3. Exhortation:
Therefore keep Christ with us and we are well enough. V. 16. 19, 20.
and seal up my Law amongst my Scholars, and when any say to you, seek to
Witches, or Wizzards, or they that have familiar Spirits, go not after them;
but hold to Immanuels testimony, the plain meaning of it: is this, that because
the salvation and deliverance of the Church from all dangers, comes only from
Immanuel, therefore we should be careful to engage Immanuel to us, hold
close to his rules, bind up Immanuels testimonies, seal them up, that is,
ratify and confirm them, let them only be of authority among his scholars,
go no(...)ayes of humane policies, use not any devilish arts, look not
succor in any unlawful way, but hold you close to the rules of Christ, that
Immanuel may own you, and you are well enough; this is the last use I shall
make of it, because the Lord Jesus does thus order all things for the welfare
and good of his Church and people, therefore if we would be safe, let us
engage Jesus Christ closely, let us hold him with us, and we are well enough;
and herein Honorable and beloved, I more especially direct my speech to you
that are called to be the great Council of the Kingdom, according to my poor
understanding, you never stood in more need of help, then you do at this day,
your enemies are very many, and full of rage and fury; and your friends truly,
they are but few, and they divided amongst themselves, they are jealous one of
another, and many of them jealous of you, and what advice, to give you, so to
steer your counsels and courses, to give that satisfaction, which (I think)
you would be glad to do to honest men, dissenting one from another; the Lord
knows I cannot imagine, what it should be, it is a hard thing to say in these
difficulties, what you should do, in the ways of humane wisdom, to satisfy
the people, and to settle and save the Kingdom; but I am sure my Text does
furnish me with somewhat upon which I can pawn what ever is precious to me,
and venture my everlasting comfort upon it, if the Lord direct you to take that
course, you may yet save your selves, and this Kingdom, that is, hold Immanuel
to you, bind up Immanuels laws and testimonies, let Jesus Christ but be
engaged with you, and he has ways to fetch all about again, beyond what the
heart of man can think of; Truly the mercy which this day we praise God for,
is a great pledge and (...) to us, how easily the Lord could do it, when with
asmall handful such a thing was done, and at such a season able time, when (I
am confident) the Malignant enemies throughout the Kingdom, had set and
appointed to have had risings in every corner of the land, (which I conceive is
the reason; why they so cry it down as an untruth, that they might hold up the
spirits of them, who run in the same way) a little check to our Forces there,
would probably have made evil affected men in forty places of the Kingdom to
have appeared suddenly; Now the Lord coming in thus unexpectedly, and dashing
them thus easily, lets us see how soon he can turn the stream; That you may
therefore engage Immanuel to own you, I beseech you receive this humble advice,
which I give you in his Name, do you obey his will in it, I dare promise you,
he will yet be with you, and do all your work for you.

Humble your selves deeply under that hand of God, which is gone out against
you, God has now laid you 1.
very low; it is true, there was never Parliament of England, upon which God
has powered so many favors, so many deliverances and victories, and it is as
true that there was never Parliament upon which God has powered so much scorn;
the glory and honor of Parliamentary Authority, seems now utterly lost, and
like the lost innocent state of man, never more to be repaired, but by an
Immanuel, none but Jesus Christ is able to repair this dishonor, and
reproach, scorn, and hatred, which is east upon the Parliament, now if you
expect any reparation from him, you must put your mouth into the dust, humble
your souls, acknowledge the Lord to be righteous in all the contempt that he
has powered upon you, and that you have deserved far worse at his hands then
he has done unto you.

Look into your own hearts and lives, enquire whether you walk as a people whom
Immanuel may be the head and leader of; whether you be a company that Jesus
Christ may take any pleasure in or delight to regard and prosper you in your
ways: Inquire whether there be not found amongst you many who never knew Jesus
Christ, nor any saving work of his upon your own hearts, whether there be not
adulterers among you, men that keep harlots, whether there be no haters of
goodness, unjust men, and oppressors, Blasphemers, and Drunkards; pardon this
plain language, you know other people talk these things, I do not charge you
with them, but I profess, if you intend Immanuel should look toward you, you
must look into your hearts to see whether these things be not so, if they be,
labor by his strength to cast them out; by unfeigned repentance for the Lord
delights not, (though he knows how to make use of all) to bless men that will
walk in ways so contrary to him; and

In your Parliamentary ways if you would have Immanuel be with you, look that
all your proceedings be 3.
according to the rules of righteousness* you cannot be ignorant of the
reports of many, it may be some of them ill affected men, it may be some others
of them through mistake have suffered and so are prejudiced against you, but
you cannot but know that there are reports overall the Kingdom, how that in
some of the Committees there is as great oppression and injustice as was ever
found in the High Commission, and Star Chamber, those Courts that God has
defiled like Tophet; Make an inquiry after these things; for believe it, if
such things be found amongst you, and that through sinful negligence or
carelessness, they be not looked into, and amended, the Lord will not regard
you, and you and we are a lost people, if Immanuel own you not: And lastly,

Look (I beseech you) to Immanuels cause above all things else, if you would
have him; own your cause, 4.
be you faithful in his cause, and to this end look back into the Vows and
Covenants you have made, into the solemn oaths you have sworn, in the time of
your distress, with hands lifted up to the most High God; remember how many
promises you have made concerning Religion, in matters of Faith, Worship and
Government, whether the Oaths of God which are upon you are performed, and ^ake
into your thoughts, as near as you can remember, the counsel that has been
given you either by the Assembly of Divines you have called to attend that
service, or by any other Ministers of God, whom you have called to Preach upon
these solemn days, and know ye that what counsel from Immanuel has been
given must be obeyed, you must not square his counsels to serve your own
designs, but all your design must be to advance his cause and Kingdom, he
will not have any Agitators in his Army, that shall give check and laws to
him, but he will be Lord of all, or he will break all; therefore for the Lords
sake, make Christ's cause the cause of Religion, the cause of Worship, the cause
of Justice, the cause of righteousness, make it yours, and promote it
seriously and unanimously, and if there have been got in amongst you, any
factions or divisions, any driving of parties, or siding with this or the
other, because you would have your part go well, throw them all in the dust,
lay them aside, know not the meaning of being of such a party, or such a party,
but with a single heart do that which Christ would have you do, and hold to
it, Vote not one thing this day to please one party, and then another thing,
another time, to please another party, but let your Rule be the same, and your
heart be right, and always the same. Honored and Beloved, if you take this
course, Immanuel will own you, but if you try other ways, he knows how to
break and dash all your designs, all your hope is only in him: I conclude
with that speech of the Prophet Azariah, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. The Lord is with you,
while ye be him, and if ye seek him, he will be found of you, but if ye
sorsake him, he will forsake you, and if the Lord forsake you, ye are lost:
Consider what I have said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

FINIS.

