Die Jovis 29 October. 1646.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That Mr. Marshall, one of the
Assembly of Divines, is hereby Thanked for his great pains taken in his Sermon
the last Fast, Preached before the Lords of Parliament, in the Abbey Church
Westminster: And he is hereby desired to Print and Publish the same; which is
to be Printed only by Authority under his own Hand.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

I do hereby appoint Stephen Bowtell to Print my Sermon.

Stephen Marshall.

A Tvvo-edged Svvord OUT OF THE MOUTH OF BABES, TO Execute vengeance upon the
Enemy and Avenger.

Presented in a Sermon to the Right Honorable the House of Lords assembled in
Parliament, in the Abbey-Church at Westminster, October. 28. 1646. the solemn day
of their Monthly FAST.

By STEPHEN MARSHALL B. D. Minister of Gods Word at Finchingfield in Essex.

Esa; 41. 14, 15. Fear not thou Worm Jacob, thou shall thresh the Mountains,
and beat them to dust. Jer 31. 22. The Lord has created a new thing in the
earth, a Woman shall compass a Man. Revel. 11. 5. If any man will hurt them,
fire proceeds out of their mouth and devoureth their enemies. London, Printed
by R. Cotes for Stephen Bowtell, at the Bible in Popes-head-alley, 1646.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS Assembled in Parliament.
Right Honorable,
THis Sermon published by your Order, holds out an instance of what St. Paul
preached 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28. God has chosen the foolish things of the world to
confound the wise; the weak things of the world to confound the things which
are mighty; and base things of the world, and things which are despised has
God chosen; yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are.
1 Cor. 1. 27, 28.
What Creature so simple, weak, or base as a Worm, a creature which no man
values, loves, or fears? yet here is a worm beats great Mountains to dust,
and makes the hills as chafe. What so shiftlesse and unable to defend it
self, or offend an Enemy, as a Babe or Suckling? yet behold here are Babes and
Sucklings quelling and destroying the strongest enemies, even the Enemy and
Avenger. Your ears have not only heard these things preached, but your eyes
do see them fulfilled in this our day: O that these things might persuade your
hearts of these Two things; 1 That it is better, more excellent and honorable
to be one of Christ's Babes, one of his weak, simple, and despised ones, then
to be one of the Zanzummims, the Nimrods, or men of renown of the world. 2
That the greatest support and strength to Families, Cities, or Kingdoms,
proceeds out of the mouth of these Babes, that their hearts and tongues can do
more then an host of Men. The first would make you with Theodosius, rejoice
more in being the meanest Christian, then in being the greatest earthly
Potentate. The latter would provoke you both to plant the Kingdom with
faithful Ministers, who are Fathers to beget these Babes unto Christ; and to
encourage and cherish the godly party of this Kingdom, who with Mordecai will
seek the wealth of the Kingdom, and as so many shields under God, defend this
Nation against all its enemies, These Innocents will deliver the Island, and it
shall be delivered by the pureness of their hands; Job 22. 30.
Yea it would provoke you to get such about you, and with David, Psalm. 101. 6.
make your eyes set upon the faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with
you, and serve you, and conclude that you and your Family shall be blessed in
them. My Lords, I beseech you let this be your choice, it is the earnest
prayer of

Your Honors most obliged Servant, STEPHEN MARSHALL.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable House of Lords at their Monthly
FAST, October 28. 1646.
PSALM 8. 2. Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings have thau ordained
strength, because of thine enemies, that thou might still the Enemy and the
Avenger.
Introduction showing the scope and parts of the Psalm.
THe 4th. Verse of this Psalm, is the key of the whole Psalm, What is man
that thou art mindful of him? or the son of man, that thou visitest him? And
it fully manifests, that the whole scope of this Psalm is to glorify God for
the singular dignity that God has put upon Man above all other Creatures; and
this dignity or glory of man is exemplified in Two particulars. First,

That God has chosen out this creature Man, whose original is from being a
Babe and a Suckling to be his Champion, whereby he will quell and destroy all
his enemies; that is in this second Verse. The other Branch is,

2.
That God has chosen this creature Man to be his Viceroy, his Deputy, to rule
and govern all the works of his hands: God has trusted him so far, as to
put all that he has made under Man's feet; and having done these two things
for him, made him his Champion to conquer his enemies, and the Master of his
house for the governing of his friends; what remains more to be done for him,
this is to be a little inferior to God himself; Lord, what is man, that thou
art thus mindful of him? or the son of man, that thou should thus visit
him? Analysis of the Text.
The first of these two, Man's being chosen to be Gods Champion, to still or
quiet Gods enemies; I have chosen to speak of this day: and in it there are
these two things to be handled. First,

1.
Who it is upon whom this great honor is conferred, described in these words,
Babes and Sucklings. Secondly,

2.
The dignity or honor that is put upon them in the other words, Out of the
mouth of these Babes and Sucklings thou have ordained strength, because of
thine enemies, to still the Enemy and the Avenger: And this second Branch has
two remarkable particulars. First,

1.
The dignity it self which is put upon him, or what the savor is, that he
has received, and that is strength, and such strength as shall quell all Gods
enemies, the enemy and the avenger.

2.
The way and manner how this strength is exercised, that is, by the mouth; Out
of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings have thou ordained strength. For the
interpretation of the words, all do agree that Man is the subject here meant,
but of what Man, is a great question. Interpretation of the Text, what is meant
by Babes and Sucklings.
I find the greatest part of Interpreters to agree, that it is meant of the
first Adam, Adam in his Creation, who was lifted up above all the rest of the
creatures, as Lord and King over them; and so it is nothing, (as they conceive)
but the praising of God for the excellency that Man was endued with in the day
wherein God created him, or formed him out of the dust of the earth: but
whosoever will seriously consult the New Testament, where this Psalm is three
several times quoted, shall evidently find, that this is meant, Esaias. 53. 3.
not of Man in his creation, but of Man in his renovation, not of the first
Adam, but of the second Adam, of the Lord Christ, primarily I say; who grew up
as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground, a poor despicable
beginning, made like the sons of Men, partaker of their nature; and
secondarily, of his brethren and seed with him, who though they have their
original from being Babes and Sucklings, as all other men have, yet they are
the prime and the choice of all the sons of Men, and upon them has the Lord
bestowed this great honor, as to ordain strength out of their mouth, to quell
all his and their enemies. And that this is the meaning, I shall first
demonstrate to you out of the Scripture; Matthew. 21. 9 15, 16. opened and
explained.
Consider the 21 of Matthew, verse 15, 16. there you will find that when our
Savior Christ rode upon an Ass into Jerusalem, which was but a little before
his passion, God did then inspire the multitude of all Christ's Disciples to
own him for their Messiah; and accordingly both by the way as he came into
the City, and in the Temple, after he was come into the City, all the
Disciples, yea, the very young ones, who had but newly learned to know him, did
all sing, Hosanna to the son of David, which was an acclamation taken out of
the 118 Psalm, verse 25, 26. the words there are, Save now I beseech thee O
Lord, O Lord I beseech thee send now prosperity; blessed is be that comes in
the Name of the Lord. This the Scribes and Pharisees did take to be such an
intolerable blasphemy, that they should ascribe unto Christ that Divine
acclamation which was peculiar to God, that they come to Christ, and ask him,
Hear thou what these say? can thou being but a man endure this, that
Hosanna should be sung unto thee, that the praises and glory due to God,
should be attributed to thee who art a man? Yes, (says Christ) I do hear
it; but have not you read, That out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings thou
have ordained praise, etc. which I confess some Interpreters do conceive to
be meant only thus, that now was fulfilled that of the Psalm, that Babes
should acknowledge him, when Rulers rejected him; but that cannot be all the
meaning, for it is clear that the Scribes and Pharisees did intimate, that
Christ ought not to permit them them thus to blaspheme; it was blasphemy to
ascribe that to him that was peculiar only to God; and Christ alleges this
Text as an apology for himself, why he did receive that acclamation, which he
might not have done, if the Psalm had not acknowledged it to be his due; and
had not this been a due acknowledgement of theirs, Christ could not thus have
excused them, children may not be allowed to speak blasphemy: But the other
Scriptures will yet make it plainer, Heb. 2 6, 7, 8.
Heb. 2. v. 6, 7. this Psalm is brought to prove, that Jesus Christ as Man
has all things put under him. One in a certain place testified, What is Man
that thou art mindful of him? or the son of Man that thou visited'st him?
Thou made him a little lower then the Angels, and crownedst him with honor,
and did set him over the works of thy hands, thou have put all things in
subjection under him; and then goes on, We see not all things yet put under
Man, but we see Jesus, who was made a little lower then the Angels for the
suffering of death, crowned with honor and glory; though this dignity of
having all things put under his feet, is not made good to other men, we see it
is made good of Christ. And as plain you will find this in 1 Cor. 15. ver. 25,
27. there it is said of Jesus Christ, ver. 25. He must reign until be has
put all his enemies under his feet, V. 26. Yea, the great enemy death it self,
The last enemy which shall be d^stroyed is death; and the proof of all this
is in verse 27, taken out of this Psalm, For he has put all things under his
feet. 1 Cor. 15. 25, 26, 27.
And these two last Scriptures are so clear, that I find many Learned
Interpreters agree that the latter part of this Psalm, from the 4 Verse to the
end, is meant of Christ, and can be meant of none but Christ; but so must the
whole Psalm also, for the Prophet speaks of the same Adam, or race of men,
throughout the Psalm: besides, there is no word in all this Psalm, of
subduing of enemies, but only in this second verse. Now to this I might add,
that some other expressions in this Psalm do further clear it, as verse 5.
Thou maedest him a little lower then the Angels, so we translate it, but in
the Hebrew it is, Thou made him a little lower then God, Phil. 2. 6. 7.
the word is Elohim, which is parallel to that expression of the 2 of the
Philippians, Though our Lord was in the form of God, and thought it no robbery
to be equal with him, yet he made himself of no reputation, and took upon
him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men: And some
Critics conceive, (though I build not upon it) that there is a further proof
out of the very Title of the Psalm, Psalm. 81. Ps. 84.
it is a Psalm upon Gittith, the word from whence it is derived, signifies a
Winepresse; and they conceive that this Psalm, and the rest which bear this
Title, were usually sung vindemiarum, or torcularium tempore, at the time of
treading their Winepresses, which was about the feast of Tabernacles, the feast
which typified the Incarnation of Jesus Christ. Yea, they note further, that
the rest of the Psalms upon Gittith, are Psalms which relate to the
Incarnation of our Savior. This then I suppose we may take as clear, that by
the Babes and Sucklings here meant, are our Lord Christ, and his seed; the
second Adam, the seed of the woman: The rest is easy, To these Babes and
Sucklings the Lord has ordained strength, that they shall quell Gods enemies,
because of thine enemies, and the enemy and the avenger. If it be demanded,
who? and what are these enemies? the answer is ready, plainly, if by the Babes
and Sucklings be meant the seed of the Woman; What is meant by enemies, and
the enemy, and avenger.
by enemies, and the enemy and the avenger, can be understood none, but the
seed of the Serpent; the one is the Church militant, the other is the Church
malignant, Satan and all his children, his. Instruments, and his followers,
these are the opposite party; and elsewhere is Satan called the enemy and the
avenger, as Psalm 44. By reason of the enemy and the avenger all this is come
upon us; idest, through the malice and power of the Devil and his instruments.
But that lie and his seed, are the known and only enemies of God and his
Christ, his Church, and his people, is so clear, that it is altogether
needless to add any further proof. To these babes and sucklings (says my
Text) the Lord has given strength: What is meant by strength.
Strength, what is that? the Lxx. Interpreters render it, thou have ordained
praise, and so it is quoted in the 21 of Matthew, but the word plainly
signifies strength; and as the Learned do observe, it is robur celebrandum,
robur laud dignum, eminent strength, praiseworthy strength, glorious
strength, such strength as shall still thy enemies; What by still or quell.
still, that is the next word, That thou might still the enemy; the word
that is translated still, is sometimes rendered silentium imponere, to stop
their mouths, these Babes shall be able in disputing, to stop the mouths of
the adversaries, that they shall cease to blaspheme; but frequently it
signifies, removere, cessare facere, perdere, redigere in nihilum, to remove,
destroy, wholly to take away, and because it is here used in reference to
enemies, I conceive this latter here to be intended, that these babes and
sucklings have received strength to overcome, and wholly to destroy all Gods
and their enemies. What is meant by mouth
Lastly, for the meaning of this other word mouth, Out of the mouth of babes,
etc. the clear meaning is, as shall (Godwilling) sully appear afterward, that
all this strength whereby they thus overcome their enemies, proceeds out of
their mouth. So then the sum of it all amounts to thus much, Out of the mouth
of babes and sucklings have thou ordained strength, because of thy enemies,
that thou might quell the Enemy and the Avenger; that when Satan the Devil
had cast Man from that excellency that God had given him at his Creation, even
the Lordship and dominion over the creatures, and brought him into spiritual
slavery and bondage, and had himself become the Lord of the world, ruling and
domineering in the hearts of all: God having a purpose to quell and destroy the
power of this adversary, chooses out a Champion, raises up a generation to
undertake him, and in his choice did not pitch upon the seed of Angels, who
might seem equal matches for the Devil and all his followers, but chooses out
the Creature, Man, (whose original is from being a babe suckling, an unlikely
Creature to cope with such an enemy) and sends his own Son to be borne, and
to become even a babe and suckling, and so in all, other things like unto men,
except their sin, and culls out a certain number of sinful men to join
with, and under him, and these has he endued with such valor and strength,
that (how unlikely soever it appear to flesh and blood) they shall tread under
feet all the power of Gods and their enemies; and the peculiar way and manner
of their fighting and overcomming, is by a force proceeding out of their mouth.
The words thus interpreted, do afford two excellent Instructions.

Doct. 1.
That though it be very unlikely to flesh and blood, to sense and reason; yet
Christ and his seed have sufficient strength wholly to rout and destroy all
their enemies. The second is,

Doct. 2.
That all that power and strength which Christ and his followers are endued
with, proceeds out of their mouth: Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings have
thou ordained strength to quell thy enemies.

The first of these has two Branches:

1 Doctrine in two branches.
That to sense and reason it is a most unlikely thing, that babes and sucklings
should ever quell the enemy and the avenger; that Christ and his followers
should ever be able to cope with the adversaries that are engaged against
thems.

2.
That though it do appear most unlikely to sense and reason, yet so it is,
they have sufficient strength to quell and subdue all their enemies; That it is
an unlikely thing to sense and reason, I ground it upon the expression which
the holy Ghost has chosen, Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings: 1 Branch.
It Is an unlikely thing to sense and reason that Christ and his Church should be
able to overcome their enemies.
Christ and his followers are here called babes and sucklings, not only because
their original is from being babes, but principally because the Lord would
show the disproportion which to reason does appear between them and their
enemies, they are babes, and the other are Giants; they are poor sucklings,
the other are the enemies of God; yea, the enemy, the great enemy and the
avenger: so that little David with his sling did bear more proportion to the
Giant that was armed in brass, then babes and sucklings can bear unto those
whom God calls his professed enemies; and you may observe in the Scripture, the
Lord uses to set it out by the most unequal matches that can be found; Jer.
31. 22, 23. opened and explained: Proved by the comparison which sets out the
unlikelihood of it.
First consider that expression, Jer. 31. 22. How long will thou go about, thou
backsliding daughter; for the Lord bath created a new thing in the earth, a
woman shall compass a man. God had promised them deliverance, and now he
blames them for going about to seek other helps, and would not rest on his
word, because they saw no hope or probability of its coming to pass; he
tells them this should be no bar to believing, for the Lord will create a
new thing, a woman shall compass a man, the church was a weak woman,
destitute of arms, of strength, of skill, the enemy from whom they should be
delivered, were as a man, yea, a strong man, (so the word signifies) and such
was the Babylonian Empire at that time; yet this woman shall compass, i. e.
besiege this man, so as to overcome and take him: Now how improbable this was
to sense and reason, that a weak woman should be able to do this to an armed
man, any man may judge. Consider also that comparison in the 41 of Isaiah,
verse 14, 15, 16. when the Lord would set out the opposition betwixt the Church
and the Enemies, the Church is called a worm, the enemy is called a mountain,
yea, mountains, in the plural number; Fear not thou worm Jacob, I Will make
thee my threshing instrument to beat the mountains to dust. Now what
proportion is there betwixt a mountain and a worm? one bit of a mountain
would kill 10000 worms; but here is one worm to cope against a great many
mountains, a most unlikely thing; Psalm, 22. ver. 6. Christ compares himself
and his people to a worm, I am a worm, and no man, a reproach of men, and
despised of the people; Psalm. 22. 6. 13. 16. 202.
and his and their enemies he compares to fat Bulls of Bashan, to ravening and
roaring Lions, to mad and fierce dogs: Thus also our Savior told his
Disciples, they were as sheep among wolves, Behold I send you out as sheep
among wolves. Luke 10 3.
A handful of sheep go to fight with a whole multitude of Wolves, is there
any probability to sense or reason, that they should carry the victory? Proved
2 by some instances
But it will be yet clearer in a few instances:

First, take that of the Lord Christ himself, who is the head and
Captain-generall of the Party, when he came into the world to undertake this
grand enemy, even the enemy, and the avenger; mark how he appeared, the state
of the world then stood thus, the Devil and his Angels in all places were
worshipped as so many Gods, the Empires and Kingdoms of the world were all at
the Devils dispose, he was then the God of the world, and ruled in the hearts
of all; the Lords friends lived in one only corner of the world, in the Land
of Judea, and they were at that time brought into captivity to the great red
Dragon, the Roman Empire, the professed enemy of the God of Heaven, and these
were his vassalls; Among them comes Christ as a Champion to undertake this
great adversary; and thus he enters the Lists, borne in a stable, wrapped up in
rags, bred a poor Carpenter, lives 30 years in the world almost untaken notice
of, when he did come to show that he was the Savior who had undertaken the
redemption of his people from their thraldom, they who should have owned him,
and joined with him, scorned him, rejected him; none but a few women and
children, and fishermen, would so much as acknowledge that he was sent of God,
yea, they never leave him till Jews and Romans, (following the counsel of the
Devil) had agreed together to destroy him, they took him, hung him upon a
cross, crucified him, and there let him remain a shame and a reproach, and
curse, and laughing stock to all the world, and now was the time he was to
fight the field; thus was he accomplished for the warfare, and now was hell
let loose upon him: who that should have looked upon Christ at that time, would
ever have thought that deliverance should have come by him? would not all have
said of him, as some of the sons of Belial did of Saul, and with a great
deal of more reason toe, How can this Man ever save us? fiesh and blood, I
dare say, would have given up the Cause as lost.

Secondly, take another instance in the first Champions whom Christ sends out
in his Name, his Apostles, and the rest of his Disciples, taken out of
Fisher-boates, and from other the like conditions, and he sends them to reduce
the world under his subjection: see what probability there was, that they
should ever speed: they go out a Company of weak men, without money in their
purse, without a sword by their side, unto a prejudiced world, where all were
engaged against them, and thus must they go to subdue the world, and how I
pray? by preaching such a Doctrine as was for the greatest part utterly above
the capacity of man, ridiculous to man's reason, that they should believe in a
crucified God, and appoint them a way of self-denial, plucking out their
right eye, and cutting off their right hand, and their right foot, and
forsaking all, and taking up a cross, and following a crucified God, and when
they had done all, then they should look for that which no man ever saw, a
reward in a place where no man ever was that they had heard of, a reward of
glory in another world, after they had undergone nothing but misery in this
world, and with this Doctrine must they overcome the world. When Mabomet came
out, he had a Doctrine that suited Man's reason and his lusts. And when
Antichrist came, he had a way that would please whatsoever was in a carnal
heart, but these must go out with that, against which every man has as many
principles as he has lusts in his heart. Would ever any man think, that all
this project and undertaking would not have fallen presently into the dust? I
could go on (but that I have many things to handle) and show you that in all
the Churches conflicts it has been so. When God sent a shepherd to fetch
600000 men out of the land of Egypt, where they were in bondage, how ridiculous
an attempt would it appear to flesh and blood? When they were to come out of
the Captivity of Babylon; when Athanasius was to undertake the Arrian world;
when Luther and a few company of Friars and Monks that came out of their
Cells, undertook to destroy the masterpiece of policy that ever the Devil
had, was there any likelihood to flesh and reason they should carry it? I add
further, every particular Saint who is brought home to Christ, is a sufficient
proof of this, when grace comes first into their heart, as a spark of fire
into a well of water, as a grain of mustardseed cast into a barren ground, a
poor weak Creature, who has only learned to know the way to life, presently
assaulted with all the power of the world and hell it self. No man that should
look upon it with the eyes of reason, but would conclude, it will never come
to any thing.

The reason why it is so unlikely to sense and reason.
And there is this reason for it, because the principles of sense and reason
can behold and view all the power that is against them, the temptations and
allurements of the Devil, the world and the flesh, are all agreeable to our
corrupt nature, and we can discern what strength is in them, the opposition
which the wisdom, authority and power which all the Kingdoms and men of the
world make against the Saints, appear in its full strength, as clearly as the
Army sent to take Elisha the Prophet, did unto his servant. 2 Kings 6 15
But on the part of the Babes and Sucklings, sense and reason sees their
weakness, but sees nothing, of their strength, that is no more discerned then
the fore mentioned servant saw the mountains full of Chariots and Horses of
fire, before the Lord opened his eyes, that is, a hidden, secret thing can be
beheld and known only by the light of faith, and the revelation of God, which
they have no understanding of; there is the first. The second Branch is,

2 Branch. Yet they have strength to doc it, and shall do it.
How unlikely soever it appear, yet so it is, they have a strength, whereby
they shall and will quell all their enemies, even the enemy and the avenger,
the victory is sure enough: For the proof of this, nothing is more clear in
the Book of God. First,

Proved first by many promises that it shall be so.
All the promises are for it, a thousand promises have declared it must be so,
The seed of the Woman must break the Serpents head; Genesis 3. 15.
I will build my Church, the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
Matthew. 16. 18.
No weapon that is formed against thee shall ever prosper; Every tongue that
rises up against thee, in judgment thou shall condemn; Esaias 54. 17.
Fear not thou worm Jacob, thou shall thresh the Mountains, and beat them to
dust: Esaias 41. 14.
Arise and thresh O daughter of Zion, and I will make thy borne iron, and thy
hoofes brass, and thou fhalt break in pieces many Nations: Micah 4. 13.
I will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone, for all people that burden
themselves with it, shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth
be gathered together against it: Zach. 12. 3.
God will tread Satan under your feet shortly: Romans 16. 10.
All that is borne of God overcomes the world: 1 John 5 4
I write unto you little children, because ye have overcome that wicked one: 1
John 2. 13.
who has not read abundance of such promises as these are?

2 By experience it ever has been so.
And experience has found it thus, see it in a few examples: First, our Lord
Jesus Christ himself at that time, when he appeared so unlikely, as you have
heard, then did he break all his enemies, and led captivity captive; and has
hitherto so far prevailed, that all the Empires which have risen against him,
the Assyrian, Persian, Greeian, Roman, whether the Roman be considered as
Pagan, or Arrian, or Antichristian, Christ has got the victory over them all,
he has broke them all, no power of Devil or world has not been able to stand
against him; this stone cut out of the mountain without hands, has smitten
and broken the great image of Gold and Silver, Brass and Iron, Dan. 2.
and he must reign till all his enemies are made his footstool. Psalm. 110.
And not only Christ, but the Fishermen and the rest of their companions that
have been spoken of, serve for a second experiment; I will be bold to say it,
that Alexander and all the Caesar's never conquered so many, as those simple men
subdued to Christ in a very little time. In one age their line went into all
the corners of the world, the Sun did hardly shine upon a place, where they
did not set up Trophies of their Victories, as unlikely a thing as it was. Yea,
all the Saints of God that have lived hitherto, have all found, that whatsoever
Tongues or Spirits have risen up against them have been condemned, the woman
has compassed the man, the worm has destroyed the Mountain, and they have
at the long run been able with Paul to triumph, not only over poverty, and
hunger, and nakedness, and persecution, and such outward troubles, but over
Principalities and Powers, Romans 8. 35, 38
and all spiritual wickednesses too, the Devil himself has bin trod under all
their feet. And shall be so more and more.
And as there has been experience of it hitherto, so whosoever reads the
Scripture will find, that the older the world grows, the more experience
there will be of it continually, because now begin the times of Christ and the
Churches manifest conquest: hitherto they have carried it, but not so visibly
always before the eyes of men; but we expect the days to be at hand, wherein
the Saints shall take the Kingdom, Dan. 7. 18.
and all the Kingdoms of the world shall be the Lord Christ's, and he shall
reign over them; Revel. 11. 15.
and that Kingdom that will not serve Christ, shall be destroyed, and they
shall with joy and comfort bring all their glory, and confer it upon the head
of Christ, and put it into the hands of these Babes: So that the Babes and
Sucklings must carry it; Reasons of it.
and if you will have a ground or reason for it, 100 might be added. First,

1.
It is Gods only design, the only great project that the Lord has laid from
eternity, that the Babes and Sucklings should carry the day against all their
enemies; it is the masterpiece of his contrivement, wherein he will not endure
to be disappointed. And then secondly,

2.
His heart is with them, his love is set upon them, they are his children, the
apple of his eye, they are written upon the palms of his hands, they are
continually in his sight, he loves them as he loves himself.

3.
Thirdly, and his power is with them, his Almighty power, that power which can
as easily make a World, as it can uphold a straws all that power is engaged,
that no man shall ever be able to prevail against them. These, and many more
such reasons as these are, have been so frequently set before this Honorable
Assembly, in the times of your greatest extremities, to uphold your hearts,
that I shall not need to say any more, neither in truth do I know what to add
to that which has been spoken by other men. I come therefore to a short
application of both the branches, and among many excellent Uses we might make
of the first, That it is an unlikely thing to sense and reason, that Christ and
his Church should be able to conquer their enemies, I shall observe only this
one,

To teach you all not to wonder, why the wisest men, and Use of the first
branch, not to wonder though so few wise men own the Churches cause.
greatest men of the world, the most politic and wary men of the world, in
all ages have, and do most of them reject the cause of Christ and his Church,
seldom willing to venture themselves for it: ^ou know Paul observed it in his
days, 1 Cor. 1. 26. Brethren, you see your calling, not many noble, not many
wise men after the flesh, not many learned, and all ages have proved it so. And
when multitudes followed Christ himself, the Pharisees demanded, Do any of
the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believe on him? John 7. 48. And Hierome
observed in his days, that when one Paulinus a brave young noble man embraced
Christian Religion, there was more wondering at it, than if a Mule had cast a
foale: now this lesson may fully instruct you in the reason of it, so far as
any of their principles are able to make up a judgment, the cause of the
Church is a lost cause, Christ and his Saints are but like David against
Goliath, they are but worms against a Mountain, and what wise man would ever
engage himself in such a foolish and unlikely business? who that has
understanding would put his fortune into a Ship that he thinks will sink in
the Sea, which will dash against the next rock, or be split with the next
wave? Indeed when the Church is smiled upon, and countenanced by Kings and
Princes, it is no marvel though wise, rich, and great men do join with it;
but when wars and persecutions are raised against it, which has most-what
been the Churches lot hitherto, wonder not though wise men withdraw from it,
when they can see nothing but ruin attend them who take with this side; and
this is the very reason of their withdrawing, and this also abundantly
satisfies me in our present trouble, wherein we have had so many Lords, so
many Gentlemen, so many Learned men, so many great and rich men to have
deserted the Cause that the Parliament was engaged in. I solemnly profess, I
rather wonder that any wise man, if not sanctified, has stayed, that any Man
not guided by the Spirit of God, should venture himself in a Cause that
appeared so desperate as this Cause of Christ has done to the eyes of flesh
and blood. I justly call it the Cause of Christ and his Church, because it is
apparent that the Parliaments engaging themselves for reformation of Religion,
as well as preserving civil Liberties, has provoked most of these enemies
against them. Therefore let this satisfy you abundantly, when the multitude of
the world generally go against the Cause of Christ, they think it folly to
own it, because they look upon it as a lost Cause. But the other Branch
affords many excellent Uses: One is,

Uses of the second branch, Consolation to whom; who join with the cause of
Christ and his Church
This may hold up and content the heart and spirit of every one that has given
up his name to Christ and his Cause, entered his name into Christ's
Muster-booke, is enrolled amongst the soldiers of the Lamb; I know flesh and
blood, sense and reason, thinks we have the worser end of the staff, but let
such know, what days soever may come, he shall never have cause to repent
that he engaged himself on this side, the victory is sure enough: some men in
these conflicts of ours, have solemnly protested, that their plot was only to
be on the safest side, that they might be sure to stand, whosoever fall. In
the name of God, I promise it to every one that has undertook with Christ, in
the Cause of his Church, they shall succeed well. They used to say in Rome, in
Germanieus his days, Salvus Germanicus, salva Roma, salva omnia, Germanicus is
well, and the City is well, and all is well: I say it with better confidence,
Christ is well, his Church is well, their Cause is good, a succeeding Cause, a
prosperous Cause, and all shall be well, the worm must beat the mountain to
dust, the Woman must compass the man. It may for a while seem to go very
hard with the Church, but the end will be comfortable; it was of old said of
the Romans, they were sometimes praelio victo nunquam bello, they lost many a
battle, but in the conclusion they conquered every Nation which warred against
them: This most undoubtedly is the fate of the Church, and might hold us up in
all our present difficulties: I know many of you are yet at your wits end, and
wonder what will be the end and event of these things; the pillars of the
Earth, the pillars of the Land, the pillars of Truth as well as of Peace, are
shaken, ready to fall; we are woefully divided into minutula srustula, and the
young child of Reformation in danger to be swallowed up, a Hydra, a Dragon
watches for it, a malignant party on the one hand, Blasphemies, heresies, and
divisions on the other hand; but there is a Spirit working will subdue all, the
zeal of the Lord will bring all well to pass, therefore hold up your Spirits
and fear nothing, I cannot but commend unto you that excellent speech of Luther
to Melancthon, when the Protestants were in a very low estate, when Melancthon
was afraid, Come (says Luther) to him, let the Pholips, let the Bishops, let
the Turks, and the Devil himself do his worst against us, nos filii regni
sumus, we are the children of the Kingdom, Dominus prope adest, the Lord is
at hand, we are engaged with Christ, whom they have crucified and spit upon,
we must carry the day from them: So I say to thee, Fear thou nothing, the
Barque wherein thou art may be tossed, it will never be split, troubles may come,
the present may continue, new ones may come, but nothing shall come, but such
as that Christ contrives purposely, that things may appear difficult to us,
that his glory may be the more in his carrying us through them all, and in the
name of Christ, I promise you the event shall be successful.

2 Use of consolation to every particular Saint.
And as this is comfortable in reference to the whole Church, so it is
wonderfully comfortable to every particular soul that fears the Lord Christ,
and may uphold them in all their temptations and afflictions, crosses and
desertions. I am persuaded many a soul who hears me this day, wonder how
they shall subsist one week longer, their spiritual pressures, temptations,
desertions, are so strong, another finds their outward afflictions so
intolerable, and their pressures more and more breaking in, so that they are
ready every moment to sink under their burden, and know not what will become
of them; ready every day to conclude as David did in his haste and fear, I
shall one day perish by the hand of Saul, I shall never hold out, I shall never
be able to stand against these impetuous assaults; but cheer up thy heart, if
there be any thing of Christ in thee, though it be but as smoking flax, it
shall never be quenched, though but as a bruised reed, it shall never be
broken, though it be but a babe and suckling, thou shall quell all thy
enemies. I tell thee, I know it, that all the power of hell is engaged against
thee, because thou art for Christ, whether there be any power of hell in thy
heart, in thy lust, or in thy family, in thy father, in thy husband, in thy
mother, in thy brethren, or about thee, all will be against thee; but as this
power is against thee, so I assure thee, all the power in Heaven is engaged for
thee, all the power that the God of Heaven has, all his Attributes are for
thee, and therefore do thou conclude, though thou art a worm, a woman, etc.
the worm shall thresh the mountain, the woman shall compass the man, the
lamb shall overcome the wolf, and what is said in the 17 of the Revelations,
of all the Kings of the earth, that they should set against the Virgin Company,
who follow the Lamb, but the Lamb should overcome them, for he is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, and those that are with him, who are called, and
chosen, and faithful, the like is true of every soul who is a follower of the
Lord Christ, they must overcome, and by the help of the Lord tread all their
enemies under their feet.

3 Use, exhortation to all, to have nothing to do against these Babes and
Sucklings.
Secondly, because how unlikely soever the thing be, the Babes and Sucklings
must queil all their enemies; let me teach you all this point of wisdom, never
have any thing to do against the Lord Christ, or any of his children; beware
how thou have thy hand in any contrivement against any of those that are the
Lambs followers: I cannot give it you better, then in an expression of
Solomon's, in Proverbes 24. 15, 16. to a wicked man; Lay not maite, O thou
wiched man, against the babitation of the righteons, spoil not his resting
place; For the righteons falls seven times a day, rises agains; but the wicked
fall into mischiese: Prove. 24. 15, 16
I take the plain meaning to be this, Solomon tells wicked men, he knows
they cannot but be like themselves, plotting and contriving mischiese against
those that fear God, and possibly it is, that through their contrivements they
may cause the people of God oftentimes to fall, to fall into afflictions, under
many crosses, but let them fall never so often, they will be like the cork,
thrust it under the water, you cannot keep it under the water, it will rise
again, so shall it be with godly men, they will get out of their troubles:
but when the wicked falls, he falls to the purpose, he will fall into
mischief, and never rise again, God will deal with them as he did with Moab,
in the 16 of Isaiah, We have heard of the pride of Moab, (he is very proud)
even of his haughtiness and his pride, and his wrath, but his lies shall not
be so; therefore shall Moab howl for Moab. Isay 16. 6, 7.
Moab thought to make my children mourn and howl, but I Will make Moab howl for
himself: So thou may think to carry on a plot or design against Religion,
against the servants of God, either their Cause in general, or some particular
person of them, but forbear it, as Gamaliel said to them, Forbear these men,
middle not with them, lest ye be found fighters against God; Act. 5. 38.
they may fall into trouble, but God will bring them out. I conclude this with
that speech of David, Psalm. 37. The wicked plotteth against the just, and
gnasheth upon him with his teeth, the Lord shall laugh at him, for he sees
that his day is coming. Psalm. 37. 12, 13
This is the first Lesson, now I proceed to the second.

Which is the manner how these Babes and Sucklings do exercise this their
great strength, Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings; You know that every
creature which God has endued with any strength, has a peculiar way of
bringing out its strength'; the Lions strength lies in his jaws, the Bear in
his paws, the Eagle in her talons, a Man by his arms, the Bull by his horns,
the Scorpions have their power in their tayle'; thus every creature that has
any notable strength, has some eminent way to exercise it: Now would you know
which way do these Babes and Sucklings, exercise their strength, it is out of
their Mouth, Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings. The Lesson I propound to
handle from it, is this,

That the peculiar way, whereby Christ and all his seed do Doct. 2. The
strength whereby the Babes and Sucklings do overcome their Enemies, proceeds
out of their mouth. Thus Christ himself.
overcome their enemies, is by a power that comes out of their mouth: That Is
the peculiar way of fighting, power comes out of their mouth: For the truth of
it, see it, First, in Christ himself, when it was prophesied of him in the 11
of Isaiah, v. 4. how he should reign and rule over all Nations, the Spirit of
God lays it down thus, He shall smite the Earth with the rod of his mouth,
and with the breath of his lips he shall slay the wicked. Esaias 11. 4.
It was a rod of his mouth, and the breath of his lips, that is the staff of
his power, that which is called in the 110 Psalm, the rod of his strength,
Psalm. 110. 2.
is in this 11 of Isaiah called the rod of his mouth, so also in the 19 of the
Revelations, v. 15. where he is brought on horseback, fighting his battle in
the field, and destroying all his enemies; it is said, Out of his mouth came a
two edged sword, that with it he should smite the Nations; and if you read his
story while he was upon earth, you may observe that all in a manner which he
did, came out of his mouth; sometimes by a word of command, thus his miracles
were wrought, be healed, be opened, be cleansed, etc. sometimes by preaching,
converting some, convincing others; sometimes by prayer, that is one reason, as
some think, why he is called (...), the Word of God; because all that he did
was by a word. Secondly,

2. Thus also all the Saints overcome.
See it likewise in his servants, all the servants of Christ; these Babes and
Sucklings that are his brethren and his seed, they all overcome by a power that
comes out of their mouth; And to clear this, consider first some passages of
Psalm 68. a Psalm, which I confess deserves to be more fully cleared, then a
short Sermon will allow, being so full to this purpose, the whole Psalm being
a full declaration of the way and manner how Christ and his followers do
overcome all their enemies; The first verse of the Psalm is, Let God arise,
and his enemies be scattered; and the close of the Psalm is, God has given
strength to his people, blessed be God, that is the drift of it, to give glory
to God for the strength he has given to his Son, and the followers of his
Son to subdue all their enemies, and how is this performed? to say nothing of
Christ himself, you may see the way of his Saints overcomming, notably
described, ver. 18. Thou bast ascended on high, thou have led captivity
captive, thou have received gifts for men; even for the bellious also, that the
Lord God may dwell amongst them: Psalm. 68. 18.
When Christ ascended, then he gave such gifts to his children and servants,
that by them they should be so far able to tame the most rebellious that the
Lord God might dwell among them, set up his throne and habitation in the midst
of them; what these gifts were, the Apostle tells you expressly in the 4 of the
Ephesians; When he ascended up on high, he gave some to be Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, and Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 7, 8, 9, 10,
11.
these were the gifts which were powered out upon the day of Pent^cost, all
which were represented by the similitude of cloven Tongues, Acts 2. 3.
whereby the Lord would teach you, that all the gifts which Christ has powered
out upon his Church, there is nothing so lively a resemblance of them all as
the Tongue: out of the mouth by the tongue, comes all the power that the Saints
have; Rev. 11. 5 6. explained.
you will find it as plain, if you look into the 11 of the Revelations, ver. 5,
6. where the two Witnesses of Christ their manner of overcomming is described.
These two Witnesses are by the best Interpreters judged to be the small number
of true believers, who followed Christ all the time of the Antichristian
Apostasy, against these all the world fights, for the space of twelve hundred
and sixty years, these two Witnesses ever cartyed the victory, and there are
they compared to Moses and Aaron, to Elias and Elisha, to Joshna and
Zerubbabel, so that look what Moses and Aaron did in their time of Isreal's
coming out of Egypt, what Elias and Elisha in the time of that Apostasy, and
Joshua and Zerubbabel in the time of that Reformation, these two VVitnesses
should do the same; but how? even as Moses, Aaron, Elias, and the rest
overcame all enemies and difficulties, by a power proceeding out of their
mouth, as appears in their stories; so do these, these can smite the earth
with plagues, these can turn waters into blood, these can shut and open heaven,
these can destroy their enemies, who would hurt them; but all this proceeds out
of their mouth out of their mouth comes fire that destroys their enemies, all
is done by their mouth; Rev. 12. 11. explained.
and in the 12 of the Revelations, verse 11. you may there read a great battle
described, that is fought between the Saints, Christ and his Saints, and the
great red Dragon, but Michael and his Angels overcome the Dragon and his
Angels; at the 11 Verse it is said, They (that is, the Saints) overcame the
Dragon by the blood of the Lamb; that was the meritorious cause, but the
isntrumental cause was the word of their testimony; They overcame him by the
blood of the Lamb, and the word of their testimony; but you will be better
satisfied after I have opened unto you,

Qu.
Wherein lies the power which proceeds out of their mouth, what is it? or what
does their mouth?

Resp. 5 Things proceeding our of these mouths of Babes and Sucklings whereby
they overcome.
Possibly I shall not be able to name every particular branch, but there are
five things that are most clear, which all are the fruit of the mouth, and by
them in all ages, these babes and sucklings have overcome the enemy and the
avenger. First, 1. Preaching. 2. Confessing, or professing the Name, Truth, and
Cause of God and his Christ. 3. Praising, singing out praise, and Psalms, and
hymns to God. 4. Praying. And, 5. Covenanting.


You shall see how by all these the Saints from time to time have carried the
victory, First,

1. By Preaching.
Preaching; when Christ sent his Apostles out to go conquer the world, what
was their apparatus? what was their furniture? their instruments of war? it
was only thus, Its, praedicate, Go out into the world and Preach: Mat. 28.
19, 20.
And when he sent out the Lxx Disciples, Luke 10. as lambs among wolves,
without sword, or money, or scrip, this was the great weapon he furnished them
withal, Preach unto them; and by that time they had been a little trying the
power of this weapon, they had led captivity captive, and return with great
spoils; and tell their Master, Lord, (say they) the very Devils are subject to
us. True (says Christ) I saw Satan falling like lightening down from heaven,
by preaching they could shoot the Stars down from heaven, and fetch the
Devil out of his Throne: It were an endless task for me to recount unto you,
what preaching has done; what strong Castles have been demolished by
preaching; how many thousand enemies have been made friends by preaching; how
many Kingdoms have been subdued by preaching; how many thousands, and ten
thousand times ten thousand, have been taken out of the roaring Lions den by
preaching; how before Paul's death the preaching of the Word had gone into all
the earth, and unto the ends of the world, Romans 10 18.
Psalm. 19.
and rent in pieces the Kingdom of the Devil. This, this is Christ's Arms, this
is the power of God to salvation, a thousand tongues are not able to set forth
the excellency and efficacy of it; this is the great Monster queller, which is
able to batter down all the strong bolds of Satan, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.
2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. which can cast down every high thing which exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and bring into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ: In a word, preaching is that whereby Christ destroys the
very Kingdom of Antichrist, though it is the Devils masterpiece laid the
deepest in policy, and founded not only in States but in men's consciences, yet
Christ destroys it by the Word of his mouth, that is, the preaching of the
Gospel in the mouths of his Ministers. Preaching is one, and Secondly,

2. By confessing and professing the Truth.
Confessing is another; Preaching, though it belong to the whole Church, as a
gift given to them for their good, yet it is to be exercised but by the
Officers of it, it is given to all, not to be exercised by all; but all the
rest of these ways of overcomming are to be exercised by all these babes,
whether in office or not, whether men or women, old or young, learned or
simple, and confessing or professing the truth is one of them, one of the
things which proceed out of the mouth, whereby the Saints overcome their
enemies, I Will give you but one text for it, the Lord Christ tells his
Disciples, Luke 21. 15.
Luke 21. 12. what usage they should find in the world, That they should be
carried before Kings and Princes for his sake, this might be looked upon as a
terrible thing to them who had been brought up among rude and common people, to
be brought before Kings and High Courts, whose splendour and majesty would dash
them out of countenance and amase them, so that they would not be able to
speak, and whose wisdom, understanding and subtilty was like to be such, as
would quickly put them to silence; but fear not this, says Christ, why? I
will give you a mouth, I will give you a mouth (that is his promise,) that none
of your adversaries shall be able to stand before it; that mouth is nothing
but a bold confession of the truth and cause of God: a notable instance hereof
we have Acts 4. 13. the Council or Synedrion had called the Apostles before
them, and demanded by what authority, or by what Name they had done this? they
presently made a bold Confession of the Lord Jesus, and says the Text, When
they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and perceived they were unlearned and
ignorant men, they marvailed, Acts 4 13.
yea, they could say nothing; and whosoever has but read the stories of the
Church may find that the Confessions which the Saints, yea sometimes women and
children have made, have repressed the enraged adversaries, have sometimes
won, the hearts of them, yea, have converted thousands: that is a second
weapon out of the mouth. Thirdly,

3. Singing of Psalms.
Singing of Psalms, though this you would think the unlikelyest of all, yet
the Scripture is plain for it; in the 149 Psalm, Ps. 149. 4, 5, 6, etc.
there you have a promise, verse. 4. God will beautisie them with salvation,
yea, such salvation, that they shall execute vengeance upon the heathen, bind
their Kings in chains, and their Nobles with fetters; this glory have all Gods
Saints. How shall this be done? Let (says the Prophet) them sing aloud, let
the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two edged sword in their
hand: whatever be meant by a two edged sword, plain it is, that the high
praises of God in their mouth is one of their weapons: And in Psalm. 68. the
place before mentioned, about verse. 22, 23. etc. you have a description of Gods
terrible march before his people, the very fight whereof was dreadful to his
enemies; They have seen thy goings, O God, even the goings of my God, my King
in the Sanctuary; and how was it? you have it verse 25. The singers went
before, the players on instruments followed after, among them were the Damsels
playing with timbrels, all singing Hallelujah, bless ye the Lord in the
Congregations, even the Lord from the fountain of Israel. Psalm. 68. 23, 24, 25.
And you have an instance of it in 2 Chronicles. 20. when the children of Edom and
Moab, and Mount Seir came against Jehoshaphat, when he and his people went
against them, they went singing of Psalms; and it is said, verse. 22. When they
began to lift up their voice, and to sing praise to God on High; the Lord set
ambushments against the children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, which were
come out against Jehoshaphat, and they were smitten, and they destroyed one
another. 2 Chronicles. 20. 22
Many other instances there are in the Ecclesiastical story, of the strength
which Gods people have found in singing of Psalms; there is one famous one, of
the Protestants in Mountaban in France, who when they (being besieged) were
compelled to fight in their own defense, always went out to fight singing of
Psalms, and grew so terrible to the besiegers, that in the end, as soon as
they heard their singing voice lifted up within the Town, before the
Portcullis was drawn up, or the gates were opened, their hearts would fail
them, and they used to cry out, They come, they come, and even fled away for
fear, This is a third weapon out of the mouth; but then there is a fourth
which is super-excellent in many respects beyond all, like Goliahs sword, there
is none to that, that is,

4. Prayer.
Prayer: The wonders which the Prayers of Gods people have wrought, no time is
sufficient to tell: Prayer uses to fetch in all things they need, it removes
all evils which lie upon them; Prayer is the key of Heaven, the conqueror of
God himself, the scourge of Satan, the out-gate from all distresses; you
find, Psalm 107. five sorts of men in misery: 1 Wanderers out of their way. 2
Troubled and brought low with sickness. 3 Prisoners. 4 Tossed at sea with
tempests. 5 Oppressed by enemies: but Prayer is a medieamentum eatholicum, a
remedy for all these; then Psalm. 107. 6, 13, 19, 28.
They cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivers them out of their
distress; This Solomon begged, 1 Kings 8. per totum.
1 Kings 8. When thy people go to war, when they are oppressed with their
enemies, etc. if they humble themselves and pray, hear thou in Heaven and
deliver them; and God promised Chap. 9. 3. that it should be so; 1 Kings 9. 3.
and this innumerable multitudes of Gods people in all ages have found to be
so; when Moses hands are lift up in prayer, Amalek is routed; Exodus 17. 10.
when Samuel prays, the Philistims are disconifited; 1 Samuel 7. 9.
when David prays, his enemies flee, When I pray, my enemies are turned back;
this I know, (said he) for God is with me. Psalm. 56. 9, 11.
The time forbids me to tell of the thundering Bands of Gods servants, and what
their prayers have done: but in a word I am assured, that what the Apostle
says, Heb. 11. 32, 33. of the power of faith, The time would fail me to tell
of Gedeon, of Barak, Samson, Jephthah, etc. who through faith subdued
Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped mouths of Lions,
quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness
were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight Armies of aliens,
etc. Heb. 11. 33.
has all been made good of Prayer: Prayer has done as much as all this; yea,
it has made the Sun stand still, the Rivers run back, what is it that
Prayer has not been able to do? Never did these Babes and Sucklings in the
time of their distress, seek God by Prayer in vain. This is a fourth weapon
out of the mouth. Fifthly,

5. Covenanting.
Covenanting, is another, and for that you have abundance of evidence in all
the ages of the Church, from the days of Moses go on to Joshua, and the
Judges, and Asa, and Jehoshaphat, and Hezekiah, and Josiah, and Ezra, and
Nehemiah, all these in their great extremities, (when nothing did prosper, but
all went contrary to them) used to renew their Covenants with God, entered into
Oath and Covenant with him, and God ever prospered them after it. The stories
of these things are so fully known, that I shall not need to insist upon them.
Reason of all this, when they are made so, mighty in working.
If now you ask the reason of all this, why should this power of the Mouth,
Praying, and Preaching, and Confessing, and Covenanting, and Singing be thus
mighty in operation, whence grow these Samsons locks. I answer, many excellent
Reasons might be given for every one of them, but I will go no surther then my
Text, which I know will satisfy you: My Text says, Out of the Mouth of Babes
and Sucklings thou have ordained strength, or thou have founded strength, so
the Hebrew word signifies, constituted, made, appointed; and that word when it
is applied to God, ordinarily signified one of these two things; sometimes his
Counsel, or what his Decree has appointed, but most commonly it signifies his
making or creating a thing. The Lord by wisdom founded the Earth, Prove. 3. 10.
the same word that is in my Text; so also Psalm. 102. 25. Thou Lord from the
beginning have founded the earth; and Psalm. 104. 5. Thou have founded the
earth, or, laid the foundation of the earth; so that this is Gods appointment
and his creation, God has decreed it shall be so, and the Lord has created
it, and therefore it is so; and truly you must resolve all other things into
the same reason, Why has the Lion that strength in his jaw? God has founded
it there; why has the Bull that strength in his horn? why has Man such
strength in his arms? why the Serpent in his sting? God has founded it:
Philosophers will carry you on from reason to reason, and show how these arise
out of their compositions and natures; but when all is done, it must be
resolved into this, God has appointed it, and made it so and so, God has
founded this strength in them, and thus to be exercised by them. And now I
should think this Lesson were very fit for application, did I not know it
necessary to remove one great stumbling block out of the way, which when I have
done in a few words, I shall endeavor to set it home in 2 or 3 Uses.

Ob. All this by some is used as an argument against our defensive Arms.
All this which I have said of the Arms of Christians, is by some retorted
upon our selves against our present war, as if we held not our selves within
the bounds of Christianity for say they, If these be all the weapons and
strength whereby the Saints do overcome, why do you use any other means to
overcome your enemies? why rest you not contented with this? either these are
not all, or you are not Christians, not true to your own Principles; Indeed
(say they) the time has been when such a Sermon as this was owned as Divinity,
in the time of the Fathers, when preces and lachrymae, prayers and tears, were
all the weapons which the Church did use; but now when you have spoke all these
things of the power of Preaching, and Praying, and Confessing, and Covenanting,
you are glad to betake your selves to Arms, to see what they will do, to
help these out, whence it is apparent you dare not rest in these as sufficient
helps; and so they throw this as a stumbling block in our way; but this is
easily removed. I answer therefore,

Resp. 1.
First, that many of those who object this against us, do it only, that
thereby they might the better spoil us, as Julian the Apostate, when he would
expose Christians to all manner of injuries, and discourage them from seeking
or using any lawful way to right themselves against any spoil or wrong, he
endeavored to tie their hands by their own Principles of Religion; and would
scoffingly tell them, that Christianity taught them, If any man struck them on
one ear, they must turn the other; and that if any man did take their coat,
they must let him have their cloak also. Howsoever, I know this answers not
the Objection I therefore answer, Secondly,

2.
We acknowledge, that as we are Christians (in that capacity) we use no other
weapons then these I have told you of, these only are proper and peculiar to
us as we are Christians; but the weapons which we enjoy as we are
Christians, do not deprive us of those that we enjoy in the capacity of Men;
look whatsoever belongs to us in the capacity of Men, or in the capacity of
Subjects, or of Freemen, Christianity does not take them away, but super-addes
these unto them. I say therefore, that we have all the same means of defense
against unjust violence, that are common to us with other men, as we are Men,
and we have the same means of defense, as we are Freemen, which other
Freemen have; and we challenge in this no more then we might lawfully use, if
we were Papists or Turks, if we were Pagans, Jews, or Indians: we challenge
not this to belong to christianity, as peculiar to it, we have learned that by
the law of Nature and Nations, men may defend themselves against unjust
violence; if the Turks should invade a Country of Christians, they will tell
him, that as they are Christians, their Praying, and Professing, and Singing,
and Covenanting, these spiritual weapons out of their Mouth will quell them;
but as they are Men, they have a liberty to defend themselves against him, and
vim vi repellere; or if a Christian man were travailing upon the highway, and a
Thief should demand of him, how as he is a Christian, he defends himself from
his enemies; he would tell him by Faith, by Prayer, by the Word of God, by
weapons out of his Mouth; but if the Thief assault him, to take his life or
his purse, as he is a man, he will use his sword, and his Christianity will
sanctify this use of his sword to him. The like instances might be given in
other things which concern Christianity. If any man demand, how live you as a
Christian? I would answer, by faith, by every word that comes out of Gods
mouth; but yet as we are Men, we must eat our bread by the sweat of our
brows, and as we are Christians our Christianity sanctifies these other
means of life unto us, it takes them not away from us: So when unjust violence
is offered to us, contrary to the laws of the Land, look what defense is
lawful by our Laws, Christianity deprives us not of that, it sanctifies that,
and we have all these which I have spoken to boot: And so is it in our present
business, when the Parliament (the highest Court of Judicature, the Court
where all controversies between the King and his Subjects receive their final
judgment and determination) were proceeding to reform abules, and call some
grand Delinquents and Incendiaries to a legal trial, a force was raised to
protect these Offenders, and consequently to compel the Parliament to desist
from their work: (and let once the authority of Parliaments be overthrown,
we are an inslaved and conquered people;) thereupon the Parliament, the
representative body of the Kingdom, takes Arms to defend themselves, and to
bring in these evil doers to condign punishment; this (say we) we do
according to the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and were the Kingdom and
Parliament Papists or Protestants, Christians or Heathens, the case is the same
as to the matter of the war, the Laws of the Land warranting this just
defense; now our being Christians, and true believers, deprives us not of this
defense which we enjoy as Englishmen, but super-addes these five things which
I have spoken of, to sanctify our other lawful means of defense, and to make
them the more effectual; and blessed be the name of God, we have found it by
experience. Now I proceed to apply the Doctrine for our good.

Use 1. Exhortation to to take notice of the comfortable experience we have
had of this, in our present troubles.
Is this the great power whereby Christians do overcome their enemies, a power
that comes out of their Mouth? O how good is it for us to take notice, how God
has made all this good to us in our experience, in the great conflicts and
deliverances which we have lately had? we must thankfully acknowledge, God
has raised us up Counselors who have done their part, and Commanders and
Soldiers that have done their part too; the mouth of the Sword has done its
part, but (I say) the sword of the Mouth has done more: We may say of the
mouth of the Sword, as it is said of Saul, that he had slain his Thousands,
but the sword of the Mouth has slain its ten Thousands. We in our
extremities have sought God, Prayed to him, Covenanted with him, Humbled our
selves before him, owned his Truth, and professed it; and God has carried all
our affairs so, that when oftentimes our wise Counselors have failed, and our
Armies have failed, and all other helps have come in, and have told us, that
we are like to be ruined, the Babes and Sucklings never failed to carry it in
the times of our extremities: And I have begged it from God, and said it in
this place, and cannot but say it again, I would think it a wonderful glory
to God, to have it truly Written and Recorded, how in all our extremities, the
power that has come out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings has saved us from
utter ruin: Our adversaries have laughed at these things, and esteemed all the
weapons of our Mouth to be but wind, but God has made them such a wind as
has scattered them. And (Right Honorable and Beloved) it becomes us well to
observe it, and to stand amazed, and say with the Psalmist here, Lord, what is
Man, that thou should be thus mindful of him? O Lord our God, how excellent
is thy Name in all the world?

Use 2. Exhortation to maintain those Forces for time to come.
Secondly, because this is the great way of our conquering our enemies, I
beseech you (I principally speak to your Lordships, and to those that are
interested in being the great Council of the Kingdom) take care that this
Magazine of the Mouth, the powers that come out of the Mouth of Babes and
Sucklings may be preserved and recruited, and not any ways disbanded; It is
now a great dispute among you that are wise Statesmen, what we should do with
our Armies? whether (there being no visible enemy in the Field) it would not
be fittest to disband our present Armies? A dispute I have nothing to do
with; but this I have to do with, and make bold to tell you, whatsoever you
do with other Armies, you must not disband the Forces of the Babes and
Sucklings, out of whose Mouth comes your strongest help. You are far from
having your work done as yet, Ireland is in a sad condition, England is
woefully unsettled, terrible divisions are found every where; look to it, that
you have a force about you; what other Forces are needful, I leave to your
wisdoms, but sure I am these Babes and Sucklings, are the Triarii, the
Veterani, the old Soldiers, the Lifeguard of England, disband them once and
you are lost. Therefore for the Lords sake, see that this power that my Text
drives at, may have all the encouragement that may be: To this end be careful
of two things.
And to this end, your Lordships must be careful of these Two things. First,

1.
To give all the assistance possible, that these Soldiers may be encouraged
and multiplied in all parts of the Land, I mean, that the Gospel may spread,
the Preaching of the Gospel, that Saints might be won, and that the Church
might be enlarged, be settled in peace, that there might be freedom to seek
God, and to serve him according to his will; and know you for certain, that
every soul which shall be won to Christ, be it the soul of a woman, or of an
old man that stoops for age, or of a child, yet every soul won to Christ,
and so numbered among these Babes and Sucklings will be as stout a soldier as
ever you did employ, and will in your extremity do more then all the
experienced Captains that tread on English ground, because God is with these,
and these must carry it; the power of heaven is engaged with them, therefore
for the Lords sake further Religion, the propagation and settling of it; you
are wise, and can think of the ways which have been often set before you, God
Almighty bless you in it, and ever let these parties be dear in your eyes,
who have such interest in Heaven, let them be owned as the Soldiers who will
never fail you, though others may and will. The other thing I humbly advise is
this,

2.
That you would always carry this in your wise thoughts, never to engage in
any cause, wherein you should not be accompanied with the power that comes out
of the Mouths of these Babes and Sucklings: you have found, (though it may be
carnal eyes see it not) that the prayers and tears of Gods people, and their
cleaving to God, and their interest in your Cause, has been the greatest
means under heaven to keep your Lordships to be a Parliament House to this
day; and the Lord keep you, that whatsoever business you have, what contest or
war soever you may have, that your Cause be such, that these Babes and
Sucklings be not constrained to withdraw from your assistance; my meaning is,
that the Cause be ever good, and such a Cause as God will own, and as God calls
you to; hitherto your Cause has been manifest, and your way has been clear;
the Lord keep you, that you and the Babes and Sucklings of my Text may live and
dye together, and then we are well enough; but when ever you engage against
them, or without them, you will be worsted.

3. Exhortation to all these Babes and Sucklings to use their power against
Christand their enemies.
2. To the rest; who is there among you that belongs to this party who are of
Christ's number, I beseech you give us your help, come all of you and help the
Lord against his enemies, help in the great work that now is in hand; do not
say you can contribute nothing, it may be some of you have no Money or Lands,
no wisdom or authority: I am sure thou have that which Gods people may receive
benefit by, Christ has given thee a mouth, which is a quiver full of choice
arrows; thou can profess Christ's truth, thou can sing his praises, thou
can call him Abba father, thou can be one of his remembrancers, thou can
pray for the peace of Zion, thou can say, Our Father which art in heaven, let
thy kingdom come; and little do thou know what great things thou may do,
in thy Closet, in thy Chamber, in the Fields at thy work; no tongue can utter
what admirable help thou may give; thou may reach Rome and Spain, and
Ireland, succor the one, and destroy the other: O for the Lords sake lay out
your strength to the utmost; come out (I say) and help the Lord all that are
able; Solomon says, He that in a famine withholds Corn, the people will
curse him; what will thy condition be, if thou withholdest thy help in the
needful time of trouble; you know Mordecai's speech to Hester, Who knows but
thou came to the Kingdom for such a time as this? I say to thee without any
if or and, I know thou art endued with all this strength, for such a time as
this, O therefore fill thy mouth with praises, with confessions, with prayers,
and with whatever else may quell the Lords and thy enemies, even the enemy and
the avenger.

2 Rules how to use this power of the mouth, so as to make it effectual.
But take this in, thou must be careful so to use this power, that it may
take and speed, think not that every one that pretends to pray, or pretends to
Covenant, or profess Gods name can do it: I could give you abundance of
instances, where the Lord has aborninated al these things, and they have bin
curses to them who have used them, have you not often read of such speeches as
these, What have thou to do to take my Name into thy mouth? when ye make many
prayers, I will not hear you; when they pray, I will destroy them with sword,
famine, and pestilence; and many other the like, know therefore its not bare
Preaching or Confessing, or Singing, or Praying, that will do any thing, these
must be used and done aright; and there are excellent Rules for every one of
these, to teach us how to use them, so as to make them effectual, but a Sermon
will not bear the handling of them, I shall at the present commend only two
directions which are common to them all:

1.
1 See that that Mouth out of which all this strength must be exercised, be a
sanctified Mouth, a Mouth separated to, and engaged in Gods Cause only; let it
not be the Mouth that St. James speaks of, Out of the same Mouth comes
cursing and blessing; James 3. 9. 10.
let it not be a Mouth that shall sing Hosanna to Christ in the Temple, and
crucify him in the Court; that shall sing a Psalm to him in the Congregation,
and a bawdy Catch in an Alehouse or Tavern; that shall bless his Name in the
assembly of his people, and blespheme him in the company of profane ones; that
shall talk of Heaven and holiness in one company, and uncleanness and luxury
in another, this is a Mouth end a Mouth, a double Mouth, that the Lord takes no
more pleasure in, then in a double heart: No, let the Mouth, that is such an
excellent instrument as this, and the tongue in it, let it (I say) be for the
Lord, and for the Lord only, let it be a sanctified Mouth. And secondly,

2.
2 That though all this power must be exercised out of the Mouth, yet it must
come further then from the Mouth, the Mouth is the instrument, it is the gun if
you will, or the sword, but the Mouth it is not the magazine, it is not the
storehouse; though the tongue is the glory for execution, there must be
another thing that must be the fountain: A double storehouse, whence the
Mouth must be supplied with strength.
and therefore this sanctified Mouth must fetchall from another treasury, and
there is a double storehouse whence it must be furnished. 1 Christ's Merits.
1 Christ's merit, the meritorious cause of all the conquest, is the blood of the
Limb; go not thou out in the force of thy prayer, say not, I can pray, I can
preach, I have a bold Spirit to confess Christ, and I have taken the Covenant,
and will stand to it: God forbid thou should think this can contribute any
thing because it is in thee; no, but let the blood of the Lamb be the
meritorious cause upon which thou relyest, faith in it will make the sling
stones, able with David to kill these Goliahs; take this away, and thou can
do nothing. 2 From a sanctified heart.
2 See that all come out of the good Treasury within, from a sanctified heart;
when thy Mouth makes consession, see that it come out of a heart that
believes; if thou sing to Gods glory with thy mouth and voice it must be with
grace in thy heart; if thou will pray, see to it, that it be not lip-labor, or
only a company of words or sentences well composed, but let it be the pouring
out of the heart, the crying with the heart, with an humble heart, with a
believing heart; and so let thy Covenanting be, thou will swear a Covenant,
let thy heart stand to it, and hold it out, and maintain it; this is the way
to use these Mouth-weapons aright. I should have enlarged my Discourse upon
them, but I rather fear I have been burden some already to your patience.
Consider what I have said, and the Lord give you understanding in allthings:
And I shall end.

FINIS.

