THE Perfect Cook BEING The most exact directions for the making all kind of
Pastes, with the perfect way teaching how to Raise, Season, and make all sorts
of Pies, Pasties, Tarts, and Florentines, etc. now practiced by the most famous
and expert Cooks, both French and English.

As also The perfect English Cook, or right method of the whole Art of Cookery,
with the true ordering of French, Spanish, and Italian Kickshaws, with Alamode
varieties for Persons of Honor.

To which is added, the way of dressing all manner of Flesh, Fowl, and Fish,
and making admirable Sauces, after the most refined way of French and English.
The like never Extant; With fifty five ways of dressing of Eggs.

By Mounsieur Marnette.

Printed at London for Nath. Brooks at the Angel in Cornhil. 1656.

The perfect Cook.

The FRENCH Pastery-Cooke
Sold at the Angel in Cornhill, by N: Brook 1656. To Vaughansculp



TO The Right Honorable the Lady Dethick, Lady Mayorels of the Noble, Ancient,
and most Renowned City of London, and the Right Worshipful Ladies, the Ladies
Tenson, and Frederick, the Wives of the Right Worshipful Sheriffs of the
aforesaid City, etc.
Honored Ladies:
HAving had the happiness to draw my first breath in this renowned City, though
of Foreign Parents, and being turned young into the wild and Military World,
to become a Son of Mars, I was forced to rely on Esau's Blessing, and to
content my self with Alexanders Portion; but being of late returned again to
this the place of my Natievity, and permitted to endeavor an honorable and
honest subsistence, I have resigned, my self to Minerva's milder tuition and
protection.

In prosecution whereof, meeting with the ensuing Treatise, originally written
in my Predecessors Language, I have adventured to make it speak English, and
presumed to publish it under your Ladyships Patronage, the better to shelter it
from such Critics of the Times, who savor no Viands but of their own fancying
and Cookery.

And although this work in it self may seem very improper to be communicated to
this Nation, where every Matron, and young Damsel are so well versed in the
Pastry Art, as that they may outvie the best Foreign Pastry Cooks in all the
World besides, yet this said Treatise containing nothing save Outlandish Cates
and Junkets (far inferior I must confess to ours) I doubt not but will give
that satisfaction unto your Ladyships, and unto all other worthy Matrons, and
ingenuous Damsels, as may encourage my self, the Translator, to proceed to the
Englishing of other Treatises of the like nature, proper for the knowledge, and
use of so judicious personages as your selves.

A Second Motive which made me to adventure upon this piece of Pastry, was, to
testify my gratitude to this my Mother City, by preparing (for her Sons and
Daughters pleasures and divertisements at their spare hours) some Foreign
Cates and Delicacies, happily never as yet tasted within her walls.

Nor could I omit to dedicate them unto your selves (most Honored Ladies (who
all three of you, may be justly termed to be the Mirrours of Knowledge and
Excellency in these laudable Professions, that thereby I might give a testimony
to the whole World of my submission and obedience unto my Political Parents,
your selves being such, in reference to those Honorable places of trust so
deservingly conferred, and so worthily supplied by your Honored second Selves,
who as they are the Supporters of this flourishing Cities admirable Government,
so will their renowns, and yours (honored Ladies) live to all eternity by
theirs and yours Patronizing, and cherishing of Virtue and Learning.

In confidence that this my presumption may meet with a favorable
construction, and a kind acceptance, I crave your pardon for this importunity,
only requesting an additional Boon, That I may have leave to style my self,
Honored Ladies,

This 17 of May, 1656. Your most devoted humble observator:M. M.

The French Epistle to the Reader, Translated.
Courteous Reader:
BEing informed that Foreigners and Strangers do give a favorable
construction, and a kind admission unto several new Books, when they find the
Names of French Authors annexed unto their Titles, or Inscriptions, as the
French Gardner, the French Cook, and diverse others, although they have several
such like Editions extant in their own Languages, treating on the self-same
subjects; yet I was easily induced to believe they would the rather countenance
and cherish such as should denote unto them some new Faculty, Art, or Science,
which happily may not as yet have been made public; wherefore I do presume to
present unto them our Pastissier Francois, or French Pastry Cook, which may be
said to be one of the first (if not the only first) of the number of those
which as yet have been extant.

Nor have I met with any Author as yet (in this our French Dominions) who has
penned the least instructions concerning this Art, or who has deigned to offer
them to the Public; and the ill nature of our most famousest Pastry Cooks of
the French Court, and of the City of Paris has been hitherto so predominant,
that notwithstanding this said Art is known to be very profitable unto all
such persons as are in health, and most requisite for such as are sick; yet
they have endeavored to smother it at least have hoorded it up in such a
manner amongst themselves, as that there are many famous Cities and Provinces
in France, nay I dare say whole Countries in Europe, where hardly one sole
person is to be found, who is learned in this Art, and who has a capacity to
put it in practice.

To remedy and prevent which default, the perusing and practiseing of this
ensuing Treatise may in some measure be assisting unto you; and be an
effectual means, that hence forwards there will not be any City, Town,
Borough, Village, Hamlet, Castle, nor the least Gentleman's Country House, or
habitation, where the good Houswives, and ingenuous young Maidens may not on a
sudden be able to give a most noble and delicious treatment unto their Kindred,
Allies, and Friends, upon all occasions, and in all the several seasons of the
year, as well to the sick, as to those which are in health with a great deal of
ease and pleasure to themselves, and a very inconsiderable charge or expense;
all which they may perform in their several particular, and private
habitations, though never so remote from any Cities, Towns, or Villages
whatsoever.

Assuring you besides, that this Book does not contain any composition or
mixture which is not very easy to be prepared, far more pleasing to the
palate, and not at all chargeable to the purse, since you are at liberty to
employ as much, or as little in the making and imbellishing of these Cates, and
Junkets, as your means, the times and your own occasions will permit you to
bestow thereon. Thus promising my self your favorable acceptance of these my
puny endeavors on so mean a subject, I shall commend you to the Almighties
protection:

Farewell.
The Contents.
Chapter 1 How to make Rye paste or dough, Page 1 Chapter 2 To make white paste
or dough for great Pasties, Page 2 Chapter 3 To make paste for Mince Pies,
Tarts, Custards, and the like, Page 5 Chapter 4 To make the finest paste that
can be used, Page 6 Chapter 5 To make a paste with oil, and to take away the
scent of the oil, Page 9 Chapter 6 To make sweet paste, Page 10 Chapter 7 To
make sweet spices, Page 11 Chapter 8 To make salt spices, Page 13 Chapter 9 To
make pastry varnish, Page ib. Chapter 10 To make Pastry cream, Page 15 Chapter
11 A second sort of Pastry cream, Page 17 Chapter 12 A third sort of Cream for
Lent, Page 19 Chapter 13 The manner to make sugared Ice, or frost, Page 30
Chapter 14 General notes concerning the Pastry Art, Page 21 Chapter 15 To put a
Gammon of Bacon in paste, Page 24 Chapter 16 To make a Baske pastie, Page 29
Chapter 17 To make a Turkish Gammon pasty, Page 34 Chapter 18 To put all kind
of Venison in paste, Page 37 Chapter 19 To make a Royal pasty, Page 47 Chapter
20 To make a Capon, Veal, Pidgeon, or Lark pie, Page 52 Chapter 21 To make a
Pasty with a sweet sauce, Page 55 Chapter 22 A Pasty to be eaten hot, Page 56
Chapter 23 To make a Cockney pie, Page 60 Chapter 24 To make a Sweetbread pie,
Page 63 Chapter 25 To make a Sweetbread Tart, Page 64 Chapter 26 To make a
minced meat Tart, Page ib. Chapter 27 To make a Cardinals Pie, Page 66 Chapter
28 To make an English pasty, Page 67 Chapter 29 To make Swifs-pasty, Page 72
Chapter 30 To make a Giblet pie, Page 73 Chapter 31 To make an Italian minced
Pie, Page 76 Chapter 32 To make Spanish minced pyes, Page 79 Chapter 33 To make
Princess minced pyes, Page 80 Chapter 34 To make Fish pyes, Page 82 Chapter 35
To make a Fish pie to be eaten hot, Page 86 Chapter 36 To make minced Fish
pyes, Page 92 Chapter 37 How to unbone and mince Fish, Page 96 Chapter 38 To
make Lenton Fish minced pyes with oil, Page 100 Chapter 39 To make a March-pane
wafer, Page 102 Chapter 40 A second sort of March-pane, Page 107 Chapter 41 To
make a Cream Tart. Page 109 Chapter 42 A second sort of Cream Tarts, Page 113
Chapter 43 To make a Marrow Tart, Page 114 Chapter 44 To make a Tart of Bacon,
Page 115 Chapter 45 To make a Kidney tart, Page 117 Chapter 46 To make an Egg
tart, Page 118 Chapter 47 To make a Tansie, or Herb tart in Paste, Page 119
Chapter 48 To make a Tart of the roots of Herbs, Page 122 Chapter 49 To make a
Tart of green Fruit, Page 124 Chapter 50 To make a Melon, Pompion, or Gourd
tart, Page 125 Chapter 51 To make an Apple or Pear tart, Page 128 Chapter 52 To
make a Flawn of Apples, or other raw fruit, Page 129 Chapter 53 To make a
Comfet Tart, Page 131 Chapter 54 A second Comfet tart, Page 132 Chapter 55 To
make a Custard, or Whitepot, Page 133 Chapter 56 To make a Fuellentine, or
puff-past, Page 138 Chapter 57 To make all kind of small Tarts, Page 140
Chapter 58 To make a Cheese tart, flawn, or Custard. Page 142 Chapter 59 A
second sort of Cheesecakes, and several other tarts, Page 143 Chapter 60 A
third manner of Cheesecakes, Page 144 Chapter 61 A fourth manner to make
Cheesecakes, flawnes etc. Page 146 Chapter 62 To make a round puff-paste tart,
Page 148 Chapter 63 A second kind of puff-paste tart, Page 149 Chapter 64 To
make small pasties with several mixtures, Page 151 Chapter 65 To make
Cheesecakes. Page 154 Chapter 66 To make a kind of a pancake to be baked in a
Tart pan. Page 155 Chapter 67 To make soft tarts without Cheese, Page 160
Chapter 68 A second kind of Tart, or Cheesecake to be baked in a Tart pan. Page
162 Chapter 69 A third kind of Cheese-cakes, called by the Flemmings an
Eggcake. Page 165 Chapter 70 A fourth kind of Country Tart, Page 167 Chapter 80
To make soft Tarts with Cheese, Page 170 Chapter 81 To make a kertled tart.
Page 172 Chapter 82 To make a tart according to the Italian fashion. Page 174
Chapter 83 To make an Almond tart. Page 176 Chapter 84 To make a leaved or fine
March-pane. Page 178 Chapter 85 To make refined Tarts or Cakes, Page 179
Chapter 86 To make a puff cake like a Pumpion. Page 182 Chapter 87 To refine
and clarify butter, Page 184 Chapter 88 To make puff-paste buns, Page 185
Chapter 89 To make sweet and delicate wafers, Page 186 Chapter 90 To make
wafers with milk or cream, Page 188 Chapter 91 To make Cheese wafers. Page 189
Chapter 92 To make excellent Fritters. Page 192 The Translators additional
observations concerning wafers. Page 195
Chapter 93 A second kind of excellent Fritters or Buns. Page 196 Chapter 94 A
third kind of Turret Fritters, Page 199 Chapter 95 A fourth kind of excellent
Fritters. Page 200 The Translators additional description, how to make
excellent Pancakes, Page 201
Chapter 96 To make minced-pyes, like unto Mouscherons, Page 203 Chapter 97 To
make minced pyes brown fried, Page 205 Chapter 98 To make excellent
Cheese-Cakes, Page 207 Chapter 99 A second manner of Cheese-cakes, Page 208
Chapter 100 To make buttered wigs, simnels, or Cracknels. Page 210 Chapter 101
To make ordinary pastry Biscuit, Page 214 Chapter 102 To make the Queens
Biscuit, Page 218 Chapter 103 To make Italian Biscuit, Page 219 Chapter 104 To
make Cinnamon Biscuit, Page 220 Chapter 105 To make Sugar frosted Biscuit, Page
222 Chapter 106 To make Pistaches Biscuit, Page 222 Chapter 107 A Gamby or
kertled Biscuit, Page 223 Chapter 108 Lenten Biscuit. Page 224 Chapter 109 To
make ordinary March-paue, Page 226 Chapter 110 To make Maccaroons, Page 230
Chapter 111 To make Lemmon paste, Page 232 Chapter 112 A second kind of Lemmon
paste, Page 234 Chapter 113 An Egg paste, Page 234 Chapter 114 To make an egg
Pie in a Pot, Page 235 Chapter 115 A tart or egg cake, Page 236 Chapter 116 An
egg tart with apples. Page 238 Chapter 117 A Pompion tart of beaten Eggs, Page
239 Chapter 118 To dress eggs like Fritters, Page 241 Chapter 119 To dress
Eggs like Macaroons, Page 243 Chapter 120 An Egg tart like unto Fritters, Page
244 Chapter 121 To make a bisk of eggs, Page 245 Chapter 122 To make an Egg
breath, Page 247 Chapter 123 To make an egg tansy. Page 247 Chapter 124 Ten
several manners or ways of poaching of eggs, Page 249 The Translators
additional Manner to butter a dish of Eggs without any butter at all, Page 255
Chapter 125 Five manner of ways, to dress and set out hard Eggs, Page 256
Chapter 126 To dress eggs according to the Portingal manner, Page 259 Chapter
127 To make stuffed eggs like unto a pudding. Page 261 Chapter 128 To dress
hard eggs with sorril, Page 263 Chapter 129 five and twenty several sorts of
Omelets of eggs: or Pancakes of herbs and eggs, Page 264 Chapter 130 To make
fourteen several kinds of Marmalades of eggs, Page 293 Lastly, The manner to
dress an exquisite dish of stirred eggs, called in French, ala Hugenotte or
Presbyterian Eggs; etc. Page 310

THE FRENCH Pastry Cook
CHAP. I.
Containing the manner how to make Rye Paste, or Dough.

AS for example, take a Peck and a half of Rye flower, out of which the course
bran has been taken, knead the said meal very well with hot water, until you
make it become firm; This kind of paste, or dough, will chiefly stand you in
stead to make Pasty-crust for your grosser sort of Venson, and for gamons of
Bacon, which are to be sent afar off, or to be long kept; which said cruft
must be strong, and at least two or three inches thick. To this kind of paste,
or dough; you may add one half pound of Butter which will make it the better.

CHAP. II.
To make white Paste, or Dough, for great Pyes.

FOr Example, place on your pastry Table, well cleansed three quarters of a
peck of fine flower, make a hole or hollownesse in the middle of it, which
concavity the French Pastry Cooks call a fountain, add unto it two pound of
sweet Butter, and in case the Butter be hard you mustwork it with your hands,
before you put it upon the pastry Table, to the end that it may become soft;
when you have mingled the Butter with the flower, you may add thereunto about
the quantity of three ounces of salt reduced to powder, and immediately also
add thereunto half a pint of fair water, after which you may begin to make
your paste or dough, which must be very well kneaded; and whilst you are
making of your paste as aforesaid, you may by whiles sprinkle it with water.

Now when your Paste is very well kneaded, you must extend it and stretch it
forth with a wooden rolling Pin, strew some flower both upon and under the
dough, that so it may not stick to your pastry Table, nor rolling Pin.

You may observe once for all, that it is requisite in Winter, to make the
paste fatter than in summer, to render it the more supple and tractable, and on
the contrary, in Summer or in hot weather, you must make the paste less fat by
a little, and consequently put less butter therein, for to make it firmer, for
the heat does over soften the Dough, and causes it to fall, which is
occasioned by its being made over fat; However you must observe thus much,
always to qualify your paste proportionably unto the finenesse you will have
it of.

You must also observe, that in case the weather be cold when you make your
paste, you shall do well to cover it with a warm cloth when it is half kneaded,
to the end that it may be the better mollified; after which you may complete
the working and kneading of it, until your dough be thoroughly stifned, and
that you do not feel any clots, or clutters in the kneading of it.

CHAP. III.
To make very white fine Paste or Dough, which may be useful for Mince-pies
and such like to be eaten hot; as also for crust for Tarts, Florentines,
Custards, Fools, Chees-Cakes, Lambs-stones and sweet-breads, and the like.

MAke your white paste as aforesaid, and instead of putting two pounds of
butter to three quarters of a peck of fine flower, you must put three pounds
therein; And thus you will attain to the making of an excellent Paste for
Mince-pies, for veal Pies, for Pigeon pies, for Mutton pies, and such like,
which are to be eaten hot.

And when you have a mind to prepare a Paste to make such a like Pie of, you
must give it a thickness of about three or four half Crowns, but you must have
a care to make the bottom of the pie somewhat thicker, that so the Pie it self
may be the better supported.

And when as you intend to make use of such like paste for Tarts, Custards,
Cheese-Cakes, white-pots, Lambs-stones and sweet-breads, and the like, you must
only give it a thickness of about half a crown, more or less, proportionably
according to the bigness of your Pie, tart, custard, or the like.

CHAP. IV.
To make a leaved, or Extraordinary thin Paste or Dough.

AS for Example, lay upon your kneading board or Table, half a peck of wheaten
Meal flower, make a hollow in it, and pour a glass of water into it, add
thereunto about half an ounce of beaten Salt, mingle all these very well
together, to make your paste or dough, and ever and anon sprinkle it with some
water proportionably as you shall find it to be requisite.

When this your Paste shall be very well knitted together, although somewhat
limber, you may put it into a Mass or round lump, and so let it remain for the
space of one half hour or thereabouts, to the end that it may become dry and
firm, after which you may extend it with a rowling-pin, until it be an inch
thick, casting good store of flower upon it now and then.

After which you may take a pound of good fresh Butter, which is very stiff and
hard, and spread the said Butter over your Paste, and flatten it upon the Dough
with your hands; after which you must fold in the four corners of the Dough, or
else you may only double your Paste, in such, a manner, as that the Butter may
be enclosed in it, which being thus done, you must again extend your Paste, and
roll it very thin with your Rowling-pin, then double in again the four
corners of your Paste toward the middle, and spread it abroad again with your
Rowling-pin, and thus you must fold it and unfold it five or six several times,
that so you may finally render your Paste as thin as it shall be requisite;
Nor must you forget to strew it with a little flower, that it may not stick
upon your Kneading-board or Table, neither upon your Rowling-pin nor Fingers.

Whenever you will make use of this thin Paste or Dough toward the making of
a Pigeon Pie, or any other Pastrie work, you may take as great or less a
quantity of it, as you may judge convenient, according to the proportion of the
Pie you intend to make; and having put it up in a mass or lump, you may
afterward extend it with your Rowlingpin, strowing it with some flower, so
that you may reduce it to the thickness of about a shilling piece in silver.

And when you have thus rolled out your Paste for the last time, you shall
again strew it with a small quantity of flower, and then double it again, and
put it upon one half of the Pie-plate, after which you may abate upon the other
half of the Pielate, the other half of the Dough or thin Paste; And finally in
this manner you may fashion and shape your Pastie in such a manner as shall be
hereafter described.

Note, that in case you put less Butter than is prescribed in your Paste, it
will be then but a half leaved Paste or Dough.

CHAP. V.
To make a Paste with Oil, and the way how to take away the sent of the Oil.

IN the first place you must set your Oil over the fire, that is to say, you
must cause it to boil till it bubbles no more; and by this means you will take
away both the sent and the unpleasantnesse of the Oil. Some others whilst the
Oil is a boiling put a crust of bread into it.

Having thus prepared your Oil, you may put upon your kneadingboard, as for
example, one pint of Meal-flower, whereunto add two or three yolks of Eggs,
and as much salt as you can take up betwixt your two fingers, and as much Oil
as your own discretion will prompt you to, and the fourth part of half a pint
of water, or thereabouts (a little more or less) mingle all these things very
well together, and work your Paste thoroughly with your hands, but leave it
somewhat of the hardest, because the Oil has not so firm and solid a body as
the Butter. Finally having made your Paste or Dough in this manner, you may
make use of it according to your pleasure.

CHAP. VI.
To make sweet Paste or Dough.

FOr example, take a quarter of a pound of powdered Sugar sifted through a hair
or ranging sieve, then put it into a clear Marble Mortar, add thereunto the
quarter of the white of an Egg, and about half a spoon-full of Lemmon juce,
stir all these foftly together, until the Sugar begins to jelly, and in case
it will not easily jelly, add thereunto some few drops of Rose Water, and when
the Sugar does begin to jelly, you must beat it with a Pestel till it becomes a
hard and firm Paste, and when the same is well mingled, you may make Pastie
crusts thereof.

Note that at your pleasure you may also make Paste that is but half sweetened,
by mingling an equal part or proportion of Sugar and of Meal together; the
which you may mingle together in the self same manner, as is hereafore
described.

CHAP. VII.
To make the sweet spices which are used by the Pastry-Cooks.

FOr example, take two parts of Ginger, as two ounces, and one part, viz. one
ounce of beaten Pepper, mingle them together, add thereunto beaten Cloves, and
Nutmegs very small grated, and beaten Mace, one ounce or thereabouts of each,
for one pound of Pepper more or less, as you please, and put up all these
several ingredients thus mingled in a Box.

Note, that it is at your liberty to preserve all the foregoing several sorts
of spices separately in little leather purses, or in a box which is divided
into several drawers or repartitions.

Note also, that diverse persons do only make use of the single Pepper, in
stead of the other spices, although it must needs be granted that the composed
spices altogether must needs be more pleasing and Aromatic than the Pepper
alone.

CHAP. VIII.
To make salt spices.

CAuse your Salt to be well dried, and afterward beat to powder, of which
powder you shall mingle with your sweet spices aforementioned, the weight of
the said Salt being more than the weight of the spices four or five times; all
these you must preserve together in a place which is not at all humid or moist.

CHAP. IX.
The manner how to make the Pastry-Cooks varnish stuff with the which he
gives his Pies a color.

BEat together the yolks and whites of Eggs, just as if you would make an
Omelet or Pankake; and in case you will have your varnish to be strong and
good, it will be sufficient to beat one white of an Egg with two or three
yolks; and on the contrary, in case you will have your varnish Pale, you should
only need to take the yolks of Eggs and beat them with water.

Now the way to make use of the aforesaid wash or varnish, take a few feathers,
or a little Pencil, or brush, either of Silk, or Hoggs brussles, which said
brush or Pencil must be very soft, Wet the said Pencils or brussles in your
wash or varnish, and so use it at your discretion to wash or varnish your
Pastery works.

Now in case you will not go to the charge of Eggs to make your wash or
varnish, you may dissolve a little Saffron, or Marigold flowers in Milk; so
likewise in Lent you may make use of the Eggs of a Pike, or Jack, for your wash
or varnish, that being most proper for Lent, having no relation to flesh.

One thing you must observe, that the Pastrie-Cooks put honey in their washing
or varnishing for to spare Eggs.

CHAP. X.
The manner how to make Cream which the Pastry-Cooks use.

AS for example, take one half pint of good Milk, complete Milk, Maids
measure, which does weigh near about one pound and a half, of Cowes Milk.

Put the said Milk in a skillet on the fire, and take four Eggs, and whilst the
Milk is a warming on the fire, break two Eggs and beat the yolks and whites of
them together, with about half a pint of meal flower, in the self same manner,
as if it were to make broth, adding thereunto a little Milk; And when the meal
shall be well thinned, in such a sort as that there are no clots left, you
shall break the other two Eggs into it severally, that so they may be the
better mingled in this Composition.

And when you perceive the Milk does begin to boil, you must pour the said
Composition of Eggs and Meal thus steeped together with the Milk, as we ordered
it before; After which let the whole boil together over a small fire which
burns clear without any smoke at all; stir all this composure or mixture with
a spoon, just as if it were broth; And whilst it is a boiling, you must salt
it according to your own discretion, and add thereunto a quarter of a pound of
good pure fresh Butter.

This said Cream must be boiled within a quarter of an hour, and a half, or
thereabouts, after which you may pour it into a Porrenger, and so preserve it;
This Composition is by the Pastry-Cooks called Cream, and is by them made use
of in sevetal Pastry meats and other Cookenes.

CHAP. XI.
Another kind of Cream which is far delight fuller.

AS for example, take a quartern of sweet Almonds pilled, and beat them in a
Mortar, and add thereunto a good quartern, or almost half a pound of Sugar,
mingle them together, by adding now and then a little Rose Water.

When your Almonds shall be thus prepared, you must take half a pint of Milk,
according to the Milk-Maids measure, and four fresh Eggs, break your Eggs, and
put only the yolks of them in a Porringer, and make them thin with a little
Milk, after which you shall cast them into the Almond paste to be mingled
together.

And hence you must take as much flower, as four silver spoons will contain,
and make it liquid with some of your milk, in the same manner as if you were a
making of broth, and after that the said milk is perfectly soked and
dissolved, you may add the rest of the half pint of milk thereunto; and so
let it boil like unto a broth; Note, that you must spare a little of your
milk, that so you may put it in the Cream whilst it is a seething, in case it
should grow too thick.

Now when this said Cream shall be half boiled, pour into it your almonds which
you shall have prepared as aforesaid, and you must have a care to stir the
whole very well whilst it does boili, and to salt it likewise; And when as this
composition shall be well boiled and thickened to a competent consistency, you
must pour it into a Porenger, and let the said cream rest in the same manner
until the next day, or at least so long time until it be converted into a
gelly, insomuch that you may be able to cut it with a knile, just as you do
other gellie, paste, or dough.

CHAP. XII.
The manner to make Lenten Cream.

TAke a pint of good Cows milk, and cause it to be boiled, take also a little
more than half a pint of flower dissolved in milk, and pour it into the boiling
milk, after which add thereunto a good quarter of a pound of sweet Almonds,
peeled and beaten in a mortar together with a little Milk, and you must
observe, that they must be a little less beaten than those you intend to make
Macaroons, or little sweet Fritter-like buns withal, you must salt your said
Cream whilst it is a boiling, adding thereunto a quarter of a pound of fresh
butter, and you must always stir this composition whilst it is a boiling, and
toward the latter end you may thereunto add a small quantity of steeped
Saffron in milk, to give your said Cream a pleasant colout, and when your said
Cream shall be thus boiled to a sufficient consistency, you may dish it up in
porengers, until such time as it is fixed and settled, and so let it rest till
you have occasion to make use of it.

CHAP. XIII.
The manner how to make sugared Ice, or Frost.

TAke an earthen dish, and put hereinto, (as for example) a quarter of a pound
of sugar, powdered very fine, add thereunto the half of the white of an egg,
and a silver spoon full of Rose water, or more if it be requisite, Beat all
these ingredients together, until the whole be reduced to a consistency of a
thick Sirrop, or like unto clear broth.

The Pastry Cooks call this composition sugered Ice or Frost, because they make
use of it to gloss their pasties, and March-panes and their English pyes, upon
which it must be gently and suddenly spread, according to the directions which
shall hereafter be given thereon, either with the back of a little spoon or
with a knife, or with a pencill, in the same manner as your varnish is applied
to the Pastry-works.

CHAP. XIV.
Several general advertisements concerning the Pastry Art.

OBserve that in case you have but a few pasties or pyes to be baked in a
great Oven, you shall not therefore need to heat the whole Oven, but one part
thereof proportionably to the pyes you have to bake.

Curious house-wives and Lovers of this Art, have purposely small Ovens fitted
for this use at their own dwellings, and others are so exact, that they have
portative Ovens; which may be transported from place to place.

Your Cooks they for the most part make use of covered Tart pans, wherein they
bake their delicate Cakes, Tarts, and exquisite pyes.

Observe, That whenever we do speak of, or allege the word pound, as for
Example, a pound of butter, we do thereby mean the pound which does weigh
sixteen ounces or two marks of Goldsmiths weights, and thus of all weights
proportionably.

Observe also, that when we mention or allege a Pint, that we mean the pint
according to the Parisian measure, the which does contain the weight of two
pounds of water, within an ounce or thereabout, and almost the same quantity in
wine; The Choppin as they call it in France is half a pint, and the Septies as
they call it, is a quarter of a pint; And although these measures have several
appellations according to the respective places where they are used, However
you can never be mistaken in case you stick unto the weight of the measures
which are by me propounded.

Observe therefore, that when we speak of a pint of milk, that such a pint
most weigh three pounds within an ounce or there abouts, and all the other
measures proportionably, and consequently the Posson, as the French call it, of
Milk being the eighth part of a pint of milk, according to the milk-maides
measure, must weigh five ounces and a half, and three drams or thereabouts.

Observe also, That when we speak of a French Bushel of meal, we do thereby
understand the meal that is boulted, and without Branne, and such a bushel of
meal must weigh twelve or thirteen pounds, or thereabouts; And of the other
measures proportionably, viz.

That the half Bushel must weigh six pounds or a little more. The quarter of
the bushel must weigh three pounds full and good weight.

The Lition as they call it, or pint, being the sixteenth part of a bushel of
meal flower, must, weigh three quarters; That is to say twelve ounces.

And thus you have the general observations concerning the measures and
weights, which are commonly used in Pastry work.

CHAP. XV.
The manner how to put a Gammon of Bacon in Paste.

CAuse your Gammon of Bacon to be steeped in water, more or less, according
unto its bigness, thickness, and dryness.

In case a Gammon of Beacon be very big, well smoaked and dried, as your
Mayence Gammonds and Bayonne Gamons usually are, you must let them steep in the
water, for at least the space of twenty and four hours, or more; and then you
may give a guess, whether or no your Gammon be well steeped.

Which that you may the better be able to judge of, you shall take it out of
the said water, and make an opening or hole in the midst of the flesh, drawing
forth a little piece of it, and by tasting it, you may be able to judge
whether the salt and brine be sufficiently extracted; which having done, and
finding it according to your expectation, you shall thus prepare it for to be
put in paste.

In the first place therefore you must pare the top of your Gamon until you
come to the quick flesh, that so you may take off the superficies or upper part
of the flesh; and all that you judge to be too dry and salt, after which you
must also take away the skin or upper part and you must also cut off the
knuckle.

Now having prepared your Gammon in this manner, you must knead as much dough
as you shall judge requisite for your pasty; and you must make your crust at
least two inches thick or thereabouts, and upon the middle of the bottom of
your Pasty, you must make a bed or foundation of slices of fat Bacon.

This bed or foundation of fat bacon must be as broad as the whole Gammon of
Bacon, and upon the said Bed of fat Bacon you must place a good round handful
of parsley grossly shredded; after that you shall strew your Gammon with your
sweet spices, and consequently you shall place it upon the bed of fat Bacon and
parsley, which having done, you shall stick some cloves upon your Gammon, and a
few small pieces of Mace, after which upon the top of your Gammon, you shall
lay another Bed of parsley, and a bed of fat Bacon sliced, and five or six
Laurel leaves upon the fat bacon, and after that a good half pound of sweet
Butter, which you must so spread as that it may quite cover all the slices of
fat bacon which lie upon your Gammon.

Moreover, you shall knead as much paste or dough upon your kneading board as
will be requisite to make the Cover or Lid of your Pastle, which dough you
must morsten with your little brush, and immediately cover your pasty therewith;
and having thus quite completed your said Pasty, you must straightwayes put it
into the Oven, which must be heated in the same manner as if you were to bake
household bread.

If your Gammon be a great one, as aforesaid, it will require 3 hours boiling,
but if it be an indifferent one, two hours and a half will serve, or two
hours, according to its bigness.

When your Pasty has been in the Oven about half an hour, you must make three
or four holes in the Lidde, for to give your pasty vent, for otherwise it would
burst; And this you must observe in all great Pasties. Moreover, in case the
Pastycrust does suddenly get a too high color, and grows black, that is a sign
that your Oven is over heated, and that it burns your Pasty; wherefore you must
take away the Embers.

And on the contrary, if your Pasty attaines no color, that is a sign the Oven
is not hot enough, and which will force you to increase the Embers, that so
your Pasty may be thoroughly baked.

One day after your Pasty has been baked, you must stop up the holes which you
made in the Lidde, with some dough, lest your Pastie might bespoyled by the
letting in of Air at those holes, which would be the cause that your Pasty
would be subject to grow moldy, and would not keep at all.

CHAP. XVI.
The manner how to make a Pasty according to the fashion of the Baskes, or the
inhabitants near Bayonne upon the Fronteers of Spain.

CAuse a Gammon of Bacon of Bayonne, or of Mayence, to be steeped in water,
(an ordinary Gammon will serve turn) and when your said Gammon is thoroughly
steeped, you may take it out of the water, and cleanse it well on the top of
it, and cut off all the yellow rindes, until you come to the quick flesh, cut
off also the knuckle, and take off the skin, and in case the fat of the Bacon
be above an Inch thick, you must cut off the overplus, which will serve to be
cut into slices, and to stuff your pasty.

When as your Bacon is thus prepared, you may cause it to be half per boiled in
water, with some few Bay leaves, and other sweet herbs; And when it is half
boiled or thereabouts, you may take it out of the liquor, and may place it upon
a dresser-board that it may dry, you may also take out the bones of the said
Gammon when it is half boiled, especially if you intend to have your Pasty to
be eaten hot.

After your Gammon shall be well dried, you may prepare a Ryepaste, or dough,
or a paste of white meal, without any butter at all; you may also make this
pasty like unto a venson-pasty if you please, but you had better make a pie of
it to be presently served up, by reason of the thickness of your Gammon;
Wherefore to make the better hot pasty of this your Gammon, you must make up
your crust in a round form, of a sufficient bigness, and give it at least half
a foot in height, and make it above an inch thick, after which you shall line
the inside of your pastie with a lay of great slices of fat Bacon, like unto
that Bacon wherewithal you are wont to lard your Capons and Turkies, upon
which Bacon you must strew a little parsley grossly chopped, then you shall powder
your Gammon with two or three fingers full of sweet pices, two fingers full of
white beaten Pepper, and two fingers full of beaten Mace, and then you may
place your Gammon upon the lay of your fat Bacon, and you shall stick upon your
Gammon a matter of a dozen Cloves, with as many small pieces of Mace sliced,
and Cinnamon, whereunto you must add a couple of bruised Onions, a small
quantity of Parsley and Time, half a pound of hoggs grease, half a pound of Beef
marrow, and half a pound of good fresh butter, which is well softened and
spreaded, insomuch that the said butter may cover the whole top of the said
Gammon; And on the top of the said Butter, you shall again strew a good fingers
full of white pepper, and as much beaten Cinnamon, upon all which you must again
lay some slices of fat bacon, and two or three Bay Leaves.

When your Pastie is thus seasoned and prepared, you must cover it with a lid
of Dough, which cover must be at least an inch thick, after which you must
varnish or burnish your said lid, and you must pierce it in the middle and
place upon it a little Cap or Crown of Dough made like unto a Socket, in case
the Pastie be to be eaten hot; after which you may place your Pastie upon a
sheet or two of Paper to put it into the Oven.

This Pastie must be at the least four and twenty or thirty hours a baking;
and your Oven must be a little less heated than if it were to bake brown bread
or Rye bread.

After your Pastie shall have been five or six hours in the Oven, you must take
it out of the Oven, and place it upon your dresser board, and you must guess
by the lid which you may take off, to see whether or no your Pastie be full of
liquor or of sauce; for in case you find that the liquor is diminished, you
must fill up your Pastie again with good flesh broth, which has been made
without Herbs or salt; and in case you have any Mutton gravy, you may mingle it
with your said broth, after which you may cover your Pasty again, and put it
into the Oven immediately, and every five hours or thereabouts, you must take
your Pastie out of the Oven again to see whether it be not grown dry, to the
end to fill it up with broth as aforesaid; and in this manner you must
continue to supply your Pasty with broth, until the meat which is in your
said Pastie shall be rotten baked.

Three or four hours before your said Pastie shall be baked, you may fill it up
with Lamb-stones, sweetbreads, Muscherons, and such other like Imbellishments
which will render it the more savoury and peasing.

So likewise must you observe that whilst your Pastie is baking, you must
always keep your Oven heated, to which purpose you may now and then put hot
Embers into the Oven, at a distance from your Pastie, and sometimes
faggot-sticks well lighted.

Now in case you shall have made your Pasty venson wife, that is to say, in a
long sorm, you must prepare and fit it in the self same manner, as abovesaid,
and overabove what has been prescribed, you must moreover place a lay of
parsley both above and beneath your meat.

Nor must you forget to make three or four holes in the Lid of your Pasty to
give it vent; as for Venson Pasties, you need not to make any Cap or Crown upon
them.

CHAP. XVII.
To make a Gammon Pastie after the Turkish Mode.

YOu must cause your Gammon to be prepared as before, and when it shail have
been half perboyled in water, and that you have caused the bones to be taken
out, you shall lard the lean part of your Gammon with slices of fat Bacon
powdered with sweet spices, the slices of Bacon shall be as big as a Goose
quill, after which you shall powder the Gammon it self with a few sweet spices,
and with a little beaten white Pepper; after which you may prepare a paste or
dough of white crust, as in the foregoing Chapter. Those who are very curious
indeed, do most commonly make use of half-leaved paste to make their Pastie
withal, chiefly in the winter season, because that kind of paste as then has
the better support; but you must observe, that in case you should make your
paste of whole-leaved dough, it would be very difficult to be wrought.

Having made your paste, you must line it, or fill it within with slices of fat
Bacon, a little Parsley and Time, after which put in your Gammon, upon which
stick a few cloves, and a dozen slices of Cinnamon, and woe good fingers full of
beaten Cinnamon, add thereunto a little Parsely, a bruised Onion, and half a
quarter of a pound of Pineapple seeds or kernils, and half a quarter of a
pound of Currants, a quarter of a pound of Pistaches peeled, one quarter of a
preserved Lemmon, cut in small slices, a good quarter and a half of powder
Sugar, a half pound of fresh butter, a half pound of sweet suet, and half a
pound of marrow, and upon all this a great slice of fat Bacon, a Bay leaf or
two, and a thought of Time; close your said Pastie, and make a Cap or Crown
upon the lid thereof, and cause the said Pastie to be baked in the self same
manner, as in the aforesaid Chapter; look by whiles to see whether the liquor
be wanting, and have a care to fill it up as aforesaid.

Three or four hours before your Pastie is baked, you may add thereunto some
Muscherons, and Lambstones with sweet-breads; and two hours before you draw
your said Pastie out of the Oven, you may pour a sweet sauce into it, composed
of a glass of white Wine, of a quarter of a pound of Sugar, of a little beaten
Cinnamon, and if you please you may add a little Verjuice or Vinegar thereunto.

Observe, that in case this your Pastie be not all eaten at one meal, you may
cause it to be heated several times; and in case your liquor or sauce should
chance to fail, you may supply that defect with broth or Mutton gravy, which
you may add thereunto.

CHAP, XVIII.
The manner how to put all kind of Venson in Paste, either Stags flesh, wild
Boares, Bucks and Does, or any other gross Meats, as a brisket of Veal, a but
tock of Beef, a leg or any other joint of Mutton.

So likewise the manner how to make a Hare Pie, a Conny Pie, a Goose Pie, a
Turkie-Cook Pie, a Duck Pie, a Partridge Pie, a Pigeon Pie of old or young
Pigeons; and finally all other kind of wild or tame foul whatsoever.
YOu must generally observe, that no kind of flesh whatsoever may be put in
paste before it be mortified; Therefore you must let that flesh which ye do
intend to put in paste be sufficiently mortified, which may be done, by
hanging it in the Air, or by burying of it under ground for the space of twenty
and four hours; after which you must beat the said flesh-meat more or less
with a wooden rowler or pestel, according to the said fleshes thickness and
hardness, which is a third way to mortify it; so likewise must you observe,
that Beef and Mutton must be more beaten and mortified than any other flesh
whatsoever.

Observe likewise, that it is requisite to take out the superfluous and great
bones of such flesh as you intend to put into paste, as for example out of the
leg or shoulder of Mutton; and as for the remaining bones which are in the said
flesh, you must burst and break them at least, in case you intend not to take
them out quite; in the like manner you take out the breast bone of a
Turky-cock, and of other foul in the like manner.

Observe also, that in case your flesh which you intend to pastrie up, has
great nerves and hard sinnews, or tough skins, you must take all that away; as
for example, from a shoulder or leg of Mutton you must take off the skin; in
the like manner, if you intend to make a Hare-pie, and that you apprehend it
may be an old and hard one, you must strip off its uppermost skin before you
lard it.

Moreover, you must observe, that in case there be hollow places in such flesh
as you intend to pastrie up, as there is in a Hare, and in several foul, you
must bruise and break those bones which cause that same hollowness, and so make
your flesh even and smooth; As for example, the Maw of a Turki-Cock, which you
must cut and flash at every four fingers distance, that so you may the better
be able to lard it.

Now in case your Venson, or other gross Viands, which you do intend to put in
paste, should be somewhat tainted, or in case they should be warm eaten, cause
water and salt to be boiled together, and let your said Venson, or other gross
meats steep therein, as in a broth, and having so steeped for a while, draw it
forth again, and hang it up to dry, that so the said liquor may run out.

Now your Viands having been prepared according to the several foregoing
prescriptions, you may lard them very close with great pieces of fat Bacon,
bigger or lesser, according to the proportion and quality of your several sorts
of Viands; some slices of Bacon as thick and as long as your little finger, for
Venson, Beef, and Mutton, others less, according to your own discretion; and it
will be requisite that you steep your larding Bacon some pretty while before
you use it, in a little Vinegar seasoned with salt; and before you lard your
Viands with them, powder them with beaten white Pepper, or with your sweet
spices, which you please.

And in case your Viands be thick, and of the length of half a foot, or
thereabouts, as for example, a Brisket of Veal, or a Turky-Cock, and the like,
either lance them, or cut them with Trenches at every four inches distance or
thereabouts, in such a wise however that all the skin, or upper part of the
flesh may remain whole, and by the means of these deep Trenches you may easily
come to lard all the parts of your said Viands, which cannot be otherwise
done; Besides that, your Viands remaining entire and whole, would be the more
difficult to be baked, and the sauce or liquor of your Pastie would not be
able to penetrate or pass through your flesh, but with a great deal of
difficulty, in case it were not lanced in the same manner as it has been
proposed.

Some there be that do steep their Beef, Mutton, Veal, and other Viands which
they do intend to put in paste two or three hours in Verjuice or Vinegar
seasoned with salt and Pepper, or with sweet spices, and with some sweet herbs,
and the which must be done, as soon as the said Viands shall have been beaten
with the Pestel or Rowling-pin, and after the said Viands shall have been
larded, and when you shall have drawn it forth of the said liquor, you must
perfect the putting of it into paste in the following manner.

Your flesh being ready to be put into paste, you must season it according to
your own discretion with your salt spices, in such a manner as that your said
Viands do well retain the salt or season, to which end you must powder them
thoroughly on all sides, and in case it be a Foul or any other flesh that is
hollow, you must as then powder it inwards, and before you powder it on the
thighs and back, you must make some lancements or inlets therein, to the end
that your said spices may the better hold or fasten, and may have the better
operation.

Your Viands being thus seasoned, you must place them upon the one end of your
Dough or paste, either framed of Rye crust, or of wheaten or white, which you
please, at discretion as aforesaid, which said paste must be at least an inch
in thickness, and long enough to make up the whole Pastie.

Your Viand or Venson, or the like, being placed upon one of the ends of your
Paste, you may stick therein some few Cloves, and after that you may fill it up
with some slices of fat Bacon, unto which you may also add some Bay Leaves,
and over and above all these things you may also apply some fresh butter spread
over the whole pasty, as aforesaid in the foregoing Chapter.

Observe or note, that to make a good Hare, or Turky-pye, or a pie with four
Ducks, you must have at least a quarter and a half, or much about half a peck
and a quarter, or three quarters of a Bushel of meal; moreover two pounds of
butter, and if so be you will have the crust to be very fine, you may put
therein two pounds and a half, or three pounds of butter, yet however note this
also, that the crust being so fat may be subject to burst in the Oven.

Now in case your pasty be of Venson, or of any other viand that is not fat, as
for example, in case you have a mind to accomodate a Hare excellently well, you
must needs have one half pound, or three quarters of a pound of fresh butter to
wrap the Hare in, and at least one pound and a half, or two pounds of fat
bacon, as well to lard your viand; as to cover it after it is Empasted.

But and if the Meat you intend to put in paste, be not over dry nor lean; As
for example, suppose it be a Turky-cock, well fatned, or a good fat joint of
mutton, you shall only stand in need of a good quarter of a pound of fresh
butter, to enclose the said viand withal, and good store of fat Bacon, to lard
it to boot, wherein you must not fail.

Another observation you may take along with you, that some pastry-men do make
use of sweet suet, instead of fresh butter, to raise their paste withal.

Finally, So soon as your flesh shall be well and thoroughly seasoned with all
the requisite spices, and ingredients aforenamed, and that it shall be well
lined with butter below and above, you may as then turn up the end of the paste
which is left, over the whole, only moistening the end of the paste which
remains, to refresh it, and join well the sides, and when you have thus well
joined or added the sides, you may give it what shape you will, after which you
may burnish your Pie or Pasty, and immediately after you may put it to the Oven.

Observe, that your Oven must be almost as hot, as is prescribed in the
precedent Chapter, and thus these foregoing Pasties, will be sufficiently baked
in two hours space provided they be not extraordinary great and thick ones.
And when your said Pasties shall be thus well and thoroughly baked, and cooled
again, you must not forget to stop the holes which you made in their liddes.
For the reasons before alleged.

By reason that in case you do not make the said holes in the Lidde of your
said Pastie, within a little while after it has been in the Oven, it will
split or burn by reason of the heat.

CHAP. XIX.
To make a Royal Pasty which is to be eaten hot.

TAke a good Leg of Mutton, strip the skin off from it, take out the bones, and
the sinnews, after which beat the flesh, to mortify it, and then cause it to
be well chopped, and as you chop it, you must season it well with salt spices.

Now your Meat being thus well chopped, you must make up your Pasty of
Rie-crust, and give it at least two inches in thickness, proportionably
according unto the bighesse of your Pasty, and raise the paste thereof high
enough.

You must line the bottom and sides thereof, with fat Bacon in slices, and in
the bottom you must also place a good handful of ox suet, which is small
minced, and thereunto add your Meat, after it shall have been well minced, and
in case chestnuts be in season, you may add thereunto a reasonable proportion,
after they shall have been first half roasted.

When your Meat shall be thus in your paste, you must add thereunto one
handful of Beef suet well minced, and about half a pound of beef marrow cut
into small pieces, about the bigness of a wall-nut. All which composition you
must cover or overspread with some slices of fat Bacon.

Finally, You shall cover this Pastie with rye crust at least a finger breaths
thick, and you must make a hole in the said lidde.

Such a like pasty as this, must be at least 20 or four and twenty hours in
the Oven, which said Oven you must all the while keep shut, to the end that it
may yield a sufficient heat, whereby the said Pasty may be thoroughly baked;
which said Pasty you must oftentimes take out of the said Oven, to supply it
with broth or gravy, as often as it shall be wanting.

To which purpose take the bones and the skin, and the sinews, which you have
cut away from the said Leg of Mutton, bruise them indifferently, and
afterward boil them together with the said skin and sinnews, for the space of
one hour and a half in water without salt, and when as the said Liquor and
Broth shall be concocted in such a manner as that there shall be but a pint
left, you shall make use of it in the following manner, viz.

After your Royal Pasty shall have been about the space of four hours in the
Oven, you must draw it, and you must pour thereinto with a Funnel, about the
quantity of a quarter of a pint of the said liquor or broth, being well
heated; After which you shall again put your Pasty into the Oven, and within
two or three hours, you shall draw it, and you shall see whether or no it does
want any sauce or liquor, in case whereof you shall add more sauce unto it,
and in this manner you shall draw your said Pasty at several times, till it
has continued in the Oven for the space of fifteen or sixteen hours, when as
you shall again draw it forth of the Oven, and shall take off its Lidde, for to
embellish your Pasty with the Yolks of Eggs; hard boiled cut in quarters, you
may also add thereunto Mucherons, the Gils and combs of Cocks, and other-like
sweetbreads, you may also thereunto add a small Clove of Garlic, and a drop
or two of vinegar; for to make the sauce more pleasing and tart, observe also
that your Lambs-stones, and sweet-breads, must be seasoned with your sweet
spices.

After which you must return the said Pasty into the Oven again, and you shall
let it remain there till it be thoroughly baked, at least three hours
afterward, and you must have a care that the sauce or liquor thereof be
perfectly consumed before you take your, Pasty out of the Oven, for good and
all; So likewise must you have a care to maintain the fire in the said Oven, in
such manner as that there may be a sufficient heat to bake your said Pastie
without the burning of it.

When this like Pastie is thoroughly baked, you shall take out of it the Clove
of Garlike which you did put into it; before you do serve it up to the Table,
and after that you shall fasten on the Lidde of your Pastie again, that so your
Pastie may be brought whole to the Table; and if so be the said Pie be not
eaten up at one meal, you may cause it to be heated again in the Oven, until
such time as it is quite expended.

CHAP. XX.
To make a Pasty and a Tart of a Capon, of a Breast of Veal, of Pigeons, of
Larks, and of other sorts of small Fowls, to be eaten hot.

PRepare your Pastie Crust which must be very fine, make it of a proportionable
height and bigness, of that which you do intend to put into it, and have a care
to make the middle of the bottom a little thicker than the rest of the Pasty;
fill up the bottom or line it with a little Beef suet Minced, and some marrow,
in case it be to be had, or else instead thereof put therein a little sat
Bacon small shred, the pieces not exceeding the bigness of a Pease.

Afterward take the meat, which you do intend to put into the said pasty,
having first washed it with warm water, and having entirely cleansed it, and
dried it that it retain no moisture; And if it be a breast of Mutton, you may
make it become extreme white by perboyling of it never so little in the said
hot water; And the Meat being well wyped and dried, you must cut into several
pieces about two fingers in thickness, and you must also cut the ribs in
twain. Thus much for Veal.

But and if it be a Capon, or any other sort of foul, or any kind of Venson
which you intend to put in paste, you may flatten its breast, bruise its bones,
and cut some lansements in its breast; Moreover you must cut off its neck, the
extremities of its wings and its legs, and afterward put the Meat into your
Pastie, after which you must season it with your salt spices, and at last you
may fill up your Pie with a good lump of butter, and with slices of fat bacon,
you may also if you please, add hereunto some Lambsstones, Cox-combes, some
sparagus, some Hartichoak stools, some whole boiled yolks of Eggs, or in
several quarters, some Mucherons, some verjuice in the grape, and some parsley
very small chopped, and also some small sausegees, above all which ingredients
you must lay a few slices of fat Bacon, and a good quantity of butter, after
which your said Pasty being thus furnished and garnished, you may close it up,
and you must wrap it up in brown paper to sustain or uphold the crust, and to
hinder it from bursting in the Oven.

You must make a hole in the midst of the Lidde, and after you shall varnish or
burnish your Pasty, and so you may put it into the Oven, giving it a like heat
unto your Pasties, which are to be served up hot to Table, according to the
foregoing prescription, and as it shall be more particularly declared in the
ensuing Chapter.

These kind of pastys will be sufficiently baked within an hour and a halfes
time more or less, according to the bigness of your pastie, as also
proportionably unto the heat of your Oven.

You may also make these kind of Pasties, in a Tart Pann, with a leaved Crust,
chiefly if you do garnish it with Pigeons.

CHAP. XXI.
To make a Pasty with a sweet Sauce.

NOw in case you do desire to make one of these self same Pasties, and to give
it a sweet sauce, you must draw it forth to the Ovens Mouth, by that Time it is
half baked, and you must put a Funnell into the hole which is in the middle of
the said Pasties Lidde, and you shall pour thereinto a glassefull of
Hypocrisse well sweetened, or as much as you shall judge requisite according to
the bigness of your Pastie, or otherwise a good quantity of melted Butter, in
which Sugar has been dissolved, and a little Cinnamon, more or less of each
of them according to the bigness of your said Pasty.

After which you shall put your said Pastie into the Oven again and shall let
it be well and thoroughly baked.

CHAP. XXII.
To make a Pastie to be eaten immediately, being served up hot.

AS for example, take almost a pound weight of Veal, or of fresh Pork, or of
Mutton, or of Beef, the brisket of Veal is the most properest piece to make
these Pasties of; take likewise one pound of Beef suet, which is fresh, or
rather marrow, mince or chop all these very small together, and in the choping
of them, you may powder them with salt and spices, and after that you may
thoroughly chop them small, you may also if you please mince a few Leeks, or a
little Parsley amongst your said Meat and Suet.

When your meat is thus minced, you may add thereunto the white and the yolk,
or the white alone of a new Egg, and you may the better mingle it with your
minced meat with a wooden fork, to the end that the whole composition may be
the better mingled and knitted together, unto which you may add some few
Pineapple seeds or kernels, and currants, in case you be so minded, or do
desire to have your pasty very delicate.

After which you may prepare a paste of fine dough, of a round form, and you
may fill it up half full with your minced meat, which having well plained, and
pressed close to your Crust, you may lay thereon a few sparagus, or some pieces
of Hartichoak bottoms, or Muscherons, yolks of Eggs boiled hard, and cut in
quarters, some slices of Ox tongues, in case you have them at hand, some sheeps
Plucks, some Pistaches, and such like other Lamb-stones and Sweet-breads, such
as you can get, you may also add thereunto some pieces of marrow amongst your
other Lamb-stones and Sweet-breads; and also Chestnuts half roasted; And in the
season, of Verjuice in Grapes, you may add thereunto about a dozen Grapes,
more or less according unto the bigness of your Pastie; finally you may proceed
to fill up the rest of the Pie with your minced meat, and you may presle it
down gently upon your Lamb-stones or Sweet-breads.

In case you make a very high Pasty indeed, you may place therein several
lays of minced meat, and season it only (as it has been already prescribed)
with nothing but Junkets, as Lamb-stones, sweet-breads, and the like.

Cover well your said Pastie and wash it, after you shall have made a small
hole in the upper part of its Cap or Crown.

Now if so be the crust of your Pasty be very fine and high, you must put a
stay of gray course paper, round about the body of your Pasty; this said stay
must be fastened to the edge of your Pastie, and rubbed with good fresh butter
on the side which is to touch your Pasty crust, after which you must put a
piece of pack thread to tie it unto the Pastie.

When as your Pastie shall be thus prepared, garnished, stuffed and covered,
you may put it into the Oven; Nor needs the Oven to be so very much heated as
when you intend to bake greater Pasties; For these kind of Pies will be
sufficiently baked in the space of a good half hour, unless they be
extraordinary big; and in case they have a proportionable heat allotted unto
them; moreover according to the greatness or littleness of the said Pies,
they will require a greater or lesser time to be baked.

Note, that you may very well make one of these Pies in a Tartpan, and you may
also make the crust leaved, or very thin if you please.

CHAP. XXIII.
To make a Pie of Cockney ovall minced Pies.

THese kind of Pies must be made of the brisket of Veal, or likewise of other
meat minced with Suet, and seasoned in the same manner as your former Pies
were; wherefore a Pie of Cockney minced Pies differs only from the foregoing
Pies, only that the former are made in a round, and covered with a hovil or
high paste; and these latter are flat, uncovered and made after the figure of
an Ovall; moreover these Ovall minced Pies have another particular property,
that they must be sprinkled and seasoned with a white sance, made with
Verjuice, and some few yolks of Eggs beaten together; this sauce is put into an
Oval mince Pie, when as it is well baked, after which you must again put your
said Pie into the Oven for about the space of one quarter of an hour, to the
end that this said sauce may thicken.

Observe, that you must fasten the meat of your said Ovall mince Pie, and the
crust together; that is, you must press it with your fingers close to the
crust, but chiefly round the sides, that so your paste may be the firmer and
faster.

Now, when as you have prepared your first lay of meat, you must cover it with
Sparagus, and with other Lamb-stones and Sweet-breads, amongst which (if so be
they are in season) you must put some Spanish or French Chestnuts, half roasted,
and some Verjuice in Grapes when it is to be had, after which you may grate a
little Nutmeg over the Lamb-stones and Sweet-breads, and you shall again cover
these Lambstones and Sweet-breads with a lay of Minced meat, prepared and
seasoned as abovesaid; and after you shall have somewhat pressed the said meat
upon the Lamb-stones and Sweet-breads, you may make up the sides of your
Pastie, and you may stiffen them by a shoulder of paste which you should add
thereunto on the inside, and you shall make in such a manner, as that it may
somewhat overtop the meat; and then you must cut off the said top of paste
which does touch the meat of your Pastie, and add thereunto some few small
puddings or rowles which you shall have purposely prepared of your mince meat,
you may also grate a little Nutmeg upon your said Pasty, just as it is in a
readiness to be put into the Oven.

Cause your said Pie to be baked, and when it is almost thoroughly baked, you
shall draw it to the Ovens mouth, to pour into it the white sauce, of which
we gave you a hint and prescription before, and after that, return your Pie
into the Oven again to be perfectly baked.

You may also make one of these Pies in a Tart-pan, and you may also make the
Crust of leaved paste as aforesaid.

CHAP. XXIV.
To make a Pastie or Pie of Lamb stones, Sweet-breads, and other Junkets.

YOu must make use of minced meat to make these Pies as well as the former, and
you must season them in the same fashion, as for the foregoing Ovall minced
Pies, either to be kept cold, or those which are to be served up hot; but you
must observe, that in these Lamb-stones and Sweet-breads pies, you must put
less minced meat than in the others, and more Lamb stones and Sweetbreads, and
also more suet and marrow betwixt the lays of the Lamb-stones aad
Sweet-breads; And you must garnish the whole with small rowls or puddings made
of the same minced meat, after which you may grate a little Nutmeg over it,
after which you may close your pie, and put it into the Oven.

CHAP. XXV.
The manner how to make a Tart of Lamb-stones and Sweetbreads.

YOu must only make the foregoing pie in a Tart pan well garnished with all
manner of Junkets, and let your crust be made of leaved paste, which will
produce a rare Tart.

CHAP. XXVI.
Another manner how to make a Tart of minced meat.

TAke either Veal or other good meat which is well perboyled if it be a good
Capon it is the better, flea it, take out the sinnews and the bones, after
which mince the meat thereof very small, and pound it in a Mortar, add
thereunto a little fresh Cheese, and as much old Cheese grated or shredded very
small, put therein six Eggs well beaten, and as much marrow as you shall think
fitting, or in stead thereof, as much fat Porke small shreded, add and mingle
these things all together, and season them with salt well powdered, as also
with a little spice, or beaten Cinnamon.

When you have thus prepared your ingredients, you may put in a Tart-pan a
paste of leaved dough, garnish it sufficiently with your puddings or rowls,
after which cover it with a lid of paste, make a small hole on the top, and let
the said Tart be sufficiently baked.

CHAP. XXVII.
To make a Pie after the Cardinals manner.

SPread abroad into a little Tart-pan, or in a white lattin square Pie-pan,
leaved paste or dough as thick as almost a half Crown, and let it hang over the
Tart-pan on all sides, fill up this pasty sufficiently with raw Veal, or any
raw Fouls flesh whatsoever, or if you please let it be perboyled; that is to
say, let it be above half boiled, and let it be very small minced, with the
self same quantity of Marrow, or Beef suet, and let this composition be
seasoned with salt spices; you may likewise add thereunto some Pineapple
kernels, and a few Currants, as also a few morsels of the yolks of Eggs hard
boiled.

When as this your said pie shall be well garnished and filled, you must
curiously cover it with a crust of leaved paste, and then cause it to be put
into the Oven.

Some Pastrie men do put Sugar into these kind of Pies, as also a sweet sauce
when as they are half baked; moreover if these pies be but little ones, you
may cause them to be baked in a little brass Oven which is portable.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The manner to make a Pastie according to the English manner.

TAke a young Hare which is very tender, which is uncased; take off all its
skin, cut off its head, and feet, flatten its stomach, and beat the said Hares
flesh also very well, to the end that it may become the shorter, make little
slashes in the back and thighs of the said Hare, but let them be long and deep
enough; or else if you please you may cut the said Hare all in pieces, and
afterward lard the flesh thereof with small slices of fat Bacon.

When your Hare shall be thus prepared, you must make your Pasty of a sufficient
bigness, and let it be at least two good inches thick, place it upon a sheet
of paper, and upon the end of your said pasty, you must place a lay of Marrow,
or of beef suet, or of fat bacon very small shreded; this lay or bed must be
as long and as broad as the whole Hare, and season this lay of marrow and suet
with salt spices, after which you may lay the Hare upon this bed of marrow,
with its belly downwards and if so be you have cut the said Hare all asunder,
you must place all the several parts in their proper places again, after which
you must season the said Hare with salt spices, and on the top of the said Hare
you must again place a lay of marrowor suet Minced, and afterward garnish your
said Pie with Lambsstones and sweet-breads of all sorts, with Currants, with
Pine-kernells, well washed, with the ryne of Lemmons preserved, cut in small
slices; add hereunto likewise small morcels of marrow, Muscherons, Pistaches,
if you have any Calves reigns, Cocks combs perboyled, the yolks of hard Eggs,
quartered, or whole, and Capers, if there be any to be had.

You must mingle all these Lambsstones and sweet-breads together, and season
them with a little salt spices, and after all these Lambs stones and Sweet
breads, shall be placed upon the Hare; You may cover it with a slight lay of
minced suet, and put some few slices of fat Bacon upon it, upon which you may
spread all over half a pound of fresh butter, which you must place upon the
whole, and above the butter you must put a good thumping handful of sugar.

When your Pie shall be thus prepared, and furnished, cover the hole with the
other end of your paste which remained unused; and when your pie shall be well
covered and fashioned, you must wash it on the outside or burnish it, and so
cause it to be put into the Oven upon a sheet of paper, and have a care not to
break it.

After this pie shall have been in the Oven, for the space of one half hour,
you must make a hole in the middle of the upper crust, that so it may not burn;
And you must keep the Oven as if it were for a Turky-pye.

This said pie may be very well baked in two hours time.

Some Curious pallats do steep half a grain of Musk with a drop or two of
Rose Water, and do pour it into the said Pie in their filling of it up, but
the sent of the Musk does for the most part ostend the Female sex, and some
Males too; wherefore it is far better omitted; and deemed best not at all to
put in any.

When this your Pie shall be well baked, you must draw it forth of the Oven,
and you shall spread gently upon the crust thereof, frosty sugar, which may be
done with a knife, or with the back of a silver spoon, and this said frosty
Sugar, must be as thin almost as a sheet of paper.

So soon as your said Pie shall be washed, or burnisht with this Frost, you
must put it again into the Ovens Mouth, for the space of a half quarter of an
hour, to make the said frost dry; And you must note that the heat must be
very moderate, that so the said Frost may remain white, for if the Oven should
prove to be over hot, the said Frost would turn red or yellow, as soon
therefore as your said Frost is dried, you must draw your Pasty out of the
Oven, and you must serve it up to the Table as speedily as you can, least that
your Pie should take cold, and that as then the frost should melt.

CHAP. XXIX.
To make a Pasty according to the Sweisses fashion.

MAke a Pasty of half leaved Dough, and make the crust at least an Inch thick,
put into the bottom thereof a good handful of minced veal with suet, after
which you may garnish your said Pie with a Hare, or Conny, cut asunder; season
the meat thereof with salt spyces, add good store of Spanish Ches-nuts
thereunto, Muscherons, a Leek, or an Onion bruised, or cut in quarters, and
some sorts of Junkets, if they are to be had, after which, place thereon a
handful ofminced veal, with suet, and six or 7 rouls of veal, afterward one
half pound of butter, a quarter of a pound of marow and a quarter of a pound of
beef suet minced, and Lastly, Some few slices of fat Bacon on the Top of all.

When this your pie shall be well garnished and furnished, you must cover it
with a lidde of leaved paste, as thick as the half of the little finger, wash
or burnish the said lidde, and make a hole in the middle of it; after which you
shall do well to lap up all your said pie in a Buttered paper, which must be
as high as the pasty it self, and you must tie on the said paper that it may
not fall off.

Put your pie into the Oven upon a white paper, and give it an indifferent
heat, as for a Custard.

The said pie will require at least two hours baking.

CHAP. XXX.
To make a passing delicate Giblet Pie.

YOu must cause your Giblets or Offalls of all kind of fowl to be very well
picked, and cleansed, as for example, the necks which are cut into morcels, the
wings, the gizzards, and livers; out of all which you must take all that is
bitter; wash all these several parcels very well in 3 or 4 several waters, and
afterward let them dry and drop out again; you may likewise cut into moreels
the Lights and Livers of a Lamb, or of a sucking pig, after you have taken that
which is bitter out of them; that is to say, the Gall; and you must have a care
well to wash the said Geather after you have cut the same into pieces.

Afterward you must put these several pieces into a clean wooden platter, and
season them well with salt spices, with Parsley, and with Bacon small sliced or
minced; Hereunto you may add some few Muscherons, and verjuice in Grapes when
they are in season, or Cardus roots, or Sparagus, or else some Hartichoak
bottoms cut into small slices.

When all these ingredients shall be in a readiness, you may make up your
paste or dough, which must be made of very fine meal, and you must give it a
thickness of about half a Crown, more or less, according to the bigness of
your Pastie, which you must afterward fill with the Giblets aforenamed, being
seasoned in the self same manner as it has been already prescribed; upon which
Giblets you must place some slices of fat Bacon, and a good lump of fresh
Butter, which you must spread according to the bigness of your said Pastie.

Put a lid of paste upon your said Pie, and wash, or burnish it, and if so be
you think it fitting, you may wrap it in a sheet of paper well rubed with
butter; forget not to make a hole in the lid of the Pie, and cause your said
Pastie to be put into the Oven, and when it is baked you must pour a little
white sauce into it through a Funnel, after which you must put your Pie into
the Oven again for a pretty while, until the sauce or liquor thereof (which
must be composed of the yolks of Eggs, beaten with a little Verjuice or
Vinegar) be well thickened or come to a competent body, after which you must
draw it for good and all.

CHAP. XXXI.
To make a Mince Pie according to the Italian fashion, with leaved or fine
Paste.

PRepare your leaved or fine paste, and give it an inch thickness, in the
bottom whereof you shall place a lay of about a hand full of minced Veal and
Suet together, unto which you may add three Partridges, or old Pigeons, having
cut off their feet and legs, the wings and necks, and beaten the breasts flat,
which said fowl you shall lard in several places in the self same manner as it
was prescribed in the larding of a Venson Pastie; after which you may season
them with your salt spices, And put unto them peeled Chestnuts, Pine apple
kernels and currants, a little handful of each, three yolks of Eggs hard
boiled, and cut through the middle, a small quantity of beaten Cinnamon, and a
quarter and a half a pound of Sugar; a slice or two of preserved Lemmon peel,
and hereunto you may add some Mouscherons, and Lambstones and Sweet-breads, if
they are to be had; And if so be you are not minded to put Partridges or
Pigeons into your said Pie, you may make the same of any other meat; as for
example, a Conny cut into several pieces, and well larded.

Moreover to keep a better nourishment, or to augment the meat of this your
Pastie, you may add unto all these ingredients one handful of minced Veal,
with Marrow, or Suet, a quarter of a pound of each, and some slices of fat
Bacon on the top of the whole; which said Pastie being thus well filled up, you
must cover the same with a lid of leaved or thin paste, not above the thickness
of your little finger, or thereabouts, wash or varnish your said lid, and make
a hole in the top of your said lid.

Observe, that you must of necessity wrap your whole Pastie in a buttered
paper, which must be as high as your said Pastie, and you must tie it about
your pie with packthred, to preserve your Pastie the better. After which, cause
your pie to be put into the Oven, being placed upon a sheet of white paper, and
you must give your Oven an indifferent warm harth, as you are used to do unto a
Custard; This Pastie will require at least two hours and a half baking.

When your said Pie is almost baked, you must cause it to be drawn forth of the
Oven, and you must pour thereinto with a Funnel, through the hole which you
had left in the lid, a sweet sauce, made with a quarter of a pound of Sugar,
and almost a quarter of a pint of white wine, whereinto you must infuse a
little Cinnamon powdered; After which you must put your Pie into the Oven
again, and there leave it at least half an hour to thicken the said sweet sauce.

CHAP. XXXII.
To make small minced Pies according to the Spanish fashion.

YOu must make your paste very fine, and to one pint of flower, add four
yolks of Eggs thereunto, and when your said paste shall be thus prepared, you
shall form the crust of your little minced Pies, not above two sheets of paper
in thickness, or a little more, according to the bigness of your Pies, and
you shall fill them up with the following minced meat. Viz.

Mince very small all the flesh of a Capon, a quarter of a pound of fresh
Porck, and a quarter of a pound of Mutton, two Calves kidneys, a quantity of
fat Bacon, good marrow and Beef Suet, of each one a quarter of a pound, a few
Leeks or Onions, and great store of Mouscherons, both salt and sweet spices at
difcretion; All which ingredients you must mince together.

You must garnish, or fill your pies with these minced meats, and after that,
make up your Pies with fine flower lids wrought; and having washed or burnisht
your said lids, you may cause these your little Spanish minced pies to be well
and thoroughly baked.

CHAP. XXXIII.
To make small minced Pies according to the Princess fashion.

TAke sugared paste and make little pie pastes of them in the least form, which
you can possibly make, you must make up these in little Tart-pans in the same
manner as you would make your pies according to the Cardinals manner; Fill up
these little pies with perboyled or roasted flesh which is very tender, as the
flesh of a Capon very small minced, together with some Marrow of Beef, being
well se asoned with salt spices; you may add hereunto Sweetbreads, Cox-combs,
and such other like Junkets, as Mouscherons boiled in Butter, and the like.

When your little Princess Pies shall be thus filled up, you must cover them
with the same paste, and afterward you may cause them to be baked, giving
them an indifferent warm harth; And you must observe, that one quarter of an
hours time will bake them sufficiently.

CHAP. XXXIV.
To make a Carp or any other fish Pie, Venson Pastie-like, to be eaten cold.

TAke a fair large Carp, or any other fish that is large and big; and if it be
a scale fish, you must scrape off the scales; and afterward gut it; some kind
of fishes there are which you must flea like as you do Eeles,

After you have thus gutted the fish, you may also take out its lungs which is
naught to be eaten either boiled, baked or stewed.

Your fish being thus prepared, you must lance it well, and deep on the back,
and afterward lard your fish, with lard made of her wings, or slices of Eeles,
and out of Lent or Ember weeks you may also lard your fish with sat Bacon, as
you do flesh.

You must not forget to take out of your fish the Milters, and Rows which you
shall find in their bellies.

Now when your fish is thus thoroughly prepared you may then form, or raise a
paste two or three inches thick; And if so be you have a great fish to put in
paste, you must be sure to make our pastie long and broad enough; After which
you must place upon one of the ends of your said paste, a lay of fresh Butter
which must be proportioned to the length of your fish; which you must powder
with salt spices, and afterward you shall place your fish upon the said lay of
Butter; so likewise must you powder your said fish, both within its belly, and
without, all about it with your salt spices; as also put into its belly a lay
of Butter, and afterward on the top of your said fish, place another lay of
Butter, together with some few Bay Leaves; you must place the Milters and Rows
of your said fish on either side of it in the said Pastie; and be sure to spice
them well; you must salt your said pie according to your own discretion and
judgment, and when you have thus seasoned it, you must close your pie, and to
this end redouble or cover over your said fish, with the other end of your
paste which you had left empty; After which you must wash or varnish your said
Pie with lean varnish, in case it be in Lent; that is to say, a varnish made
without Eggs.

Put this Pie into the Oven, and after it shall have been half an hour therein
you must make a little hole in the upper crust, and afterward you must return
it into the Oven again, to have it fully baked.

Observe, That such a Pie as this of a great fish, will require at least three
hours baking; especially if your Pie be any thing big; And when you shall
judge that your said Pie is almost baked, you shall cause it to be drawn out
of the Oven; And you must try with a little stick which you may put into the
hole which you have left on the top of your Pie, whether or no your liquor or
sauce does swim above the fish; For that in case your sauce chances to be too
much consumed, as it does oftentimes happen, you must as then cause some butter
to be melted, which you must season with your salt spices, and afterward pour
it into your Pie through a Funnel, to augment the sauce which shall have been
consumed, as aforesaid.

One day after this your said Pastie shall have been baked, you must stop the
hole which you have made before in the lid thereof; And the which you may
easily do with a little paste which you may put thereinto; And thus your said
Pie will keep for a good while, till such time as you shall have occasion to
eat it.

CHAP. XXXV.
To make a fish Pie, covered or uncovered, which said Pie must be eaten hot.

TAke what kind of Fish soever you please, as for example, a Carp, or an Eele,
or a Tench, or a Roche, fit and prepare them in the same manner as we have
prescribed you in the foregoing Chapter, save an Eele, that you must not lard
them.

Some are of Opinion, that it is best to perboyle the Fish in hot water, after
it shall have been prepared and accommodated, especially if the said Fish be
slimy or gravelly, as your Tenches or Eeles are; which must be done before you
put them into the Paste; which is also practiced by the Pastry Men; for you
must note that in case you put Raw Fish into Paste it will make your Pie burst.

When as your fish shall be thus prepared, you must also make ready your Paste
of fine or leaved dough, and you must proportion it to the length and height of
your Fish; And you must also observe, that all Fish Pyes are commonly made
Oval-wise; However you must also observe, that the crust of such like Pyes is
not usually made so very fine as the others, that is to say, you must not put
so much butter in the Dough, especially when you intend to make the said Pyes
open because that otherwise the crust would easily fall down, and your sauce
would be spilt, the crust must be about the thickness of two or three half
crowns at least.

You must therefore observe not to make the paste of your said fish Pyes so
very thin, and that your good Pastry men do knead it with hot water, to make
it the firmer; and when you shall have made up your crust for a fish Pie, which
is to be open or uncovered, you must leave it in the air for the space of an
hour or two, that so it may become firm before you put your fish into it.

And you must proportion the greatness of your Crust unto the bigness of the
fish which you do intend to put into it; And after your said Pasty crust shall
be well thickened and firmed, you shall place in the bottom of it, a lay of
fresh butter; and you must powder it with your salt spices, and so lay your
fish upon it; which you must have lanced in the fleshiest parts before you put
it into the said Paste, And in case you have cut your fish in Morcels, you must
have a care to place the said pieces in their proper places, and if your Pie
be made Ovallwise, as then put a lay of butter in the fishes belly, and
another lay on the top of your said fish, after which season it with your said
salt spices, you may also lay at your fishes sides the Rows and Milters, and
you must also powder them with your salt spices, you may also add unto your
said Pie, Pineapple kernells, Currants, Muscherons, Capers, and Pomgranats,
small pieces of Hartichoak stools, or such other like junkets, in case they
are to be had, and some new verjuice in grapes, some who are more curious do
add hereunto Oysters, which are perboyled in seething water; And you must have
a great care above all things that your Pastie be not over excessively salted.

Moreover in case your crust be very fine, or that you apprehend that it may
chance to fall when it is in the Oven, when your said pasty shall be well
moistened with your melted butter, you must as then swathe it without, and you
may also put a double swathe of paper in the inside of your Pasty before you
fill it up. The swathes must be made of double paper, and must be well rubbed
with butter, and you must also not fail to tie them on the outsides with good
Packthread.

Put your Pie into the Oven, and take care that the crust thereof, do not fall
down neither of one side nor of the other; And in case it should chance to fall
down on any side, you must as then gently heave it up again with an Oven Peel.

When your Pie shall be half baked, you must draw it to the Ovens mouth, to
pour butter and verjuvce into it, or else you may put into it two ounces of
peeled Almonds which shall have been pounded, or reduced to milk, with a little
verjuice, after which you must put the Pie into the Oven again.

Moreover, these Fish-pyes which are uncovered, may be very well baked in an
hour, or an hour and a halfs time, provided that they be of a middle size.

Observe that in case you be minded to put a whole Eele in paste, and to make
an open pasty of it, you must open it, and cut it at every four inches length
or thereabouts, for if so be you do not break it, it will prick it self up in
the baking, and in its stretching it self forth, it may chance to break your
Pasty and so spoil it, wherefore its better to cut it into morcels, as long as
you please your self.

You may also make these fishpyes covered, and to this purpose you must make
your Pasty large and long enough, to make your Pasty all of a piece, in the
same manner as you do make a Venson-pasty.

When your Pasty shall be thus prepared, you must place on one of the ends
thereof a lay of fresh butter; season it with spices, and place your fish ready
dressed upon it; and when your Pie shall be thus fully stuffed, you may cover
it with the other end of your paste which you shall have left empty, after
which you must make a hole on the top of the Lidde, as it has been formerly
said, in the Chapter which treats of the Venson-pasties.

Observe Moreover, that sometimes you may make round fishpyes, or others, like
unto your mince-pyes to be eaten hot; And these like Pyes must be also
covered as it has been before alleged, and the fish which you do intend to
put therein must be also cut in pieces as aforesaid.

CHAP. XXXVI.
To make Minced Fish-Pyes, the bones and grissels being taken out.

TAke as much fine dough as your own judgment and experience will guide you
to, which said Paste you must make as fine as your minced pyes, or
Cockney-Pyes, and prepare and shape your pasty or Pyes in the same manner as
your Cardinal Fasties are made: And in case you make them like unto your
minced Pyes, you must remember to make your crust a little thicker in the
bottom then else where.

When your pasty is gotten in a readiness, you must first line it with a
slender lay of butter, after which you shall fill your Pie up half way with
minced Carp, or of other Fish which is seasoned in the same manner, as we
shall hereafter prescribe.

After which you must place upon your minced fish, some few Lenten Sweet-breads
and Junkets; As for example some morcels of Hartichoak stools, or of perboyled
Sparagus, or Carps Tongues boiled in good broth, or Chestnuts half roasted; And
out of Lent you may put therein some of the yolks of Eggs, hard boiled, so
likewise on gaudy days, you may add thereunto some morcels of marrow.

When your Pie shall be thus replenished with Lamb-stones and Sweet-breads, you
must add another morcel of Butter thereunto, and although you should not
chance to put any Lamb-stones and Sweetbreads at all in your said Pie, yet you
must not fail to place a lay of Butter upon the first minced fish;

After which you may proceed to fill up your Pie to the very top with your
minced fish, upon the top of all which you must again place a lay of Butter,
and if so be your pies be made in a round form like unto your hot minced
Pies; you must add unto them a lid of paste like unto a pinnacle which you must
place upon the top, and afterward you must wash or varnish your said Pie lid.

Put these Pies into the Oven, and given them an indifferent warm harth as you
do in the baking of your small minced Pies.

And in case you intend to make these minced fish Pies uncovered, after they
shall have been baked, you may add unto them a sweet sauce; And if it be upon
a flesh day, you may add thereunto the gravy of a joint of Mutton, or of any
other piece of Roste meat, or else a white sauce made of the yolks of raw Eggs
beaten together with a little Verjuice.

After which you must put your Pie into the Oven again, for a little while,
that so it may partake of the taste of the said sauce, and likewise the said
sauce may have time to thicken; But you must observe not to make these minced
Pies of fish too big, for that else you will not be able to handle them, nor
order them well; And therefore you had better make them in the manner of Tarts,
and bake them in a Tart-pan, making them up in a paste or dough very thin, and
as we formerly called it, a leaved paste.

CHAP. XXXVII.
The manner how to unbone your fish, and to prepare a good mince meat of fish,
where withal to fill up and garnish your Pies.

THe best way to make a minced meat of fish, is in the first place to scale
your fish if it be needful; and afterward to peel it, that is, to flea it,
and afterward to gut it, and to take all out of its belly, as well the Milters
and the soft Rows, as the blood; after which you must take out the bones, that
is to say, you must separate the fish from the bones, and you must also take
away the small bones which are mingled and interlaced betwixt the fishes flesh;
Moreover you must be very exact in taking out the said bones, which may be
performed by slicing your fish into several morcels, and taking the bones out
of them with a knife; As for example in a Carp, But by reason that this way or
manner of unboneing a fish is hard and somewhat difficult, and that also the
flesh of your fish being put into your Pies raw, will make them burst; it is
therefore necessary that you cause your fish thus to be unboned.

When your fish is scaled and stripped, you must plunge it into water, which is
almost boiling hot, and let it steep therein more or less according unto the
thickness of your said fish; and you may know when it is time to draw it forth
of the said water, which you may do, when you may easily separate the fish from
the bones, and in this manner you will easily unbone your fish; But whereas the
hot water does take away part of the fishes taste, and substance, you must
therefore cause it to be boiled in a thin broth, and after you shall have
suffered your said fish to have become cold in the said thin broth, that so it
may partake of the taste of it, you may easily separate the flesh from the
bones of the fish.

Having thus separated the bones from the fish, you must place it upon a table,
adding thereunto a little Parsley, some Salt, and a few Muscherons cut in
slices, and a few spices, and if you have a mind to have your said Pies be
sweet, you may add unto them a few Currants, and some Pineapple kernels, well
washed; All which ingredients you must mince together, and when your minced
fish is thus prepared, you may fill up your Pies therewith, as it has been
already described.

Now if you have any minced fish remaining over and above, you may put it into
a Porrenger with some Butter and an Onion, or with a Leek, and cause them to
be all boiled together, and whilst they are a boiling, you must now and then
stir them, and add unto them a few Capers, and a little thin broth if you
have any, and at the latter end a little Verjuice.

When your said minced fish is thus boiled, and that your sauce is become
savoury, you must take out your Onion or Leek, and you must grate a small
quantity of Nutmeg upon your said minced meat, in case you have put no spices
into it before.

You may also add unto your said minced fish some slices of fried bread, as
also a quantity. of Almane, or Dutch sauce, in case you have not any thing
broth to put into it.

And the better to disguise your minced fish, you may mince amongst it some
yolks and whites of Eggs hard boiled, or else you may add thereunto some gravy
of a joint of Mutton, or of any other good meat.

Moreover, in case you desire to make any Chitterlings or Links of your said
minced fish; take your said minced fish before it be per boiled in Butter, and
sprinkle it with the white of an Egg, or with a little Verjuice, or a little
white Wine, after which you must press or squeeze your minced fish in your
hands, to incorporate it in the manner of Chitterlings, after which you may
cause them to be baked in the same manner as your minced Pies.

Some do cause their minced fish to be perboyled before they do maketheir Pies
of them, but when once the minced fish happens to be perboyled, it becomes too
too flashy, or washy by reason of the sauce which is added thereunto.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
To make little minced Pies of Fish with Oil, in stead of Butter, to be eaten
in Lent.

MAke up your paste with Oil as aforesaid, and make up small Pies of the same
in Tart-pans, unless you had rather make up your little Pies as they are to
be eaten hot.

When your paste shall be thus prepared, you may replenish them with the minced
parts of Carps, or Pikes, Perches, or Soles, or Whitings, or any such like
excellent fish boiled in a good thin broth; and let this your minced fish, be
well chopped with a little parsley and Pineapple kernells; and a few Anchoves
well watered, whereunto you may add some Muscherons boiled in butter, and let
all these things be well minced together, and season these your said minced
meat with salt spyces.

Now when this your minced Fish, together with the aforesaid ingredients, shall
be well chopped and mingled together, you must add thereunto, a reasonable
quantity of pure and sweet Oil, which you must cause to be refined in the
self same manner as it has been prescribed in the Chapter which treats of Pies
baked with Oil; And when your minced-meat shall be thus prepared, you may
fill your Paste therewith, after which you must cover your Pies with a Lidde
made of the self same paste kneaded with Oil, varnish it, and cause these your
Pyes to be baked, but let them have an indifferent warm harth.

Moreover, Those who do not love or affect Oil, may instead thereof, use
butter in the making of your said Pyes.

CHAP. XXXIX.
The manner how to make a March-Pain wafer.

SUppose you intend to employ half a peck or thereabouts of wheaten flower, to
make a March-Pain, you must take about the bigness of two Hens Eggs of
leaven and place the third part, or thereabouts, of your flower, upon a clean
dresser board.

Make a ridge or Fountain in the middle of your Meal, put your leaven therein,
and dissolve it exactly with hot water, by kneading of it with your hands,
after which you must mingle your meal with the leaven you have thus dissolved
in the water, and you must put such a quantity of water therein, as will
suffice to knead your said Paste, until it becomes very soft, and you must not
leave it until it be very supple; Now when your paste shall be sufficiently
kneaded as aforesaid, in such a manner as that there be no Clots remaining in
it, you must cover it over, and place it in a warm place, where no Air nor
cold can enter, just as if you had prepared Dough to make bread withal.

You must leave your said paste for the space of two or three hours in this
kind, especially in summer, that so this your paste may be the better united
and settled, but if it be in a cold season, as in winter, you will need five or
six hours time, to prepare and fit this your leaven.

You must also have an eye on your paste now and then, and when you shall
perceive that it is swollen up, and as if it were split on the top, you must as
then place on your kneading board the rest of your half peck of flower, make a
pretty good Trench in the middle of your said flower, and put therein a little
warm water, wherein you shall have dislolved half a quarter of a pound of Salt,
and a quarter of a pound of fresh butter, put also into the said Trench all
your former paste, and mingle it all together, and reduce it to Dough, but you
must observe not to make it so soft as your first paste was.

Mould and knead thoroughly this your said paste, and afterward make it up into
the form of a great Loaf of bread, immediately after which you must cover it,
that it may not take cold, and become flaggy.

Leave all your said paste in this manner, for the space of one half hour,
after which you may make it into a roll, or you may place it upon your kneading
board, which you must have first powdered with a little flower, to the end that
your Dough may not stick upon it, after which you must make your marchpain
wafer, which you must varnish both without and within side, you must also prick
your marchpain with a sharp pointed skuer in several places, both without and
within, that it may not puff and swell.

When you shall have thus shaped your March-pain, you must place it upon a
peel, which is big enough to contain it; And you must have a special care not
to crack your March-pain, when you put it into the Oven.

There will be a little half hours time, requisite for to bake such a
March-pain of the bigness of half a peck of flower or thereabouts, and your
Oven must be a little more heated, than when you intend to bake household bread.

And you may know when your March-pain is baked, by the same observation which
you use to know when your bread is baked.

Take notice that several Pastrymen or Cooks, do employ yeast, or the Scum of
Beer in the March-pain which they do make, instead of putting real and true
leaven into them, which they do, because that the yeast or Scum of beer, does
make their paste or dough sooner work and rise, and does make their March-pains
show the better, and eat the tenderer, although they are not so wholesome nor
yet so toothsome.

Observe also, that when you do intend to make a very great March-pain, you
must roll your paste with a great wooden Rolling pin several times, too and
again; to render your paste the more supple and pliable to your hand.

CHAP. XL.
To make a March-Pain far more delicate, which is usually at Paris, called a
Cosen or Nepheew, and in other places it is called a Kindness or a Contril.

PRepare your leaven as it is prescribed in the foregoing Chapter, with one
third part of half a peck of fine flower, and when you shall have thus made it
into paste, you may take the rest of your half peck of flower, into which make
a Trench as aforesaid, warm a quarter of a pint of water, or rather of milk,
to the end that this your March-pain or Co^tril may be the finer and tenderer,
cause two ounces of salt, and one pound of butter, to be melted in the said
Milk, and pour it into the midst of your flower, add thereunto one half pound
of Cheese made of milk which was not uncreamed, and if you will add thereunto
three or four Eggs dissolved and beaten in a little milk, add your leaven to
the whole, and let it be altogether well mingled and thoroughly kneaded.

When you shall have thus well worked and kneaded your paste, you must shape
it, as in the foregoing Chapter, afterward you must cover it, and you must let
it rest for the space of an half hour, and then you may form a March-pain or
Contler of it, which you must both varnish and prick before you do put it into
the Oven.

When it is in the Oven, you must be sure to let it bake longer than the
former, because it is made of a finer dough, and that the paste of it is better
stuffed, or has more ingredients in it.

CHAP. XLI.
The manner to make a Cream-Tart, according to the Pastrymens usual form and
manner.

PRepare a Coffin of fine, or of leaved paste, and fit it in a tart-pan Observe
that it will be requisite to have your Copper Tart panns, trimed and glased
within side, that so your Pie or Tart Crusts may not stick to your Tart Pannes,
and that they may not receive any ill or offensive sent or taste from the Coper.

You must also have a care that the bottom of your Tart pannes, be smooth, and
that there be no rigs or flaws in them; that so the bottom of your Pyes and
tarts, may not stick to the bottom of your Tart-pan.

Observe also that with your thumb you must spread a little butter gently in
the bottom, and round about your Tart-pan, in case your Crust be not very
thin and leaved paste, that so it stick not to the tart-pan in baking.

You must also butter the inside of a tart-pan, when you intend to bake any
Pastry meat, fish, or fle shin it, which has no crust at all, as for example
an Homelet made with bread.

Now when your Pie Coffin, is made of leaved paste, it will not be needful to
butter the bottom of your Tart pan with butter, but it will suffice to
powder it gently in the inside with a little mea^ flower, that so your Pie
Coffin may not stick to the Tart-pan.

When you shall have put your Pie Coffin into the Tart-pann, you must set in a
dish over some Charcoals to be melted, as for example, a quarter of a pound of
fresh butter for an indifferent big Tart, and when it is thus melted you must
put into it about the bigness of three Eggs of Pastry men's Cream, one good
handful of sugar, a little Cinnamon powdered, and a little Rose Water, a few
Currants may be also added, Pine apple-kernells, and small slices of Lemmon
peels comfited.

You must mingle all these preparatives together, and fill up your pasty Coffin
therewith, the Crust whereof must be of the thickness of about half a Crown,
and after this your Tart shall be sufficiently filled up, you must cover it
over with slices of paste separated the one from the other, at a pretty
distance.

This Tart will not need above one quarter of an hours time baking; and when it
is almost or quite baked, you must draw it out of the Oven to powder it with
some Sugar; After which you must put it into the Oven again for a while, that
the Sugar may become glased or frosty; and then draw it for good and all, and
sprinkle it with a little Rose Water.

Observe thus much in general, that whenever you intend to put any Currants
or Pineapple kernels in your Pies or Tarts, you must well pick and wash them
beforehand.

Observe also, that in case you cause a Tart or any other piece of Pastry work
which is made up in a Tart-pan to be baked in an Oven, you must sometimes draw
forth your Tart-pan out of the Oven, and place it on a fire of Charcoals or
wood.

Observe also, that in case you cause a piece of Pastry to be baked in a
Tart-pan upon the hot Cinders or Embers; without putting of it into an Oven;
The border of your Pastry work must be lower than the border of your Tart-pan;
and you must cover your Tart-pan with a sufficient Copper lid or cover, upon
the top of which you must lay hot Cinders, and a few kindled Embers or
Charcoals, more or less according to the bigness and thickness of your Pastrie
piece; for you must note, that there must be fire both above and under your
Tart pan, when as you cause any piece of Pastry work to be baked in a Tart-pan
by the fire in the Chimney corner without the putting of it into an Oven.

CHAP. XLII.
The manner how to make another excellent Cream-Tart.

YOu must gently rub your Tart-pan with a little good fresh Butter; After which
garnish your Tart-Pan with a Coffin of fine, or leaved paste, and you shall
fill up your said Coffin to the brims with Pastry men's Cream, whereunto you may
add the bigness of an Egg or two, of excellent fat Bacon or lard, grated
with a grater, or shredded with a knife; In the same manner add some small
slices of preserved Lemmon peels cut into small shredds; After which you shall
only need to fashion or shape the Lidde or Cover of your Tart, which you must
make of small slices of Dough as aforesaid, and afterward cause it to be put
into the Oven.

When your said Tart shall be thus baked, you may powder it with Sugar, and
you must afterward put it for a while into the oven again; after which having
drawn it for good and all, you may sprinkle it with some Rose Water.

CHAP. XLIII.
The manner to make a Tart of marrow of Beef, or marrow bones.

TAke a quarter of a pound of Beef marrow, break it in pieces into little
morfels betwixt your fingers, and reduce it to the smalnesse of a hasel Nut,
add thereunto the like quantity of powder Sugar, and two yolks of Eggs, a
small quantity of salt spices, some Pineapple kernels, some Currants, and the
rind of a Lemmon small shred, add thereunto likewise some Naples Biscuit, or
Macaroons or peeled and beaten Almons, or about the bigness of an Egg of grated
whitebread, mingle all these things together with a fork or spoon, And when you
have prepared all these ingredients, you must fill up your Pastie or Tart
Coffin therewith, and put it into your Tart-pan; After which you may either
close your Tart quite up on the top, or else you may cover it with a lid of
paste, which is pricked and transparent in several parts.

Cause your Tart to be baked, and after that powder it with some Sugar, and put
it into the Oven again for a little while.

CHAP. XLIV.
The manner to make a Tart of Bacon.

GRate or shred fat Bacon or lard with a grater or knife, or do but mince it
very small; you may also let it steep a while in fair water, and afterward you
shall weigh out a quarter of a pound thereof, add thereunto the like quantity
of powder Sugar, and two yolks of Eggs, a little salted spice, about the third
part of a leaf of Lemmon peel, and about the bigness of an Egg of grated white
bread, or else Macaroons, or much about the like quantity of peeled and beaten
Almons, with a little Rose Water; or else in lieu of any one of these
ingredients, you may put a good spoonful of Pastrie men's Cream, for that this
is very good in all kind of Tarts, mingle all these ingredients together, unto
which you may also add a few Currants, and some Pineapple kernels; And when
you have prepared this composition, you shall fill up therewith a Tart-Coffin
fitted to your Tart-pan, after which you may fashion and make up your Tart, and
cause it to be baked, after which you must powder it with Sugar, and must again
return it into the Oven, where leaving it while being again drawn, you shall
besprinkle it with a little Rose Water.

CHAP. XLV.
The manner to make a Veal kidney Tart.

WHen your kidney of Veal is well roasted, you may take the Kidney, together
with the fat that is about it, and mincing them very small, you must season
them in the same manner you were to do your Beef Marrow; To all which you may
add one spoonful of fine Pastry men's Cream.

Fill therewith a Pastie Coffin placed in a Tart-pan, cover this Tart with a
Pasty lid which is pricked and carved; After which cause your Tart to be baked,
and after it is well baked, you must put some Sugar and Rose water into it, as
in the foregoing Chapter it is particularly expressed.

You may also make a Tart of Calves Tongues in the self same manner as you do
the Kidneys Tart

CHAP. XLVI.
The manner to make an Egg Tart.

FIt your Tart-pan with a Pastie Coffin of fine leaved dough, into which strew
one handful of fine powder Sugar, and you must cut in sunder the yolks of
about twenty hard Eggs, more or less, according to the bigness you intend to
make your Tart of, range these half of the yolks of Eggs in your Tart-pan, on
the top of your strowed Sugar, and when that lay of Eggs shall be well
furnished, you may stick five or six Cloves on five or six of the said yolks of
Eggs; after which you may powder the said lay of Eggs with a little beaten
Cinnamon, add thereunto as much preserved Lemmon peele as you please, you may
also add some Pineapple kernels, and a few Currants. Over all this
preparative, strew a good handful of Sugar, and lay a good lump of fresh
butter over it; As for example, half a quarter of a pound of Butter spreaded
and playned upon the top of the Sugar.

Cover this your Tart with small slices of paste, and afterward you may cause
it to be baked in the same manner as you bake your other Tarts, and after it
is well baked, you may strew it with Sugar, and put it into the Oven again for
a trice only, when as having drawn it again, you may besprinkle it with some
Rosewater.

CHAP. XLVII.
The manner to make a Tart of Herbs, or a Tansie in Paste.

TAke two handfulls of sweet herbs as for example, beet herbs, or Lettesses,
Mallows, Spinnage, and pull off the stalks, after which wash your herbs, and
let them steep a while in some seeding water to mortify them, that is, to take
the earthy sent and taste from them; After which you must dry them, and press
them well between your hands, or betwixt two Trenchers, that so they may become
very dry.

Afterward chop your said herbs very small, and pound them in a Mortar, and
put the bigness of two Eggs of them into a Porrenger, with about the bigness
of an Egg, or a little more of good fresh Butter, ready melted, add thereunto
a good handful of powder Sugar, or more if you please, and season this your
preparative with a small quantity of sweet spice, as much beaten Cinnamon, and
a little salt, you must also add thereunto about the bigness of a Hens Egg of
white bread crum grated very small, as much dry Naples Biscuit, or in lieu
thereof two Macaroons, or a few sweet Almons pilled and beaten in a Mortar,
add thereunto likewise about the third part of a side of a preserved Lemmon
being sliced into small bits, and about the bigness of two Eggs of the
Pastry-mens Cream; you may also add thereunto the yolk of a raw egg, or else
the bigness of an egg of green Cheese, which was made before the Cream was
taken off from the Milk; whereunto you may moreover add a few Pineapple
kernels, and a few Currants, chiefly in the winter season, and in Lent; mingle
all these things very well together with a wooden ladle, or with a spoon.

When these ingredients shall be very well united, you must garnish your Tart
pan with a Dough-coffin of fine or leaved paste, of the thickness of about half
a Crown, which said Dough-coffin you must sufficiently fill up with your said
ingredients, and afterward frame your Tart lid with small slices of past; you
may if you please pink and garnish the borders of your Tart, and imbellish it
with wrought works, according to your fancy.

Put your Tart into the Oven, and by turns set it upon some fresh embers; you
must observe that your Tart will require but a little half hours baking, and
when it is almost baked you must draw it forth of the Oven, and powder it with
a good handful of Sugar, and a little Rose Water, and putting it again into the
Oven you may leave it there for a little while, afterward drawing it forth
again, you may powder it with a little sugar.

CHAP. XLVIII.
The manner how to make a Tart of the roots of Herbs.

TAke Skirrit roots, scrape them and cleanse them, after which cause them to
be boiled in water until they be sufficiently perboyled, then let them dry
thoroughly, and pound them in a Mortar; you may also sift them through a sieve,
that so you may only retain the very marrow of them, which you must put into a
porrenger with as much grated bread, or Macaroons, as also about the bigness of
two eggs of Pastry-mens Cream, two handfuls of Sugar, and a little Rose Water,
some Salt, Cinnamon, and other spices, according to your own discretion, as also
Pineapple kernels, Currants, and preserved Lemmonpeeles, mingle all these
ingredients together with about the bigness of an egg or more of melted
butter, and when this preparative is thus fitted, you must put it into a
Tartpan, garnished with a Tart Coffin of paste, made of very fine or leaved
flower.

Cover your said Tart with slices of paste as aforesaid, and put it into the
Oven, and when it is well-nigh baked you must draw it, and powder it with a
handful of Sugar, and sprinkle it with a little Rose water, and after that
putting it into the Oven again for a trice only, you must again powder it with
some Sugar, whereby your said Tart will be completed.

CHAP. XLIX.
To make a Tart of raw or green Eruit.

FIt a Coffin of very fine or leaved paste in your Tart-pan, put thereinto a
lay of Sugar, and after that fill it up with Goose-berries, or with red
Currants, or with verjuyce in the Grape, out of all which you shall have taken
the kernels; or with Cherries near ripe, or with Apricocks cut in two, or with
Plumbs peeled, in which you may leave the kernels if you please; and if you be
minded to put your Apricocks whole into your Tart, you must peele them, and
add unto them a lump of Butter, a little beaten Cinnamon, a few slices of
preserved Lemmon-pills, and a handful of Sugar, more or less, according to the
bigness of your Tart.

Then you must cover your said Tart with a lid of leaved fine dough, which you
may pink and carve into quarters, and then having varnisht it, you may put it
into the Oven, and when it is almost or quite baked, you must powder it with
Sugar, and put it again a while into the Oven as aforesaid.

CHAP. L.
To make a Tart of the mellow of Pumpkins, Gourds, or of Melons.

TAke the mellow of a Pumpkin, or of a Gourd, or Melon, cut it into pieces as
small as a Nut, let them be half boiled in the same water which they will
yield, over a gentle fire, and have a care sometimes to turn and stir them
that they may not burn, or stick to the pot. And that you may have the less
trouble with them, and cause them to boil the faster, you may add some water
to them, but that will diminish their Natural taste.

When your Pumpkins are thus half boiled, you must draw them forth of the
water, and laying them dry you must cause them to drop out all their moisture,
or press them in your hands between a Napkin, or any other linen cloth, after
which you must bruise them, and work them fine with a spoon.

Observe, that instead of this foregoing manner of preparing your Pumpkins,
Gourds, or Melons, you may take the mellows of them raw, and pound it, and
cause it to be half boiled in water, or Mutton broth, and after it shall be
thus half boiled (fit for to be fried either in butter or oil) you must pass it
through a sieve, or coarse cloth, to take away the strings of it.

When your Pumpkins are thus prepared, you may put them into a platter, or
little dish, and add unto them a quarter of a pound and a half of Sugar, or
more, a little Spice, some beaten Cinnamon, and a little Salt, you may also put
some Pineapple kernells and Currants therein, and a little preserved
Lemmon-peele, out in slices, some of the Pastry Cream, or grated white-bread,
or Macaroons, or Naples Biscuit grated, or the bigness of an egg of sweet
Almonds peeled, and pounded exactly in a Mortar; you may also add thereunto
green Cheese, which has not been uncreamed.

Add to all these ingredients as much melted butter as you shall judge
fitting, or of Marrow, or of fat Bacon cut into small slices, and if it be on a
Flesh day, instead of putting Pastry cream into the said Tart, you may put some
yolks of raw eggs into it.

Mix all these ingredients together, and make it up into the likeness of a
Pudding; and if you meet with any difficulty in the mingling and knitting of
them together, you may add a spoonful or two of Milk the better to incorporate
them.

Your said Pudding being thus sufficiently prepared, you may put a good
quantity thereof into a tartpan which is furnished with a dough Coffin, after
which you may cover your said Tart with a lid of paste, and varnish your said
Tart, and so put it into the Oven, and when it is almost baked you must powder
it over with some sugar, and sprinkle it with some Rose Water.

CHAP. LI.
To make an Apple-tart, or Peartart most exquisitely.

FVrnish your Tart-pan with a Coffin of paste, and lay a bed of Sugar into it,
and fill it up with the mellow of Apples or Pears pared, and small shredded, or
cut in slices, the seeds and cores being taken out, mingle Pineapple kernels
therewith, as also Currants, and the peele of preserved Lemmons if you please,
powder the whole with a little beaten Cinnamon; add thereunto some powder sugar
at discretion, and a morsel of fresh butter, about the bigness of a Walnut, or
thereabouts, for an indifferent Tart; cover this Tart in the same manner as you
do the other foregoing Fruit-Tarts, and put it into the Oven after you have
varnished it, and after it is baked you may powder it with some Sugar, and put
it into the Oven again for a while, and so sprinkle it with Rose Water.

CHAP. LII.
The manner to make a Tart, or Pasty, or Chosson, or a Flawue, of Apples,
Pears, or any other raw fruit.

MAke up your Coffin of paste of any bigness, or how you please, and lay a bed
of Sugar in the bottom of it; add thereunto Apples, Pears, or any other Fruit
you please, cut asunder and shred, and the corestaken out; add thereunto a
morsel of fresh Butter, and a little powdered Cinnamon, or green Anniseeds, and
instead of Butter you may put Marrow into these kind of Fruit-tarts, or Pyes,
as also Pineapple kernels, Currants, or damask Pruins, or the peels of
preserved Lemmons cut into slices, and on the top of all this you may strew a
handful of sugar powdered.

And after you have covered this Tart, or Pasty with a lid convenient to
either, you may cause it to be baked according to the former prescriptions.

CHAP. LIII.
To make a Tart of Comfits, or any kind of preserves what you please.

GArnish your Tart-pann with a Coffin of paste, and in the bottom thereof put a
lay of Powdersugar, and afterward place your Comfits therein; add thereunto a
few Lemmon-peels cut into very small slices, add thereunto a little Sugar, and
some Rose Water.

Cover your Tart with a lid of thin-leaved paste, as it was formerly prescribed
in the foregoing Chapter treating of the Apple tarts; varnish this your Tart
on the top, and put it into the Oven, and cause it to be speedily baked, which
will be done suddenly, because there needs not any thing to be baked save the
crust.

When your said Tart is thus baked, powder it with sugar, and put it into the
Oven again only for a trice, and having drawn it for good and all, strew a
little sugar upon it.

CHAP. LIVE.
The manner to make another Tart much like unto your foregoing Comfit-tarts.

TAke any kind of Fruit which is dried in the Sun, or in an Oven, and cause it
to be boiled in water till it become soft and pappish; as for example, Suppose
you have a mind to make a Tart of any kind of Plums, Dates, Raisons, dried
Pears, or the like, to all these you must add some sugar.

And when the Fruit is sufficiently softened you must take the cores and kernels
out, after which you must pound or beat them in a Mortar, and strain them
through a sieve; add some sugar, and a little flower to them, and a very
little beaten Cinnamon; mingle all these things together, and after that
garnish your Pasty Coffin therewith, and so make up this Tart just as you were
prescribed to do the former.

CHAP. LV.
The manner to make a Custard, White pot, or a Tansie-Tart.

PUt upon your Kneading or Dresser-board three quarters of a pound full weight
of the finest flower, and some salt at discretion; you must work your said
flower in a moist place with the white of an Egg, and make it soft or supple
enough to reduce it into as fine and thin a paste as possibly may be.

When your paste is thus prepared you must let it rest a while, that it may
become the more supple, and afterward spreading it again upon the
Kneading-board, you must work it as thin as possibly you can.

Immediately after your paste is thus spread, you must rub the bottom of your
Tart-pan with sweet Suet, and you must spread one of the ends of your paste
thereon to make a Coffin, you must rub the said Coffin with your sweet suet,
and fold the paste again upon it, and afterward once more rub this fould of
paste in the suet, and so the other fould, till you lay on a fourth fould which
you must not butter.

When the fourth fold, that is to say, the fourth Coffin of paste is laid on,
you must put into it as much of the ingredients hereafter expressed as shall
be requisite to fill it up, which you must have in a readiness against you
begin to fit your Pasty Coffin.

Now to prepare the said ingredients, you must put into a Skillet half a pint
of sweet Cream, which has not been skummed; add thereunto four yolks of Eggs,
a small quantity of salt, and a little fine flower, mingle these together, and
let them boil upon the fire for the space of one half hour, and stir this
composition continually, until it become as thick as broth which is thoroughly
boiled.

When your said stuff is well boiled, you must pour it into a dish, and when
it is half grown cold, you may add unto it a quarter of a pound of Pistaches
peeled in hot water just as you peele your Almonds, and afterward you must
beat or pound them very well in a Marble Mortar, in the same manner as you do
when you do intend to make Maearoones; add thereunto also a quartern and a
half of Sugar poudered, a little beaten Cinnamon, a slice of preserved
Lemmonpeele cut in sundry pieces, twenty kernels of Pine-apples, and a good
quantity of Currants, you may also add thereunto some Ambergris, and some
Musk steeped in half a spoonful of Rose Water, or Orenge-flower flower water,
and the bigness of an egg of Marrow small shredded; mingle all these things
together, and fill up your Tart sufficiently with them; which having done, you
must fould your paste four times over all your Tart to make the lid, and rub
the top of every fold with sweet suet as aforesaid, except the uppermost.

After which you may cut off the borders of the lid, and you must observe to
press and close it with your thumbs, that so the fould of your paste may be
well closed, and joined, that so your ingredients may not burst out in the
baking.

You may also use your own pleasure and discretion in your fashioning and
garnishing the borders and lid of your Tart, as for example, with pinked works,
Cantels, and the like.

You may also pink the two uppermost foulds of the lids without touching the
undermost, which you must do with a Penknife, or any other sharp-pointed
knife; and you must observe only to work such small holes as may not pierce the
second fold of your lid, for fear the stuff should come forth, as aforesaid.

You must varnish your said Tart on the top of the lid, and put it into the
Oven upon some embers which are not over-hot, and you must have a care to set
your Tartpan very strait and upright.

You must let your said Tart stand at least an hour in the Oven, by which time
it will be baked, and will swell at least half a foot in thickness.

When your said Tart is thoroughly baked, draw it, and powder it with some Sugar,
and sprinkle it either with Rose Water, or with Orange-flower water; after
which do but just put it into the Ovens mouth, that it may become frosted,
which will be effected in half a quarter of an hours time, and then you may
serve it up to the Table.

CHAP. LVI.
The manner how to make a Fueillentine, or Puff-paste.

PUt into a Dish or Porrenger the bigness of two Eggs in Pastry Cream, a
quarter of a pound of Poweer-sugar, a yolk of a raw Egg, a few Pineapple
kernels, and Currants, a little preserved Lemmon peel small sliced, a little
beaten Cinnamon, and a good quantity of Rose Water; All these things you must
mingle and beat together with a Ladle, or with a Silver spoon; and add
thereunto some juice of a Lemmon, or Orange-flower water, but you must not put
in much of either.

Or instead of all these ingredients you may only compose your preparation with
Pastry Cream alone, with grated white-bread, or Biscuit, a few Currants, Sugar,
Cinnamon, and a few drops of Lemmon juice.

Having thus fitted your Composition, or mixture, you must make two Coffins of
paste of fine leaved dough, each of them of the bigness of a Pewter or Silver
plate; put one of your Coffins upon a piece of Paper, into which you may pour
your aforesaid mixture, which you must spread abroad with your Ladle or spoon,
after which you must wet the borders of your Coffin, and after that you must
cover it with another Coffin of paste; you must have a care well to cloze the
borders and edges of your said Coffin, and to fasten them together in the
fashion as those of a Tart, and so put your Tart into the Oven, which will
require but one half hours baking, or thereabouts.

When your said Tart shall be almost baked, you must powder it with Sugar, and
sprinkle it with some few drops of Rose Water, or rather Orange-flower water,
and putting it into the Oven again, let the Sugar become frosty, and having
drawn it forth the last time, powder it with Sugar again, as in the former
chapter.

You may also make, and bake such a Tart as this, which we have even now
described, in a Tart-pan: so likewise may you make them of several sizes, and
those according as your own fancy will lead you, and you may serve them up to
the Table piping hot severally, or jointly, according as you have company and
occasion; all which depends on the will of those who are to spend them as
aforesaid.

CHAP. LVII.
The manner how to make small Tarts of all sorts.

PRepare your paste, but let it not be so fine as for your foregoing Tarts,
let it be at least a half Crown thick, proportionably unto its bigness, and
observe that the bottom of your said Tart must be thicker than the rest.

Your crust being well dried, you may fill it with Pastry Cream, or with
Comfets, or with Fruit, or with Cheese, all which you must season with Sugar,
with Currants, with Pineapple kernels, with Cinnamon, or with sweet powdered
spices, with fresh butter, and other ingredients, in the same manner as you
would make the foregoing Tarts.

When your said Tart is thus filled up, you may cover it over at top with some
lays of paste small sliced, and having powdered it with sugar you may put it
into the Oven, and after it is well baked you must again powder it with sugar,
and sprinkle it with a little Rose Water, and thus you may make all sorts of
small Tarts to be eaten hot.

CHAP. LVIII.
To make a Cheese Turt, or a Flawn, or Cust ard.

TAke about the bigness of two handfuls of green Cheese uncreamed, or
unskimmed, and about the bigness of a Wal-nut or two, of the best old Cheese
well grated or scraped, or else cut into small pieces, add thereunto some
Salt, and about a quarter of a pound of butter unsalted and melted; add
thereunto the whites and yolks of two or three Eggs, mingle all these together,
and beat them thoroughly the better to dissolve them, and if your mixture be
too thick, put a little cold water into it, but in case your Cheese be very
green indeed, and has Whay in it, you must not at all add any water to your
said mixture; to the contrary, you must press out the said Whay, for that
otherwise your mixture would be too flashy and washy.

Reduce this your mixture into a body, like unto good thick and well boiled
broth, and porridge, as thick as glue, whereunto you must also add the bigness
of an Egg in fine flower, or the crumbs of white bread grated; fill up your
said Tarts with these like ingredients, or pudding, and put it into the Oven
till it be well baked, after which you may powder it with sugar.

Observe, that in the making of these Cheese Tarts you may make use of
Hogs-greace instead of butter.

CHAP. LIX.
Other sorts of Tarts and Cheese-Cakes which are made of a finer stuff or
dough, and are usually the good Wives Tart, or a Tart for a friend in a corner.

BEat two or three yolks of Eggs together, with one handful of powdered sugar,
and when they are very well dissolved, pour them into the paste Coffin, or into
the crust which you have prepared for the Tart, spread this first mixture about
your Tart, after which lay upon the top of it as much Cheese-cake-pudding, and
other ingredients prescribed in the making of ordinary Cheese-cakes.

Your Tart being in this manner sufficiently filled up, cause it to be baked,
and when it is almost baked, powder it with sugar, and sprinkle it with some
Rose Water; after which return it into the Oven again, that so it may be
completely baked, and that the sugar may become frosty.

CHAP. LX.
Another manner how to make a Cheese-Cake.

PRepare your Crust, and when it is become dry and firm, fill it up with a good
lay of dry Cheese, as for example, of those Cheeses which in France they
commonly call Angelots, being little round Cheeses, about the bigness of two
Pieces of Eight, or two Crowns, you must put of these about the thickness of a
fingers or thumbs breadth, and let this Cheese be cut into small slices, or let
it be well crushed, squeezed, or beaten in a Mortar; add thereunto a pretty
quantity of good fresh Butter, some yolks of Eggs well beaten, after which
cause it to be bal^ed. Now in the Province of Picardy such like Tarts are
called, unbuttoning Tarts, for they cause men to relish a cup of Wine very well.

Moreover, this Tart may be far better relished, if you add all the
ingredients together, viz. your eggs, your butter, and your cheese, as also the
rest of your spices, and seasonments, and so make them up into a pudding all
together before you put them into your Pastry Coffin; and you must also
observe, that instead of old dried Cheese, it will be fair to put two sorts of
green Cheese into your said Tarts, the one whereof must be a little staler than
the other.

CHAP. LXI.
Another manner to make a Cheese-Cake, Custard, or Flawn.

TAke a half pound full weight of fat Cheese which is as yetsoft, but well and
thoroughly dried, bruise it upon your Kneading-board, or dresser, whereunto add
a good quantity of sweet and thick Cream about a pint full, and a few Parsley
leaves shredded small, the yolks of three eggs, and a grain or two of Salt,
mingle all these very well together, and when you have made up this mixture
into a thin pudding, pour it into a pastry Coffin of about the thickness of a
Crown, and as broad as a Plate, put on the top of your said pudding half a
quarter of a pound of good fresh butter broken into small Gobbets, cover this
your said mixture with a lid of fine and thin paste, wet the borders of it with
some water, and paste them together very exactly, and put a ruff about them in
such a manner as you think fit. This kind of Tart will be like unto a small
dish turned upside downwards, or reversed, you must varnish its lid, and in the
middle of it leave an indifferent overture, or cross slit to give vent unto the
Tart, and it will be likewise requisite to heighten the corners of your
lid-slits; after which cause your said Tart to be baked, which will be done
in the space of one good half hour, or thereabouts.

CHAP. LXII.
The manner to make a Rattoone, or a round Puff-paste Tart.

AS for example, take a pint of fine flower, and a good quarter of a pound of
fresh butter, about half an ounce of salt, and about a quarter of a pint of
lukewarm water, or thereabouts, mingle all these together upon your
Kneading-board, and work them with your hands till you have made them into a
very fine paste, which must be inclining toward soft, put this paste upon a
paper besmeared with butter, and make it up in the same manner as you do your
great Cakes, giving it at least the thickness of a Crown for its crust, and in
breadth like unto a small plate, more or less, according to your own pleasure,
and heighten the borders of it a little; you must varnish and fill this your
said Puffpaste with the same ingredients wherewithal you do make your Cheese
Cakes, and accordingly you may cause your said Rattoon to be baked as aforesaid.

CHAP. LXIII.
To make another kind of Rattoone, or round Puff-paste.

TAke three or four spoonfuls of fine flower, or of powdered Rice, dissolve
them with Milk, that so your mixture may become as thick as broth well boiled,
add thereunto some beaten salt, you may also add thereunto the yolks of an
Egg or two, more or less, or a Macaroon or two, or a spoonful of peeled and
beaten Almonds, although unless you please your self, it is not at all needful
to add any of the aforesaid ingredients of Macaroons, Almonds, or the yolks of
Eggs, save only to give it a better taste.

Your mixture being thus in a readiness, cause the bigness of an egg in fresh
butter to be melted, in a pretty big Skillet, or in an indifferent Tart-pan,
and when the said butter is melted, and is become half swarty, and very hot,
pour your said mixture into it, and have a care that it may be equally spread
throughout the whole Skillet, or Tart-pan, and let it not be thicker than the
half breadth of your little finger, or thereabouts, cause this your Rattoone to
be gently baked upon an equal moderate fire, without covering of the same, and
have a care now and then to look whether or no it does not burn at the bottom,
and when it shall be sufficiently colored, and brown baked at the bottoms
turn it that so the other side may be also baked, and get a good brown color;
which having done, you may serve it up upon a plate, and may powder it with
sugar both on the top and at the bottom.

CHAP. LXIV.
The manner how to make Darioles, or small Pasties, filled up with several
mixtures according to pleasure.

PUt into a wooden Bowl or Basin the fourth part of a pint of fine flower, and
the whites and yolks of two eggs, beat all these together with a Ladle or
spoon, pour thereinto little by little some Milk, and Salt, more or less,
according to your own discretion, a little will serve turn; dissolve this said
flower or mixture thoroughly, as if you would make broth of it, and when your
said mixture is become very thin, add thereunto half a pint of Milk, which you
must also well beat and mingle together with the said ingredients as aforesaid,
in the same manner as if you did intend to make broth; and in case you have no
Cows milk, you may make use of Almond milk, which if you do, you must add
thereunto a little more flower.

The mixture being thus prepared, you must put a Pastry Coffin into a Tart-pan,
and causing it to be set into your Oven, you may sufficiently fill it with the
aforesaid mixture, after which cause your said small paste to be baked, and
when it is sufficiently baked, being drawn out of the Oven, you must cut in
sunder cross-wise the inside of your said Dariole or Pasty, but not the crust,
and into the said trench of your said Dariole you must pour about the bigness
of a Wall-nut in fresh butter, a good half quartern of sugar powdered, and a
little Rose water; put your said Dariole into the Oven again, that so the
Butter and the sugar may be melted, and that the taste of it may be
incorporated into your said Pasty, which will be done in a trice, and so draw
it for good and all. Now in case you have not a Tartpan to bake your said Pasty
in, you must take a piece of Dough that is not so fine kneaded as the former*
and thereof you must make your Paste Cossin big enough for a Tart, and you
may give it at least two fingers thinkness at the side. Put this paste in the
Air for a while, that it may become dry and firm and when you have a mind to
make up your Dariole, you must put about the bigness of a Wall-nut of fresh
butter in the bottom of your said paste, and then put your said paste into the
Oven, that it may become firm; then pour into it one half part of what you
shall need to fill your said Dariole, and a while after put in as much more,
and so at length you may proceed to fill it up quite with the said mixture, or
pudding.

You must allow at least one half hours time to the baking of this said
Dariole, or Tart, made with half a pint of Milk.

When as your said Dariole or Tart is baked, you must add some butter, sugar,
and rose water unto it, in the self-same manner as it has been before said,
instead whereof you may only content your self merely to strew it with a little
sugar, and to sprinkle it with some Rosewater.

CHAP. LXV.
The manner to make Cheese-Cakes.

AS for example, take about the bigness of two handfuls of green Cheese newly
made, being uncreamed or unskimmed, a good handful of fine flower, the white
and yolk of an egg and half, according to your own discretion, whereunto you
may add if you please about the bigness of an egg of old dry Cheese which is
grated, or scraped, mingle all these things together, and enclose all this
mixture in a Pasty Coffin of fine Dough, and you may give it the shape of any
thing, garnish your said Cheese-cake, and put it into the Oven. Observe, that
you must not quite fill your Cheesecakes, because that the ingredients and
mixture which is in them would swell, and run out in the baking.

CHAP. LXIV.
The manner to make an excellent great Cake, and to bake it in a Tart-pan.

TAke two small Cream-cheeses, which are new made, fresh and good ones, without
any salt in them, put them into a dish or basin, and bruise them with a spoon,
after which add unto them about a good quarter of a pound of fresh butter
which is melted, add thereunto moreover the whites and yolks of three or four
eggs, the which you must separately incorporate with your said mixture, and you
must also gently mix therein three spoonfuls of flower, or of grated white
bread very small, or grated Naples Biscuit about the bigness of an egg; add
thereunto a Macaroon beaten small, and two or three spoonfuls of powder sugar,
which will make about an ounce of sugar; season this mixture with a little
salt, and after that you must your self taste the pudding to see that it be not
over-salted, whereof you must have a great care, and give no more thickness to
your said pudding than you would do to broth which is made for Children; and in
case it falls out so, that this said pudding happens to be too thick, you may
pour a spoonful of milk or water into it, to make it more slender.

When your said pudding is thus seasoned, you must rub the inside of your
Tart-pan with a bit of fresh butter, then put your said Pudding into it, and
spread it abroad through the whole Tart-pan until it be a fingers breadth
thick round the same.

Stir your Tart-pan a little, that so the Pudding may be equally distributed,
after which put your Tart-pan in the Oven, or set it upon the hot Embers in the
Chimny Corner, when as you must cover your Tart-pan with a Copper cover, upon
which you must lay hot Cinders and Embers, but you must so equally lay them,
that there be no more heat in one place than in the other.

If your Tart-pan be covered as aforesaid, you must now and then open it, to
see whether your Cake does bake or no; and whether it receives a higher color
in one place than in the other, for that as then you must take away the Embers
from the place where the Cake is most baked.

And in case your Cake does swell, and rise over much in its baking, and chance
to touch the Cover of your Tart-pan; That is a sign there is too much fire, or
that your Cake was made too thick, wherefore you must diminish the fire, or you
must withdraw your Tartpan a while from the fire, and let it stand open a
while, giving vent to the Cake, which will cause it to fall, after which you
must again close the Lidde of your Tart-pan, and put some Embers on the Top of
it and place it near the fire again, that so it may be thoroughly baked, the
said Cake will require at least three quarters of an hours time, for its
thoroughly baking.

When it is sufficiently baked, you must set it upon a great Pie plate, and
having well powdered it with sugar, you may either eat it hot or cold as you
please.

Moreover, if you cause this Cake to be baked in an Oven, you must not cover
your Tart-pan; for that it will bake the better and easier, and you have also
the advantage of making it the thicker, as for example, you may give it an inch
in height more or less, according to the borders of your Tart pan.

Observe also, that in the mixture and preparing of this your cake or tart, you
may add two ounces of sweet Almonds peeled and beaten in a Mortar, instead of
Macaroons, you may also put thereinto one ounce of good Pineapple Kirnels
indifferently beaten, especially if you put no Macaroons at all into the said
mixture, you may also add thereunto some preserved Lemmon-peels, or Apricock
paste, or such like dry Comfits, Although all these ingredients are needless,
for that your Cake or Tart will be very good without them all, only upon an
extraordinary occasion, you may add them all to make it the better, which will
be more chargeable and painful, the other way being the less troublesome and
expensive.

CHAP. LXVII.
To make excellent soft Tarts or C^kes without any Cheese at all.

PUt upon a Table, or in a Basin, or in a wooden bowl, about two pintes of
flower, make a hollownesse or gutter in the middle, that is to say, a great
hole, into which you must put one pound of fresh butter, which has been well
worked with your hands, and so softened to your purpose, in case it be too
hard, unto which butter, add besides a half pint of Cream, according to your
wine Measure, and not according to your milk measure, for that would be too
big; add thereunto almost an Ounce of beaten Salt, and beat four fresh Eggs
therein.

Observe also, that you must not put all your Cream in at once, the half being
enough at a time, or one third part.

Mingle and mix all these things together, adding now and then some Cream to
your ingredients to make them dissolve the better, and continue so to do,
until you find that there are not any more clots or lumps remaining in your
said paste, and that your paste be strong enough to sustain it self in the
form of a Tart upon paper, without spreading it self, or running abroad here or
there, after it shall have been made up into the form of a Tart.

And when as you conceive that your paste is sufficiently kneaded, you must
Taste it, to know whether it be not oversalted, after which you must cut or
break it into Morcels and Lumps, and place it upon paper smeared with butter.

Make up your said tarts and cakes, and give them a bout an Inch thickness of
paste, and make them as bigg as a middle-sized Trencher, more or less,
according to your own will, and afterward varnish them over: Put them into the
Oven, and let them remain there at least three quarters of an hour, by which
time they will be baked.

The Ovens harth must be very nigh as hot as when you intend to bake Household
bread, or other ordinary bread, and observe, that if the Oven be not hot
enough, your Tarts and Cakes will not take a good color; and on the contrary,
if the Oven be too hot, your Tarts and Cakes will not bake well within.

CHAP. LXVIII.
To make another soft Tart or Cake without Cheese, and the which must be made
in a Tart-pan.

PUt in an earthen pot, or in a great dish, a pint of fine flower, beat eight
eggs therein, and a good spoonful of Beer yeast, add thereunto a good quarter
of a pound of fresh butter which has been melted upon the fire, with a quarter
of a pint of milk.

Mingle all these ingredients together, and season them with beaten salt, taste
whether they be sufficiently seasoned, and afterward cover them with a hot
cloth, and place them nigh unto the fire, that they may only feel the heat
thereof, and leave them near the fire for about the space of one hour, that so
the said pudding may rise and swell. When it is thus fisen and swollen, you may
cause about half a quarter of a pound of fresh butter to be melted in a great
Tart-pan, and pour your mixture or pudding into it, after which cover the Tart
pan with its cover; put fire both above and under it, and cause your Tart thus
to be baked.

This Tart will require three quarters of an hours time or more to be thoroughly
baked.

When your said Tart or Cake is thus baked, you may cat it without making any
other additions unto it; or as soon as you take it out of the Oven, you may
sever the top from the bottom of it, by cutting it in two with a Knife, or by
passing a thread through the crummy part of it, and you may lay aside the lid
or upper part, and so besprinkle the inward part of your Cake with good fresh
butter melted, and powder it with some sugar, as also sprinkle it with some
Rose Water, or Cinamon-water; after which replacing the two pieces of your Tart
upon each other, you may let it remain a while near unto the fire, that so the
Sugar and rose water may soak in; and that your Cake or Tart may not take cold
before you cat it.

Observe, that this Cake will be a very thick one, and therefore at its serving
up you may take out a part of its crum, and only leave the two cru^ts garnished
with a little crum in the form of a Pompion.

CHAP. LXIX.
To make another soft Cake or Tart without Cheese, which Cake the Flemmings do
call Bread dipped in Eggs.

PUt into a Basin, or upon a Table, two pints of fine flower, break and beat
some eggs into it, add thereunto half a pound of fresh butter which you shall
have caused to be melted over the fire, with a quarter of a pint of milk, put
also into this mixture a spoonful of good beer yeast which is somewhat thick,
and rather more than less, as also salt at discretion.

You must well mix and work all these things together with your hands, till
you reduce them into a well knitted paste, and in the kneading of this your
paste you must now and then powder it with a little flower.

Your paste being thus well powdered dered will be firm, after which make it up
into the form of a Loaf, and placing it upon a sheet of Paper; you must cover
it with a hot Napkin.

You must also observe to set your said paste near unto the fire, but not too
nigh, lest that side which should be too nigh the fire might become hard.

You shall leave this said paste in the said indifferent hot place until it be
sufficiently risen, and it will require at least five quarters of an hours time
to rise in, and when it shall be sufficiently risen, which you may know by its
splitting, and separating it self, you must make it up into the form of a Cake,
or Tart, which you must garnish over, and then put it into the Oven to be
baked.

The Ovens harth must be as hot almost as when you intend to bake indifferent
great Household Bread.

This Tart or Cake will require almost three quarters of an hours baking, or at
least a great half hour; and when it is drawn forth of the Oven you may powder
it with some sugar, and sprinkle it with some rose water before you do serve it
up to the Table, which depends of your will.

CHAP. LXX.
To make a Tart or Cake according to Mistress Susanna the Dairy-maids manner.

PLace upon your Table, or Kneading-board three quarters of a pound of flower,
make a Crevase in it, put thereinto eight yolks of Eggs, and two whites of
Eggs, and half an ounce of beaten salt, add thereunto three quarters of a
pound of good fresh butter, which you shall have caused to be melted with
aquarter of a pint of milk, or rather with so much Cream, your Milk and Butter
must be very hot, and you must put it into your Mixture boiling if you can, not
leaving any thing at all in the bottom of the Porrenger.

Mix well together all these ingredients, until such time as this said mould
or paste be well nigh become cold, after which let it cool for the space of one
half hour longer, and so let it grow to a stiffness, and in the mean while you
may prepare the following leaven, which you must begin to make one quarter of
an hour after you shall have fitted your paste.

Now to make this said leaven, you must place a quarter of a pound of flower
upon your dresser board, and make a trench in it, and put into it half a
quarter of a pint of good thick leaven, add a little Milk or Cream unto it,
let it be hot, that so you may reduce your said ingredients into a soft and
gluish paste, which you may do in kneading of it well upon your dresser board;
and having thoroughly kneaded your said paste, you may make it up into the shape
of a loaf, and let it so rest for a quarter of an hour, or thereabouts, or
until such time as the leaven be well risen, which as aforesaid you may know,
when your paste begins to crack or split; and you must remember to keep your
Leaven in an indifferent warm place.

As soon as your said Leaven begins to be split, or to crack at top, you
must mingle it with the aforesaid Paste; and working them very well together,
you may afterward make one mould of all the said paste and leaven together,
and make a kind of a loaf of it; place it upon a sheet of paper, and frame it
into the shape of a Cake, and give it about a thumbredths thickness, after
which varnish it, and let it lie by, a good hour in summer, and two hours in
winter, and put it into a place that is not very cold.

When this your Cake is thus prepared and ready to be put into the Oven, you
may raise it into a Coffin of paste, and slice the upper part of the borders,
or sides of your Cake or Tart, with a knife, after which put it into the Oven;
you must give your Oven but an ordinary heat, and you must let your said Tart
or Cake bake very leasurely, so that it may be baked in a little hour; draw it
not forth of the Oven, until it be very well settled and dried on the inside,
that so it may not chance to break or crack, at your taking of it out of the
Oven.

CHAP. LXXX.
The manner to make soft Tarts or Cakes with Cheese.

TAke about the bigness of two handfulls of green Cheese new made, which has
not been skimmed or uncreamed, season it with salt small stamped, add thereunto
half a pound of fresh Butter, beat two eggs into it, and in case your Cheese
chances to be over much dried, and consequently less humide or Moist than it
ought to be, to make up these your said Tarts or Cakes withal, you must put a
little water in this Mixture, to help to bind it, whereunto you must add
almost a pint of flower, and work all these ingredients thoroughly well with
your hands, the better to mingle them; And when you shall have thus prepared
your ingredients, you must butter a sheet of paper, and place your paste upon
it, to make a Cake or Tart thereof, which you must make at least two fingers
breadth in thickness, varnish your said Tart or Cake, and put it into the Oven.

Observe, that this kind of Tart or Cake, will not require above one half hours
baking.

CHAP. LXXXI.
The manner to make a Tart or Cake, which is knobbed or kertled.

MAke up your paste, as in the foregoing Chapter, for your soft Cheese-cake,
spread it upon the buttered Paper in the form of a cake, and let it be at least
two inches thick, after which you may raise the sides round about in a coarse
or gross manner, about the height of three fingers, in the same manner as if
you would make a Tart, press down the middle of your said Tart with your hands.

Afterward take about one quarter of a pound of delicate Chief, according to
your own fancy and taste, cut it into small pieces about the bigness of little
dice, which you must strew upon the Cake or Tart, and in so doing you must
flatten and press them down with your hands, to make them enter and stick fast
into the paste a little, unto which Cheese you must also add about a good
quarter of a pound of fresh butter, cut into small pieces, and add thereunto
one beaten Egg, and finally you must elevate or raise and fould down again the
borders of your said Paste or Cake inwards.

This your said Cake may be baked in one half hours time, or thereabouts, and
you must heat your harth in the same manner as you would do for other kind of
Pyes.

Those who do love Cheese very well, do cause the said Cakes or tarts to be
made double, and to this purpose do prepare two pastry-Coffins, at least two
inches in thickness, and upon the bottom pasty Coffin, they lay a bed of fine
shredded or scraped Cheese, after which they put the other paste Coffin
thereon, and joining them very close together, you may furnish and complete
your said Tart or Cake as aforesaid.

CHAP. LXXXII.
To make a Cake or Tart according to the Italian or Millan fashion.

PLace upon your Kneading-board a pint and a half of fine flower, make a gutter
in the middle of it, and put into it a pound of butter which is neither hard
nor salted, break into it two or three Eggs, and add thereunto about the
bigness of one handful of good soft Cheese which has not been uncreamed, but
newly made, and add thereunto some salt to season this your said mixture,
which you must very well work, or knead with your hands to reduce it into
paste, by adding a little water unto it.

When this your said paste shall be sufficiently kneaded, you must spread it
upon a buttered paper, and make it at least two inches thick, you may also
shape the borders or sides of it according to your own fancy, varnish your said
Cake or Tart once or twice upon the top of it, and garnish it with works with
your knife, or else you may in some places pink it.

A good half hours time will sufficiently bake your said Cake, or Tart.

Moreover, if you desire to have this your Tart to be very dry and tender, or
short, you must let it thoroughly dry in the Oven.

Observe that your Royal Cakes, or Tarts (as they call them in France) are made
in the same manner as these Millan Tarts are, save only that they ought not to
be composed of such fine flower as the others, and that the Pastry-men do put
leaven of beer in them.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
The manner how to make an Almond Tart or Cake.

AS for example, place upon your Kneading-board a good pint of Meal or more,
make a gutter in it, put thereinto about half a pound of fugar powdered, spread
the said sugar in the said hollowness, add thereunto half a pound of sweet
Almonds being peeled and beaten, or stamped in a Mortar of Stone, or Marble,
put thereunto likewise a quarter and a half of good fresh butter, add
thereunto a little salt stamped or beaten, the quantity of a Hazel Nut, and two
or three yolks of Eggs, and a little Rose Water.

Knead all these ingredients together, and if your paste chance to be too
hard, you may add thereunto a little Rose Water of the best.

When your said paste is thus prepared, you must spread it equally upon paper
which is rubbed with butter, and make your said Tart or Cake at least a thumbs
breadth in thickness, and enterline it on the top, as if you would mark it out
into several parcels.

Sometimes you may varnish these kind of Tarts on the tops, but it is better
to put them into the Oven unvarnished.

You must give them but a gentle fire, and at the expiration of one hour they
will be sufficiently baked and dried.

As then you may draw it out of the Oven, and in case your said Cake be not
varnished, you must gloss it with sugar; and to this end as soon as it is baked
and drawn forth of the Oven, you must presently spread your frosted sugar upon
it, which must not be laid on thicker than a sheet of paper; and finally you
may put it into the Oven again for a while for to dry your frosly sugar and as
soon as you have drawn it for good and all, you may prick or stick into your
said Tart or Marchpane Cinnamon in slices, and morcels of preserved Lemmons,
which you must be sure to stick in quickly whilst the Tart is warm.

CHAP. LXXXIV.
The manner to make a leaved or very fine Tart, or Marchpane.

SPread abroad your leaved or very fine paste upon an unbuttered paper, and
make this paste at least an inch thick, and cut this paste round with a knife,
that so you may shape it into the form of a Tart or Marchpane, varnish it all
over on the top, and so cause it to be put into the Oven; which said Tart or
Cake will be well baked, and well dried in the space of one hour, or
thereabouts.

CHAP. LXXXV.
The manner to make refined Cakes or Tarts, in French called Flemiches,

PLace upon a clean Table board about a pound and a half of good fat cheese
some what salted, which has been made some days since, as two or three, or ten
or 12 days at most, bruise the said Cheese with your hands, or with a rolling
pin, and work it with your hands until you feel no more clots in it, after
which add thereunto a pound and a half of good fresh butter, two ounces of
beaten salt or thereabouts, and 8 or 9 Eggs; Mingle all these things together
until they be well united together, as if they were soft paste, or like unto
a pudding, after which spread it upon your kneading board, and pour into it
about a glass full of cold water; that so this pudding or paste may be the
better steeped and limber, as also cleerer, almost just as if it were beaten
Eggs.

After which you must take about a quart of flower, spread about the two thirds
of it upon the said pudding, which you must mingle and incorporate with your
said pudding, and so by degrees you must add all the rest of the flower,
except a handful or two.

Your Mixture being thus reduced into a very fine paste, you must powder the
said paste with a little flower, and you must work it softly two or three times
with your hands, during the space of a good quarter of an hour, after which you
must spread abroad your said paste two or three times with your rolling Pin,
and reduce it into a Mass or lump again, and so let it rest, and recover it
self, for the space of half a quarter of an hour at most; As then roll this
said paste long wise, and cut it in pieces, to make such like Cakes or Tarts of
it as you please, of any shape or bigness, and make them 2 or 3 fingers
breadths thick, more or less, proportionably unto their bigness; you must
place these Cakes or Tarts upon paper buttered with good butter, and raise
their borders round about, enterline and pinck the tops of them, and afterward
varnish them, and so cause them to be baked.

You must observe that one half hours time will bake them admirably well, they
will require as hot an harth almost as when you intend to bake middle sized
loaves; you must keep your Oven well closed, that so your said Cakes or Tarts
may have the better color, and now and then look upon your said Cakes, when
they are baking, that so they may not chance to be burned, and that they may
be gently baked, which will render them the more delicate, you must therefore
be sure not to give them an over great or sharp heat; and have a care not to
draw your said Cakes out of the Oven, until they be sufficiently, through
baked, and well dried.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
The Manner how to make a Poupelaine as they call it in French, or a puff Cake,
like a Pumpion.

TAke about the bigness of your Fist of small puff paste Cheeses, which are
little cheeses uncreamed, made the very same day; Put these cheeses into a
Porrenger, and bruise them small, adding thereunto a very little flower, which
being done accordingly, you must beat two eggs in this Mixture, and add
thereunto a good handful of fine flower, and a little beaten salt: And after
that mingle all these things together with a wooden ladle.

When this mixture is thus ready, you must place it upon paper buttered with
butter, spread it in the manner of a Cake, and make it about a fingers breadth
in thickness, and then cause it to be put into the oven; And your Ovens harth
must be as hot as that your Cake may be baked in half an hours time, after
which you may draw it again forth of the Oven, and part it asunder to separate
the two Crusts entirely the one from the other, after which you must put them
severally the one after the other, into a Basin or into any other commodious
dish or vessel, in which there may be a good quantity of fresh butter melted,
and the said Butter must be clarified as it shall be hereafter expressed more
at large.

You must dip your undermost crust first of all into the said melted butter,
and a little after draw it forth again, and let it drop dry again, and after
that you must dip the uppermost crust of your aforesaid puff Cake.

When both your crusts is very well dried again, you must powder them with
sugar both above and underneath, and sprinkle them on the inside with a little
rose water; you may also garnish the undermost crust on the inside with a few
small slices of preserved Lemmon peels, and afterward covering it again with
the uppermost crust, you must powder it very well with sugar, and after that
you must place your Puffpaste Cake for a while again into the Ovens mouth, that
so your sugar may become glased, as also to keep your said Cake hot until you
are ready to serve it up to be eaten.

CHAP. LXXXVII.
The manner how to refine and clarify Butter.

CAuse fresh butter to be melted, and let it boil gently upon a bright fire
until it become very clear, and that the Cheese be sunk unto the bottom,
after which you may take your pot off from the fire, and let your melted butter
grow half cold, that so all the dross and filth may sink to the bottom, or
that it may assemble in the skum, after which you must most exactly skim your
said butter, and pour it into several Gally-pots to make use thereof upon all
occasions.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
The manner how to make little Puff-paste Bunns, called in French Choux.

YOu must make the paste of these your said Buns just like unto the paste of
your foregoing Composition Cakes, only a little coarser in dough and stronger.

Having made your said paste you must place several morcels of it upon buttered
paper about the bigness of an Egg, more or less according to your own
pleasure; make them up into a round form, and varnish them somewhat gently,
after which put them into the Oven.

Observe, that both the Oven and its harth must be very hot.

When these small Buns shall be well baked, you may cut them asunder in the
middle, and dip them into butter, and finally make them up as you did your
Pumpion Cakes.

Or else you may cut these your little Buns into pieces, and put them into a
porrenger with a little fresh butter, and rose water, cause them to be
thoroughly heated, and so you may eat them.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
The manner how to make sweet and delicate Wafers.

BReak three Eggs into a Basin, add a quarter of a pound of powdered sugar
thereunto, and beat them together, after which add unto them a quarter of a
pound of flower, or a little more; dissolve all these things together, and add
thereunto half a quarter of a pound of good fresh butter melted, and mix all
your ingredients with a ladle or spoon, and if so be you conceive that your
said mixture is too clear and slender, you may add a little more sugar unto
it, or flower which will thicken it.

When this preparative is ready, you must cause your Wafer Irons to be heated
on both sides, but you must not heat them until they do smoke, for as then
they would be too hot, and would burn your Wafers.

When your said Wafer-Irons are thus well and duly heated, you must open them,
and put about the bigness of an Egg of your paste into them, which you must
spread somewhat at large, and shutting again your Irons gently, you must put
them again upon the fire, and a little afterward you must turn them on the
other side, that so your Wafer may be baked on both sides, after which you must
take it gently out of your Wafer Irons, and you must cut off the beards, that
is, the borders, which hang over your Wafer-Irons.

Observe, that in case your Wafers chance to stick unto the Wafer-Irons, that
is a sign your paste is too fine, wherefore you must add a little more meal,
butter, and one egg unto it.

Note also, that these kind of Wafers are far better cold than hot.

CHAP. XC.
The manner to make Wafers with Milk, or with Cream.

PUt a pint of flower into a Basin, beat two or three Eggs therein, and
dissolve them together, add thereunto Cream, or Milk, which you please, though
Cream be the best. Moreover a little salt, and the bigness of two eggs of green
Cream-cheese newly made, or merely soft Cheese which has not been uncreamed,
and a quarter of a pound of good fresh butter which is melted, and if you pu:
but half a quarter of a pound of butter thereunto it will be sufficient; but
then you must add a good quarter of a pound of your best Marrow small shredded.

Mingle all these ingredients together, and when this your mixture shall be
well knitted and incorporated, you may heat your Wafer-Irons and make your
Wafers.

These Wafers you must eat whilst they are hot, even coming forth of the Irons.

CHAP. XCI.
To make Cheese-wafers.

PUt a pint of flower into a Basin, beat two eggs into it, add thereunto a
quarter of a pound of melted butter, green or new made Cheese about the bigness
of an Egg, and thrice as much fine grated Cheese, or cut into morcels, which
you please, so they be no bigger than gray pease, add thereunto some beaten
salt.

You must mix all these together, and reduce them to a paste which is somewhat
soft, and in case it fall out so that your said Paste proves to be too hard,
you may add a little cold water unto it, or only knead it; or rather a little
Milk or Cream, which is best of all.

Work and knead all these ingredients till you have made your paste of a good
consistency, or have brought it to a good body.

Afterward heat your Wafer-Irons sufficiently on both sides, and in the
interim take a piece of your said paste and flatten it in the manner of a
Pastry Coffin, which you must make almost as big as your Wafer-Irons, and let
it not be much thicker than a piece of Eight, or a Crown, but let it be longer
than it is board; and when your wafer Irons be hot enough, you must put one of
these dough Coffins into them, and shutting your Irons, you must cause your
wafers to be baked on both sides

These Wafers must be eaten whilst they are piping hot, rather than when they
are cold.

Moreover, in case you should apprehend that your fine grated cheese will stick
to the wafer Irons, you shall not need to put any of it in the mixture of these
your said wafers, but after you shall have prepared small pastry coffins to
make your wafers withal, you may strew scraped cheese very gently upon them,
and the bigness of a wallnut, or of two Hazel Nuts, will serve turn for each
wafer. This grated Cheese or small sliced Morcells, which you please, you may
strew along the Coffin, and so rolling them into the said Coffins, you may
place them in your wafer Irons, to cause them to be baked on all sides, which
you may be sure off, so you do often turn your Wafer Irons in the baking of
your said wafers.

CHAP. XCII.
Another manner how to make most Excellent Fritters.

TAke a Pint of Milk, and cause it to be heated a little more than Lukewarm
in a skillet, after which put about two pound more or less, of flower in a
pewter basin, or in any other vessel, after which dissolve the flower and milk
together, the latter being somewhat hot.

To which you must also add a half quarter of a pint of yolks of Eggs beaten,
in a Porringer, and mingle them gently with the aforesaid paste, which you may
do with a wooden ladle.

And before you put your Eggs into the said Mixture, you must dissolve into
your aforesaid paste half a spoon full of good yeast, that is to say, of thick
yeast.

After all which you may add unto the said paste, three quarters of a pound of
good fresh butter, which you shall have caused to be melted in a skillet, and
just as the said butter begins to boil, you must pour it into the said
paste, adding thereunto half a handful o^ salt beaten very small.

Observe, that after your Eggs are once put into your paste, you must not much
stir the said mixture, and if you do stir it, it must be very gently,
because that otherwise your wafers would not be so pleasing to the taste, nor
so render and light, as otherwise.

You must place all this Mixture in the Chimney Corner, and cover it very warm,
until it be risen and have wrought, and you must let it remain so, at least
the space of two hours before it will be sufficiently raised, which depends of
the goodness of the yeast, or leaven which you must put into it.

When your paste shall be thus sufficiently risen and worked, you may heat
your Wafer Irons, and rubbing them over with butter, you may pour in your
paste into them with a wooden ladle, and as soon as you have put the said
paste into them, you must close your said Irons and turning it upside
downwards, you must heat it over the fire, and when you conceive your Wafer is
well baked on the one side, you must turn it on the other, until your said
Wafer be well baked, which must be done over a light fire not too hot, and
your Wafer-Irons must be supported by an Iron-Trivet large enough to contain
your wafer-Irons.

The Translators additionall observations, concerning Wafers.
YOu may make your Wafers far Excellenter and pleasing, or if in case you
will go to the charges of grating into the mixture of your said Wafer paste,
three or four Holland Biscuites, some Rice, or if you please some Naples
Biscuit, or Diet bread; and two pennyworth of Saffron dissolved, which will
greatly add to their tenderness, pleasantness in eating, and delightfulness.

So likewise after your said wafers are baked, you must sprinkle them over with
half a spoonful of good fresh butter, which you must have ready melted by you
for that purpose, and afterward powder them with good store of Cinnamon, and
fine powder Sugar small beaten together, and after all this sprinkle them again
with Rose Water, or Orange flower-water, which will give them a most fragrant
relish.

And to render them yet better, you may add unto the said mixture, a quarter
of a pound of the best Marrow you can get, small sliced or grated.

CHAP. XCIII.
The Manner to make Excellent Fritters, or Bunns.

TAke a pint of fine flower, add thereunto, three small Creamcheeses made the
very same day you intend to use them; beat three Eggs into them, and about the
bigness of an Egg of Marrow, grated or small shredded, dissolve all these
ingredients, and mix them very well, which you may do by adding thereunto half
a pint of White Wind, or more if need be, season the whole with a little
beaten Salt, and with an Ounce of powdered Sugar; You must make your said
mixture or paste as thick as boiled broth, after which you may add thereunto
Pippins small shredded, and preserved Lemmon-peels, or others, small grated or
shredded, or cut into little morcels.

When your said mixture is thus prepared, you must cause sweet suet to be
melted, or sweet butter, or oil which you please, and do love best, and when it
is sufficiently hot, you must dissolve your said mixture therein with a spoon,
taking your spoon very full, and so mixing it with your said Suet, Butter or
Oil.

As soon as your Fritters or Bunns, shall be thus fried, you must take them out
of the Drying Pan, and let them drop out all their moisture, and afterward
placing them in a dish you must powder them very well with Sugar, and sprinkle
them with Rosewater, or Orange flower-water, if you Please, as aforesaid, in
the Translators Additional Observations, which you may also follow by adding of
Rice, Biscuite, and the like to your Fritters, as to the Wafers and Pan-Cakes.

Observe, That you may make your mixture far more fine and substantial if you
please, and even bring them to a kind of a soft paste, by putting the lesser
quantity of wine into them.

And this, the last kind of paste will serve to make.

That is to say, instead of common Fritters, you may divide your paste into
small round morcels, as big as Hazel Nuts, which you must cause to be fried in
your sweet Suet, in your sweet butter, or in your oil, until they be quite
brown fried or well baked.

CHAP. XCIV.
Another kind of Fritters, which are commonly called in French Tourrons, or
pointed Fritters, in shape like unto a Turret.

CAuse Rice and milk to be boiled together, or Rice and water, but it must be
very thick, and when it is become cold, you must peele your Rice and beat it,
adding thereunto some peeled and beaten sweet Almonds if you please.

Put all these ingredients into a Dish, add thereunto half as much, or
thereabouts of flower, some raw Eggs, and a little salt small pounded, and some
white wine, or milk at your own discretion, mingle all these together, and
frame them into a kind of a pudding or broth, or into a paste which is neither
too stiff nor too supple, you may add thereunto some Raisins, and the peels of
Lemmons grated.

After which you must cause some sweet suet to be moulten, or butter if you
will, and when it is sufficiently hot, you must take a spoonful of the
aforesaid mixture, and pour into the Drying Pan.

Cause these your Fritters, to be fried on both sides, and to this end you
must turn them in the Drying Pan the one after the other, And when they are
well fried, you must lay them in a warm Dish, and cause them to be well
drained or stifned, after which changing their Dish, you must powder them with
Sugar and Cinnamon, before you intend to eat them.

CHAP. XCV.
The Manner how to make another kind of Fritters.

KNead flower with water, and sa't and make your paste pretty stif, and spread
it with a rowling-pin, cut it into small square pieces, or into any other
figure you please after which fry them in butter, or in sweet suer, or in oil.

And when you shall have drained them, you may powder them with Sugar, or else
you may make use of them to garnish a Dish of Spinnage, or a Dish of Pease, or
an open Fish-Pye, or any other kind of pastry-meat.

The Translators additionall description how to make excellent Pan-cakes,
according to the Flemish and Hollaxd Fashion, and the which as it seems, was
omitted in this Treatise.
TAke five Pints of Milk, one quarter of a Peck of flower, eight Eggs, two
pennyworth of Saffron a whole Nutmeg grated, mix all these together, and beat
them well until you bring them to a sufficient thick body, as of a pudding or
thick broth, shred thereinto fifteen or sixteen Pippins, and half a pound of
Currants, add thereunto one spoonful of yeast, add thereunto half a quarter of
an ounce of Ginger powdered, stir all these ingredients very well together, and
set them in a great earthen pot, either in the chimney-corner, or in the
passage of an entry, where the air and wind plays through, to rise and work,
and leave them so working, for at least the space often or twelve hours.

You must observe to put them in a sufficient big vessel, least they chance to
work over.

Having thus well mingled, steeped and worked them, you may bake your Pancakes
thereof, as thick or thin as you please your self in a Drying Pan, with good
fresh butter, over a quick fire.

Observe that in case you intend to eat your said Pancakes hot you must make
them the thinner, if you keep them to be eaten cold, you must make them the
thicker.

Observe that in the mingling of your Pancakes, you must not put any butter
into them, for that would hinder their baking, and would make them too washy,
etc.

And having thus baked them; you must powder them with sugar and Cinnamon
powdered, and sprinkle them with Rose Water, or Orange-flower-water if you
please.

CHAP. XCVI.
The Manner how to make Minced-Pyes, called in French Rissoles like unto
Muscherons.

TAke Beef, Mutton, Pork, or Veal, either roasted, or boiled, mince it very
small, season it with a few salt spices, after which make small Pastry-Coffins
of white dough half refined, into which put a little of the aforesaid
Minced-meat, and when your little minced Pyes shall be thus fashioned, you
must fry them in sweet suet which is hot, in the same manner as if you would
ma^e Fritters, and when your said little Pyes are baked yellow on the one side
of their Crust, you must turn the other side of them into your sweet suet,
which you must do with a small wooden spoon, without breaking or cracking your
said Pies, and when they are brown fried on both sides, you must draw them out
of the Suet with a Skimmer or peirced spoon, and lay them dry.

CHAP. XCVII.
Another manner of minced Pies, brown fried, being of a finer leaved paste.

TAke good boiled Meat, or rather let it be roasted, and if it be not all
together over roasted it will be the better; As for example, take the fleshy
part of any foul, or a brisket of veal, and you must observe, if there be any
thick skins or sinnews in the said Flesh, you must take them out, after which
you must mince your said Meat, and put it into a Portenger or Dish, with a
little salt spices, some Currants, some Pineapple Kernels, a little Sugar
according to your own liking, and a little Rose Water, all which you must
mingle together.

And having so done, you must prepare small Paste Coffins of fine leaved dough,
and make them about the thickness of one half Crown wrap into your said
Coffins, about the bigness of a little Egg or great Wal-nut of your said
Minced meat, more or less as you please your self, and so make up your minced
Pyes, varnish them, and put them into the Oven upon some paper.

These kind of minced Pyes, do require an easy fire to be baked by, just as if
you were to bake a Tart, let them also bake leasurely and in case they be very
little ones, one half hours time will serve to bake them.

When these minced Pyes are well nigh baked, and that their crust is become
brown, you must draw them forth of your Oven, and powder them with Sugar, and
after that put them a while into the Oven again, to finish their baking, and to
cause the Sugar which you have strewed on the top of them to become glazed,
after which serve up your said minced-pyes as hot as you please.

CHAP. XCVIII.
The manner how to make excellent good Cheese-Cakes.

YOu must take some pieces of Marrow, and let them be somewhat long sliced,
each of them as long as your Thumb, if it be possible, scald or perboile them
in water which is well nigh boiling hot, after which take them out of the said
water with a skimmer, and let them drop a while, and thus having laid them one
by one upon a Table, powder them with powder Sugar, as much as you can, and
add thereunto a little salt spices, or a little salt and beaten Cinnamon.

After that make up your small Coffins of fine leaved Dough very thin, fill
up one of the Corners with a piece of Marrow as long as your Thumb, and if it
be requisite, you may moreover add thereunto some Sugar Seasoned as abovesaid,
and then cover over the otherlid of the Coffin upon the top of the said Marrow,
you must also somewhat moisten the borders of your said paste, that so you may
with the more ease join them together.

When your cheese Cakes are thus filled up, you must fry them in butter, or in
sweet suet, and you must have a care not to spil them in the turning of them,
and when they shall be thus well fried; you must take them out of the
drying pan with a Skimmer, and having well powdered them with Sugar, and
Cinnamon, if you please, you may presently eat them.

CHAP. XCIX.
Another Manner of Cheese-Cake.

TAke green cheese uncreamed, which is new made, or else curdled Cream, or
dried Cheese, small shredded or scraped, add thereunto raw Eggs, a little fine
flower, or rather pastry Cream, some few Currants, Pine apple Kernels, and some
Sugar, seasoned with salt spices, or only salt spices alone, you may also add
thereunto, a little boiled or roasted mince meat, mingle all these ingredients
very well together, and make as it were a pudding of them, by adding of a
little milk to them, and let this your said Pudding be somewhat liquid.

Fill your Pastry Coffins of fine leaved Dough with these puddings, and so make
your Cheese cakes of them, which you must fry in butter or in sweet Suet, and
after that you may powder them with Sugar and Cinnamon, as aforesaid, which
depends of your own pleasure.

CHAP. C.
The manner how to make buttered Wiggs, Simnels, or Cracknels.

PLace upon your Kneading-board about half a pint of fine flower, make a small
gutter in the middle thereof, and put therein about half a glass-ful of beer
yeast, as also as much warm water as will be requisite for to knead it and
working it altogether you must reduce it into a thin paste, which may stand you
instead of Leaven, wherefore you must make up your said paste into the form of
a little Loaf, and you must place it in a warm place, that so it may speedily
rise and swell; and if it be in Summer, one half quarter of an hours time will
be sufficient to rise it.

Mean while that your leaven is a working, you must place upon your
Kneading-board one quarter of a pound of flower, make a hole in the midst of
it, and put one pound of fresh butter into it, which butter you must have
softened and worked with your hands in case it was too hard before; add
thereunto one ounce or a little more of salt fine beaten, mix all these things
together, by adding as much cold water thereunto as will be necessary to knead
this paste.

When your said paste shall be half kneaded, you may take your aforesaid
leaven if it be ready, that is to say, if it be risen, and have worked, and
then you must mingle it with your said paste as you do knead the same, or in
the kneading thereof.

And having thus sufficiently kneaded it, you must cut it in pieces, which you
must work with your hands into little Loaves, which said Loaves you must
afterward spread open again with your Rowling-pin, to make Wiggs or Simnels of
them.

Which being thus done, you must have water set over the fire in a skillet,
kettle or preserving pan, and let it be almost boiling hot, cast your Simnels
into it, and let them remain therein, until they swim on the top of the water;
and then you must stir them a little in the said water, and taking a skimmer
you shall list up some of the said water into the Air, and in this manner you
must besprinkle and wet your said Simnels, leaving them in the said water,
until such time as that they are become stif and firm; which you may know, if
so be you do take one of the said Simnels out of the water, and do try by your
handling of them whether they be stif enough.

And when it shall appear unto you, that your said Simnels are sufficiently
hardened and swelled, you must then take them out of the said water with a
skimmer, and place them to become cold and dry upon a drain, or in a Cullender,
after which you may put them into the Oven, and one half hours time will serve
to bake these little ordinary Simnels.

But the Oven must be very hot all over, just as if you would bake great
Pasties in it.

And if so be your Symnels do not become brown enough in the baking, you must
not forget to put a few hot Embers into the Oven, that so the heat of them may
strike down again upon your Simnels, and give them a good color.

Observe also, that in case you do not put any butter in the mixture of your
Simnels, you will only make bare and ordinary Simnels with water, which are
better accounted of by several people then your buttered Simnels.

Now as to your Simnels which are made with Eggs, they are made in the same
manner as your Simnels, with butter, save only that you must mingle the Eggs
together with the paste as you knead it; and in this wise, for one quart of
flower you must beat fifteen eggs into it, and only add thereunto one pound of
butter.

So likewise must your paste whereof you intend to make your Simnels with eggs
be well and thoroughly kneaded and far softer and finer than that of the other
ordinary Simnels, Wiggs, and Cracknels.

Moreover, you must also observe that you must not make your Oven too hot for
your Simnels with eggs, as for those which are only made with water and salt,
or with butter.

CHAP. CI.
The manner how to make the ordinary Pastry Biscuit.

AS for example, take eight eggs, put them into a dish, and beat them as if you
would make an Ommelet of them, add thereunto one half pennyworth of
Coriander-seeds beaten to powder, or green Anniseeds, and one pound of powder
sugar, beat all these ingredients together, and add thereunto three good
quarters of a pound of flower, and beat them all again very well together,
until such time as your paste becomes white, and observe that the more you
beat and dissolve your said paste, the better your Biscuit will be, and the
tenderer and pleasanter.

When your said paste is become thus white, you must pour it into your
Bisket-mould, which are by your Pastry-men called Biscuit Tart-pans, and they
are commonly made of Lattin; and you must note that before you do fill them up
with the aforesaid paste, you must rub their inside with fresh melted butter.

You must but just fill your said moulds, and you shall not need to trouble
your self to fill them, but when the Oven is in a readiness to bake them; after
which you must very well powder the tops of your said Biscuits, and put them
immediately into the Oven, at a pretty distance from the hot Embers.

You may make a trial with one or two Biscuits, as to your saying to make them,
that so you may not receive too great loss and prejudice, if they should not
hit right, since this kind of pastry Biscuits is very hard to be well and
rightly made.

Your Oven must be but slenderly heated to bake these kind of Biscuits; and its
harth must be just as hot as the Harth of an Oven is when as the bread is half
baked, or there abours and no hotter.

You must also observe to leave the Oven open, and oftentimes have an eye over
your Biscuit, whilst it is a baking; For in the first place it will run up
and swell, then it will receive its color, or grow brown, all which will
happen about half a quarter of an hour after it has been in the Oven.

Now in case your Biscuit becomes black in the Oven, that is a sign the Oven
is too hot, and therefore you must draw the Biscuit toward the Ovens mouth, to
let the heat of the Oven slacken a little. But on the contrary, if your Biscuit
does remain pale and white in the Oven, that is a sign the Oven is not hot
enough, and as then you must close the mouth of the Oven with its lid, to keep
in the heat; but you must also observe to open it very often again, lest your
said Biscuit should chance to burn:

When your said Biscuit has gotten a good color, and that it has been a
quarter of an hour and a half in the Oven, or a little longer, according to the
proportion of its bigness, you must take one of your said Biskets out of the
Oven and touching it softly with your hand, and if you find that it is hard,
and makes resistance, without becoming flat, you may assure your self that it
is sufficiently baked, and at that very instant you may draw your said Biscuit
out of the Oven, and you must also draw it out of its mould, or Tart-pan while
it is hot.

CHAP. CII.
The manner how to make Biscuit according to the Queens Mode or delight.

MAke paste as it is prescribed in the foregoing Chapter, save only put the
fewer eggs therein, since the paste for the Queens Biscuit must be stronger and
finer, so that instead of eight eggs you must put but six therein, and so
proportionably more or less.

When your paste is thus prepared, you must spread it with a ladle upon white
paper, and you must give these kind of Biskets a round form like unto little
Loaves, and you must powder them over with sugar.

You must give your Oven a little hotter harth for these Biskets than for the
other common Biskets.

So soon as your Queens Biscuit is baked, you must draw them out of the Oven,
and you must loosen them from off their papers by gently passing a knife
slender or limber betwixt the biscuit and the said paper.

CHAP. CIII.
The manner to make Italian or Piedmont Biscuit.

THe paste must be made in the same manner as your Queens Biscuit.

Only this kind of Biscuit you must spread longwise upon the paper, and make it
about a fingers breadth thick, and as narrow as you possibly can, and not above
one fingers length, powder it with sugar, and so put it into the Oven.

You must let this Biscuit remain but a little while in the Oven, because it
will be presently baked, but your Oven must be hot, as if it were to bake the
Queens Biscuit, and all one.

And as soon as your Biscuit is baked, you must immediately separate it from its
paper as before said.

CHAP. CIV.
The manner to make Cinnamon Biscuit.

TAke March-pane paste, add thereunto powdered Cinnamon, mingle them very well
together, and let your paste be very hard, rolling it upon your Dresser-board,
and give it two turns, that is, you must twice round it, and spread it over
your Dresser-board.

When your said paste is thus rolled for the second time, you must again spread
it with your rowling-pin, just as if you intended to make a Coffin of paste,
and let it not be thicker than a piece of Eight, or a Crown; then you must cut
this paste in the form of little Lossinges, or Squares, and put them upon
paper; and you must observe to let your Oven harth be very hot; in the same
manner as your Ovens usually are when the bread is taken out of them; and you
may observe, that these kind of Biskets must be dried in a stove.

CHAP. CV.
The manner how to make Sugar-frosted Biskets.

Clarify a quarter of a pound of Loaf-sugar, and cause it to be baked until
it attain to the consistency of a thick sirrop, or like unto sugar rosat, or
lossinges of Damask rose-sugar, after which add thereunto two whites of eggs
reduced to froth, beat all these things together, and spread them upon a paper
in the form of small Biskets, and let the Oven be but very mildly heated.

CHAP. CVI.
The manner to make Biskets of Pistaches.

TAke Pistaches and shale them, cause them to be pounded in a Mortar, and you
may mingle them in the foregoing Chapters mixture for Sugar-frosted Biscuit,
and this will frame you a kind of a pleasant green Biscuit.

CHAP. CVII.
The manner to make a Gamby Biscuit, that is to say, a crooked form of Biscuit,
or Kertled Biscuit.

TAke fine leaved paste after it has been well foulded, and that it is squared
with four corners, you must make your Pasty Coffin of about the thickness of a
half Crown, and afterward cut it out into whatsoever shape you please, and
place them upon the paper.

Let them have an indifferent cool harth or Oven, and it will be time enough
to put these Biskets into the Oven when you draw your other Pastry work out of
the Oven, and these kind of Biskets require about half an hours time to be
baked, and when they shall be thus well baked, you may glase them well over
with sugar.

CHAP. CVIII.
The manner how to make Lenton Biscuit, or Biscuit to be eat in Lent.

AS for example, you must take half a pound of sweet Almonds well peeled, and
pounded in a Mortar, one pound and a half of powder sugar, and about the
bigness of a small Almond of Gum cantraga dissolved leasurely in a spoonful of
warm water.

Mingle all these things together in a Mortar with a couple of whites of eggs,
and a spoonful of the juice of a Lemmon, or instead thereof grate therein about
the bigness of a Hazel Nut, or of a Nutmeg of the Rine of a raw Lemmon peele,
and you must likewise pound all these things in a Mortar at least for the space
of one hours time, and you must reduce it into a paste a little finer than a
Marchpane, insomuch that you can hardly any more knead or work it.

When your paste is thus prepared, you must place it upon your kneading-board,
and you must work and harden it thereon with a little sugar powdered, and with
a little meal mingled together, after which stretch out the said paste with the
rowling-pin, and give it two or three turns, that is to say, that you must
stretch out your said paste, and fold it in again three or four several times
with your rowling-pin, just as if you intended to make fine leaved paste;
finally, you must emplain and even it thoroughly, and make it about the
thickness of a piece of Eight, or of a Crown, and you must cut it in even
parts, or long morcels, in the same form and manner of your Flesh days biscuit;
after which you must spread it upon paper, and so put it into the Oven, giving
it a gentle harth like unto that when you intend to bake Cinnamon biscuit.

CHAP. CIX.
The manner to make common or ordinary Marchpane.

TAke a pound of sweet Almonds, new and sound ones, put them into almost
boiling water, let them soak in it about a quarter of an hour from off the
fire, only to soften their skins, after which having peeled them and as you
have peeled them you must put them into fresh cold water.

All your Almonds being thus peeled; you must roll them in two or three waters,
and after that you must lay them upon a drain, or put them in a Cullender to be
strained, which being done, you must pound them in a Marble or Stone Mortar,
adding at several times about half a little glass full of Roses in the pounding
of them, to hinder them from making of oil.

You must pound your Almonds until such time as that they are reduced unto a
very fine paste, and that they be thoroughly bruised, insomuch that when you
handle the said paste you do not find any thing therein that is hard or rough,
you must also have a care that this your said Almond paste be firm enough when
it is thus pounded, which will oblige you to put a little Rose Water into it as
you do pound it.

Your Paste being thus prepared, you must add thereunto powder sugar about
half a pound, or three quarters of a pound for one pound of peeled Almon is,
mingle well together the sugar with the pounded Almonds, and add thereunto the
white of a raw egg, after which you must again beat all these ingredients very
well together in a Mortar, with a Pessel, and when your paste shall be
sufficiently cemented and knitted together, take it our of the Mortar and put
it into a dish.

After which knead your said paste upon a clean Table, and now and then powder
it with some powder sugar instead of flower, for to hinder the sticking of your
said Almond paste upon your hands, or Kneading-board, or Table.

Cut this said Paste into as many pieces as you please, and shape them into any
form whatsoever you will your self, and if you be minded to make Tarts of it,
you must make them as thick as seven or eight fheets of paper, and when you
have shaped them, set them upon white paper; after which you must put them into
an Oven which is above half cold, to dry your said Marchpane almost half dry,
but not to burn it, wherefore your Oven must but just be warm, so that you may
put your said Marchpane into the Oven after you have drawn your Bread or Biscuit
out of it.

When your said Marchpane is thus baked, or dried, draw it forth of the Oven to
glase it, that is to say, to varnish it speedily, with sugar frost, which you
may spread over your Marchpanes either with the back of a silver spoon, or with
your knife, after which you must put your Marchpane into the Ovens mouth again,
to dry the frosted sugar, which will be done in a half quarter of an hour, or
thereabouts, and afterward draw your Marchpane for good and all, and if you
please you may after it is drawn stick on the top of your Marchpane some slices
of Cinnamon, and of Lemmon peels preserved, which you must do before the frosted
sugar is grown cold, that so you may not break or ravel the same.

Note, that your Marchpane will require more time to be dried in a Stove, but
both your frosted sugar and your Marchpane it self will be far more
beautiful, and will eat far more pleasingly, or tender.

CHAP. CX.
The manner how to make Macaroons.

TAke sweet Almonds as it has been said in the foregoing Chapter concerning
the Marchpanes, and having peeled and pounded them, you must reduce them into a
soft paste; as for example, To one pound of Almonds, add thereunto the same
weight of powder sugar, and the whites of four eggs, mingle all these things
together, and add a little Rose Water to them, and beat or pound them again in
your Mortar to make your paste fast and binding, however it must be somewhat
liquid and soft.

When this your said paste shall be thus prepared, spread it upon white paper
in bits, at a pretty distance asunder, and let these said bits be somewhat
long wise made in the shape of a Chestnut, after which powder them with fine
beaten powder, and then put them into the Oven to bake or dry, until you feel
that they are very fine and stiff on the tops.

Note, that your Oven must have but an indifferent heat, as it is expressed in
the Chapter concerning the Marchpanes, however the harth must be something
warm, the better to raise and swell the paste.

Your Macaroons must be left a little longer in the Oven than your Marchpane,
since they are to be made somewhat thicker, and you may leave your Macaroous
in the Oven until they be quite dry, or until such time as that the Oven it
self is become cold again.

However your good Pastry-men do not leave their Macaroons so long in the Oven,
lest they should become over-coloured, and do therefore draw them before they
are quite dried; but in lieu thereof they do place them on the top of the Oven
well covered, and kept warm for the space of four and twenty hours at least,
that so they may dry leasurely, and not lose their whiteness, which is all the
beauty of your said Macaroons.

CHAP. CXI.
The manner how to make Lemmon or Citron paste.

PUt a quarter of a pound of loaf sugar into a Mortar, and powder it, add
thereunto the white of an egg and a little juice of a Lemmon, and the bigness
of two Hazel Nuts of raw Lemmon peels well grated; beat all these things
together, and incorporate and mix them very well, until you have brought them
to a hard paste, and that you cannot scarce work it any more.

After which you must divide your said paste into morcels as big as a
Wall-nut, which you must round in your hands, as you do work them with powdered
sugar, after which you must spread them upon, and range them upon white paper,
and afterward you may put them but half way into the Oven, for if you should
put them quite into the bottom of the Oven, they would be subject to burn; you
must also have a care to give them an indifferent heat, and the which may be
like unto the same which is requisite to bake Macaroons, and have a care not to
close your Oven.

These Citron or Lemmon Pastes will require a quarter of an hours baking.

And you must observe to draw them when you perceive the sugar is wellhardned
and firm.

CHAP. CXII.
Another manner of Citron or Lemmon Paste.

YOu must compose or frame your paste just as in the foregoing Chapter, only
that to this you must add twice as much raw Lemmon peele; when your said Paste
is thus prepared you must separate it in morcels as big as the half of a
Wall-nut; press them a little with your fingers, and afterward place them upon
white paper, and cause them to be baked in the self same manner as your
foregoing Lemmon paste was ordered.

CHAP. CXIII.
The Manner how to make a Paste of Eggs.

MAke up a Paste of a little flower, and some water and salt, or if you please
make use of a finer paste, spread it abroad, and cut it into morcels, raise the
borders of each piece to make as many little Pies as you have Pieces, beat a
fresh egg into each of these Pastry Coffins, season them with salt, sugar, and
with a little beaten Cinnamon, after which put on their lids, and cause these
little Pies to be moderately baked, or fried in fresh butter, and you must
have a care to give off frying of them before your eggs be too much hardened.

CHAP. CXIV.
The manner to make an Egg Pie in a Pot.

MAke an omelet well seasoned with salt, with an Onion, and with Parsley, or
with other Herbs small shredded, which said Omelet you must mince, and put it
into an earthen pot, together with the broth of white Pease and good butter, or
oil, which you please, season all these again with salt, and with spices
dissolved in verjuyce, and in the Summer time you may add some Goose-berries
unto it; after you shall have caused all these ingredients to boil a while,
add unto them some hard yolks of eggs, and let them be stuck or garnished with
some Coves; you may if you think good add some fried sliced Onions thereunto;
serve up this said Pasty piping hot, you may put some Sippits in the top of it,
after you shall have opened its lid.

CHAP. CXV.
The manner to make a Tart of Eggs, or an Egg Cake.

PUt into a Tart-pan about the bigness of an egg of fresh butter, and whilst
it is a boiling you may beat five or six eggs, add salt unto them, and the
bigness of a great Turkey egg in grated white bread, or two spoonfuls of fine
flower, beat all these ingredients very well together, and afterward add unto
them two or three spoonfuls of Cream, or of Milk, and a little quantity of
sweet spices, or beaten Cinnamon, after which beat your eggs once again, and
pour them into the Tart-pan, when your butter shall be well melted, and half
red, cover your Tart-pan with its lid, upon which you must lay hot Ashes, and a
few embers, that so your Tart may be baked on all sides, and when it is
thoroughly baked serve up your said Tart piping hot; you may if you please grate
either Cheese or sugar upon it, and sprin^le it with some rose water if you
think it fitting, which will make it the better ta^ted.

CHAP. CXVI.
The manner how to make an Egg Tart with Apples.

PUt into a Porrenger or Dish the bigness of two eggs, or a little more of the
mellow part of a roasted Apple, add thereunto two spoonfuls of fine flower,
five or six eggs, and some salt at your own discretion, dissolve and beat all
these together, until such time as the flower be well incorporated with the
other ingredients, pour this mixture into a Tart-pan or Skillet, or in a Dish,
in which you shall have dissolved the bigness of an egg, or thereabouts of
fresh butter, cover your Tart-pan, and put upon it some fire, and cover also
the lid with a few embers, and after a quarter of an hour or little more you
must uncover your Tart-pan, to see whether your Cake be baked, and whether it
be sufficiently colored both above and below, and if you find it to be so
you may dish it up, and serve it to the Table, after you shall have powdered it
with some sugar, and sprinkled it with some rose water, and stuck into it some
few slices of preserved Lemmon-peels.

Observe that instead of the mellow of Apples, to make a variety of the said
Tarts, you may take the mellow of Pomkins, or of any other fruit you have a
mind to, so you do first boil or bake it before you make use of it to make your
Tart or Cake withal, according to the former prescriptions in the foregoing
Chapter.

CHAP. CXVII.
The Manner how to make a Cake, or Tart of beaten Eggs, in the form of a
Pompion Tart.

AS for example, break four or five Eggs, put the whites of them apart in a
Porringer, and their yolks in another Porrenger, beat the whites of your said
eggs thoroughly until it be reduced into a scum, which you may do with a little
bundle of twiggs; beat also the yolks of the said eggs, after which you must
put the bigness of two eggs of good fresh butter into a little Skillet or
Tart-pan, and when your said butter is so melted, and become brown, you must
beat the whites of your eggs again, and put two good spoonfuls of powder sugar
into it, and salt at discretion; when your butter shall be almost become brown
fried, put a little tossed of bread into, or an upper crust cut round, and as
big as the half of the palm of your hand, or thereabouts, and presently
afterward pour the yolks of your eggs into it, and afterward add the whites
of your eggs also to it; cause these eggs to be baked over a few hot Cinders,
which will bake them in a very little while, and if you have not a special care
will easily be burnt, you must give them the same color as you give unto your
dishes of eggs and milk, after which dressing them up on a Trencher, you may
powder them with some sugar, and so serve them up to the table.

CHAP. CXVIII.
The manner how to dress a dish of Eggs like unto Fritters.

TAke Nipp, or Cats Mint, Balm, or Bawm, and Groundsel, Mallows, and Tansie
herbs, and Parsley, of each a twig or two, young Bugloss as much as of the
others, whereunto you may add young Leeks, Scallions, or Onions, shred all
these Herbs very small, after which, as for example, you must beat six or eight
eggs in the same manner as if you were to make an Omelet, add your shredded
herbs thereunto, and as much salt as you think fitting.

After which cause some good fresh butter to be melted in a Skillet, or in a
great dish, and when your said butter is half brown fried, take your beaten
eggs with a great spoon, and pour them into your said butter by spoonfuls,
until there be enough to make three or four good Fritters about the bigness of
the palm of your hand, or thereabouts, and when these said Fritters shall be
sufficiently boiled or baked, draw them forth of the Skillet, and so proceed to
make as many as you please, or have occasion to use; but you must note that
these Fritters must be eaten very hot, and if you please you may grate sugar
and Cinnamon upon them.

CHAP. CXIX.
Another manner of Egge-tant, like unto Fritters, or Macaroons.

CAuse your eggs to be boiled until they be hard, and after that mince them
with Parsley, and a little Onions, and Time, season this mixture with some
salt, and incorporate it with the white of eggs, or with the yolk of a raw
egg; after which make small balls thereof in the shape of small puddings of
about the bigness of an egg, or in the form of a Macaroon, or any such like
form according to your own fancy, cause them to be a little fried or baked over
a Chafingdish, or in a Skillet, in butter half brown fried, after take them
forth and let them dry, and powder them with a little Nutmeg, and with some
salt if need be.

CHAP. CXX.
Another manner of Egg Tarts like unto Fritters.

BReak four eggs, add to them salt, and beat or stir them well, and make an
Omelet of them, and as soon as it shall be half fried, mince it with a handful
of Parsley, mortified over a shovel with coals, add half an ounce of currants
thereunto, and as much Pineapple-kernels; incorporat this minced mixture
together with a raw egg beaten, and a little flower, after which make small
pellets of it, or small lumps in whatsoever shape you please, cause them to be
fried in butter half brown, as it is expressed in the foregoing Chapter, and
having taken them out of the butter, and laid them dry, you may powder them
with sugar, and salt, if it be needful, and eat them before they grow cold.

CHAP. CXXI.
The manner how to make a Biske of Eggs.

PUt into a good big dish a lay of good slices of Cheese between two lays of
tosted sops of good household bread, sprinkle them a little with clear broth, or
thin Peaseporridge, or any other clear porridge which is well seasoned with
butter and salt, let the whole soak and settle a while upon the fire, after
which garnish your portage with some Parsley but grossly shredded, unto which
add some poached eggs in water, or dress it in any other manner you please,
either entire, or in pieces; you may also put betwixt your said eggs some Carps
Milts, or Rows, or some other small Fishes, as Smelts, Gudgeons, small Roches,
and the like, or else some sippets of tosted bread, add thereunto a few Capers,
Muscharons, or such like other Junkets for Fish-days, having first well boiled
and seasoned them; some there are that do add currants unto them, and boiled or
stewed pruens; season all this aforesaid mixture with some whole Cloves, or
broken into good big morcels, or any other fragrant Spices as Ginger, or the
like.

After all which you must again add thereunto as much broth, pease porridge,
or any other lean porridge, that is to say, porridge made without flesh in it,
as you shall think requisite, and afterward you must place your dish on the
fire again for a pretty while, having a care that your sfices of bread do not
cake to the bottom of your dish. Unto this Biske you may add some veritryce,
or some green fauce; some also do put Wine into it, and when you shall conceive
that this your said Biske is well-nigh ready, and well savoured, you may grate
into it a little Nutmeg, or a little white loaf crust, and so serve it up to
the table.

CHAP. CXXII.
The manner to make arkinde of a broth or sauce of eggs.

CAuse the best Oil you can get to be heated, break two eggs into it, and draw
them forth of it again before the yolks of the eggs do become very hard, after
which put them into a dish, and add unto them a sauce made with an Onion cut
in round slices, and fried in oil, season the whole with salt, and with
verjuyce, and grate some Nutmeg into it.

CHAP. CXXIII.
The manner how to make a Tansie.

PUt, as for example, the yolks of eight eggs into a silver or pewter dish, but
it must not be an over big one, and if it be on a Flesh day, dissolve them
with about half a pint of good flesh broth, which has been made without Herbs,
and instead of broth upon Fish-days, you may make use of Cream, or of Milk,
add thereunto a little salt well beaten, and two Macaroons small grated, or as
much grated Biscuit, add thereunto also two or three spoonfuls of the juice of
Beet-roots which shall have been pounded in a Mortar, together with Rosewater,
add thereunto also half a quartern of powder sugar, pour all this mixture into
a dish, into which you shall have melted about the bigness of a Wall-nut of
good fresh butter, and thus set your Tansie upon the fire, and let it be
hardened, at the bottom of your dish, after which, and that it begins to be
likewise half hardened on the top, add thereunto one ounce of preserved Lemmon
peels grated, or shredded in small slices, or cut into little morcels, add
thereunto also one ounce of Pistaches well peeled and pounded, and so let your
Tansie become quite hard over an indifferent warm fire, and at the same time
you must give a little brown color at the top, by holding a hot shovel over
it, and taking your said Tansie off from the fire, you may stick into your
Tansie a few slices of preserved Lemmon peels, and afterward powder it with
sugar and cinnamon if you please.

CHAP. CXXIV.
Describing the several ways and manners how to dress Poached Eggs, and boiled
Eggs in Water.

CAuse your water to boil, after which break your eggs into it, the one after
the other, and when they are pretty well boiled, take them out of the said
boiling water, before they become too hard; these kind of poached Eggs may
stand you in stead to garnish an herb pottage withal, or any such other like
dish. Observe also that these kind of eggs may be served up alone, with diverse
kinds of sauces, and also sometimes eggs may be poached in Milk, or in any
sweet wine.

The Second manner of Poaching of Eggs.
Put into a dish four poached eggs, season them with salt, and grate some old
cheese upon them, which will give them a good relish.

A Third manner of Poaching Eggs.
You must put some eggs into a dish, a few or many, add a little salt unto
them, and powder them also with sugar, and sprinkle them with a little
rose water, or verjuyce, or Lemmon juice, or Orange juice, unto which you may
add a little beaten cinnamon, or cinamon-water, which will give them a good
relish.

The Fourth manner of Poaching Eggs.
You may put as many eggs as you please into a dish, into which you have caused
some good fresh butter to be melted, season it with salt, add a little sugar
unto it, and in case you are not minded to put any sugar into it, a little
nut-meg grated or shredded will not be amiss, you may give these eggs a color
before you put them into the said dish, by holding a hot shovel or kettle over
them for a while.

The Fifth manner of Feached Eggs.
You must pour some green sauce over them, and so let them stand a while upon
the fire, after which you may season them with salt, and with a little grated
nutmeg.

The Sixth manner of Poached Eggs.
Cause your butter to be fried brown in a pan, and cause a sliced Onion to be
fried in it, season it well with salt and pepper small powdered, and when your
Onion is well fried, add a drop or two of vinegar unto it, and presently after
pour this sauce upon your poached eggs, to which you may add a little grated
Nutmeg. Observe, that in case your eggs be ranged in the dish, and laid in the
form of a Fish, that as then they are called a Sammon of eggs.

The Seventh Fashion of Poached Eggs.
Cause minced Onions to be fried in brown butter, and when they are well fried
add thereunto some vinegar and mustard mingled together, season it well with
salt, and pour the said sauce upon your poached eggs.

The eighth Fashion of eating Poached Eggs.
Cause butter to be fried brown, add thereunto a sauce made of sweet Mustard,
or of Grapes dissolved in Wine, or of Hypocras; take your Drying Pan
immediately off from the fire, lest your said sauce should boil, which it must
not do, and thus pour it upon your eggs; and instead of frying your butter
brown in the drying pan, it will be sufficient to cause your butter to be only
melted in a dish, after which you may add either Hypocras, or dissolved
Mustard unto it, as aforesaid, and then you may put your poached eggs into it,
and afterward powder them with sugar.

The Ninth manner of eating Poached Eggs.
You may make a Pudding of sweet Herbs, and put it into a dish, and place your
eggs upon it, and add thereunto some sippets of tosted bread dipped in butter,
or some slices of your omelet, and upon all these you may grate some Nutmeg, or
some Sugar.

The Tenth manner of eating Poached Eggs.
Cause good fresh butter to be melted in a dish over an indifferent hot fire,
after which you may break your eggs, and having taken out the white, you may
put all the yolks into a porrenger by themselves, and after that you may pour
them one by one into the said melted butter, and when your said butter shall
begin to boil take your dish off from the fire, and so you may add thereunto a
little powdered cinnamon and sugar if you please.

The Translators additional description how to poach or butter a dish of Eggs
without any butter at all.
BEat as many Eggs as you please into a good large silver dish, whites and
yolks together, after which set your said dish over a Chafingdish of hot
charcoals thoroughly lighted, putting nothing more into the said dish unto your
eggs, but stir them continually with a silver spoon, that so they may not
become hard, not stick to the dish; and when they are enough poached to your
fancy, take them off from the said Chaffingdish, and add unto them a good
quantity of Orange juice, well seasoning your said eggs with salt, and if you
please your self, powdering them with good store of sugar and cinnamon, not
forgetting to put grated or shredded Nutmeg into them, as you are a straining
of them, and before you pour your Orange juice upon them.

Observe, that this kind of buttering, or poaching of Eggs without butter is
least offensive to the palate, and less nauseous to the stomach, which is
oftentimes overcharged by the adding of butter to these kind of dishes and
junkets.

CHAP. CXXV.
Describing the several ways how to dress and set out hard Eggs.

The First manner.
PUt a lump of butter into a dish, add some vinegar or verjuyce unto it, and a
little salt, and when your butter is melted, add thereunto three yolks of eggs
which are hard boiled, dissolve them into your sauce, and after that, garnish
or set out your dish with hard boiled eggs cut in halves, or quarters, grate
some Nutmeg over them, or the crusts of white bread grated.

The Second manner.
Cause your butter to be brown fried in the Drying Pan, and add thereunto
some parsley, or some minced leeks, or young onions, and when you have fried
them, pour them into a dish, after you shall have seasoned them with salt and
pepper, after which add thereunto some hard eggs cut in twain; you may
moreover add some mustard unto them, or else make any other sauce you please,
having caused your said sauce to be poured boiling hot over your said eggs,
before you do serve them up.

The Third manner.
Sometimes you may only fry your hard boiled eggs all alone being cut in twain,
without any other formality. At other times you may sleep them in flower
dissolved in wine or milk, and afterward you may fry them in the form of
Fritters, and having drawn them forth of the butter, and caused them to be
drained, put them into a dish, and season them with salt; add some vinegar
unto them, or the juice of a Lemmon, or make a sweet sauce over them; you may
also powder them with beaten cinnamon and sugar.

The Fourth manner.
You may serve up these Eggs dressed as aforesaid, and add unto them the
several sauces prescribed in the foregoing Chapter for the poached eggs, which
will be as pleasing as the former, either poached or hard boiled.

The Fifth manner.
Put into a dish hard Eggs cut in twain, and season them with a white sauce
made in your Drying Pan with the yolks or raw eggs, and with some verjuyce, or
white wine dissolved together, having seasoned the whole with some salt, and
with a few spices, or with the powder of a few dried sweet herbs; and finally,
pour all this said sauce over all your eggs.

CHAP. CXXVI.
The manner to dress Eggs according to the Portugal manner.

YOu must fry your hard Eggs in a Drying Pan as follows; you must in the
first place fry some Parsley small shredded, or some Onions, or some Leeks in
fresh butter, and when they shall be half fried, pour unto them hard Eggs cut
into rounds, whereunto you may add a handful of Muscharoons well peeled,
washed, and cut in slices, season the whole with salt, and fry it well with
brown butter in your Drying Pan, and when they are almost fried put some
vinegar unto them.

When these your said eggs are minced in a dish, you may add unto them some
grated Nutmeg, and garnish them with some sippets of grated bread, wherewithal
you must, as it were lard eggs; so likewise may you imbellish this your said
Friscoss with slices of raw Lemmons.

Sometimes you may half fry onions and parsley in good fresh butter, and
afterward add unto them hard boiled eggs cut in rounds, and a little before
you take them out of the Drying Pan, you may add unto them a sauce composed of
mustard, dissolved with verjuyce or vinegar, and seasoned with salt; and after
you shall have given all these a turn or two over the fire, you may serve them
up, having grated a little Nutmeg therein.

CHAP. CXXVII.
The manner to make hard stuffed Eggs into the form of Pudding.

TAke sweet Herbs, as Lettice, Purselen, Burrage, Sorrel, Parsley, or Chervel,
and a little Time, take out the stalks from the said herbs, and if you will
have your stuffed eggs to be high rellished, put the more Parsley into them, or
the more Chervel, and a few Leeks or Onions, your said herbs being thus well
picked and washed, cause them to be minced, and season them with salt, with a
little beaten Cloves, or Pepper; so likewise may you mince jointly with your
said herbs some Muscharoons well washed and picked, which have been formerly
seasoned and boiled, and some persons do also add thereunto some Cheese grated
or scraped very small, pour all this said mixture into a skillet, and cause it
to be fried with brown butter, or with any other suet, or with oil, in case
you love it.

And when this your said mixture is half fried, some do add thereunto some few
Currants, and Pineapple Kernels, which is only to be done at your own pleasure,
being otherwise not requisite, and it will suffice only to season them with
salt, and when this your said stuffed mixture is fried, you must put unto them
some hard yolks of Eggs cut in small pieces, and give them a turn or two in
the pan over the fire, after which dish them up, and garnish the said dish on
the top and sides with hard Eggs cut in twain.

Sometimes you may take out the yolks of your said Eggs, and mingle them with
your minced stuffed ingredients, and when your said Pudding is fried, you may
fill the white of your Eggs therewith before you pour it upon the rest of your
pudding, and sometimes instead of ranging of the white of your Eggs about your
pudding, you may garnish it with some sippets, or with small cakes of paste
fried in butter, and after all you may grate upon the whole a little Nutmeg, or
crust of white bread.

CHAP. CXXVIII.
The Manner how to dress a dish of hard Eggs with Sorril.

Diverse do content themselves to cause some Sorril or Spinach to be fried in a
skillet or pan, after the stalks are taken out, to which they add good
store of butter, and as much salt as you think fitting, whereunto you may add
some pepper or some salt spices, and your Pudding-stuffe being baked, put your
hard eggs into the same cut in twain, or in four quarters; and sometimes you
may make a kind of a white sauce, with the yolks of raw eggs dissolved with a
little verjuyce, or water, and you may also add thereunto some fried forrel,
and after all these you may add your eggs unto the whole mixture, and also
grate some Nutmeg into it.

CHAP. CXXIX.
The manner how to make several sorts of Omelets of Eggs, or Pancakes of Herbs.

THe first manner being an ordinary Omelet, as for example, take half a dozen
of eggs, break them each severally upon a Trencher, and after that beat them
all together in a dish, and add some beaten salt to them, and some few drops
of water, or of milk; cause some butter to be mested in a Skillet, and when it
is brown fried pour your beaten eggs into it, and let them fry more or less
according to your pleasure, and according as you will have your Omelet to be
limber or stiff; instead of butter you may use oil, if you love it, or any kind
of other sweet suet as well in the making of these as all other several sorts
and kinds of Omelets.

Now in case you desire to have your Omelet to be a green one, you shall only
need to mingle some Green-sauce with your Eggs as you beat them; or in case you
make not your Omelet of a green color, you may as then serve up your
Green-sauce jointly with it, but the usual custom is to eat your Omelet with a
little vinegar, and some powder sugar.

Moreover, you may serve up jointly with your said Omelet some Mustard in
saucers, either ordinary Mustard, or sweet mustard, and in such a case you must
serve up your Omelet rolled up, like unto a black pudding, and slit on each
end, which said ends you must separate a sunder, at a pretty distance the one
from the other.

The Second manner, being an Omelet according to the Celestines or the Saints
fashion.
Beat a score or a dozen of Eggs, more or less, season them with salt, and
beat them, add unto them some grated white bread very small, and some shredded
parsley, and some powdered suggar, add thereunto also good fresh butter, cut in
small sliees, as much as you may judge to be requisite or necessary to fry
such a quantity of Eggs, and whilst you beat them all together, you must put
into a clean skillet a pound of butter, or of sallet oil if you love it, and
cause it to be heated, till it does almost boil, when as you must presently
pour it forth of the pann, and before you cleanse your pan again, you must
pour into it your beaten Eggs, seasoned with salt and butter, as aforesaid,
let them be well fried, and only have a care to stir them in the middle with
a ladle, or with a stick somewhat broad and flat at the end, or with the point
of a knife, that so your Eggs may the better mingle and ciment.

When your Omelet is thus half baked, turn it with a Trencher or Skimmer, to
cause it to be baked on both sides, and to hinder it from sticking or cleaving
to the pan, and that it may not burn, stir your pan very often.

When your said Omelet is served up, you must powder it with some Sugar, and
sprinkle it with some Rose Water or Cinnamon water.

Note also, that you make such a kind of Omelet as this in a Tart-pan which
has a high border and is covered.

The Third manner, being a crisped Omelet.
AS for Example, beat six Eggs, season them with salt, and your butter being
melted in a skillet, pour your said Eggs into it, and afterward you shall
add thereunto toasted bread, or the sliced crum of bread which has been fried
in butter. Note, that you must spread either the one or the other all over the
pan as it is upon the fire; and when your Omelet is fried, and that you are
ready to pour it into the Dish, you must have a care that your tosted bread do
remain upwards, some moreover do cause parsley to be fried, and pour it over
all what is aforesaid, and sometimes you may pour a little vinegar upon it,
almost the same quantity as the pastry-men do pour Rose Water upon their Tarts.

The Fourth manner, being the way to make a Pancake or Omelet with Apples.
PAre three or four Pippins, and cut them in round slices, fry them in a pan
with a quarter of a pound, or thereabouts, of fresh butter, and as much sugar
as you please, and when your apples are thus fried, you may pour upon them
seven or eight Eggs well beaten and seasoned with salt, stir your pan often
for to hinder that your Omelet may not stick to the pan and burn, and when you
pour it out into the dish, you must do it so as that your apples may remain
enclosed within the Eggs, and afterward powder your Omelet with Sugar and
Cinnamon if you please, and either eat it hot, or keep it till it be cold, when
you may sprinkle it with some Rose Water.

It will be a readier way, if after your Apples be fried alone, you take them
out of the frying pan, and lay them dry upon a plate, after which making an
Omelet somewhat slabby, after it shall be indifferently well fried, you may
readily clap the Apples into it, and after that grate some Sugar upon it.

Some do only place their fried Apples upon a Trencher, and then cover them
over with a washy Omelet, which they powder with Sugar.

The fifth manner, being an Omelet according to the newest mode, Oxford Cates,
or the Covent Garden guise.
BEat Eggs as many as you please, and having seasoned them, add thereunto
Pine-applekernels, Currants, and the peels of preserved Lemmons, of each a
proportionable quantity, your butter being melted and half brown fried in the
pan, pour your Eggs into it, and stir them well, serve up this kind of Omelet
so soon as it is indifferently well baked, you may also roll it up like unto a
pudding, and having grated some Sugar into it, you may also besprinkle it with
some Rosewater or Cinnamon water.

The sixth manner, being an Omelet with Lemmon-peels.
BEat your Eggs with a little Milk, whereunto you may add a little grated
bread, and likewise a little preserved Lemmon peel grated very small, and salt,
at your own discretion, and in this wise make your Omelet as in the foregoing
Chapter.

The Seventh manner, being an Omelet with Bacon.
TAke the fat of a quarter of a pound of fat Bacon, or thereabouts, cut off the
skin, and cut your lard into small morcels almost as big as hazel Nuts; cause
it to be melted in a frying pan, and when it begins to be dry, add
thereunto six or seven beaten Eggs, and salt them in case you judge it
requisite; unto which in the eating of it, you may add a little verjuice.

The eight manner, being another kind of Omelet with Bacon.
BEat six or seven Eggs, add thereunto about half aquarter of a pound of fat
Bacon shredded very small, and some salt, if it be requisite, beat all these
ingredients well together, and pour them into the pan, in which you may put
just as much butter brown fried as you shall judge convenient to fry your
Omelet, and to make it the delicater, you may add thereunto some melted
marrow, which will make you an admirable Omelet.

The Ninth Manner, being an Omelet made with Cream.
BEat six Eggs, add three or four spoonfulls of Cream thereunto, and as much
salt as you judge convenient, beat them all well together, and pour them into
butter half brown fried, and cause this your said Omelet to be very well
fried; and strew it with Sugar and Cinnamon if you please.

The Tenth manner, being another kind of Omelet with Cream.
CAuse about a quarter of a pound of butter to be melted in a skillet, and
pour thereinto half a dozen of Eggs well beaten and sufficiently salted, and
when you have mixed these together, add thereunto at least a Cows milking of
good cream, and when your said Omelet is fried and ready to be served up,
grate some Sugar over it, and besprinkle it with some Rose Water.

You must observe, that you must not let your Cream boil, wherefore if your
Omelet be not enough fried, before you put your Cream into it, you must give
it a color, by holding a hot fire shovel over it.

The eleventh manner, being an Omelet of Herbs.
MInce or shred all kind of sweet herbs together, as lettice, sorril, borrage,
buglose, Mallows, and the like, having taken away the stalks, and having well
shredded these several kind of Herbs, you must beat them together with Eggs,
and may add salt unto them, and if so be you desire to have your said Omelet
to be sweet, add some Currants thereunto.

And having caused some butter to be melted, pour your Eggs into it, when it
shall be very hot, and when your Omelet is thus prepared and ready to be
forved up, grate Sugar into it, and Cinnamon, if you please.

But and if you desire to have your Omelet to be of a nigher relish, put
thereinto more salt, and spices.

The Twelfth manner, being an Omelet with Parsley.
CAuse your Eggs to be beaten, and add thereunto parsley leaves small
shredded, and salt, beat your Eggs and make your Omelet.

You may also grossly shred a handful or two of Parsley, and fry it in butter,
unto which you may add six or seven Eggs well beaten and seasoned, and in the
eating of your said Omelet, you may add some Vinegar or verjuice, or sugar
thereunto.

The Thirteenth manner, being an Omelet of Leeks.
Mince your Leeks very small, and afterward beat them with eggs, which being
seasoned with salt, you must pour them into butter half brown fried, or into
oil (if you love it) and so make an Omelet thereof, as aforesaid.

The Fourteenth manner, being an Omelet stuffed with Succory.
Take white Succory and steep it in boiling water, you may also make use of
wild Succory, let it steep long, but drain it, and afterward shred it very
small, and season it with salt, you may add Muscheroons unto it, which are but
half boiled, and cut into small morcels, cause all these to be fried in
butter, and let them dry, being taken out, and afterward mingle them with
beaten eggs, and make an Omelet of them, which said Omelet must not be
over-fried; and when it is ready to be served up, grate some Nutmeg and Sugar
upon it, or some Cinnamon, which you please.

The Fifteenth manner, being an Omelet made with Cheese.
Whilst your butter is melting in your Skillet, you must ssice Cheese very
small, and beat it together with your eggs; add thereunto as much salt as you
think fitting, and pour it all into some butter half brown fried, and in this
manner proceed to make your Omelet as aforesaid.

The Sixteenth manner, being an Omelet of Cowcumbers.
Take as much of an Omelet of eggs as you may judge to be requisite for your
purpose, mince it very small, whereunto you may add some Pineapple kernels,
some currants, or a pudding of Herbs, or minced Fish, well seasoned and boiled,
or rows, or miits of Carps which have been fried or boiled you may also add to
each of these ingredients Muscheroons half boiled and small sliced; mince all
these with some whites or yolks of raw eggs, after which fill up great and
large Cowcumbers therewith, after you shall have emptied and hollowed them, and
after you have filled them up again, you must stop the two corners, and you
must peel the Cowcumbers, and cause them to be stewed between two Platters, or
in a Tartpan, seasoning them with butter and water, and when your sauce is well
nigh ready, add thereunto a little verjuyce, or vinegar if need be, or fresh
sauce, grate nutmeg upon it, and crusts of white bread, or powder it with
sugar, accordingly, in reference to the quality or condition of the pudding, or
minced meat, where with all your Cowcumber is filled.

And instead of sauce you may make a very thin and plashy Omelet to wrap up
your Cowcumber in, thus stuffed at the same time, when as it is well fried and
ready to be eaten.

You may also stuf a Cowcumber with a roasted kidney of Veal, after it has been
minced with its own fat, and some yolks of eggs, some Pineapple kernels and
Currants, and some salt, with what you please besides, according to the former
prescriptions.

And when this your said mixture shall be well stewed between two dishes, or
fried in a pan, you may proceed to fit it, and to serve it up, as it has been
already set down in the foregoing chapters.

The Seventeenth manner, being an Omelet according to the Turkish mode.
Take of the flesh of the hinder part of a Hare, or of any other Venison, mince
it small with a little fat Bacon, some Pistaches, or Pineapple kernels, or
Almonds, or Spanish Nuts, or Hazel Nuts peeled, or Spanish Chestnuts, or French
Chestnuts, roasted and peeled, or some crusts of bread cut in slices, and tosted
like unto Chestnuts; season this minced stuff with salt, and with spices, and
with some sweet Herbs; if your flesh be raw you must add thereunto butter,
marrow, or good sweet suet small shredded, and when you have caused it to be
melted in a Skillet, pour thereinto your minced and seasoned meat, composed of
the aforesaid ingredients, and cause it to befried.

After which cause some butter to be melted in a Skillet, and make an Omelet
thereof, and when it is half fried, add your aforesaid minced meat thereunto,
and when your said Omelet is fried, take it out of the Drying Pan with a
Skimmer or Trencher, without the breaking of any part of it, and put it into a
dish in such a manner as that the minced meat may appear uppermost; after which
pour some Mutton broth upon your said minced meat, or the gravie of some other
roast meats, grate some Nutmeg upon it, whereunto you may add some sippets of
tosted or fried white bread, and some ssices of Lemmons.

Moreover, if your Hares flesh, or other Venison be roasted, it is so much the
better, and you shall then only need to mince and season it, as it has been
aforesaid, and so proceed to make your Omelet, which when it is half fried or
baked, add your said minced meat unto it, and so make up your Omelet.

And by default of Venison you may make your said Omelet of any other or linary
meat whatsoever.

The Eighteenth manner, being an Omelet made of Calves kindnies.
TAke the kidneys of a loin of veal, after it has been well roasted, mince it
together with its fat, and season it with Salt, and spices, and with some dried
Time, or other sweet Herbs, you may add thereunto some small crusts of fried
Bread, or some boiled Mouscherons, or some peeled Pistaches, after which you
may make up your Cmelet; And when it is half fried, pour your minced meat into
it, and when all your Omelet together shall be well fried, serve it up in a
dish, and grate some Nutmeg and Sugar upon the top of it.

The Nineteenth manner, being an Egg Tart, and a minced composure of Fish.
TAke a Carp or some other Fish, according to your pleasure, take out the bones
very well, add thereunto the Milts of Carps, season them with salt and pepper,
or with spices, and if you please you may add some Mouscherons unto them,
mince all these together, add some Pine-applekernels thereunto, some Currants,
and preserved Lemmonpeels, very small shredded; cause all this to be fried in
a frying pan, or in a Tart-pan with good store of butter, and when your said
minced Fish is thus fried, you must make a good and well-seasoned Omelet, which
being also half fried, pour your said Minced fish into it, and afterward take
both of them out of the sauce, and lay them dry.

Observe, that you must roll up this Omelet, and place it upon a plate, and
cutting it open at the two ends, you must spread them abroad in the form of a
Star, after which grate some sugar upon it, and sprinkle it if you please
with some Rose water.

The Twentieth manner, being an Omelet made with stuffed Herbs.
MInce all kind of sweet Herbs, and the yolks of hard Eggs together, season
the whole with salt, you may also add thereunto some half boiled Mouscherons,
and some Currants, put these minced ingredients upon a plate, or in a Dish, and
cover them over with a stabby or limber Omelet; and strew Sugar and Cinnamon
upon it if you please.

The one and Twentieth Manner, being an Omelet made with Sparagus.
TAke young and tender Sparagus, break or cut them into small pieces, cause
them to be half fried in brown butter, after which pour into them some beaten
Eggs seasoned with salt, and thus make your Omelet.

Others do cause their Sparag as to be perboyled in salt water, and having
taken them out of their said liquor, being well drayned, they put them into the
frying pan with some beaten Eggs, After which your Omelet being made, and
ready to be served up, add a drop or two of Vinegar, or verjuice unto it.

Sometimes you may take M^^scherons, well washed, and cut in pieces, and
causing them to be stewed betwixt two dishes over the fire, pressing out the
water which is in them, you may make use thereof to sprinkle your Omelet
withal, and you may also grate Nutmeg over it.

The two and Twentieth manner, being an Omelet only made with flower, in the
form of an Egge-tart.
As for example, beat four fresh eggs in five or six spoonfuls of milk, add
some salt unto them, and about the bigness of an egg, or a little more of
grated white bread, or a silver spoonful of fine flower, which you must most
exactly dislolve together with the eggs, by beating them thoroughly, after which
you must pour them into the butter to make your Omelet, which you must turn in
your pan, and must not spare any butter in the frying of it; when your said
Omelet is well fried, you may cut it into long and thick stices, like unto your
Naples Biscuit, or into any other shape you please, adding thereunto some sugar,
and a little rose water.

In case you do not turn your said Omelet in the Pan, as it is over the fire,
but leave it somewhat limber on the inward side, it will be the better.

You may also cause your eggs to be fried in an indifferent Fryingpan of
Copper, which has high borders, or in a little Tart-pan that so you may make
your said Omelet in the shape of a Cake; and to make it the more excellent and
pleasing, you may add unto it in the beating of your eggs a spoonful or two of
sugar powdered, beat all these well together, and pour them into the Frying or
Tart-pan, in which you must have brown fried the bigness of a Hens egg, or a
little more of fresh butter; after which cause your eggs to be gently fried
over a light fire, and accordingly as your said eggs begin to harden you may
stir them with a spoon, that so they stick not to the Tart-pan.

Observe, that you may dress these kind of eggs without any milk, and when
they are thoroughly hardened, give them a color on the top with a hot shovel,
and having in this manner disht your said Omelet, you may strew it with sugar,
and sprinkle it with rose water if you please.

The three and Twentieth manner, being an Omelet called in French a Miroir,
that is, a dainty, light, thin, and clear Omelet.
Spread into a dish with the back of a silver spoon about the bigness of a good
egg of fresh butter, beat six or seven eggs into it, and season them with salt
beaten very small, after which pour some six spoonfuls of good Cream upon the
whites of your eggs, and add a little salt to them; after which cause these
your said eggs to be fried, and at length give them a color on the top with a
hot shovel; but have a care however not to render the yolks too hard.

The Four and twentieth manner, being an Omelet of Eggs made in brown butter.
Cause your fresh butter to be very brown fried, brea Eggs into a dish, and
without dissolving or beating of them, pour them into your said butter, and
season them with beaten salt, and when they are well fried dish them up, and
sprinkle them with some vinegar, which you shall have dashed through the Frying
pan; grate a little Nutmeg over your Omelet, and if you please you may pour a
sauce called in French, A Robert, over these eggs, whereby such a kind of
Omelet begets the appellation of an Omelet, according to the fashion of Millan.

The Five and twentieth manner, being a way how to dress Eggs and Milk
exqusitely together, otherwise called, a broth of Eggs and Milk.
As for example, beat five or six eggs, add some salt thereunto powdered, and
about half a pint of good milk, which you must pour into your said eggs by
degrees at several times, and well beat and dissolve your said eggs with a
quantity of the said milk, and add thereunto a spoonful of powdered sugar;
pour all these ingredients into a good big dish, and set it over a pot full
of boiling hot water, or over a Chafingdish, and put into the said dish about
the bigness of a Hens egg of fresh butter melted, and when you have powered
your eggs and milk into the said dish and butter, you must cover the dish with
another dish or bowl, and so let the Eggs and milk boil gently without stirring
of them.

When they are sufficiently stewed, you must give them a brown color with a
hot shovel as aforesaid, and the which will also hasten their being dressed; and
taking them off from the fire, you must grate Sugar upon them, unto which you
may also add some Rose Water, or Cinnamon water, which you please.

Your Eggs being thus well stewed, must be presently eaten, for that if you
should keep them never so little, there would come a water upon them,
especially if your milk be not very pure; But however you may hinder the said
Eggs, from producing any water at all, by dissolving a little flower into the
milk, with the which you mix your said eggs.

And in case you rather choose, to stew them over a potfull of boiling water,
they will be far more delicate than over a Chafingdish, will cast up less
water, and besides, your said Dish will not run the hazard of melting; All
the trouble you will have will be to entertain and blow the fire under the
said Pot of boiling water, till such time as your said Eggs be totally stewed.

And they will be yet far more delicate and more pleasing, if instead of milk
you do make them with Cream, and if you put but a very few whites of eggs into
them, but then you will need the more Cream.

Sometimes also in these your Eggs and milk, you may put some parsley small
shredded, which you must mix therewith in the beating of your Eggs, and your
said dish will be far the better, although you add no Sugar thereunto, yet
if you do, it will be so much the better.

So likewise may you compose this said dish of Eggs, and milk, without the
adding of any butter unto it.

CHAP. CXXX.
Describing the several kinds of Marmalads, first the manner of making of
Marmalade with dissolved Eggs in verjuyce without Butter.

AS for example, beat four eggs, and dissolve them well, add some salt unto
them, and four spoonfuls of verjuyce, put them together upon the fire, and stir
them gently with a silver spoon until the eggs are sufficiently hardened; after
which take them off from the fire, and stir them again a while, that so they
may be thoroughly stifned or hardened.

In the same manner you may dress eggs stirred with the juice of a Lemmon, or
Orange, but you must have a care not to put over much of either into your said
eggs, chiefly of the juice of Oranges, because the quantity of it will oblige
you to keep your said milk and eggs a great while over the fire, which will
make them become bitter, and ill tasted.

The Second manner, being Eggs stirred both with Verjuyce, and Butter.
Cause butter to be melted in a dish, or in a Skillet, as for example, beat
four eggs into verjuyce, and add some salt unto them, pour them into melted
butter, and stir them until they incline toward being hard, after which
grate a little Nutmeg over them, and letting them stand over the fire yet a
while, you may garnish them with tosted sippets, or fried ones, which you
please.

Or otherwise.
Put fresh butter, and good honey in a stone platter over the fire, and whilst
the butter is a melting beat one half dozen, or as many yolks of eggs as you
think fitting therein, add thereunto half a glass full of verjuyce, for half a
dozen yolks of eggs, without the whites of them, which you must not put into
them; season them well with salt, and beat them all together very well in the
same manner as if you were to make an Omelet of the yolks of eggs, pour it into
your melted butter, and stir it constantly with a spoon, till it be ready to
be taken off from the fire.

The Third manner, being Eggs stirred with Verjuyce in the Grape.
Cause verjuyce in the Grape to be fried with butter, after which take beaten
eggs with some verjuyce, and season them with some salt, and pour them into
your butter and verjuyce, and stir them over the fire until such time as that
they be well fried, after which grate a littl Nutmeg over them.

Another manner.
As for example, dissolve four eggs with a little verjuyce, and cause them to
be fried at the same time as you mingle them together, and when they are half
fried, add unto them about two spoonfuls of the juice or sauce of Muscherons,
which have been well ordered, add a little salt thereunto, and so proceed to
cause your said eggs to be fried for good and all.

The Fourth manner, being Eggs stirred with meat broth.
As for example, beat four fresh eggs, and dissolve them with six spoonfuls of
Gelly, or as much broth of flesh which has been boiled without herbs, pour
this broth into it by spoonfuls, to which you may add a little verjuyce, and
as much salt as you think fitting; cause all these to be stewed over an
indifferent hot fire until they be pretty well mixed and cimented, after which
you must take the dish off from the fire, and you may grate into it some
Nutmeg, or some crusts of white bread.

The Fifth manner, being Eggs stirred with Cream.
Beat four eggs in a dish, with two spoonfuls of Cream, season them with salt,
to which you may also add a few slices of preserved Lemmon peels small grated,
pour this mixture into another dish, in which you shall have caused some butter
to be melted, let them stew easily, and be sure to stir them until they be
sufficiently well incorporated and knit together.

The sixth manner, being Eggs stirred with Cheese.
Cause the bigness of an egg of butter, to be melted in a dish, and in
another dish beat three Eggs, and dissolve them in the same manner as if it
were to make an Omelet, add thereunto about the bigness of an hazel Nut of
Cheese small shredded, or scraped, and when your said butter is melted, pour
your Eggs into it, and cause them to be fried over an indifferent fire, and
stir them continually with a spoon, until they be pretty well hardened, after
which taking them off from the fire, keep them covered with a Trencher, lest
they do take cold, and so serve them up to the table immediately.

In case your Cheese be not very salt, you may add as much salt thereunto, as
you shall judge to be requisire, at the same time of the beating of your Eggs.

The eight manner, being stirred Eggs with succory.
Take white succory, and cut or shred it very small, but let it be very young
and tender, put it betwixt two dishes, or in a Tart-pan, and set it over an
indifferent fire, that all its water may be drained, which you must pour out,
and afterward fry it in butter, and salt, and when it is well boiled, you must
pour into it dissolved Eggs, in the same manner as if you were to make an
Omelet; As for example, five or six eggs will make a pretty good dish, and the
more eggs you put to it, the better it will be, and in case you put only the
yolks of the eggs into it, as then you will need the more; Mix and dissolve all
these together, and grate some Nutmeg over them, and when the whole is pretty
well fried, and that your said eggs begin to be knitted and hardened, you
shall not need to stir them any more, and it will be sufficient if you leave
them a little while longer upon the fire, only to perfect their being thoroughly
fried.

The Eighth manner, being Eggs stirred with Cowcumbers.
Peel your Cowcumbers and cause them to be perboyied in water, after which lay
them out to be drayned, and after that cut them into slender slices, and put
three or four of them into a frying pan, wherein about a quarter of a pound of
fresh butter has been fried half brown, season them with salt beaten small,
and with pepper, and fry them all together, and when they are well fried, pour
the yolks of two or three beaten Eggs into it, dissolved with a little
verjuice, stir all your said mixture into your pan, and when your Eggs shall
be sufficiently fried, dish it up all together, and grate some Nutmeg upon it,
if you please.

The Ninth manner, being stirred Eggs with green sauce.
As for example, beat four eggs in the same manner as you would make an
Omelet, season them with falt, and with a little pepper and spice, add
thereunto about the bigness of an Egg of grated white bread, or as much fine
flower, mix all these ingredients very well, and add thereunto as many
spoonfulls of green sauce as there are Eggs, after which pour this mixture
into a dish, in which you shall have melted about the bigness of an egg of
fresh butter, very hot and brown fried, cause these your said eggs to fry
gently, and stir them with a spoon until they be sufficiently fried to your
liking.

The Tenth manner, being another kind of Marmalade made of stirred Eggs.
Dissolve both the white and yolks of six eggs together, with about six
spoonfuls of Rose Water, or Fountain Water, add some salt, and a grated
Macaroon unto it, and the bigness of a Wal-nut of grated white-bread, or
instead thereof two Macaroons will suffice, and about the half of a side of
preserved Lemmon peel, either shredded into small flices or grated; Pour all
this mixture into a dish, in which there has been about the bigness of an
Egg of fresh butter melted, Let these Eggs be fried therein, and turn them
now and then with a spoon, in the same manner as you do your other stirred eggs.

When this your said Marmalad shall be sufficiently fried, though you must not
let it become too dry, take it off from the fire; and you may add unto the said
Eggs a spoonful or two of Hipocras, or of Malmsy, or of Sack, which you must
put into them when they are half boiled, after which you must very well stir
them with a silver spoon, and let them fry easily.

These Eggs are more pleasing being eaten cold than hot, and when they are
fried, you may put them into a Dough Coffin of very fine paste, and so make a
handsome Tart of them.

The Eleventh manner, being Eggs stirred with Almonds.
Take a Biscuit or two, which are slender ones, separate the top from the
bottom, and cause them to be toasted by the fire, cause also, as for example,
four eggs to be boiled hard, and take out their yolks, dissolve them in a
Porenger with a spoon, add thereunto three other yolks of raw Eggs, two
Macaroons reduced to powder, or about the bigness of a good egg or a little
more, of peeled Almonds, which have bin exactly pounded with some Rose Water;
and two spoonfuls of Sugar, salt, at your own discretion, and having mixed all
these things together you may add thereunto some preserved Lemmon peels small
shredded.

After which, taste your said Mixture, and in case you deem it to be well
seasoned, put it upon a small fire, and dissolve it with a silver spoon; And
when it is very hot add thereunto some morcels of toasted Biskers, about the
bigness of half a Crown or thereabouts, stick them somewhat deep into your
said Marmalad, that they be quite covered therewith, but however in such a
manner, as that they may easily be gotted out with a Fork, and so proceed to
finish your Almond stirred eggs.

The Twelfth manner, being yet another kind of stirred Eggs.
Season Mouscherons very well, and cause them to be boiled, to which you may
add some Sparagus cut into morcels, and when your said Mouscherons are ready
to be served up, break three or four eggs into them, and mingle them together,
and cause them to be fried with the rest of your ingredients, until they be
sufficiently knitted or united together.

The Thirteenth manner, being Eggs stirred according to the Polonian Fashion.
Cause grated white bread to be steeped in any broth whatsoever, after which
you must pound it well in a marble Mortar, and so put it into a dish, break
twelve eggs or more into it, add thereunto a little salt, and five or six
spoonfuls of broth, which you must at several times, and by degrees, pour into
your said eggs whilst you are a dissolving of them, after which, put a little
preserved Lemmon peels into it, either small shredded or cut into small slices,
pour all this mixture into a dish, in which you shall have caused some fresh
butter to be fried half brown, cause these eggs to be gently fried, and stir
them until they are well hardened and knitted together, and instead of Meat
broth, you may make use of milk, in the composing of these your said Polish
stirred eggs.

The Fourteenth manner, being exquisite, and Courtly, buttered Eggs.
Take for example, ten yolks of fresh eggs, put them into a dish, with as many
spoonfuls of jelly, or of Meat pottage, boiled without herbs, and which has
had the fat skimmed of, put the said broth into your eggs, by degrees, and by
spoonfuls, that so you may the better dissolve the yolks of your eggs, into
your said Meat broth, unto which add half a quarter of a pound or a whole
quarter of a pound of powder sugar, and an ounce of preserved Lemmon peel,
either grated or cut into small slices, or very little bits; let all these
ingredients steep together for the space of one half hour, after you shall have
added some salt to it, in case you suppose the broth be not salt enough of it
self.

Finally, you must put four spoonfuls of Rose Water into another Porringer,
with half an ounce of sugar, and let them boil but about half a dozen boylings
up only, and after that pour into it your prepared and seasoned eggs as
aforesaid; cover your said dish, and cause them to stew gently as you did your
eggs and milk, or if you please you may tame them with a silver spoon in the
same manner as you did your eggs and verjuyce.

And when they are well mingled and joined, and begin to be hardened, take your
dish off from the fire, and when the said eggs are become somewhat cold, you
must put about an ounce of powder sugar upon them, and sometimes a little Musk
is added unto them, being dissolved in Rose Water, or in Cinnamon water.

You may keep these eggs till they be half cold before you eat them if you
please; and they are likewise very good though they are quite cold; you may eat
them either ways at your own pleasure.

The Fifteenth and last manner of stirring of Eggs, called in French ala
Hugenotte, or the Protestants manner.
Cause five or six eggs to be well beaten, and pour them into the gravie or
juice of a Leg of Mutton, or of any other roasted meat, stir them well
together over the fire, and add some salt unto them.

You may also add some verjuyce, or the juice of an Orange to your said eggs,
and gravie, as also the juice of a Lemmon.

So likewise may you put therein some Muscherons well boiled and seasoned to
the life.

Observe also, that as soon as your said eggs are well mixed, and incorporated
with your said gravie, and the other ingredients; you must take them off from
the fire, and keeping them covered a while, you may afterward grate some
Nutmeg over them.

Observe also, that to render them the more pleasing and toothsome, you may
strew some powdered Ambergrease, and fine loaf sugar powdered into them, before
you do serve them up to the table.

In this self-same manner you may dress the several sorts of stirred eggs here
above mentioned, especially these last, with all kind of sauces you can
imagine, or do affect, as with Sparagus, with Hartichokes, with Muscherons,
with Cream, Milk, with green-Sauce, with the broth of Hens, or of Fish, or any
other liquor you fancy your self, etc.

FINIS.
The Perfect English COOK.
To make a Lumbar Pie.
TAke three pound of Mutton, Veal or Lamb, and three pound of Beef suit, and
shred them small together, and take the tops of Time and Margerum and Winter
Savoury, a handful of each, and mince them very small by themselves, and take
a penny white loaf and grate it, and take ten eggs and break them on your meat,
and two pound of Currants; and for seasoning take two Nutmegs and a race of
Ginger, and a few Cloves, and three or four blades of Mace and a little salt;
and so mix all these together, and make them into balls so big as an egg; and
when your Pie is made, put these balls in, and lay on them a few Raisons and a
few dates sliced, and so lay on the lid; and it will require 2 hours baking,
and being baked make a leere to put in it of varges and a little Sack, and a
little fresh butter, and a little Sugar, and set that on the fire not too hot;
and so take the yelks of three eggs, and so beat them with a little varges, and
so brew them together, and pour it in the Pie, the lid being cut up, and if you
please lay on your lid whole or cut it in pieces, and set the pieces above the
Pie and so serve it hot, and it is a very good Lumber Pie.

To bake Chickens or Partridges.
Take your Chickens or Partridges and boil them, and cut the flesh from the
bones, and mince it with pepper and salt, and Nutmegs and Sugar, and so bake
it; then take white wine and make a casdel of yelks of eggs, anon blanch them
and beat them, then strain them together and put in the Pie, and let it stand a
while after.

To make a Fregacy of Lamb or Veal.
Take Veal or Lamb, which you please, and cut it in pieces as big as is fit to
dispose on a trencher; parboyl your meat in fair water and a little salt, then
take of sweet herbs, Margerum, Winter savoury, Time and the like, but most
Time, and pick them very clean, shred them, then beat two or three eggs and put
to the shred herbs, and mix them all very well together, then roll your eggs,
meat and herbs till your meat has taken it up; then take sweet butter and fry
your meat in, and if any herbs be left, put it on your meat in the pan; when it
is fried enough, take White wine and sweet butter and Sugar, and melt for sause
and pour it on your meat, and with sippets serve it up.

To Season Venison Pasties.
A venison Pasty, the right seasoning is pepper and salt, but some season it
with beaten Cinnamon and salt. Veal, Lamb, Mutton, either of these three are to
be seasoned with Nutmegs and pepper and salt.

A Flank or Surline of Beef.
Season this only with pepper and salt, and if you will have your Surline to
pass for Venison, after you have boned it over night in Red wine, but first
beat it very well before you break the grime, and then it will pass for
Venison.

A Pigeon Pie.
When your Pigeons are drawn and washed, then break their bones and season them
with Nutmeg and Peper and salt; wrap some balls of butter in your seasoning,
and put a ball in every Pigeon, which will season them within; then season it
without and lay your Pigeons in your Pie, and on them some grapes or barberies,
and a little large mace and butter, and so close your Pie and bake it; and when
it is drawn to dish, then melt some butter and pour over the lid and letie in
at the corner, and serve it.

A Chicken Pie.
Season your Chikens with Nutmegs and pepper, and roll some balls of butter in
your seasoning, and put in the Chikins, and then put them into your Pie, and
then put to them a few currants and a few Prunes, and some barberies and dates
and a little mace, some butter, so close your Pie, and bake it, and when you
draw it liquor it with this liquor following; then throw on fine Sugar on the
top, dish it and serve it.

The Liquor for the Chikin Pie.
Take half a pint of white wine, and half a pint of varges and a quartern of
poudered Sugar, and a pound of sweet butter, let this boil up in a pipkin let
it but boil up, and pour it on, and sugar it, and serve it.

Another way of a Chikin Pie.
Season your Chikins as before, then lay them in your Pie, and then lay some
lettice sealded and cut in quarters, or some bottomes of hartichokes boiled and
the core taken out of the cut bottoms in them, and the marrow of two or three
bones, and some lettice, suckets, and dates, mace, etc. barberies, and butter
it and bake it, and serve it with the same liquor as before, and so serve it in
the fashion of the Pie.

A Lamb Pie with fruit.
Take a hinder quarter of Lamb, cut it into small pieces, then season it with
Nutmegs and pepper and salt, and fill your Pie, then put in some currants, and
some prunes, and barberies and dates, and mace, and butter, and so close it and
bake it; and when it is baked, liquor it with varges, butterand sugar, and
throw Sugar upon it, and serve it in.

Take a hinder quarter of Lamb, cut half the line in one piece, that the kidney
way lie fair in the middle of the Pie, and then cut the rest of the Lamb in
small pieces, to lay about it in the corners of the Pie, season it with
Nutmegs, pepper and salt and fill your pie, then lay upon it baberies, and
mace, and sweet butter and so close it and bake it; when you draw it pour on it
some butter and serve it.

A Veal Pie with fruits.
Leave the kidney of it fair and part off the line, then cut the other in
little piece, season it with Nutmegs, pepper, and salt, and lay it in the pie,
and lay some Ralsons of the sun and some currants and prunes, dates and mace,
and barberies and butter, so close it and bake it, and liquor it with varges,
butter and sugar, and boil it up, and pour it in; so sugar it on the top, and
serve it. The fashion; you may bake it if you will only with Nutmegs, pepper
and salt and butter with fruit.

A Calves-foot Pie.
Take your feet being boiled, and cut them from the bones, and mince them
small, then season them with nutmegs, pepper and a little salt, beaten Cinnamon
and Sugar, varges and Rose Water and currants, and some sliced dates, and
stripe barberies, then lay some butter in the bottom of the pie, and fill it,
and close it, and when it is baked, pour upon it a little varges, butter and
sugar boiled up toge her; So ferve it in the fashion.

A Chowthern Pie.
Take your Chowthern and boil them, and when they are cold, then mince them,
then season them with nutmegs and a little pepper, and beaten Cinnamon, and
beaten ginger, a little cloves and mace, and currants, and sugar, and varges,
and Rose Water, and some salt, and dates sliced small; mix them all together,
and fill your pie; then close it and bake it; an hour and a little more will
bake it; then dish it and throw sugar on it, and serve it, and keep it.

An Vmble Pie
Take your umbles and parboyl them very well; then take away the gullet, and
the skins of skirts and cast them, and when the humbles are cold take three or
four pound of suet and mince them very fine, then season them as you season the
Chowthern, and so serve them hot or cold, The fashion.

Minced Pie of Veal.
Take a leg of veale cut it from the bone, and parboyl it, and when it is cold
minceit small, then mince eight pound of suet and mix with it as many p^und of
currants, and one pound of prunes, and season it with one quarter and an half
of Cinnamon, as much cloves and mace, as much nutmegs, as much ginger, a little
pepper, one pound and a half of sugar, half a pound of dates cut small at
length, half a pint of Rose Water, half a pint of varges, and a little salt,
mix these together, and fill your pie, and close them, and bake them, and serve
them hot or cold.

To bake Pullets.
Draw your Pullets and cut off their wings and legs, and break them well, and
wash them and dry them in a cloth, then season them with pepper, nutmegs, and
salt, and put some butter-roules in the spice into them, then lay them into
your pie, and on them first meat, barberies mace and butter, and close them,
and when they are baked pour some butter into the pie, and so serve it; you may
put in oysters.

To bake a Goose or a Turkey Phesant or Capon cold.
Draw your Fowl and break it, that the bonesstart not; then season it with
nutmegs, pepper, and salt, and stick some whole cloves in the breast, and thighs
of it, and lay it in your pie; then put butter to it and close it, and wash the
outsides of your pie with yolks of raw eggs, and then bake it, and when it is
baked pour on the top of it good store of melted butter, and so let it stand to
be cold; if you love lard, you may lard it or some part of it.

A Neats tongue cold.
Boil your neats tongues and blanch them, and when they are cold then lard them
if you love lard, and stick some whole cloves in them; then season them with
nutmegs, pepper and salt and a little beaten Cloves and Mace, and so fill your
pie and put in butter and bake them, and wash your pie with yolks of eggs; and
when it is baked, put in melting butter and so let it by.

A Venison Pie cold.
Take your venison and lard it well, and season it with beaten Nutmegs and
Peper, Cloves and Mace, Ginger and Cinnamon, and Gold; season it very strong,
then lay it in your pie, and put in a few bay leaves and butter, and so bake
it; having washed the outside with yolks of eggs; and when it is baked fill it
full of butter, and when it is cold use it.

The fashion, you may bake part of the burtock of Beef, thus handled in stead
of Venison.

A Pippin Tart.
Take eighty Pippins, pare them and quarter them, and then your tart being
raised, lay in you quarters as thick as you can lay them; then put to them a
little whole Cinnamon and Ginger and a few Cloves, and a pound and half of
sugar, and so bake them; when you have closed your Tart sugar it at the top,
and so serve it.

A Warden or Quince Tart.
Take your fruit, pare, quarter and core them as your Pippins, and then lay
them close in your Tart being raised, and put to them whole Cinnamon, Ginger,
Cloves, and bake it; then throw sugar upon it and serve it hot or cold.

A Quince Pie, a Warden Pie, or a Pippin Pie, or a Pear Pie.
Pare your fruit and lay them whole into your pie, and put to them whole spice
and sugar; as to the Tarts; put somewhat more sugar to them, because whole
fruit will ask longer baking. The fashion.

To make an Apricock Tart.
Take Apricocks, pare them and lay them whole one by one in your Coffen, and
put whole spice and sugar, at least a pound in a Tart, then close it and bake
it.

A Marrow Florentine.
Take a penny white loaf stale and cut it into sippets, and take marrow of two
bones cut into slices and a pound of Raisons of the sun and a few dates cut
very small, then take a deep dish and lay some sippets in the bottom, then lay
some marrow upon the sippets, then throw some dates and Raisons of the sun,
beaten Nutmeg, and salt upon the marrow, then lay the other lay of bread, and
then more Marrow, Dates, Raisons, Cinnamon and salt; thus lay in all the bread
and Marrow and other things, and then lay sippets upon the top of all, and then
fill your dish up with custard stuff, which will bind all together, and bake it
and serve it hot.

To make Florentines of Almonds.
Take a quarter of a pound of Almonds, and blanch them, and then beat them fine
in a stone mortar with a little Rose Water and sugar into a paste; then take a
pint of Cream and eight eggs beaten well together, and set it on the fire, and
turn it to a perfect curd; then turn it into a strainer and draine away the
whey, then put the curd into a dish and a little sweet butter with it, and
season it with Nutmegs and salt and Rose Water, and sugar, two or three eggs
and some Dates, and cut all very small, and some marrow if you will mix these
together, and having covered your dish with a sheet of puf-paste, lay your
stuff in, and cover it with another sheet of paste, so close it and take it.

To make a Florentine of kidneys of Veal.
Take kidneys and shave off the fat of a best line of veal, and when it is cold
mince it very fine, then season it with Nutmegs, and salt and Cinnamon, and
Rose Water, and sugar, and some Currants, and two or three eggs, and a little
sweet herbs minced very fine, with some grated bread; mix them together and
bake it in a dish between sheets of puf-paste, and serve it hot.

To make Florentines of Apples.
Take your Apples and pare them and slice them and core them, then mince them
and season them with beaten Cinnamon and Ginger, Rose Water, Sugar and
Currants, and so bake it in a dish between two sheets of pye-paste; these are
good either hot or cold for service.

Other Florentines.
You may bake any fruit, as Apples, Damsons, Cherries, Plums, or Pears, if your
Pears be first baked in a pot; for you must understand that puf-paste will not
ask above an hours baking, therefore the stuff of the Florentine must be so
tender as will ask no longer time; now I have shown you how to make Florentine
which is seldom used; this paste for any thing besides, but for fearn tarts, or
lay tarts when it must be cut out out in branches, such as will give you
patterns for baking only upon papers, and after your paste is baked lay on the
preserves, or lay stuff, etc.

Other Tarts.
All manner of fruits, as Pears, Goosberies, Rusberies and such like, must be
all baked with whole spice and sugar, as this I have set down only in Pipines;
you may put Orengados in slices if you will, and for the fashion you may make
use of any fashion I have set down.

To make an Olive Pie.
Take part of a leg of veal, and slice it into thin slices, then take a few
sweet herbs and mince them, then take a few Currants, and Nutmegs, and Pepper,
and your minced herbs, and salt, and strew upon the slices of veal, and roll up
every piece of veal by it self, and lay them in the pie, with Dates, Mace,
Barberies, and butter, and so close it; bake it and liquor it with varges
butter and a little sugar, and so serve it hot.

Sauces.
Sauce for young Rabits roasted.
Take juice of Orenges with the gravy, and a little vargice, salt and pepper,
^tir all together with a little fresh butter, and so serve it.

Sauce for a Capon roasted.
Take a penny white loaf and grate it, and boil it in a little water with a
whole Onion, and when you take it off, put to it a little fresh butter and
sugar.

Sauce for a Feldefare, which will serve diverse other birds.
Take a little vinegar with a little Orange peel and a white bread-toaft with a
whole onion, these put in the pan under them, and after serve them up together.

Sauce for a Woodcock.
Boil Onions (if they be drawn) with a little pepper and salt; boil them
together, and so serve them.

Another.
Take toast of white bread (if not drawn) with juice of Orenges, and
vine-leaves roasted upon them, and then crumble them into the sauce with a
little bit of sweet butter and so serve it.

Sauce for roasted Larks.
Lard them, and when they are roasted make your sauce with crumbs of white
bread, water and salt boiled together.

To make Gallendine or sauce for Venison or Turkeys.
Take a pint of Claret wine, a little fair water, and a little white
water-vineger, beaten Cinnamon, beaten Ginger, a few whole Cloves, and some
grated Bread, a little Sandars, and a little Rosemary, and sugar, and as you
think fitting boil them well together, and it is made.

Sauce for a roast shoulder of mutton.
When your mutton is at the fire, set a clean dish under it, and put into the
dish some Claret wine and a few Caphers and a whole onion and baste your mutton
with the Claret wine, which is my dish, etc. and throw salt on it, and when it
is roasted take the dish which is under it, and blow or take off the fat, and
save the wine and the gravee and the Capers, and the juice of some Oringes, and
when your mutton is dished, when its baked scoltch it with a knife, and throw
salt upon it, and pour the sauce on the top of it, and throw on some sliced
nutmegs and a little Oring, Peels finely mixed and so garnish it with sliced
Lemons and serve it.

Sauce for a Carpe.
Cut some small Oysters with a few Caphers, Mace, Nutmeg, salt, and Pepper, and
boil them softly on the fire; then add a little fresh butter, not forgetting
to add some of the blood of the Carp to it, and rub the dish with a clove of
Garlic, dish it up, the bread being soaked in the sauce.

Sauce for a Barbile.
Take the quantity of half a pound of fresh butter with a little varges,
thicken it with the yolks of one or two eggs.

To boil Flownders after our best English fashion.
Take about the quantity of a pint of white wine, a little whole mace and
pepper with a little young Thyme, and season it with varges and salt, to which
add a little sweet butter, and so serve it.

To souce a Gurnet.
Take of the best white wine vinegar, with some Time, Fennel, and a little
Parsley, and let them boil well together, adding a little salt, keep it in a
close vessel, and put in the fish.

To boil Salmon, Thornback, Conger, etc.
Boil them with a little water and salt, and sweet herbs, as Time,
Winter-savoury, Rosemary, etc. but remember to keep it always well scummed;
then add a little vinegar and let them boil till it be tender; you must also
remember to blanch the Thornback while it is hot.

To stew a Trout, a rare dish.
When they are orderd fit for stewing, put white wine to the Trout, a little
water with fresh butter, a few sweet herbs minc't, and with a little loafsugar
put to them, and let them not stew above half an hour, and with a soft fire;
some add two or three hard eggs slic't and put upon the Trouts when you serve
them in.

To murine Carps.
Take a quart of water to a Gallon of vinegar, a good handful of Bayleaves, as
much Rosemary, a quarter of a pound of pepper beaten; put all these together
and let it sees softly, and season it with a little salt; then fry the fish
with sweet oil, then put it in an earthen vessel, and lay Bay Leaves between
and about the fish, and pour the broth upon it.

Another excellent way to dress diverse sorts of fish.
Take a piece of fresh Salmon and wash it clean in a little Vinegar and water,
and let it lie a while in it; then put it into a pipkin with a cover, then put
to it some six spoonfuls of water, and four of vinegar, and as much of White
wine, a good deal of salt, a handful of sweet herbs, a few Cloves, a little
Cinnamon and Mace; and being in a pipkin, set it in a kettle of seething water,
there let it stew about three hours. The like you may do by Carps, Eels and
Trouts.

To boil a fresh fish, as a Carp, etc.
Take a Carp, or other, and put them into a deep dish, with a pint of White
wine, a little large Mace, a little Time, Rosemary, and sweet butter; and let
them boil between two dishes in his own blood; season it with Pepper and
Varjuice, and so serve it then in sippets.

To pickle Oysters.
Take Oysters and wash them clean in their own liquor, then let them settle,
then drain it, and put the Oysters to it with a little Mace, and whole Pepper,
as much salt as you please, and a little Wine-vinegar; then set them over the
fire, and let them boil leisurely; be sure to skim them as the skum rises;
when they are enough take them out till the pickle be cold, then put them into
any pot that will lie close, and so barrel them in small barrels.

To souce a Carp.
Take your Carp and draw it, and wash it with water and falt and vinegar, but
not let it lie in the water; then set on your pan and put in it some water and
salt, and a little wine vinegar, White or Claret Wine, and a bunch of sweet
herbs, and a little Mace; let there be as much liquor to boil it as will cover
it; and keep it soused in the same liquor, and serve it.

To souce an Eele.
Take your Eele and souse the skin of it with salt, till the skin be gotten
off, but do not flea off the skin; then slit it down the back, take away the
inward parts; then wash it well, and cut away the head, and the tail, and take
sweet herbs, Nutmegs, and Pepper, and salt, and strew it up the midst of the
Eele, and roll it up into a roll, and bind it up; and then boil it in water and
salt, and vinegan, and White wine, and Bayleaves; and when it is boy led binder
take it up into a pan, and put the liquor it was boiled in into it, and so let
it stand to be cold; and eat it with vinegar.

To souce a Pig.
Take a sucking Pig, and salt and draw him, cut him down the chine and the
breast, into two sides, and take out the bones, and lay the sides in water two
or three hours, then wash them well out; and take a few sweet herbs, and
mince them fine, and strew on the inside of the sides, and some blades of Mace,
and a handful of salt, then roll off each sides of the Pig like a Collar of
Brawn, and bind them with pack thread and boil them with fair water, and a
little vinegar till they be tender, then take them off the fire, and let them
lie in the liquor till they be almost cold, then take them up and put them in
sousing-drink made of White wine-vinegar, and water, and salt.

To make the best sort of minced Pyes.
A minced Pie of Mutton or Beef, the meat must not be parboyled, but minced raw
with the suet, and seasoned as the Veal, and altogether costly; as also you
must put Raisins in this meat, which will eat very well cold or hot.

A Potato Pie.
Boil your Potatos tender, and then peel them, and let them be cold; then
season them with beaten Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Pepper a little; let the pieces of
your Potatos be cut indifferent, and fill up your Pie, then put the marrow of
two or three bones to them, and some Dates cut in halfs, a little Mace, some
Barberies or Grapes, or Lemmons, and some Citron Suckets, then put in half a
pound of Butter, and close it and bake it; liquor it with the liquor you make
for a Chik in Pie.

A Hartichoke Pie.
Take Hartichokes, and cut away the green leaves from the bottoms, till the
bones look white; then boil the bottoms as much as if they were to be eaten;
take out the core and season the bottoms, being cut into four parts as you did
the Potatoes, and put all things into that Pie; and bake it and liquor it as
the other.

A Skerret Pie.
Boil your skerrets and peel them, and cut them off indifferently; then season
them, and put all things to them as to the other Pie; and close it and bake it
and liquor it likewise, and serve it hot.

An Oyster Pie.
Take three pints of Oysters, and parboyl them a little, and when they are cold
season them with Nutmegs, Pepper and salt, and put them into your Pie, and some
Marrow, Dites, Mace, Barberies, Lemmons and Butter; then close it and bake it,
and liquor it with varjuice, Butter and Sugar, and serve it.

Au Eele Pie.
Flea your Eels, and cut your Eels into pieces, and season them with Nutmegs,
Pepper and salt; and lap them into the Pie, and put in them some: Crurants,
Prunes, Dates, Mace, Barberies, Lemmons, Butter and Sugar, and so serve it.

For to boil Rubits.
You must boil them in water and salt, and take some strong broth, Ale, a
little White wine, a bunch of sweet herbs, some Onions sliced if you love
them, a quarter of a pound of Samf^age, a good handful of parsley; boil these
together, then put in a little vinegar, and a good piece of sweet butter; and
let it just boil up, and so serve them being dished.

To stew Oysters.
Take a pottle of Oysters, and save the liquor of them, thus wash the Oysters
clean from gravel and shells, put them then into a pipkin, and put their own
liquor to them again, and a little vinegar, a little large Mace, Onions whole
being peeled, with a bunch of sweet herbs; and a little grose-pepper, let
these boil together till the Oysters be ready; then put away the liquor from
them and take one pound of sweet butter, shake it with the Oysters till the
butter be melted, and the butter will be thick; So serve them on sippets, and
garnish them, but take away the Onions.

A Sauce which will serve for Cocks, or Purtridges, or Phesants, or Ducks.
Take two or three Onions and peel them into some water, put grated bread,
Pepper and salt into it; boil these together a pretty while, till it begins to
be pretty thick; then takeaway the Onions, and put to it a piece of sweet
butter, and some Lemons cut small, and so put into the dish, but let it not
boil after the butter or lemon.

To make White broth.
Take your pipkin with some broth of the Capon, or Hen, then put in a pint of
White wine, with half a pint of Sack, and the Marrow taken out of three or four
bones, as whole as you can, then put in some whole Cinnamon, some sliced
Nutmegs, some large Mace, some Dates cut in halfes, three or four Pippins
pared, and quarted; boil all these together till your Marrow be very well
boiled; then sweeten it very well with Sugar; then take the yolks of ten or
twelve eggs, and bear them very well, and drain them with a little varjuice;
and when your pipkin has staid off the fire a pretty while, put your eggs in,
but stir it well for fear of curdling; then serve it in with your Capon or Hen,
with the Marrow, Dates or Spice on the top, to garnish it forth.

To make a Florentine of Spinach.
Take a good quantity of Spinach, sealed it, and chop it very fine with the back
of a knife; then make some curd with milk and eggs, and out to your Spinach,
and mince it well together; then put in the yolks of three or four eggs, with a
litttle sweet butter melted; then season it with Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and Sugar,
and Rose Water, and mix them well together, then put it into the puff-paste and
bake it.

Reader, These Books following are Printed for Nath. Brook, and are to be sold
at his shop at the Angel in Cornhil.
1. TImes Treasure, or Academy for the Gentry, for their accomplish ^ent in
arguments of discourse, habit, fashion; summed up all in a Character of Honor:
By R. Brath. Eq.

2. B. Morton on the Sacrament: in folio.

3. That excellent piece of Phyfiognomy and Chiromancy, Metoposcopy, the
Symmetrical Proportions and signal Moles of the Body; the subject of Dreams: to
which is added the Art of Memory: By R. Sanders. Fol.

4. Theatrum Chemicum Britanicum, containing several Poetical pieces of our
famous English Philosophers' which have written the Hermetick Mysteries in
their ancient language: By the truly noble Elius Ashmole Esquire

5. Chiromancy: or the Act of Divining by the Lines engraven in the hand of Man
by Dame Nature, in 19. Genitures; with a learned Discourse of the soul of the
World: By Geo. Wharton, Esquire

6. Catholic History, collected and gathered out of Scripture, Councils and
ancient Fathers, in answer to Dr. Vanes lost sheep returned home: By Edward
Chrsenhale, Esquire

7. Tactometrica, or the Geometry of Regulars, after a new manner, in Solids:
with useful Experiments, with new Experiments, never before extant, for
Gauging; a work useful for all that are employed in the Art Metrical: By John
Weyberd, Dr. in Physic.

8. An Astrological Discourse, with Mathematical Demonstrations, proving the
influence of the Planets and fixed Stars upon Elementary bodies: By Sir Chr.
Heydon, Knight.

9. Magic Astrolo, ie vindicated by H. Warren.

10. Catastrophe Magnatum: By N. Culpeper.

11. Ephemerides for the year 1652. by N. Culpeper.

12. Judicial Astrology vindicated, and Demonologie confuted: By W. Ramsey,
Gent.

13. The History of the Golden Ass.

14. The painting of the Ancients, the beginning, progress, and consummating
of that noble Art.

15. Isreal's Redemption, or the Prophetical History of our Saviors Kingdom on
Earth: By R. Matton.

16. An Introduction to the Teutonick Philosophy, being a determination of the
Original of the Soul: By C. Hotham, Fellow of Peter House in Camb.

17. Teratologiat or, a Discovery of Gods Wonders, manifested in former and
modern times by bloody Rain and Waters: By J.S.

18. Fons Lachrymarum, or a Fountain of Tears, with an Elegy upon Sir Charles
Lucas, by J. Quarles.

19. Oedipus: or, a Resolver of Secrets in Nature, and resolution in amorous,
natural Problems: By C.M.

20. The Celestial Lamp, enlightening every distressed soul from the depth of
everlasting darkness: By T. Fetisplace.

21. Nocturnal Lucubrations, with Epigrams and Epitaphs: By R. Chamberlain.

22. The unfortunate Mother, a Tragedy: By Tho. Nabs.

23. The Rebellion, a Comedy, by T.R.

24. The Tragedy of Messelina: By Nath. Richards.

25. A Treatise of Contentation, fit for these sad and troublesome times: By J.
Hall, B. of No.

26. The Grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome, in taking away the Sacred cup
from the Laity at the Lords Table: By D. Featly, D.D. 4

27. The cause and cure of Ignorance, Error and profaneness; or, a more
hopeful way to Grace and salvation: By R. Young. 8.

28. A Bridle for the Times, tending to still the Marmuring, to settle the
Wavering, to stay the Wandering, to strengthen the Fainting: By J. Brinsly,
Minister at Yarmouth.

29. Comforts against the fear of Death, wherein are several evidences of the
work of Grace; by J. Collins of Norw.

30. Jacobs Seed; or the excellency of seeking God by Prayer. By Jerem.
Buroughs Minister of the Gospel at Stepney and Crit plegate.

31. The zealous Magistrate, a Sermon by Tho. Threscot.

32. Britannia Rediviva, A Sermon before the Judges, Aug. 1649, by J. Shaw,
Minister of Hull.

33. The Princess Royal, a Sermon before the Judges, March. 24. 1650. By J.
Shaw, Minister of Hull.

34. New Jerusalem, in a Sermon for the Society of Astrologers, Aug. 1651.

35. Cabinet of Jewels, discovering the nature, virtue, value of precious
Stones, with infallible Rules to escape the deceit of all counterfeit, by T.
Nicholes.

36. Quakers cause at second hearing, being a full answer to their Tenets.

37. Divinity no enemy to Astrology: a Sermon for the Society of Astrologers,
for the year 1653. By Dr. Tho. Swadlin.

38. Historical Relation of the first planting of the English in New England,
in the year 1628. to the year 1653. and all the material passa^es happening
there exactly performed.

39. Select Thoughts: or, Choice Helps for a pious spirit, beholding the
excellency of her Lord Jesus, by J. Hall, B. of Nor. A new piece.

40. The holy Order, or Fraternity of Mourners in Zion. To which is added,
Songs in the night: or, Cheerfulness under affliction, by Jos. Hall Bishop of
Norwich, A new piece:

41. The Art of Memory: a cure for a weak Memory, useful to all persons, from
the Crown to the Clown. A new piece.

42. History of Balaam and Jonah, and John the Baptist in Verse: with other
Poems, by Jo. Harvie Esquire A new piece.

43. Re-assertion of grace, Vindicia Evangeli^: or, the Vindication of the
Gospel. Or a reply to Mr. Anthony Bu^gess Vindiciae Legis, and to Mr.
Rutherford, by Robert Town. A new piece.

44. Anabaptists anatomized and silenced: or a dispute with Mr. Tombr, by Mr.
John Cragge, where all may receive satisfaction in that Controversy.

45. The sum of practical Divinity: or the grounds of religion in a
Catechistical way: by Mr. Christopher Love, late Minister of the Gospel. A
useful piece.

46. The Yorkshire Spaw, or the virtue and use of those waters in the curing
of desperate diseases, with rules necessary to be known by all that repair
thither.

47. That complete piece called The exact Survey or of Land, showing how to
plot all manner of Grounds, and to reduce and divide the same. Also Irish
measure, reduced to English statute measure, useful for all that either sell or
purchase; By J.E.

48. Judgment set, and Books opened, Religion tried whether it be of God or
men; By M. Webster.

49. Milk for children, or a plain and easy method, teaching to Read, and to
Write, with brief Rules for Schoolmasters to instruct their Scholars in, and
Masters to in struct their families in; By Dr. Thomas.

50. Cullpepers last Legacies, left to his Wife, for the public good, being
the choysest and most profitable Secrets, which while he lived was locked up in
his breast, resolved never to be published till after his death; being
experiments in Physic and Chyrurgery, compounding Medicines. etc.

51. Culpepers Semiotica, or his Astrological Judgment of Diseases, much
enlarged from the Decumbiture of the sick, which way to find out the cause,
change, and end of the disease. Also whither the sick be likely to live or dye,
with the signs of life and death by the body of the sick party, according to
the judgment of Hippocrates, with a Treatise of Urines. by N. Culpeper.

52. Cornelius Agrippa, his fourth book of Occult Philosophy, or Geomancy;
Magical Elements of Peter de Abbona, the nature of Spirits, made English by R.
Turner.

53. Pulpit Sparks, being Set Forms of Prayers used before Sermon; by Dr. Jer.
Tailor, Dr. Gillingham, Dr. Hewit, and many other eminent Divines.

54. A Glimpse of Divine Light, being an Explication of some passages exhibited
to the Commissioners of White Hall for approbation of public Preachers,
against John Harrison of Lund. Chapel Lancashire.

55. The Queens Closet opened; Incomparable Secrets in Physic, Chyrurgery,
preserving, candying and cooking, as they were presented to the Queen,
transcribed from the true Copies of her Majesty's own Receipt books; by W.M.
one of her late servants.

56. The Conveyancers Light, or the complete Clerk and Seriveners Guide; being
an exact draught of all Presidents and Assurances now in use, as they were
penned and perfected by diverse learned Judges, eminent Lawyers, and great
Conveyancers both ancient and modern; whereunto is added a Concordance from K.
Rich. 3. to this present.

57. A Statyre against Hypocrites; 4.

58. Iron Rod put into the Lord Protectors hand, to break in pieces all
Antichristian power; by John Sanders a Prophet.

59. Wits Interpreter, the English Parnassus, or a guide to those admirable
Accomplishments, that complete our English Gentry in the most acceptable
qualifications of Discourse or Writings; also the whole Mystery of those
pleasing Witchcrafts of Eloquence and Love, are made easy in the Art of
Reasoning, Theater of Courtship, Labyrinth of Fancies, Love songs, Drollery;
the perfect Inditer of Letters A la mode: by J.C.

60. The Floating Island, a Tragecomedy acted before the King, by the students
of Christ Church in Oxford: by Dr. Stroude.

These newly printed.

61. Paracelsus Occult Philosophy of the mysteries of Nature, and his secret of
Alchimy.

62, Wit and Drollery, with other Jovial Poems, by Sir J.M. Jam. 1. Sym. 5.
W.D. Never before Printed.

63. Illustrious Shepherdess, the imperious Brother; translated out of
Spanish. A famed Romance.

64. Monarchy no Monarchy, with the Prophesies of the White King, and other
explained, to which is added several Hieroglyphics; By Will. Lilly, Student in
Astrol.

65. Shorthand Writing made most plain and easiest that ever was, newly
published by J. Rich. in short-writing.

66. Tectenicon, showing the exact measuring all manner of land-squares,
timber, stone, Steeples, Pillars, Globes, also the making and use of the
Carpenters rule, etc. fit to be known by all Surveyors, Land-meators, Joyners,
Carpenters and Masons; by L. Diggs.

67. Heaven and Earth shaken, a Treatise showing how Kings and Princes, and
their Governments, are turned and changed; by J. Davis Minister in Dover.

68. The Tears of the Indies, being an Historical Relation of the cruelties of
the Spaniards in the Islands of Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica, etc. in the
West Indies; by Casus Bishop in Spain, an eyewitness.

69. Themis Aurea, the Laws of the Fraternity of the Rossie Cross, written by
Count Mayerus, and now englished for to inform that honorable Society of wise
Philosophers; by T.H.

70. Complete Midwife's practice, in the high and weighty concernments of the
Birth of Mankind; or perfect Rules derived from the Experiences and Writings,
not only of our English, but the most accomplished and absolute Practice of
many French, Spanish, Italians, and other Nations, fitted for the weakest
capacities, in a short time to attain the knowledge of the whole Art; by T.C.
and others.

71. Sportive Wit, the Muses Merriment, a new spring of Drollery, Jovial
Fancies, etc.

72. J. Inadescan's Rarities, published by himself.

73. Most approved Medicines and Remedies for the diseases in the body of Man;
by Alex. Read, Dr. in Phys.

74. Art of Simpling, an introduction to the knowledge and gathering of Plants,
wherein the Disinitions Divilions, Places, Descriptions, Differences, Names,
Virtues, times of flourishing and gathering, Uses, Temperatures, Signatures of
Plants. To which is added, a Discovery of the Lesser World; by W. Coals.

75. Wilsfords Arithmetic, made plain to the easiest capacity, in two books,
viz. Natural and Decimal, being most useful for all Gentlemen, Merchants,
shopkeepers, and all others; by Tho. Wilsford, Gent.

76. Adam in Eden, the Paradise of Plants, a Description of all our English
Plants, wild or otherwise, with their Signatures applied to the parts of the
body of Man, with their Physical use, that a man may be his own Physician, the
Ingredients being to be had in every field and garden; made public by W.
Coals, M. D. for the benefit of all English men.

These Books will be published speedily.

77. The Perfect Cook, A right method of the Art of Cookery, restoring the
whole practice to a more refined way then was ever before extant.

78. Castellus Lexicon medicum, being a Dictionary explaining all the terms,
both in Physic, and Chyrurgery, Translated by J.D.

79. Medicina Magica, Tamen Phyfica, the method of curing diseases by Sympathy
and Antipathy, a work fit to be known by all; by S. Bolton.

80. Timothies vade mecum, or a pocket-companion for the sons of the Prophets,
wherein are Treated of matters appertaining to Ministers, and such as intend
for the Ministry; by T. Crave.

81. The Treasury of the soul.

82. Frambesarius, His scholia Medica, also the Treatise of seavers made
English, by J.D.

FINIS.

