A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, now assembled in
PARLIAMENT, At their public Fast, November 17. 1640. Upon 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. The
Lord is with you, while ye be with him: and if ye seek him, he will be found
of you: but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.

By STEPHEN MARSHALL, Batchelour in Divinity, Minister of Finchingfield in
ESSEX.

Published by Order of the said House.

LONDON: Printed by J. Oaks, for SAMUEL MAN, dwelling in St. Paul's Churchyard,
at the sign of the Swan. 1641.

A Sermon Preached before the Honorable house of Commons, at their public
Fast.
2 CHRONICLES. 15. 2. The Lord is with you while ye be with him, and if ye seek
him he will be found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.
Introduction, setting forth 1 The fitness of the Text.
THis portion of Scripture, is a part of a Sermon preached to the whole body of
the Kingdom of Judah; and a fitter I do not know in all the Bible to be
preached upon to the Representative body of a Christian State; especially on a
day when they are drawing nigh to God. The more inexcusable should I be in
adventuring to show my weakness at this time, in this place, were I not able
to call the most High to witness, that nothing but conscience of my duty kept
me (with Jonah) from running away from the Lords work. But Amos the herdsman
Amos 7. 14, 15.
must prophecy at the Kings Chapel when God commands him.

The special end of your meeting this day, is to afflict your souls before
God, that so with Ezra, you might seek a right way for your selves, and the
weighty affairs of his Majesty, and the whole State: and the special errand I
have to deliver from the Lord, Ezr. 8. 21.
is to assure you of the same truth, although in other words, which Ezra told
the Persian Emperor, that the hand of God is upon them for good that seek him;
but his power and wrath against all them that forsake him, Verse 22.
viz. That God will be with you, while you be with him.

2 The state of the Jewish Church, which occasioned the Text.
Which Text that you may the better understand, give me leave to carry you a
little back, and give you a plain view of the state of the Church of Judah at
that time.

In the days of Rehoboam there had been an horrible apostasy from the purity
of Gods worship: Religion was very much corrupted, and the forces of the
Kingdom were exceedingly weakened. And in Abijahs time things grew worse and
worse. But now when Asa (being a godly man) came to the Crown, he begins at
the right end, and makes it his first work to set upon reformation of Religion,
taking away the Altars of the strange Gods and the high places, brake down the
Images, cut down the Groves, commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their
Fathers, and to do the Law and the Commandments, Chap. 14, 2, 3, 4.
casting out whatsoever was a stench in the Lords nostrills, and he prospered
in whatsoever he put his hand unto.

This done, he then calls all his Nobles and Princes, and Elders together, and
tells them that they had sought the Lord in matters of Religion, and God had
been found of them, and that now they should go and fortify the Kingdom;
and so they did in all the Cities and prospered. Verse 7.
But in the midst of this work comes out Zerah the Cushite, the Ethiopian (or
rather the Arabian, Ethiopia lying beyond Egypt) with an Army of a thousand
thousand, and three hundred Chariots, (it may be the greatest Army that ever
you read of in any story) with these he breaks in suddenly upon Asa. But he
humbles himself before God, betakes himself to prayer, tells the Lord that it
was all one with him to help by many or few. And in the Lords name he went
out to encounter with that huge Army; over which the Lord gave him a glorious
victory, and the spoil of the enemies Country to boot.

3 The coherence and Analysis.
Now as they were coming back to Jerusalem, the Lord calls out Azariah the
son of Oded, to make the gratulatory Oration for their safe return and
conquest, in these words that I have read, and so forward to verse the eighth;
and so I am come to my Text.

In which (that I may make as brief a way as I can possibly to the matter that
I shall insist upon) two things are to be unfolded.

First, the scope and intent of the Prophet, and that is laid down in the
latter end of his speech, Be strong therefore, and let not your hands be
weak: Verse 7.
that is, go on with the good work of Reformation of Religion, wherewith you
were in hand before the enemy interrupted you.

Secondly, the arguments whereby this is pressed, and they are two.

The first is taken from their own present happiness who were in Gods ways:
The Lord is with you while ye are with him, and if ye seek him he will be
found of you: but if ye forsake him he will forsake you.

The second is taken from the misery of the ten Tribes, who were out of Gods
way, concerning whom he speaks to this effect, That for a long time Israel
(that is the ten Tribes) had bin without God, and without a teaching Priest,
and without law: and as they had cast off God, so God had cast off them:
howbeit, if they would have sought to God, and turned to him, God would have
bin found of them: but they going on in the way of desperate apostasy, the
Lord vexed them every where, in the City, in the Country, in the Family; every
where God was too strong for them, (as certainly God will make every one to
know that he has a hard match to encounter with, that dares to bear Arms
against the Lord.) And so from their misery he presses Asa and his people to
go on in the right course, to prevent the like for coming upon themselves.

This second Argument of the misery of the ten Tribes belongs not to my work.

4 The division.
I betake my self therefore to the other, wherein I shall spend the allotted
time for this exercise, namely, The present happiness of the Church of the
Jews, that were in Gods way: in which observe these two things.

First, what the happiness was that they enjoyed, in these words, The Lord is
with you.

Secondly, the Condition upon which they enjoyed this happiness, or the terms
upon which they held it; and that is

First, more generally propounded, The Lord is with you, while you are with him.

Secondly, more particularly and exegetically expounded in the next words, If
ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him he will forsake
you.

The first part, viz. The happiness of the Church
I begin with the first of them, The present happiness of the Church of the
Jews, Jehovah is with you. Where there is but one question to be answered for
the clearing of the Doctrine, that I shall a while insist upon, and that is,
what presence of God is here intended by the Prophet? Jehovah is every where;
Whither shall I go from thy presence? Psalm. 139, 7, etc.
Nay, he is not only present every where, but he manifests his presence every
where, every herb shows it, all the Creatures speak God in them. Nor only
so, but oft-times the manifestation of Gods presence is the torture and misery
of the people to whom he is present. In Isai. 33. 14. when God sends them word
that he would come among them, presently it follows, The sinners in Zion are
afraid, fearefulnes has surprised the Hypocrite, who among us shall dwell with
devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings? And in Jer.
4. 23. the Prophet beheld the earth, and lo it was without form, and void;
the mountains, and lo they trembled; the nations, and they were wasted to
nothing: what was the reason? because of the presence of the Lord. What
presence then is here intended?

For that, through Gods providence, the mornings work has saved me part of my
labor. For in effect the presence intended in this Text is Gods presence in
the Covenant of Grace, in which he is so joined with a people, that they also
are joined unto him. God to be joined with a people, and to be in Covenant with
them in the Scripture phrase is all one. Jer 50. 5. Isai. 56. 3, 6.
So that the lesson which it affords is this.

Doct. 1.
The presence of God in his Covenant of Grace with any people, is the greatest
glory, and happiness that they can enjoy.

The Prophet here encouraging them to go on and to fear nothing, uses only
this sentence, that God will be with them: As if he had said, you shall have
all the happiness that you can wish, God will be with you.

In prosecuting this point I shall endeavor two things.

First, to demonstrate the truth of it out of the Scripture.

Secondly, to make a brief application of it.

The happiness of the Church proved, 1 By Scriptures.
For the first, see how clear it is in the Scriptures, in Deuteronomy. 4. 7, 8. Moses
speaks of the Israelites after this manner: What Nation (in all the world) is
so great as thou art? All their neighbors should say, surely this is a great
people, a wise, a happy people: I pray you what was their condition when Moses
thus magnified them? there were 600000 men of them in a desolate, barren,
howling wilderness: There was not one house for a man to hide his head; but
only floting Tents, some covered with clothes, some with boughs: No land
that they could either sow, or plough, or reap: No trading; Deuteronomy. 29. 5.
hardly a man that had two suits to his back, (but as some think) as their
bodies grew, their clothes grew; as their feet grew, their shoes grew:
wherein then was their happiness? Mark what Moses says verse 7. What Nation
is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them as the Lord our God is in all
things, etc? There was their happiness, that Jehovah was nigh them, and
marched up and down before them. So you shall see in Exodus 33. the Lord was
offended with the people for making of the golden Calfe, In the beginning of
that Chap. he speaks after this manner to Moses. Take this people and carry
them to the Land that I have promised to give them: It is a Land flowing with
Milk and Honey. I will send my Angel before you, He shall drive out all the
Nations, and plant you in that goodly Country: only J my self will not go
with them, for I shall be so far provoked by their sins, that I shall fall
upon them suddenly, and consume them. But my Angel shall not leave them till
they be settled in that good Land. One would have thought that this had been an
excellent offer, thousands would have esteemed it a glorious thing to have an
Angel of God to go and plant them in the goodliest Country that was under the
cope of Heaven. But mark how Moses takes it. O Lord rather kill us all in the
Wilderness, let us never stir a foot if Thy presence go not with us. I pray
thee, if I have found favor with Thee, go with us thy Self: well, says God,
my presence shall go. Moses presses again, let it be that or nothing: for
wherein else shall it be known to the World, that I and thy people have found
grace in thy sight? Is it not in that thou go with us? So shall we be
separated, I and thy people from all the people that are upon the face of the
Earth. This is the sum of that Chapter. Again you shall find in Psalm 46.
and Psalm 48. David strangely magnifies Jerusalem above all the Cities in the
World: Excellent are the strains of Rhetoric flowing from the Spirit of God
in setting forth the glory of that City, which in a word was such as All the
Kings of the Earth should come and look on, and stand amazed at it. Without
question Babylon, or Niniveh excelled Jerusalem in David's time for outward
glory, as far as the City of London does one of our mean Country Towns.
What was the glory of Jerusalem then? You shall read in those Psalms God was
with them. God is in the midst of her: God is known in her Palaces. And every
where this is the thing he cries up: it was a glorious place, because Jehovah
was there.

And in Psalm 144. The Penman of it so far extols even the common mercies
that God often times bestows upon a people, that they then become Blessed, When
their Sons grow up as plants, and their Daughters as the corners of the
Temple, polished after the manner of a Palace; their Garners affording all
store, their Oxen strong to labor; that there is no breaking in, and carrying
into Captivity. Blessed, says he, are the people that are in such case. But
mark how he gives a dash to all he had said, in comparison of that he had to
say of the blessedness of Gods people, Yea rather happy are the people whose
God is the Lord. You shall see also in the latter end of Ezechiel, Chapter 40.
and in Revelation 21. such an Hyperbolicall description of a most glorious City
the new Jerusalem, as never had parallel. And what is the Glory of that City?
Read but the last words in the Prophecy of Ezechiel, The name of that City
from that Day shall be THE LORD IS THERE. As if he had said, would you have an
abridgement of all the excellencies of this City and Temple? This it is,
Jehovah is there. And in Revelation 21. The Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are
there.

On the other side you shall see it as plain, when the Lord threatens the
greatest plague and curse that can betide a Nation, he never mentions other,
above this, that He will depart from them: As if he had meant to strike them
dead at a blow, by saying, He will leave them. That place in Hosea Chapter 9.
11. is very remarkable: As for Ephraim (that is, the Children of Israel, the
ten Tribes) his glory shall flee away as a Bird; that is, suddenly, swiftly,
irrecoverably, he shall be utterly undone. What is the matter? The next Verse
tells you, Woe unto them when J depart from them. If God go, woe comes; all
goes, if God go. It is a known story in the 1. Samuel 4. that when the Arc
(that was called the glory of God) the visible token of Gods presence in the
Covenant of Grace, was taken Captive by the Philistines; Phineas his wife bowed
her self and travailed, and though they after told her that a Man-child was
borne, she regarded it not, but called his name Ichabod, saying, The glory is
gone; because then Gods presence departed from them.

What need I say any more? The work of the Incarnation of the Son of God,
and the Redemption of the World by him, was such, that one maine end of making
this goodly frame of Heaven and Earth was, that it might be the stage upon
which that Work should be acted. A work wherein not only all man's happiness
lies, and whence it flows; but wherein all Gods Attributes are glorified to
the highest; and for which the Church Triumphant shall think Eternity short
enough to praise God. Of this Work (I say) the sum is given in one word,
Immanuel, God is with us.

2 By Reason.
And plain Reason may demonstrate that it must needs be so. What is glory,
but the shining out of excellency? What is happiness but the fruition of the
greatest good? Now there is no Excellency that shines out in any thing, like to
that which beams out from God in the Covenant of grace to his people. There is
no good that any people can enjoy like the fruition of God in that Covenant. It
is true, God manifests himself to all the Nations in the World ( in him they
live, and move, and have their being:) yet it is as in a dark Cloud, they
grope after him, and cannot feel him, but in the covenant of grace men behold
him with open face, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
like the Sun shining in his strength, as through a Mirror: Such a Mirror
as the Prince of Orange had, that would show the Sun in his full bigness and
beauty. Thus God shines in the Covenant of grace.

The Prince is virtually present in all places of his Kingdom, but his Court
is his Glory: So where God is in his Covenant, there Heaven is; therefore this
is usually in the Scripture phrase called the Kingdom of Heaven.

But if yet more particularly you enquire, what Gods presence in his Covenant
implies: As he, who being asked what God was, required first a day, then two,
then three, alleging, that the more he studied it, the less able he found
himself to answer it. So the more I think of this, the more unable I see my
self to make a satisfactory answer: what I can, take thus; To the Nation of
the Jews it employed something which concerns not us, but mystically or
analogically: As to have the Arc, Vrim and Thummim: to have God to reveal
himself in Visions and Dreams: To answer by Thunder, etc. which my haste
allows me not leisure to explain. But to them, and to all other people Gods
presence in the Covenant of Grace implies these three things.

The Churches happiness further explaned, to consist, 1 Of Gods owning them.
First, the owning and acknowledging of them to be his own separated people,
knit to him in a league of love: he is their God, they are his people; they
have a propriety in God, and God has a propriety in them, so that they may say
of Him, This God is our God; and God of them, This people is my people. Now
this is the greatest happiness, nothing can exceed it: It has bin often
questioned, what was the greatest favor that ever Almighty God did for man?
Some prefer Creation wherein man received his being, and excellent
endowments: some Redemption, wherein man is recovered to a better and surer
estate than he enjoyed in Creation: but out of question to be a Iedediah,
beloved of God, to be near to God as his Children, as his Spouse, is the
comprehension of all that can be said or thought of the happiness of a people.
And if you look into the Scriptures, you shall see that Gods love to his
peculiar people, is such a love as carries with it all relations: It is the
love of a Father to his Children; I will be your Father and you shall be my
Sons and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty. 2 Cor. 6.
It is the love that a man bears to the wife of his bosom: I will marry thee
to me in righteousness, and truth, and mercy. Hos. 2.
It is the love of a friend: I have called you my friends: John 14
And Abraham the Father of all that are in Covenant, he was styled, The friend
of God.

And from this interest in God flow innumerable privileges, for being thus
beloved of God, and precious to him, it follows that they are accepted in
their services, that all their sins are pardoned, and that they have liberty
to ask any thing that is good for them. When Solomon was beloved of God, 2
Kings 3. 5. God bids him, Ask what I shall do for thee: It is but ask and
have. 1 John 5. 14.
And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will, he hears us. They have friendship with all his
friends: In Zach. 8. 23. Ten men shall lay hold upon the skirt of one that is a
Jew, of whom they be able to say, We have heard that God is with you. Indeed,
to have God thus making himself over to a people, to be their portion, to
love them, and to own them, is not only an heaven upon earth, but the very
heaven of heaven.

2 Of Gods assisting and prospering of them
Secondly, Gods presence with a people in his Covenant, implies Gods assisting
them, and prospering all the works they put their hands unto. This is the
ordinary expression of the Scripture: Every thing prospers, where God is. It is
said of David, whithersoever (Saul) sent him, he prospered: for God was with
him. 1 Chr. 11. 9.
Every house where Joseph came prospered, for God was with him. Gen 39.
In all undertakings, in all Counsels for wars, for peace, for trade, etc. Gods
aid and assistance comes in. If they decree a thing, God will establish it. If
they commit their work to him, the very thoughts of their hearts shall be
established; Whatsoever they do, God will make it to prosper. Thou O Lord,
workest all our works for us. Job 22. 28 Pro. 16 3. Psalm. ^^ Isa. 26. 12


Whereas now if God be absent, all men's endeavors are to no purpose in any
kind. Except the Lord build the house, they labor but in vain that build it.
Psalm. 127
It is to no purpose to plough that field that God will have lie fallow. Ye
earne much says God, but it comes to nothing, ye sow much and bring in little,
ye eat and have not enough, ye drink and are not filled; he that earneth
wages, puts it into a bottomless purse. Hag. 1. 6. 9
What was the reason? the Lord blasted all. And it must needs be so, all the
second causes work only by virtue of the first, the great wheel carries on
all the other.

A notable example of this, that Gods presence is man's prosperity, we have in
Hag. 2. where when God had told them that the reason of all their ill success
in their enterprises came from Gods withdrawing from them, for their
unfaithful walking with him in the matter of rebuilding his house, and that
thereupon the people were stirred up to consider their ways, and to build Gods
Temple, the Lord tells them, verse. 18. that though their seed was not yet in
their Barnes, nor any of their trees had brought forth their burden; and so
for ought they could see, they were like to have as hard a year as before: yet
now, says the Lord, from this day I will bless you. Now you shall have a crop,
that there shall not be room enough to receive it: for if they would build his
Temple, he would come and dwell with them.

3 Of Gods protecting and defending of them.
Thirdly, Gods presence in his Covenant implies his protection, and defense of
that people against all enemies. It is said of Joseph, he went into Egypt, he
was sold for a slave: but says the Text, God was with him, and delivered him
out of all his afflictions: Acts 7. 9.
None could hurt him, while God was with him. Abundance of excellent
Scriptures speak this truth. Observe two or three comparisons which the Holy
Ghost frequently uses, in Isai. 4. the later end, the Lord speaks thus of the
Churches of the Gentiles, that he would create upon all the assemblies (upon
all the places where the people should assemble to serve him) a pillar of a
Cloud, and a fire to keep them safe day and night: for upon all the glory
shall be a defense. Mark, Gods presence in his Ordinances, is their Glory, and
upon all the Glory GOD would create a Defense. Gen 7.
He compares Himself to a Shield, I am thy Shield. Now the nature of a Shield
is to take all the blo us, that the body cannot be hurt, till the shield be
pierced through. In Zach. 2. 5. God says he will be a wall of fire round
about them: alluding to the custom of Travelers in waste wildernesses, who
used to make fires round about them in the night, and then none of the wild
beasts durst come near them; such a defense is God to his people: And he often
says, he bears them upon Eagles wings. Some observe, that other birds carry
their young ones in their claws, (and then the young one may be killed, and
the old one not hurt) but the Eagle carries her young upon her back, upon her
wings, and so they cannot be hurt till she be shot through. Excellent is that
expression in Isaiah the 46. where God comparing himself with the Idols of the
Heathens, speaks to this purpose, Their Idols must be borne: but God bears
his people: They must be set in their place, and be kept least they be stolen
or broken; they must defend their gods: but Jehovah defends his people: In many
places God calls himself the Watchman of his people, the Leader of them, the
Defender of them: all signifying thus much, that the safety and defense of his
people rests upon his presence with them.

Some where I have read a Dialogue betwixt a Jew and a Heathen: After the Jews
return from the Captivity, all the Nations round about them (being enemies to
them) a Pagan asked a Jew how they could have any hope of safety: because
(faith he) every one of them is as one silly sheep compassed about with fifty
wolves? I, but says the Jew, we are kept by a shepherd that can kill these
fifty Wolves when he pleaceth. This God, where ever he comes is the protector
of his people; who, if he but speak the word, all the enemies of his people
are consumed and brought to nothing. And this is the sum of all Balaams
answer to Balaak, Numb. 23. and 24. that neither force nor fraud could hurt the
people of Israel while God was with them.

On the other side, if God leave a people, all their strength is gone, as
Sampsons was when his Locks were cut of. A notable instance of this you shall
find in Ier. 37. God was then withdrawing from his people, took away the
signs of his presence, and told them they should be delivered up into the
hands of the Chaldeans: they thought yet to hold it out. But says the Prophet,
If ye had smitten all the army of the Chaldeans, and none of them had been
left but a few wounded men, they should come and burn your City. Verse. 10.
Amaziah's case 2 Chr. 25.
also is most famous; he had war with a great company of malicious neighbor
Princes that hated him, and he hires 100000 valiant men of Israel, and joins
them with his own forces: But there comes a Prophet, and bids him send these
100000 people back; why? for God is not with the Armies of Israel; As if he
had said, Amaziah, it were all one for thee to carry 100000 wisps of straw, or
a hundred thousand dead Carcasses into the Field to fight, as a hundred
thousand valiant men, if God be not with them.

While God was with Sampson, he could carry the gates of a City upon his
shoulders; when God left him, when his Locks were cut (which were a pledge of
Gods presence) then they took him and made a fool of him at their pleasure.

If you be not yet satisfied, that all these three things are employed in Gods
presence: observe further that not only of Jehovah, but even of all the Idol
gods of the Nations, the like things are spoken.

As first, they are said to be fathers and friends of the people that
worshipped them. Thus the people of Moab who worshipped Chemosh, are styled the
people of Chemosh. Jer 48. 46
When Judah joined himself in marriage with Idolaters, God says of him, He
has taken the daughter of a strange god: Mal. 2. 11.
And elsewhere when God charge his people with Idolatry, the Indictment
runs thus: They say to a stock, thou art my Father; Ier 2. 27.
that is, thou art my God, as near unto me as a Father to his Children.

Secondly, all their prosperity was said to come from their gods supposedly
present among them, and propitious to them. Will thou not possess that which
Chemosh thy god gives thee to possess? said Iepthah Judge. 11. 24.
to the King of Ammon, who took Chemosh for his God.

Thirdly, their safety, their victories are ever attributed to their gods whom
they took to be among them; Our God has delivered into our hands (Sampson)
our enemy. Judge. 16. 24.
And the attempts against the Heathen, are said to be made against their gods:
as in Isaiah 46. 2. where there is a prophecy of the taking of Babylon by
Cyrus, it is thus expressed, Bell boweth down, Nebo stoopeth, etc. Their gods
are gone into captivity. So in 2. King. 18. 34. Rabshakeh vants that, in his
Masters name, Where are the gods of Hamath, and of Arpad, etc. And it is
observed as an ordinary practice of the Romans, that when they came to besiege
any City, they would first entreat the gods of that City to leave the
protection of it, and come over to them: as who should say, leave you off their
protection, and then let us alone with them: So then, the sum of all this put
together, amounts to thus much, that Gods presence in his Covenant with any
people implies that they are dearly beloved of him, that he works all their
works for them, and shields and defends them against all their enemies.

I come now to the Application of it, wherein (because I chiefly intend the
next point, the Condition of Gods presence) I will briefly make two or three
Collections only, which I conceive may be most seasonable and suitable to your
office, and to the occasion of your meeting here this day.

Use 1. for discovery of the greatest Traitors.
First, is it so, that the glory and happiness of a nation stands in the
presence of God in his Covenant: Then, I humbly pray you all to take notice,
what are the greatest Evils, and who are the most desperate Traitors, against
the King, Church, and State of England at this day. I doubt not but you have a
multitude of complaints of Grievances presented to the Parliament house: all
(at least pretended to be) contrary to the welfare of the State: give me leave
to put up one Great One; and to inform you who be the Authors of the greatest
Grievances, and Evils that can possibly betide the Kingdom of England, even
they that would rob us of our God. Solomon says, A man that wastes his Father,
and chaseth away his mother, is a miserable wretch. And I know, if evidence
should he brought into this Honorable assembly against any one that had
deprived the King of a Subject, you would think him worthy of severe
punishment. But higher, if you should light upon one, that should endeavor to
deprive the King and Kingdom of a wise Counselor, and States man, in the
multitude whereof is the safety of the Kingdom. But higher yet, if any should
be found that had lift up his hand against his Majesty, the Lords anointed, who
is the breath of our nostrills; if any such should be discovered, would you not
say of them as she said to David, Let the soul of my Lord be bound up in the
bundle of life, and let the Lord sting the souls of his enemies as out of the
middle of a sting? 1 Samuel 25. 29
yea would not every true hearted subject in the Kingdom say thus also? O but
(Honorable and beloved) they that would rob us of the glory of our King, and
Kingdom, that would take away all our happiness, and protection, and
prosperity, that would leave us naked to our shame, that we should become a
scorn and spoil, are not they worse than any of the former? You will say, Who
is he? and where is he that dares presume in his heart to do so? Hest. 7. 5.
(I pray stay for a full answer till the next point touching the Condition of
enjoying God be unfolded: in the mean time) take this in part: I pray God
there be none such met this day to fast and pray before the Lord. Every son
of Belial, every one that is a Rebel against God, every one that works
wickedness, is that wicked Haman, that sells Hester, and all her people to
destruction. If there be any such here, you will give me leave (being Gods
Minister, and your Servant) to discharge my Office faithfully. Should there be
but one such, I say, among you that are called together to be the Repairers of
the breaches, to such a one let me thus speak; If thou be found to be the
Achan, that keeps God from going out with our armies; the Jonas, that art
ready to cast away the ship, so that there is no hope of our safety till thou
be cast out; if thy conscience accuse thee that thou art a child of Belial, an
Idolater, a superstitious person, a profane Esau: lay this close to thy heart,
how miserable and wretched a man thou art, that not only adventurest thine own
soul to most certain ruin in opposing the Lord; but, as another Sylla, thou
pluckest out thy fathers purple hair, and deprivest the Kingdom of the glory
of it: so that it may be written upon thy Gravestone, This man was the ruin
of his King and Country. Judge. 18. 24.


And for the Lords sake (Honorable and beloved) take it to heart, and lay it
up with you, that if Gods presence be our glory, then those that would robus of
it are our greatest enemies. Think of them all, as he (upon less ground) said
of the Children of Dan. You have taken away my God, and what have I more?

2 Use of the Churches happiness, direction how to lengthen out our happiness.
And secondly, let me beseech you all in this your great National Council,
and Assembly, to take seriously into your thoughts what may be the best way of
lengthening out our tranquillity. Beloved, all the Nations in Christendom have
been in grievous perplexities many years round about us: we have been
hitherto kept as another Land of Goshen, where light has still shined, when
all others have been in darkness. And I know the hearts of some of you have
sadly expected when God should come and erect his Justice seat among us, or
give the sword a Commission against us: now you are met for this very thing, to
provide for our welfare: for the Lords sake take care to keep him with us: if
he go, all goes: we can never light our Candle, if this Sun be set: we
shall never fill our Buckets, if this Fountain be shut up. All your counsels
and advising will be nothing, if God say, I will stay no longer in England:
Ier. 37. ^^
We shall then be a spoil to any enemy; a few unarmed men will be too hard
for us all.

It is recorded of the Palladium in Troy, that while that Image remained there,
the City was impregnable, and that till the Greeks lighted on that stratagem to
steal that Idol away, they could never win the City. What ever fancy there
was in that, you know how much it concerns us to keep our GOD with us; let
your maine care be to fix and settle him therefore among us, and then we are
safe: if you let him go, we are an undone people.

3 Use of the Churches happiness. A ground of protection in any undertaking
for God.
Thirdly, if Gods presence in his Covenant be the glory and safety of a
people; then may all of you, undertaking any service for GOD, and his Glory,
most comfortably and securely rest on God to defend and protect you against all
dangers. It is no question but your enemies are mighty, malicious, and cunning;
and it may be they are digging as deep as Hell for Counsel to do you
mischief in this great way and work that you are in. But while you are with
God, God will be with you. Are not five Sparrowes sold for a Farthing, says
our Savior? Are not you more worth than all the Sparrowes in the World? are
you not in Gods Work? As Caleb said, The Lord is with us, fear not them, They
shall all be bread for us. Number. 14. 9.
Go on boldly, use what providence you can to prevent dangers, but comfortably
remember, that the Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous run to
it, and are safe. Prove. 18. 10.


Expos. in Esai 30. v. 15.
I will conclude this with a story of Luther, which he tells of a Bishop of
Magdenburg. A Duke of Saxony prepared war against him: the Bishop hearing of
it, falls to praying, reforming of his Church, and amending what was amiss.
One of the Dukes spies then in that City, when he saw him make no preparation
for defense, came and asked him, if he did not hear what the Duke was
preparing against him? Yes, says he, I do; but Ego curabo Ecclesiam meam, and
Deus pro me pugnabit. I must look to my work, and the defense of me belongs
to God; which when the Duke heard, he disbanded his forces, and acknowledged
that he should prove too weak to deal with that man that engaged God in the
quarrel against him. So follow you on the work, be ye for the Lord, and
comfortably rest your selves under Gods wing, to prosper and protect you. So
much for their present happiness. The Lord is with you.

The second part viz. The Condition of enjoying that happiness.
I proceed now to the second part, the condition upon which this happiness is to
be enjoyed: For God is with you, while you are with him. This Adverb while
implies:

First, the duration of time, how long God will be with you, so long as you are
with God; so long, and no longer: for so it is used in the very next words of
the Text, If ye seek him, he will be found of you: but if ye forsake him, he
will forsake you. So David says to Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28 9.
Know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with
a willing mind: if thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou
forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.

Secondly, While signifies likewise the Degree and measure of Gods presence.
This is, the beam by which GOD weighes out his presence, the Standard whereby
he measures it; that is in what degree people are with God, in that degree he
is with them. If they be with God in outward formalities only, God will be
with them in outward blessings only: If they be with God in all things as
Amaziah was, but not with a perfect heart, God will be so with them: if they be
with God absolutely and entirely as Josiah, and David, and Hezekiah, etc. were
with God, God will be so with them, 2 Chronicles. 28. 2.
fulfilling that in Isai. 26. Verse. 7.
that the most upright God ballanceth out the ways of the just: he weighes
out their way, and gives them a just proportion; according to that in the
eighteenth Psalm, Verse. 26.
With the pure God will show himself pure, and with the froward he will show
himself froward: that is, he will deal with men as they deal with him.

This is fully laid down in Levit. 26. where God says, if they walk humbly
with him, he will walk graciously to them: if they walk frowardly and
stubbornly, and contrary to him, he will walk contrary to them: If they vex
him seven times, he will vex them seven times. So in the seven Churches, when
some of them had a few things for God, God would be with them in a few things.
If they will have something contrary to God, he will ever have something
against them: and as their ways are to him, so the most High God will measure
out himself to them; and that is the Doctrine that I am to handle, viz.

2 Doct.
God will be with his people to be their glory, their portion, prosperity,
and protection, just as they are with him.

Before I proceed further with this point, give me leave by way of Caution to
remove two or three stumbling blocks, which lie in the way of many men.

1 Cleared of Cavils, by a three fold Caution.
First, when you hear, that God will be with his people as they are with God,
take heed you understand it not as some, who (that they may set up the rotten
Dagon of man's free will, above the Arc of Gods free grace) do use out of such
conditional Scriptures, to argue, that God has an antecedent, undetermined,
uncertain, suspended purpose of doing good to a people, which is moved,
changed, or determined, according to the ebbings and flowings of their carriage
toward him.

A few words may serve in this assembly: these conditions show not the moving
cause of Gods presence, but describe the Subject or People with whom he is
present: the hand of the Dial makes not the Clock to go, but shows how it
does go. These Conditions quicken us to our duty, and tell us upon what terms
we must look for God to be with us, but he himself is not thereby limited,
but still at liberty to work in us the Condition which himself requires of
us: Gods love of Friendship (which is his manifesting himself in his Covenant)
we cannot expect, except we be with him; but no Law is hereby laid upon his
beneplacitum, his free favor, whereby he works both the will and the deed,
and causes his people to walk in his ways. God gives conditions to us, but
takes none from us.

Secondly, much less need we stick at the gloss of the Papists, who out of
such conditional Scriptures use to argue our performance of the condition,
formally to merit Gods gracious presence, and so they will have it to be
rendered by him, not as a merciful giver, but as a just Judge. The Scripture is
plain to the contrary; our merit is nothing but Gods mercy: We grant indeed
Gods presence to his people is a reward of their obedience; but it is a reward
not of justice, but of mercy. So says the Prophet David, Thou O Lord art
merciful, for thou rewardest men according to their works. Psalm. 62. 12.


Thirdly, nor yet must we think, that when this Condition is required of a
Nation, that it is so limited, that unless the universality of the people
shall perform it, the rest cannot expect Gods presence with them: for that was
never done, no not in David's, nor in Solomon's time. But it is chiefly meant of
the Princes, Rulers, Ministers, and the face of the people; whose ways
(whether good or bad in regard of Gods national proceeding with them) are ever
interpreted to be the ways of the whole body. These blocks removed, I return
to the Lessou, viz. That God is with his people while they are with him, in the
sense before given. For the making this more profitable, I shall endeavor,

2 Further explicat^d by the resolving of a question.
First, to show you what in the Scripture language the being of a people with
God does implie.

Secondly, to make application of it to our selves.

Quest. What it is to be with God.
First, what is it for a people to be with God.

Answ. 1. Negatively
I must show first Negatively, what it is not. Secondly Positively, what it is.
First, Negatively, it is not barely to bear Gods Name, and to be called his
people; It is not merely to draw near to him in the external performance of
certain duties: It is not to hang down the head like a Bulrush for a day,
Isai. 58.
though in fasting and prayer: It is not to bring thousands of Rams, and ten
thousand rivers of Oil Micah 6.
before God. You know many, and many people have done all these things, yet God
has protested, they were not with him, nor he with them.

2 Affirmatively it imports 3 things.
Secondly, positively and affirmatively what it is.

It implies these three things.

1 To be an holy people.
First, to be a holy people a Ieshurun, a righteous Nation, to be those that
undertake the counter-part of the Covenant, that as God makes himself over to
be their God, and their portion, Deu. 32 9
so they deliver themselves up to him as a people renewed and sanctified, to
become his portion. That is a chief thing which the Scripture always means,
when it speaks a people to be with God, that they must be a holy people,
separated from all iniquity unto God, as was clearly and largely opened in the
morning. Read over all the book of God, and you shall never find that a
people are said to come home to God, but when they put away all their
abominations, threw away all their lusts and Idols to the Moles and to the
Bats, Isai. 2.
loathing and detesting themselves for them, Hos. 14.
being as the Doves in the valley, Eze. 7. 16
every one mourning for their own iniquities, fully determining and resolving
never to return to them any more. And indeed if this be not done, it is
impossible for a people to be with God, or to endure God to be with them: For
God is a devouring fire to wicked men; and all wicked men to him are as Straw,
Hay, Stubble, and Wax, which the nearer they are brought to the fire, the
sooner they are devoured. Therefore you shall read that the nearer wicked men
have at any time been brought to God, the greater their misery. And for my
own part, I question not but if an ungodly man should be lifted up into
Heaven, where God most manifests himself in glory, he would there be most
miserable. Clemens Alexandrinus speaks of a Temple, upon which was written, No
unholy thing must come near this place. This is Gods very inscription. Hab. 1.
13. Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity.

Look over all the Epistles in the new Testament, and you shall find, that
however the external profession of Christianity admits men to the external
privileges of Gods presence, yet unless they be inwardly renewed and
sanctified, there is no being nigh to GOD, James 4. 8. Draw nigh to God, and
he will draw nigh to you: Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purge your
hearts, etc.

This is most clear in that great work of man's Redemption by Jesus Christ:
when God had created man holy and righteous, God delighted to be nigh unto
him: but so soon as iniquity was found in him, there was a wall of separation
built, and a gulf made, that never could be filled up, till the Lord Jesus
Christ by his infinite sufferings did it: And when that work is done by
Christ, the Lord will not communicate his Christ to any soul in the world, but
upon these absolute terms, (and God has sworn that it shall be so) that so
soon as he has delivered them, and brought them near to himself, in calling
them to participate that Redemption, they should serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of their life. Luke 1.
This is the first thing, they must be a holy people.

2 To be true worsh^ppers of God, in purity.
Secondly, to be with God, is to be true worshippers of him, maintaining the
purity of his Ordinances from Idolatry and Svperstition. This is abundantly
proved Hos. 11. 12. Ephraim (says the Lord) compasses me. One would have
thought that Ephraim was near to God, when he compassed him: but says God,
He compasses me with lies. What is that? with Idolatry, for it is usually
expressed in the Old Testament, that Idols are lies, and lies are put for
Idols: as in Isa. 49. 20. Is there not a lie in my right hand? Thus Ephraim
(that is the ten Tribes) compasses me, says the Lord, but Judah remains
faithful with God, therefore he rules with the Saints. What was Iudahs
faithfulness? it was her keeping of the marriage Covenant with more care; when
in Hezekiahs time (to which the Prophet refers) Religion was reformed and
advanced, then Judah was faithful with God. For the more full understanding of
this second branch, let me commend one observation to you concerning all the
Kings of Israel and Judah after Solomon's time; the Scripture sets down a
character of every one of them, that all the world might know what judgment God
had of them. You shall find that of all the Kings of Israel (though there were
some very brave men, yet) there is not one of them that God acknowledged to
have walked with him, because they were all Ieroboamites, worshippers of the
golden Calves. And when he speaks of any King of Judah, he ever singles out
one thing as the chief matter of his commendation; and that is, how he stood
affected in point of Religion: Such a man was upright with God: the meaning is,
all his days he maintained Gods worship. And yet let me tell you some of
their moralities were no better than they should be. Asa in the Text was a
choleric passionate man, and covetous in his old age, and many other
weaknesses were found in him; yet because he went through-stitch in the
reformation of Religion, Asa's heart was said to be upright with God all his
days. With this God uses to cover all their infirmities as with a veil.

But if any of the good Kings did but halt in this point, God has left it upon
record, as a blot upon their honors, therefore are they blamed, if (through
their default) the high places were not taken away, though the Idols set up in
those places were removed. And in the new Testament, throughout all the time of
Antichrists apostasy, the true Church of Christ, that walked with him aright,
are described by this Character, that they are a virgin company, not defiled
with women; Rev. 14. 4
that is, they were never guilry of the spiritual pollutions of that
Apostaticall Church of Rome. This was to be with the Lamb, and to follow him
wheresoever he goes. That is the second, to keep close to God in his worship.

3 To be on Gods side in all Causes.
Thirdly, to be with God, is to be on Gods side; to be engaged in Gods cause,
to appear in those things wherein God looks that all his friends should stand
for him. When the Levites would know neither Father nor mother, but slay every
man his brother, or companion, or neighbor, Exodus 32. 26.
that they might avenge Gods quarrel; this was to be on Gods side. 2 King. 19
When Elias was zealous for God, at a time wherein all the Kingdom (as he
thought) played the Apostates: when Phinehas goes with his Javelin, Number. 25.
and executes vengeance on Zimri and Cosbi, when men stand in the gap; Ezekiel.
22. 30.
when (in a word) a people are for God and his cause, as Iehoshaphat said he
was for Ahab, I am as thou art, and my people as thy people: 2 Chronicles. 18. 2.
My horses as thy horses, and my Chariots as thy Chariots, this is to be with
God.

And indeed, if this be wanting, people cannot be interpreted to be with God,
because God is not acknowledged in his due place, unless they be for him with
all their hearts, and with all their soul, and all their strength, when he
has most need of them. If a woman will do many things for her husband, yet
if her heart go more after her Puppets, her clothes, her servants, than after
him, especially in times of his necessity, her heart cannot beeinterpreted to
be with her husband, because he is not acknowledged in the due place of an
husband. So if there be any thing, any cause, any person, that we rather engage
our selves for, than for God and his cause, we cannot be said to be with God.

So now you have the meaning of the Condition of enjoying God, while ye are
with him: It is, 1 To be reconciled to God, and to walk with him as an holy
people. 2 To continue with him in the purity of his worship. 3 To stand by him
in every cause, which does concern his glory.


The deductions which might flow from this Doctrine for our use are many; I
shall confine my self to these two, as being most suitable and seasonable to
the time, and your work.

First, matter of Humiliation, and mourning before God for time past.

Secondly, matter of Duty, for time to come.

Use 1. Of the second point, which is, a Use of deephumiliation.
For the first, Honorable and beloved, you stand this day before the Lord to
afflict your souls, and (though you be the chosen men of your Tribes, lifted
up above your brethren) yet you are now called, not only to bemoane your own
iniquities, but to bear the iniquity of the whole Kingdom. And (me thinks) I
look upon you, as upon the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel 4.
when he was to bear the iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah, he was to
lie upon his side, and to eat his bread made of Wheat, and Barley, and
Beans, Lentiles, and Fitches, miserable coarse bread, and baked with the dung
of man, and to drink a little water for many days together. How sad and heavy
the Prophets spirit must needs be when he was thus to bear such a burden, is
easy to judge. Such a temper of spirit would this day well become you. And now
could I but speak to you from the Lord how sad things there are against
England, in this point of not being with God, could you with patience and grace
hear me; and would the Lord affect my heart and yours in handling and hearing
of them, we should make this place a Bochim, a place of weepers, the stoutest
heart would be as Queen Huzzab, and her Ladies, Nahum. 2
when they went into Captivity, tabering on their breasts, and mourning as
Doves, yea howling after the manner of Dragons. Could I, as in a mirror, set
before your eyes, how infinitely far off the body of this Kingdom is from
being with the Lord, we should wonder that the Lord has not wholly forsaken us
long agone; and that instead of enjoying this liberty of pleading with God for
our lives, for our Prince and Country, and for whatsoever is precious to us,
we are not left like unto Sodom, and made like unto Gomorrah. Take a view of
all the three particulars mentioned in the point.

Because we are 1 Not an holy people.
First, are we an holy people? (I am now pleading Gods cause, and though a
poor unworthy man, I stand betwixt God and a Kingdom) I ask again, are we an
holy people? Are our Princes, our Rulers, our Magistrates, our Ministers, and
the body of the people holy? Do we walk according to the rules of
Christianity, the sum whereof for the practical part is laid down in the
ten Commandments, and those expositions that our Lord gives of them? Do we
walk thus? I know there is no man here so ignorant as to imagine that we do.
Alas! the Prophets speech too well befits us: Ah! sinful Nation, a people
laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, Children that are corrupters: The
whole head is sick, the whole heart is faint: from the sole of the foot, even
to the head, there is no soundness in it, but wounds, and bruises, and
putrifiedsores. Isai 1.
Egypt was never more bespread with Locusts and Frogs, than our Kingdom is
with horrible profaneness, uncleanness, oppression, deceit, and whatsoever
is a stench in the Lords nostrills. The generality of people wearing indeed the
Lords Livery, ( being Christened) and doing the Devils work all the year long.
Nay, is there any thing this day so hated, as holiness? have we not gotten
terms to scoff down all goodness? is not almost every man who will not
swear and be drunk, and be deboyst as a Turk, or worse, cried down with the
odious name of a Puritan? That as Ambrose said of Paulinus, a young noble man of
Rome, at whom when he was converted to Christ, and left the worlds glory, to
carry Christ's Cross, there was more wondering than if a Mule had cast a Foale.
And as Bede said of the ancient Britains, immediately before their destruction
by the Saxons, that they were come to that height of wickedness, as to cast
Odium in Religion is professores tanquam in adversarios. God knows many
thousands are guilty of the same in this Land, this day: the measure of our
iniquity seems to be more than full. O that our hearts could this day bleed
for it!

2 Not with God in the matter of hisworship
Secondly, see what wonderful cause we have to be abased for all the injury
the Land stands guilty of, in abusing God in the point of his Worship, which is
the defiling of the marriage bed betwixt God and his people. God has visited
all the Reformed Churches, brought most of them almost to nothing: yet, pass
over and see, whether ever any of them have provoked the Lord in this kind so
much as we have done. Let me name four or five things, too much practiced,
and too little lamented: God in mercy affect our hearts with them this day.

First, the Articles of our faith, the depositum, the good thing committed to
us, which we received from our fore Fathers; and should transmit entire to our
posterity: oh the miserable defection that we have made from God, adulterating
thereof! Tell me, beloved, what one point, what one Article of Faith
controverted betwixt us and the Church of Rome is there, that our Pulpits, and
Presses, and University Acts have not been bold withal? as if we were weary
of the Truth which God has committed to us: as if indeed, for our not
receiving the truth in love, God were giving the Nation up to believe lies.

Secondly, let me instance in the Lords Day; a day which is a sign betwixt God
and his people, that He is their God that sanctifies them. That as
Idoll-worshippers are known by keeping holidayes to their Gods: So Gods people
are known to be his people, by observing of his Holy day.

It is most true, that our ancient Doctrine established is purer in this point
than can be found in most of the Churches, and excellent Laws we have for the
backing of it: but I believe there has not been in all the Christian World
such high affronts offered to the Lords day, as of late has been in England,
and (I am confident) they all lie in the Deck charged, as the sin of the
Nation, till by some public Act, the fourth Commandment be restored to its
due place and honor.

Thirdly, go to another branch, the point of preaching the Word. The preaching
of the Word is the Scepter of Christ's Kingdom, the glory of a Nation, the
Chariot upon which life and salvation comes riding: such a treasure as that any
wise Merchant would sell all to buy the field wherein this Treasure lies. O
that God would humble England for the great abuse of this invaluable mercy!
What little care has the State in general taken to provide that Christ might
ride in Triumph upon his white horse? that the Word of God might spread into
every corner of the Land? But, oh the cruelty that has been offered to many
poor Congregations, in taking away the bread of Life from their mouths,
without any pity! as if the starving and murdering of souls, for which Jesus
Christ shed his blood, were a matter of no moment. And oh, the spoil, and
havocke that has been made among many faithful and painful Ministers, for
such trifles as will not endure trial in the day of the Lords appearing? Could
we as in a mirror, behold the great guilt we lie under for these things, and
apprehend what great wrath is kindled against the Kingdom for them, how would
our hearts tremble before God this day?

Fourthly, but above all, the extreme daring, bold audaciousnesse of a
generation of men, that have adventured as much as in them lies, to corrupt
Gods worship, that not only rejoice to see the Idolatry, and superstition of
Rome practiced by others, but have dared to set their thresholds by Gods
threshold, and to dress out all Gods worship, according to their own fancies,
things too apparent to need any further proof.

It may be some may think, this is no great matter, and much complaint need not
be made against it: a few distinctions will salve all that is done to quit it
from Idolatry, and superstition. But as Lodovicus Vives says of the Papists in
his days, that for ought he saw, they (in effect) gave the same reverence to
their Saints, which the Pagans did to their gods: So I may truly say of these
men, (that notwithstanding all their distinctions) little difference is to be
found betwixt their practice, and the superstitions and Idolatries of the
Church of Rome.

Will some say, let it be granted that men have been too blame, (as doubtless
multitudes have been too bold) in this kind, yet God forbid, that we should
judge so far, as to make them as odious to God, as if they were the bringers
of Gods wrath upon the Nation, as if they were as bad as whoremongers, or
blasphemers; or that we should offer to compare them with the gross Idolaters
of the Church of Rome: God forbid such a stain should be cast upon them. Thus
some men draw a fine veil over these foul enormities.

Good Lord, that the glorious light of the Gospel in eighty two years, should
not take away this filme from the eyes of men! Judge you the case, you that are
husbands, you that have a spirit of jelousie, be ye Arbitrators between the
Lord and this Generation; and say, if a wanton look in your own wife, if a
whorish dress, if the giving, or receiving of love tokens, if the least
degrees of dalliance would not render your own wife more abominable to you,
than the known fornication, or adultery of any other woman whatsoever? Do you
not know that the Church of Christ is his Spouse? Exo. 33. 5
Do you not know that God is more easily provoked by a people among whom he
walks, than by any other people whatsoever? I beseech you lay these things to
heart.

And let the remembrance of this day, help you in it. This day eighty two
years agone, the Lord set up the Gospel among us, and took us to be a nation
in Covenant with him. Oh the progress that some nations would have made! The
thankfulness and fruitfulness that some people would have attained to in so
long a time! but that we should grow worse and worse in point of Gods worship,
that we should hanker after Idolatry, and Superstition, and fall away worse
than any of our neighbors, that God has visited so severely: what shall we
say, when God comes to reckon with us for these things?

Fifthly, add the horrible profanation of the holy Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, the promiscuous multitude every where, not only allowed, but even
compelled to the receiving of it: Multitudes of whom, know not whether Christ
were a man or a woman, nor how many Gods there be, multitudes wallowing in all
profaneness and licentiousness; yet if they profess that they be no
Papists, almost every where they are admitted to the polluting of these
reverend Mysteries, as if we would compel the Lord to depart away from us.
Ezekiel 8.


3 Not with God as in gaged in His Cause.
And then, if we should take in the third branch of engaging ourselves in Gods
cause, how little zeal is there for God? The wrongs and cruelties that are
done to many, the tears of the afflicted, and oppressed; and so few that will
open their mouths, or appear to plead any cause which GOD will own,
abundantly proclaims this. Verily, beloved, were you all as innocent as Ezra
Ezra 9.
was of the fact among the Jews, of the wretchedness of the people of Israel:
If you did know what God looks for at your hands this day, you would rent the
very Caul of your hearts before the Lord, and sit down with him astonished,
and refuse to be comforted, and wonder that GOD has not wholly left us, and
delivered up our glory as a spoil, and severely revenged the quarrel of his
Covenant.

But to come nearer yet, and bring it home into your own bosoms; what if you
your selves be guilty of these things? You that are the flower of your Tribes,
the chief of the Thousands of England; You that are lifted up above your
Brethren, whom GOD has made the Head, and not the Tail of the places where
you live, when GOD might have left you to be hewers of Wood, and drawers of
Water. And he has made some of you Noblemen, some Knights, and Gentlemen, and
now called you to be the Repairers of our breach, to heal and prevent our
ruin. What if you your selves have a chief hand in these transgressions? What
if among you be found swearers, cursers, adulterers, drunkards, haters of Gods
ways, scorners of his Children, and his Ordinances, men who go on in your
sinful ways, and resolve to do so: and because you are great, will therefore
be children of Belial, refusing to carry Gods yoke: what if any such should
be here? The Lord of heaven forbid. But if there should be any such, I beseech
you think what a Magor-mizzabib, what a terror round about you there will be,
when God comes to find you, and to reckon with you!

Are you come to Fast, and Pray before the Lord? Do you come to stand betwixt
God, and the Nation, when you wallow in such ways as GODS soul abhorres? Do
you such things as are rebellion against God, and pull down his vengeance on
us? Do you call this an acceptable Day? Do you think the LORD will accept of
any service at your hands? Be ashamed, and confounded, and never rise up till
GOD have broken your hearts, and spoken peace to you in the blood of CHRIST.
Let deep humbling thoughts for these things, be now to your souls as those
bitter Herbs wherewith the Israelites of old did eat the Passover. But if
you make nothing of all this, but will go on carelessely, and walk contrary
to God, God will walk contrary to you, the Lord will not be with you. This is
the first use for Humiliation.

2 Use. Of the escond point. Exhortation consisting of 3 branches.
Secondly, I add but another of Exhortation, and I have done: (I beseech you
pardon the Liberty, which your call gives me, I were unworthy ever to speak
more, if I should not now speak freely) You stand all this day before the
LORD, and have been exercised in the Duties of Fasting, and Prayer: I beseech
you tell me in Gods presence (or rather answer GOD in your own hearts) what
was the thing you propounded to your selves? was it to keep a day for
Formality? because it is now a received thing in England, in the beginning of a
Parliament to keep a Fast? Or was it, that by hanging the head as a Bulrush
for a day, you might expiate your sins with God, and take a new Ticket to
sin again? As it was said of Lewis the eleventh, that he would kiss his
Crucifix when he had done evil, and then God and he were friends, and he
might go on in his old way again. If it be so, expect a sad reckoning for
this days work: you deal with a God that will not be mocked by the greatest
of you.

You shall read in Ezekiel. 14. diverse of the Elders came to the Prophet to
inquire of God. These men, says God, have set up their Idols in their hearts,
and they come to enquire of me: Tell them I will answer them with a witness,
I will set my face against them, and make them a sign, and a Proverb. So I
say, from God to the greatest of you, who brought your sins in the morning, and
purpose to return to them in the evening, and keep such a solemn day only
for a formality, and there an end, God will reckon with you for it.

But if you desire indeed to meet God, and to be with God, that God may be
with you, then weigh what I shall say from the Lord; and if it appear to be
his will, then (as you were taught in the morning) draw it up into a Covenant;
Covenant betwixt God and your souls, come, and receive the Sacrament upon it,
and lie at Gods feet to obtain grace for performance. My exhortation shall be
answerable to the three branches of the Doctrine.

1 To turn unto God as an holy people.
First, resolve every one of you for his own part to turn to God, to cast out
all your abominations, never to turn to any of your wicked ways from this
day forward. It may be this motion seems harsh, and will not easily down:
(because in our wretched days, as the Turks use to account all fools to be
Saints; so men with us account all Saints to be fools.) But this must be done;
necessary things fall not under deliberation. To live in hell you would not; to
live with God you cannot: hard it will be to be damned; impossible it will be
to be saved, unless with full purpose of heart you turn to God, and become
new creatures. I must say to you as the Prince of Orange said to his soldiers
at the battle of Newport, when they had the Sea on the one side, and the
Spaniards on the other: If (says he) you will live, you must either eat up
these Spaniards, or drink up this Sea; So must you, either conquer your lusts,
eat up the Spaniards, or drink up the Sea, the devouring Gulf of Gods wrath:
and none of you know how soon this time may come, that will ye, nill ye, ye
must be be brought near to God, who is a devouring fire, utterly to consume
you, if you be Straw and Stubble, or to glorify you if you be Gold.

The Pagan King of Niniveh saw this, that without turning every man from the
wickedness that was in his own hands, there could be no hope of escaping the
wrath of God. And therefore you who are Christians cannot expect that God
should be with you in any thing that you take in hand: till this be done, God
will not only loath you, but the works of your hands also.

2 Be with God in matters of Religion
Secondly, this done, be with God in matter of Hag. 2. 11, 12, etc
Religion: my meaning plainly is this, be

First, such as cleave to the purity of his worship in your own practice.

And then in your great Counsel, be ye purgers and preservers of our
Religion. Look thoroughly what is amiss, and pluck up every plant that God
has not planted; throw to the Moales, and to the Bats, every ragge that has
not Gods stamp and name upon it. That it may be said of this Parliament in
matter of Religion, as it is said of Josiah, There was never any like him
before him, nor any after him. So there was never any Parliament before this,
nor never any after it, that followed the Lord with all their heart, and all
their soul, and all their might, according to all the will of God.

Motives thereunto from the second Commandment.
And to provoke you, give me leave to give you a brief view of the hedge that
God has made about the second Commandment. The intent of that Commandment
is, that Gods people should worship him with his own worship, and his own
ordinances, and never dare to tender to him the devises, and traditions of men
for a homage. Now the Lord knowing the itch, and pronenesse in men to be
tampering in the worship of God, to set their thresholds by his threshold, has
set such a hedge about it, that if a man did consider it seriously, he could
not but admire that ever mortal man should dare in the matter of Gods worship,
to meddle any jot further than the Lord himself has commanded: it standing
like the Cherubims, and the flaming Sword, which turned every way to keep the
way of the Tree of Life. Genesis 3. 24


1.
First, he is a jelous God, as if he should say, the matter of my worship is
to me as the marriage bed; and I am a Husband easily provoked to jelousie,
which is Prove. 6. 34
the rage of a man, and will accept no ransom.

2.
Secondly, all such are said to hate God, I will visit the sins of them that
hate me. They all pretend that they are lovers of him. They that made men
kiss the Calves, yet would have them swear Jehovah lives. Jeroboam pretended
nothing but respect to God, and to Gods people, when he set up his Calves: so
these men pretend reverence and veneration to Gods Ordinances: but God protests
that they all hate him, which may appear by the odious names he gives to
their sin, calling it sometimes Rebellion, as being a denying his
Sovereignty, Josh. 22. 16. 22. Sometimes Apostasy, Ier. 2. 13. Sometimes
Adultery, the most unpardonable sin betwixt man and wife, Ezekiel. 16. And
sometimes Blasphemy. Isai. 65. 7.

3.
Thirdly, it is a sin that has vengeance, and punishment intailed upon it to
the Third and fourth generation. The Jews say to this day, that there was never
any calamity betided their Nation, since their coming out of Egypt, but there
was an ounce of the Golden Calfe in it. It is a sin that GOD fails not to
visit upon Children, to the third and fourth Generation.

4.
But now on the other side, God will show mercy to thousands of them that love
him, and keep his Commandments. How is that? The Lord interprets them to love
him that purely worship him. As a man who finds his wife faithful in the
marriage bed, judgeeth that she loves him, and that her heart is one with his,
what ever other infirmities she may have. Yea, they are interpreted to keep
all his Commandments. God will trust them for all his Commandments, whom he
finds faithful in his worship: Yea, to a thousand Generations, he will
remember them, which is longer than this wicked world shall stand. The
kindness and faithfulness of them that maintain and preserve the pure
Religion and worship of God, shall ever be in the sight of God for them and
their posterity.

Oh! let me help your reckoning in the day of the LORD, entreating you for
the Childrens sake of your own body, Job. 19. 17.
to lay what I have said to heart, that you may provide that the Ordinances of
God be neither taken away, nor defiled, that GOD may be purely worshipped in
his own way for time to come. And that by a Generation of men, who seek only
to glory in our flesh, Gal. 6. 13
we be not jugled our of our Religion, nor misled in such a way of service,
as that Gods soul should take no pleasure in us.

3 Be with God, in every cause of God.
Thirdly, and lastly, (which is the comprehension of all the rest) be on Gods
side, engage your selves in every cause which is Gods: Own what God ownes. As
Christ said, You shall not have me always; that is, in my person, but the poor
you shall have always, and when you will you may do good to them. So I say, you
have not Christ with you in his person: but you always have his Cause, his
Truth, his Ordinances, his Day, his Ministers, his Children, the Tears of the
afflicted; all causes of Instice and Righteousness, these are Gods causes. God
would have all his friends zealous for him, and appear for him, his Church,
and his Cause. And to inflame your hearts to this, be pleased to consider these
few encouragements. Motives hereunto.


1 GOD has deserved it at your hands.
First, God has deservedit at your hands, that you should appear for Him, He
has appeared for you when none could: His Son Jesus Christ gave his own
soul a ransom for your sins, or else you had perished in Hell for ever. He
has made you the Head, rather than the Tail: He has heaped upon you Honor,
Wealth, and Friends; and you can give no other reason why you are not more
miserable than the poorest Vagrant, that wants both house and home, but only
this, that GOD has been on your side. Does not he then deserve to be owned?
They say, Love is loves Loadstone, and loves Whetstone.

2 Gods cause has many enemies, and few friends.
Secondly, Gods Cause, his Church, and Children, have few friends, and many
enemies, and those enemies no Babies, but Principalities and Powers, Cruel,
Cunning, Malicious, and unweariable: And more now than ever. Satan knows his
time is short, he stirs up all his instruments, as if one spirit possessed
them all. And is it not a shame, that the Lords friends should be more
backward in his cause than the vassalls of Satan are in their Masters?

3 GOD has, for punishment to his Church permitted the enemy to prevail very
far.
I add thirdly, the Lord to punish the Pride, Sloth, Hypocrisy, and
Formality of his people, has of late suffered the enemies of the Church to
prevail exceeding far. The face of Christendom this day so miserably rent
with Wars, Sedition, Heresies, and Schisms is a most ruthful spectacle. Who
can look upon poor Germany, and not even be compelled to weep over the
Book of the Lamentations again? And GOD knows whose Lot is next: Little
quiet I fear is to be expected in Christendom, till the Beast his Kingdom
be ruined.

Now we know that the Lord accounts that the most seasonable time for his
friends to own his cause, when the enemies are most violent against it: then
God says, Who is on my side, who? When the pressures of the Church are
greatest; the opportunities of appearing for the LORD are most seasonable, and
great are their Rewards who then stick to him. Every one would gladly embrace
a glorified CHRIST: but when the whole Council shall reject him; then, with
Nicodemus to plead for him, this is honorable. When hanging upon the Cross,
his Disciples run away from him, then with Joseph of Arimathea boldly before
Pilate to show love to him, this is acceptable.

When the Jews had an exalted Mordecay, then the people of the Land would
turn Jews. The Samaritanes would help to build the Temple, when the Persian
Emperor is a friend to the Church: But our Lord says, let me have the man
that will not be ashamed of me before a froward and adulterous Generation.
Mark, he does not say in a gracious Generation (then no man will be ashamed
of him) but in an adulterous, and froward Generation.

4 Gods Cause is the best, and his side will prove at last the prevailing party.
Fourthly, when you strike in on the LORDS side, on his Churches side, on his
Causes side; you shall not only strike in with the best side, with the best
Cause, but with the most prevailing; with that side which must and shall have
the victory at the long run. It would make a man never to be afraid to be
engaged in a quarrel where he is sure of the Victory. The Bark wherein
Christ, his Church, and Cause are, may be tossed, but can never be drowned.
Populus Romanus saepe praelio victus, nunquam bello. Florus.
The Romans lost many Battles, but they were never overcome in a set War;
at the long run they crushed all their enemies. So all the enemies that seem
too hard for Christ's cause, and his Church, must perish. He must rule, till
all his enemies be made his footstool. Psalm. 110.


In Zachary the 12. there are four or five admirable expressions. The Church
is compared to a Hearth of Fire in the midst of a Wood. Like a Torch of Fire in
the midst of a Sheafe. Whether the Wood, or the Fire, the Torch, or the
Sheafe will have the victory judge ye. In verse the second she is compared to
a cup of Poison, that will end them who think to devour it. To an heavy
Stone, that will return upon those to their ruin, who endeavor to carry it
away. So shall it be with all Nations that fight against the Church and cause
of Christ. And if any man should happen to lose his life in the Lords quarrel;
as the Angel said to Daniel, He shall stand up in his lot: Dan 12 13
He shall rise up, and follow CHRIST, clothed with glory. Revelations the
nineteenth, the Armies in Heaven, that followed Christ's triumphant Chariot,
were such as were holy, and faithful, and loved not their lives to the death.
Would not this move any man to be on Gods side?

5 The consideration of the office and calling of this house of Parliament
should provoke them hereunto above others.
Lastly, (Honored, and beloved in the Lord) let the consideration of your
great place, and office that God Almighty has called you to raise up your
spirits to endeavor great things for the LORD. For my part, I am too weak to
fathom in my thoughts, what the great work is to which you are called
together by God. You are met to seek the good of the Land, the good of the
Church, a greater charge than the salvation of your own souls, is put into
your hands. It may be not only our welfare, and peace, and Religion: but even
the welfare of all Christendom, under God depends upon your meeting. That God
that might have left you (as I said) to be hewers of Wood, and drawers of
Water, has called you to be Repairers of all our breaches, and the Prayers,
and blessings of all GODS people are upon you. The eyes of all the Nation next
under GOD, and our gracious Sovereign, are fixed upon you.

Oh what a mighty tie does this put upon the soul of every one of you, to lay
aside all business, and pleasures, and lusts, and ends of his own, and solely
to study how to advance CHRIST'S cause, and appear where Christ would have him
appear. Your work is great, our evils are many: but be not discouraged; only
rememember, that God is with you, while you are with him. As it is in Zech. 4.
Who art thou, O great Mountain? before my servant Zorobabel thou shall become
a plain. If God be with Zorobabel, Mountains shall become Plains before him.
God can make those things, that you apprehending as Hydra's, and Monsters would
tremble to think of, to fall before you as the leaves of a tree.

There is a notable story of Luther, when he first came out against the Pope,
Albertus Cranzius (a Bishop that liked well his project, but thought it
impossible to bring it to pass) wrote to Luther, Frater, Frater abi in cellam,
and dic, miserere mei Deus, Friar, Friar, go to thy Cloister, and say, Lord
have mercy upon me, this work is too hard for thee; yet Luther wrought
wonders. One Luther will do great things, if GOD be with him. One Parliament
may do great things, if God be with them.

Resolve upon it this day to be for God, make this another blessed seventeenth
of November. But if through fear, treachery, cowardice, pride, or sloth, you
withdraw your selves from Gods work; Deliverance shall come to Gods people
another way; and you for your part shall not only lose your share in the
comfort: but you shall bring all the guilt, and sins that the Nation groans
under, to stand upon your own score before God. Yea, (you will think it is a
great word; but I speak it not rashly) it may be more guilty, than the very
Authors of our mischiefs, who have been firm to their own principles, in
the bringing of them in: and you contrary to your light, and office do
further them, if you not withstand them. As he who solicited an Emperor for a
pardon for one that had killed two men, and received a denial upon that very
reason, that the delinquent had twice imbrued his hands in blood; replied to
the Emperor: Nay, you killed the second; for if he had been cut off for the
first, he had never killed the other. So, abundance of evils committed by
private men, are not the sins of the Rulers and Princes at the first, but may
afterward through their connivence or want of zeal, be truly reckoned and
accounted theirs. God forbid that you should bring so great a burden upon your
own souls and consciences. Up and be doing, and the Lord be with you in his
cause.

Now although your wisdoms best know what is to be done; and it may seem
unfit to prescribe such a College of Physicians a way of a Cure: Yet give me
leave only to propound one thing (even the same which was pressed in the
forenoone) which I suppose would prove a Catholic remedy for all our evils,
and the greatest means for the lengthning out of our tranquillity, and the
healing of all our distempers: that is, the promoting, establishing, and
maintaining a faithful, learned, painful, preaching Ministry: that every
Candlestick may have a Candle, that every Flock may have a faithful
Shepherd to guide them. This is the thing I would propound to you. This was
the course Iehoshaphat took, who sent Princes and Levites, who taught in
Judah, and went about through all the Cities, and taught the people. 2 Chronicles.
17. 7.


Blessed be God for the light that shines among us. Yet I must tell you that of
nine or ten thousand parishes, which they say are in England, I believe there
are many thousands, which these eighty years have not had the blessing to
enjoy (at the least any long time) a settled, faithful, preaching Ministry. So
that I believe, (and I speak somewhat from experience) that many thousands, if
not thousands of thousands, know not the right hand from the left, in the very
principles of the Doctrine of Christ. What ever be the cause, whether it be
that our Laws and Constitutions are defective: whether the negligence or
corruption of our Governors; whether the want of a preaching maintenance, or
whether all these be the fault: Certain it is, there has been hitherto a
(...), somewhat which has hindered the spreading of it.

And it is worth your most diligent inquiry, whether the neglect of this has
not been one maine cause of the ill success of so many former Parliaments.
Could you provide mercifully for people in this, you would make all safe, and
England would thank you as long as it is England.

To incite you, be pleased to consider but these two things.

First, we deserve no further the name of a Christian Nation than this is done,
nor any further than this is advanced. This is the Scepter whereby Christ
rules: The dwelling of his Word with a people, is the greatest proof of their
owning him for their Prince, and his acknowledging them for his own Subjects.
Is any Country esteemed a part of a Princes Dominion, that is not ruled by his
Laws? Neither can any Land be accounted Chists Kingdom, where the preaching
of the word, which is the Rod of his power is not established. And the Lord
has ever esteemed the hinderers of his Word, to be the men that would not
have Christ rule over them.

Secondly, if all the good Laws in the world were made, without this, they
would come to nothing; order what you can, leave this undone, you will never
do the thing you aim at. Magistrates and Ministers of Justice will not
execute them, and people will not obey them. The dark places of the Land are
ever full of the habitations of wickedness. Psalm. 74. 20.
But if Christ Isaiah 11. 4, etc.
smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, the Wolf shall dwell with the
Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, the Calfe, and the young
Lion, and the fatling together, and a little Child shall lead them. There shall
nothing hurt nor destroy, where Christ's Scepter rules: Your Laws cannot give
men new hearts, nor new strength; that is the privilege of the Laws of Christ.

The Poets speak of excellent Musicians, who by the power of their Music
made stones leap into Walls, beasts to be tame, etc. This will do more, this
will take the stone out of men's hearts, this will give them a new heart; this
will make all the Commandments easy; there is a kind of omnipotency in it.
Ibeseech you amongst all your excellent purposes for our good, let this be the
first, and chiefest: If this will not do, nothing will: If they hear not
Moses and the Prophets, they will not believe though one rise from the dead.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed by J. O. for SAMUEL MAN, dwelling in St. Paul's Churchyard, at
the sign of the Swan. 1641.


