XXIX.

DIRECTIONS AND Considerations, stirring up to Watchfulness, where every
Christian may get Armor in these dangerous times, to fight against Antichrist,
and his Adherents.

With Thirteen Principles of Religion;

By M. Perkins: By way of Question and Answer.

Showing, What necessity there is for all that are for Reformation, and are
desirous to venture life fortune and estate, for Religion, King, Parliament,
laws and liberties; against those who (if they prevail) will blot out Religion,
and utterly destroy us all.

Published by Richard Marsal Minister of Gods Word.

Set forth by Authority, and printed with Order.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop. 1647.

Thirteen Principles of Religion, taught by Mr. William Perkins, Preacher of
Gods Word in Cambridge; (deceased) and sent to his Son in Law John Hind,
resident in London in the Borough of Southwarke.
Q. WHat is your Happiness;

Answ. To know God and my self.

Quest What is God;

Answ. A spiritual substance, every way infinite; goodness it self, creator
and governor of all things: Distinguished into the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost.

Q. What art thou by Creation;

Answ. A creature endued with the image of God. which stands in
righteousness and true helinesse.

Q. What art thou by the fall of Adam;

Answ. A sinner, and by my sins I have deserved everlasting death which is the
destruction both of body and soul for ever, in the pit of Hell.

Q. What are thy principal sins?

An. Guiltiness in Adams first offense and the disposition of my heart to
every evil, with the innumerable fruits thereof in thought, speech and action

Q. What is the remedy of these sins?

A. Jesus Christ the Son of God made man, who was cruecfied upon the cross to
redeem all mankind that was lost in Adams disebedience in eating the forbidden
fruit.

Q. Sinner, how do thou know that Christ was crucified for thee?

A. By faith I believe that Christ was crucified for me and all believers, and
thahe was made unto me wisdom, justification, sanctification, and redemption.

Q. When does this faith begin to be bred in thy heart?

A. When I begin to be settled in the knowledge of the love and mercies of God
in Christ and to hunger and thirst after Christ and his righteousness, above
all the things of this world.

Q. What is the means to begin and confirm this faith?

A. The preaching of the word of God, reading reverent receiving the sacraments
and prayer.

Q. What is a Sacrament?

A. A sign to represent Christ till he came, a seal to confirm unto me his
death and resurrection, an instrument to exhibit Christ with all his benefits
to all believers.

qu. What is Prayer?

A. A speech to God made in faith wherein I ask in the Name of Christ, things
wanting, and give thanks for blessings received.

qu. What owe thou to God for thy redemption?

A. All thankfulness.

qu. Wherein stands thankfulness?

A. In new obedience, which is to carry in my heart a constant purpose never to
sin any more but to endeavor to do the will of God, and that within the
compass of my calling,

An Exposition on Mr. Perkins his Thirteen Principles.
THe high calling that every child of GOD is called unto, is not this temporal
calling which God has placed us in, but out Election stands in obedience to
know Gods will, and to know what we are by nature, the children of wrath and
firebrarnds of hell, if we labor not to know God, and to be assured that
Christ has redeemed us from the second death, and that the ^ates of Hell
should not preaile against us; therefore our true happiness is, to labor
while we have time, to know our duty to God and man, and to labor to know,
that of our selves we are lost in Adamstransgression, and that Christ has made
us free citizens by his death and resurection. For man by nature in himself.
out of Christ, is the unhappiest of all creatures that God made: therefore in
these sad and perilous times, we must fit our selves for a better life, and
whilst it is to day, harden not your hearts, but redeem your mis spent time,
for the days are evil: Broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many
there be that find it; but narrow is the way that leads to everlasting life,
and few there be that find that strait gate.

Therefore to labor to know Christ crucified that you may be sealed for the
day of redemption:

First, fast not as Adam fasted in eating the forbidden fruit, for which he
lost Paradise, for in this world Paradise is won or lost? Man's life is short,
and frail, in comparison but a span long, therefore Christ bids us come buy
milk without money or price, Gods Word is sweeter then the honey or the honey
comb: therefore let us taste the benefit that we have by Christ and let us
relish that by belief, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the Patriarchs, were
justified: It wet not Arons beard alone, but drencht his beard throughout, and
finally it did rain down his rich attire. How precious it is and joyful for
to see Brethren to hold together in the love of Christ, in the bouds of Unity:
and he that created us for this thing is God, who has given us the earnest of
his Spirit, For he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth,
live unto themselves, but unto him: which died for us and rose again.

Therefore all they that desire to be in Christ, let them deny themselves, and
hunger and thirst after Him and His righteousness above all the things in the
world: For old things are past away, behold all things are become new, Now is
the axe laid to the root of the Tree, every tree that brings not forth fruit,
shall be hewn down and cast into the fire. Therefore let us deny our own
righteousness, and cry out with Saint Paul; O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death;

Therefore these thirteen Principles holds forth our happiness to know what
the essence of God is, in creating the world.

Secondly, to know what we are by Adams disobedience in eating of the forbidden
fruit the which all Mankind stands guilty of (which is our original sin
which we brought into this world) till we are grafted and baptized into
Christ's Flock and made lively Members of the same.

Thirdly, the mercies of God in Christ, that the seed of the woman should
bruise the serpents head, and pierce his heel.

All that by the eye of Faith lay hold upon this promise, are justified, and in
fullness of time God sent his only begotten Son born of the Uirgin, which was
conceived by the Holy Ghost; of whose Life, Death and Resurrection, his twelve
Apostles are witnesses: And to confirm his Death and Resurrection the night
before he was betrayed (instituted at the eating of his Passover) the
Sacrament as a pledge.

First in the breaking of Bread, which sets forth the breaking of his Body.

Secondly he took the cup, drink ye all of this in remembrance that my body was
broken, and my blo^d sh^d for you, and for many, for the remission of sins.

Christ's sufferings upon the cross is our glorification, which frees us from
the second death: Therefore while we have time, let us have recourse to God in
his Ordinances, for the righteous man sinned seven times in a day: nay, seventy
times in a day. Therefore, how much need have we to renew our covenant with
God, and to forsake our sins and to loath them, and condition with God to
become new creatures, that the guilt of sin may be taken away.

For Christ pressed upon man, so often as you take this sacrament by belief you
are healed, and renew your covenant with GOD, to become new creatures.

Let us take heed that we put not off this precious time lest we be numbered
with the Foolish Uirgins that while they went to buy Oil, the wise Uirgins
entered into the wedding chamber with the Bridegroom: so many put off this
duty, excusing themselves that they are not fitted; that is the Devils policy:
First, labor to try your selves what you are by nature, then the benefit you
have by Christ; He bids us, To day if you will hear my voice, harden not your
hearts, to morrow is not ours again: Christ says, Come unto me, all that are
weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you.

Therefore, we ought to crave a blessing of GOD by prayer, on all dur
endeavors, whether in our callings, or in our walking abroad, or what ever we
take in hand, we ought always to pray to GOD for his blessing, and to desire
his Kingdom to come, and his will to be done. For God requires nothing of us
but thankfulness, and obedience to walk with him, with a purpose of
knowledge of life: Therefore let us beseech the Lord, in mercy to open our
blind understanding, and to guide us in the right way, that the commandments,
the Articles of our Belief, and the Lords Prayer, may be a savor of life unto
life, and not a savor of death unto death.

Therefore let us remember our creator in the days of our youth (...)
adversity, before the evil days come or the yea^es approach, when we shall
have no joy in them, and to cast off our sins by repentance. For the Lord
has promised, he will not leave us nor forsake us hough we suffer for a season.

Considerations exciting to watchfullnesse against Temptations and motions to
sin,
1 COnsider the g^orious and dreadful, Majesty o^ that God with whom thou
have to do he is a con^uming fire, his commandments are to be obeyed, his
threatenings to be feared, his service not to be slighted, but to be performed
with watchfullnesse and fear, etc.

2 Consider thy sins, that in number exceed the hairs of thy head, in weight
and measure the sand of the sea, the vileness of sin, the unthankfullnesse of
thy sin in respect of that good God who has done more for thee then for others.

3 Weigh the fearful curses and punishments threatened against sin, and misery
of this life, eternal ^ntolerable torments hereafter.

4 Nothing melts the heart like love, ponder therefore the infinite love of
God, and the rich grace of Christ taking thy sin upon himself, and bearing the
wrath of his Father, which was due to thee.

5 Awaken thy soul with meditation of the small number of those that shall be
saved, the multitude of those that shall perish, the certainty of their
damnation who carelessly despise, or wilfully abuse the grace of Jesus Christ
to carnal security, orwilful continuence in known sin.

6 Never call to mind the Devils unwearied malice, violence, and subtilty, how
he goes up and down like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, to whom it
is easy to become a prey.

7 Know the desperate corruption that is in thy heart ready to betray thee to
the basest lust, and most abominable wickedness.

8 What terrors of conscience what sharp and stinging scourges of outward
crosses, sickness, pains, poverty, may God inflict to rouse thee out of thy
spiritual slumber, if other means avail not.

9 How unworthily have thou rejected the commandment of God, whose mercy have
been and are so abundant and free toward thee, with promise of more and larger
mercies then for the present thou enjoyest.

10 What snares and temptations thou art every day exposed to, by occasions
ministered from the flesh within from the world without sometimes from the godly
as well as from the wicked.

11 Consider thy latter end the shortness of life, how it is subject to a
thousand calamities, and nothing to be done for God or thy soul, after death.

12 Meditate on the nobleness and excelency of thine immortal soul it is born
to a higher employment then the service of a base lust, or of the vanishing
world, that is not fit to put pibbles in a golden ca^ket.

^3 Often revolve in thy mind the infinite glory of heaven and that eternal
happiness there kept in flore for them that fight the good fight of faith and
finish their course and keep the faith, and look for the appearing of Jesus
Christ.

14 Be every day drawing some sweetness from the precious promises of all
sorts for comforts of this life to them that love God, and forsake any thing
for Christ, that all things shall work together for good to them, no good thing
shall be withholden from them, and for any thing thou have forsaken, thou shall
receive them in this world in the midst of persecutions, an hundred fold more,
and eternal life in the world to come.

15 Behold the experience of the sweet peace of conscience, and blessed
contentation, and spiritual rejoicing in the midst of tribulations and
persecutions that is found in many of the servants of God and withal prosesse
to be certainly attainable by those that watch and pray and are sober, and
exercise that faith and grace which the Lord has imparted to them.

Christian directions concerning duties in evell times.
1 BE diligent to examine thy self whether thou art in the state of grace, or
no, when we are like to be tried, it is wisdom to do it before hand.

2 Strive with God to get thine heart weaned from the love of this pre^ent
world; a thing which is but hanged on a pin, is ^oon heaved off; things glued
together are hardly sundred, excessive love to the world makes the Cross ten
times heavier.

3 Be much with God in holy duties: when Judas plotted against our Savior, he
prepared for the Passover, and last Supper: let us be moved with reverence to
use the means to have our selves and our families say to God, Thou art my
hiding place, enter into thy closet, shut the door to thee, hide thy self
with God, until the indignation be over-passed.

4 Pray earnestly that thou may enjoy the favor of God, which is better then
life. It is intolerable to fear the wrath of God, and to be deprived of all
comfort of the creature at once.

5 Exercise thy self to keep a clear conscience toward God and man, that if
crosses and troubles come to molest the outward man, yet thou may have sweet
peace within.

6 Acquaint thy felse with the precious promises: they will be as strong water
to keep the from sainting in the day of trial.

7 Get into thy heart the experimental know ledge and love of the truth: you
can never suffer for that you know not, much less for that you love not.

8 In evil times be forward to comfort and encourage others: for God has a
book of remembrance to write their names in, Mal. 3. 16. who often meet to
commune together of the ways of God.

9 Set before your eyes the joys of heaven, as Jesus Christ did, and Moses,
and Paul, 2 Cor. 4. 17. and all the Martyrs, who for the name of Christ
suffered tormenting deaths; our momentany sufferings shall be recompensed with
eternal refreshings.

10 Spare not one sin unmortified: for the love of any one sin will work us
more woe then all our enemies, and raise doubts and fears in us when others
shall have comfort.

11 Cast away all confidence in thy self, trust not to any righteousness or
work of thine own; in his own strength shall no man prevail: boast not thy
self of any thing in thee, but be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might, Ephesians. 6. 10.

12 Take heed unto thy words, The prudent shall keep silence in evil times:
It is their wisdom to (...) now before whom and w^ that er^^hey speak.

13 Exercise your self in works of mercy, Cas^ thy bread upon the face of the
waters, though it se^m to be lost for the present, yet afterward thou shall
find it, Again, Give a portion to seven, and al^o to eight, because thou
know not what days (...) ^ome, take the present season to do good in, the
merciful have the promise of mercy.

14 Prepare for a Judgment before it come, forewarned by Gods faithful
watchmen, forearmed; meditate upon the miseries which have befaln our neighbor
nations, the Sword, famine, pestilence devouring thousands, and what do we know
how God will deal with us.

Those who slight God and Religion in prosperity, take up religion for credit,
and will not endure small trials, they will not suffer the power of Religion to
come into their hearts, nor will for religion and the truth, lay down their
lives.

FINIS,

