AN ANSWER TO A Lawless Pamphlet entitled, The Petition and Articles exhibited
in Parliament against Doctor Haywood, late Chaplain to the Bishop of CANTERBURY.

By R. M.

LONDON, Printed by I.N. for Henry Seile, at the Tygres head in Fleetstreet,
over against Saint Dunstans Church, 1641.

To the honorable, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House in
Parliament, etc.
Most humbly shows,
THat we live under the pastoral Charge of one William Haywood Doctor of
Divinity, who has lately published, in sundry Sermons by him preached in his
Parish Church, most damnable and erroneous Doctrines full of gross Popish
tenants. And whilst he was House Chaplain to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
did license a Book, entitled, An Introduction to a devout Life, containing the
like Popish Doctrines, etc.

Whose practice in Church Discipline is superstitious and idolatrous;
manifested by strange antike gestures of cringings and bowings, etc.

In whose Parish Church aforesaid, are set up Crucifixes, and diverse Images of
Saints, and likewise Organs, with other confused Music hindering Devotion, etc.

I
1 HE affirmed that a Minister has power to remit and retain sins, and not
declaratively, or Ministerially only, as (he said) some would have it, but
actually and absolutely, etc.

II
2 He affirmed that every man in his natural condition is by the fall of Adam
wounded only, and but half dead, etc.

III
3 He affirmed that the Virgin Mary was free from, and without any mortal
sins, etc.

IV
4 He affirmed that Confession to the Priest, of our particular sins, is very
necessary to the forgiveness of sin, etc.

Particular Erroneous, popish Doctrines, contained in a book Entitled, An
Introduction to a devout life, etc.

The said Church is divided into three parts* the Sanctum Sanctorum being one
of them, is separated from the chancell by a large Screene in the figure of a
beautiful gate, etc.

Seven or eight foot within this holy place is a raising by three steps, and
from thence a long Rail from one wall to the other, into which place none must
enter but the Priests and the subdeacons, etc.

This deske is overlaid with a covering of purple Veivet, which has a great
gold and silk fringe round about, and on this Deske is placed two great Books
wrought with needle work, in which are made the pictures of Christ and the
Virgin Mary with Christ in her arms, etc,

For the preparation of this duty, the said Doctor and three Subdeacons do
all go from the body of the said Church, etc.

Then they all advance to the beautiful Gate, where they stand; Then every one
bowing to he ground three several times as they go; They enter into the
Sanctum Sanctorum, in which place they read their second Service, etc.

It was proved, that when that Popish Book was printing, the Printer seeing
such gross popery in it, commanded his Workman to stay his hand, till he spoke
with the Licencer: so he took his Corrector of his work, (being a master of
arts) with him, and showed the Doctor diverse popish passages in the Book,
saying he durst not print it, etc.

The printer was troubled, and put into the Pursivants hands, threatened with
Star Chamber, except he would deliver up the original Copy by which he
printed it, which he refused to do, for that it is ever their custom to keep
originalls by them for their own safeguards, etc.

But at length he by promises and threats was constrained to deliver up the
copy wherein the License was, etc.

At the hearing of the business before the committee, the Doctor was asked in
what places it was altered from that he licenced. He answered in page 691.
Articie 4. he allowed it to be read* Call to mind the Saints of Heaven, etc.
and the printer had left out the word mind. etc.

It was proved that a Parishioner of his being seduced to Popery, the Doctor
was entreated to admonish and reclaim her: and though he had been solicited
three or four sever all times, yet he refused, etc.

Another woman being perverted, her husband got her to go to the Doctor, hoping
by his counsel and reasons to have reclaimed her: instead whereof he
confirmed, her, in saying, that Salvation might be had in the Church of Rome,
etc,

He has caused the Protestation to be read and taken in that ridiculous,
absurd, and disdainful manner, etc.

What was already heard, appeared sufficient cause for his removal, which this
Honorable assembly without all question will do, etc.

His Altar stands dect continually, week days and all, and me wed up within
the Screene and Rayles as before, some of the parishioners desiring to receive
the Sacrament in their Pewes, were denied it, and sent away without it, and he
forces all to come up to the Railes still as before. In diverse of his Sermons
since the hearing of his business, he has with much bitterness inveighed
against the petitioners, and at those that go from their own parish Church,
although he has so weak a voice that he cannot be heard by the one half of
these that come to Church.

FINIS.
Happening lately upon a printed Pamphlet entitled, The Petition and Articles
exhibited in Parliament against Doctor Haywood, etc. and finding many apparent
untruths in it, I thought it a deed of charity to vindicate the man, lest he
should suffer in the opinion of them that know him not, and lest those that are
well-affected to him in his Parish should be too much scandalized by the boldness
of some few malicious ones, whose blind zeal I much pity. Knowing therefore
the Doctor employed in continual preaching, and having little leisure to
answer for himself, I have endeavored to give an answer to some particulars,
such as are notoriously false or scandalous, and desire the indifferent Reader
by that little here replied, which will be found undoubtedly true, to judge of
the rest of their accusations against the Doctor.

First, whereas they call it a Petition exhibited by the Parishioners of Saint
Giles in the fields, it were to be wished they would tell us, who they are and
how many of them. For as the world reports, the Petition was at first set on
foot by two or three illiterate Tradesmen in the Doctors absence having been
fourteen weeks sick, and then scant recovered waiting at Court. And whereas
in all reason and conscience they ought first to have repaired to him (taking
offense at ceremonial matters) to have tried whether he would have yielded to
alter any thing or no, they were so far from it, that they labourd under hand
to procure as many hands as they could against him, and though they attempted
all of al sorts many days together, yet they could draw none of any quality,
not a Nobleman, not a Gentleman, not a Vestryman, not a Citizen of any better
breeding, but a few such as themselves illiterate and ignorant, many of them
not able to write their names, and scant any of them using to come to Church.
And of those they could not make up 100. taking so great advantage of the
Doctors long absence, and soliciting al persons against him, whereas the parish
consists of above 5000. Communicants, numbers whereof are Noblemen, Knights,
Gentlemen, and worshipful Citizens, as greatly interested in the affairs of
the Church, and as much engaged in conscience to complain, if they thought the
parish not well served, as any of the Petitioners, if not more.

The Petition it self. To the Honorable Knights, Citizens and Burgesses. etc.
It Is worth observing in this Petition, first that they touch not the Doctor any
way for his life, nor his frequency in preaching, or residing amongst them,
none of all which they would have spared if they had found any color to accuse.

Secondly; where they charge him with popish doctrine in his sermons, it is well
known he has preached in the Parish Church of St. Giles within this five years
since he was first Parson, near upon 200. Sermons (neither fails he any week
being in health and not otherwise called away) among all which Sermons they
except but against three, two of them preached about two years since, the third
more then a twelvemonth ago. And it can hardly bethought if at any other time
he had preached what these men could have excepted against, they would have
failed to have inserted it.

But for the Sermons, to satisfy the world, the Doctor has the^ word for word
as they were delivered written, and here willing to promise for him, since they
are thus publicly traduced, they shall God willing, as soon as may be, be
publicly set forth for every man's reading, and he takes God to witness that
he will not alter, nor add, nor diminish, a word from the coppie by which he
preached them.

The particulars of the Sermons.
In the mean time the better to clear these accusations, he has given me
certain passages of the Sermons complained of, to set down verbatim as they
were spoken, and definitively uttered as his own opinion, which many that heard
them will witness to be so. And let any man judge by those passages, whither
it be possible for the Doctor so far to contradict himself in one and the same
Sermon, as to say what these Petitioners would make him.

Out of the Sermon preached April 21. 1639 upon Whose soever sins ye remit
they are remitted.
Yea! What has man then the authority of imprisoning or releasing the
conscience? Has Christ put off his power and given it to his Apostles? Has
the Father committed all judgment to him, that he may commit it to them, and
set them as it were in Gods Throne to pronounce sentence of life or death upon
sinners as they list? No, not so. A power though Christ has granted, yet it is
not an absolute power, and independent, but ministerial only and subservient.
He has not given over what is proper to himself, but only honored men to
serve under himself, etc.

Out of the Sermon preached June 7. 1640. upon Which now of these three
think thou was neighbor to him which fell among thieves? etc.
Thus miserably wounded he lies in the way to eternal Perdition, Adam and all
mankind with him. Half dead, because though his body be alive, his soul is
dead in sin, and as it were corrupted. Though he have some little motion to
good, yet he is utterly unable to fulfill it, etc.

Out of the Sermon preached January 20. 638 upon, Jesus said unto her, woman
what have I to do with thee?
For what concerns the Holy mother of our Lord, I must speak freely, I cannot
see how it can any way advance the honor of our religion, to cast dirt on her
honor, or to wrest all places in the Gospel to the worst sense that may be
made, only to show her guilty of sin, and not much holier then other women.
Sure I am, we may be far from adoring her, far from invocating her and
clothing her with Gods honor, and yet confess her spotless and blameless
from any foul sinful touch, as preserved by that holy Spirit that chose her
for his Mansion. By sinful touch, I mean not Original guilt, nor lighter
slips, but gross actual crimes, and therein have St. Austin and many ancients
to second me, etc.

Out of the Sermon first mentioned preached April 21. 1659. upon VVhosesoever
sins ye remit, etc.
And yet, not as if no sinner could be forgiven but what the priest forgives:
Let me not be so mistaken. God is merciful at all hours, and has not bound
up his grace in such fetters. But because in great and weighty ones that wound
the conscience deeply, there he would have our souls humbled, not only before
him, but before his Ministers. Where this may possibly be done, and without
peril, this would be done; where not, we go not to limit Gods infinite
goodness, he has other ways of remitting then we imagine, etc.

Let any one judge by these passages which were uttered definitively, and not
as an others opinion, whether the Doctor could so* contradict himself as in
the same sermons to teach what these Petitioners charge him with. And let it
vvithall be noted, that his Auditory at all the foresaid Sermons was very
large, full, and Judicious, not one of which ever told the Doctor of any
offense taken at the said Sermons or at any other preached by him: Neither
were these Petitioners by the Doctor, or any of his friends heard to find
fault with these Sermons, till some year or two after they were preached
viz. in December last, after this present Parliament had long sitten.

Particular erroneous Doctrines contained in a Book entitled An Introduction
to a Devout Life.
It seems these Petitioners wanted matter to furnish up their charge against
the Doctor, that they have brought in this Book, called in by authority, and
burnt five years ago. And by whose means was it called in, but by the
Doctors own complaint first, finding diverse popish passages, touching
invocation of Saints, re-inserted after he had dashed them out. The Book is
well known by all that know the latin original to be a very pious work, and
excellent well worth the translating, and publishing in any language (abating
only some usual superstitious passages touching invocation of Saints amongst
those kind of people, etc. for it was made by a papist) and it had been diverse
times before translated into English though the Doctor then knew not so much.
But knowing it in many things a godly treatise, and a book that might do much
good, if well purged, he bestowed his pains the more willingly on it; and
never misdoubting the honesty of the translator that brought it to be licensed,
one Christopher Barrows, as he called himself, who came recommended to the
Doctor by letter from a special friend, after the Doctor had kept the book
with him some half a year, and struck out all passages contrary to our
Religion, he gave it license in November 1636. being then at Croydon, by
reason of the great sickness in London, which caused the Doctor to allow the
larger time for printing, and to deliver it to the Translators hands alone, But
this translator played the knave egregiously, For he kept the Book in his hand
after it was licenced, and carried it not to the Press till toward the end of
February following, and in the mean time had opportunity to make what
alterations he pleased. And so it appeared he did, for when the Book came out
in April following, diverse gross passages of Popery were to be seen in it,
which the Doctor was sure he had cancelled. Whereupon according to his duty,
the Doctor presently certified the Lord Keeper, and the Arch Bishop, as their
Chaplains can witness, how much he thought the Church and himself abused. And
the book was presently called in, and the mattter was brought in question
before the Lords of the Council, Who required the Kings Attorney to send for
the Author, and the Printers, and the licencer, and to enquire where the abuse
lay, which he did, and finding the whole fault to have been in Barrows (who
fled instantly upon the books calling in, and was discovered by his Trunk and
papers left behind him to be a Romish Priest) the Kings Attorney accordingly
certified the Counsel Board. Whereupon a Proclamation went forth immediately for
the apprehending of Barrows, and the D. and the Printers were dismissed without
farther trouble.

No reason therefore has the Doctor to stand to any thing in the said
corrupted book, which lay so long in the hands of a popish Priest to alter it
how he pleased. For this Barrows was afterward Overseer of the Press, and
when the Book was Printed, carried half the written copy away with him. And
how he might play false by inserting new sheets and adding new passages who
knows; for the Doctor remembers no particulars now but what were turned over
before the Kings Attorney, and his leisure would not serve to look on many.
One thing the Doctor is sure of; The petitioners had little reason to complain
of theo Book: For it gave them no offense, they never saw a coppie of it till
they sought for it about December last to fill up their charge against the
Doctor. Nor could they have met with it had they not happened by chance upon Oaks
that Printed it.

Doctor Haywoods supersticious and idolatrouse manner of administration of the
Sacrament, etc.
Here are many untruthes couched together. The Sanctum Sanctorum, and the
Subdeacons, and the beautiful Gate, are all terms or these men's own
invention. The Doctor never so called them, nor any by his aprobation. The
Skreene a fair Ornament of the Church, and great honor to that religious Lady
who bestowed it, was assigned where to stand by the Parishioners, nor can it
be placed conveniently but where it now is. The Doctor neither persuaded the
making of the Screene, nor contributed a penny toward it, nor knew of what
fashion it would be, nor was present in the Parish, when it was set up. The
Ornaments of the Holy Table, The silk curtains, Carpet, Covering, Books, and
much plate are all the pious gift of the same honorable lady which bestowed
the Skreene. And being for the decency of Gods servi e, and well accepted of
by the Parishioners, the Doctor had no reason to refuse them. As for the
Crucifix, Organs, and Church-musick me tioned in the Petition, they were there
long before Doctor Haywords coming. There is no Deske upon the Lords Table,
only a little stay to hold up the plate, nor any such pictures on the Books as
the Petitioner speak of. For the Ceremonies used in administering (the
scornful description whereof, and his abusive wit that drew it, the Doctor
much pitties) they were none of them invented, nor new brought up by Doctor
Haywood. His pattern he had from his Majesty's Chapel, not far from that
place: Neither did any man ever tell him he was offended with the sight of
these few Ceremonies. Yet since the Petitioners complaint, the Doctor (as I
heard) has laid them down; And professes that for matters of Ceremony he will
ever be obedient to the lawful orders of the Church wherein he lives, nor
ever use any hereafter, but what authority and general custom require.

These Articles were all proved before the grand Committee, etc.
This seems a stirewd evidence against the Doctor, but if well sounded makes
rather for him. For what does it prove, but that the Doctor believed well of
his own industry in purging out Popery, and credited his own judgment, rather
then the Printers objections, an argument that he had bestowed good pains in
perusing the Book? But why does not the Printer tell us what were the Popish
passages that so much stumbled him? They were such as the Doctor denies to be
popish. Three of them as he remembers the Printer told him of. One that the
Church triumphant praid for the Church militant, which the Doctor as it is said
defended. Another, that we ought to desire the prayers of the Saints living
upon Earth for us. A third, that before God there is no respect of Prelate,
Prince, or People. Not one of these three are objected in the Doctors charge,
and I believe the petitioners objected all they could find* But indeed the
Doctor heartily wishes, either that the Printer had never come to him, or that
he had showed him somewhat truly popish, that he might have had cause to
suspect Barrows, and to stop the press. For showing him such slight things
(which in a translation might well enough be borne with, though, not so well
perhaps in a new book) the printer lost the credit of his judgment with the
Doctor, and increased the Doctors good opinion of Barrows, and made Barrows
thereupon more bold to put in what popery he listed, while the Printers were
the slacker to complain of it.

As for the Original Copy the Printer reports to have been wrested from him,
the D. wonders what became of the first part of it; for before the Kings
Attorney there was produced but the latter half: The rest it was said Barrows
had convei'd away with him. It Is well known the Doctor had never sight of the
Original Coppie after it was first delivered to the Press, but only before
the Kings Attorney, while the falsifications were turned to: For the Coppie was
laid up in the Star Chamber office where it is yet.

At the hearing of the business before the Committee.
The Doctor said not that the Printer had left out the word Mind, but that
Barrows had falsified that place and struck out the word Mind, so that the
printer could read it no otherwise. And this the printers examination upon oath
confirmed. The Doctor instanced in this place, because one of the Printers was
so impudent, as to say before the Committee, there was never a blur, nor any
thing canceld in the original coppie, But it is evident to them that look on
the said Coppie, That where the Translator had first made it, according to the
Latin, Invocate the Saints of Heaven, the Doctor had struck out the word
Invocate, and put over head Call to mind the Saints etc. And Barrows had again
struck out the word Mind, and left it Call to the Saints etc. which was done
questionless after the book was licensed, and done of purpose. For what reason
else had Barrows to run away? or how should the same words [call to mind] and
the same manner of dashing out be found in several places in the written
coppie as it is?

But the D. takes God to witness, he never allowed any exhortation to invocate
the Saints in that book nor in any other, Nor any superstitious passage else,
contrary to our Religion, wittingly. Invocation of Saints is a point the Doctor
has often preached against, publicly disputed against, and subscribed
against; Nor did he ever in his life favor that Romish Error, or abet any that
did.

At the hearing of the business before the Committee, etc.
The D. denies not, but that this whole sentence taken together may bear an
unsavory sense, but it may also as properly bear an Orthodox sense. And the
Doctor might very well understand it in the better sense when he read it, and
not consider the worse: and according to the Latin, it must be so understood,
Recordare sanctos (quibus specialiter devotus ei) ut te in coelesti itinere
promoveant Call to mind the Saints (to whom thou have a special devotion) to
help thee in the way to Heaven [call to minde] that needs little defense, for
it is in regard of imitating their ventues [to whom thou have a special
devotion] that needs not much, There is devotion in calling the Saints to mind,
and a special devotion in calling some special virtues of some Saints to mind,
And this calling to mind the virtues and good life of the Saints does help in
the way to Heaven. But the Doctor rather believes it might besome mistake, for
he had in diverse places before turned [invocate] into [call to minde] and
might do it here, hastily reading it, and thinking the place sufficiently
purged, without deliberating upon what followed. And yet I Pray who knows
whether those words (to whom thou have a special devotion) were not the
handwriting of Barrows, after the Book was Licensed?

It was proved that a Parishioner of his being seduced, etc. There is nothing
here to be blamed but the Doctors memory, confounded with a multitude of other
business. It Is notoriously false, that the Doctor was solicited three or four
several times: For he never saw the Woman's husband that reports this, but
twice, till he saw him at the Committee. The first time he met the Doctor going
upon earnest business to Westminster, and the Doctor took his name, and the
place where he dwelt, promising to come; Yet appointing no certain time,
through multitude of other business, forgot it. The man coming again about a
fortnight after, and perceiving his face, and his errand forgotten by the
Doctor, went away in a chafe, and came no more.

But it is well known, and ready to be proved, that the Doctor has conferred
with diverse Recusants, and converted more families then one, and brought them
to Church; Although he has great reason to take heed how he talks with women,
for that other woman's sake mentioned presently after. For whereas it is
delivered, that the Doctor should say Salvation might be had in the Church of
Rome: It was no saying of his, but a question put forth by the woman asking the
Doctor whether he could deny it. To whom the Doctor replied (as diverse will
witness) That what ever might be thought of Papists beyond Sea, or of those in
former times who knew no other Religion, yet for such as she was, who lived in
wilful disobedience to the Church wherein she was baptized, and refused to be
better informed out of Gods word graciously offered her, there was no hope of
salvation.

But above all things, the Doctor wonders any should except against his manner
of taking the Protestation. What could be more solemn? It Was taken on
Whitsunday last in the afternoon, immediately after Sermon, before so great a
congregation as usually no Sunday in the year has more. It was told the
Parishioners in the morning publicly that they should take it. The afternoons
Preacher so soon as ever the Psalm after Sermon was ended, first read it in the
Pulpit, then took it, so did the curate. Warning being then given to strangers,
and women to depart, and the Parish gathering about the Doctors Pew, the Doctor
himself first took the Protestation audibly in his own person, and give it to
others to do the like. When this was done, there was a place assigned, that as
many as had taken it should come and subscribe their names in a book, namely,
at the Vestry, on Tuesday following, where the Doctor and the Churchwardens
subscribed their names, and others of the Parish as many as would did the like,
both then and on the next Sunday following.

All which considered, it may be wondered why any should yet doubt of the
Doctors soundness in Religion, notwithstanding these men's objections. For lest
their malice should not sufficiently appear in alleging things colourably
true, they have not spared to print things manifestly false, such as these,
That he has inveighed against the Petitioners in his Sermons, a thing that all
his hearers, except the Petitioners, will be ready to swear the contrary. That
he forces all Communicants to come to the Rails, whereas the Doctor knows
not of any yet that has ever refused to come, till Sunday last, being the 27
of June 1641. That he inveigheth against those which go from their Parish
Church, whereas he never yet reproved or caused to be presented one of his
Parishioners for so doing. That his voice is so weak half the Church cannot
hear him, which none but deaf people will say. Nor is it much more to the
purpose to allege his keeping the Lords Table within the Screen and the Rayls,
a thing that no authority has yet enjoined the contrary, As for the Honorable
Houses of Parliament, for both which the Doctor daily prays, they need not be
pointed out by these men what they have to do. They see I doubt not, how much
their justice is prejudiced by scattering such Libels, exposing men to obloquie
before they are proved guilty. Let me therefore desire these Petitioners not
to snatch the power of judicature out of their hands, and to condemn and
proscribe before sentence, Nor to follow with such implacable bitterness a
harmless Minister, of God, who prays heartily that God would give them a
better mind, And endeavors nothing more then theirs, and all his Parishes
proficiencie in godliness, desiring them for a farewell to think upon that
sentence of S. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. We beseech you, brethren, to know them
that are ever you in the Lord, and admonish you. And to esteem them very highly
in love for their work sake, and be at peace among your selves.

FINIS.

