A THANKS GIVING SERMON: PREACHED To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, Upon occasion of the many
late and signal Victories, and Deliverances vouchsafed to the Parliaments
Forces, In Paul's Church London, July 27. 1648.

By STEPHEN MARSHALL, B. D. Minister of Gods Word at Finchingfield in Essex.

Psalm 66. 11, 12, 13. Thou broughtest us into the net, thou laydest
affliction upon our loins. Thou have caused men to ride over our heads, we
went through fire and water; but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place. I
will go into thy house with burnt offerings, I will pay thee my vows. LONDON,
Printed by R. Cotes, for Stephen Bowtell, at the Sign of the Bible in
Pope's Head Alley, 1648.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE John Warner Lord Major of the City of LONDON.
My Lord,
THis plain Sermon was preached in obedience to the call I received from you,
it is published according to your request, and that it may be (though in never
so weak a measure) a strengthening of your hands in your great work, it is
humbly presented unto you as a pledge of the unfeigned respect and service of

Your Lordships much obliged STEPHEN MARSHALL.

A THANKSGIVING SERMON: PREACHED To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London.
ISAIAH 9. 4, 5. For thou have broken the yoke of his burden, and the staff of
his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, as in the day of Midian; For every
battle of the Warrior is with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood,
but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire.
THE first word of my Text For, (For Introduction showing the coherence.
thou have broken the yoke of his burden) does tell us this has dependence
upon what is laid down before; If you please to look into it, you will find it to
be thus: The Lord in the former Chapter had threatened the terriblest calamity
that ever came upon the Jewish nation, a woeful dark night of affliction of
several hundreds of years was now beginning, and such calamities were
threatened, as the Lord professed that many men amongst them, when they looked
up to heaven, and saw nothing but darkness there, nothing but confusion upon
earth, they should rave and be mad, they should curse their God that would not
help them, curse their King that could not help them, should be driven into
utter darkness; but yet notwithstanding in the beginning of this Chapter the
Lord says, that unto those that feared him, to his own people, the darkness
and uncomfortablenesse of it, should not be so great, as they had formerly met
with in some lesser afflictions; for God did (as i^ were) create a new Star,
that should shine unto his people, all that long and dark night, that is, a
most glorious promise of Jesus Christ, and salvation by him, which is laid
down in the seven first verses of this Chapter, and there are several
degrees, or breakings out of the light of this comfort, I Will but name them so
far as may lead me to the Text. First,

The Lord tells them whence this comfort should come, there should a glorious
light shine to them, in the second 1.
verse; the people that walked in darkness should see a great light, they that
dwelt in the land of the shadow of death, upon them has the light shined,
which is the promise of Jesus Christ setting up his Gospel amongst them, as it
is expressly interpreted in the fourth of Matthem. This Text seems to be a
prophetical description of Capernaum, Matthew* 4. 15, 16.
where Christ first set up his Ministry some hundreds of years before it was
built, which stood in the land of Galile by the Sea side in the way leading to
the Gentiles. Secondly,

The next degree is, what the comfort is, that they 2.
should have from this light, in the third verse, they should have great joy by
it, the Lord had formerly more multiplied their nation, but never gave them
more joy then now they should have, though they should be in a very afflicted
condition, yet they should have as much joy in the Gospel of Christ, as ever
that nation enjoyed in the days of David or Solomon; though now they should
live after a precarious manner, and should be tributaries to all the four
great Monarchies of the world in their succession, first to the Assyrian, then
to the Persian, then to the Grecian, and then to the Roman, and all this time,
a space of some 700. years, they should be a despised, contemned people, yet
from the Lord Christ and the promise of the Gospel, should they have as much
joy as ever they had when their Nation was most enlarged, yea such joy that it
should be like the joy of harvest, or the joy that Soldiers have when they
divide the spoil, that is the second degree; now my text is the third degree
or breaking out of this glorious comfort, and that tells you,

What the mercy shall be that shall be the cause of so 3.
much joy; what it is that should fill them with so much joy, why he would
break every yoke of their burden, every staff that lay upon their shoulders,
every rod of their oppressors, that whipped them, he would break all as he
did once do it in the day of Midian, he will burn up their enemies with fuel
of fire, he would free them from them all, and tread them under their feet;
then the last branch of all, and the height of their comfort is,

That Christ will not only break other yokes, but would 4.
put the yoke of his own sweet and easy government upon them, himself will
be their King; To us a Son is given, to us a child is borne, upon whose
shoulder the government shall be, his name is Wonderful, Counselor, the
mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace; and in these things
should the hearts of Gods people rejoice in their most afflicted times. Thus
stands the dependence of my Text, so that these two verses that I have read,
contain the cause of all the joy that the people of God should find in Christ
in their afflicted times; and Scope and parts of the Text.
there are two branches of the Text to be handled. First,

Here is the blessing that should be conferred upon them, in these words, thou
have broken the yoke of his burden, 1 Which are A great deliverance of the
Church.
the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressors: that is the mercy they
should receive. Secondly, 2 The manner how i^ must be wrought.


Here is the manner how this should be done; and that is laid down, First,

It should be as in the day of Midian; that is, as in the day when in Gideons
time with 300. men with lamps and 1. Judges 7.
pitchers the Lord destroyed an innumerable multitude of Midianites; so would
the Lord Christ now work this great deliverance, that he promises to his
people. Then, Secondly,

The manner of it is yet more clearly and fully laid down in the 5. verse, by
showing that the way of Gods 2.
working of this, shall be diverse from the manner of other deliverances:
Every battle of the Warrior is with confused noise, and garments rolled in
blood, but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire; the meaning whereof
in a few words is this, This victory that God would give his people, should not
be in the way of humane help to do it, as Nations get victories one over
another by bringing one a greater Army then the other, or better disciplined or
trained men then the other, or with policy and valor, with shouting and
making the others lie wallowing in their blood, and so man's Arm to be the
instrument of it; no, this should be with fuel or burning of fire, that is,
it should be done by Gods own hand; for what the Lord does immediately himself,
that is ordinarily said to be done by fire, or fuel of fire, it has been
the ordinary way of Gods manifesting himself by devouring fire, when he
threatens to show himself he will come in devouring fire, seldom has he
appeared, but it has been either in smoke or fire; so then this expression
signifies it should not be done by man's help, Interpretation of the Text.
but the Lord alone would come and do it by his own immediate hand.

Let us now first inquire into the matter, what it is that 1.
they should enjoy; the Lord would break the yoke of their burden, the staff
of their shoulder, the rod of their oppressor: And here we must consider, First,

What this signifies, what does God intend in this? 1.


For the Grammatical meaning the yoke of his burden, this is an Hebrewisme,
and signifies his burdensome yoke, 1.
he will break his burdensome yoke, that is, the heavy yoke that was put upon
his shoulders, by those that had enslaved him; the staff of his shoulder, that
is, the staff wherewith his shoulders used to be beaten; the rod of his
oppressor, that is, either the Scepter of those Tyrants that kept them under
often expressed by a rod; or otherwise the rod of correction, wherewith the
enemies that kept them under did use to discipline them: and by all this
congeries of words, these several expressions of yokes, and burdensome yokes,
and rods and staves, the Lord does signify the greatness of that misery and
bondage, that his people should lie under at that time, when Jesus Christ
should come to deliver them. What are those yokes, and staves, and rods that
are here meant? I answer, that it will appear clear unto every one that marks
the Text, that here are two things intended.

Breaking of the temporal yokes, the yokes that they 1.
should lie under from the Assyrians, the Babylonians, and so the successive
Kingdoms and Empires, that should keep them under subjection and bondage; but
principally here is meant,

The spiritual yokes of sin, and death, and wrath, and curse; and that both
these are meant is clear in the Text; 2.
that the outward yokes are literally meant is obvious to every ones eye that
does but compare this with the two former chapters, and all the chapters that
follow, for five or six of them together: in the eighth chapter the Lord
threatened he would bring the Empire of Assyria upon them, and the Assyrians
should carry them into captivity, and fill their land with waters up to the
neck; and for a great many chapters together from the seventh chapter, I
think there is not one but there is somewhat of the Assyrian Empire that
should lie heavy upon the back of Gods people; that is the literal, but
another thing intended is, the mystical, the spiritual Babylonish yoke, the
devil and sin, and death and hell; Jesus Christ will break all these yokes
from off the neck of his people. And that the spiritual is intended as well
and more then the temporal, is clear both by what goes before, the preaching
of the Gospel should do it, and by all that follows, for unto a us Child is
borne, to us a Son is given: both these sorts of yokes would Christ beak by
his own hand; if you would have it yet a little more clear, I conceive the
deliverance most immediately intended in the letter was the destruction of that
great Army of Senacherib 2 Chronicles. 32. 2 Kings 18. 19. Esaias 36. 37.
that came in Hezekiahs time, which came to swallow them up, and was destroyed
with Gods hand immediately from heaven, which (as all the rest of the Jews
deliverances) was intended as a Type, to show how God will break all other the
yokes of those that lie heavy upon his inheritance. This then for the meaning
of it, That whatsoever enemies should rise up against the Church or people of
God, however they may keep them under for a while, Christ has a purpose, and
will in his own due time break them, and their yokes in pieces, and he will
do it in a strange way, by his own hand, in a way that shall be very easy to
him to work, but very hard for them; either to resist or to bear. This is the
plain scope of the Text; Now I proceed to some matter of instructions; and
first, if you look upon these words, as they stand in their connection or
dependence with the former verse, they joy before thee as the joy in harvest,
and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil, for thou have broken every
yoke, the yoke of his burden, the rod of his oppressor; because God destroyed
his enemies that would have destroyed him, therefore they shall joy like the
joy in harvest; learn one lesson from it, very suitable to the occasion of our
meeting; namely,

That the Lord does expect that his people should Obs. From the connection of
these words with the former, Gods people should rejoice when God breaks their
enemies and their yokes in sunder, Psalm. 126.
greatly rejoice when he does break the yoke of their enemies, and the staff
and rod wherewith they whip Gods people when God uses to defeat the plots, and
enterprises of wicked men against his servants, he expects that the hearts of
his people should be filled with joy, and their tongues overrun with his
praises. There is abundance of evidence for this in the Scripture, in the 126.
Psalm you shall find the Church exulting, her mouth was filled with laughter,
and her tongue with joy; every one that looked in the face of Gods people saw
them have a merry countenance; why? because God had broken the captivity of
Babylon, he had brought back the captivity of his people, and broken in pieces
the enemies that kept them under, so likewise did Moses and all the Israelites,
Exodus 15.
when they saw the Egyptians sink like a stone into the depth of the Sea, in
the 15. of Exodus, and Pharaoh and all his Chariots drowned in the red Sea,
they all lift up their voice, and sung to God praise and thanksgiving in the
highest, I will sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously, the
horse and his rider has he thrown into the Sea: So did Deborah, and Barak in
the fifth of Judges, when Sisera and his host was broken before Judges 5.
the servants of God, they rejoiced, and prayed God it might ever be so, that
all Gods enemies might so perish, and all his people might so rejoice; thus you
shall find it prophesied in the New Testament, in the Verse. 19.
19. of Revelations, you shall read in the latter end of the 18. chapter of
the destruction of the Babylonian party, mystically Babylon, the Popish party,
the Antichristian party, the Malignant Church that is risen up against the
Church of Christ, there I say you shall read the ruin of it, and the means
of it, the Saints help to do it, and you shall there see all the Kings of the
earth weeping and howling, and all that were friends to the harlot were
condoling one with another for that great loss; but in the 19. chap. in
heaven, that is, in the Church of Christ, there was nothing but Hallelujah,
praise ye the Lord, for the Lord has avenged himself, and when her smoke
arose up for evermore, again they say Hallelujah to see Rome burning, and the
instruments that would have oppressed Gods people destroyed, and trodden under
foot; it was Use. A notable trial of our hearts whether they be right to
Christ and his Church.
Hallelujah to the hearts of all that fear God: This I do but touch, but,

It may be a notable trial of your spirits, for certainly, it is a sign of a
gracious spirit to refuse to be comforted in Zions ruins, and to refuse to be
sadded in Babylons ruins; to find a soul, or a people that will hang their
harpes upon the willowes, and will mourn and lament, and rather wish that their
right hand forget their cunning, then to sing one cheerful song while Gods
people are in Babylon, and yet to find them full of joy and rejoicing, when God
is breaking the yokes of oppressors, and treading them under feet, that rise up
against them; this I say, is an argument of a heart that joins with Jesus
Christ, when they fulfill that of the 66. of Isaiah, Rejoice Esaias 66. 10.
with Jerusalem all ye that mourn for her; And that of Psalm. 58. 10. The
righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance: and on the other side, it
is an argument of a base spirit, of a spirit malignant against Christ and his
cause, that is either rejoicing when Gods people are trodden under foot, or
malignes those that are the means or instruments of delivering of Gods people,
that with Sanballat and Tobiah, are vexed and grieved at the heart when they
see God raised up any that may be for salvation to his people; but it is a
token withal that as their hearts are not with Jesus Christ, but against him,
so they shall perish in the ruin of his enemies: This I do but point at from
the connection, they shall joy like the joy in harvest, for Christ has broken
the yoke of their oppressors, broken the yoke of the enemy and the enemies
themselves, and the enemies themselves together; but I come to the words, which
I shall handle only as they respect their temporal and outward deliverances;
and under that consideration there are these two lessons that I intend by the
Lords assistance to handle: The first is,

That the Lord does sometimes leave his own people Two doctrines from the
deliverance promised in the Text.
to lie under heavy yokes, to have the staves and rods of oppressors lie upon
their backs and shoulders: Secondly, and principally,

That Jesus Christ will in his due time break in sunder all the yokes that lie
upon his peoples neck, all the staves that beat their shoulders, all the rods
that whip their backs, Christ has a time wherein he will break them all, both
yokes and oppressors together, and set his people free from them; this second I
most intend; a word or two of the first.

That the Lord does sometimes leave his own people to be under the tyranny of
them that hate them: I say 1 Doct. Christ sometimes leaves his own people under
grievous yokes. Esaias 8. 8.
his own people (for this was Emanuels land, you will read it called by the very
name of Emmanuel in the eighth chapter) the Assyrian shall come and fill the
breadth of thy land O Emmanuel; they were Emmanuels people that should have
these terrible yokes put upon them: to understand this lesson, be pleased to
premise thus much; That it is of all judgments one of the most terrible and
uncomfortable that ever a people can be exposed to, to have those that hate
them to tyrannize over them, that was David's prayer, I have done justice and
judgment, Psalm. 119, 121.
give me not up to mine oppressors: O Lord deliver me from that judgment,
that I be not left to wicked men, to put yokes upon my neck, to beat my
shoulders; and God used to threaten it as one of the severest plagues that ever
should come upon his people, when he was angry with them, that he would give
them up, that they that hated them should bear rule over them: and truly it
will easily appear to be one Esaias 3. 12. Deuteronomy. 28. 29. 33. Psalm. 106. 41. 42.
Hos. 5. 11.
of the terriblest judgments of all, because it is a misery that is opposite
and contrary to the greatest mercy that can be enjoyed upon earth; which is to
have rulers and governors, such as are over a people, to be as a Sun or a
Shield, as a Shepherd, as a Protector, as a Father, for these are names
whereby the Spirit of God deseribes good Magistrates and rulers, to give such
to a people as may defend every one in his own right, protect the fatherless
and widow, and see that every one have justice and judgment, that there may be
no complaining in the streets of a people; but that they may live and serve God
in godliness and honesty, in peace, to be preserved in security and
tranquillity, O happy are the people tbat are in such a case, faith the Spirit
of God in the 144. Psalm; Psalm. 144. 12, 13.
now if this be the greatest earthly mercy, then for God to give up a people,
or to let them be given up to the judgment that is contrary to it, that their
shepherds should be like them in the 34. of Ezekiel, who should kill the
Ezekiel. 34.
fat, and tread under feet the lean, that should pluck off the wool, and
tear off the skin; that should be as they are described in the 7. of Micah,
as briars and thorns Micah 7. 34.
that should rend and tear the people that are under them, when the Lord shall
give men up to such a condition, that those that should defend them, should
enter into the field of the fatherless, and undo a man and his neighbor,
without mercy and compassion, this of all judgments in the world is one of the
cruellest, and the heaviest that a people can be given up to: now I tell you
that God sometimes leaves his own people to this condition, there are
abundance of examples, and I should spend the time needlessly to receite them to
you, because you cannot be ignorant of them; so they were in Egypt, when their
lives were made burdensome to themselves, by reason of the heavy yoke of
bondage that lay upon them; so they were in the times of the Judges, oftentimes
an enemy comes in, carries away the harvest that they are ready to reap,
sometimes carries away the corn they had gathered into their barnes, mightily
oppressed them, put heavy yokes upon them; so was it in Babylon, if you read
but the fifth of Lamentations, it will make you weep to consider Lamentar. 5.
per totum.
the sad complaint that the Church makes there, Our inheritance is turned to
strangers, our houses to aliants, we have drunk our water for money, our wood
is sold unto us, our necks are under persecution, we labor and have no rest,
servants rule over us; we eat our bread with the peril of our lives, Princes
are hanged up by the hand, young men are taken to grind, and the children fell
under the wood, etc. such abundance of examples there are that I shall not need
to prove it, only let me a little discover to you out of the Word, for what
causes the Lord uses to leave his own people to this terrible judgment: I
find three For what sins God uses to give up his people into the hands of
tyrants and oppressors.
clear causes why God oftentimes has left his own people to be given up to
oppressors, to Tyrants, to put such heavy yokes upon their necks, their states,
their consciences, their liberties, and the first and greatest and most
frequent is when God himself offered to be the King and ruler of his people, to
put the yoke of his government upon their For refusing to be under his
government he gives them up to be under cruel governers.
necks, a yoke that should be sweet and easy, honorable and profitable, and
his people cast off Gods yoke, would not be under that, then has the Lord
frequently let them fall under the yoke of some others, that they might know
the difference betwixt being Gods servants, and the servants of other men; take
but two instances of this, one in the 2 Chronicles 12. it was in Rehoboams
time, when 2 Chronicles. 12. 8.
Shishak the King of Egypt came against them, though Egypt and Judah had been
in a league, articles of peace betwixt them, Shishak comes against them, and
brings a mighty Army, and Rehoboams subjects knew not what to do, they cried
to God, they prayed the Lord to deliver them, no (says God) I will not give
you wholly up to a spoil, but you shall be the servants of the Kings of
Egypt; why? because they shall know the difference of my service, and the
service of the other Nations; they shall see whether they had not been better
to have let me be their King, then to bring those to rule over them, who I am
now resolved shall be over them for a while; There is another terrible
instance in the 11. of Zachariah; you shall see the purpose of that Zach. 11.
opened.
Chapter is to signify these two things: First, that Jesus Christ would come
to be a Prince and a Ruler over his people, as a faithful and good shepherd,
they would none of him, they sold him for 30. pieces of Silver, which as it is
noted, was but the price that a slave used to be sold at; Christ the Lord
himself came from heaven, offered himself to them to be their shepherd, and
they sold him for 30. pieces of Silver; A gooly price that I was sold at, says
the Lord! Well, but what becomes of this? the rest of that chapter tells you,
that he will give them other shepherds that shall tear them to purpose; in
the 6. verse, I will give them up every man into the hand of his neighbor, I
will give them up into the hand of their King; who was that? it is plain that
the Roman was their King at that time, because Christ came at that time when
the Roman was over them, now when Jesus Christ would have been their King, and
they say nay, we have no King but Caesar, God therefore gives them up into the
Romans hands, and then they shall have Shepherds that shall tear them to
purpose; because they would have none of the Lord Christ, the Lord would give
them up into such hands as should discipline them after another manner; that is
one cause, when God 2.
offers himself to be their ruler, and they will not have When his people are
unthankful for good governors, he gives them up into the hands of oppressors.
him to be their ruler, then God puts other yokes upon them. Again secondly,
another cause I find is this,

When the Lord has raised up to a people good Rulers, and Magistrates, that
under them (though possibly with many humane frailties) they might be ruled in
godliness and honesty according to Gods ways, and the people have been
ungrateful for them; the Lord then gives them up to the hands of others, that
they shall not be able to shake off, when they will; so you find it in the
example of Gideon; when Gideon had delivered the Israelites, they came to him,
and say be our King; not I (says he) God must be your King, (which by the
way, let me interpret it to you, he meant, he would not change that form of
government, that God had set up in that Commonwealth, which was this, that
every Tribe had their own Aristocraticall government, that is, the chief men
of their Tribe did rule all, as it might be the Mayor, Aldermen,
Common Council men in every Tribe, and when a time of special danger came,
that an enemy invaded them, God from heaven used extraordinarily to raise up
some Judge, and that danger being over the government of the Commonwealth went
in the old channel) they would have had Gideon to be their King, No (says
he) not I, nor my sons, but you shall have God to be over you; well, but
when Gideon died they forgot Gideon and they would have a King, and took
Abimelech, who proved a cruel tyrant to them, whereupon Iotham in the 9. of
Judges, (when all the people were together) tells Judges 9, 7, etc.
them a tale; The trees (says he) would have a King, and they went to the
Olive, and the Vine, and the fruitful trees to rule over them; No (say they) we
must keep every one our own rank, I cannot leave my fatness nor my
sweetness, etc. But a King the trees will have, and their King proves a
Bramble, so (as his speech intimates) will it prove unto you for your
ingratitude to God for Gideon and unto Gideons family, it will come to pass
that this bramble your King shall first rend and tear you, and afterward you
and your King consume one another, and this curse or prophecy came upon them,
and for that very cause. Another like instance we have 1 Samuel 8. God had
raised up Samuel in a time of much trouble, to be a Judge and Savior to the
Jews, they took occasion upon some 1 Samuel 8.
miscariages of Samuels sons to cast him off, and they would have a King
after the manner of the Nations round about them, and therefore God in his
wrath gave them Ho^ea 13. 11.
Saul, who proved a Tyrant: Ingratitude for good governors is one cause why
God gives people up to such oppressors. And then thirdly, I find,

When people use to tear and devour one another in 3.
their petty precincts, when as any one gets a little power When people are
tyrants and oppressors one over another, God uses to give: him into the hands
of oppressors. Esaias 9. 21.
in his hand, he loves to put a yoke upon the neck of his brother, for this
does the Lord send them those that shall put yokes upon them all; so you find
it in this very chapter, in the latter end of it, Manasses bites Ephraim, and
Ephraim Manasses, and these two confederate together to bite Judah, and for
this the Lord gives them up to Senacherib, and he bites and devours them all;
Thus was it also, Jeremy 6. 6. when the people were given wholly to oppress
Jer. 66. 7. 23.
one another, the City was wholly oppression in the midst of it, violence and
spoil, grief and wounds were every where found, then was Jerusalem a City to
be visited by them who should gleane them as a vine, who should be cruel to
them and show no mercy. Thus you see the Lord sometimes leaves his people under
heavy yokes, yokes put upon their lives, estates, consciences, liberties, when
they will not be under Gods government, when they are not thankful for good
governors, when they according to their own power will be tyrannical and
oppressive one to another. I shall not stay upon the Application of this, I
only say of it, as Christ of the Cup he Application.
was to drink, Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me; Lord let
this Cup pass from us, let not our God give us up to spoil, to confusion, to
oppression; for I am too well assured that in all these things I have spoken,
we have deserved to drink this cup, and our sins cry loud in the ears of
God for it; and whatsoever you may say of the two latter, I am confident you will
all bear me witness we have highly deserved it in the first of these; the
Lord has offered to England the government of his own Scepter, the government
of his Gospel, and he is showing us the way how he will rule us in
Ecclesiastical things, but alas, there is not a thing under heaven more
abominable to the people of this Land, then to think that they should have such
a yoke put upon them, though the aim and end of it be only to make them
holy; but we will have none of it, the thing we will have, is, to live as we
list, we will not have this man rule over us; the Lord grant we be not
broken with other yokes; And as for ingratitude for our other Magistrates and
Rulers, and for our biting and devouring one another, the Lord knows it is to
be found in every corner of the Land; I only mention these things that in
this day of rejoicing for mercies received, you may all join in prayer that
the Lord bring not this evil upon us. Thus briefly for the first; the second
lesson which I mainely aim at is,

That howsoever the Lord sometimes lets his people lie under heavy and terrible
yokes, yokes upon their lives, 2 Doct. Christ will in due time break all the
yokes which lie upon his peoples necks.
names, estates, liberties, consciences, (call them by what names you will) yet
Jesus Christ has a time, when he will break them all; Thou have broken, it
was not broken yet, but God uses to speak of his mercies intended for the
Church, in the preterperfect tense, as things already done, because they were
so sure; the Lord Christ will break the yoke of their burden, the staff of
their shoulder, the rod of their oppressor; when the Lord does at any time
leave his people in this sad condition which I have spoken of, he never puts
them out of his own hand, though he may deliver them into the hands of others,
he always keeps the line in his own hand, that the adversary cannot do what
they list, they are bounded by him, and it is not for want of love or of power,
that the Lord lets any such yoke ever come upon the neck of his people, but
only from his own will, and from his own wisdom, the Lord orders it so,
that the heaviest thing that betides them, shall never hurt a hair of their
heads, as Christ has it in Luke; though some of them be put Luke 21. 1^.
to death, not a hair of their heads shall perish, he never gives them so
into the hand of wicked men, as to put them out of his own hand, or to cease
his own care; but this doctrine holds out a further mercy, that though the
Lord sometimes puts them into the hands of wicked men, and lets them be his rod
to scourge them, beat them, pinch them, thresh them, yet in his due time he
will break all those yokes, and the yokers together, all such as put them upon
his peoples necks, they and their yokes shall all perish, for both of them are
equally intended, as it is in the next words, as in the day of Midian, not
only the people of Israel were saved from Midian, but the Midianites destroyed
also; and so in Senacheribs time, not only the people delivered, but the
enemies destroyed; now that the Lord will do it, blessed be his name, there
are 1000. promises that it shall be so, and as great a cloud of instances, to
prove it has been so; Egypts yoke was broken, the Philistims broken, Ashur and
Babylon broken, yea the ruin of all the kingdoms of the earth who have
successively lain heavy upon his Church and people do all bear witness to
this truth, that the rod of the wicked Psalm. 125. 3.
shall not always rest upon the back of his people. I shall not enlarge my
discourse upon this, because I think it is a known theme, every one that
has read the Scriptures can give proofs of it, I shall only present to your
consideration two or three Texts, one is that of Isa. 49. 24. The Lord promised
in the former Verses a great enlargement, Esaias 49, 24, 25, 26.
increase and prosperity, so that their Land should be too narrow for them,
and Kings and Queens should bow unto them, now he knowing how hard it would be
for his people to believe this, because of the great bondage they lay under,
and the utter improbability of getting out of that state, brings them in in
this 24. verse, objecting thus, Alas, our miseries plead prescription over us,
our hope is gone, shall the prey be taken out of the hand of the mighty, or the
lawful captive delivered? now our adversaries say, we are a lawful prey, we
are prisoners of war, and they can plead right as well as might to bring us
under, and now shall we ever be delivered? yes says the answer of God, even
the captive of the mighty shall be delivered, and the prey of the terrible
shall be taken out of his hand, for I will contend with him that contendeth
with thee, and I will save thy children, and all flesh shall know that I the
Lord am thy Savior: and in the 51. of Esaias after he had promised to consume
their enemies as a moth eats a garment, Esa. 51. 13, 14.
and that his people should return with the voice of singing unto Sion, he
then chides their fear and unbeleefe, Why fear thou a worm that shall die,
why fear thou because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he were ready to
destroy? and where is the fury of the oppressor? alas it is gone as a puff of
wind: then follows, the captive exile hastneth that he may be loosened, that
he may not die in the pit, nor that his bread should fail, he fears lest he
should starve or die in his bondage, and therefore makes have out of it; but
Gods people shall not need to make such have, their seasonable deliverance is
sure enough; many other Scriptures speak this truth as plainly; But that which
I chiefly aim at for clearing this doctrine, is, the discussing of two
questions, the one is,

1. When the Lord uses to do this; 2. How he does it. For the first, that he
will deliver his people from all their oppressors, is not to be doubted, but
when the Lord will do it, that is the time that every sad soul Quest. 1. When
Christ uses to deliver his people.
cries after, How long Lord, holy and true, do thou not avenge us? or when
Lord shall it be? I answer,

Though it be not for us to search curiously into the times and seasons that
the Father keeps in his own bosom, Answer to the first.
as you have it in Acts 1. 7. yet the Lord has left very comfortable
prognostics in his Word, whereby we may guess when the time of the
deliverance of Gods He always does it in the best time.
people from their bondage is even at hand; certainly it will come in the best
time, in the fittest time, but when that time does appropinquate, draws nigh,
you shall find it clear in the Word by these three things; the And that time
may be known to approach.
one is,

The Lord ordinarily makes that the time of his breaking When the rage of his
and their enemies is highest.
the power of the enemies of his Church, when they are filled most with rage
and fury against the Church, when they breath out nothing but slaughter, and
threatenings against them, blaspheme not only them, but their God, and their
profession, and their way, when they are risen up to that height that their
sins are full against God, and their rage against Gods people, that is the
time when the Lord suddenly uses to break out and crush his enemies; I might
give you many examples of this in the book of God, take that expression in
Jeremiah 30. 17. Jer. 30. 17.
for one, the Lord would speedily come to deliver his people, but why? even
because they said, This is Zion, whom no man cries for; Zion was then a scorned
company, I will therefore (says he) restore healing to them; therefore would
he come, because the enemy said, this is Zion that no body cares for, every
one can tread it under foot; So likewise, Ezekiel. 25. 3. because the Ammonites
said Aha against his Sanctuary, against the Land of Israel and against the
house of Judah, when they went into captivity, Behold I will therefore deliver
them, etc. and Ezekiel. 28. 67. because the King of Tyrus had set his heart as the
heart of God, therefore God would bring enemies upon him. What need I multiply
examples? you shall find it was thus to all the people that ever had Gods
people under them, go from Egypt, to those of Syria, Palestina, to the
Assyrians, the Babylonians, the Grecians, the Romans, you shall find in them
all, that when their rage was most furious against Gods people, then was the
time near that God used to break them, and deliver his people from them.
Secondly, another time is,

When the Lord by the threshings of their enemies 2.
has purged the chafe out of his people; when the Lord When Gods people are
humbled and seek his face and favor.
has by delivering his people up into the hands of wicked men wrought in their
hearts a spirit of repentance, a spirit of humiliation, a spirit of Prayer, a
spirit of looking unto God, the Lord never stays long before he does deliver
them; I beseech you search the Scriptures, and you will find that the morning
star is not a more infallible argument of the day, of the Suns approach or
rising, then a spirit of humiliation and prayer powered upon Gods people, is an
argument of their deliverance at hand: The burden of Hadrach, and Damasous,
Tire and Sidon, ruin Zath. 9. 1. etc.
to them is prophesied of in the 9. of Zachariah, but when should it be? When
the eyes of the Tribes are toward the Lord, when God puts it into the hearts
of his people to look to God, to humble themselves and seek his favor, the
Lord is then at hand, to ruin their enemies and deliver them: So also in the
102. Psalm, Verse. 13. Thou Psalm. 102. 13.
shall arise and have mercy upon Zion, mark the phrase, Thou shall arise, it
is somewhat akin to that place of Isaiah, where the Lord says, Ask me of
things to come, and concerning my sons and daughters command ye me; so the
people of God come in, Thou shall arise and have mercy, why? what makes them so
confident? the set time is come, the time of deliverance of Zion is come, even
the set time is come; how can they tell that? thy servants mourn over the dust
of it, thy servants are compassionate, they pity, they pour out their souls,
and mourn to God, and out of this; the Church could set down the conclusion,
the set time is come for it, when the Lord has prepared his people, and
humbled them: And then thirdly,

When he has broke all other means of deliverance, so that they see no hope
or means of help in any other, 3.
the heart of man cannot think how prone even Gods And when all hope of
deliverance by any other means is cut off.
servants are to rely upon other Crutches besides God, and to catch as sinking
men at every twig, and every Bulrush, but when the Lord has broke all their
probabilities, and expectations elsewhere, that there is none shut up, nor none
left, then does the Lord use to come himself and rescue his people, and break
those that thought to swallow them up; of this you may please to take two
notable instances; the one is a Prophecy in Deuteronomy 32. 36. Deuteronomy. 32. 35.
the Lord had said how he would scatter his people, but (says he) when he
saw, that their strength was all gone, that there was none shut up, nor none
left, that is, none to be a help, there were enough of Gods people left, but
not any one that could work any deliverance for them, what then? then did the
Lord repent concerning his servants, and his own Arm delivered them; you have
it yet rather more clearly in Isaiah 59. 16. the words are these, The Lord
looked, and there was no man, and wondered that Esaias 59. 16.
there was no intercessor, the Lord could find none that could speak for
them, none that could act for them, when God saw that, then his own arm will
do it, he then put on his mercy and goodness, and arrayed himself with his
zeal like a robe, and his own Arm did it; that they might fear the name of
God from the rising of the Sun to the setting of it: and that is the reason
why the Lord uses to come in at such a time, because he has the more glory.
This for the time, when God uses to break the yokes of his people that lie upon
them, when the enemies are at highest, when he has humbled and prepared his
people, and when all other helps do fail them, then the Lord does it: But
then in the next place,

How does he do it? after what manner does he use to deliver them? Quest. 2.
How, and after what manner does God use to deliver his people.


I answer first in general:

Which way soever the Lord does it, all ways are alike easy to him; alike
easy for him to contrive; alike easy for him to use his infinite wisdom, and
his infinite Resp. 1. All ways are alike easy to him.
power knows no degrees of ease or strength in any way, all are alike to him;
It is all one to him to save by many or to save by few. Secondly, I answer,

That when the Lord comes to deliver his people, he seldom does it that way
that his people expect, seldom Resp. 2. He seldom delivers in that way his
people expect it.
walks in the paths that we have causeyed for him, or by the line that we have
chalked out for his direction; seldom or never does God take that way: We are
prone to deal with God as Naaman did, when the Prophet had sent for him to
cure, that he and his master might know there was a God in Israel who knew how
to cure him of his Leprosy; Naaman believed it, but he had fancied by the way
how it should be done: Now (says he) I shall find a Cure; and he will surely
come out to me, and strike his hand over the place, and stand and call on the
name of God, and so I shall see a miraculous work wrought upon me; the Prophet
went clean another way; and because the Prophet did not come out, and take that
way he thought of, he went away in a rage, and thought there was no cure for
him: So verily most people deal with God; we think this is the way how our
deliverance must come, by such a Parliament, by such an Army, by such a
design, by such an association, by such and the other way, here it must come,
if this way fail, we think all is lost, and God seldom goes the way we have
chalked out; study you the Scriptures and you will find it: But yet if
positively you will know what way he does it; I answer more particularly:

Very frequently by his own immediate hand, without Resp. 3. Esaias 63. 4 He
usually delivers his Church without any humane help.
the help of any other; he alone trod out the winepress of the wrath of God,
and there was none of the people with him to help him, but does all himself, so
my Text says in the next verse, The battle of the Warriors, etc. if other
Nations conquer, they do it by garments rolled in blood, and by confused
noise, but this shall be by burning and by fuel of fire by Gods own hand; Or
which is all one,

He ordinarily does it by most unlikely and contemptible Resp. 4. Or which is
all one, by unlikely means and instruments,
means, he will not always work Miracles, that is to do a thing without any
means at all; but in the deliverance of his Church, he always works miranda,
marvailous things, by doing it by such means as are altogether improbable and
unsuitable to the great things that are to be done by him. This instance of my
Text is a most notable proof, He will break every yoke of the oppressor, as in
the day of Midian; how was that? you may read the Story in the 17 of Judges:
the way was this, there was such a numerous and mighty Army of the Midianites,
that the text says, they lay like grasshoppers, and covered over all the
Country; the Lord meant to destroy them and Gideon must go with 300 men, and
these 300 men must every one carry a pitcher, and a lamp therein in one hand,
and a trumpet in another hand, and compass in this mighty Company, every one at
his post, and blow with the trumpet, and not strike a stroke, but cry, The
sword of the Lord and Gideon; and this routs and destroys an invincible Army.
As in the day of Midian, says the Lord, so will Jesus Christ, that is, by some
unlikely means: And give me leave to say confidently, That whosoever reads the
book of God from one end to the other, will find that most of all the
deliverances which the Lord has given his Church, have been by people that
have been most unlike to do their business; A shepherd shall bring Israel
out of Egypt; Rams horns shall blow down the Walls of Jericho: A Shepherds
boy with a sling and a stone in it, shall overthrow Goliath; the Israelites like
two little flocks of Kids shall overthrow the Assyrians, that fill all the
Country, thus has the Lord used to do it: If you will know the reason of this
manner of proceeding as well as of the time when he does it, Reason. Because in
this way of working God appears most like himself.
it is,

Because then he appears like himself; the truth is, let God do it by never
such probable means, it is God that works all; God did no more when he
destroyed the Midianites by Gideons 300. then he did when he destroyed 2 Chronicles. 13. 13.
the Army of the Israelites, with 400000. of the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin,
God did no more in the one then in the other, for it is God who works all in
all, but God does not so much appear, for we that are thick sighted can see
what the creature does, but we cannot see that this creature is in Gods hand,
and that it is God that does all; but now when the Lord uses means which are
altogether unlike to attain it, and are wholly unfit for the work then to do
it, all say this was digitus Dei, this was the Lords doing; now the Lord says,
when there was none to speak, then his own arm did it, that Gods name might
have the praise from the rising of the Sun to the setting of it: these things
I might have prosecuted further; give me leave to wind it all up with an
Application, and I shall dismiss you; and there are but two Uses, which I
intend of this Lesson, the one is, First,

A word or two of admonition to enemies, if there should be any such here, that
are ill-willers to the Church Use. Admonition to them who have ill will at Zion.
and people of God that love not Christ's cause in the hands of his servants,
who wish ill to it, who are glad when power and strength comes into the hands
of those that would, or are likely to oppress Gods people, and as far as they
can are contributing their power toward such designs; let me tell thee who
ever thou art, Thou will wholly be frustrate of thy expectation, flatter not
your selves, O ye malignant spirits, if any such hear me this day, I say
again flatter not your selves with any thought that you shall be able to do
any great matters against the servants of Christ, your plots will all come to
nothing; I will tell you a story, you shall find it in 2 Chronicles. 28. the Church
malignant, I mean the Church 2 Chronicles. 28.
of the ten Tribes, (who had made apostasy under Jeroboam) had rallied a
mighty Army together, and went against the true Church of Christ, against
Judah, and they got the day, and carried away 200000. of their brethren, whom
they made account to keep or sell for slaves, and so keep them in bondage, and
now they thought all was their own, there comes a Prophet and meets them, who
tells them from God, With a rage that reaches unto heaven, you have slain
many of your brethren, and now you think to keep the people of Judah under, it
will not be (says he) there are sins amongst you, great is the wrath of
God that is kindled against you, let them go home again, meddle not with
them: and truly though the people were naught, they took the Prophets
counsel, they saw it would be in vain for them to kick against the prick; so
I say, it may be there may be some such here, for I can hear of strange
insultings and threatenings in the mouths and tongues of many against those whom
they think shortly to have under their feet, but do not flatter your selves,
the people of God are too heavy a stone for you to carry far; I will make
(says Zach. 12. 3.
the Lord in the 12. of Zachariah) Jerusalem a burdensome stone, for all people
that burden themselves with it shall be broken in pieces, though all the
nations of the earth should be gathered together against it, the people of God
will be too heavy a weight for them: in the same place he speaks to them
that thought to drink their blood, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling
unto all the people round about; you cannot hurt them, you may be Gods flaile
to thresh out their Chafe, be a means to purge and winnow them (which they
will have cause to thank God for,) but for you to think to oppress them long,
that the rod of the wicked shall remain or rest upon the neck of them that
fear God, it cannot be,you will ruin your selves in the design; be wise
therefore and leave it off; but I forbear, for such ordinarily are more filled
with fury and rage against that that is spoken in this kind, then willing to
profit by it, and therefore my next Use is,

To them that will profit by it, and whom I hope the Use 2.
Lord will teach to profit by it, to all those that have sincerely owned Christ
and his cause amongst us, I would speak somewhat to them, the Lord grant I may
speak effectually, I am sure it is a word in season, you who are the
Exhortation Gods people not to be dishartned by the threatenings of ^^em^es.
Lords people, that are in Covenant with him, who desire to know and fear him,
and to see the welfare and prosperity of Zion, the thing I would leave with you
is this, lay not to heart overmuch the dangers you seem to be in for the
present, from the hands of those who would destroy you, lay it not (I say) so
far to heart as to be dismayed: I confess it is as Arrows in the hearts, and
Swords in the bowels of many, to hear the extreme threatenings and scorns which
in many places are cast upon those that desire to fear God, they are often
told, You are not far from hanging, you must shortly look for it, England
will be too hot for And to walk so as to be under the shelter of this doctrine
you, your doors are marked, you are known well enough, the day is coming,
you will be caught ere long, what of all that? which if these things be belched
out? I confess if our lives were in the hands of men, if the Lord would
deliver us up to them to do what they would, and put us out of his hand, I
believe there would not be a godly man left before to morrow night, so much
rage and fury is throughout the Land against them, if Satan might have the
ruling of the roast, and the determination of businesses; but truly the
servants of God are never nearer to deliverance, then when such threats lie
upon them, and the Lord Jesus Christ being the same yesterday, to day, and for
ever, knows his own best time, and his own best way, and we should fix our
eyes upon him, when all other things go cross, and study only to walk so
as we may be under the power of this doctrine, that we may be under the
reach, and cover and wings of it, and when we have done that, we have done
all we should do; and therefore to this end, give me leave in this close of
the Sermon, to give a threefold advice to Gods people, what they should now do
in regard of the present straights Directions how this may be done.
and dangers that we are cast in, that so we may the more comfortably expect
deliverance from Christ: the one is,

Let us all (in the first place) take the counsel of the 1.
Prophet in Jeremiah 8. 14. when the Lord was giving up First, be humbled and
ashamed for our unworthy walking in the midst of so many wonderful
administrations toward us. Jen. 8* 14.
his people to most woeful spoils, the Prophet speaks to them after this
manner, Why do you sit still? assemble your selves, and let us enter into the
defenced Cities, and let us be silent there, for the Lord our God has put us
to silence and given you the water of gall and wormeword to drink; for we
have sinned against God; so I would say to all, O that the voice of God in this
could reach his servants in the Parliament, in the Court of Aldermen, in the
Common Council, in the City, and throughout England, that it might prevail
with all that have been unfainedly devoted to this work, to get into their
closets, to lay their hand upon their mouth, and weep before God, and say, This
cup of gall and bitterness is given us to drink because we have sinned
against God, my meaning plainly is this, I think the servants of God in
England, since the Gospel came into England, have never miscarried, nor
dishonored the Gospel so, as we have done since God has wrought these
enlargements for us; surely we walked 100. times better in the days of
persecution, then we have in the midst of our enlargement; O to what
abundance of looseness even good people are come, what pride in many of their
hearts, what scandalous walking in the eyes of those that are enemies to
Religion, what bitter divisions one against another, undermining one another,
opposing one another, when one side gets power striving to beat down the
other, if the other get the ball, they kick as unmercifully against the other,
even to the scorn of Religion: truly we have even lost our selves; our
foolish walking has took off the awe that the profession of Religion laid upon
the hearts of wicked men, who heretofore though they did not love goodness,
yet they saw such a conversation in those that were good, that it laid a bridle
upon them, but now they see that many godly, or who at least pretend to be
godly, appear so selfish, so bitter, so worldly, not only to be of differing
minds, but of differing affections, falling into horrible rents, and abominable
opinions, this I say, has took off the awe that lay upon men's consciences,
and therefore is there so much rage let out against us; I desire therefore that
we all that profess our selves to be Christ's servants may get our selves into
our Closets, and be silent, lay our hands upon our mouths, and say, It is most
just with God we should be given up, we had a little power and we have
abused it, we have dishonored the Gospel, and now the Lord has given us the
water of Gall and Wormwood to drink, because our finnes have called for it.
Beloved, our adversaries can speak of these things, and it is good for you to
hear of it from the Ministers mouth, for when we lie low and submit, and say,
God has walked contrary to us, because we have walked contrary to him, then
the Lord will quickly turn things about, and be gracious to us: that is one;
let the servants of God wherein they have miscarried be sensible of it,
humbled and abased for it in Gods sight; And secondly,

Let our conversation for the time to come, be according 2.
to the principles and ways that we walked in the To walk according to our
first good principles and ways.
beginning of this work, when we were first engaged in it; In the beginning
of our work, what were our principles? what were the things we aimed at then?
Did we not then aim at the reformation of Religion, execution of justice,
enjoyment of liberty, etc. were not these the hinges that carried us? and the
ways wherein we walked then, what were they? Were they not the ways of
Prayer, and the ways of Christian love, and a spirit of zeal? Was there not a
spirit of prayer mightily poured out in every corner of the Land, so that you
could come no where, where there were any that feared God, but frequently in
public and private there was knocking at heaven gate, and wrestling with God?
and was there not a spirit of Love amongst Gods people then? We know not the
divisions and animosities that are come in since, every one helped together;
and was there not also a spirit of Activity? Were they not all vigorous and
active laying out all their strength and all their talents, when the enemy was
not so active as now? which diligence many have given over, and the enemy has
taken up; now let us endeavor that the same spirit may be revived amongst Gods
people for the time to come, let us remember our engagements, and what the
things were we vowed, when we lifted up our hands to the most high God, and
do our first works; O that we could see a restoring of these things, O that
we could see a restoring of the Spirit of prayer again among the godly people
of England, and a Spirit of love to unite one with another, (I am sure we see
all our enemies unite against us) O that they would now unite one with another,
though they cannot be all of one mind, yet of one heart, bearing one another
infirmities, indeavoring to heal all that is sinful in each other; O that the
spirit of zeal to promote the cause we are engaged in, might once more be
found amongst us, that we might with Abishai and Ioab play the men and
bestirre our selves, and let God do what is good in his own eyes: let that be
our second care, remember our first principles, and our first ways; And then
thirdly, and lastly,

With lamenting and bemoaning our failings, and with 3.
our recovering our first love, and our first ways, let us With confidence
expect a good issue from God.
quietly leave it to God, to do what he will; O that God would once bring his
servants to this pass, never to look for any great good from man, nor never to
fear any great evil from man, neither good from the best of men, nor evil
from the worst of men, but to resolve that the Lord can and will himself do
his own work, and were there not left in London, in England, in all three
Kingdoms any one of power to stand for the cause of God, were all swallowed
up, yet let us conclude the fire of God will burn up all the briars and
thorns that are risen up against the Lords vineyard; were our Armies all lost,
were our friends all gone (as indeed we are come to a very low ebb) yet is
our deliverance never the further off, therefore hold up your confidence;
indeed if we were engaged in an ill cause we ought to give it over to repent
of it openly, and take shame to our selves; if we have done ill, to stand for
reformation, contend for our liberties, to contend to be a free people, if
this were sinful let us be humbled, and tell all the world of it, but if it
be right, it is not the falling away of this man or that man, or the revolting
of this or the other Ship, or Castle, or this party or that party, all this is
nothing, if God turn but his face against them they are all gone; Brethren,
let me speak truly of it, it is thus in Scotland at this day, the godly party,
they that are for the Covenant and Religion; though they are overborne with an
Army, a degenerate party risen up against them, who threaten to swallow up all,
and have plundered and wasted the estates and goods of them who will not join
with them in this sinful and wicked engagement, yet they hold one and cleave
to their old rules and principles, and confidently expect deliverance; the Lord
teach us to do the like, that as we meet this day to praise God for his
mercies and deliverances lately received, a whole catalogue whereof were now
read unto you, so to resolve it for the time to come to seek him in his own
way, we to do what we can, and with faith leave him to do what he will.

FINIS.

