MANZINIE HIS MOST EXQUISITE ACADEMICALL DISCOURSES UPON Several Choice
SUBJECTS.

Turned into French by that famous Wit MONSIEUR de SCVDERY, Governor of
NOSTREDAME. AND Englished by an Honorable Lady.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop in S.
Paul's Churchyard at the Sign of the Princes Arms, 165^.

To the Reader.
IF, to divert my self, and prevent the ordinary idle humor of Malancholly, I
had taken the boldness to present you with some abortive issue of mine own
brain, I might, certainly, have expected a punishment from your severity, and
(reasonably) despaired of ever procuring your pardon for my presumption; but
since I offer nothing but the quaint conceptions of one of the most eminent
Wits of his time, and Nation (for which I must refer you to the judgment of
Scudery, a Person so notorious (by his Writings) for ingenuity, and from whom I
do but borrow these Pieces of Manzinie at second hand) I will not so much as
suspect your Mercy, whereof, though upon occasion of greater Crimes, a little
has ever been thought due, and a larger proportion usually afforded to the
weaknese of our Sex from generous Persons. I dare promise, your Clemency is not
likely to encourage me so far, as to make me appear ungrateful by giving you
any further trouble of this nature: But, if to your pardon for my attempt you
shall please to add the favor of a kind acceptance, as it ought to be
beyond my expectation, so shall it ever be (with thankfullness) acknowledged
to be far above my desert, who confess my self ashamed of my work by not
daring to own it with my Name.

The Titles of the several Subjects.
1. HOratio Suppliant. Page 1 2. Horatio Opposed. Page 8 3. Coriolanus
Appeased. Page 16 4. Cato Generous. Page 25 5. Cleopatra Humble. Page 33 6.
Sentiments Paternall. Page 40 7. Paris in Love. Page 48 8. Paris Opposed. Page
57 9. The Magnanimous Rivals. Page 64 10. The three Rivals. Page 73 11. Love
without Faith. Page 81 12. Hunger has no Law. Page 87 13. The Sports of the
Carnivall. Page 96 14. Stesicrates the Rash. Page 106 15. Appelles Revengefull.
Page 112 16. The Apology for Marriage. Page 115 17. The Philosophy of Love.
Page 120 18. The Pusillanimity of Seleucus. Page 127 19. The Funerals of
Beauty. Page 137
HORACE his ORATION.
The Argument.
Although Horace were happy in his Victory, and profitable to the
Commonwealth, and that Tullus was obliged to the Valor of the Conqueror, yet
he could not be exempted from the punishment of his fratricide; the rigor of
the Law must pass upon it, notwithstanding his Victory was so generally
advantageous, that every one was inclined to mercy. Horace in so doubtful an
Estate, could neither rejoice in his Triumph, nor complain of his danger; his
good Fortune had blinded him, and his ill had brought him to the Precipice; in
this fatal conjuncture Manzine supposes that this illustrious Criminal used
these words to defend his cause.

IF I had a heart, O People of Rome, that knew as well to complain as to
conquer, it may be the tenderness of my Tears would obtain that compassion
from you, which is denied to the remembrance of my Victories: See at your feet,
O my Judges, an unfortunate man, to whom without boast, you are indebted for
all your felicity; behold me suppliant, but without tears, they were all shed
in Tuscany upon the bodies of my two Brothers, not believing then, that he who
had saved his Country, should ever have need of weeping: O household gods
defended by me! you tutelary ones, whom I have preserved, if I have deserved
any recompense, teach me only what Divinity I ought to implore, to save my
life, since you will not do it; O deceitful hopes, unprofitable labors! O
prodigy to be admired! Horace is suppliant, and not suppliant to any offended
Deity, but to that Republique which holds from his Victory, that power which it
now exercises upon him. O you gods who looked with a favorable eye upon the
labor I underwent, to preserve your Temples, and your Altars, suffer not that
I make my vows any more to you in vain; let me obtain attention and pity
in those hearts, which sleep when they should remember good turns, and who so
slightly esteem their Wives, their Country, their liberties, then lives,
their Empire; nay, their gods themselves, which I have preserved to them, in
exposing my life to danger; I would not for an hundred lives, O my Judges, that
you should believe me so affrighted at death, that it were absolutely necessary
for me to beg life at your hands. Fathers conscript, I am a Roman born of that
House, in which the Republique has found three men, whom it judged worthy to
defend it. I have a soul resolute enough to meet a greater danger than that I
am in, and if the fact which I have committed (which ought to be styled a zeal
for my Country) might not also be named a fratricide, I should slight that
death, which I desired in the field, when my dear Brothers fell; I have a heart
which loves life, when it may do service to my Country, and which would not
fly death, when it is necessary to confirm the generosity of life: when is it
that death could be less frightfull, or more willingly embraced than now, when
I have given life to the people of Rome? Death cannot come too swift to him who
has attained to honor and glory, neither can it be ill for a good man: I do
not refuse to offer my head to the block, yet I confess I have some repugnancy,
to see my self ready to be deprived of life by the ungrateful sword of the
Romans, and be confident, I have more grief to find my high services at so
low an esteem, that I should need to ask life, then I shall have to lose it: I
return triumphant, O my Judges, from a field, where (by this sword) I have
interred the fortune of Hetruria, and from a field which I have besprinkled
with my own, and my Brothers blood, and from a field consecrated to the
victory of the Romans, all our Country, and all our Empire was nothing but
Palms and Laurels, the Earth, the Army, the Heavens, and the gods applauded
our Triumph, when a Woman presented herself before me, afflicted at my
Victory, sad at the greatness of the Empire, upbraiding and cursing the valor
of my Arm and your Fortune, invoking the vengeance of the Heavens, and the
gods, wishing a general desolation of our Country, striving to draw upon us,
by her imprecations, the ill influence of the stars, and the fury of Hell: My
sword, accustomed to shed the blood of them, who looked with grief upon the
happiness of my dear Country was, in this, but the just revenger of so base
and black a crime: I sheathed my Poniard in the heart of her, who could know
how to grieve at the advantages of her Country; I believed I had made a just
sacrifice of that infamous one, who when she died wept at the victory of the
Republique.

This is the Fact, for which those that envy my happy success, have made me
guilty, that they might utterly deface that little virtue which they cannot
equal: they resolve I shall suffer because I have destroyed a fierce Enemy,
and such a one, that even among the Tuscane Troops, there is not to be found a
person who bewailed their misfortunes with so great a passion: But if to
destroy the Enemies of our Country, be a crime meriting death, why did I not
suffer it in that day wherein I returned Conqueror of the three brave Curiacii?
what? should that unfortunate Wretch have been exempted from the punishment
she deserved, because she was born within those Walls, which she wished to see
buried in their own Ruins? It was that which was not reasonable, and that
which I could not suffer; for I believed, it was a spectacle too sad, for the
eyes of a Roman to see any one weep in the midst of the victories of their
Country; why did you (O Romans) lay all the care of the Commonwealth upon my
shoulders, when it was tottering and ready to fall; if you believed me so
feeble that I could endure to see any body shed tears, as condemning my
actions? I put all my confidence in this, that those who are to be the Judges
of my Cause, are the same persons for whose sake I committed the crime, and
that those who pronounce my death shall be forced to confess, that it is from
me alone they hold their liberties, their lives, their Authority, their
Victory, and the Republique; and that from the fact for which you pretend I
ought to make excuses, I say, I ought to reap advantages: I was so zealous for
the honor of my Country, that I did not forbear to revenge it on my own
sister, when she wept and declared her self an enemy: Those which love their
Country less then I, might perhaps have pardoned its greatest enemies; but I
could not forgive my own sister, because I loved my Country more then my
sister, more then my Father, yea, more then my self: I believed I should have
had more need to have implored your mercy for sparing, rather than for killing
a sister that had so lost her piety; but what said I? a sister? no, she is no
sister of Horaces who bewailes the death of the Curiaces, and who with grief
beholds the Victory of her Country, and their Gods preserved; what? will it be
possible to find out a heart that bears so little affection to the
Commonwealth, and so little gratitude to me, that it will not know that
design in killing that detestable person, was to extinguish a dangerous Crime,
and not the life of a sister? neither was she a sister when she was an enemy of
my Country, nor was I her brother when I thrust my poniard into her heart, I
was the Arm of Victorious Rome, which destroyed the Enemy of the Republique,
and its supporters: Let my Accusers show you by what degrees of wickedness I
have proceeded; can it be believed that these hands yet never stained with
blood, but in a just cause, should of the sudden arrive to the highest pitch of
impiety and fratricide? let them upbraid me with crime, if ever this Sword has
given death to any, but to save the life of my Country; I render thanks to
Fortune, O Rome (dear to my heart) that she has given me so notable a way to
show the love I bear and owe thee, in the field I have fought against thine
Enemies, and in the City against them of Nature, and I was no more conquered by
the affection I had for my sister, then by the valor of the Tuscans: Well then
it is thought just that so great a favor as I have received from Fortune,
should cost me no less then my life, nor would I refuse to give it upon this
occasion, if I had not resolved to lose it, O Rome, to add to thy glory; what
then shall I be in a more dangerous condition that am victorious, then my
Brothers (which were not? they found the end of their miseries in their
destruction, and I the beginning of my calamity in my Victory: Ought this to be
the cause of my tears? or to say better fatal to me the love of the
Commonwealth? the memory of my virtue? the glorious remembrance of my Victory,
and triumph? I confess I pity that part of my blood which I spilt in
destroying that unfortunate Woman; yet after all, I cannot think it spilt,
seeing it was sacrificed to the victory of the Commonwealth; and truly I had
deserved she should have wept for my achievements, if I had not had generosity
enough to conquer the tenderness of Nature, and that my heart had wanted
resolution to take her life, that would else have drowned her self in envious
tears, for the liberty purchased by my blood, of her Country; by this action
alone, our enemies from henceforward, can have no hope to reap any fruit of all
their practices, when they shall see that it is permitted to sacrifice our own
sisters that look malignly upon the advantages of our swords; but my fault
(justifiable if committed upon another) seems only monstrous, because she was
a person so near me in blood, as if when we were to punish the malignants of
our Country, we ought to take counsel of the inclinations of Nature: Consider
with a fatherly eye, O Senators, if it were not impossible for me to know that
guilty one; for how could I take notice of her, as of a sister, hearing her
complain for the victory of her Brother? or how could I remember her to be a
Roman, when she spoke the sense of the Tuscans? I believed her to be a relic
of the Curiacii, and I thought I should do an Act of piety to my Country, in
rending up by the root, a Tree that might bring fruit to support our enemies
power and if this action be of a strain so black and shameful, that it
cannot be expiated but upon a Scaffold, with the blood of this unfortunate
man, who has added one Nail to the Wheel of the Roman Fortune, then you
think the death of her that bewailed your Victory, more incompatible with your
government, then the life of him that gave it you: Perhaps it displeases you,
that I should take away from the Tuscans her that might have increased the
Curiaces; but believe me, if I had suffered a Woman, of the House of the
Horacii, to have been long fruitful in Tuscany, it may be the Romans could not
have kept their Empire, nor would the Tuscans (at least quietly) have permitted
them. What? was the life of this Traytress so precious, that there must be
sacrificed to it, that life which was the soul of the greatness, and Fortune
of the Latins? But what voice, or what rumor is that I hear, which
interupting my discourse, hinders me from further declaring my innocence? Who
are they that deny me the favor of pleading for that life, which has
preserved the life and liberty of the Commonwealth? But behold a deadly
spectacle, and worthy of tears; see, O my Judges, see my Father, who never
failed of his duty to the Republique, but when he begat this Daughter; see, O
see an unfortunate Father, who has newly lost two sons, to assure to you
those powerful seats you now possess, look how he fears to be deprived of the
third and last, who surely (if there be any gods) shall not die without
vengeance; hear how he complains, that he, a Roman, and chief of the Horatii
should be thought so base, that with his own hands he would not have torn out
my very bowels, if he did not know that his Daughter was justly shine; O
Heavens! shall I be so unfortunate to die, for taking out of the world a Woman
who was thought unworthy to continue in it by her own Father? Can you suppose
that those Troops which I have returned to you victorious, will ever endure to
see him dragged to death that gave them life, and victory? What! shall Romes
Enemies see him punished, that the Commonwealth thought only worthy to defend
its honor? Could the Tuscans desire more mischief to him that rendered them
miserable? I am not so little acquainted with humane frailty, that I repine at
my mortality, at my death, but I grieve for not being thought innocent, and to
see that my Country will be guilty; things are reduced to such terms, that as
long as the Commonwealth remains, it will be stained with ingratitude; I am
forced to detest my own honor, O strange estate that you have placed me in!
since it is just to wish, that my death had gone before my victory, and the
establishment of your Empire. What! shall my fortune be worse in the Capitol
then in Hetruria? Can that be, O Romans? I swear by the souls of my two
Brothers, who were so voluntarily sacrificed to your Greatness, that I have
more shame of the Roman people, than grief for being so cruelly deprived of my
life and triumph, which I have so well deserved; but so long as I carry with
me to my Tomb the glorious Spoils of the Curiacii, the Scaffold will be as
honorable to me as the Capitol; I desire nothing of you, O my Judges, but that
you will be always your selves, and that before you pronounce the sentence of
my death, you will be pleased to remember, that while I was arming my self to
the fight, you offered up Prayers and Vows to the gods for my life; stay! O
stay you thunders, O you Powers that hearken to us, and tell how many times the
people cried me up to be the Preserver and Father of my Country; and if it be
true that I was so, will you punish Fratricide with Paricide, and in stead of
employing your gratefulness in adorning me with a Statua, will you take away my
life in an ignominious manner? But if knowledge of the cause which made me
commit the Fact? if the tears of my Father? if the merit of my Brothers? (who
died for your service) if my victorious Arm, consecrated to the Altar of your
fortune, has not power and eloquence enough to make me obtain life? Why, O
Senators, do you deferr my death so long? all that I look upon speaks
punishments, and there is nothing in my soul but mortal Chymera's; that I may
not dye so many times, I am forced to ask my death as a favor from you, kill
me then quickly I pray you; what do thou stay for, O Lictor? come tie these
hands which were heretofore the hands of the Republique; these hands which have
made the Roman Eagles fly upon the Laurels of Hetruria, and present the infamy
of a Gallows to him who has advanced Palms upon the Capitol: which of you
calls my unhappy and dear Father, that he may come, alas, that he may come
and comfort my heart, by his last offices of kindness, and fortify it against
the rigor of my destiny? that he may come with his last kisses, and sustain
my feeble and languishing spirits? that he may come, even that unfortunate man
may come, and close those eyes in death, to which he gave occasion of seeing?
Comfort him, O Senators, and tell him, that it is true I die honorably, tell
him that the Gallows (if ever upbraided in the House of the Horacii) is not
shameful; tell him that I did not mount the Scaffold, but in descending from
the Chariot of Triumph; make him remember, that if there be Fathers that have
had Children more happy, there is none that has had a Son more generous;
assure him, that you will always remember the blood of his Sons, lost for the
Commonwealth; swear to him, that you will not forget, that I have shed my
blood for your safeties; tell him, that you confess, that it is from me you
hold your plenty, and all your enjoyments, the embraces of your Wives, the
Caresses of your young children, the honor of your dignities, the safety of
your Lives, the Liberty, the Greatness, and the Fortune of the Roman Empire:
and to conclude, it is from my blood and sweat, that you have authority to
condemn me to the Gallows; this unfortunate man; who has enobled his death by
the memorial of the generous actions of his life: And you my Companions,
carry, I pray you, these Arms to those miserable Orphans, my desolate Children;
bid them remember that they were Horaces; and tell them, if they use them one
day with an Arm equal to mine, they will produce their ordinary effects for
the good of the Commonwealth. Enjoy in all peace, ye Nobles and people of
Rome, our Country in the happy estate I leave it, and may it be eternally
glorious, and full of Heroes; thou great Republique, these are my wishes in
spite of my misfortunes: Country, sweet Country, dear Country, to which
Horace owes all, enjoy happiness, O Citizens of Rome, Plenty, Riches, Peace,
and Power: and seeing the Heavens would not permit me to be a sharer with you,
I rejoice that I was at least an instrument by whom you are not left
unfortunate: And provided I may die assured that the memory of Horace may
sometimes live in your hearts, of that Horace who never refused his blood, to
the sword of the Enemy, to assure you your Goods, your Lives, your Country,
and your Empire; I die the happiest man that ever lived. But it is time, O
Senators, that I hold my peace, and that I yield to violence. I have permitted
my self to be transported by resentments too tender, for though my misfortune
has made me drop a tear, yet my life past will not permit me to be seen in
such a posture, neither do any of my actions deserve sighs; nor can I esteem
of a soul so effeminate that will ease its miseries by tears: we must die as
we have lived: in a word, it is for you to do as you will, and for me to do as
I ought. I have said.

The Effect of this Oration.
THe merits of Horatio in this great service abated nothing of the justice of
the Senate, but according to the Law provided against murder, he was condemned
to be whipped within and without and Walls of the City, and then to be hung
upon that Tree which in Livy is called fatal; which exact and severe sentence
gave Manzine cause to believe, that it was occasioned by some sharp speech of
one of the Senate, which he fancied in the Oration following.

Horace Opposed.
The Argument.
After Horatio's Speech, one of the Senators, in discharge of his duty, gave
this Answer.

Which of you, O Fathers, Senators, and Roman Knights, is for my sake so far
touched with compassion, at the ungrateful Office I am to perform, as to help
to cover this face afflicted for the public shame? and whither shall I turn
mine eyes, which had rather still continue fixed upon the earth, than behold
these walls, which have been the Scene of Fratricide? what tears can I afford
to the common miseries, when I feel a particular grief in my self, that makes
me weep whether I will or no? and invites me to lament my own misfortune,
which has not only made me so unhappy to see the Commonwealth dishonored by
a Citizen of Rome, but placed me in such a condition, that I am forced to
publish our shame, and plead for punishment against those that ought to
triumph? I vow to you, O S^^tors, I could wish my self without either heart or
tongue, upon this occasion; I never looked upon a Victory more favorably than
this, gotten by an unfortunate person; I rejoiced at his honor with a
resentment that was affectionate, grateful and sensible of my Countries good;
do but imagine how heartily he did it, you that know what pleasure a Victory
may afford to those who have saved by it their Goods, their Lives, their
Children, their Country, and their gods; truly I know not how my soul, which
did cherish this criminal person so tenderly, can be so far provoked against
him, to desire and endeavor to procure him punishment: Alas! I loved him with
more than ordinary affection, both upon mine own and the public account; as
often as I have seen my dear children playing about me, so often have I blessed,
and given thanks (with tears) to that virtue by which they were preserved; I
said with my self these hands were not free, but by thy strength, and perhaps
( Horatio) without thee I had never kissed my Children, but in bondage in
Tuscany, I am infinitely obliged to the unlimited courage the gods have given
thee; I owe all I am worth to thy good fortune, and I found the whole safety of
the Commonwealth hanged upon the edge of thy sword, I have not a heart so
insensible, to be ignorant of what I owe thee; these eyes that wept for the
danger thou were in, can hardly behold Horatio unfortunate; this tongue
accustomed to traverse in the field of thy praises, will think it wanders
astray when it has lost that way; and I believe the gods, when they see my
prayers altered, will either believe them irreligious or feigned: what shall I
do then unfortunate man that I am? I whose duty bounds my gratitude, and my
gratitude opposes my duty? But what shall I say (O Senators) these are but
effeminate fancies? shall then future ages know, that in a Roman heart any
tenderness was sufficient to make Fratricide supportable? shall there be found
any hearts so much at enmity with their Country, as not to fear the evils
which such a president may bring forth, if this should pass unpunished? and
what fortifications can secure us from the violence of his sword that has been
once victorious, if this wickedness shall escape like the sword of justice?
ought I to fear the fury of a people obliged by the fury of this guilty
person, as if I made so little account of the wisdom and justice of the
Romans, that I did not think them capable of judging betwixt good and evil,
and to punish crimes with rigor, as well as recompense generous actions with
Bays and glory? it is fit for the honor of the Senate to make it appear to
such as merit Triumphs, that they ought not to be so confident in the peoples
favor (which is uncertain as the wind) as from thence to assume so much
boldness and insolence as to think by their swords to stay the course of
justice: well, well! I am here to plead against an unfortunate wicked creature,
who has done us more dishonor with his sword, than we can gain advantage by
his victory; and why should I be afraid to be the Instrument of cutting him
off from the Commonwealth, who is the first in it that stained it with the
murder of a sister? This day is no less sad and unfortunate, than yesterday
was glorious, when lessening the Tuscane, pride advanced the greatness of
Rome; of that Rome, which being derived from the gods, is obliged to actions
suitable to the divinity of its original: Never was there a more horrid and
execrable crime that came under the punishment of the Law, or the eyes of man
kind, then is now before you; pardon me Fathers, if in this so venerable and
sacred place, I am forced to mention the name of Fratricide; let your own
inclination (O most just Judges) provoke you to wipe off this blemish from the
same of the Latins, and waken the ancient generosity to vindicate the honor
of justice which so much insolency has slighted, and trodden under foot: expect
not I should use any Art to incline you to my opinion; the Age we live in were
too unfortunate, if we should need to beg the aid of Art to describe a Common
wealth necessitated, to preserve one Citizen from another, a Brother from a
Brother, and the Country it self from those that have deserved Triumphs; and
what wickedness will hereafter be unattempted, if a man may be pardoned for
killing his own sister? whosoever desires to see his children secured from
each others swords, who desires to have the gods propitious to our innocence,
and would be contented to see his Country no less admired for justice, then it
is for valor, let him for ever rejoice at this opportunity to make his own
virtue eminent, to be an honor to his Tribunal, and to justify the actions
of the Senate against the slander of their enemies, who accuse them of
injustice and coveteousness, and say they never punish any person, though never
so guilty, unless he be poor? Shall then those that love justice be afraid
that the ingenuous consciences, and entire judgments of so many such Senators,
can be so merciful to one particular person, as to become cruel to the
public? to provoke you to punish, I will only tell you the crime; excuse me
if I plainly show you one of the members of your own famous body in the true
condition wherein it now stands, for I am forced to show you the malignity of
the wound, which can now admit of no other cure but a sword; I am again
pricked to the heart to put you in mind of so cruel a speetacle, but I know
not otherwise to appease her injured Ghost, if I do not show her with how many
tears the Roman People beheld her accursed murder, and how severely they
intend to revenge the same; this glorious woman-killer returned from a field,
where he got himself more shame by his flight, then he did his Country
advantage by his victory; when being met by his sister weeping (whether for joy
of her Brothers triumph, or for grief of her Husbands loss, without any
respect to his Father afflicted with the memory of his slain Sons, so much the
more to be lamented, because they died honorably,) this Tiger lifts his bloody
arm, and sheathed his sword in the bowels of his sister: O horrid spectacle! O
poisonous heart! O incomparable mischief! what tears were ever more just then
those that were dropped for the death of two Brothers and a Husband? Forget ye
Doves! forget your hollow groans and sobs, silence ye Turtle Doves your
amorous sighs, since this new Reformer of Nature thinks them unreasonable: I
will proceed no farther, O ye Judges, to represent the miseries of this
unfortunate dying woman, because I would not provoke you to tears, though to
say truth the subject is not at all too light, seeing it is no less then the
death of one of our own Countreywomen: alas! poor unfortunate creature, who
were born to tears, and diedst for weeping; had thou been seen to lose either
thy Husband, or thy Brother, thy lamentation for either would have seemed a
crime as to the Cause. Oh! the unhappy age we live in, that we are not
allowed so much as to complain: can there be a greater occasion to shed
tears, then to see ones self reduced to such a condition as not to dare to
weep!

This Murderer thinks perhaps to excuse himself by saying, he killed his
sister for grieving at the Victories of her Country; why he killed her we
know not, but we are sure she is dead; what! did the Roman Tribunal want a
sword of justice to cut off a corrupted member from the body of the
Commonwealth? who gave thee commission to employ thine upon this occasion? who
knows but that he killed his sister lest she should discover some cause for
her tears in fit to be known? but put case she did grieve at the prosperity of
the Commonwealth; thence consider what stock this man is sprung from whose
sisters lament for the prosperities of their own native Country: nay, the
unfortunate Wretch wept not for the loss of her Hushand nor was troubled at
the triumphs of the Commonwealth, but was ashamed at this man's glories: she
was not sorry she had lost a Tuscane Husband, but grieved she had a Brother
that fought like an Arabian, not a Roman.

Well, declare nevertheless (if you think fit) this glorious Murderer to be
innocent, one that has deserved well of his Country, triumphant and fit to be
honored, whose victories are so generous that his own sisters have been
ashamed to rejoice at; and though he may perhaps upbraid me as envious of his
glory, because I promote the chastisement of his crime, I shall not for all
this desist from my undertakings; I am so zealous for the honor of the
Commonwealth, that I desire as earnestly to see it just as to reverence it
triumphant: Unhappy Man! and who should I envy? can I envy thee that in thy
victory wast a runaway, and in thy triumph a fratricide? but why do I name
fratricide? a crime of all others the more shameful, by how much it is the
more unjust, so much the more scandalous to the Commonwealth, by how much it
is the more public; so much the more detestable as it has been committed by
a person more interested; and so much the more hatfull to the gods as it was
perpetrated in a time of gratitude, and justice.

Think with your selves, O Judges, with what insolence he, but now, bragged
before you of a victory obtained only by the Roman fortune; and who will not
confess that the gods will disdain that the Republique should seem to
acknowledge their power and their glory from any thing else but their own
benignity? since (to get themselves the Palms from amongst the vilest persons)
they chose the veriest Runaway, to the end that we might acknowledge that to
be the mere gift of their favor, when we look upon the weakness of our own
force: you might perceive with what outrageous desires he would have outrun
victory with death (as if we could not among all this warlike people) have
found out one man that knew how to overcom without flying; it is like this
earth, only made fit to bear Palms, should want victories, and those not fit to
be blushed at, not gotten by running away: what kind of Heavens? what gods will
this man call to for succor to his innocence? perhaps some that he believes not
in; do you think that he believes there are any to whom he can pray to for
their help in case of a sisters murder? and what obligation can you have to
him for this victory in which he has exercised his sword, making it a Master
in the Art of killing, to no other purpose but to be able readily to employ it
against the bowels of his sister, and of his Country? if we ought to be torn
in pieces, and to have our throats cut here within our own walls, in the arms
of our household gods? I should think he deserved rather the name of a
Preserver, of a Redeemer of his Country, who, restoring us to the swords of
our Enemies, prevented the danger at least by the hands of our own Soldiers,
by the hands of Roman Soldiers: and how can you ever trust your selves with
this man who had not been above an hour in Tuscany, and yet has learnt to
turn his sword against us? But what! I know I wrong the Tuscane piety in
comparing them with this Villain, who being a Conqueror could not pardon his
own sister, whilst they, being yet enemies, compassionating themselves and us,
submitted to this generous Duel, whereby having drawn them to out obedience,
they are become associates of our fortunes: perhaps the tears of this poor old
man his Father may move your compassion; why! without doubt he weeps rather for
his sons crime, then his danger. I confess I am tenderly sensible of the
prayers of so just a man, he has lost his daughter, and so wounded by his
grief in his affection, by his son in his blood, and yet pardons the offense,
and makes vows for his safety who has brought to him all this desolation; Oh
too easy old man! and ye who can choose but sympathize in thy grief? I should
wonder if the gods should not crown all the sons of so good a Father with
constant victory; he is one (O Fathers) that deserves that you should revenge
his quarrel, though he ask it not, though he desires it not at your hands:
shall he then who has bloudily offended him escape unpunished, because the
old man is just, pious, and ^agnanimous? none then but Fathers that are cruel
and impious shall have the injuries they receive from their children revenged
by your justice: it may perchance serve this man's turn to allay your just
anger, to tell you, he gained a glorious conquest for the Commonwealth, and
who knows not that he came to it by the honor of election, and when he was
in, he fought for fear of death? but what do I say, fought? I would it had
pleased the gods he had fought half so well, as he fled swiftly from it, 'twas
no better Fathers, 'twas no better; I will stand no longer upon calling our
shames to remembrance: if he fought he did but his duty; it is not to be called
a good deed not to be wicked; and if he overcame, 'twas for that Country, by
which he himself had been so often preserved by so many victorious Armies, he
pretends not to thanks as for a gift, that does but pay a debt, those toiles
that are undergone by the son for the Father, or by the Father for the son, are
but duties, not obligations.

He has already received as much honor and applause, as would make up a
triumph, and is as fully rewarded as any man could pretend to merit, who had
justly deserved to be carried in a triumphant Chariot; and if his generous
actions have been crowned, I know no reason why his crimes should not be
requited upon the Gallows: to what purpose was it to defend the Country from
the Enemy, which he might depopulate when he pleased with his sword or (which
is worse) by his example? and who is so simple as to think 'twill be any
shame to us, if our Enemies shall reproach us, and say, that the Commonwealth
had no stronger an arm to defend it, then a Murderers? when we shall be
able to retort, that the guiltiest person we have, the veriest run-wayes were
sufficient to suppress and overcome them; they will rejoice that they are to
live under the shadow of such a government, which will not in the least
measure pardon crimes, though in the Chariot of triumph, when victory shall be
st^in'd with injustice, then to grieve they are fallen under so great severity,
which does but teach them piety toward their Country and Kindred.

Hold thy prace awhile thou insolent creature, thou that boasts of victory, and
call that Country ungrateful to which thou art obliged for thy birth, thy
food, thy education, for justice, yea, and thine own honor; discover the
series of those generous Acts which rendered thee a person worthy, of whom the
Commonwealth amongst so many Armies, so often triumphant should alone make
choice, and to whose sword they would entrust their Estates, their Lives, their
Liberties, and their Empire, and if thou can find no other reason, but the
mere favor of the Citizens of Rome, and of thine own Country, with what
face can thou call her ungrateful for a benefit which thou thy self have
received, not given? we have (O Senators) actions of ingratitude, as well as
the murder of a Sister; nay, more! did you not perceive even now, how being
afrighted at his crimes, which threatening punishments are but praeludium's to
the pain of execution; did not you your selves perceive how invoking the Army,
which he called as it were newly born again by the virtue of his sword, he
endeavored to surprise the authority and justice of the Commonwealth, by
stirring up your Armies against it, enchanted by the Artifice of his subtle
speeches? did you not observe with what cunning he upbraided you with his
Victories? so proud he is and so insolent, that whilst he was begging his life
of you, he deserved death; behold him here ungrateful to his Country, guilty
of treason against the Commonwealth, of fratricide against his sister: what
needs any further delay, O Senators, the least of his faults is the murder of
a sister: secure your selves and me, O Judges, I beseech you, from the rage of
this wicked wretch; do you not see with what a bloody countenance he already
designs destruction? look to it, that fratricide upon a sister prove not
patricide upon his Country: Can you believe that he who could not pardon a
sister, guilty of nothing but a few Crystal tears, will ever forgive those who
have made him guilty of so grievous a crime, and forced him into so eminent
danger of his life?

You may fear perhaps, lest after ages should blame you for not rewardding a
Victory; and would you not blush to be justly upbraided, for not knowing
justice, or rather for trampling her under your feet? as long as I have any
rigor left in my breast, I will never cease to call it to mind; I will ever
be a witness to the justice of his cause, who is willing for their crimes to
make examples even of such as are triumphant; if every little effect of valor,
or rather of fortune, is able to secure a man from the force and justice of the
Commonwealth; what valor, what fortune, what justice is that of Rome? if we
can be no safer from the sword of a Brother, 'twill quickly be thought
necessary to prevent our Brothers sword with our own: Consider seriously, O ye
Senators, the grievousness of this offense, consider it to the prejudice of any
absolution in this horrid heinous fact: this example may do more mischief
then this offender can do good; if not I what has he to say for himself but
excuses and a small victory, rather stolen then fought for? he can find no
other Advocate, but only that he can say, I have defended my Country:
hearken! O people, to all the glories of our person triumphant, he was in a
Battle, and there was content not to be killed: hear the Encomium's due to
Horatio the great, it being in his power to save his Country, he graciously
vouchsafed to do it; what will future Ages say, when they shall see a Roman
Senate pacified with a few tears for the murder of a sister? how heartily
will all the Provinces round about us endeavor to avoid coming under our
power, where even our own sisters are not secure? what kind of sacrifices will
those be, wherein the Victimes must fall by swords accustomed to the bowels of
sisters? what answers will the gods give to our prayers when their ears are
continually dulled and importuned by their ghosts ever howling and calling for
justice and vengeance? Up, up! ye Senators, and prevent Joves thunder bolts by
exercising your Gallows; the Heavens will not long have patience to see
fratricide unpunnished: let not the gods by their chastisements rob you of the
occasion of doing your justice: be ye solicitous, O ye Executioners, that the
People may not accustom their eyes to fratricide: but alas! what am I doing?
whilst I go about to persuade you to punish this Offender, I seem to question
the justice of the Senate; pardon (Fathers) this boldness, I have rather done
it in pursuance of my duty, then out of any thought of teaching justice to
Justice it self: the excess of this crime has made me exceed in my desires to
have it punished.

I beg pardon of the gods, and of the soul of this poor wretch, who was
unjustly cheated of her life, if out of a desire to see her revenged, I have
taken up the time due to her revenge; let the sword of justice now fall, which
has been held up, and tied by the knot of my discourse; I will retire to give
you time to execute the desire which I perceive in you (O Fathers) to purge the
Commonwealth from this blemish, and to revenge it for the contempts and
outrages it has suffered by this offense; I should be accessory to his fault,
should I retard the execution of this magnanimous affection that is in you to
vindicate justice: let future ages learn, who shall see that it is not
possible for any thing (that is not God) to withdraw it self from the justice
of the Senate of Rome: there is no greatness of birth, no degree, no fortune
which can secure a Citizen of Rome from the rigor of the sword of justice, if
he shall depart from the Rules of honesty, and duty. I have said.

The Effect of this Oration.
SVch or the like were the words that moved the Senate to sentence Horace to
death, who without reply heard it, when one of his friends advised him to
appeal to the people, whose counsel he followed, and his old Father flowing
in tears, adjoining himself with him, they prevailed, and the people delivered
the son to the prayers of the father, ordaining him nevertheless that he
should pass under the Gallows, as having received a just condemnation.

Coriolanus Appeased.
The Argument.
Coriolanus, being banished by the People of Rome, went to the Volsques, the
unreconcilable Enemies of his Country, and being a person of high Reputation,
and one that had often put them to the worst, he was received very honorably:
not long after he returned at the head of a great Army, and laid siege to Rome,
which he reduced to such extremity, that it could not long hold out; whereupon
they repenting their former severity toward him, endeavored to appease his
wrath by Ambassadors, declaring their sorrow; but their Embassy proved
unprofitable, they could obtain nothing of this great enraged spirit: the
People of Rome in despair at this ill success, sent again all their Priests,
in their Robes Pontifical, followed by young Virgins, and Children, who all
cast themselves at his feet, to implore his mercy, but the remembrance of his
injuries, made him shut his eyes and ears against so pitiful a spectacle,
insomuch that this second Troop obtained no more than the first; in this
general desperate condition, Volumnia his Mother went out to him, and spoke
thus, if we may believe Livy, or Manzini after him.

I Have cause to fear, that after you have forgot the love of your Country,
the interest of your own honor, and the reverence which you owe to the gods,
that you will hearken with contempt, to the prayers of a Mother, to the sighs of
a Wife, to the complaints of your children; but these being the only Arms we
have to protect us from the fury of yours, I am forced to make use of them, and
to employ that little breath which grief has left me, to soften your hard
heart, yet it is not without great reluctance, that I have obtained from my
despair, spirit and heart enough, to come and embrace in one person both my
son and mine Enemy, for I have found it hard for me to resolve to come my self
and present you with our tears, and prayers to spare our bloods, and to put you
in mind how much more honorable it is to have the title of the Deliverer of
your Country, then the Destroyer of Rome; yes, I confess my weakness, I have
hardly been brought to see Coriolanus armed against himself, and to kiss the
hand, which it may be within few days will set fire to our houses, massacre
our Citizens, throw down our Altars, and destroy our Temples, and I assure you
that the sentiments of nature and those of reason have had so strong a Combat
in my soul, that, if they have not overcome one another, I may say, I have
been conquered by both; for it is true, my son, that I abhor your actions,
and have tenderness for your person. I consider not your present error,
without remembering your past innocence, and I may affirm, that the most sharp
grief which I feel, is, that I cannot offer up my prayers for your safety
without wishing destruction to my Country, nor pray for the prosperity of my
Country, without desiring your ruin; and I am reduced to such a sad
necessity, that I dare not implore the assistance of the gods, neither for
you, nor for my self, victory will be equally sad to me, for on which side
soever she declares her self, I am sure to reap neither profit nor honor; in
this conjuncture of things, I must either see you led in triumph by our
Citizens, or see you triumph over your Country; my disasters are come to so sad
a period of extremity, that I cannot cease to be unfortunate, but in ceasing to
live; the anger of the gods is now grown so visible to me, that I know no more
to doubt of it: it is true that the sacrifices I have offered have obtained
your return, but it is as true, that your return makes me more miserable, it
is by you that our City is besieged, our Citizens murdered, and that all our
Country sighs, and that the gods are provoked; what remains to be added to
my misfortune? my Husband is dead, and my Son is turned mine Enemy; Ah my
Coriolanus! this is the only thing that could have increased my unhappiness
what more bitter smart can my soul feel, than to be obliged to love mine
Enemy? and to fear the sight of a man, to whom I have given life, and who now
makes use of that life to trouble the repose of mine? The common Laws of
Nature ordain, that the care which Mothers take in the education of their
Children should be recompensed not only by obedience, but by all their
actions; to the end that the praises which they deserve, should be attributed
to her who was the cause of their being; and who, through tender affection,
has contributed all her industry and power to advance them in the way of
virtue: Judge after this how much you owe me, my Son, seeing instead of the
public acclamations, which I ought to expect for the reward of my pains, I
hear nothing all day but upbraidings and reproaches; the people look upon me as
the cause of their calamity, and they all say with one voice, that I am the
Mother of the Persecutor of Rome: I know very well that the war you have
undertaken is not without pretense of Reason; revenge is sweet to enraged
spirits, but withal I know it to be more generous to pardon those who offend
us, when they are in our power to punish, then to follow our own inclinations,
which often furiously hurry us to destroy them; the conquest of our selves is
much more honorable, then a victory over another, and if you would suffer your
self to be softened by my tears, and by the submission of a people so haughty,
to humble themselves to you, if you were not a Roman, I dare promise you the
love of your Country, the immortality of your Name, and the protection of the
gods.

Is it not enough that we have seen our fields desert? the Cabines of our
Shepherds (where innocence used to reside) serve for Courts of Guard to your
Soldiers? their Fockes for Victuals to your Camp? our Villages on fire? and to
sum up all, murder and ruin where ever your Army has marched? have you yet
cruelty left, to sack a City wherein you had your birth? can you consent to the
destruction of so great and glorious palaces, who express the magnificence
and splendour of that age, wherein they were erected to be inhabited by tru^
Romans, who made it their business to shed their blood for the preservation of
those walls, which you seek to lay level with the earth? can that high and
generous heart which you have from me. can it permit you in following the
custom of war, to take your share in the detestable plunder of the City,
wherein you took your first breath? you, who have so many times returned home
laden with the spoils of foraigne Enemies? can you be so inhumane to expose
the beauty and chastity of our young Wives and Virgins to the lust and rape of
your insolent Soldiers, and the feebleness of old age to the fury of an Army?
and the innocence of Babes to the tyranny of a strange people? can you behold
the Virgins dishonored in the arms of their Mothers? and their kindred drowned
in their own blood? and their young men laden with chains? me thinks the cries
of so many unfortunate wretches should have power to move you to compunction,
if the gods permit, for the punishment of your crimes and ours, that your
revenge must be satiated, does not this horrid Table which I present to your
immagination, appear frightfull to you? will your patiently permit me to
finish it? and shall I show you in Rome Rivers of blood, mountains of dead
bodies, our Temples demolished, and for the accomplishment of all mischief,
Coriolanus setting fire to our City, and making the place of his birth, a
bloody shambles?

I know not whether this Picture touch you or no, but I am sure it ought to
do; the very immagination of it you see makes your Mother shed abundance of
tears, and in their torrent hurry me to a resolution to end my days, and to
finish my misfortunes, that I may not see my son wash his hands in the blood
of his Family; you must Coriolanus, you must upon necessity, either give peace
to your Country, or death to your Mother; for if you shut your ears against my
cries and prayers, and that you are resolved to lose your self, in destroying
us, and draw upon your head the hatred of Mankind, and the anger of the gods,
you shall see infallibly, that when your Rams and other Engines have broken
down our Rampires, and when you come to skale and enter us, that I will be
the first that your fury shall kill upon the breach, and you shall be
constrained to tread upon my body when you ascend to the Capitol; it shall be
thus, thus, that Rome shall be ruined, for the mischief that I have brought
upon her in bringing you into the world, the cruellest of her Enemies; and
believe me, that this generosity is not particular, for I do assure you, that
your Wife and Children have resolved rather to die gloriously, then to live in
that infamy which you have prepared for them: for what life can be reserved for
us but to be the prey of our enemies, or which is more to be abhorred, the prey
and spoil of their Father and Husband: Ah Coriolanus! what cruelty soever there
is in Fortune, it is inferior to yours, and we ought not to complain of the
rigor of destiny, since it leaves us liberty to die; it is you alone of whom
we ought to complain, that will not permit us to die with that liberty we have
lived in, and your inhumanity is grown so great, that you had rather have no
Mother, nor Wife, nor Child, nor Country, nor household gods, if they may not
be your prey, and you their Tyrant: What shall we say to you after all? we
can call you no more our Coriolanus, seeing you have given your self to the
Volsques, you are come to steal us, even from your own self; it is in vain
Virgilia for thee to think that thy tears and complaints can alter our
destinies, it must be tears of blood, that must have power to touch his
cruelty; the preservation of our lives will be now an act of injuctice, and we
are obliged for our own honors to prevent our misfortunes, since we cannot
divert the miseries of our Country; and indeed what have we more to do here
in this place? shall we take care of our persons, and preserve them to adorn
the triumph of the Volsques? or shall we nourish Victimes for our Enemies? or
breed up the Children of Coriolanus, for his tyranny? No, no, let us rather
stifle this cursed race of his, who would stifle the liberty of his Country,
and if we must be deprived of hearing the sweet name of Mother, from the mouth
of our Children, at least let us by this generous action gain it from the
people; O Coriolanus, your rigor destroys in us all the resentments of
Nature, and you have reduced us to such sad terms, that to do an act of mercy
and courage, we must take those out of the world which are derived from us,
but if in the midst of all the fury and blood, which possesses your soul,
there yet remains any place for innocence and justice, make it appear to us,
that our tears may give place to our hopes, and let gentleness succeed your
cruelty; but if it be true that all your inclinations to virtue be corrupted,
and that on the sudden your sweetest delights be in horror and blood, and that
your greatest crimes are your greatest pleasures, employ all your rage to
destroy me, it is by this murder alone, that you can complete your Barbarism,
and violate at one blow all the Laws of Nature and of Reason, your inhumanity
shall be satisfied, together with the desire I have to finish my days, the
repose you give me this way will establish yours, and you will have nothing but
your own conscience to upbraid your crime, but be sure of that domestic enemy
that will follow you to your grave, and however victorious you are, a continual
horror shall triumph over all your joys; this Corasive will ever dwell in your
soul to see always our innocence dwell in your crimes, then shall you wish
for that death you have given me; Oh how long a time was it before I could be
brought to believe, that your Revenge had carried you to this engagement! we
are slow to give credit to those things which are to afflict us; I did not
think it possible that such an exalted soul, which seemed to be inspired with
the Roman honor, should ever descend from its own greatness, to humble, and
mingle it self with a barbarous People, the most remote, the Volsques, and
with them become the Destroyer of his Country, to be their Captain, or to
speak truer, the slave of his Enemies; but we are not to think it strange,
since it pleases you to destroy your own Race, your Country, together with
the household gods of Rome, which are the only things they hate, or rather
which they fear; what have I to dread from the rigor of my destiny? I might
be at peace without enemies, if I were without Children, my barrenness would
be abundance to my Country, as on the contrary, my fruitfulness has changed
the glory of Cities into a Desert; to what more deplorable estate can I be
subjected? what malediction of fortune, or indignation of the gods can be more
severe then that which has constrained Virtue to be the Mother of Vice; and
which causes the innocent to give birth to the guilty? the little consolation
which is left me in my misfortunes, is to see, that both gods and men are
accessory to my faults.

Ah Coriolanus! if you have not renounced Reason and humanity, I know your
complaints will follow mine, and that Repentance will succeed yours; consider I
beseech you, that your crimes are of so transcendant a nature, that the gods (I
dare not say) are guilty of them; but less that they are innocent: Ah my dear
son! if you were acquainted with the inclinations that your Children have to
honor, certainly it would change yours, they are so zealous for the interest
of their Country, that they make it their entertainment to weep, and
complain, insomuch that the tenderness of their tears astonish all beholders;
for it seems almost a prodigy that any who bear the name of Coriolanus should
be virtuous, and that being yours, they should be capable of shedding tears
for your slaughters; it is by their complaints and tears that I conjure you to
attention: Oh that their sighs and sobs might gain peace to Rome! I know that
from any other hand but yours we have deserved war, but I would have you grant
to your Children that which they ask, which is to say, that which is to be
expected from a generosity without example: Come then, my son, and teach them
in their tender age to sow Palms in the Capitol, quit those Arms which
affright them, and come and embrace them; if they obtain grace from you, give
them the title of Fathers of their Country, in an age that others are scarce
known to be sons of their own Fathers, and then I can assure you, that you
will advance them immediately from a Cradle to a Chariot of triumph; can you
refuse this honor? or, to speak plainer, can you hope for a greater? the way
to conquer Rome is to pardon it.

Do you not esteem a victory, without you obtain it by fire and sword? is it
possible you should be so unreasonable, rather to force your way, then to be
joyfully received through an Arch-triumphall? no, no, I will not think your
determinations so ill waighed, I rather hope that your desire of honor will
over balance those of Revenge, and give you a sudden resolution to pardon your
desolate Country, to dry up your Mothers tears, to restore your wives life,
and add honor to your Children; the execution of this design is not hard,
since it is certain that the Volsques will with joy embrace the alliance of a
man whose sole valor has conquered their Enemies, enlarged their Territories,
and given reputation to their Arms; and to sum up all, whose courage alone
has made Rome tremble, they cannot refuse their friendship to our Citizens,
since it is by one of them, that their forces equal ours, and they will
consider, that by this union we shall overcome all our Enemies, and make a
settled peace through the whole world, being certain that there will be none to
resist us.

But if the unsatiable desire of rule makes them promise to themselves an easy
Victory, let them remember how dangerous that valor is that is forced, let
them consider the instability of all humane affairs, let them learn of me,
that the Roman people can never be conquered, without being utterly rooted out;
they know how to sell their bloods, and not give it, and that they never ask
for peace, when they have reason to despair to have it granted, let fortune
fail us, our hearts never shall: But it may be, that your ambition persuades
you, that the way to preserve your greatness, and power over so great an Army
as you now command, is to conquer us, and that you cannot reign, unless we be
your Tributaries; if you be a Coriolanus, have you forgot that those for whom
you fight, are your natural Enemies, and that they have sucked in with their
milk, the design of your destruction, they do not embrace you, but for your
ruin, it is their need of your valor that makes them flatter you for a time,
but as soon as you have conquered, you shall become subject to those you have
made Kings, then you will find, that they protected you to gain those
Kingdoms they never meant you should enjoy; if their pride could suffer them
to be commanded by a Roman, they would never have disputed with the Romans for
their Empire; believe me, my dear son, you are not their Master, but to keep
them from being our slaves, and that as soon as ever you have put the power
into their hands, you will be the first that shall feel its rigor, and be
fore'd to groan under the yoke you have imposed upon us; I know that your
generositie will rather make choice of a voluntary banishment; but what say I?
good gods, you will not have power to banish your self, you have given them an
example in your Country, which will render them cruel to you, they have
learnt, to our cost, how dangerous it is to leave you your life and liberty,
and that Repentance quickly follows the least injuries that are done you: in
fine, you manure a field, whose flowers and fruits are not designed for you,
and in establishing the felicities of others, you destroy your own, you will
then find your self the only unfortunate person of your party; it may be
you will tell me, that fortune favors all your designs, and that you need
fear nothing; but if you place your ^onfidence in her you will be deceived,
her inconstancy is so great, that there is but one way to protect you from it,
which is to tempt her seldom; take heed that in going about to try her, you
do not drive her from you, and that in raising your self too high, you take
not the greater fall.

How many times have we seen a Vessel swallowed up by the deeps, in the very
same place which a little before served for a Haven of safety? suffer your
self then rather to be conducted by Reason then Fortune; or, to speak more
properly, be kind to your self in sparing us: but if your obdurate heart do
yet carry you on to vengeance, for the injuries you have received, and that
contemning my discourse, it inspire you to our conqust; think a little what
advantage you can reap by a Victory obtained by falsehood, ingratitude, and
cruelty; imagine that the foundation of Rome were reverst, and your Country
totally destroyed, do you not believe after all is done, that Hell has flames
horrible enough to burn to ashes those unjust and shameful Palms which you
have sprinkled with our bloods? can you esteem that Victory glorious which you
cannot rejoice in, but with impiety? and do you think it will be for your
honor, when the whole world shall know, that being able to conquer all that
resists you, you have been overcome by your own passions? since that the
remembrance of the injuries of some that were envious of your virtue, has had
more power in your soul, then Virtue itself, or the desire of true honor;
this is to yield to them to make such use of your Victory, and to endeavor
rather to outstrip them in Villainy then courage.

Behave your self so, my dear son, that the Romans may know the worth of
him, they have offended, and if they have been ungrateful, be not you
inhumane; be revenged of their malice, in making them confess to all the
world, how great a fault they have committed, in banishing a man that knows
how to use a god-like Virtue, Mercy to his Enemies; it had been better you had
been for ever deprived of the sight of Rome, then to have seen it for its
destruction; your banishment was the guil^ of others, but your return in this
way, is your own; you are yet in a condition to take away this stain from
your life, and to let posterity know, that you are not contented to keep your
self within the strict limits of a son, but that you have the noble ambition
to be styled the Father of your Country; if I should beg of you, in preserving
us, the ruin of the Volsques, I confess it were hard for you to grant, for it
is no more just to betray those that trust us, then to destroy our Country;
the peace that I demand is equally profitable for both Nations, only so much
more honorable for the Volsques as that when it may be probably supposed, that
they have certain Victory in their hands, they seem freely to grant to us two
sovereign blessings, Peace and Friendship, though they are alike partakers of
the benefit with us: if you yield to my just request, you will have the
reputation of giving felicity, in this age, to Rome; but if you deny me, all
the guilt of ill consequence will be imputed to you, as well by the Volsques as
by the Romans, for though the fortune of war is always very uncertain; yet
this I am sure of, that if you be victorious, Story shall mark you out to
posterity, as the plague and ruin of your Country; whereas if you be
conquered, they will say, that for revenge of private injuries, you have ruined
those who gave you protection in your exile: if you consider well, my
Coriolanus, there is none more obliged to return benefits, then your self,
seeing you so eagerly pursue ingratitude; submit your self then to Reason, and
yield to the demand which it makes to you by me, and give the Romans cause to
rejoice in that safety which they hold by your generosity, and the Volsques
will also hereby bless themselves, that they have had for their General a
man, whose Statua shall be placed in the Capitol, to which hereafter there
will be Temples and Altars erected, and who shall have no other Title then the
Restorer of his Country, and the Defender of our gods.

Cast away those Arms which dazzle mine eyes, and which make me tremble only
to think, they are so near us, your fury has already been too great, since
it has brought your violence before my face; give, my dear Coriolanus, give
something to the supplications of a Mother, who gave birth to your generosity,
and that loves you yet so tenderly, though you are turned an Enemies; do not
deny your Children to be Witnesses, as well as Imitators of your noble
actions, which are to come; come teach them by your example, to sacrifice all
their interest to the honor of their Country, and testify to the
Commonwealth, that you came not against it, but to instruct it to do its
duty, and that it was rather for the honor of your Country, then for your
own, that you took up Arms; but I will not that the force of my Reasons, and
the fervency of my Prayers take from you the honor of granting quickly, that
which you cannot deny without injustice; on the contrary, I desire to obtain
that from you, which I may expect in justice, under the name of mercy only:
Prepare then, O People, to render thanks to your Deliverer; come and admire
this noble soul, which is conquered by nothing but Pity! come see this
Coriolanus whose absence has cost so many sighs, and whose return has
preserved the Commonwealth of Rome; come my dear Virgilia, come, and kiss
that hand which comes to untie our chains, and to give liberty to his
Country; wipe away those tears which blind you, and come and enjoy the sight
of a man, that will be ravished at yours: come, O generous Children, and kiss
your victorious Fathers hands, follow his Chariot of triumph.

I would, O Coriolanus, say more, if my motherly affection would give me leave
to speak, but since you have been so long absent from me, it is fit I leave
entertaining you this way, and join my self in near embraces to you.

The Effect of this Oration.
ALL the indignation of Coriolanus was not proof against this discourse; all
in tears he cast away his Arms, and told his Mother (giving her his hand)
that she had gained a very happy Victory for her Country, but an unfortunate
and deadly one for her son: in effect, these words were Prophetic, for
having raised his seige, and returned with the Volsques into their Country,
that barbarous Nation in dislike of this honorable action, murdered him in
full Senate.

Cato Generous.
The Argument.
Cato of Utica seeing the Liberty of Rome oppressed by Caesar, was resolved not
to survive it; his Son, perceiving his design, endeavored to hinder him:
Cato answered thus.

IF I were, my son, of the number of those men, who, given over to their own
appetites, judge of all things according to their passions, thy tears would
not only alter my mind, but they would be powerful enough to afflict my
soul, to see him weep so tenderly, who, being so near a part of my self,
testifies so much more his affections to me, as he finds my death intolerable
to him: but the life which I have led until this day (never waighing
weariness, nor dreading danger, when the service of my Country was concerned)
will speak for me, that it is not fear, but strict necessity that takes me
out of the world, and I hope I shall not die without the pleasure of leaving
thee capable of some consolation, it being not possible to believe, but that
Reason is the most powerful consideration in the House of Cato; I rejoice to
find thee sensible of my death, not but that I am angry that thou do not
know that I ought to tend to my Center, and that, in making haste to a better
life, I make haste to my felicity; but because it is a sign that I have a
Son who is pleased with my fatherly kindness, and a Son that in desiring my
presence, does by consequence approve the actions of my life; they are those
tears which, contrary to their nature, inflame me more to die, because they
assure me I shall leave a Cato behind me: But if thou did rightly consider,
what that death is of which thou complainest, thou would find, that both
Fortune and the Heavens have rendered it so necessary, that neither my House nor
my Country can sustain damage by it: So long as the Commonwealth was capable
of my service, I never left it; but now that the particular fortune of Caesar
has overcome the public, why would thou wish Cato to live, to be affronted
by the multitude, who follow his wicked party? if in opposing the Conquerors
Army, I might ease the public Calamities, I would not desire death at my own
hands; but what shall I do? Caesar has conquered, and cannot be subdued, but
by his own fortune: all the Commonwealth runs with emulation to his service,
and I cannot deliver my Country from any other milchief, but from seeing Cato
in bondage: in fine, the Roman liberty can never die more honorably, then
with Cato, neither can Cato die more gloriously then with the liberty of the
Republique; if I should expect death from the feeble hand of old Age, I should
be seen to live unprofitably, or, which is more shameful, to survive the
liberty of my Country: if I would go to search for death in the war, where
should I find it? seeing all strange Nations are subdued as well as ours has
been overcome, and if it appear to thee, that in dying I seem to envy
Caesar's glory, and that I take from him the honor of pardoning Cato, remember
thy self that Cato is not an object for mercy? it would be a sacrilege to
guilty fortune if Caesar should pardon Cato, for what fault can he be guilty
of? he whose whole life was never employed, but for the honor of his Country,
and the gods? No! no, the providence of Heaven is such, that it has ordained
the destiny, not only of particulars, but even the general order of all
things has informed Cato of the necessity of dying; all men may, but all men
ought not to yield to the fortune of the Conqueror.

Thou have perceived, my Son, that I have been so active for Liberty, that if
for the preservation of my life, I could endure servitude, I should never
possibly be assured of that life which is held in slaverie; he will be
always jealous of my fidelity, and to assure his Empire, be enforced to
cruelty; I will as much as is possible hinder the crimes of the Prince of our
Country, and carry it so, that Caesar at least, be thought innocent of my
death, so shall the Commonwealth rejoice to see arrived in the Haven of
safety, that little which is left unconquered: in a word, seeing I see nothing
free but dying, it would be very unjust, that death it self should not be
granted me at the last, but with some kind of servitude, and since I know not
how to finish so many miseries, by more generous hands then mine own I am
resolved: is it possible that thou had rather see thy Father die by the hands
of the Hangman, then by those of Cato? No! no, it belongs only to the Cato's,
as to know how to live, so to die, when they please; and it is no small honor
in Caesar's time to be master of Cato's life.

Admit Time has ordained me for many years, thou see my Son, how many are
already past, and if I should refer the few that are left to the pleasure of
Fortune, consider what life can be more shameful, than that which depends upon
the will of an Enemy, to prolong Cato's days, thou must not desire him to die
less honorable; I will not be the first that has brought servitude into the
House of Cato, how can thou desire him to live unprofitably and undervalued,
that has been the foundation of our liberty, and the fundamental pillar of
the Commonwealth? and how is it possible thou should be so averse to behold
Cato free, and Cato immortal? what is it troubles thee? is it only the
immagination of what thy Father is to undergo? is it any other thing then the
same death so much scorned by one of my Slaves? who, to avoid my fury, for a
fault he had committed, cast himself headlong from a Rock? is it any other
thing then, but the same death affronted by a Girl? who impatient at the
absence of her Lover, abandoned her life, and used for her instrument a halter;
the evil ought to be deemed very mean, which is encountered upon such slender
grounds; what then? shall the thoughts of fear and pusillanimitie, prevail
over those of Virtue? No, no, my Son, if thou have a mind by thy tears to
show me the Sentiments of a true Son, show me a soul full of the Sentiments
of Cato; thou oughtst to consider, that the day of death is not the last of
life, but the last of mortality: if the soul survives the body, what day is
more happy then that wherein a man begins to live free, and independent? and
if it does not survive, what man is more fortunate then he who has finished
the miseries of life? if it proceed from the gods, death cannot be ill,
because the gods ordain nothing bu: what is good, especially to the just; and
if there be no gods, or if they take no care of humane affairs, how can it
displease a wise man to part from a world without Deities, and without
Providence? Death to diverse has been the end, and to others the remedy of
their sufferings, and there have been men who have desired it, and others who
have procured it, but none (besides the wicked) ever thought it ill, and those
esteem it so, because their guilty consciences will not permit them to hope
for a better place; those are slaves unto, and not Masters of life, who, being
deprived of all happiness, had rather live in languishments, then leave to
live: Nature has ordained us to live as long as life is to us content and
ease, but to abandon it when it grows a burden; why should we be exposed to
the malice of Fortune? to the frowns of the angry Heaven? love life my Son,
whilst life is to us happiness, but not when it is worse then death: The gods
have put my soul into my body, but not chained it in, and if it had been their
intention it should have been a Prisoner, they would have made the means to
free it, more difficult; but on the contrary, all things may be ravished from
us by Fortune, except death alone, which always depends upon our free wills;
he that is much a Lover of life, is much the subject of giddy fortune; there is
nothing without vexation to him, because there is nothing without hazard.

I do not deny, but that Nature has created man with an inclination to love
and preserve the body, but it is an inclination which the Beasts have in
commune with us, and which it may be Nature does not give, but to keep us from
detesting that life, which experience shows us to be the object of all
miseries imaginable: The Earth is a natural, but a painful abode, it is a
residence which the wise ought not to slight, so long as they may exercise the
best affects of their Reason, but when Fortune and Reason have reduced them to
such terms, that they cannot make use of Virtue without being scorned by the
wicked, what life is it then? it would be an Argument of a mean soul, if I
should fear either danger or change in my virtue: so long as there was hope to
conquer my misfortunes by constancy, I preserved my life (expecting better
times for the Common wealth and for my self,) but who now sees not that the
public affairs are desperate, and that liberty is overthrown, and that I
cannot aid my Country any other way, but in sending Cato to Heaven? it is my
grief that thou have not yet served thy Country so much as thou ought, who
art borne my son, for if thou had, I would persuade thee also to stop by
thy death the instability of Fortune, and to prevent an unhappy life, by which
thou may know, if thou considerest rightly, whether he ought to be deplored
that is delivered from so miserable an agitation: for me, I render thanks to
the gods, with all the zeal that my soul is capable of, that they have taught
me this truth, and indeed I cannot find that I have any other obligation to
life, then that it has made me know the value of death, and I rejoice that I
have found an occasion to die so honorably; to what purpose should we so long
be bandied between so many miseries, and so many mischiefs? whosoever has a
mind to be enslaved to all the tyrannies of Fortune, let him cherish life: in
a word, if life be profitable, let us live; but if it be the contrary, the gods
have not placed us in the world to keep us there miserable, we may go out of
our selves, for sleep and death are natural, and we find little difference
between the one and the other; why then are we not as ready to die as to sleep?
and why do we think a profitable death less lovely, then a languishing one?
what reason is there why that death should seem more horrid, which cuts off
our lives in a moment, and almost without pain, then that which vexes us
miserably, almost a whole age together? if thou do believe that kind of
death not to be so cruel as the violent, which overthrows us at one blow, let
us examine a little what this thing called life, is; it is subject to a
thousand misadventures, and every minute exposed to the ourrages of all, even
the least things; in its infancy it is helpless, and less reasonable then the
beasts, and if by chance it attain to old age, what creature is then more
feeble or fuller of infirmity? or more worthy of compassion? it is born in
tears, it is bred and nourished in dolor and pain, preserved with many
fears and dangers; there is nothing more poor, nothing more impotent in the
beginning, and nothing more furious, more avaritious, more proud, nor more
vain in the continuance; the world is a Hell to it: did thou ever pass from
one season to another, without feeling the excess of heat, or the extremity of
cold? and what thing can the tormented souls of the damned imagine more cruel
then these ordinary changes? men themselves are enemies to themselves, and when
they are in league one with another, they think of nothing more then whom they
may oppress, and whom they may ruin; to what end are there so many Armies,
and so many Victories, if not for the destruction of one another? and who is he
that has not gone with impetuous haste to the Capitol to render thanks to the
gods for the slaughter of numberless numbers of men such as himself?

Covetous wretches have dug up the intrails of their common Mother, the
Earth, to tear thence Gold where with they purchase our lives; it is the
Hemlock wherewith they poison, and the sword wherewith they kill: what soldier
is there that does not learn to handle his weapon to kill, even with Art? we
are subjected to a condition that we do not only suffer death, but study it:
Behold I how many men are afflicted which way soever they turn themselves?
they compound, with their laborious sweat, the cause of our misfortunes; to
what use serve these Lances, and Arrows pointed with steel, to which man's
bloody invention has given wings, to send death flying where a remorseless
hand destines it, who complains himself of being mortal, whilst his heart
and his hand are not employed but for death? O unfortunate state of life I of
which even those are enemies who live: certainly, if thou would consider what
this life is, thou would find, that such are worthy of being envied, who in
the beginning of their days, have found the end of their miseries, in making a
Sepulcher of their Cradles; there is no kind of life that has not his pangs,
and his disquiets; if a man be a fool, he is worse then a beast; if wise, it
is hard for him to find an equal; if wicked, he is a living Hell, Pride
renders him subject to hatred. Envy gnaws him, Avarice torments him, and
debauchery consumes him; if he be just he is persecuted by Antypathy, if he
beretir'd from the world, he leads a life solitary, unprofitable, and more
suitable to a wild beast then a man; if he be employed in the public, he has
to do with a body composed of wicked members; public affairs are mingled
with deadly dangers, particular are not worthy to take up the heart of a man of
courage; Poverty causes anxiety; Riches puff up and disorder; servitude
dejecteth, and is a continual misery; Command is not without peril: single
life is a kind of solitude, yet has its thorns; a Wife is a sweet companion,
but afflicting; the luxury of the age is great, the mind of woman is
fluctuating, and in short, the domestic disquiets, the petulancies,
giddiness, and weakness of Wives are insupportable; often we are not Fathers,
and often we are so to the perturbation of our souls. I must needs confess it
is a great pleasure to have children, but it is that which sits uneasy upon
the soul of Man, to have them as Hostages in the hands of Fortune: and it is
an unspeakable agitation of the mind to have occasions so obliging and
pressing, as are so far from permitting us to live with freedom, that they
will not allow us to die with it.

Behold an example in Cato, in this Cato, so miserable, that even his own
children endeavor by their tears, to hinder his liberty: finally, I am forced
to conclude, that this life is nothing else but a Sea subject to tempests,
wherein a thousand things may raise a storm to drown us: See now if this
condition be worthy to be desired; I now live under the yoke of servitude, and
remain under the power of an Usurper, that has abolisht the liberty of his
Country, and vilely placed the dignities Consular, and Priestly amongst the
offices of his slave, and subjected the Capital to the necessity of applauding
his guilty and criminal Triumph, and approving the slavery of the Romans:
what! shall this life be deemed worthy to be continued? shall I add to the
number of the enslaved of my Country, and omit an opportunity so remarkable of
showing to the world, that it is high time for those to die who have lead the
life of Cato? what! shall my eyes (accustomed to behold the glorious Statua's
of my Ancestors, who have counted in their lives more Victories then days,)
shall they (I say) see the Roman Fortune bound in fetters? what! the Fasces of
the Consular dignity, must they serve to make a Faggot to set the Commonwealth
on fire, and Cato be yet alive? what! this Cato, that did not vouchsafe to give
his Niece to Pompey the great, shall he prolong his ills to do homage to him
that has ruined that liberty, which with so much sweat and peril was founded
by Cato? the gods preserve me from an adventure so shameful: why do thou not
rather exhort me, O my son, to serve my self of that privilege which Nature
has given us of being able to deliver our selves from so many evils by one
death? would thou not blush to see thy Father numbered amongst Caesar's
conquests; govern, O govern better thy too tender thoughts, and do not
desire that thy tears should be more powerful then all these most important
necessities; it will be most agreeable that I, who have given so many blows
for the liberty of the Commonwealth, should give one for my own.

I was made so independing both by Heaven and Nature, that I should blush to
be found alive in Caesar's time, as well as under his Empire: if it troubles
thee that thy Country shall lose Cato, let him survive in thy actions; as
often as thou shall recount my life in thy memory, thou shall have me living in
my Examples, and my Precepts; all love is vicious which is not grounded upon
Reason; if thou love me, imitate my Virtue, for when thou shall love me by
immitation, thou will see that the Commonwealth has not lost Cato, who shall
certainly see him, both living, and glorious in the virtue of his Son.

The effect of this Oration.
Young Cato not knowing what to answer to his Father, retired all covered with
tears; after which, this great man employed one part of the night in reading a
Discourse of the immortality of the soul, and slept the other, with as much
tranquillity as if he had not had a design against his own life: At last be
awoke, and sent to the Ports, to see if his Friends were departed, according to
his order, and being answered, that they were all gone, he fained as if he
would yet sleep a little longer; but as soon as the Company was retired, he
took his sword from under his beds head, and violently thrust it into his
bowels; at the noise of his fall, his friends came into his Chamber, and
finding that he was not yet dead, they dressed and bound up his wounds, but
within a little time, he got opportunity to pull off the bands with which they
were bound up, and with his own hands tore out his intrails, for fear he
should be enforced to live: Thus died this great Man, to whom they give the
glorious Title of the first of Men, and the last of the Romans.

Cleopatra Humble.
The Argument.
Cleopatra not to be comforted after the death of Mark Anthony, and the loss
of her Kingdom, and Liberty, receiving a Visit from Augustus ( a rumor being
spread abroad that he had designed to carry her to Rome to add to his
triumph) to alter his intention, spoke this following.

AT the last I have seen that which I thought had never been possible.
Cleopatra obliged by a Mortal; here it is (O Caesar) that thou first
triumph'st over Egypt; when thou have conquered the Kingdom by thy Fortune,
that Fortune has brought thee to visit Cleopatra, not to comfort her in her
great disasters, but to teach the world they ought to submit, as well to thy
Virtue, as to avoid thy sword: what object can thine eyes desire to see more
pleasing? or what Music can sound more sweet in thine ears, then to hear
Cleopatra speak humbly? and that the Queen of Egypt should have need to
offer Vows and Prayers? O Caesar, thy Virtue has raised thee to so supreme a
pitch of greatness, that thy mere visits have power to make Queens happy; this
is the first time since my reign, that favors are done me upon Earth, I never
received any that I esteemed so, but from Heaven alone, from Heaven said I?
alas, it is benign influences are changed into malign, and inauspitious; it
has left me no hope, unless it be that my Conqueror has as well the
generosity, as the high courage of a Roman.

I have had heretofore so large experience, and interest in the gallantry of
Romans, your Peers, that I should deem my self ungrateful, if I had not an
entire assurance in the Virtue of a Caesar, there does now arise a large
subject for hope to this captive Queen, seeing that the mercy of her Conqueror
invites him thus early to do her this honor: and I confess my self to be more
overcome, by the gentleness of this Visit, then I was by the power of thy
Troops: Force and violence overcame there, here nothing but thy Virtue subdues.

I give thee thanks (O most noble Conqueror) and if I do it not as I ought,
it is but an effect of my disastrous fortune, the memory of my past felicities
disorders me in this new learning of giving thanks: how transitory the favor
of Fortune is, Cleopatra's condition furnishes a great example.

Behold (O Caesar) to what she has reduced Cleopatra, who has received no
less incense from Kings then from Kingdoms, that Cleopatra, for whom the
Caesar's have fought, the Pompey's have traveled through dangers, and Anthony
has lost his life: I speak of that Anthony whose person, and whose actions
were the lively image of Hercules, his Predecessor: I speak of that Anthony,
who, whilst he was in the world, past for bounty it self, for the soul of
Arms, and for the delight of Greece, whosoever demands of all Asia, who was
the Tutelary god, doubtless the answer will be, it was the great Anthony.

Unfortunate Cleopatra, to what extremity art thou reduced? if I would oblige
thee (O Caesar) it is necessary that I praise thee, and if I praise thee
worthily, I can find no nobler way, then by recounting the glory of that great
Anthony whom Fortune made chief of all men, to show to thee, that the chief
of all men was less then thy Virtue, less then thy valor, and less then thy
Fortune.

I am indebted to the Destinies (always mine Enemies) for no other Favor, but
that my infelicitie has ministered matter to oblige thy generosity, to exercise
thy high Virtue: There runs for all that a confused rumor, that thou intendest
to carry me hence Captive, and to make me follow thy Chariot in thy triumph;
but be pleased to believe Cleopatra is not capable of suffering such contempt;
death cannot seem to come too hastily to her who has already seen the death of
her Reign, and Liberty.

I am forced (being terrified by so unpleasing a noise) to supplicate thee (O
merciful Conqueror) not to think of a thing so contrary to my quality, and I
am the rather a Suitor unto thee, because thou shoul'd do things suitable to
the favor of this Visit, then for any need I have to obtain that of thee
which I can always command from my self; I swear to thee, I had already
conducted my interests to an assured Port, by this hand, if I were not obliged
to acknowledge thy civilities, for I will not that thou reproach me, as thy
Divine Father did Cato, that I envied thee the glory of pardoning me.

Be content with this, that I am become a Suppliant; it is no small triumph to
see Cleopatra petitioning, and humble: I assure thee that a heart less then
thine should never be entreated by Cleopatra, for that soul accustomed to
receive respects from the Caesar's themselves, would disdain to humble it self
before man; If I did not know thy Virtue worthy to receive the same honors
which we render to the gods.

If thou would know the value of this triumph which ought to make thee proud?
demand of Heaven, if ever Cleopatra offered vows to any but to the gods, and
Caesar; I know thou remembrest the Time, the Affection, the Treasures, and the
Men, I have employed in the service of Anthony: But I also know (O noble Enemy)
that thou art not ignorant of the price of that faith which ought to be
inviolable, from the instant in which it is given.

Alas, unfortunate Cleopatra! of what crime art thou detected, if not for being
faithful? if I had betrayed my Party, as others have done, I should be still
the so much adored, Cleopatra: but because my faith was unshaken, ought I to be
drawn as a vile slave after thy triumphant Chariot, by that which I have done
for Anthony? consider (O Caesar) what I may do for thee, if thou shall be
favorable unto me: Could I be so base to break my faith with the conquered,
and embrace his fortune that is victorious, I should be secured from the
peril which now threateneth me; but thou can have no assurance (O Caesar)
that I will not betray thee, as well as another, if the relics of the
Triumvirate should produce any new matter of war.

I have served (I confess) and loved as much as I ought the noble and
unfortunate Anthony, and I dare swear (so certain am I) that Caesar himself
would have served him, if he had been in Cleopatra's place, since the effects
of Virtue never change, although their residence be in several hearts! alas
unfortunate Anthony! that the memory of a Name so sweet, should be this day so
bitter to me; pardon me Caesar, if thou art as merciful as victorious? pardon
me, I say, if my indiscreet tenderness makes me lament before thy face, the
death of thine Enemy: I sigh for mine own misfortunes, not for the
establishment of thy unparrallel'd greatness; that thought is too sensible,
when I call to mind a man who never did any thing without having for his
object my will.

There is but one thing alone, that gives me cause to complain of Anthony,
which is, that I have heard him swear a thousand times, (which I now deem
flattery) that my beauty was divine, and all powerful, and that it might
soften Rocks; thou deceivedst me Anthony, and thou deceivedst thy self, seeing
it cannot cause one sentiment of pity in his heart, whose courtesy is greater
then his fortune, although his fortune be greater then his Empire of the world.

In fine, O Caesar, the sum of my petition is, that I may increase thy
reputation, in being content to obtain of thy virtue, that which I can always
obtain of my own; I entreat thee to consent that I may live without shame,
for otherwise in teaching Cleopatra, that thou intendest to triumph over her,
is but to teach Cleopatra that it is time for her to triumph over her self;
for she is absolutely resolved to follow no other Chariot, then that of thy
mercy; if thou intendst by thy Victory to draw that base humiliation from my
misfortunes, thou may well see Cleopatra amongst thy Triumphs of death, but
never amongst the Triumphs of Caesar; in being industrious to hinder my death,
to the end, to preserve me to increase the number of the Trophies and Spoils
which thou destinest to the Capitol, is not out of a desire I should live, but
that I should survive my reputation; which is not magnanimous, which is not
like Caesar.

If the malignity of any fatal star had rendered thee to the condition that I
am in, would thou submissively resolve to follow a Chariot? No! no, life is
not precious enough to be purchased so dearly; and what honor can it be to him
to triumph over a Queen, endued with no more generosity then to be capable of
living to be carried in triumph?

Remember (noble Enemy) that the most feeble and vulgar power may deprive me of
life, and use me ill, but the conservation of my first Majesty is an action of
an Arm no less powerful then Princely: Caesar I ask pardon for telling thee
that the inclination to take revenge is as much below Caesar, as Caesar is
above the power of being offended; chastisements that proceed from such as you,
if they have not for their end, the design of making the Offender an Example,
are fury, and not correction.

My miseries as they now appear, may serve for instruction of all those that
hereafter, like Cleopatra, would engage their affections for an Anthony; thou
have attained to such a degree of greatness, that for expiation of crimes
committed against thee, that ought to suffice which appeaseth the gods, which
is to say, I confess I have done amiss and ask pardon.

To conclude, even the common Animals, at least those that are generous,
always treat them favorably whom they find humble; if to exalt thy Victory
it were necessary that Cleopatra should follow thy Chariot, I would enchaine my
self to increase thy glory; a thousand consolations, drawn from past
examples, attend my misfortunes, as that to be conquered by a Caesar, though
it be a misfortune, it is one of those which are honorable; that I have not
wanted the courage of a Conqueror, though I have wanted the fortune; that
Queens are not less mortal then Kings, and that all things in the world have
an end. It is thus that I comfort my self, and thus that I resolve to honor
the Triumph of my Conqueror, if the Triumph of my Conqueror may be honored by
my miseries; but to appear Conqueror of Egypt, it is more proper for thee to
carry the Crown, then the head of Cleopatra; neither shall thou ever see
Cleopatra humble her self to suffer such an indignity, for if she has not
strength to revenge the injuries done her, she shall have at least strength
enough to deliver her selfrom the violence of those that offend her; thus thou
may see, O Caesar, that there is not any thing to be gained of Cleopatra, by
any other way, then by generosity.

Thou will appear incomparably more great, by thy mercy, and by thy mercy
exercised toward an Enemy that repents, then for having been the cause of the
death of a miserable Queen, for the short and vain pleasure of this Ambition;
but if the hate which thou have for Anthony, incline thee to be cruel to me,
to the end that thou leavest not unpunished any one thing relating to Anthony,
to what purpose is all this? Alas Caesar! consider how ill it becomes a man of
honor to be cruel to the dead, the Victory of the generous ought to be bloody
rather in, then after the Battle: but if for the compleatment of thy Victory,
thou would finish the Conquest of Anthony, let the world then see, that thy
Victories proceed from thy Virtue alone, and not at all from thy fortune, and
what greater punishment can be afflicted upon a noble soul, then to make it
sensible what a generous, what a merciful, and what a noble Conqueror it has
transgressed against?

But since Fortune has been so cruel to deprive us of the body of Anthony,
save his Soul, O merciful Enemy, for even that was Cleopatra's: but alas! what
say I in my grief? what? could the soul of Anthony survive Anthony, and
humble it self before Caesar? Ah poor Anthony! thou would never have
permitted Cleopatra to have entreated so long in vain, but if the rigor of my
destiny will render me so concerned in the inclinations of another, as that
the love of Anthony should endanger me, why may I not as well hope for
advantage from the respective affection wherewith Caesar heretofore honored
me? that Caesar which thou reckonest amongst thy Fathers, is reckoned amongst
my Husbands; if thou do drag me after thy Chariot of Triumph, will thou not
blush to think thou do not triumph without paricide? Caesar! the reputation
of thy clemency is so great, that in denying thy mercy to me alone, thou will
declare upon the Theater of the world, me to be the most unworthy to receive
it that ever was, which is to do injury to the judgment of thy divine Father,
who much loved me; cruel Fortune! to what have thou reduced me? the war is
finished, yet I have not finished my losses; poor Cleopatra! the Heavens are
turned brass to thee, as well as the heart of him that holds thee captive.

Pardon me, Caesar, if I do not bewail my misfortunes as I ought, it is not
an effect of my pride, it is of my despair; Tears cannot enough express my
miseries for those which give us leave to complain, are common, neither do I
think it civil to shed Tears before Caesar, whose virtue would be offended,
if I believed it capable of a feeble and base pity, for pity is a virtue of a
low and vulgar soul: I call upon Caesar to make use of his magnanimity, not
his compassion.

And to conclude, it would be a great addition to my misfortunes, if I found
in my Conqueror a popular courage; but it is time that I hold my peace, not
that I want words, for the Destinies have left me nothing else; neither do I
fear that thou will hearken to me favorably, for I know how agreeable the
Discourses of those who have generous designs are unto noble souls; but it is
that, in the present condition of things, I dare not abuse the Patience of an
Emperor, whose hours are all precious; I will only tell thee, that if rigor
to Cleopatra, be not to be accounted cruelty, the noble Treatment of her
cannot fail to be esteemed, at least, an effect of a noble soul; for in fine
the opportunities for great hearts to exercise their Virtue, are favors which
they receive, and they beg from Heaven.

I insist upon this to show thee, how happy he is whose felicity is such, that
his very Triumphs themselves afford new matter of Triumph, but I will not be
indebted to the force of my Reasons, because I do not desire to have them
esteemed powerful and great, but to have found thee so; for my part I have no
doubt of thy virtue, but I mistrust my own Fortune, and I fear the Heavens
(enemies to my peace) should take from thee so remarkable an occasion to gain
honor, and ravish from me the opportunity of being obliged to thy magnificence.

Consider (O Caesar) to what height of power thou art ascended; as to my
interest thou art above the stars, upon thy will depends my Fate, and
whatsoever thou will, shall be my condition, and if thou in thy mercy grant me
that which is fit for me to ask, and that which I ought to obtain, thou shall
be deified by thy Valor, and adored by the subjected Cleopatra, thou shall be
the Disposer of liberty, the Conserver of life, the Master of Destiny, and the
Protector of Kings, properties not inferior to the gods themselves.

But if the implacable anger of Heaven, together with the unalterable decree of
Fortune be such, that it has deafned thee to my requests, that I cannot hope
to find Caesar in Caesar, behold this bosom (O great Conqueror) oppressed with
all calamities, for its last refuge to rest, eagerly implores to receive from
thy famous sword, as an effect of pity, that death which otherwise I shall
search by the most horrid ways that can force a soul from a body; if it be
forbid thee by any higher power to oblige me by thy mercy, it is not forbid
thee to favor me by thy sword; my adventures shall be glorious, if I fall under
that sword which has conquered all the East, and which in delivering me from
the infamy of servitude, shall permit me to die free, and a Queen to whom the
apprehension only of the Capitol, and the consideration of attending a
Chariot render this life insupportable.

Go on then, noble Conqueror, pierce this miserable bosom, and deliver me
from the many misfortunes that overwhelme me: what! do thou fear to oblige
me, that thou art so slow? thou shall receive a thousand praises for an action,
which perchance thou believe to be too severe; strike, O favorable Enemy,
strike, for since I must lose both my Crown and Liberty, it is the only mercy
thou can do me: But why art thou silent? is it possible, that thou should
deny me so poor a relief? thou who art descended from a Race, which has
presented me with Kingdoms; believe me cruel man, that this heart could never
have been so much beloved of Caesar, if it had not something in it like
Caesar; I have been bred, crowned, and instructed by the Caesar's, judge after
this, if I can be capable of servitude.

But to what end serve these my Complaints, since they are addressed to a Rock?
I will not that my unprofitable prayers betray me to the baseness of Triumph
and servitude: I have done, O Caesar, cruel Caesar, if thou will not suffer me
to enjoy this Kingdom left me, by my Ancestors, at the worst thou can not
hinder me from dying, and practicing those Virtues which I learned from their
School, all things may be denied me but death, and no Virtue is more vigorous
then that which is desperate.

The effect of this Oration.
EVery one knows that Augustus treated this fair unfortunate Queen with much
civility; yet in the midst of his courtesy, she perceived his resolution was
to make her attend his Triumph to Rome, but to prevent the shame she so much
dreaded, she killed her self with an Aspe, which was brought to her amongst
flowers; so, by the generosity of her death, she wiped away the blemishes of
her life.

Sentiments Paternall.
The Argument.
The Graecians were assembled in Aulide, to consult upon the just revenge they
meant to take for the Rape of Helena: Agamemnon, Brother of Menelaus, and
General of the Army, to recreate himself, went to hunt, and killed a Hind in
a Wood, which unknown to him was consecrated to Diana; things being in
readiness for their departure, the Heavens and Seas opposed it by impetuous
and terrible tempests: They had recourse to the Oracle, the Priest declared
that Diana enraged for the death of that Animal would not be appeased, but with
the head of the eldest Daughter of that sacrilegious and unfortunate person,
Agamemnon, being advertised of his fault, and frighted with the tumult of the
Army, spoke to them thus in favor of the Princess his Daughter.

What god (favorable to the Trojans, our Enemies) has sowed in our Camp this
furious sedition? hearken to me, O Soldiers! if your military obedience do
yet render you such; I would call you Companions, if the quality of a King
might suffer an equal: what tumult is this? what! I that within these few
days was proclaimed King of Kings, not to have power to preserve mine own
blood? Alas! I am ashamed to speak of the madness of my Army, I refuse not the
head of my Iphigenia, to be offered for the public safety, but I refuse it to
particular Envy, if you judge it a thing requisite for the honor of our
Troops, not only to sprinkle the Altars, but to drown our fields with the
blood of my Children; it shall be I my self who will conduct the Victime to
the Altar, and will rejoice more to have bred them for the good of my Country,
then for the repose of my Age; for what blood can be more happily powered forth,
then that which serves to appease the angry gods, and render happiness to our
Country? Certainly, if ye believe I had a soul capable of meaner thoughts
then these, it would be an injury both to your judgments and honors in making
choice of me to command so many brave men, otherwise the most vile Members of
this great Body might have been made the chief: No, no! whilst Agamemnon
lives, the head of Iphigenia shall not want a Sacrificer; but it seems very
reasonable to me, that Pity in these generous Troops, who to recover an
Adulteress, slight their Country, their Kindred, their Goods, their Wives and
Children, and all things dear to them, either in this world or in that to come;
it seems (I say) very reasonable, that they consider first, if the stayning
their hands in the blood of a Virgin, be an Act proper to render the gods
propitious to our designs; for how can a sacrifice offered with so much
praecipitation please the gods? believe, O valiant People! O believe that when
you offer a sacrifice in fury, you satisfy no god but that of Envy alone; it
is a thing which to me seems very strange, that for regaining of an
Adultresse, it should be thought fit to lose a Virgin, and that to recover the
daughter of another, it should not only be thought convenient, but necessary,
that I this day lose mine own; if innocence shall be exposed to loss, you
will force your Daughters to that adultery, which finds more safety and
protection then Virginity it self; if we may begin our enterprise no other
way, but by the death of my poor Daughter, who will not confess that this war
is ominous to me, before there is any violation of peace to begin the hopes of
our Victories with the blood of our Daughters; alas! it is to begin them with
our own losses, if we are out of hope, that the gods will not be favorable to
our designs, unless we imbraw the Earth and Sea in the blood of our own
bowels; truly it will be a very criminous atonement.

Those achievements are too dear bought, that cost us a Victime, for the
preservation whereof, no Victime should be thought too precious: I have seen a
war begun for the defense of Virgins, but never saw the murder of a Maid
inaugurate the happy success of a war; that may be called losing of the
battle without fighting, and to fill our houses with murder before they be
taken, and without looking one Trojan in the face, we shall bewail the death
of our Children: God forbid, that our undertakings should be so inauspitious;
reserve! reserve the fury of your swords to destroy the Daughters of your
Enemies.

Those of Ilion shall not be more swift to shut their Ports for their
preservation, then we will be to fly to the immolation of the most
illustrious Virgins of Troy, there we will assuage our angers, and revenge our
indignities without sparing a Maid that breaths in the air of our Enemies,
from the rigor of our swords: But what new astonishment is that I read in your
faces? you seem to have in horror the thoughts only of a spectacle so bloody,
I was confident in representing to you the massacre of young Virgins, I had
chosen an entertainment agreeable to your inclinations: Poor Iphigenia! under
what malignant star were thou borne, that, that rigor which would be cruel,
barbarous, and detestable, if it were afflicted upon the Daughters of our
Enemies, is believed honest, pious, and desirable, when it is addressed to our
own? what? shall the sisters of Paris then fear the Graecians less then the
Daughters of Agamemnon? who taught us that Religion which makes us merciful to
others, and cruel to our selves?

To begin the war by an act so inhumane is to better the condition of our
Enemies, because we oblige the Heavens to defend those that are most innocent,
for who can deny that a Ravisher sins less then a Homicide, and that it is a
less fault to have loved a Wanton, then to murder a Virgin? Paris opposed,
and wrestled with his lusts, as appeared by the fears of his flight, and those
of his conscience, to show to the world, that at least he knew his guilt, and
dreaded punishment as well from the gods, as men; but how shall we excuse our
crime, the wickedness of which renders us impious and cruel toward both gods
and men?

We style the profanation of the Altars an Act of Piety, and as a sacrifice
celebrate a detestable murder, who can excuse those crimes committed, not
only before the eyes, but even upon the very Altars of the gods? I am not
ignorant that the wickedness of those who proposed this sacrifice, will say
that the divine Decrees ought to be obayed, and not disputed; but I answer that
the Athenians, to appear falsely devout, were not ashamed to picture their
gods cruel Homicides, those very sacred Intelligences which dwell above, for
the preservation of Mortals, do revenge, not desire the death of Innocents.

What? have the Gods rendered the Heavens serene, and the Sea calm, to favor
the flight of an incontinent, and after do they show them in prodigious
storms, thirsting for the blood of a Virgin, who perchance is preparing
Hecatombs for them, whiles they are decreeing her ruin? No, no! it would be a
Hell upon Earth, if the Heavens should oblige us to shed the precious blood of
Innocents; how is it possible that Jupiter should resolve to reign over a
world desert and wicked? and who is there abject enough to continue amongst
those Deities, whose number is not composed, but of more vile then our selves?
but what god is it has brought cruelty into Heaven, as if humane kind were to
be made the object of fury instead of love and mercy? all sacred forbid, O
Jupiter! that we should believe the gods to be more cruel to us then our
enemies themselves; what? the Trojans love our Daughters, and the gods massacre
them? it is not likely; produce the Priests, and name the Temples where this
Oracle has been heard and received, that we may not rashly precipitate any
thing against the innocent, which has always been known by all to be the
prime object of love to the infinite powers; let us be careful that that
piety which endeavors to remove the clouds from the neck of Juno, take not
away by violence the thunder bolts from the hand of Jupiter.

But if you tell me, that Calcas the Interpreter of the gods (to deliver our
Fleet, which the Sea holds as besieged, and which, it seems, conspireth for
the defense of our Enemies) has pronounced this, which is rather to be called
a sacrilege, then a sacrifice to appease the gods of the woods incensed by my
hand for the death of a Hind? I answer, that certainly any other but Calcas a
Magician, a Sorcerer and Conjurer, accustomed all his life time to the
formidable way of Hell, by incantation with certain verses which he muttereth
more horrid then his own conscience, would never endeavor to acquire the
reputation of Interpreter to the gods, by such a detestable invention, as to
engage us to the necessity of shedding innocent blood.

But it is time, that I discover to you the tumor of this wound, that you may
know how poisonous the steel is that made it; it is hence that Oracles are
obtained by the gold of mine Enemies, and not the voice of the Thunderer, that
pronounces the fatal Ordinances of the all-powerfull Deities; it is he who
envies me, my Scepter, and labors my deprivation, that he to whom Calc^^ has
sold his loyalty may usurp it, and that you by a fancied piety should become
not religious, but superstitious; for certainly if I had not been chosen
General of the Army, Cynthia would never have desired that her Altars should
be adorned with my calamities; that Envy which darts Thunderbolts upon the
most supreme and exalted things has (foreseeing that our Troops desire of me
a sacrifice not only abominable, but impossible for a Fathers affection)
engaged me to the necessity of abandoning you, to avoid that crime, or your
selves to deposing me, from that dignity to which others pretend; but consider
I pray you noble Soldiers, if it can be possible for that Goddess, the great
Patroness of Chastity, to design the throat of a Nymph, of her own train,
to be cut in revenge, for the death of a Beast.

If the Hind was consecrated to Diana, to whom was dedicated the virginity of
Iphigenia? and what Deities are they, who express more tenderness for Beasts
then men? I know already they will say, it is a punishment which Agamemnon
deserves, for daring to enter into a Wood consecrated to Diana, and more for
killing her Hind, but what correction can he deserve, who has committed a
faulty Act, with an innocent heart? and how can he be guilty of irreverence
that knew not the sanctity of the place which he has profaned?

In fine, I have not killed a she Priest in a Temple, but a Beast in a Wood,
and shall this heart, which has always reverenced Diana, be implacably
condemned for a light fault, and a fault not of will, but of ignorance? but if
the sin be mortal, and the punishment inevitable, was it ever seen that the
gods condemned an innocent head, for the error of a guilty hand? what? shall a
spotless Virgin fall under a sword, piercing her bosom? and I who committed
the sacrilege survive in glory, and command an Army which is to be always
victorious? if it be thus, what shall become of justice?

Ah! if Diana wishes for the head of Iphigenia, she wants not means to
accomplish her desires, without employing the aid of your swords: Demand of
Acteon, if she ever had recourse to the assistance of men, to revenge the
injuries she receives in the Woods and Forests? return! return into your
selves, O valiant Warriors, and appease those Furies which it may be have been
provoked, as well as the Sea for our misfortunes by a hand, which has drawn
the fury of Hell upon us; appease those hearts and those spirits, who desire
unjustly, that the Sea should be calm, when their reason is overcast with
Clouds and Tempests: No, no! Diana cannot hinder the revenging of a crime,
wherein her Deity is more interessed then our selves, for who is there that
has so little judgment, as not to know how much the action of Paris has
outraged the pudicity, of which that Goddess makes profession? and who sees
not that this Ravisher by his incontinence is as much an Enemy to Diana, as an
injurer of Menelaus?

But if those Reasons seem too remote, do but consider whose Daughter this
Helen is, for whose sake all Greece is in Arms? If you answer me, she had for
her Father the Almighty Jupiter, whom Diana reverenceth as her own, what
reason is there to oblige a Goddess to hinder the punishing of a man who has
dishonored her sister? and what sense is it, that one of the number of those
who are infinitely just, should be agitated with a thousand furies, to hurry
her to vengeance for a yellow Beast? and that she should be so implacable as to
desire the death of her Niece? for if there be none that doubts, but that
Helena is the sister of Diana, is there any to be found that will question
whether Iphigenia be her Niece or no? it may be there is, for I ought to
apprehend all things from my misfortunes, and believe all that is ill of mine
Enemies.

What say they now, after I have demolished all the stratagems raised by Envy;
will they yet return and inculcate that the Heavens threaten us, that the Air
is full of Tempests, and that the Sea is plowed up into billows? But what! is
it so extraordinary a Prodigy to see the Heavens troubled, the Winds
boisterous, and the Sea tumultuous? how is it that this Dreamer of Oracles (as
well impious toward the gods as cruel to men) how is it (I say) that he dares
impute the impetuosity of the Tempest, to the severity of that goddess? by what
new division of the Universe, has Neptune yielded the Empire of the Sea to
Diana? Alas! would it had pleased the Destinies, that the most chaste of all
Goddesses had power over the Waves, they had not been crossed over with so
little peril by that Adulterer, by that fugitive, that Trojan Ravisher.

We are very ill Interpreters of the favors of the Heavens, it may be their
goodness not only permits, but raises these tumultuous billows to dissipate
the fury of the Tempest, which spent at last with its own violence and
impetuosity, will afterward permit us a Calm and prosperous passage; if in
the change of things, a Tempest succeeds a Calm, and a Calm a Tempest? we
must confess that the gods who keep us now in the Port, are more favorable to
us, then the Ocean, in making us expect the opportunity of a calm, and serene
passage; but peradventure to maintain their great prerogative, the gods
detain us here, being unwilling that any other force, but their
Thunderbolts, should undertake the punishment of so detestable an Adultery, or
peradventure being pleased with our piety, that we, banishing our selves from
our native soil, should endure the fury of the Winds, the danger of the Sea,
and the inconstancy of the Heavens, leaving our Houses desolate, and abandoning
our Wives, to precipitate our selves into the miseries of a painful war, whose
success is uncertain, and often depends less on Council, then upon that
blind Goddess Fortune, who ordinarily favors guilt more then innocence.

But the Heavens defend us from a presage so unlucky, we are to hope the best,
and we ought not to distrust the justice of a cause, which if it proceed from
the gods, shall not be without protection, the Heavens are on our side already,
and I hope we shall also, at the last have the Sea: I must for all that
confess, that fear and horror invades my spirits as often as I represent the
unusual new manner of piety, where with this wicked man pretends to appease
the Heavens and facilitate our Voyage, for if anger makes this opinion, (I mean
the anger of Cynthia, for only the death of a Hind which was hers) has
disturbed all the Elements, what will become of us miserable Wretches, when we
have mutthered a Virgin so dear to the Goddess, for her Virginity, and so
near for her consanguinity? return! alas, return (I say again) to your
selves, O valiant men, and believe that my own interests touch me less then
the public: Alas I if now, when we are yet innocent, the Sea is unquiet, and
the Heavens are darting Thunder bolts, what will they do then, when they
behold us cruel Homicides?

No, no! let our Daughters live safe from the violence both of men and gods;
the ground of our piety, intended to be employed for punishing injustice,
deserves not that the gods should make us tremble, and that they should render
their very Altars terrible to us; suffer then this innocent Victime to live,
that they may know what we have done a far off in revenge of injured virtue.

The simplicity of my prayers with which I strive to preserve my Daughter from
the hands of Envy and oppression, shows clearly the confidence I have in the
justice of the Arrive Troops, your hearts have no need to be softened into
mercy by my tenderness; yet I would entreat with more importunity, if it
became the quality of Agamemnon to be a Suitor, and if the Grecians had souls,
capable of so much baseness, to follow and obey a suppliant, I do not desire
that my afflictions should remember you that I am a Father, if that which I
demand be not just, which if it were not, I should blush with shame for
entreating you, though it be for the preservation of a Daughter.

The magnanimous; the Soldier, and even Kings themselves, are subject to
fatherly affection; but if in what I have said, affection appears more then
justice, I desire it may avail nothing, as if I had never spoken: I have not
put you in mind of the merits of the unfortunate Maid, nor of mine own,
because I desire to owe the happy success of my prayers to the justice of my
cause, rather then to the eloquence of my language; I have dedicated to Justice
all the actions of my life, and for the liberty and happiness of my native
Country.

I have esteemed, as fortunate, all the occasions which have so many times made
me shed my blood for the common prosperity of all Greece: but I do not pretend
that that shall assist me at all to preserve my child, if justice and
innocence did not render her inviolable, I would not save her, for I am a
Father, but a Father no further then the Altars, I have endeavored only to
open your eyes, that Envy and wickedness triumph not under the veil of piety,
after this Iphigenia and Agamemnon both shall go as very happy Victims, if it
be proper and requisite for the public affairs.

The Effect of this Oration.
NEither the Eloquence, the Reasons, nor the Tears of Agamemnon could
prevail, the Ordinance of the Oracle must be obeyed, but the fable (which
under the figure of an afflicted Father, yet obedient) demonstrates to us the
entire resignation that men ought to have to the will of the gods, and withal
it evidenceth that almost always the gods are contented with obedience, for it
feignes that at the very instant that Caleas lifted up the sacring knife to
strike that innocent Victim, Diana conveyed her away in a Cloud, and put a
Hind in the place, in such manner, that under this pleasing fiction, Poesy
entertaines and instructs at once.

Paris in Love.
The Argument.
The Enterprise of the Argonauts, besides the ruin of Ilion which was half
destroyed by them, having cost the Trojans, together with the death of
Laomedon, and his sons the Captivity of Hesione; Antenor crossed the Sea to
ransom her, but returned with contempt: The Trojans incensed for the injury,
resolved Vengeance; whereupon Paris, who ever since the judgment on Mount Idae,
had always entertained high hopes, was dispatched for that purpose, and
quickly returned; the issue of his Voyage was the Rape of Helena, which so much
enraged the Greeks, that they breathed nothing but War and Revenge, and
Cassandra presaged nothing but misfortunes; the Trojans knew not what to
resolve, when Paris, fearing to be abandoned, spoke thus to the King his
Father, and to the Prince his Brother, which he assembled for that intent.

I Could never believe I should live to see fear reign in the House of Priam,
but the more high and noble thoughts I had of the valor of the Trojans, the
more unjustly I see my self reduced to the necessity of fearing the
instability of that fortune, which has so happily raised me to so supreme
felicity, a soul infinitely captivated with love can never fear enough: The
womanish weakness of Cassandra makes so much noise, that I fear Fortune her
self envies my prosperity, but the more she shall strive to trouble my repose,
the more vigorously I shall endeavor to oppose her malice, and I render thanks
to Helena, who gives me occasion to show the strength of my resolution, as my
election of her has been the Argument of my judgment.

I am not ignorant (O my Father, and you my generous Brothers) how
inconsiderable a woman's fears are, compared with the nobility of your courages;
but the justice of my cause, the inclinations of my scule, the reputation of
the King, and the safety of the Kingdom, are treasures so precious, that we
cannot be too watchful to guard them: I know to make you draw your swords it
is sufficient to remember you, that the Valiant ever carry their Reasons in
their hands, and to excite you bravely to a war, it is enough to say it frights
none but women.

It is absolutely necessary, that the war must please Hector, since it
displeases Cassandra, the souls of Heroes and those of Women, are too distant
to have the same thoughts, and he that consults the affairs of war with his
Daughters, has no great mind to fight: but I will not that Mars should overcome
Justice; if you do not by solid Reasons judge the war profitable, honest, and
necessary to the reputation of the Trojan greatness; the hatted betwixt the
Grecian people and us has already lasted so many years, that it being now as
a natural inclination, I see no likelihood of a peace, and in my opinion that
is no small advantage to justify the war.

You hear by this, whether you ought to hearken to the clamours of Cassandra,
and if the generous Sentiments of Paris deserve assistance of your Arms in a
war so necessary, that it ought rather to be finished, then disputed, to be
consulted on: let us sacrifice (O my Brothers) let us sacrifice to that
Fortune, that even upon necessity conducteth us to honor and triumph.

I might strive by my sad accents, to soften your hearts, and to prepare your
ears favorable to my requests; but I do not yet believe my self to be so
deserted, as to fear that I shall find my Brothers wanting in humanity to
me, I will not esteem my life, if it deserve not to be cherished, at least by
the Sentiments of Nature, and if I cannot hope that you will hearken favorably
to an innocent Brother, whom she injoynes you to defend, though he were guilty.

But if the stars which reigned at my nativity were so fatal to have it
otherwise, I should feel a joy in my soul, to see a life torn from me, which
my Fathers and Brothers themselves have thought unworthy their Protection; for
in fine, Paris pretends to no other honor, but to deserve some reputation
among the Priams and Hectors: I parted from this River with order to treat
about the ransom of Hesione, as an Ambassador, or to declare war as an Enemy.

My Voyage was fortunate under the conduct of the Divinity of the Sea, who
foresaw I went to be the Nephew of Helena was his Niece.
Neptune, but finding things so little favorable for us amongst the Greeks, I
had no hope to make my Negotiation happier then that of Antenors, and certainly
I might have despaired, if my confidence had not been in that Venus.
Goddess, who was engaged to second my designs.

I had recourse to Menelans, who (though mine Enemy) was rendered favorable by
her, according to what she promised me at Mount Idae; yet I was no sooner
arrived at his house, but to evade the importunity of my requests, he absented
himself upon the false pretense of some affairs, which discovered to me,
that I had been brought into his house rather by the force of Destiny, then by
his courtesy, all his whole Palace (even out of their innate hatred to our
Nation) comported themselves toward me, as if I had been their particular
Enemy, there was none save only this Royal Princess Helena, in whom I could
discover common humanity, she knew at first the equity of my demands, and I
found her as favorable as the justice of my Cause deserved, or any moderate
heart could desire: it is true, that my observation of it had no sooner
encountered those fair eyes, (for comparison of whom, it is too much to name
the Divinity, and infinitely too little to think of any thing we see upon
Earth) but I presently apprehended a way in her to balance the unjust
detension of her I came for; the fell nature of our Enemies took from me all
hope of remedy to the loss of Hesione.

It was thence I laid my design in favor of your Empire; but my heart had
scarcely received the image of that glorious object presented to mine eyes, but
I resolved to mingle my particular inclinations with the public interest, so
that having for my object a face too fair for expression, the Idea was no
sooner received into my breast, but Helen was inthroned in my heart, not only
amongst my affections, but divinities, for to know the glory and greatness of
her beauty, you may but consider it was I that made choice of it, I, that came
from seeing that of Venus.

The tumultuous imbtoylment that her taking away raised through all Greece, may
teach you (O my Brothers) to know the value of the person, and how much she
deserves, whose absence alone has put so many Provinces into Arms to recover
her; I know not better how to boast to you the perfections of this excellent
Lady, then in remembering you that she is the very recompense promised me by the
Goddess Venus; and how can we more severely revenge so many outrages, received
from the injurious hands of the Grecians, then in depriving them of a Treasure
which dazzled the eyes of a man newly come from beholding without astonishment,
the wonders of the prime beauties of Heaven; what shall stay us lazy, vile,
feeble, (and that which I esteem yet more shameful to our great souls)
insensible men, to dwell under such indignities without vengeance? Shall we
suffer the Greeks to regaine Helena, and retain Hesione? The death of
Laomadon, and the murder of his Son, the ruin of Ilion, and the injuries of
Antenor, are they all fled your memory? No, no! the prize I have taken cannot
be retained at a less rate then the hazard of a Kingdom; the greatness of the
hazard will set the greater reputation upon our honor, rather then to be a
subject of fear, or terror to generous souls; the more dangerous and difficult
things are, the more virtuous actions are enobled by being versed in them, and
when I consider well the estate of this affair, my soul is vexed that neither
by the condition of our matters, as they are, nor by the will of the gods, the
war that the Greeks threaten us withal, cannot be of danger great enough to
render us worthy detainers of that sovereign piece of excellence, beyond which
there is nothing to be desired, by those who have eyes, of souls able to
judge; what ought we to fear? it may be you will say the Forces of falling
Achaya, or those of miserable Sparta; No, no! my Brothers, either Mars must be
a Trojan, or Venus will show to us, that ingratitude reigns even in Heaven,
but (my Brothers) those ought not to fear the fury of Mars who have Venus for
their Protectress; the poverty of the Grecian Kingdoms permits no one of their
Kings to assault us alone, and if diverse Princes compose the number of our
Enemies, it cannot be but very happy for us.

Diverse are the Grecian Princes, and all of them have without doubt more
vanity then valor; who will there be amongst them that will yield the Empire
of himself to one that he believes not his superior; nothing is more hard to
reconcile, then the opinions of a multitude, and how much harder will it be,
when the question shall arise about the command of an Army wherein the danger
of all parties is concerned: some will prove unwilling, some unable; the former
loath to engage themselves in a war, the other not in a capacity to undertake
it; there is no man so happy in his misfortunes, that all men should bear a
part in his disasters; Menelaus has his Enemies in Greece as well as we,
those who are unwilling to see him prosperous, will divert his forces, hinder
his relief, and prove rather serviceable then Enemies to our success.

But what is at length become of the usual gallantry, and ancient reputation
of the Trojan Monarchy, dreaded to that extreme part of our world, where the
Land ends, so much reverenced through the whole Universe? and though not only
Greece alone, but all Afric should join with her, and take up Arms against
us, must Asia therefore run away beyond the known limits of the World, where
are so many tributary Kingdoms allied and united as well by the bonds of Nature
as Interest?

There is not one of these Neighbor Princes, but will fear the prosperity of
the Greeks, nor one that will nor remember the Favors that he has received
from the Trojans; where shall be that Jupiter, which never found the pleasure
of Love, but in the Trojan beauties? where shall be that Venus, which holds
not her Scepter, and reign over beauty, but from my judgment? it was she
which promised me Helen for the Companion of my life, and her self to be my
Protectress, let those alone distrust the justice of my cause, who believe not
the oaths of the gods.

The Greeks, as yet, have not assembled their Troops, nor so much as sent forth
their Commissions to form their Army* nor Victualled any Navy for their
transportment, nor past over so many Seas, which separate our Territories from
theirs, wherein they will have need of the conduct of their best stars, to
perform so long a Voyage, without great dangers, at least impediments; we
shall have famine, and sickness, winds, and Seas, Heavens, and seasons,
disorder, and discordance fight for us.

But if all the powers of Heaven and Earth should be against us, and that we
should be utterly without Forces capable to defend us, what ought we to do?
ought we to let succeeding ages find in Story that the Kings of Troy so long
evil treated, injured, and (which is yet more shameful) scorned by the
Greeks, not only to leave so many outrages unrevenged, but to tremble at the
very threats of the Enemy? and after having by the favor of heaven, in this
one action of mine, repaired all our losses, to yield back timerously, without
fighting, such an inestimable booty? we owe! (O my Brothers) we owe higher
resentments to the greatness of our births; for my part, I will not be
affrighted with this vain woman's Predictions, and I abhor the only thought
that the heart of Paris should be daunted, being only informed from the fears
of a young Girl, that the Enemy threatened to be revenged.

But on the contrary, because our Enemies threaten I fear a great deal the
less, we ought to fear those, whose words are actions, not those, whose
actions are words; whosoever endeavors to abase me with lower thoughts, let
him first take from my memory, that I am the son of a Priam, for the nobleness
of my extraction, and the meanness of such thoughts are not compatible: No, no!
I shall never be capable of so degenerate an ingratitude to her, who has so
nobly expressed her affection to me, my Country, and its injuries.

What may all the world say, if Paris for a few threats should return her back
again to Greece, who turned Fugitive for his love, and is recalled rather, for
punishment, then for consolation with her Husband? what? ought I to betray, and
abandon her, who, was the only person in all Greece, that would have afforded
justice to the Trojans? she who scorning her Jupiter.
Fathers anger, and the fury of her Husband, left those unjust people, and came
with me upon my word? what god would leave, so many oaths violated, after the
faith that I engaged, unpunished? I blush with shame to think that I have
suffered great Helena to entreat for the safety of that Person, who has saved
the honor of the Trojan Empire.

Which of you (O my generous Brothers) would not esteem vilely of me, if I
should shamefuly consent that Jupiter should see his Daughter betrayed by us,
and betrayed, at a time, when she rather is to be adored, then abandoned? then
shall we be less afraid of the vengeance of the gods, then of the Princes of
Argos? shall the Grecian faith, hitherto so infamous, corrupt ours, and mark
our Names with a Character so black, that future Ages will make a proverb of
the abomination of our infidelity? thus then we may behold the Grecians to
triumph over Troy, before they have drawn their swords; No, no! (my Brothers)
we ought not to put shame, and life into the same Balance together, we ought
to resolve to lose the one nobly, rather then preserve the other with such
ignominy.

But admit my sentiments were not governed by Justice, how is it possible (O my
Brothers) that Paris should be so little considered by you, he who would
sacrifice his life with so much alacrity, for the establishment of your
felicity, he I say, that must without doubt die, if he see ravished from him,
the only thing, next his noble Brothers, which makes him desire life?

Helena is a Beauty created by the gods, as a Master piece to express their
power, all hearts, that are not ravished with so divine an object, are too
near insensibility; our Daughters desire not her absence, but our of envy to
her perfections, their eyes cannot suffer the fairness of her complexion, which
in whiteness surpasses the feathers of that beautiful The Swan.
Bird, whose form Jupiter assumed, when he solaced himself with her Leda.
Mother; Oh! how, by the malicous spirit of Cassandra, is the dream of Hecuba
misinterpreted, that a slame kindled by the hand of Paris, was to consume to
ashes the Empire of Priam? which rightly interpreted intends nothing but the
bright beams of Hellena's beauty, which we cannot behold, but the whole Empire
must be inflamed by her.

I might fear lest my passion, or to say better, my tenderness does render me
too sensible for that royal person, if I did not remember, that even by
gratitude, and acknowledgement of her high merit, I owe this return to that
Helena, whose eyes, full of love, and pity, regarded the justness of my
cause, and alone considered the danger to which I was exposed, and favored the
design of my Voyage; Helena! who borne our Enemy, was no sooner entreated to
lend her assistance for the protection of the Trojan greatness, but she had
compassion on our sufferings, and my honor; on the contrary, Cassandra (my
sister) no sooner saw my return, but she envied my success, and endeavored
to engage all the world to leave me in danger.

What action, if not this, can be thought dishonest if I should fail in my
faith to her, who though (at that time) an Enemy, has expressed more tenderness
of my honor then mine own sister, who is thereunto by the bond of Nature
obliged? I say again I might fear that my passion blinded me, and made me
love her person wantonly, if I knew not that I am obliged to love her, more, by
the generosity of my soul, then by the charms of her incomparable beauty; I
love not alone in her those attractions, which will be effaced by time, but I
love to be the son in Law of Jupiter; I love to have my Children on both sides
of the blood of the gods: In fine, either the election of Paris is good, or the
great majesty of the gods signify nothing.

I might have an ill opinion of my flame, if I did not know it to be kindled by
the ordinance of the Destinies, and that its original is from heaven; when
Venus obtained by my judgment the prize to which she pretended, she made me
read her thankfulness written in Characters indeleble; Paris (said she) thou
shall love, and thou shall love that Helena so worthy of thy flames, whom
Menelaus keeps for thy Nuptials; who then shall deprive me of a Legacy, which
the Heavens not only bequeathed me, but assured that Helena was borne for
Paris? and to know her value, consider she is chosen by a Goddess, as the most
precious reward to gratify a man, that had served her in an affair of such
importance, that it troubled the tranquillity of the gods.

This in my opinion is enough for my justification; but if the infatuation of
Cassandra suggests it a great crime, to seduce a Beauty from the House of her
Husband, and that she reproaches me with violating the sacred Laws of
Hospitality, and cites Jupiter incensed for that, and the rape of his Daughter?
consider, I beseech you, that the Destinies, not Menelaus, made entertainment
for me in Argos, and that in committing an act of affection, I have performed
one of obedience; Helen has been waited on by me, not ravished, she is not
ravished who consents, nor is she a Beauty to be rendered back if she had been
stolen, this would be an injury to Venus, if I should go about to mend her
election, and neglect her decree; I deny not but such a Beauty deserves to be a
thousand times ravished; I appeal to Theseus, that Theseus, who, after he had
been preserved from the sulphur of Hell, could not behold, without passion,
the face of this Helen, who to show her birth carries her lightning in her
Eyes, as her Father does his thunder in his hands.

Helena was returned back by Theseus, that she might ever be retained by Paris;
or rather she was returned back, because his eyes accustomed to the obscurity
of Hell, could not endure the brightness of hers; for my part I know no Reason
why Jupiter should be less willing to see his Daughter married to Paris, then
to Menelaus: How is it possible (I say) that Jupiter shall be offended with me,
who has so much valued his Race, that I have deemed it worthy, even with so
much peril, of being ravished? how shall it not please him to see his Daughter
beloved and married into a Family, that has produced Children worthy of the
love and rape of Jupiter himself?

Thou did ravish from us (O great god) our Ginimede, and by thy example, I
have ravished thy Helena; who can doubt that my theft is not approved by the
gods, since I did it not but to imitate them? why think you (O Trojans) that
Jupiter declared me the most sufficient of all men to be the Judge between the
three Goddesses? it was to justify his amorous Thefts, before the world, for
in declaring me to be the wisest of all mankind, he justified his Thefts,
since they are imitated by the justest of all Judges: Alas! all eyes have not
optics strong enough, to gaze against such a Beauty, and all Eagles cannot
stare upon the Sun.

If the gods had been angry with me, they would not have permitted my return
to have been so happy, nor have calmed the Seas in favor of my Navigation; so
that if you have no stronger motives to induce you to fear, it may be called
as unjust as feeble; be victorious (O my Brothers) for if you shall dispute
whether it be necessary to return Helena, there is no person that will ever
believe, that any thing but fear makes you leave a Brother, and render back a
Jewel, which is of value sufficient to recompense all your losses, and restore
your honors; for my part, I apprehend not how, in the family of The son of
Tios their Ancestor.
Assarac, there should be souls so low, as to have need to be excited by
prayers to lead them on to honor; great actions require great constancy, those
succeed best that are undertaken with most resolution; either we must not do
them, or done, maintain them nobly.

The most part of those Actions that valor renders so glorious, would have
little reason of their sides, if they were scinned by the Rules of exact
Justice, all the ill in the rape of Helena is blotted out by Time, we must
justify it by Arms, not by a poor repentance; if we rashly restore her, we
shall discover to the Greeks, that we can be forced, and that we may be
punished.

Believe me (O noble Brothers) I am not blinded by affection, the surest way (I
confess) has somewhat of danger, the sword must now justify our cause, or we
shall become the Fable and scorn of the generations to come; the honor of the
public, and my particular concern dictates this to me, and if I could
believe that without danger to the Kingdom, and dishonor to the Crown, the
return of her would not puff up the Enemy to a belief that they do so
surmount us in courage, as to make us af^aid when they please, I should
regulate my desires, and rather then trouble the public peace, I would
undergo, with patience, whatsoever Fortune should lay upon me, yes, to procure
your repose, I would suffer not only my heart to be torn out of my bosom,
but even my Wife from mine Arms.

But what do I say? (unfortunate wretch that I am?) it seems I make a
distinction between my heart and my Helena; No no I (my Brothers) I can as well
live without my heart as without my Helena; or to say better, they are but one
same thing.

It is here I will terminate my discourse; it is here, I assure you, that you
cannot take her away, without you take away my life also; it is you that are to
consider, if one, or the other be necessary for your safeties, that I may prepare
my self: O my Father! behold my Helena, and behold also your Paris, we are
both at your feet to demand the favor of permitting us to be always together
in the same Palace, or at least in the same Sepulcher.

The effect of this Oration.
THe beauty of Helena, not being less persuasive, then the Eloquence of Paris,
did not weakly fortify his Reasons, the Eyes of the one finished, what the
Mouth of the other had begun, and all ears to come were weak in comparison of
one fair Face, and one fair Discourse, they mocked at the Dream of Hecuba,
and slighted the Predictions of Cassandra, all the World was moved with
compassion, and hardly would they hear the Discourse which follows.

Paris opposed.
The Argument.
After Paris had made an end of speaking, as in the preceding Oration you have
read; Troilus his Brother taking up the Argument, answered, and thus opposed
Paris.

I Take it for no small misfortune, to find my self enforced to be of a
contrary opinion to any of you (O my Father, and generous Brothers) and I am
reduced to hard terms, that I, who have ever looked upon Paris, as an Object
worthy admiration, as an Example of Prudence, and as the delight of my soul,
should be constrained, upon necessity, to condemn his actions, oppose his
desires, and incense his angers, and to account that the greatest of my good
fortunes to see him by me made unhappy, in the most sensible, most tender, and
most delightful of all his passions; but since all Asia is in Arms for his
doings, I must, in discharge of my duty, speak freely, and I must contradict
Paris, because I love Paris, I should injure his honor, if I believed he would
not willingly hearken to truth, and I should wrong the merit, and justice of
Paris, whose praises have been celebrated by Jupiter himself, if I thought
Passion would wilfully triumph over Reason in him, whom the gods thought worthy
to be their Judge.

The violence of so many united Provinces, which are confederated together, for
our Ruins, is the least evil, which can come, to disturb the felicity of this
Kingdom; Cassandra weeps in vain to make me afraid, the Greeks make a noise,
and the Heavens themselves threaten; I have a heart as great as yours, and
cannot fear death, I can be as jealous of honor as any other, if the
Sentiments of Paris endangered nothing but life, happy that life, which should
be lost for the felicity of Paris, whom we all love; but what will succeeding
Ages say, when they know that we have imbroyl'd the whole Universe, to
maintain the passion of one, most unreasonable, who could love nothing but an
Enemy? What will all the Earth say of our injustice, when they shall see us
defend a man that could not love without ravishing, and could not ravish
without violating his faith, and who could not violate his faith without
engaging his Country to a precipice, and that could not engage his Country,
his Family, himself, his Kingdom, for a more illustrious occasion then the
love of a Woman, and which is yet worse, an Adultress, a Fugitive, and a Enemy?
Oh unfortunate Vessel in which Helens shame was conducted to our shores! it
shall not be imputed to Troylus, if Paris do not acknowledge Continence to be
the most amiable virtue that can beautify and become with better Reason grow
in amoured with her, then he is now of his Helen.

Thou were chosen to negotiate for the return of Hesione, a Trojan, home to us
from Greece, and thou have not only failed of that trust, but Paris himself
is become a Grecian: consider, I pray thee, that thou have not only failed in
declaring to the Greeks their injustice, but thou have dishonored the just
pretense the Trojans had to make war upon them; to whom of all the gods ought
we any more to have recourse, to implore relief against the Greeks that have
ravished our Daughters? shall it be to Jupiter, whose Daughter has been
ravished, and whose Son in Law ingratefully betrayed? why! he is obliged to arm
his all powerful hand with vengeance against us; judge then (O Paris) of the
justness of thy Cause, and of thy disobligements to us, and our Nations, thou
have deprived thy Country of the assistance of the gods, and thou know none
can be more accursed then those who in extreme calamities, cannot at least
presume to have recourse to the immortal Powers; even this is also ravished
from us by thee; and yet thou would have us approve, and comply with thy
actions, the thought of which is abominable.

Hesione, being compelled to marry a Grecian, is bewayl'd and wept for by us,
as for a principal limb lopt off from our body, and shall we not only rejoice,
but become Idolaters and slaves to a Grecian, the high way to ruin? God
forbid: the Trojan Troops should ever fight ingloriously under strange
Ensigns; Troylus had rather see the Kingdom of Laonudon amongst the Spoils
of Mars, then amongst the Trophies of a Grecian, he will never endure to
behold the Empire of Troy envassail'd by the sparkling eyes of a charming
Fugitive, to bear dishonorable chains, and to fall, for the love of them
into the formidable displeasure of an incensed Fate.

If these evils (O Paris) are not supportable which are believed least
shameful, we should offer vows to Fortune, that our Country rather perish,
by the flame of our Enemies, then by those of thine incontinency, but if the
injustice of thy action, the fear of the gods, the danger of our Country, and
the honor of out persons are not sufficient to bring thee to reason, at least,
consider the occasion, that involves thee in so many mischieves, whereby Asia,
that spacicus, and fair part of the world, may be most deplorably reduced to
ashes, without any nobler cause to consume it, then the Eyes of a Woman; O
strange infamy! I blush to see a Council of Kings assembled to debate the
question, whether the peace and happiness of so many Kingdoms ought to be
preferred before one Woman, who also is our Enemy, certainly so dead-killing a
Thunderbolt could never fall, but from a very incensed Heaven, nor could these
disoders ever proceed, but from woman, who is the mistake of guilty Nature.

What? upon the arbitration, or rather the tyranny of one woman, ought the fate
of so many Provinces to depend, and be reduced to sigh out their calamities? O
Victimes too noble for so unworthy an Ladies, I would not have translated this,
but that the prime Author means this only of the Italian women, he could never
intend it to the English.
Idol! O Sex dangerous in all times, in all places! who cannot be beloved
without repentance, and cannot love without Tyranny; consider Paris how vile
the cause is, which produces such sad effects, that the Histories of all Ages,
and of all Nations, shall bewail our miseries, whosoever will learn that
woman, that killing Monster, was created for nothing else but to punish the
world, let them consider the strange condition of Asia, at this day.

A chaste Woman is a Rock, an unchaste one a Quicksand; a course Woman is
nauscious, a fair one, an Inchantress; if thou love her, she is vanity it
self; if thou slightest her, she is a fury; all her inclinations are madness,
she loves not without self ends, she speaks not without feigning, and under
her smiles lurks deceit, ingratitude reigns in her heart, and if inconstancy
be a corporeal substance, Woman is inconstancy it self, and certainly there
was never knowing man, that ever loved Woman, that would expect to find faith
in that Sex; her heart is as deceitful, as her face: Vipers, venomous
Serpents, and Aspes are Monsters I confess, but Monsters which deceive not,
they, in only showing themselves, premonish thee to fly, but Woman allures thee
as a Goddess, and poisons thee as a Basilisk, she is, I say, the Error of
Nature, a chastisement to the World, an infascination to the Eye; she has no
qualities that are not wicked and dangerous, her seeming Excellencies are
adulterate, and in burying themselves under so much Ceruse and Vermillion, do
they not seem to confess, that they are indeed what they are ashamed to appear?

Behold Paris! from whom thou expects faith, it is even from those whose very
faces are counterfeit, and deceitful, and whose complexion composed of
sublimate, can have nothing but poison in her beauty: have they one hair that
Nature has placed as we see it? no, no, Paris! all is artificial in them, I
pray then judge what kind of creature Woman must needs be, that is never
contented with her self, but when she is nothing of her self, to what end
serve so many Jewels, which Women's luxury has made precious? these magnificent
creatures could not be covered, if they did not reverse the mountains, trouble
the Seas, because they would rather load their bodies, then not adorn them;
how is it possible, that for a beauty so counterfeit, so false, and so
dangerous, a generous man should so far lose his Reason, and the Empire of
himself, as not to live commanding, and to die triumphing?

How is it possible (I say) that Woman the most weak, the most false, the most
cruel, and the most inconstant of all other animals, should cause at this day
the ruin of Asia? What? shall the state and life of Priam; and the illustrious
destiny of Troy, hang upon those hairs, which it may be are borrowed from
those which make Perrukes? Return! return into thy self, O noble Brother,
and let not future Ages know, that thou did prefer in thy soul, the love of
a Fugitive, before the affection thou owe to thy Country; thou have but too
much already subjected thy judgment to thine Eyes, although no other thing but
Reason ought to command him, who is borne to command; if thou love war, thou
have a Enemy within thee, whom to subdue will be thine eternal honor; passion
by growing old, will be enfeebled, and yield to time, as well as all other
things; if this be true, as certainly it is, were it not better that the honor
of this Victory be thine, then that thou should owe it to Time?

Consider that this beauty is the beauty of an Adultress, who was likewise her
self, begot in the same crime, a beauty unfaithful to her own Husband, and
the beauty of an Enemy even to thy self; the more fair she is, the more
shamefully she has darkened, by her incontinency, the luster of so divine a
donative; she is fair I confess, but fair more for the ruin, then for the
delight of those that behold her,

Theseus, that rendered her back, knew how she was to be valued, and we may
say, she is a Sun, which who can gaze on, but he must distill tears? so will thou my Brother, I fear considering the imbroylment she has involved a many
of Nations in; she is fair thou say, and it is because she is fair, that I
think we ought to return her; why should thou nourish a Serpent in thy
bosom, whose venom is inevitable? ought we to believe, that that beauty will
live more honorably in the House of an Adulterer, then in that of her Husband?
her Father has seen her follow Theseus, her Husband sees her follow Paris,
and undoubtedly Paris will see her follow some other.

What? can we hope to see Helen chaste? the impunity of her sinning has
taught her that she may sin without punishment; if we leave her to her own
liberty, she will not only reign over us, but she will establish her tyranny
to overwhelme us, to our dishonours; if we should restrain her, we should
force her to commit those stolen scapes, to which liberty will carry her more
openly; for my part, I confess, I should doubt lest she had brought with her
the Grecian perfidy, feigning to be an Enemy to her Country, to the end that
she might ruin ours, if I did not see our Country is already turned Greece,
since our Kings are under the obedience of a Grecian Woman, and at this rate
she would but betray her self by betraying Ilion.

But in fine, whether these walls fall by her treason, or whether they fall by
the force of the Enemies, it is certain they are menaced with a fall so much
more dreadful as we have deserved it, by the injustice of his Action, and by
our supine stupidity, having been premonished of the malignance of our
Destinies by the Praedictions of Cassandra, and by the portentious signs
observed in Heaven, which threaten us every day; I know very well, that,
according to the inclinations of thy seduced heart, all these ominous things
are held vain, for Love is a Fury, and the furious, or men intoxicated, favor
neither of reason nor Religion, they fear not the menaces of the gods,
whereupon, I conclude, that we ought not to follow thy errors, and that is
most fit to use thee as a man frantic, to tie thy hands for thy safety.

Alas! with how little Reason do thou believe thy self engaged to be
grateful to the friendship of this Helena, who has only ensnared, not
obliged thee? Helena was inclined to love, not by a sentiment of compassion to
thy flames, but to qualify her own hot appetite, she was excited by her inate
Vice, not moved by any tenderness to Paris; if thou art afraid of being
ungrateful in Vice? thou have here found the means to be vicious under the
pretext of Virtue, and it is rather to outstrip Helen in inconstancy then
gratitude.

Love is not a benefit, he lays an obligation that takes pains for another,
but the Lover acts simply for himself: The particular pleasure from the party
beloved reflects back upon the Lover, is that which love proposes for its end.

If she love thee, it was to enjoy thee, she considered thee, as a good for
conversation, or as a remedy to those loose desires, which govern in her
wandering thoughts, and what obligation can we have to a Woman, who to allay her
heat, wooes the embraces of her very Enemy? but (O my Pa^is) who assures thee
that it was love that gave her to thee for a prize, and for a Companion? why
might it not as well be out of hare to her Country, or to her Husband? it is
no incongruous thing to judge that we hate them, from whom we fly; but admit
that this were certainly the truth of this affair, this were yet the least
evil, for who knows whether this Artificial Woman, left her Country for
nothing but to evade punishment for some like Crime which thou art ignorant of,
searing the return of her Husband? excuse me Paris if I speak too home, and
too plain, and think it not strange that I name that woman unchaste, seeing
thou haste made her so thy self, we can never sufficiently doubt the faith of
a woman, who has betrayed her Husband, to follow his Enemy.

I should ask thee, if thou can remember the occasion which carried thee
into Greece? but if thou answerest me, it was for nothing else, but to use the
best endeavors to hinder the marriage of Hesione to Telamon, I shall then say
unto thee, that we who would not endure a lawfu^l conjunction between a Trojan
and a Greek, shall with very ill will undertake so long, and dangerous a war
as this is likely to prove, to patronize, and protect the adultery of a Trojan,
with a Grecian woman.

Troylus could not endure without blushing to see his Nephews (though they were
legitimate) not only borne of a Fugitive, of a Wanton, but merely to be born
of a Grecian Mother, would be cause enough of regrete; this is not to chastise
the Grecian thefts, it is to imitate, or rather to authorize them; this is not
to wash out our shames by vengeance, but to draw the thunder of Heaven upon our
own heads by our crimes; and I wonder not that a Grecian Lady was capable of
pleasing him, who so little valued his own honor and the reputation of his
Country.

Return! return into your self, O generous Brother, and be thou thy self
the first to solicit us to render her back, whom we cannot keep but
unjustly; it is only by this way that we may justify the actions of the
Trojans, Paris shall not have deceived Menelaus, but he shall have revenged
Hesione, if he retains Helena for no other end, but to cause them to render
back Hesione, and if Helena has been ravished for that Reason? happy the house
of Assarac, who by a privilege particular make their very thefts glorious: but
I see by the change of thy countenance, that so noble a motive never induced
thee to steal that prey, and that this my discourse displeases thee.

Pardon me! I am about to hold my peace, pardon me (I say) if my Reason opposes
thy passion with some violence; I love thee as thou art a man, as a Trojan, as
a Brother, and as my self; but I am no less a Lover, and a Lover jealous of
the justice, and honor of the King, and Kingdom: But what do I say? I am
about to hold my peace! there is more need that I were beginning to speak a
new, it is not just to leave the Reins of the Empire in the hands of a
Madman, the gods forbid that the affairs of the House of Troy, should be so
very desperate; it is to you that I address my self (O my Father,) and to you,
my noble Brothers, to you magnanimous Princes, who are borne to hold the
Scepter of this Kingdom, whose safety depends on your resolutions, it is you,
wise Heroes, who are to consider, and to establish that which is just.

Paris has lost both his Judgment and his Will, and is sick of a disease
which requires contraries, he counsels what his malady would, not what he
ought; it is for you to oppose, to his violence, the wisdom of your Counsels,
and to the blindness of his passions, the just reasons of State, and to the
love he has for an Enemy, the love you have for you Country; in short, it is
for you, to save, whether he will or no, both your own honors and his.

The Effect of this Oration.
THat which the Fates ordain, is unchangeable; they had decreed the ruin of
Troy, and it came to pass; Paris was heard with a more favorable Ear then
Troylus, and the wisdom of Priam was led by the f^lly of Paris, which, as an
evil guide, conducted him to a Precipice: In fine, none are ignorant, that the
imprudence of that Young Man, lost his Father, all his Family, and himself,
and that the Lascive Amoure of Paris did contribute as much as the Armor of
the Grecians to the destruction of Troy.

The Magnanimous Rivalls.
The Argument.
Manzine makes this discourse in Rome, in the Academy of the humourists; the
Argument whereof is nothing but the generosity of two souls, the one knowing
how to give a City, the other to refuse it: This passage is written in the
life, and amongst the Triumphs of that Alexander, who was and always shall be the
highest honor of humane kind.

Virtue is a chain by which a good man is tied to honesty, it is formed of a
hundred Linkes, which are the peculiars of its Essence, as Prudence, Fortitude,
Justice, Temperance, and many other excellent qualities; this here is one,
which to have the means being different, seems to have different ends, by which
it has a kind of appearance, of contrariety: as for Example, Humility, and
Magnanimity, Clemency, and Justice; but it is not so indeed, as it will be
evident, for if one Virtue were opposite to another; this inconvenience would
follow, that there would be an Antipathy between the Members of the same Body,
which Nature her self will not admit, I will endeavor by an illustrious
example, to establish the thing in question.

Alexander, the Mirror of the first Times, the Favorite of Fortune, and the
fortune of all the gallant men of that Age, beheld the distress of a poor
Philosopher, who spoke his wants; Alexander was moved to compassion, and
assisted him like a King of Kings; he gave him a City which the other refused,
as a gift too high for his condition: Who sees not, that the Temperance of the
one, and the Bounty of the other seems here to dispute which shall have the
better? Yet there are none but those who are accustomed to the exercise of
Virtue, who do not judge their thoughts very contrary, however both pursuing
honor, they tend to the same Center.

Now that I may acquit my self of the charge you impose on me (O noble
Auditors) I shall endeavor to sever the one Virtue, from the other, upon
condition that your patience will recompense, by attention, the readiness of my
obedience, and support with favorable arms, the feebleness of my spirit.

That Alexander who was generated amongst Victories; who, was the builder up of
the Macedonian glory, and who tracing the steps of Hercules, went also beyond
him, who proved himself the son of Jupiter, more by his Heroic actions then
by the mouth of the Priests, so repleat with courage, that the Sybels named him
invincible, so liberal, that he made more then a thousand Alexanders of a
magnanimity so expansed, that he was not satisfied with one world; that
Alexander (I say) hearing a Philosopher ask an Alms, forthwith gave him a
City, he to whom the Hannibals, though not without envy, yet without shame,
yielded the pre-eminence; is not this an act of a liberal soul to think of
giving a City upon such an occasion? The Philosopher dazzled with the splendour
of so stupendous a munificence modestly refused it, excusing himself, that
he neither desired nor needed so much.

I am demanded which of these two actions set the most lively gloss upon the
rays of that Virtue, which made them thus scorn, deserve, and give
Principalities; it is for you (O Courteous Auditors) to weigh them, that you
may know their value; for my part, I will be the Advocate to allege Reasons
on both sides, and I will leave the censure of them to persons against whom
Alexander may not make exception, and from whose judgment the Philosopher need
not appeal; those who are evil look always with an eye of Envy upon great
things, they say that it was too much to give a City, and that it was (if I may
so speak) like money, out of a Palsy hand, rather falling then given, but that
which we give to a good man is never too much; he who deserves all, can never
receive enough, and if a City may not be given to a Philosopher who knew how to
govern it, to whom should it be given? it is not a gift says he, which agrees
with my quality; ungrateful man! thy quality is, that Alexander judges thee
worthy; the favor of the King carries with it thy fortune; do thou not see
how the Virtue, of this great Captain, shines in all things? know thou not
that the generous considers all as nothing? another might have obliged thee
by the quality of the gift, this brave man obliges thee by his opinion in
esteeming thee worthy; so that it is not because the gift is too great, but it
is because thou art a thing too little; for, the favor of the Prince supplies
thy want of merit, if the gift agrees not with thy condition, make thy
gratitude agree with it; we ought not to render as vain the actions of
Princes, especially when they tend to his honor, which is so much more dear
to him as he pursues it more ardently: a noble Prince is a good star, whose
every influence is a Treasure; Alexander wanted nothing in this concurrence,
but another Alexander; there were no Eyes upon Earth worthy so glorious an
object; for a City to be given with as good a will, as others receive it, is a
thing which was never seen but once.

All the Captains in the Army of Alexander might know how to take a City, but
never any but Alexander knew how to give one: I have heard this Philosopher
commended for so little esteeming a gift so magnificent, as a City; and why do
they not celebrate the praises of that Alexander, who knew how to dispoile
himself of Kingdoms, to reward the virtue of such as could likewise scorn
even Scepters?

Virtue they say, was the cause why that good man had no need of a City, and
the like Virtue made Alexander have need to give it to such a one as this man
appeared to be; shall I speak as I think? it was not Alexander that was
vainglorious in giving a Principality, but the other in refusing it; that
subtle man would not only show his poverty, but he would do it with vanity,
and why did he call that necessity which he made his treasure? he showed not
his poverty, but his vainglory, he begged but to have the opportunity to
refuse; why did he make this use of his present fortune? it seems his
indigence was his wealth, not his want: he may well purchase nakedness a^ a
thousand talents, who places his wealth in the show of poverty.

There was no want here, but of Virtue* and this Vice was so much the greater,
that could find out a place for pride and vainglory, even in straw and
hunger: It was not Philosophy which slighted that City, but Ambition;
Philosophy would have taught him to accept it rather, then to have been
ungrateful to the bounty of his King; he had not wanted means to have been
delivered from the burden of it, if it had been too weighty for him; he might
have imployd it in redeeming the afflicted out of captivity, in easing
thousands of persons, he might have obliged his friends; indeed, what might he
not have done?

It is more likely that he, who nobly gives away his goods, does as he ought,
then he who refuses them, after he has asked an Alms; who knows but that
he refused out of a doubt that he was mocked, or out of a fear, that it was
only to tempt him? who knows but that feeble soul might be dazzled with the
brightness of so great a generosity? we cannot make Images of all sorts of
Wood, and all souls are not capable of so high a fortune; it may be he
accepted it not for fear he should be obliged to quit his poverty, in which
he had found so much tranquillity, and for fear of being forced to serve the
public with more inconvenience; and shall he then that does nothing but for
his own ends and ease be compared to Alexander? poor and unfortunate
Alexander! methinks I hear him say these very words, I hold my self more
dishonored by this comparison, then if I had lost the Battle against Darius;
and shall I who have exercised Philosophy, be compared to him who has but
merely learnt it? I! who taught the Hircanians to marry, the Aracossians to
exercise Husbandry, who made the Sogdians to quit their paricide, and who have
hindered sons from marrying their Mothers; I, who have disperc'd humanity
beyond the known world, who has extended Greece through the whole Universe,
and I who in conjoyning souls to bodies, have made one Province of all the
Earth? I! I say who am such a person, to be put in balance with one good for
nothing, but himself, who refused this Mass of Treasure only for fear of
being thought to depend upon another, and who avoided not the command of a
City, but to serve himself with another sort of ambition? these are the tears
I should shed, if I had the honor to be Alexander.

I know they will tell me, that Alexander gave thus lightly a City, because he
valued it little, and that it cost him nothing; but this opinion is false,
considering his illustrious Conquests cost him so many men, so much labor, and
so much blood; Anaxercus asking him an hundred Talents, his Treasurer told him,
it was too much; give him an hundred more, said Alexander: he had reason to
demand so much, knowing he had a Friend that both could and would give much;
he gave fifty Talents to Zenoerates, and fifty to P^rillus, to enable them to
give portions with their Daughters in marriage: He gave Bagoa to Parmenio,
which was worth more then a thousand Talents yearly.

All those that served him, were made so great by him, the very soales of their
Boots and shoes were of massy gold; and others when they went to take their
recreations in hunting, pitched a hundred Pavillions of no worse stuff, then
cloth of Tissue: In fine, Alexander was of so immense a bounty, that those that
served him, were greater than we can immagine Alexander: Neither was it new in
Alexander to give away a City on this manner, he had formerly shown large
instances of that Virtue.

On a day when he gave to his Favorites money, gorgeous clothing, Pavillions,
Palaces, Cities, and all the Royal Treasure, Parm^nio asked him, what he would
leave for the King? he answered, Hope.

O inclination truly royal! I will now cease to wonder why he desired to
search for new Worlds, but the wonder is, how he could chance upon a soul so
mean, as to judge that the gift of a City, was excessive, coming from a King
who found the world too little (though he conquered it) to give away.

Whosoever accuses Alexander of Prodigality, knows not the largeness of his
soul; the least Alms that could enter into his thoughts to give to such a
person was a City: Those who upbraid him of being profuse, are unacquainted
either with his Virtue, or Fortune; the bounds of his Empire were the bounds of
the Earth; that part of Nature which would not be subject to Alexander, was
retired (if I may so say) beyond the Seas.

To sum up all, Alexander was greater for the World, then the World was for
Alexander; so that a vulgar liberality, had not suited with a soul so
Princely: if his Majesty, Wisdom, Fortitude, and his many other royal
indowments ought to surpass private actions, why not his munificence? Royal
gifts ought to carry with them the majesty of the King which gives them.

Alexander would never let any man implore his bounty in vain, he met their
demands with the same cheerfulness, that others do favors; his liberality
never troubled him, but when he wanted a subject to express it on: In a word (O
illustrious Auditors) would you know the true degree of his magnificence, he
gave away more then could be received? neither do I see that the bounty of
Heaven expresses it self in such a degree as Envy would seem to reproach
Alexander withal: the Sun makes no such distinction of persons, but gives
light equally to all.

But I know how it comes to pass, that they murmur so at that liberality; they
are vexed for not being borne in that Age, and believe it too great because it
is without Example, and remember not that the magnimity of Alexander is without
Example; behold a reproach well grounded that they speak ill of that, they
could not share in; O false understanding of things I he gave more then can
be parralleld, we are in no very ill condition, since our acception only is
abundance.

But it is time I make an end of speaking for Alexander; I should injure his
Virtue, if I believed that his praises could be contained in this Discourse,
that Virtue is little considerable which can be expressed by praises; those of
Alexanders were no such: one asked him an Alms, and he gave him a City; think
with your selves, O noble Auditors, who could have a heart more royal, then
his whose very Alms are whole Cities?

But who shall speak in favor of that poor Philosopher to whom it was no
small advantage, that Fortune had raised Alexander to so supreme a height, as
to be able to give away Cities, to give him opportunity to express his Virtue
by a refusal? let him defend himself, for I will not be accused of a rash
undertaking; yet if a Philosopher has need of defense, who will not be ready
to take his part, though he himself is better able to defend himself?

That man asked an Alms of Alexander, Alexander gave him a City, the
Philosopher refused it, as a thing not suitable to his condition, with a grace
so full of majesty, that he appeared rather a King, then a miserable Beggar:
Fortune was not unkind in depressing a man, who was able to tread her under
his foot.

Me thinks I hear him say, I thank you, but I have not a soul ambitious of
command, I have implored the charity, not the magnificence of the King; if thou
had enabled me only to buy me a Cloak, thou had plentifully satisfied my
hopes, I will not quit my poverty, it suffices me to have my soul enriched
with Virtue; in that, and not in the goods of Fortune consists my felicity: I
esteem it not a charity in them, that would deprive me of my Peace; a City is
too much for him, who is contented with himself, I would not have my Estate
more valuable, then my self, it being a thing preposterous, for a Master to be
in worse condition then his Slave, so miserable is he, whose patrimony is
nobler then his soul; I ask peace in my necessity, not trouble to my repose, I
have not need of Kingdoms, I have enough to do to reign over my self, or
rather I enjoy an Empire, which is not subject to the injuries of Fortune.

Indeed my Estate is small, but withal secure; what happiness is it to me to
have a large and sumptuous bed, if I cannot sleep? or what is the difference to
be shipwrack'd in a great and gilded ship, or a petty Pinck? why then should
my life be more dear in a royal palace then in my present condition? No, no!
if I am just, I shall not be poor, and if I am not just, what should I do
with a City? I shall be but a Viper in a Vessel of gold, who, for all that,
will not be less dangerous, less venomous.

Alexander, thou have used me like Polierates, but I will not use thee like
Anacreon, when I shall not be able to sleep without thinking of rendering thy
City back unto thee, in doing whereof thou will esteem me either little
generous in my command, or very inconsiderate, in accepting such a gift.

Now when I got to sleep with Diogenes in the Porch of the Temple of Jupiter,
it is with an assurance that either within doors or without, I find my self
lodged with the gods, so that when I shall have accepted of this thy
magnificent offer, I know not how either to better my hosts or my lodging: In
fine, I am contented with my self, I will have no other Empire, then to reign
over my passions, that shall be my Principality, it is in such a condition,
that I fear nothing, and so full of satisfaction, that I desire nothing.

I am not rich in that men traffic for me into every provioce, but I am rich,
because although they do not traffic at all, I shall live; a few Olives and a
handful of Figs suffice me; if I have bread it serves to accompany them, if
none, they serve me for bread, and when I am thirsty, I have recourse to
Nature, who me thinks made the fountains for nothing more specially then to
quench it, to defend my self from the rigor of the several seasons, I am as
well under the Rocks of my Country, as under foreign marble, and I am not
less defended from the rain under a tree, then under a guided fretwork.

He that has need of Tyrrian purple, or of Phrygian embroydery to keep him
from the cold, we may say it is rather in his soul then in his body, that he
feels the sharpness of Winter* a Tree, or a Fountain (both common things) are
sufficient for every bodies hunger, or thirst; it is not necessity, but luxury
that covers the rest: I should not refuse that Scepter, if I had need of a
Kingdom to make me a good man; but because I ask thee a Cloak, do thou
judge me to be poor, for what natural cause have I been incited to ask thee? it
may be answered to save me from the cold, why shines the Sun so hot, if not as
well to warm us, as to give us light? and why has Nature placed me above the
Animals, the Trees and Herbs, if not to make use of the wool, the leaves, and
the bark.

If I did not equally fear to offend the modesty of a Philosopher, and the
Majesty of a King, I might tell thee I ask thee not to obtain, but to see with
what a grace thou know how to give: I have tempted thy generosity, not thy
prodigallity; consider what little need he has of a Kingdom. that knows how
to speak thus to a King: yet you who command may brag of one thing above the
rest, that no other height equal to thine would permit me to speak to a Prince
that were not Alexander, and this honor is so much the greater, because it is
particularly your own.

Alexander, I am in such an Estate that Fortune shall never hear me a
Suppliant, I am content with what suffices Nature, and I will not put my self
in a posture to lose it; in the place where I am necessity never finds me: in
the same instant that I accept of thy bounty, I shall have need of slaves, of
Horses and Dogs, of Treasures, Soldiers and Arm^s, for my devertisement, for
my honor in peace, and to defend me in war, thus then I shall accept of a
thing to trouble my repose, a thing that presupposes war, and will reduce me to
such condition, that I shall have need even of Beasts; I must not only lose
the tranquillity of my living, but my Reason. No no, Alexander! if repose
accompanied with all other things, greatness and power, I am poor and thou art
rich; if otherwise, I am rich and thou art poor, for by a chain so weak as a
City I will not be drawn in the triumph of thy Virtue, not that I envy thy
glory, but I will be tender of my own reputation; thou have performed an act
of great munificence in offering, it behooves me to express one of modesty in
refusing; thy liberallity shall not be concealed for all this, but I will not
to advance that, that any murmur at my Avarice, if I should hereby be a means
to serve to thine honor, why should it be thought reasonable, for that to be
built upon the ruin of my Virtue?

Thus is mine opinion he might discourse, who possessed in himself both a King
and a Kingdom: Behold how deplorable humane Nature is, and what discord it
carries within it self: Alexander lavished away a thousand lives to win a
City, which a poor Philosopher was ashamed to receive by way of gift;
Alexander thought to surmount that man by an Act, as of a Master of the World,
but that man confounded Alexander by an Act, as of one Master of himself.

Ogallant stratagems of Virtue! this is not to ask an Alms, but a Triumph*
any man that commands an hundred Kingdoms, may know how to give a City, but
none can know how to scorn it, but he who commands Fortune: Alexander is Lord
of the World, and this man Lord of himself; but behold with how much
inequality it is, that which one scorns, is more then the other can give,
considering the poverty of the one and the power of the other; who will not say
that this miserable poor one was above that King, who was above all the Earth?
But why call I him miserable, whose condition is so high, that he scorns
Cities? those are rather miserable who believe a man, can be poor, that is
free from all care, and who esteem him only happy, that proudly groans under
the weight of gold and purple, formely the coverings of poor animals: we are
not to consider men by exterior ornaments, the best are not always the best
clad.

Aristotle, who merited the name of Just, being questioned what Justice was?
answered, not to cover the goods of another, but our Philosopher has exceeded
that moderation he has scorned them; if Alexander would supply his wants, a
City was too much, and if he would try his Virtue, his Empire was too little,
but however it was, we have seen two souls dispute so generously, that the
least is greater then a Kingdom; the fortune and virtue of the one raised him
so high, as he might scorn triumphs, Palms grew under his feet; he marched
not, but amongst Victories, his sword was the Scepter of the World, glory
conducted his Chariot, and wheresoever he went he found nothing but new matter
to enlarge his glory.

But when I turn toward the other, I find him so wise, that there is little
likelihood, that that man who has refused a Crown of gold, should accept one
of Laurel; on every side I meet with danger, I will not launch into so vast
Seas, he knows not how great a merit there is in despising a City, who has
not mastered his passions, and embraced the means of being happy without one:
nor can he judge what honor it is to give a City, that is ignorant with what
hazard of life, honor and Arms it is acquired; the one gave, the other
refused, and both of them deserved it.

I might proceed, if the faculties of my soul would give me leave, but when a
soul is possessed with astonishment, it is a sign, that it is less then its
object, and that for want of apprehension, it is forced to express its weakness
by reverence: so do I now, not knowing which of these two Heroes is the more
magnanimous: Judge you then, O illustrious Auditors, for, for my part in either
condemning the one or the other; I can have nothing for either the one, or the
other of these noble Combatants, but respect, and wonder; these are the Victims
which suite best with the Altars of Virtue, and the most worthy Trophies we can
raise to her, which ought to be the more adored, the less she has left us
ability to define her.

I have said.

The Effect of this Oration.
ALL the Academy, upon this occasion was divided, the Philosopher had as many
Voices as the King, and as Temperance did not triumph over Liberallity, so was
not Liberallity subjected to Temperance; and this illustrious debate rested
undecided in such a manner, that opinions being equal, it is in the Reader to
turn the Scale, according to the Balance of his judgment, if he be bold
enough to judge of Kings and Philosophers, or able to decide a Question upon
which so many excellent men dare not pronounce sentence.

The three Rivals.
The Argument.
Three Lovers of one fair Lady, coming at the same time to a place where she
was, saw a prodigious Murderer strike a Poniard into her bosom, who in the
very instant fled, at which fearful Object, the first of the three,
transported with a just rage, with his sword in his hand, ran after that
Monster to revenge his Mistress, and to punish the accursed fact: the second,
pressed by his compassion, flew to relieve her, and endeavored to stanch the
blood which issued abundantly from her wound, and to lend her all assistance
possible in so sad a condition: the third, having (...) compassion too tender
for the sight of so horrid a spectacle, fell in a swound at the feet of the
fair dying Lady, whom he adored: the question is put, which of the three
expressed most affection in that occasion; and this is the subject of our
Author Manzines examination in the Discourse following.

BY the sword of an infernal Fury (for illustrious Auditors, no other but a
Fury, would ever have had the cruelty to shed the blood of a fair Lady,) by
the sword I say, of a Monster come from Hell, 3 unfortunate Lovers saw their
Mistress wounded, which fell at the feet of that Barbarian: the first moved by
generosity and love, drew his sword, and ran after that base assassinate that
ran away, to sacrifice him to his anger, and to revenge her whom he adored: the
second flew to her relief: but the third, out of a sense of tenderness, and
grief, fell in a swound, and verified that ancient position, which assures,
that the soul subsists more, where it loves, then where it animates.

I am under your command to examine, which of these resentments ought to be
preferred, though I am unable, yet I obey willingly, for who would not
willingly obey the commands of those, who have the goodness to be satisfied
with obedience only? I am proud of this command, though I know, I undergo it
not, but with the hazard of that reputation, you vouchsafe me; for speaking in
so high a place, I ought to fear a Precipice, but the dangers to which we are
exposed by knowledge, are so noble, and so glorious, that we never ought to
eschew them.

I would to Heaven, and my good Stars, that I were able to perform it as I
ought, I shall cheerfully do the best I can; I am too much obliged to the
courtesy of a City, whose least honor and glory, is to have filled all Europe
with the wealth of Peru, by the illustrious and fortunately bold enterprise, of
one of their own Citizens; a City, whose treasures are much more precious,
then all the Riches of the new world* since if persons be considered according
to the Majesty of their merit, and not what outwardly they only are, we may
boldly say, it has given birth to more Kings, then all the Earth has
Kingdoms.

I was never very willing to acknowledge my weakness, but upon this subject,
the more I attempt above my strength, the more my obedience, and the desire I
have to serve you, is to be esteemed; but whither does my gratitude carry me?
rather then I will lose the opportunity of giving thanks, I am like to lose
that of obeying you, behold me then prepared for this problem.

The cruel Homicide having given the fatal blow, flies, and truly his flying
agreed well with the nature of such a Tygre, which certainly was very cruel,
seeing he had the heart to besprinkle with gore, a breast which intranc'd with
delight all that beheld it, a breast that could not receive a wound without
putting more souls, then one, in danger of forsaking their bodies; this
Barbarian flies, I would say as a cruel Scythian, if it were reasonable to
compare him to a man, Alas! why was not I commanded instead of opening anew the
wounds of these Lovers to express my anger against that Caitiffe wretch, whose
rage assaulted that tender beauty?

Beauty! it is to be adored in what face soever one meets it, I partake so
sensibly in the griefs of these poor afflicted, that I should be as well
pleased to revenge their infortunities, as I shall think my self happy, if I
have ability to distinguish the merit of their resentments, but since that is
not allowed me; hearken noble Academicks by what reason he pretends to be
preferred, who had already his sword in his hand, and who so swiftly pursued
the cruel and detestable Butcher, to ease his griefs, by the death of that
inhumane Murderer, who destroyed and set a period to all the felicity he had
set all his affections upon; let us die, said that generous Lover, or let us
make it appear to her, whom we adore, that our souls are all on fire, with
rage, to undertake her revenge, by that I would have her know the fervency of
my love, and that this Age from thence may learn she was my Goddess, and that
none, but these, that can defend themselves from a Thunderbolt, shall dare to
profane her, whom I adore, and that I am not capable of permitting to be
ravished from me, without vengeance, the life of all my hopes, the object of
all my desires, and the only felicity of my soul; how shall my Mistress know
that I am worthy the honor to be beloved by her, if instead of flying to her
revenge, I should stay to manifest my affection by effeminate and feeble tears?

No, no! to the intent that all the world may see Mars is never far from Venus,
I will pursue the Monster; she will love valor in me, since it is the effect
of her fair Eyes, and my passion; I will demonstrate, by wounds worthy of my
hand, what the wound was I received from those piercing Eyes.

I never assault any, but those that offend me, and none can offend me, but
in depriving me of my Treasure, and if you would know what that Treasure is,
enquire of this Evil which is unsufferable, inexpressible? hitherto Fortune
has been so little favorable to me, that I had never occasion to express my
love, but by unprofitable sighs; but it is unseasonable to show either love, or
grief, in the midst of vengeance, since I never had the honor to serve her,
but after I had lost her; let us run and sacrifice this Monster to the Divinity
that he has profaned, we shall have time enough afterward to sigh, and
complain; those who slay to lament when they should revenge, deserve to lament
eternally.

O God! what do I do? I stay too long to give the blow, whose sole honor
consists in being given quickly; let us not walk, let us not run, but fly, if
it be possible, to repair our negligence; what? can any heart dispute the
vindication of the divinity it adores? delay, alone, will efface the merit of
my service, whosoever loves truly, cannot leave one moment unpunished, that
cruel and bloody minded Monster, then, if it be true that we love as we ought,
let us fly to our vengeance.

It is thus (O noble Auditors) me thinks that this generous afflicted would
speak to justify the cause of his fury, and the violence of his proceedings;
but whither runnest thou? whither runnest thou, cries that other judicious
Lover, consider that it is more proper first, to remedy misfortunes, before we
prosecute revenge; whither runnest thou? whither runnest thou, inconsiderate
Revenger? if this fair unfortunate cannot be revenged, without being
abandoned? leave her revenge to those that desire her death; stay! I prithee,
stay, this is no testimony of thy love, it is of thy fury, this is not the way
to repair our losses, it is to multiply them, the more our rage inclines us to
vegeance, the more we shall merit in depriving our selves of a sweetness,
which, though it gives consolation for the present to our souls, hinders not
her destruction, and our future loss of her for ever.

Relieve so well (if it be possible) this dying fair one, that she may live,
for to let her dye, to revenge her, is to finish, not punish the impiety of him
that killed her: if thou abandon her whom thou have sworn to be the Mistress of
thy soul when half dead, and languishing, she so needfully implores thine
aid to sustain, and help her; I will never say thou have revenged her death,
but thou have let her dye, that thou might be revenged.

Oh propensity too bloody, unprofitable, arrogant, and cruel honor! if thou
have left as a prey to death, her, whose pale, and languishing countenance so
eloquently challenges, that for the last proof of thy fidelity, thou would
give her some assistance; if (I say) thou leavest her in this extremity, for
whose sake will thou prosecute revenge? if thou do it to follow thine own
inclinations, thy love ought not to pretend to the honor of it, for not being
able to suffer so excessive a grief, thou hopest, vengeance will give thee
some ease in so great a misfortune, whence it plainly appears thou love
little, seeing thou searchest for consolations, when she (whom thou namest thy
soul, lies wounded, and assaulted with the mortal agonies of departing pangs)
sighs the last disfavours of her fortune, and can I speak it and my heart not
break?) peradventure sobs out her last breath.

For my part, I had rather pardon that inhumane (who shall punish himself
abundantly by the conscience of his own crime) then fail in performing those
offices of tenderness, and affection, which shall, it may be, have the power to
draw not only from the grave, but from danger, the only Beauty I adore; let
our Enemy be safe, rather then our Mistress perish; I will that all my desires
tend to her preservation, love has so ordered me, that I have nothing in
particular, all my wishes, and all my thoughts depend absolutely on her, if she
be lost nothing can sufficiently repair me, for the evils of another cure
not mine, and if Heaven, and Destiny preserve her, I have no need of Remedies;
all my wounds will be cured with hers, I have for my only object the weal of
her I love; my passion will not give me leave to think of mine own Interests,
so pure is my regard of her, that I wish she might yet once more know the
quality of my love, whose sole aim is, that she may live, to the end only,
that she may live, rather then for any other satisfaction to my self; it is
not that which enclines me to desire, or assist the preservation of her life,
and that she would please to give me leave, to stop that pure blood which
issues so fast, without the guilty thought of obliging her, but of doing my
duty.

I melt (O noble Auditors) at the laments of this afflicted Lover, that to show
to his Mrs. how ardently he desired her life,-would have continued his
complaints, if he had not been hindered by the care of applying all his
thoughts and art to her wounds, and by the need that the fair fainting Lady had
of repose, which required his silence.

But who speaks for the poor miserable man in a swound through his excessive
grief, and being sensible of his own loss, appears to love himself more then
that beauty which he hinders not to dye without either relief or revenge? I! I
my Lords am most propense to it, it shall be I, who will take into my
protection a grief which we do not understand, if we do not infinitely
compassionate, and if we do not think most worthy of our pity.

Oh God! behold at thy feet barbarously wounded, and all imbrewed in blood that
bosom of snow, which was created for the wonder and delight of our Eyes, that
bosom, the chief workmanship of Nature, the object of the soul, and the
cause of all thy flame, and the glory of its Age, that divine person, as much
lovely, as much beloved; what? can thou see her wounded, languish, and dye,
without letting thine Eyes lament? thy soul, thy heart, and thy life? how
came thou turned to such a Rock, to endure that spectacle without dissolving
wholely into tears, and without dying with her?

O gods! behold at my feet those radiant Eyes, whose splendour ravished my soul,
whose glances consolated my heart, and whose regard occasioned all my felicity,
those Eyes whose light gave light to my affections, subsistence to my hopes,
and from whence proceeded all my delights, those inlivening Eyes, those
inlivening I say, eclipsed, and they themselves almost lost for want of light,
languishing, and dying at my feet; can thou consider her in this Estate,
insensible man, and not dye thy self? (but if this poor Lovers trance
astonisheth you (noble Auditors) you ought to wonder more, that I who have so
perfect a sympathy with his passion, sink not as well as he; that I did not
help her (said he) is indeed rather a mark of my feebleness then of my love;
yet I grieve not that I fainted, but I grieve that I ever revived, since my sad
Fate reserves me to behold so killing a Spectacle; let the Mistress of my
thoughts see, if she please, that she is the soul which makes me live, seeing
she could not receive a wound without my dying first; what marvel is it, that
I fell in a swound with a stroke that wounded only her? I received it in my
soul, she in her bosom: can thou deny (O my life) thy self to be the life
of my life, seeing I live by thy life, and die by thy death? can thou deny
that thou art my soul, when I am constrained to dye, by the least wound thou
receivest? have pity on me, and comfort me, O you Lovers, who know the
torments of Love! comfort me, I say, for my body deprived of his soul, has
only love for the soul; I love with all my heart, and withal my soul her,
who is the heart, and soul of my heart, and soul.

I loved her only for her self, I loved her not because my soul desired she
should have been my Love, nor because from her love might proceed all my
felicity; if it be not to love well to love thus, teach me in what fashion I
should love; but if none of you can teach me otherwise, why do you condemn
the feebleness of a man, who has no heart, but as it has relation to that
fair one who was its soul, and with whom it is inseparable?

O life, of my life! soul of my soul! if I relieved thee not after thy wound,
it was because thy wound left me in no condition to relieve thee; the others
loved thee by the consideration of the future, which they hoped would be
favorable to their passions, and I loved thee by the present estate of things;
I neither feared thy rigor, nor hoped to see thee merciful; thou art what
thou art, and I loved thee, for nothing, but because I love thee still; my
heart neither hops, nor fears, nor reasons, but it loves in such a
manner, that not living but in thee, by thee, and for thee; it is no wonder if
it die with thee, or if it revive with thee, and as it is not reasonable to
oblige the dead to assist thee, it is not just to punish the living, for the
impotency of the dead.

Such in my opinion were the reasons of that Lover, if it were p^ssible for him
to reason, who lay buried in the immense gulf of Love, and who lived for
nothing else, but to testify the wonders of that powerful passion; let those
incredulous ones, who take for hyperbolies, the discourses of those Lovers, who
vow to their Mistresses, that they are their souls and hearts: consider this
poor Lover in a swound, and if, searching for the wound which caused it, they
find none, but in the bosom of the person beloved, let them conclude in
confessing themselves conquered, that the divine mysteries of love, are
incomprehensible; and that the knowledge of those inscrutable secrets, cannot
be attained to, but in Heaven.

Behold (illustrious Auditors) all that my weakness is able to say, touching
the ardent affection of these three passionate Rivalls, their loves fly too
high a pitch, for my dull eyes to follow, and my soul astonished, at their
several apprehensions, is more capable of bewailing, then judging their
impressions: Excuse me (Noble Signiors) I pray, and be favorable to the
affection, and readiness I had to obey you; and in consideration of the injury
which I have offered to my modesty, in presuming to undertake a thing so beyond
my ability; Excuse me I say from the necessity of attributing the pretensions
to supremacy to either of these Lovers: I am in so profound an admiration of
the quality of every one of them, that I know not how to give the crown to
either of the three, without derogating from the merit of the other two, and
without giving them cause to complain against the weakness or partiality of
my judgment.

The Theater, whereon I am brought to judge them, is too high, not to be
dangerous; the one swounded, the other assisted the wounded Lady, and
complained, the third fled threatening vengeance on the assassinate; these are
spectacles more capable to take away the faculties of the soul, then of
enlightening it; and how can a heart, without experience, know the grief of
those who saw before their eyes, the object of their passions murdered? it is
a grief which cannot be judged without comprehending, and cannot be
comprehended without dying: there are none but those in Hell can judge what
Torment it is to lose beatitude: without being in love, we cannot judge of
love, and being in love, we cannot judge at all; for judgment, and election
have no place to reign where there is so much Tyranny. I have said.

The effect of this Oration.
THe Academy was as irresolute, as Manzine; the Generous would have the Valiant
preferred, the Charitable desired that he who assisted his Mistress, should
have the advantage, and the pitiful pretended, to make the feebleness of him
that fell in a swound, to triumph: the first was called courageous, by some,
and by others furious: the second past for provident, but insensible: and the
third was esteemed a perfect Lover, but cowardly: each of them had their
opposers and partakers; but after a long, and earnest contestation, they agreed
that all three merited equally, and that the inclination of the Lady should
alone turn the balance; but a second dispute destroyed this Agreement; for
one said, that the Lady, being as much obliged to the one, as to the other,
could not follow her inclination without injustice, to one or the other, and that
there was no reason to suffer passion to prefer one, and neglect the virtue and
merit of another; for the one having a desire to revenge, the other having
relieved her, and the last being almost dead for her; a Lady truly noble in
that equality of obligation, could never make either happy, without making the
others miserable: that opinion revived their first voices, and the Academy
conceiving her to be just, and of sound judgment she alone, upon whom the
Problem was founded, ought to decide the question.

Love without faith.
The Argument.
The Assyrians having besieged the City of Samaria, and reduced it to extreme
necessity: Two Mothers oppressed with famine, resolved to eat their own
Children, having no other thing left to sustain life; the one killed hers,
which was devoured by them both, but when the time came that the other should
be killed, the Mother preferring her sons life before her own, cast her self
at the feet of king Joram, to implore his power for protection of her pious
infidelity.

BEhold the King! O behold the King! my oppessed heart begins a little to
revive, since the Heavens permit me to behold the King; great Prince, give me
leave to cast my self at thy feet, to seek refuge there, in my extreme
necessity; alas! the remembrance of the danger I am in, takes away my breath,
behold the Prince! it is he, who is to defend his subjects; behold the
Livetenant of the Almighty, to whom appertains the protection of innocents!
behold an afflicted King, who grants to our miseries the same relief he
implores from Heaven for his own! and that favorable God; that sends it him,
be eternally praised.

Sir, in the universal famine, which causes the death of all thy people,
feeling my self not only to want milk to sustain my child, but spirits to
maintain my own life. I prepated some days before, all things that were
needful for my grave, when being overwhelmed with my sad thoughts, I went to
the house of one of my friends, that we might comfort one another, to the end
that the apprehension of our ensuing death, might be the less bitter to us; in
the weakness I was in, I imagined no pain was like that of going down my
stairs, but by that time I had ascended hers, I found the contrary, all my
Muscles were loosned, and all my Nerves without strength, I let my languishing
body fall upon the Earth, in which there appeared not to be any life, but by
the feeble beating of my heart, to whom Nature gives the privilege to be the
last to dye: farewell, said I, dear friend, (I made haste to salute her, for
fear death should prevent me) farewell dear friend. I thought fit to come
with my child to visit you, to the intent that she, whose like and miseries
should be prolonged for some moments, may think of the Sep^lture of the other;
this woman mingled, I know not what of cruel in her Compliments, she raised
her self upright before me, with a motion more violent, then belonged to her
deplorable estate, and under the pretense of easing me of my burden, she took
my dear child into her arms, and begin to praise it, that it was still so fat,
she made me shed tears, and quickly repent my bringing it to her house; thou
art (said she) a thousand times welcome, and without so much as regarding me,
she continued praising, touching, and I dare say, weighing the poor Innocent,
which she took sometimes into her bosom, sometimes between her arms, and
sometimes between her thighs.

O gods! said I to my self, what have I done? and then I reassumed my lovely,
and dear burden, whom danger made me think more light then it was before, I
was too weak to go from her, and she too resolute to permit me, in this
distraction I recommended my self to Providence, to send me relief,
proportionable to the danger I feared.

To what purpose are these O^^sons, these tears, and unprofitable weaknesses
of ours? this Inhumane began to say, we are lost! but Despair is a great
searcher, and Necessity a knowing Mistress, the last thing we ought to do is to
dye, we must think of all before we lose all; what do we do? ought we to
dye with famine, our own children by our sides? to what end serves our
timidity? can it preserve them, what shall we do? let them dye, let them die,
since they can no longer live, and let them help to nourish their Mothers, who
have noutish'd them whilst they were able; of our evils it is the least, since
they must dye however.

To extreme maladies, ordinary remedies signify nothing, and if thou think
it good, it cannot be ill, being necessary, let us resolve, to begin with
mine, I am content, upon condition thine may have the same fate, I am so far
from deceiving thee, that I will be the first that shall undergo this loss.

This last Discourse stayed my soul, which full of horror and fear was upon
the wing, I was ready to offer mine own flesh to that Barbatian, upon
condition she would preserve my child, when she her self ran to the relief
of my irresolution, with the pitiful cruelty of her prodigious offer.

O gods! how was I revived? I felt my self newborn, but in the mean time
what should I do? I thought with my self, if I refuse to consent to the death
of her son, I hasten that of my own, it is not best to undertake the
opposition of her brutish design, without power to hinder it, she appears too
resolved to this horrible action, to be diverted by my words, and seeing I can
gain nothing else, let me gain time, this is a danger which cannot be avoided,
but in going out to meet it.

Thus I consented to the death of my child, that she might begin with hers
first, which would give me opportunity to come, and east my self at at the
feet of my King; my design has happily succeeded: I am here Sir: look upon
this innocent, whose life is in question, and if thou think me obliged to
perform conditions, present it thy self to this Tygress; behold how she
stands grinding her teeth, and rolling her eyes, look upon her as having
prepared the knife in her hand, and ready to dismember, and devour it; on then,
do thou pronounce, and determine, what shall be done with thy subject; see
here, and judge, if it be proper to cut in pieces an innocent, to sustain a
wicked person, who deserves a Thunderbolt; if thou do not join with me in
opposing this Fury, we may say, that the City is already taken, since our
Enemies devour our Children.

But what do I say? is it possible, there can be any Enemies so barbarous to
eat our Infants? shall I be so unfortunate to fear, thou will consider me
less, then this bloodthirsty creature, who is more our Enemy, then our Enemies
themselves? and I (who had rather see mine own child dye for thy service,
then for the preservation of mine own life,) ought I to fear I shall not have
protection from mine own Prince, whose subjects this unnatural woman has
begun already to devour? I, I say believe that the life of the King himself
is not assured, since her own flesh, and blood was not.

The fierce and barbarous resolution of this Tygress admonishes us that we
have cause to fear all things, for what will she devour next, now she has
no more children to eat? who can assure us, that incited by her hunger, she
will not sell her Country for meat? and, to obtain it of our Enemies, attempt
to take away the life of the King himself? if the famine continue and paricide
escape without punishment: I know she will accuse me of ingratitude, and call
me perfidious, for complaining of a crime which has nourished me, but for
what reason does she think she has obliged? is it for prolonging my life?
Alas! I am so far from thinking that an obligation, that for but only seeing
such a wickedness, I shall sigh eternally, and be eternally without comfort; it
does not content* he, O detestable one, to have been wicked, unless thou enjoy
the vanity to brag of it, and boast that thou have also made an unfortunate
Woman, as wicked as thy self; there is but one thing can fall out, to make me
think the saving my life a favor, which is (Sir) that I may be so happy, to
see the punishment of her sin, before I dye.

I confess I consented to her enormous crime, but how could I avoid it? if I
had not resolved to take part in the tragic banquet of the body of her child,
my feebleness had subdued me, to the necessity of seeing her devour mine; but
there is nothing in the world but the preservation of the life of a Son, could
ever have induced me, to have participated in that cruelty, which this Tygress
calls a favor; the same action which was her crime, has been my punishment;
was it not thou thy self that with thine own hands, tore in pieces thy
innocent Babe? did not I turn away mine eyes? had not I horror in eating it?
did not I mingle my tears with its blood? yet that, which I could scarcely
endure to do with thy child, thou would have me suffer with mine own.

Oh! neither the justice of the King of Heaven, nor Earth will allow this; I
should deserve that my child should be devoured, if I had a soul so much an
Enemy to my Country, to give consent, even with mine own blood, to the
nourishment of a Fury who has eaten her own child; I have sinned, if I may
say so without sin, because I sinned without election, for the soul sins
not without the will, but I am not excusable by the same reason, which she
believes capable to excuse a Paricide; I have a thousand Reasons besides, to
justify my innocence.

Imagine Sir, (if your piety will give you leave to hearken to me) you saw her
with a knife in her hand, with a Savage, and bloody look, snatching
unmercifully the weeping innocent (whose destiny was that his very tears
hastened his death) and giving him twenty stabs with a poniard, and then to cut
his throat, and afterward tearing out his bowels, breathing, and panting, and
at last cutting them in pieces, and all this with such dexterity, and
quickness, that it astonished me more, then the paricide it self, and made me
think she had served an apprenticeship in practicing upon other children, the
barbarism she now exercised upon her own: but alas! how shall I make an end?
she spitted it, she blew the fire, and basted the little body, she complaind of
nothing, but that the fire was too slow to roast her son: O Tygress! O Fury! O
wicked Demon!

But Sir, I perceive this horrible Relation does so much astonish you, that it
takes away your power, not only of judging, but of hearing me, and indeed who
would not have the same resentment? Now Sir, if you tremble, without having
seen this cruel spectacle, but in my description, you that are a Man, a
Soldier, and a King, you that are out of danger, judge then of my condition in
the midst of that horror? I who am a Woman, weakened with famine, and danger of
my child between life, and death; in this ecstasy, I had nor time, nor means,
nor strength to know what I did, I eat I know not what, for my soul wholly
intentive, to save my own Infant, had no leisure to think of that of another.

Behold that she Caniball, who devours the subjects of her Prince, the
Soldiers of the Kingdom, and the Defenders of our Country; punish, O punish
this ravenous devourer of our Citizens, who has taught to others, that the
flesh of her own is nourishing, and who has incensed the Heavens when they
have most need of appeasing: it troubles me, there should be no other way to
punish her but by that death that I should have thought a happiness before she
made me sin, if I could have been assured her rage would have spared my
child; I say well in saying her rage, for I should lie, if I should say; it
was only her hunger, for, a woman, who had strength to fright a Mother, and to
engage her to the necessity, of defending the life of her child, was not
reduced to the last extremity of hunger, she was too quick, too fierce, and too
menacing; for a woman, whom famine had extremely enfeebled, and if she deny her
fury and her force, the great blows she gave to her own son will evidence it,
they could not proceed from an arm decayed, from an arm of a Woman, and from
an arm of a Mother enfeebled by long famine.

Chastise this malefactor, stifle this pernicious example, revenge the injury
done to the Hebrew name, in punishing her crime, that we may show to after
Ages, we abhorred it: our Nation will be more detested for her paricide, then
it was glorious for the victories of Sampson, and David, nothing, but she
alone, shall darken the honor of so memorable a Siege, and so nobly maintained.

On then brave Prince! on then Father! on then Sir, cut off this corrupted
member, for fear it corrupts the whole body; tear up, by the roots, this
contagious branch, whose very shadow is dangerous: what do you stay for? you
already know her inclinations, her own son being devoured, she intends to
devour those of others; and that she is yet more dangerous, she pretends to
do it by justice, so ill an opinion has she of the equity of her Judge; it is
against thy interest (O great King) to permit this poor Innocent to the rage
of this insatiable Woolfe, it will be quickly devoured, it is too little to
last long, and she too ravenous to make more, then one meal of it; with what
shall we assuage the hunger of this monster accustomed to eat the flesh of
children? as for those that have none, they are not concerned in my interest,
but they that have, let them consider that the enemy threatens to make them
slaves, and she to devour them, if the justice of him, who is above justice,
does not protect them; let us go and offer our Children to the sword of our
Enemies, I say our Children, because the Children, of our Enemies, please not
this impious wretch, will you then expect another proof then this very
instance of her wickedness, if necessity constrain her, ought she not rather
to eat the Enemies Children then ours? do not your valiant swords kill enough
by so many brave sallies to satisfy the hunger of this ravenous devourer of
flesh?

Go on then merciful Prince! go on then Protector of Innocents! preserve thy
Kingdom from the greatest infection it can have, besides the wrath of the
Almighty, for can thou believe that God will deliver from so dangerous a
siege, a City, wherein Paricide passes unpunished? I would speak more, but I
dare not for fear lest in the mean time the absolute, and last necessities of
hunger seizing upon this unnatural, it should not lie in the power of the King
to save my Child from her ravenous fury; and besides I feel already
feebleness oppress me, which is an infallible sign of my innocence, I have
eaten so little of the Child of another, that my weakness constrains me so
suddenly to leave the defense of mine own, from whence you may judge whether I
did it by force, or inclination: but I die, and yet there is left too much to
say; the death of this unfortunate is not the cause of my tears; for it
brought mortality with it into the world, the War, Fortune and Famine have
reduced me to such a degree of calamity, that I weep it rather as dead, then
about to die, neither are these agitations new to me, I grieve that my son, my
soul, my bowels should be forced to serve for nourishment to a Monster, who
has dishonored my Country, and would make it desolate.

Grief stifles me, and takes away my voice, I can say no more, I dye, behold
this miserable poor unfortunate Babe! what crime has it committed? Behold
Sir, this innocent which knows not the danger that threatens it; if the
unjust conditions she pleads, be far more powerful then the King, offer it
thy self, to this hunger slarved Creature, offer it thy self if thou have the
heart, for it is thine, it was borne for thy service, and if it die, devoured
by this Samaritan Tygress, it dies in serving thee, I will not be against his
honor.

On the contrary, I shall esteem him happy, for who ought to be more
contented to dye, then he who dies in the service of so just a Prince, that the
least of his glorious titles is the Protector of Orphans? but on the other
side, in exposing this Infant to the phangs of this wild beast, who foames at
mouth with greediness to tear it in pieces, it is to render me the most
deplorable creature that ever was.

Alas! Father of thy people, Protector of the distressed, be concerned, rouse
up compassion toward this little one, who never deserved this miserable fate:
Sir, save thy slave, it is an act suitable to thy honor, and the quality of
thy charge; it is a favor which his poor Mother deserves, who would not save
the life of her son, for any other end, but that he may dye in serving his
King, his Benefactor, and his Preserver.

The Effect of this Oration.
IT is easy to know by the words of Scripture, that this Oration, which
Manzine has much enlarged, touched very sensibly a King, who was not
absolutely unjust; but my Author supposes, that an impartial Judge, ought to
hear both parties, before he give sentence, do you suspend your judgment
until you have read the next following Oration.

Hunger has no Law.
The Argument.
If motherly love were eloquent, self love was not silent; the first of these
women spoke for the life of her son, the second for her own; the one would
reserve her self, the other her child, and both destroy one another. Love
pretends to the Empire over all wheresoever he is, hunger disputes this power;
you have heard the reasons of the one, hearken to those of the other.

SIR, It is a Woman which speaks, it may be it seems strange that I tell thee I
am a Woman, for by the state of body, in which I appear, I may fear thou
believe me a shadow, and I know they have described me to thee, as a wild
Beast, but I give thanks to Heaven, which has brought me before a King, whose
profound Judgment cannot be deceived; behold then here a Woman so miserable
that she has been forced, even to the eating of her own Children, and yet so
persecuted, that she is accused of monsirous impiety; when she comes to demand
justice, she whose life I have preserved with mine own bowels, strives to
procure my death, I find my self accused by one, from whom I expected not only
thanks, but recompense.

The necessity which has forced me to eat mine own Child, begins to be the
least of my evils; Alas! who will pity me? or rather who will not pity me? I
demand Justice (pardon me great Sir, if I am not upon my knees, weakness, and
not irreverence is the cause, I shall fall if I stoop) and since I ought not
endeavor, by a feigned humility, to surprise a Judge, whose wise, and
apprehensive soul cannot be deluded by outward semblances; you will therefore
pardon the omission of Ceremony.

Unhappy I! if amongst my other infelicities, I had met with a Judge of a
common capacity, or a Prince of a vulgar soul, one that would have been
captivated, and charmed with flattery, and one that the very appearance of
crime is able to discompose, unhappy were I! I say, if I had met with such a
one, an ordinary apprehension had at the very name of Paricide, condemned this
unfortunate, without considering the quality of the fact, or the cause that
compelled me to commit it; but those are slight, shallow, or effeminate men,
without bottom, without courage, and not only unworthy to command Kingdoms,
and pretend to triumphs; but of souls so undiscerning, that the bare names,
without circumstances of crimes, fright them: we ought to consider reallities,
and not appearances.

And now to have met with a Prince, of so magnanimous courage, who with only
one City, and that hunger-starved, dares yet promise himself the Victory over
a great Kingdom, that bandies it self against him; is not this, is not this a
blessing over-ballancing all my other infelicities? but I esteem my cause such,
that I believe it needs no other eloquence, then its own equity; expect not
Sir, that I dress up my distresses, nor that I aggravate my sufferings, I
invoke not the Heavens, I envy not against my accuser, innocent causes have no
need of such gilding artifice; for my part, in recounting to thee nakedly my
business by the testimony of my very Enemy, I will make it evident to thee, that
I am so innocent, that she her self shall confess that all, that she had patched
up together, when she complained against me, amounted to nothing, because she
has proved nothing, and because an equal Judge takes impression of nothing,
but the fact only, when he perceives that the passion and interest of those
whose subtilty would disguise truth, and seduce his judgment by deceitful
inductions, which often hurry Judges into a precipice of error, and unjust
sentence.

And thou my fierce, and ungrateful Enemy, who accusest me with so much
injustice, art thou contented to appeal to thy self? for though thy consent
be not material, and thou being accustomed so little, to observe actions done
by thy self, will thou that thy own depositions shall be valid? I feel my
self so cast down with hunger, that if they permit thee to reply, and that
they oblige me to tedious formalities, it is certain that the sentence will be
on thy side, if the judge will not, Famine will cast me into my grave, before
the end of this sad process.

What? do thou desire that I confess my fault? if that be it, thou have said
nothing that I am not ready to affirm: in fine, what do thou resolve? she is
silent, that is to say, without speaking, she acknowledges her fault, and is
undoubtedly ready to discharge her conscience, and it may be my unhappy child
(dead as it is) in the bosom of this cruel woman, fights in favor of his
Mother.

Sir, she says, that constrained by hunger she ascended my stairs with her
Infant: she says, that I received her with I know not what of horrible in my
countenance, and with a motion too strong for the weakness I was in, and that
praising the good plight of her child, I gave her cause to tremble at the
unsafety of that innocent, is it not true Sir? I subscribe to all she has
said; in fine, God protects innocence? our Enemies themselves witness in
favor of mine: See Sir, what I was! I was so hunger-starved, that the
extremity of Famine, had transformed me, to be as a wild beast; I was become so
horrible, that I was even such to my friend, she here found me in such a
condition, that she believed me capable of eating her child, and yet, in this
dreadful estate I stayed at home, and expected peaceably my death every moment.

Dear Auditors, are you not touched with pity? I received her with a motion
too precipitate, ungrate and barbarous as she is! in this condition which was
so horrible. I lost not courtesy for this Wretch, yet she has lost humanity
for me, even when I saved her life with my own bowels; if I praised the good
plight of her child, you may imagine to what extremity I was reduced by
Famine, that I was forced with envy to behold the flesh upon the bones of the
living; I took her child out of her arms: here you see, though I was half
dead, I eased her of her burden, she grew jealous, and took it from me; but
if she assures you, she took it from me by force, she injures the pretended
justice of her cause, for if she were not brought to the extremity of
feebleness by hunger, how could she resolve to eat a man child?

In that she will lie, you ought not to marvel if she waver in her words, and
if she say I rendered it unto her willingly, my innocence appears, seeing in my
last extremity, I was just in returning back a thing more valuable to me, then
all the treasure of the Universe, since it might have saved my life; but
amongst these disputes violences, and fears, my soul, agitated with a
thousand various passions began to feel evils yet more horrid, and my hunger
was so strongly augmented by that object, that to give back a child, and a
child which was none of mine own, and a child in so good plight, was to hasten
my death, and yet I did it; but Nature having lost the remembrance of all other
obligations, save that of preserving it self, began to suggest the means as
strange, as profitable; let them eat what they may, said I, since necessity
hinders from eating what they ought.

What do we do? in vain we offer vows to Fortune, to send us Rats or Dogs, for
of all Victual heretofore horrible (but now worthy of Envy) there is no more
in my house unless in my intrals digested; I do not say in my flesh, for if I
had found one ounce in any part of my body and God he knows whether I sought
with care, or not, my heart had never been capable of giving consent to that
paricidall thought, of feeding upon the flesh of my child, that is to say, my
heart, my life, and my soul, no not in this point, where necessity is
pronounced invincible, and all things are permitted but delay, if I had found
but one morsel of my own flesh left, I had never thought (I say) of feeding
upon my own child.

What shall I do? (said I) and, being desperate, I turned toward this woman,
and spoke to her thus; but great Prince recall into your memory the words that
she has uttered to you, which are these, for I would not, in speaking in my
defense, alter, sweeten, or forget the least thing: be you your self therefore
pleased to repeat the words of my accuser, the last thing we are to do is to
die, we are to think of all before we lose all, thus Nature has taught us,
reason has dictated, and our Predecessors have learnt us by their examples,
what ought we to do? or what can we do my friend? for, although I was forced
to be led by necessity, I would take her counsel for fear of failing; ought
we to die at the feet of our children without doing them any good? will they
escape their death by ours? even in killing them, I thought of doing good,
seeing they cannot save their own lives, let them save their Mothers, and save
their Mothers, not for themselves, but for their Country; and what think you
Sir, did then this merciful, this tender hearted, virtuous Mother, to whom my
crime has been so horrid? she has told you her self, therefore you may
believe it, she alone, even without a pause, she consented, she came without
all question, not only to consent to the fact, but to invite me to commit it,
for if she had come for any other intent, she wanted not the means to hinder
me, when I made the proffer, why did she not refuse it? why did she not cry
out? but excuse her if you will, by saying she durst not, she was in an
affright, she swounded, but why did she ever revive? I know that she will say,
that whatever her crime is, she never intended the death of her child, but
being resolved to deceive me, and only conspiring against the life of mine, she
pretends her affrightment for her excuse, and perceives not that little
policy, which yet absolves her not from paricide, adds the crime to her, of
being deceitful to her friend, and impious to Heaven; for in agreeing to our
conditions, she invoked the name of God, which, in this case as it is
conspicuous before you, must needs be judged a crying sin, barely to mingle the
sacred name of the most high.

Yet had she the boldness to call, to countenance her wicked deceit, that
Almighty power which she invoked without either believing in him, or trembling
to offend him, if it be true she believes in God? Consider by the truth of her
intention, you here present who have heard what her faith was; if this woman
who was not enforced by the extremity of her hunger, to the necessity of such
an action, had opposed me, and represented unto me the horror of the fact, I
should undoubtedly have abstained, and after the knowledge of it, should have
dyed a thousand times, rather then have killed a son; indeed why should I have
asked counsel if I had not feared the necessities of the body, might have
extinguished the light of the understanding?

If the only design of nourishing me, had carried me to that resolution, what
need had I of her? had not I a child as well as she? and in what have I
bettered my condition in dividing with her? did she not receive the same thing
from me, which I was afterward to have from her; and in that fatal
participation no advantage could accrue to me, but that hazard to which I am
now exposed, that this disloyal does not observe conditions, after the death
of my child, might be my lot; it may be, out of a just fear I should have
urged her to begin with hers, you have heard her, herself repeat my words.

Let us begin (said I) with mine, I am content, provided thine may have the
same fate, for I would not have it enter into thy thoughts, that I have any
intention to deceive thee: Behold my Lords! that to save the life of a child,
I would not deceive, and that I knew how to be just even in killing; I should
never have thought of so horrible a sustenance, whilst I had strength or hope
to find any relief any other way, but when necessity, which is always
invincible, had reduced me to the last extremity, and that the constraint of so
long a siege had left nothing for man, but man, and that the famine having
overcome all other things, had at last overcome Nature, and constancy, it was
absolutely unavoydable for me to resolve, yet I did it not without consulting
of the thing, and finding it inevitable, to what should I have addressed me? it
may be you will say rather to the children of others; no Sir, I addressed me to
mine own.

But tell me in pity Sir, in an exigent so important, in mine own house, and
having in mine arms the fat child of another, was not I very just, in that I
began not with the death of hers? O God! is there a heart so hard, not to have
compassion on mine affliction? that being enforced to eat a child, or famish,
when I had in my arms the child of another, I began with mine own; all
Fathers are obliged to this Example for the lives of theirs.

Ah! If there be a heart to be found capable of wishing me ill, it deserves to
feel a grief suitable to mine, that to stain Nature, they be constrained to
act against Nature: I know that this frightfull name of paricide, dazles weak
souls, and raises me many Enemies, but I know withal, that this weakness is
not a weakness of Kings, but of vulgar, and unknowing men; those Laws which
have permitted Fathers to kill their children, for punishment, would they
forbid them to kill them for necessity, to which all things submit?

If I had killed my son for some unnatural outrage, done against his Mother,
they would have esteemed me innocent, now having killed him by irresistible
constraint, they believe me guilty; but great Prince, who was he at the
beginning of the Siege, made us pull down, and burn so many magnificent
Palaces, contiguous to the very walls of our City, and such Palaces as were
worth half a Kingdom, and took up little less room? was it not thou mighty
Prince? and why that cruelty, common Father of the Country, to thy subjects,
and to thy children? what could they fear worse from the Enemy? me thinks I
hear every one answer me, that it was to assure the City, and to prevent
harborage to the Enemy, he was compelled to perpetrate this merciless cruelty;
it is then true, that the design and end proposed, is that which justifies, or
condemns the action; how many Provinces, and how many Armies by the command of
their Kings, and of their Generals have willingly exposed themselves to
extreme losses, to prevent eminent evils? then if it be a remedy ancient, and
approved, that in extreme necessities, men devour men? what star, or what
fatal destiny excludes me from the common privileges of humane kind?
peradventure it may be for that I am a woman, my resolution did not suit with
my sex; it may be, because I am a Mother: why? is the desire of living less
natural to the Mother, then to the Son?

We never condemn that instinct, which, for the necessity of life, makes the
Infant draw every day the most pure blood from the bosom of his Mother; and
may not the poor Mother, incited for preservation of her life, and by
compulsion of Nature lawfully by the right she has over her Child, make use
of her own blood, and of her own bowels?

I know as well as another, that there is none so cruel, but has compassion
for the murder of a young Infant, whose innocence is so capable of pity, but
who might be killed with so little loss to the Commonwealth as this young child?
and by what other Reason should a Mother that has lost her Son, have been ever
comforted, if there had not remained that feeble consolation of seeing it die
at the least innocent? me thinks all here present say, that she who accuses
me would have endeavored to have had a child of the Enemies, O abominable
wickedness! O execrable thought! God deliver me from an attaint so impious, no
not to redeem my self from my grave, I could not go, and search for the
Infants of others, unless I had had a design to eat children, before I was
constrained by the extreme necessity of the siege; O God deliver me from
purposes so impious, such as could never be hatched in the thoughts of her who
is so humane, that she never thought of eating humane flesh, before she found
it absolutely impossible, to defer one moment the eating of her own son!

Thus from the very same things of which thou accusest me; I pretend to derive
my honor; expect not great Prince, that I should entreat thee, or conjure thee
to exterminate this ungrateful Creature, who instead of observing religiously
conditions with her that preserved her life at so dear a rate, endeavouts by
an impudence without example, to take that from me, which I value more then my
life, my reputation, she would make an impression in thy judgment, O King,
that I am wicked, and that I am unjust: No, no Sir, I think not of it, for not
having committed a crime to preserve my life, I will not to pursue my revenge.

Be thou then judge what is to be done, thou whose prudence in all times, and
in all places, and in all things knows so clearly to distinguish equity from
iniquity, and innocence from guilt, whether she did eat of my sons flesh for
cruelty or necessity? ask her, herself, whether a woman so enfeebled by
famine, could go rambling abroad to seek for relief, and then consider whether
it be likely she was in that extremity that being in an affright for the danger
of her son, she had yet strength enough to tear it from the bosom of that
Fury who devoured it with her eyes; yes, demand of her, herself, if she be
impudent enough to maintain that hunger had rendered her feeble, and
languishing?

After she has confessed her son to be fat, and thriving, demand of her (I
say) whether a Woman in the condition she has depainted her self, could have
milk enough to preserve him in such well-liking; this pretended foundation
being demolished, where was that necessity? such a necessity as in my case has
been evinced by the testimony of my fiercest Enemy, I know not, but I believe
you see the Rampires, whereby she believed her impiety assured, to fail and
fall; what will thou do Sir? will thou suffer a woman so impious, so
barbarous, so detestable, to live under thy protection?

Great Prince, what do thou resolve? for my part. I make no supplications to
be revenged, though this Monster shames not only her Country, but the whole
Age; if she fall, I would rather have it to be merely by thy justice, then by
my solicitation; yes, let her outrage to me be pardoned, provided it wound not
thy Justice, neither do I demand the murder of her child, but I demand
something, even any thing, to sustain my life, which is even now expiring, if
I have not presently some food to relieve me; if she has any other thing for
my nourishment, and to dis-ingage her from the conditions to which she is
obliged, it shall satisfy, whatever i^ be, but if she cannot perform it
otherwise, then Sir, I demand Justice, that child is none of hers, since I have
bought it with mine own bowels, she has sold it, and sworn to observe
conditions, she has not only received, but eaten the price agreed of between
us.

That every one have what belongs to him, is a Rule thought to be most just in
all Kingdoms, and especially here where the King is so just, that rather then
to abandon him, his subjects resolve to eat their own children.

Well, what is there more expected? the Examination is had, she has confessed,
and I demand immediate sentence; for by this little delay thou O King! wilt be
guilty of my death: the most cruel hangman that the wickedness of this woman
can fear, is that which I feel in my intrals; Sir, Hunger tears me, if thou
forbear to do me justice, because this kind of justice carries with it I
know not what, of prodigious, it is to do an injury to thy Kingly Office, which
ordaines thee to do as thou oughtst, though it overthrow the whole World.

That which I demand is a life; but it is true, a life unprofitable, a life
full of misery, alife that I have purchased with mine own childs life; to be
merciful to a child, will thou be cruel to a Mother, who desires to survive
her child only for thy service, and that does not find life supportable for
love of it, but that it may be useful for thy service? indeed for whom could
I have prolonged a life, which Widdow-hood, and the loss of a child, old Age
and Famine, makes a living Hell, if it had not been to serve thee with that
little strength which remains to carry earth to fill the Bulworkes, and
Hot-water to the Soldiers to defend the liberty; the Scepter, and the life of
my King?

Resolve then wise Prince, resolve (I say) then dear Master; what do thou
expect, that I also perish to become food for this wicked Woman, whom I could
not oblige by giving her, her life? it is less dangerous to do her injury,
then favors, I have preserved her, and she would destroy me, if thou do
preserve her; she will certainly be mischievous also to thee; of this truth I
am a sad example, seeing I have torn out mine own bowels to feed her, she
brings it to a question, whether that which I have bought, and paid for, be
mine own; r^solve then Noble Prince, according to thy generosity resolve, I am
so withered with Famine, that my very eyes will aff^rd me no more tears, to
move thee to pity, for these few moments that thou delayest me I dare tell
thee, yes I dare tell thee, thou shall be no more my King, but my H^ng-man.

I confess this discourse is bold, but it imports little, whether I die by a
Halter, or Hunger, if I must lose my life; I perceive my end, famine tears my
intralls, languishment overwhelms me, and my own supplications assist time,
and famine to consume me; either relieve me living, or thou shall be obliged
to defend me dead, for she who has eaten the child, will not be nice to
devour the Mother also? Ah Sir! I can no more, I faint, I fall, I die.

The effect of this Oration.
NEither That is, the second of Chronicles.
the fourth Book of Kings, nor Josephus tells us what King Ioram ordained upon
this dispute, but it is easy to be conjectured, that he ordered nothing
unjust, since the Scripture notes, that he was so extremely afflicted, that
they saw a garment of humiliation under the ^oyall Mantle, and that the next
day the City was miraraculously delivered by a Pannick fear which seized the
Army of the Assyrians; and made them raise the siege; therefore we ought to
believe, that the Prince gave that Innocent to the tears of his Mother: as for
the other, that would not have killed hers, but to prevent her own death
threatened by famine, she had no need of a repast so detestable; for the day
after, there was abundance in Samatia, by the plenty of Provision, which was
found in the Enemies Camp.

The Sports of the Carnivall.
The Argument.
The Cardinal proposed the Argument of this Discourse to the Acadedemy of the
night, for in a fair and large Assembly of Knights and Ladies, some having
maintained, that a Masque was only fit for ill-favored faces; others as
confidently affirming, that Beauty, as the more dangerous thing, was only fit
to be masqu'd: in this diversity of opinions, Manzine declares his, after this
manner.

I Have not so advantageous an opinion of my self (most illustrious Auditors)
as to believe I have a liberty allowed me to hold an opinion contrary to your
judgment; that judgment I mean, which was pleased to think me capable of an
enterprise, which I thought far above my strength; it is a thing nevertheless
not a little strange, that a person bred under the shade of night, should be
put to discourse of beauty, that is a bright Sun; and that those eyes should be
chosen to judge of deformity, which have been accustomed to abide the most
lively, and penetrating beams of this beauty.

And thence it comes to pass, that in spite of my endeavors, my sense gets the
Mastry of my understanding, offering to my imagination what traverses a
miserable weak Cock-boat may justly apprehend, that undertakes to struggle
against the large waves of the vast Ocean. But hap what will, by his authority,
who has commanded me, I am engaged in the main Sea; and those stars (which
upon another occasion I should call suns) make me hope for a safe harbor, and
give me assurance, that their favorable beams seconding the Art of the Pilot,
will bring me safe to shore.

And although that lively Alabaster, which sparkles round about me, like the
beating of the Sea threatens me with quicksands, I shall nevertheless esteem
that shiprack happy where the waves are of milk, and the field is so fair, as
'twould prove an honor to procure a grove in it.

But to lose no time, which of it self runs so fast, away, with which part of
the dispute ought I to begin my discourse? The question proposed is, whether a
Masque do more properly belong to a handsome, or an ill-favored face?

I know that those who consider things but slightly by the outward appearance,
will conclude, that a Masque infallibly belongs to the worst face; that they
will believe, 'twas invented only to secure ill faces from the injuries men's
eyes might do them; so that they will be ready to say, that no shape in the
world can derive so much advantage by being hid as deformity, which, buried
under a Masque, is not only protected from injuries, and contempt, but which
is more, under that favorable shadow she marches upon such equal terms with
Beauty, that the visage of Hocuba and Helen are the same thing, whilst they
both continue so covered. This happy Misque adds so much to an ill-favored
face, that it not only hides an object that displeases the eye, corrects a
default in Nature, and rectifies a sin of the Times, but besides, places it in
the same condition with Beauties, and makes it equal with that which has
been adored even by the Heathen gods.

All this is well, (may some one say) but if we hide our ugliness, what shall
put us in mind, that the defects of the body ought to be repaired by the
excellency of the soul. Socrates exhorted youth to view their faces in a
glass, that those that were ill-favored might endeavor to mend themselves,
and those that had beauty might take care not to deforme it by the
imperfections of Vice.

And indeed when a noble soul shall perceive it self imprisoned in an
unhandsome and contemptible body, the more will it endeavor to make it self
visible to become worthy of esteem: For my part I have always looked upon
unhandsomness as a very considerable gift of Heaven, and a deep design of the
Divinity; for having resolve to impart to the world one beam of its own
brightness in humane beauty, made use of deformity as her opposite, that the
eye by comparing contraries, might fully, and entirely discover the excellence
of beauty.

And is it not evident, that if all Women were handsome, beauty would grow so
common, that no man would admire it; and that 'twould be impossible to have any
strong desires for so ordinary a thing? Amongst the greatest advantages which
belong to Beauty, one of the most considerable is, that it serves the mind as
a light, to guide and help it to ascend to the knowledge of the intelligible
world.

But to demonstrate how much more deformity contributes to that then beauty; it
will suffice to compare them together: What Lover is there, whose judgment is
not distracted, and that, in his Idolatry does not believe, that nothing but
what he adores can justly pretend to the title of beauty? what Lover can be
found, which calls not that his Sun, which is his fire; which invocates not
her, as his tutelary Angel, who in conclusion proves his evil spirit? and
looks not upon that house as a Heaven, or a Temple, which preserves his Goddess
from the injuries of men, and weather? O miserable Deity! whose divinity has
need of humane help? that were indeed to tie the soul to earth, and not to
lift it up to heaven. But as the shadow makes the light appear the clearer,
and cold weather makes the Sunbeams the more welcome: even so deformity not
at all furnished with any thing that might delight the soul, does put the
mind into such a loathing of all these frail and transitory vanities of the
world, that raising it to the contemplation and knowledge of the only true
happiness, it is forced to resolve to quit these perishable beauties, and
wholly to fix it self upon him, who only is perfect and desirable: so then
ugliness is a gift of Heaven, and by so much more precious then beauty, as it is
less obnoxious to the injuries of time, from whose severity it apprehends not
the least danger of being made worse.

Unhandsomness, the sure and infallible guide of the mind; the certain mark
of Divinity, shall that be covered under a dark Veil, or imprisoned, and
buried under a troublesome cloud? and what shall then become of that unchaste
vestall beauty, that does so much mischief, if she that is the very
quintessence of chastity must be buried amongst the living? she that is a
Virgin so pure, and unspotted? 'twill be as great an injury to Virtue, as
ill-favour'dness, if she be contemned, for thereby we declare that even Virtue
her self is not every where amiable: as if the Sun were only operative upon
the purest matter, and Jewels derived their value from the Casquet, wherein
they are enclosed.

Olympia the Wife of Philip was much in the right, when she told a Courtier,
who had made choice of a handsome, but unchaste Mistress, that 'twas not fit to
choose a Wife, only, by the outside; and indeed, what more is beauty (for
whose sake we would bury the precious treasure of deformity) but a single
stroke of Natures Pensill? a Cheat of the times, a good thing that flies away,
a glorious Sun that soon sets, a possession that is always troublesome,
because ever envied, kept with too great subjection, and adored with too much
Idolatry? If she be pitiful, she is dishonest, cruel, if she resist.

To conclude, an ingenious soul must needs say of outward handsomness, as
Lisander spoke of certain fine gowns, that were sent him for his daughters; I
will not have these fine clothes make my daughters seem less handsome: From
these Reasons opposed to the former, the result will be, that this Tomb of the
face (if you will give me leave to give a Masque that name) is more proper for
nothing, then Beauty; and I very well perceive by some languishing eyes, that I
see about me, that more then one in this company could wish, that this
dangerous thing called Beauty had never walked but in her Masque.

I am of opinion, that the famous Painter Thimantes, had done sacrifice to the
god of Counsel, when having made a Picture of Venus excellently handsome in
all the parts of her body, he drew a Veil over her face; not as the weaker
sort believed, because he despaired of finishing what he had begun, with the
like perfection; but that this discreet Painter knew, that her beauty was so
great, that had he given it the last degree of perfection, she must have proved
as dangerous, to the soul, as pleasing to the Eye; and thereby taught us, that
it is no less prudence to hide beauty, then to suppress a great fire.

And this was Alexanders opinion, when, having taken the Wife and Daughters of
Darius prisoners, he declared that the Persian Beauties were very hurtful to
the Eyesight. Lucian, who detested beauty, called it the Enemy of Nature, by
whom man being created free and courageous, was (like a poor slave) reduced to
serve that Idol with more satisfaction, then he was capable of receiving by
the command of the whole world. Let us then cover this Inchantress, which
seduces our Reason, and so blindes the eyes of our understanding, that it is not
able to distinguish those objects, which deserve to be contemned, from such as
merit adoration.

Phidias, who painted Venus upon a Torteys, (to teach the Grecian people 'twas
fit to shut up Beauty in a house) would never have put himself to that
trouble, had he known the use of a Masque; which is only sufficient to
preserve chastity, to keep men's hearts at liberty; to defend beauty from
violence, and secure the eyes from treachery, and deceit.

I confess it is true, should we masque Beauty, we should be deprived of some
kind of sweetness, which this pleasing Witch suffers us to taste: But whilst
we receive this wound, it is like that Enemy of Prometheus the Thessalian, who
cured him with a wound: happy Prometheus, whose very wounds prove his good
Fortune.

Hide then, O hide this Beauty which is so criminal, that having more of
Heaven in it then any other thing, is by so much the more guilty for having so
ungratefully abused those great advantages: Hide that thing which imperfect,
that it can never give a man entire satisfaction, whose poison is very like
that of the Serpent, which the Naturallists mention, which when a man has once
taken, the more he drinks, the more he shall thirst.

But if the effects of this Beauty be such as these, let every one consult
with his own heart, and not trust his eyes, which are but like foolish Gnats
dazeled with the least glimmering; who to enjoy the brightness of the light,
fear not to perish in the heat of the flame. Hide that enchanting Syrene,
which never shows her self, but to ruin us; who Syren-like destroyed Orpheus,
the ornament of his age, the soul of Music, and son of harmony.

Hide, O hide this perfidious flatteress, this proud vanity, which triumphs
over the world, this unseperable companion of pride, this impudent Mother of
unchaste desires; whose triumph is the ashes of those that run after her, whose
Trophies are distracted souls; in whose Temples we only sacrifice to vanity,
and her oracles are only given to make us. Let us bury this ruin of the
Universe, and at length revenge so many Provinces made desolate, and quite
brought to nothing for her, or rather by her: Let the famous City of Troy tell
you, what she can do, that Troy, whereof there are not now the least footsteps
extant, but in men's memories; though 'twas formerly the wonder of all the Earth.

But if any too passionate Lover should persist, and tell me, it cannot be fit
to cloud Beauty under a Masque, since it is the delight of the eyes, and the
choicest piece of Natures worman-ship; I shall be forced to answer him, that
for that very reason, it ought to be hid, because so precious a Jewel cannot
be too carefully preserved.

How often has the lovely Rose growing upon its own stock (or rather upon its
Throne of beauty) forced the hand of the Beholder to do it a mortal outrage?
how often has the falling Lilly in perfumed tears bewailed her beauty, which
perished only by being too much shown? In fine, a Masque is so proper for
beauty, that, no doubt, she her self found out the invention: She found she
was a fire dangerous to the heart; a treasure too much exposed to the desires
of such as endeavored to enjoy her; so that at length wearied with so many
sighs, and complaints; and resolved to free her self from the importunity of
her Lovers; resolved to be delivered from the slavery of a Looking-glass, that
mercinary Counselor, which, as a reward of her flatteries, takes away from
the Ladies above half the time of their lives; resolved to set her self at
liberty from the troublesome subjection to pride, and vanity, the inseparable
companions of her Majesty; she devised this covering for her face, or rather
this Buckler for her chastity, that, hiding her beauty, which is the seed of
Love, she might secure her honesty, the chief ornament of a virtuous and
well-born soul.

Who shall then for ever hereafter dispute Beauties title to the Masque? No,
no! it must be yielded her, and if we will not have her hid, because she is
innocent, let her be covered because she deserves it, as being divine. Sacred
things are covered to stir up our reverence; Majesty, lest it should grow
common; Beauty to prevent satiety; all to make themselves desirable.

But, me thinks I hear some impatient man complaining, that I am celebrating
the funerals of Beauty; and, that, burying her under a Masque, I leave the
world in such a miserable condition, that their eyes are of no farther use: for
to what purpose should we open those useless doors of the understanding, if
beauty be hid, which is the rare, and only object of the heart, the delight of
the soul, the light of the mind, and the greatest grace that ever was sent
from Heaven to the Earth?

But this angry man is mistaken, who without knowing my meaning, reproves me
too sharply, whose whole study, and all the actions both of my body, and soul,
have never had other object then beauty, of which I am and ever shall be an
Adorer: My eyes serve me to no other purpose, but to behold her; my mouth opens
not, but to praise her; I walk not, but to do her service; nor stand still, but
to admire her; I sleep not, but to dream of her; nor wake, but to see her
again; and in a word, I kneel not, but to adore her, as the purest beam of
the Divinity, which gently conducting the mind to its original, forces it, in
the midst of earthly things to reverence the heavenly.

Shall I, that hold from this Beauty the small merit my soul can pretend to,
which guided, and enlightened by her has often attempted, if not with great
success, at least with great desire to attain to the highest degrees of
Virtue? Shall I bury mine own glory, and frame that darkness, and deprive my
eyes of the sight of that brightness, which they so highly delight in? And can
you believe I should have been made choice of amongst so many eminent wits, to
speak out of this Chair, or rather this Capitol, where so many great men have
triumphed, if I had not within me inclination proportionable to the matter I am
to treat of?

We resolved to treat (as you have heard) of the high perfections of beauty;
and because he best deserves to speak of beauty (not that has most eloquence,
but) that has most affection for her, I was advanced to the honor of being
heard in such a place, where it is a favor to be admitted as an Auditor.

Then judge if I, who am indebted to Beauty for so many favors, and have so
many several ways had experience of her power, can ever endeavor to obscure
this Sunshine, or endeavor to imprison her, which, like fire, burns with
the more violence, when it is restrained. I am not so ignorant, like Aesops Cock
to undervalue jewels; nor so ill advised to attempt the death of that beauty,
who, being heretofore injured in words only, deserved so well, that Jupiter
himself revenged her quarrel: Stesicores is a sufficient testimony of this,
who having by his ill-language endeavored to obscure Helens beauty, was
stricken blind; it is true, that when he had shown his repentance, by
advancing her praises, whom before he had injured, the gods restored him to his
sight, thereby leaving us an assurance, that Nature has nothing more worthy of
respect, nothing more precious, nothing more divine in all her stores, then
beauty; that beauty which is the salt and light of all things; the Theater of
the infinite power, the object of all our desires; the Epitome of all
perfection; the chief ray of the uncreated Sun; and the Image of the only
God of the whole World.

Is not Beauty (according to the Platonists) the only thing which the soul
ownes to be divine in this lower World? So that whosoever shall veil her, may
it not be justly said of him, that he envies the soul its felicity, and God
the honor of the favors he has done us? Is he not a rebel to Nature, who
has decreed us beauty for our chief object? and is he not an Enemy to Reason,
which has so fixed it self upon the consideration of that delight, which
pleases the heart, informs the understanding, and elevates the soul?

Whence should we find Arguments to condemn the impiety of Diagoras, if this
beauty should no more appear, which carries with her so great a splendour, that
it is impossible her original can be derived from any thing, but such a Sun,
whose light is eternal? In fine, what would become of all the stars of Heaven,
and all the fair flowers of the Earth, if all their beauties must be hid? and
what kind of Oration must mine be, if nothing of Beauty dare appear in it?

But if any of this Auditory desire to know exactly, what this beauty is? let
him hear the witty Lucians opinion thereupon: Beauty (says he) is the
intrinsic value of all things, which are only esteemed precious so far forth
as they are adorned with beauty; and Isocrates adds, that Virtue her self is
therefore more valuable, then all other things, because more beautiful.

'Twas a pretty Question in Plutarke, why the Ancients gave order, that the
Temple of the Goddess Horta should always stand open? Labeon answers, that
'twas for no other Reason, but that this Goddess had her very name from the
word, to exhort and encourage men to handsome actions: But what is so likely to
do that work, as beauty, being her self, not only the Theater, but object of
virtuous actions? Shall then the Temples of this Divinity be shut up, which not
only exhorts to noble actions, but represents them before our eyes? Shall her
Images be covered with Vailes? I am not able to endure it.

I am not ignorant that Beauty does so powerfully captivate the heart, that
some have thought her an Inchantress: But Olympias, the Wife of Philip King of
Macedon, has made her Apology: For her Husband being so strangely in love with
a Thessaliau Lady, that all the World swore he was bewitched; this Queen never
left, till she had procured the sight of her; and seeing her so admirable
beautiful, she cried out, let no man accuse her any longer of Witchcraft,
since she has so many charms in her eyes.

What shall I say more? Beauty was called by Bias a good thing, which belongs
not to the person, that has it, but to him that beholds it, as indeed none
enjoy it, but those that see it. So that if this be true by concealing this
admirable Scene, we deprive our selves of a glorious spectacle of a most
pleasing object, of a benefit which of right belongs to us.

To conclude, (Gentlemen) Beauty has so many advantages over all other things,
that Hell it self does reverence, and adore it; but what did I say reverence,
and adore? those are effects, which may spring from fear in a poor spirit;
but Hell it self does cherish, and desire beauty: The Devils themselves have
often been in love with beauty; whereof the Heathen Stories will furnish us
with plenty of Examples.

Envy, the most mischievous Monster in Hell, from which nothing is free under
the Sun, humbles her self before Beauty, which she fears and respects: So
that Melancomes had reason for what he said, that all things are envied but
Beauty, which is adored. And it is an infallible mark, that it is a divine
quality, to which Nature acknowledging her self inferior, has not the
boldness to envy it.

Shall we then be more rigorous then Hell? and would we willingly eclipse that
light, which the fair Ladies extract from the Stars; in the brightness of
her eyes, the whiteness of her bosom, the beams of their hair, and the
warmth they bring to Lovers? Let beauty live, let her live uncovered, since not
just to be too sparing of the favors of Heaven: let Beauty be visible to the
eyes of such as delight in it; but if any be of a contrary opinion, let it be
for ever concealed from him; for it is not just he should enjoy the light of the
Stars, who desires to see the sky always clouded; let him then rejoice in the
unpleasant rarity of deformed objects, that desires to be deprived of the
pleasing sight of beauty.

For my part, I have little reason to condemn it to a Masque, who should
thereby pluck a Thunderbolt upon my head, that would destroy me in an instant,
in obedience to those that had power to command me: I could do no less then
discourse the matter they had appointed me; but it is none of my part to decide
the question.

They that wish I should give sentence against beauty, are ignorant of my
apprehensions; and he that would have me pronounce against deformity, knows
as little of my Interest; how much of my self must I (upon that account) keep
for ever from the view of the World, and particularly this Discourse, which
has nothing beautiful in it, but the matter? But if nevertheless (most
illustrious Auditors) you desire to receive the sentence of an Oracle in the
point, to come to Delphos, 'twill not be necessary to sacrifice to Neptune, nor
to implore mercy of that god, that commands in Aetolia; for that severe Apollo,
who did not heretofore afford his Oracles, but with much ado, to the devoutest
of men, is now become prodigal of them, and by an extraordinary miracle makes
his beams shine in the Academy of the night.

Behold! view these fair Ladies, and judge whether we need seek after any
other Sunshine; and whether our night can ever expect more glorious stars: you
will guess by considering them, if it be just to conceal beauty: whether love
can possibly permit it, since 'twill prove destructive to his Kingdom; whether
Nature will endure it, since it injures her workmanship; whether 'twill not
provoke God to rank his Image amongst such things, as are either hurtful, or
unprofitable; for indeed Beauty masqu'd is but as a Sun eclipsed, or a
treasure buried under ground.

But to what purpose are so many uncertain words? I have done, and have no
more left, but to turn my self to you, fair Ladies, whom I would call the
Graces, if 'twere not an injury to your Beauty to allow a Venus above you.

I have no more to say (fair Ladies) but to beg your pardon for our Academie,
that was so blind to make a question in your bright presence, whether it might
be fit to hide beauty; for when she proposed this Question amidst the darkness
of her night, she had never seen the splendour of so many Suns; nor has she
compared beauty, and deformity to injure your fair eyes, but, as a mark of her
affection, weighed the one, and the other, to the end, that having exalted that
Beauty, we might lift up our eyes to admire it, and bend our knees to give it
reverence.

The Effect of this Oration.
EXcept those Ladies, that thought of preserving their complexions, the Masque
had not one of its party; every one wished it might be sent back to the other
side of the mountains, and that the French custom might gain no footing in
Italy. They said that the Beauties of Greece and Rome would not have been
inferior to those of France, though they had had no Masks to preserve them.
In conclusion, the first part of this speech was utterly cried down, and the
latter had all the Votes; and it was the general wish, that no fair Ladies
might ever make use of any covering, but against the Sun, or the Wind.

Stesicrates the Rash.
The Argument.
Apelles, and Lysippus were only permitted to paint, or make a Statue of
Alexander, because this generous Prince was unwilling to be put in condition to
be undervalued, even in a Picture. Stesicrates as much beyond the other
Statuaries, as a Mountain is above a Statue, proposes a design of higher
consideration; 'twas of Mountains contiguous to Heaven. He will make an
Alexander of the Mount Athos to the glory of Alexander: who ever saw an
Alexander mounted higher? He will place him a City in one hand, and a River in
the other, and yet still reserve in this prodigious Colossus the resemblance of
Alexander. This is the subject of this Discourse.

ALexander, the time is now come, that thou must perceive, that either
Alexander needs no Statue to eternize him in the memories of men, since he is
so deeply graven in their hearts, or that Stesicrates alone is worthy to leave
to posterity the Image of that generous Prince, which can no way resemble him,
unless it be fancied of greater things, then the understanding is able to
conceive.

What? can it be possible, that, that Alexander, whom I have heard bewail,
that he was too straightly confined within the vast compass of the Universe,
should esteem a little cloth, or a few plates of Brass a Theater worthy his
Majesty? And how? can I leave Alexander in so pitiful a condition? he whose
only smiles or frowns create the felicity, or terror of a hundred Kingdoms?

But what did I say? pardon me Great Prince, if I spoke (before I was aware) of
a hundred distinct Kingdoms, since we now see no body reign in the World, but
Jupiter and Alexander. To paint Alexander to make his memory live the longer,
were a rash error: If Alexander be borne mortal, and perishable, as other men
(which I will not undertake to prove) that were to increase not his glory, and
eternity, but his shame, and frailty: He makes thee last but for a short time,
that wishes no more, and such a thing as thy Apelles framed thee.

That very thing wherein he has established to future ages the greatest glory
of ours is no stronger, then a poor cloth; and what can less resemble our
Alexander, then one composed of so much weakness? If he have framed thee of so
feeble materials to take away the violence of that Thunderbolt he has placed
in thy hand, I excuse the kindness he shows to the world; but if he did it
out of a belief to answer the qualities of the original, he is a Liar, a
Traitor, a Blaspheamer, even with his Pensill.

Alexander the delight of Mankind, shall he put in a capacity to last but one
age? Alexander borne for the good of the World, ought he to be trusted with a
Thunderbolt, but one hundred of years? What? shall those that carry thunder be
not only subject to the injuries of time, but worms? Do we multiply
Alexanders to the end more then one may be destroyed? and who can secure us,
that the least wind shall not carry away our Jupiter, as well as his Engle?
but how comes it to pass, that Lysippus has not been ashamed to make thee of
brass? thee, who deservest Statues more precious then that of Artaxcrxes?

Brass is too hard and rude to represent an Alexander so clement; who is never
brass, but when he fights against an Enemy. When thy hand (that has been ever
liberal) shall be implored to relieve all other men's necessities, will thou
not complain, though insensible, that thy hands are of brass? Alas! he that
makes not thy hands always doing good, knows thee not.

By imitating the features and proportions of the body, we may well copy a
Darius, but not an Alexander: Alexander was never buried in the superficies of
his Motherswomb; he has a soul which reaches farther then himself; and he
must have something in him larger, then the greatest of things, who will
picture that Alexander for whom the world was too little.

It Is I. Great Prince, who will frame an Alexander which shall borrow some of
the Virtues of the Original: Hear, consider, and by the nature of my design
judge, what an esteem I have of thy worth. The large extent of the high and
lofty Mount Athos, appears in the confines of Thrace, whose top mounts up even
to the very stars, and the foot reaches very far into the Sea.

This is the only matter I find worthy to receive from Art the form of that
Alexander, who even in Effigies is fit to command the whole Earth: Yes
Alexander, thy courage has made thee head of all the Earth, and I am resolved
to establish thee so. This is that Athos, whose foot was divided from the
Continent by Xerxes his rashness, who to leave a monument of his power would
make it possible to sail over Mountains, and to march on foot in the midst of
the Sea.

What higher thoughts did ever enter into the heart of man? and yet I will
bring it to pass, that the World shall see the highest Fancy of this ambitious
Monark, shall for ever lie prostrate at the feet of my Alexander. This Image
shall have a City in the right hand; for even in a Statue the hand of Alexander
ought not to be without command.

From the left a River shall power down; for, what can better resemble
Alexanders liberality, then a River? My intention is, that even in Statue
Alexanders hand should be a Fountain of goodness. This is the Alexander
Stesicrates has designed: The worth of my Heroes will not agree with a traile
Statue.

It Is to do Alexander an in jury to employ any thing less then the Mount Athos
to represent such a Greatness, under whose shadow so many Nations fly for
shelter. Would not thou complain of an Artist, who thinking of Alexander,
could fancy any thing lower, then a high Mountain? Every Apelles, every
Lysippus can counterfeit an Alexander; it is Stesicrates only can draw his true
Copy, Every Apelles, every Lysippus can make an Alexander; bu^ it is Stesitrates
only can frame an Alexander the Great. For indeed who can look upon my
Alexander without admiration? who will not presently know it to be Alexander,
that has always a City in his hands? Is It any new glory to this hand to give
away Cities, even for Alms?

Pictures ought, if it be possible, to have not only the are of those Heroes
they represent; but something to denote their principal inclinations, to the
end they leave as well their glory as their Countenance to posterity. Now it is
impossible better to represent Alexander, or more lively to express his
liberal inclination, then by placing a City in his hand, as if he were giving
it away.

It Is in this manner we ought to make Copies of Alexander, and not with a
Pensill, which draws nothing but the shadow of the Body it pretends to imitate,
and that but imperfectly. In that manner, which I design thy Statue, if to the
misfortune of the world, it should ever fall out, that thou should find thy
self mortal, I dare promise, it shall never come to pass, that Alexander
shall be left without a soul: if thou lose the reasonable, thou shall not part
with the vegetative soul; and so long as the Earth brings forth Trees, shall
Alexander flourish.

The World cannot contain an Alexander greater then mine: He that desires a
greater must find a World, that has more space betwixt Earth and Heaven: He
that would fancy him more liberal, must find out a Liberality more profuse,
then such a one as overflowes, more profitable; then that which nourishes
mankind, more constant and durable, then that which belongs to my Alexander,
whose spring shall never dry up.

To make Alexander an ordinary thing, though 'twere but only in an Image, is a
crime in that understanding, that can stoop to such a thought: We must either
find out some place where it is impossible to erect any other Statue, but
thine, or find out some matter capable of no other form: otherwise how should
we distinguish thy worth from some ambitious rich person, that had a mind to
be equal with, and perhaps greater, then Alexander?

That Hercules, which lived before thee, knowing that without a rough draught
'twas impossible to design an Alexander, fixed the bounds which he prescribed
to his courage, in the middle of the vast extent of the Ocean, to put thee in
mind that Hercules and Alexander ought not to erect Trophies to their memories
in such a place, where the meanest Citizen may lay the foundation of his.

Will thou suffer the Image of so great a King, promiscuously to be made an
ornament to every House? Divine Alexander, can thou (though but in Effigies)
endure to have a Master? Pardon what I have said; though I am so much concerned
in the honor of thy name, I could yet approve of the outrage done to thee, if
for the general good of the Universe, they could find out a man worthy, that
Alexander should serve for an ornament to his Palace.

But who shall that man be? If I were to adorn a house with Alexanders
Picture, Jupiter forbid! it should honor any other, but his own. I will frame
an Alexander which shall be an Ornament to the World, a Burden to Hell, and
profitable to all men; I will make an Alexander, who shall have the center of
the Earth for his foundation, the Sea for his Looking-glass, the Earth for his
Theater, and Heaven for his Pavillion: Stesicrates his Alexander shall be
subject to no misadventure but the fall of Heaven, which is so near him.

If nevertheless it be possible for him to perish under those Ruins, who has
shoulders strong enough to prop up Heaven, which is the only part of Nature,
which has not yet been partaker of the good thou have done to the Universe.

To conclude Alexander, I did intend my boldness should imagine things for thy
honor, which even timerity her self durst not have thought on. The Giants, to
lift themselves up to Heaven, Fancied not a higher Ladder, then I have made for
Alexander; and yet I fear not Thunder bolts, unless Heaven shall prove envious
of thy Virtues.

Thou see, most generous Prince, what kind of Statue I am preparing for
thee; God only can make a greater: I know not whether 'twill please thee, but
I should be very unfortunate, if Alexander (the King of all that are
magnanimous, as well as of the Macedonians) should undervalue a Statue, which
Stesicrates to the wonder of the World intends to set up to the eternity of his
Master. The Heavens, the Sea, and the Earth have all sworn their assistance to
the completing of so mavelous a work.

The Sea, as his Tributary will be ever at his feet; the Earth will embroyder
his garments with Trees, Herbs, and Flowers; and the Heaven will crown the
forehead of Stesicrates his Alexander with Stars eternally.

What more legitimate Prince can the Earth obey, then him that shall be crowned
by Heaven? In brief, nothing ought to be above my Alexander, but that which
can make an Alexander greater then mine. That rash person who should dare to
attempt to overtop my Alexander, cannot possibly rise higher without knocking
his head against the Region of Thunderbolts, which would soon punish his
ambition.

Hercules, had no Stesicrates, had he had one, he would never have contented
himself with two poor Pillars, which were (to say truth) too low a thought
for so high a Spirit.

I will let all the World see, that Jupiter and Alexander are two neighboring
Monarchs, and that the bounds of their Empires are very near one another.

In effect, if it come not near Heaven, wat Kingdom is left in the World, to
which Alexanders extreme courage may further aspire?

Thus probably Stesicrates spoke to Alexander, but his Rhetorique could make no
use of Hyperboles, since the Heavens and Mountains were his most ordinary
conceptions.

The effect of this Oration.
ALexander was about to answer Stesicrates, when he was hindered by Apelles,
who spoke to him as you shall hear in the next.

Apelles Revengefull.
The Argument.
Because Stesicrates boasts, he is able to frame the Effigies of a man, out of
a Mountain, we ought not from thence conclude him, worthy to triumph over
Apelles that had deified a mortal Man. Apelles was willing to revenge himself
upon Stesicrates, and I find Stesicrates had reason to tremble before a Man,
that could not only represent the Thunderbolts, but him that made them. The
Reader is only desired ( as Alexander did) to hear the Answer to this Rash
Person.

BEhold at thy feet, O great King, Apolles, whom they accuse upon pretense,
that he has offended Alexander; can thou believe it? thou who know that I
have always had my soul, mine eye, and my hand employed near an Alexander,
who holds the Thunder in his hand; thou, I say, must not expect that I will now
employ my hands to petition thee, to be favorable in my cause; for those hands
which know how to make an Alexander, cannot put themselves into the posture of
petitioning, neither ought I to do it, for if I have erred, that I have it
either by intention, or action; my action has deified thee, and for my
intention I need not discover that to a Jupiter, he knows the heart; in a word,
the same I have made thee, the same I implore thee.

O how unfortunate should Apelles be, if to be cleared he were forced to offer
his vows in any other place but at thy feet? indeed whither should he go else?
should he go to the feet of that Jupiter, from whose hand he has taken the
Thunder, to give it to his Alexander? it is not very likely for him to find
protection there?

My Accuser is Stesicrates, that rash Stesicrates, who envying thy valor, and
not knowing how to oblige all the Divinity of Heaven to conspire against
Alexander, would oblige Alexander to remove Mountains that he might be taken
for a Giant, and have the same punishment. I will defend my self, not that I
think this accusation can lessen me in the opinion of that Alexander whom I
have made a Jupiter, but that they may see that none can be near Alexander
without being enobled with frankness of spirit, being unjustly debased to
return due reproach to an insolent depraver: I have made a Picture of Alexander
in matter facile, and gentle, to make it resemble Alexander, even in facility,
and gentleness to comply with the love of his subjects, who each of them burn,
with ardent desire, to have him their Alexander, and to offer their oblations
of vows to him; Alexander is not only the head, but the heart of all his
Subjects.

If I had framed an ALEXANDER of a stupendous fierceness, I should have
defaced that sweetness, which of an ALEXANDER has made him esteemed a God,
through all his Dominions: I have made him common, but not vulgar, and if by
chance the meanness of the matter render him less valuable, he has his weapon
of terror in his hand, the Thunderbolt will ever procure him reverence; in
very being ALEXANDER he is valuable; and being depainted in cloth, he is the
more communicable, hereby he shall reign in every house, as he does in every
Kingdom, it will be my glory to have multiplied so many ALEXANDERS in the
world; I might have provided a figure of gold, less precious, for all that,
then this my object, if I had designed to have my ALEXANDER esteemed for the
matter; but in this, ALEXANDER is the ornament of ALEXANDER.

Let him covet glory from without, who has none essential within him: but the
Beauty and Majesty of ALEXANDER has luster enough of themselves; I will have
all the world bow their knees before this poor piece of cloth, that mean and
contemptible thing, which thou strivest to trample on, O Stesicrates, shall
reign over all the Mountains thou designest!

The wise Lycurgus, thinking it not fit to distinguish the poor from the rich,
at least in the service of the gods, ordained by a decree that they should
offer no sacrifice but of things of low price; even so, have I facilitated the
means for all persons to be owners of an ALEXANDER, to whom they may pay their
daily reverence; the gods accept the will, and not the Expense; let the winds
carry my ALEXANDER whither they can, they shall never carry him beyond his
Empire; wheresoever he shall come, he shall find Subjects and Altars.

I have made him of Linen, to make known to the World, the merit of a man who
knows how to make himself adored even in a Picture drawn upon a piece of
Canvas: but the envy of this insolent man, stopped not there, he would have me
guilty of treason because I have placed a Thunderbolt in the hand of that
ALEXANDER, which he would have made of Earth: I have placed a Thunder bolt in
his hand, that the world might know that ALEXANDER is my Jupiter, that my
Jupiter shoots no Thunderbolts, and thereby may learn that ALEXANDER deserves
Incense.

If I had intended to make him as terrible as amiable, I would have placed his
sword in his hand, which is a Thunder bolt which never falls in vain; what?
do thou wish his Thunderbolt had been thrown? and do not perceive,
impertinent fool, that if ever it go out of his hand, it will hurt no other
ALEXANDER but thine? it will rend Mountains: it was an effect of my gratitude,
not my invention, O great Prince, to place a Thunderbolt in thy hand; for who
has given me Campasbe, the fair Venus that reigns in my heart, but
ALEXANDER? why should not he, that has received a Venus from him, furnish his
Jupiter with Thunderbolts? and why? can any but Jupiter give a Venus? but I
wonder not at this man's extravagant undertaking, his wit is perverted, he is
an enemy to Nature, and to shame her would in spite of her teeth, transform
Men into Mountains, and Mountains into Men.

O ALEXANDER! he does not complain, that I have made thee a Thunderer, but
that I have made thee a Jupiter; if it were for the worlds safety that made him
complain, to see the number of the Thunderers increase, he would not frame an
ALEXANDER that should with his own hands carry Cities to ruin: this monstrous
Giant deserves a more severe punishment then those of Phlegra; for if they
rashly endeavored to climb up to Heaven, they were content to leave the Cities
at least quiet upon Earth; but I hope there will be no need of Thunderbolts to
ruin this Colossus, since he carries a River in his hand, sufficient to
overwhelme his pride, and to drown himself, as a just punishment of his crime
that undertook to overturn-Mountaines, and to precipitate Rivers; behold what
a kind of ALEXANDER this Stesicrates fancies, who is a greater Enemy, and more
injurious to the fame of ALEXANDER then to that of Apelles.

Behold, but not without vengeance, how he lessens thine honor, to advance thy
^tatua, he would make an ALEXANDER as heavy as the Earth, an ALEXANDER that
inhabits the Air, and troubles the Sea; his ALEXANDER shall have his forehead
crowned with Tempests, and his sides with Precipices, so that it shall be
impossible to approach his feet, washed with the Sea, without Shipwreck.

Who ever saw a less considerable, a more pernicious contemptible ALEXANDER,
then that which Stesicrates has formed? Sir, he exposes you to the
Thunderbolts, and reproaches me for putting one in your hand; I humbly submit
the cause to your judgment.

Thus Apelles opposes Stesicrates and these two flatterers, would make this
Prince believe, that the one could make a Mountain to be ALEXANDER, and the
other make him a Jupiter.

The Effect of this Oration.
THE Painter got the better of the Carver, and Apelles Pensill triumphed over
Stesicrates Chissell: Alexander was content to be thought the wonder of all
Ages, without being a Monster; in conclusion be heaped honors upon Apelles,
and put not Stesicrates to despair, for he found good reason to be satisfied
with the magnificence of a Prince, who knew how to recompense a good
inclination, as if it had been a desert.

The Apology for Marriage
The Argument.
A Question was proposed by one in the Academy of Sleepers to be debated, which
of the two, either a Wife or a Suite in Law, was the greatest diversion from
study: One, who having a Lawsuit, and no Wife, and so by consequence, better
knew the pain of pleading, the the pleasure of Love; seemed to disclaim
against Marriage, Manzinie stopped himon this manner.

I Have always heard with submission, and respect (O noble Academicks) ^ll the
discourses you have raised, and I never had the least inclination to condradict
the opinions of those exalted spirits, who, with such facility (as one may say
even in their slumberings) accomplish all their undertakings with honor, and
applause; none of my opinions have been inconcurrent with yours, and I have
never had but a high value for you, I have made it my honor, and esteemed my
self happy in the conformity I have had with so many excellent men.

But if I have followed your tenants hitherto by reason, I must abandon them at
this t^me by duty, finding I am too sensibly provoked by a Problem, which by
treating women ill, gives me occasion to manifest to her (the Loadstone of my
heart) that in what place soever I am in, I will always enter the Lists, not
only for the Interest of her person in particular, but to defend the honor of
the Sex in general: I am demanded (if I rightly understand the Question) which
is the greatest hinderance to study, a Wife, or a Suit in Law? but can there be
a heart, insensible enough, to doubt the advantages which men receive from
Wives, and compare them to a thing so contrary?

What! (my Lords) Marriage, which we may call the only love Lawful, the bond
which unites the Universe, and the last felicity of unreasonable man, shall
that be reckoned amongst the greatest misfortunes of humane tranquillity? I
pretend not (my Lords) to prove to you that a Lawsuit is a greater hinderance
to study, then a Wife, not seeing how I can do it, without sacrilege; for if
I say, that a Wife is a less obstacle to study then a Process in Law, I should
yield that a Wife is a hinderance to study, which I will never do, I must not
be so unjust or ungrateful to admit of a blame in that essence, from whence I
have mine, and by whom I expect the felicity of my days.

What obstacle can she be to study, who brings to our houses wealth, beauty,
modesty, and Virtue, who comforts us in all the misadventures of our life, who
partakes our happiness, and who becoming an inseparable companion of our
fortunes, diminishes our displeasures, and increases our satisfaction, by the
share she has in it? no, it is impossible that she should be a hinderance to
study.

On the contrary we may say, that she is not only a means to make us study,
but an ease, and consolation of the weariness which follows it; and to say in
a word, a subject, her self fit to be studied; and to evidence the truth of
what I say, we must have recourse to experience, all the world knows that
there is no person exempt from the care of business, but those only who have
Wives, their wisdom and industry supplies the men's places, and gives them
leisure to employ, in study, that time, which otherwise they would owe to the
necessities of domestic affairs, and this being true, why should we call that
our hinderance to study, which furnishes us with means to give our selves
absolutely to it? and why should we not own to be indebted, for this good,
to so perfect a Sex? that a Wife is a consolation of the Labors, and travels
of study, is not to be doubted.

A Husband, in coming out of his Closet, meets with a Person, whose
complacency cheers him after his solitude, whose conversation gives new lights
to his understanding, and who, by the sweetness of her Eyes, makes him forget
the pains, which the tediousness of study gave him, and prevents the
irksomness, and lassitude of spirit, caused by long reading; but if she be a
help for study, and an ease to the anxieties which it leaves? she is also (as I
have said) a subject proper for us to study, and, I think, it will not be hard
to prove to you, if a Wife be good and virtuous, she produces in our souls an
emulation, which inclining us to imitate her, is more profitable to us, and
draws us nearer to the way of Virtue, then Philosophy it self.

If on the contrary she has wicked inclinations, instead of being an obslacle
to study, she constrains us to study, with care, the way to change and mend
her, or to endure her evil customs with patience; no, no! a Wife is not a
hinderance to temperate study, but she is a hinderance to the debauch of study,
that is to say, to the excessive labor, since she rules and moderates it.

Those, who seek for true knowledge, learn it, and not only in Books, but
find it in all things which come in their way; study it self has need of
moderation, for he which studies, as if he had nothing else to do in all his
life, but to turn over the leaves of Books, and to load the Memory with the
doctrine of all Ages, cannot say he studies reasonably, but we can assure him
he loses the occasion to show in effect, by some great, and generous actions,
the fruits which he learnt from Philosophy, with so much pains, study, and
time.

He that supposes his Wife a hinderance to study, has without doubt, his
spirits dep^aved; he searches not for knowledge, but satisfies his curiosity;
he studies not to become either more able, or more virtuous, but only for his
divertisement: it is no wonder (my Lords) if he that is intemperate, even in
good things, and loves not Virtue it self, but, by the voluptuousness of his
spirit, maintains that a Wife is a hinderance to study the first disorder of
the soul causes the second, and (I think) I ought to say that he, that sindes
a Wife an obstacle to learning, and would banish her from the society of
reasonable men, is himself a hinderance to Virtue, and to the felicity of
mankind.

Socrates, the wisest of all antiquity, and so acknowled'd by the Oracles
themselves, lived a long time married unto Xantippe, whose humor was so unquiet
and divelish, that we may say she was possessed with a Devil rather then a
soul; and yet to show that Socrates believed not that a Wife was an enemy to
Philosophy, though she whom he had was very troublesome, and that she made his
life unto him such, as all the world called a continual Hell, yet she was no
sooner dead, but he espoused Mirro, sister to Aristides, and, by this second
Marriage, gave an illustrious example to approve my Tenent; not only a
Philosopher, a Socrates to take a Wife after Xantippe, but a Philosopher that
knew by experience what belonged to a wicked Wife; yet for all that he took
one, and so much for the advantage of my Argument, that he was a Philosopher,
and a Philosopher, whom other Philosophers acknowledged for their Master.

A virtuous Wife invites thee to Virtue, and a wicked one makes thee exercise
it, said that Master of knowledge, who suffered, with a mavelous tranquillity,
all the outrages his Wife did him; if I were not afraid to anger those of a
contrary opinion to mine, I should say, that a Wife is not only, not an
obstacle to study, but she is more advantageous then study it self, if we will
consider the utility of domestic affairs; how much labor and time might we
expend in study, before we should gain so much as our Marriage ordinarily
affords us?

We are borne in an age wherein we may say, the Muses field is the barrenest
ground we could undertake to manure; if we value profit by the satisfaction of
the mind, what sublunary blessing can raise us to more felicity, then the
affection of a lovely person, who in giving us children, gives us the pleasure
of being feared, obeyed, and loved? if we will consider the consolation in
point of Virtue, we shall find it sublime; by the sweetness of her eyes, we may
observe a Ray of the Divinity, and lift up our thoughts by beholding the
marvels in his creature, to the contemplation, and admiration of the Creator;
what Books, what Philosophy can teach us so perfectly temperance, moderation,
piety, devotion, and continence, as the example of a virtuous Wife?

But if any, in reproving me, say that all Women are not fair, and that all
Women are not good, I should answer him, that there is no Woman so ugly, but
custom and conversation renders fair; nor none so wicked, but his Virtue may
make good.

If I would maintain my tenent by a multitude of Reasons, the justice of my
cause would furnish me with enough; but shunning tediousness, what I have said
is sufficient to clear to you, that this Question is a Problem, without
Problem, not doubting but you perfectly know, manger the eloquent discourse of
my Adversary, that it is impossible for a Wife to be a hinderance to study, but
that I may entirely destroy a problem, which so uncivilly endeavors to
disparage a Sex, for whose sakes I declare my self partial, and of whom I am
an Adorer, if not an Idolater.

It will be necessary to add something, and to maintain also, that a Process
in Law is no hinderance to study; for on the contrary, it may advance it: but
if any oppose my opinion, I will give him for example the dispute now agitated
between us, for the judging whereof, this noble Assembly are met.

I have observed in the souls of every one in particular, a redoubling of
light, and knowledge, which makes me confident, that it is impossible, but that
a Lawsuit it self helps study.

Alas! what do I do? little judicious that I am! whilst I enter to discourse of
troubles in Law, I hinder you from going home to give thanks to those amiable
Creatures your Wives, whom I have proved to be so great an advantage to the
study of knowledge.

The Effect of this Oration.
EVery one agreed that a Suit in Law, and Study could not dwell together; but
in respect the Academy was composed of Men that were married, and of others that
were not, this reply for Marriage did not pass without dispute; in the end, the
plurality of voices carried it, and they entreated Manzinie to remember, that
Apollo was never married, nor was Minerva, and that the Muses are Virgins,
Antiquity having a mind to teach us, that Study, and the cares of Marriage are
almost incompatible, and that we may say this without offending the beauty of
Ladies, that the Muses often dwell with love, and the Graces very rarely with
Hymen, but never with Discord, who causes all Law Suits; so that without
determining which was most contrary to men of Learning, Marriage, or a Suit in
Law, they concluded that Men, that addicted themselves to study, ought not to
have the one, or the other.

The Philosophy of Love.
The Argument.
All Ages have made a Dispute, whether the Body were the Prison of the Soul?
and Manzinie was forced to revive this Philosophical question, at Gennes in
the Academy of Sleepers. This serves for the Argument of the following
discourse.

THE greater the Question is, (most illustrious Auditors) the less
proportionable is it to my abilities: It is to be inquired, whether the soul
be Prisoner in the body, but which is fit to determine it, the soul or the
body?

The body cannot discourse it, without being informed by the soul, and then it
follows, that the body is governed by the soul; but, if the soul be to
discourse the matter, it is necessary that the body afford it not only the
liberty, but the means, in representing the species of those objects, which it
conceives not only to help the understanding, but to direct her in point of
election; and from thence it may seem that the soul is ruled by the body.

For my part, whatsoever others may say, who have more knowledge, I esteem it a
very hard question to resolve: And as I find my self unable to determine it,
so I think 'twill be superfluous to discourse of it, since I shall be able to
do nothing but multiply difficulties, and contradictions. Nevertheless, to the
end my obedience may supply the place of merit, and my will amend the defects
of my judgment, I am resolved to acquaint you with an adventure which has
happened to me; which though it may seem a story too far distant from the
style of an Oration, it will not be impertinent to the business proposed by the
Academy.

Do me the favor to hear; for since I speak only to obey, I may boldly say,
I deserve to be heard: I was last night in my study drawing some few lines to
demonstrate (according to your orders) that the Body is the Prison of the
Soul; when a friend of mine came in, and asked me what I was doing, and
whether I had nothing to read? I told him I was transcribing something which I
had composed to speak to the Academy, and that I would be glad to show it him,
and to be governed by his judgment: He expressed a great desire to hear it,
so that (as if I had been before this Assembly) I began in this manner.

That the Body (most excellent Auditors) is the Prison of the Soul, the
ancient Philosophers have born Witness; the Divine Prophers have proved it,
and our own souls make it evident every day; which, being oppressed with the
burden of the mortality of the body, (which is worse) so fettred in this
Earthly abode, that they have wholly lost the use of their liberty, which would
soon conduct them (could they act freely) to that place to which they aspire,
as to their Center.

Bring my soul out of Prison, says David, wearied, and disgusted with the
unfortunate, painful, and miserable condition of our life, into which no man
enters, but weeping, nor leaves it* but he is reduced to nothing.

Seneca wrote, that his Body was the burden of his mind, which was ready to
sink under the weight, and was kept in continual chains. And Proclus under
the name of confinement seem^s to enlarge (not mend) this Prison; for he
always declared, that God had confined the soul to the body, as to a
pestilentiall and miserable place.

This body is a Prison in which the soul is obliged to answer before the
supreme Judge, with what gratitude she has resented her creation; and from
thence must she expect the sentence, which declaring her innocent, must
dis-ingage her from those bonds, which hinder her from mounting up to Heaven.

It seemed strange to some of the Ancients, who were ignorant of this truth,
that God should make the Planets and the Stars of Fire, (for so they believed)
the Winds of Air, Fishes and Birds of Water, and Man of Earth, an Element
inferior to all the rest, and that Man was thereby obliged (at least in the
worthiness of his matter) to give place to the least Bird that flies, and the
meanest Fish that swims.

But they considered not, that 'twas not probable God would have rather made
choice of the Earth, then any other Element to frame a Body to the Soul, if he
had designed to build her a Palace.

He made the body of Earth, because he meant it for a Prison: when he resolved
afterward to build them a Royal Palace, he made use of the light, and not of
the Earth, and allowed them the Sun for a cloth of estate, and a Throne
imbroyder'd with Stars.

Plato affirms in his Timens, that after God had created Souls, he lodged
them in the Stars, as in their proper Sphere; as in a place proportionate to
their natural qualities; and that there was their abode before man was
created; but that afterward (by a strange madness) they grew so ingratefully
in love with Earthly things, and so weary of Heavenly, that the Divinity, being
infinitely displeased at their error, and ingratitude, threw them headlong,
from Heaven, and confined them to the Body, which is the Prison where they are
tortured, and do penance for their crime: But if any man will reject other
men's Authorities, and desire a clearer demonstration to assure him, that the
soul is indeed a Prisoner to the Body, the Argument may be framed in this
manner.

In relation to its place, the soul has no liberty, for although it be a
spirit, like an Angel, nevertheless it cannot, like an Angel, remove it self
from place to place, so much is it tied to the body. It has no liberty in
relation to its objects, because being a Prisoner she absolutely depends upon
the will of her Jailer.

She can think nothing without those Idea's the Body represents, nor does any
thing enter into the understanding, which passes not through the senses: Nor
has this poor P^is'ner any more light to her mind, nor liberty to her will,
but what it pleases her Keeper to grant.

If this severe Guardian sleep, it is then, that, contrary to the Nature of
other Prisoners, she is so closely locked up, and so totally deprived of
liberty, that although it be most certain, that the Soul wakes, whilst the
Body sleeps, yet is it as undoubted an Axiom (which cannot be questioned in our
Church without a crime) that what operation soever the Soul may have during
sleep, it can neither merit nor offend.

Judge then, whether the soul be free, when it has not so much as the liberty
to sin: The Soul has no liberty to operate, unles the Body give it; nor has
it leave to refuse those employments, which that commands. In what then can the
Soul be free in the Body? And truly (to pass from intellectuals to manners) if
the Soul were not fastened to the Body, how is it probable it could be pleased
in so unlucky a Mansion, which all Ages have confessed to be only a place of
complaint, and misery?

O miserable man! one cannot so much as name thee, without treading thee under
foot; thy Body being composed of Earth, thou art thrown to the ground, as
soon as thou art named; thou art imprisoned in a Body made of Earth, conceived
in sin, borne in pain, and exposed to all the tyranny of fortune, to whom all
seasons are troublesome, all the Elements dangerous: Thy Soul is placed in a
body, which derives its diseases from its proper nourishment, and perils from
its own wealth, which loves not without grief, hates not without trouble, and
possesses nothing without torment: in a body to which the influence of Heaven
designs disasters, the Earth brings forth death, and hell prepares torments.

Judge then whether a soul created to be partaker of eternal felicity can
willingly make that her habitation? But why do I speak of Heaven and Hell?
those are things too great to be named in a discourse of so mean a subject.

This unfortunate man is obnoxious (both dead and alive) to such things as
scarce have a being, which may (almost) be called nothing. An atome animated, a
flea devours his blood; a Worm of the Earth will gnaw him, if he be a Giant:
and after all this cannot be thought, that the Soul (which is but little
inferour to the Angels, which may and ought to aspire to eternal glory) should
willingly and without constraint, dwell in a body subject to these conditions?
sure it is impossible.

The ancient Philosophers, who were men of great wisdom, did very rightly say,
that a dying man was set at liberty, and laid to rest, when he was dead.

But if some men should doubt this truth, by seeing with what an affection the
soul is tied to the body, and when it is forced to leave it, with what
extraordinary expressions of sorrow it sighs, to part with a place, which it
would never grieve at, had it not been pleased with it: let them remember, that
it sighs and laments, not for love of the place she is to leave, but fear of
that, to which she is going: for, who can assure her she is not to dye with the
body, said Themistius, who had not learned a better Doctrine from the School
of the Gospel?

The life the gods have given is a hidden thing, says Hesiod. If the Soul
then fears not to die, as to its being, it may, as to its well being. No man
knows whether he be worthy of love or hate, and therefore the Soul of a just
person will part with less grief, and more assurance, then a wicked man,
because the goodness of a man's life makes him reasonably hope for happiness at
his death.

Most noble Auditors, I was scarce advanced thus far in my discourse, or to
speak truth, I had scarcely begun to read him my Reasons, when my friend (who
had before expressed by his wry-mouths and gaping at me, how little
satisfaction he received by my Arguments) interupted me in an instant; hold
your peace, said he: for (by the fair Eyes that I adore) I am no longer able
to endure this impertinence.

I speak with that sincerity which a Soul ought to have, that loves truly: and
how is it possible, that such a man as you, who have always delighted in the
beauty of Learning, should suffer himself to be thrown down headlong into
such low conceptions? In what condition are you? what? the Body the Prison of
the Soul? he spoke this in such a manner, with such a kind of scorn in his
Eyes, that instead of angring me, he made me laugh; and presently drawing a
golden Case out of his pocket, he drew near the Lights, and showed me the
Picture of a Lady extremely beautiful: I confess the sight surpised me, and
that my soul was fixed upon it with delight, and that I turned not mine eyes off
from it, but to have the content to return.

I had continued longer in this ecstasy, had not my friend caught his Picture
out of my hands: And now (said he) what do you resolve? can you still continue
in your false opinion? I, who by this admirable Vision was not only disturbed
in the course of my blood, but of my reason; assured him, that I knew not, what
he meant to infer upon his Proposition: He answered me on a sudden; If thou
be not stark blind, Judge whether such Bodies as this represents, are fitter
to be called horrid prisons, or objects of felicity?

I presently apprehended the subtilty of his amorous Philosophy, and made him
answer, that I acknowledged my self vanquished, and would presently tear my
papers, that they might not remain as testimonies against me of my former
error: But he would not suffer me to do it, but spoke to me in this
manner: That thou may not believe, that the blindness of love rather then
the strength of Reason invites me to oppose thy Arguments, do me the favor
to hear me a little.

It Is the property of the form to contain, of the matter to be containned:
If then thou will not say the form is contained by the matter, thou can not
more affirm, that the Body is the Prison of the Soul, since the Soul is the
true essential form of the Body.

Nothing can be beloved but what is good, and beautiful: The Soul, which is
all spirit^, and light, loves the Body; Therefore the Body is the good, and not
the Prison of the Soul. Aristotle has proved the major, and the Soul proves
the minor (as thou thy self have confessed) when being forced to part with the
Body it complains and afflicts it self at this separation.

Now, that the Body is the good of the Soul, and that consequently it loves
the Body out of its own interest, and affection (and not for fear of being
buried with it, as Themistius said; nor by the violence of a forced necessity,
as Seneca did almost believe) I think I shall have no hard task to prove,
having Reason and Thomas Aquimas on my side: What difference (said this
Angelical Doctor, who had a greater privilege then any other to treat of
Angels) what difference can be found betwixt an Angel and the reasonable soul?
The difference is, (says he) that although both the one, and the other are
spiritual substances, which may exist without a Body, the Angel nevertheless
is perfect without the Body, but the Soul without the Body is imperfect.

The reason of this imperfection is, because the Soul (being the very
essential form of the Body, and so essentially but a part) when it is
destitute of that part which concurs with it in the constitution of the whole,
must needs remain imperfect.

From hence is risen that opinion of some Divines, who it is possible in some
measure to prove the resurrection of the Body, even from the natural sight of
Reason: because the Soul, being naturally imperfect without the Body (as the
form without the matter) and having a continued desire of being reunited; it
is a thing which appears not conformable to Nature (which cannot endure
perpetual violence) that the Soul should be for ever imperfect, and be
continually agitated with an uncessant desire, and longing after accomplishment
of its natural inclination: And therefore many believe that the happiness of
the Soul in Heaven shall not be in its full perfection, until the Body be
likewise glorified.

So wonderfully are we made, (says Gregory) that Reason possesses the Soul,
and the Soul possesses the Body: and Aristotle gave this sentence, that the
Soul might govern the Body, as the Master commands the Soul.

But not to trouble you with so much Philosophy, behold (and then to my great
content he opened the Box again) behold this face, that proves it better then
all the Arguments in the World: I know thou look upon it with joy, and I
very willing to contribute any thing to thy delight: Behold it, take it, and
draw your Arguments.

I replied, I was satisfied, and wished him all content, who had showed me a
face, that pleased me so much. In conclusion, I see that Love is a Musician, a
Philosopher, a Poet, a Divine, and what you will, and he that is not in Love is
nothing; so that, my dear friend, it is not without Reason, that thou admirst
a face, which has taught thee so many sciences.

I have reason indeed (answered he) so to do, for should I do otherwise, I
must acknowledge my self both ungrateful, and stupid; for, to conclude (and
then he took up his Poetic Vain) who would not adore a Face, whose Eyes are
Stars, or rather Suns; whose hair are threads of purest gold, and her
complexion fairer then Aurora in her brightest luster? who would not adore a
person, whose lips were of Coral, her teeth of pure Ivory, and her voice
equal to that Goddess, which the ancient Poets called HARMONY?

Who would not adore such a face as appears so beautiful, that 'twould do the
Sun an honor to be compared to it? To this sparkling Beauty only I can compare
the Stars, when I would flatter them: But let neither the Sun nor Stars grow
proud of this comparison; for certainly they must both yield, as well in power,
as beauty to this incomparable. If the Sun can boast of being the Author of
life; this face has the power of life, and death.

If the Stars glory of the power of their influence, those Eyes determine our
destinies at their own pleasure; I will not say as it pleases their tyranny;
for I will not place tyranny in Heaven. How then? shall this Body, which is so
accomplished, be believed to be a Prison, and not a Paradise to the soul, that
inhabits it? Oh Heavens! for what reason can that be? It Is I confess, a Prison
of the Soul, but it is of mine.

Well then in these days, either such places as resemble Paradise are Prisons;
or the bosom of a fair Lady is no Prison; or at least such Prisons are
desirable, as Paradise. So concluded this Poet in propose (sighing and going
from me) who had framed his Paradise in a Picture. My Noble Auditors, you have
heard him, and me; be you the Judges. I have said.

The effect of this Oration.
THE Academy took the Lovers part; every one believed the Soul was too
perfect, and too innocent to be condemned to Prison as soon as 'twas created.
One amongst the Throng cried out, that if the Body were a Prison, there were
some bodies (at least) which falsified the old Proverb, that no Prison is
beautiful: This Carahine recoyl'd as soon as 'twas short, and Manzinie was
forced to yield to the general opinion.

The Pusillanimity of Seleucus.
The Argument.
I did never wonder much, that a Man composed of ambitious desires, after the
goods of fortune might bring himself to complain, that a single World was not
sufficient to satisfy his desire of glory: but I have not a little marvel'd
that any heart could possibly grieve at that power, which all others so
vehemently desire. Seleucus sighed at his being borne a King, and esteemed
himself buried under (not adorned with) that Diadem, which others account a
Character of Divinity. I have often thought to have sacrificed to Fame to
incline her to silence this fact; but finding it impossible to stop her mouth,
I am resolved to oppose this Discourse, which cannot be heard without
indignation, nor ought to be passed by without punishment. Thus Manzinie
designed the Argument of the ensuing Oration.

THE desire of Command has always been the strongest passionamongst men; so
that considering often the extreme impetuosity of this generous affection,
which has so often overturned the World, I could not choose but search into the
Cause which has produced this painful longing in Mankind.

But reading in Genesis, where the Creator considering his own excellence in
that of his last piece of Workman-ship: I observed, that he no sooner saw that
this work was good (as the Scripture says) but by a Divine impatience, (if it
be lawful so to speak) he instantly began to bless him, called him to the
government of all things upon Earth, and gave him the command over all living
Creatures; as if God had said that power was the accomplishment of all
blessings, and that whosoever had obtained it, might, and ought to esteem
himself happy.

I protest to you (my Noble Auditors) I was something exalted with this
conceit, whereof I thought my self the Author: But I happened on a passage,
which made me know that, in truth, it was a Divine Conception, lively expressed
by God himself; since that Esau complaining that Jacob had stolen away the
blessing from him, (that is to say, the government of his Fathers Inheritance)
seems likewise to infer, that the blessing is no other thing, but only the
right to command.

Who will he then be, that considering those eminent prerogatives of
dominion, will not (as I do) pity those famous unhappy persons, who have
unfortunately, rather then wickedly, lost their lives in pursuit of their
desire of advancing themselves to government? I shall wonder no more that some
men have had so high thoughts of themselves, that they have endeavored to have
Altars, and Incense devoted to them, as if they were gods indeed.

This excellent condition of Ruling is so great, and accompanied with a train
of so many eminent additions, that it is no strange thing, that a man (proud in
his own Nature) should straggle out of the way, and suffer himself to be
cozened by this honor, which certainly has something of Divine in it, if the
matter in which it resides, corrupt it not. This man considering himself
adorned with a soul, whose noble and divine qualities have brought forth so
much admiration, that many (with Plato) have persuaded themselves, that 'twas
coeternall with God, and others (as Lactantius) that 'twas of the same
substance with God: This man (I say) seeing himself in so eminent a degree, if
he cannot say with Job (when he went about to contest with God) Now that mine
Eyes have seen thee, I abhor my self in dust and ashes, may easily be brought
to such a degree of presumption, as was represented by Ovid in the Fable of the
Giants; and indeed if those favors be rightly weighed, by which God has
exalted the excellency of Humane Nature; they will appear so admirable, that
not only the Saracene Abdala (who had nothing of the knowledge of God) called
it the Miracle of Miracles.

But David himself (not able to suppress his astonishment of such a multitude
of mercies) cried out, What is Man, that thou have so exalted him? thou have
made him little less then the Angels, with glory and honor have thou crowned
him.

So then if unto Man, who is by Nature so great, and in his own esteem much
greater, there be the addition of a Kingdom, whose power renders him
formidable and omnipotent, there is no cause to wonder, if he pretend to
Altars, and Incense, since he may then say, that the destiny of the People
depend upon his will, and the good or ill of all his Subjects; which may pull
down or erect Cities, as he please, who is above Laws and dispenses Fortune at
his pleasure; on whom depend both war, and peace; death, and life; and in
conclusion, then whom nothing appears higher, but Heaven it self.

Alexander, that great Prince, who made one Kingdom of the whole World, after
having viewed the vast extent of his Dominion, that it even bordered with
Heaven, seeing himself placed so near Divinity, resolved to believe himself a
God.

And truly power is a thing too great, and too Divine not to be desired; and he
must be a mad man, that knows not the value of such a thing, as is so
vehemently pursued by all Mankind. When then I found a man, and him a King
that not only despised Royalty, but complained of it, and affirmed, that
whosoever did truly know the weight of a crown, would not so much as stoop to
the ground to take it up, I could not but be infinitely astonished.

For how is it possible a man's heart should be capable of so much weakness, to
esteem Command a Servitude, and a Kingdom a misery? I have chosen this poor
apprehension of Seleucus for the subject of my Discourse, to the end, that,
examining the lowness of his Spirit, we might likewise find out (most Noble
Auditors) the unhappiness of Tyranny, which affords nothing but bitterness
amidst the sweetness of a Kingdom.

This King-like Act of Ruling is nothing else but the government of a lawful
King, as the only object of a virtuous Prince is the public good; so that, I
must confess, if to labor for the good of the Commonwealth be a thing to
make Royalty be thought odious; it is most certain a man may loath it upon
that score, since it is impossible it should be free from troubles, and cares;
and which do so necessarily take up a Kings time, that he can never be idle,
but the Commonwealth is the looser.

But who perceives not, that to complain of being obliged to watch for the
Public safety, to look after the integrity of his Ministers; to provide for
the necessities of the poor, and to prevent the extortions of the Rich, and
the designs of Neighbor Princes, is to grieve at a continuill necessity,
imposed upon him of exercising his Prudence, Justice, Charity, Magnanimity, and
all other the most perfect acts of Virtue; or rather it is to be sorry to be
obliged to tend to his own center, which is nothing else, but to complain of
being tied to his own happiness?

Royalty is without doubt accompanied with some trouble; but whosoever will like
Moses have the Tables of the Law in his power, must (no more then he did) shun
the pains of getting up to the top of the Mountain. He that will appear upon
the throne, with the sword of Justice in his right hand, must not be unwilling
to lift the Billance of Equity in his left: Labor, and a Kingdom are
Relatives, but that which we call labor, is a duty, an operation, not a
disquiet, a calamity: that motion which tends to its own center is never
painful; the fire mounts to its own sphere without any pain, and the water
which runs toward the Sea, suffers no violence.

If all things, which are inseparable from humanity, were painful, it would be
so not only to be a King, but to be a Man; nay, our very being would be a
trouble to us, there being nothing in Nature, which is not liable to these
conditions.

A Pelican parts willingly with her life to preserve her young ones, and shall
we think it painful and irksome to be obliged to think, to watch, and take
pains for the good of our People? but why do I call it taking pains? the body
is out of temper, when it is a pain to it to perform its natural operations.

He that finds difficulty in a Kingdom, betrays the weakness of his
constitution, and that his inclination is not Royal: but whether it proceed
from the ignorance, laziness, or malice of those poor spirits; many there be,
who change the true names of things, who take the Mask for the Face, who
esteem care, simple thoughts, and business, foolish operations, and after that
rate it is no strange thing, that to him (who accounts the actions of
Sovereignty a pain, and the thoughts troubles) Royalty it self should appear
a slavery.

He that calls the least motions of care and business, labor and trouble, is
not to be thought to be of a Nature that is quiet, and peaceable, but feeble and
useless: and how? shall we account those employments burden, some, which are
our duties, as Fathers, and as Christians? No, no, he that complains of
business, and action, is grieved, that he cannot be idle, negligent, and lazy.

Was it not (O illustrious Auditors) an unjust complaint of that Prince, who
not finding forage ready in a quarter for the Horse of his Army, much bewailed
the unhappiness of Kings, that were bound to take care even of the very Beasts:
And who cannot easily discern, that to be the misery of men, but the mere
condition of Humanity?

Nature who has linck'd all things together, as with a chain, has well
ordered, that one thing should be necessary to another, but not insupportable:
To complain of being obliged to take care of Horses, is to repine, that we are
not able to walk without feet, that we were not created Angels, which can
operate with the intellect alone.

It Is the duty, not the misery of a General to take care of his Baggadge
Horses, if he expects service from them, that they should remove him from
Egypt into Lybia, and give him the Water of Nilus to drink upon the most
inaccessible heights of Caucasus, and the Pirenean Mountains. The sails of a
Vessel are made to conduct it, and not to burden, or overset it; and yet
those are they, which these lazy persons call burdens or intolerable weight.

But these things which thou complainest of, are but the exercises of life, and
not the troubles of a Kingdom: where will thou find the ease which thou
desire, if every thing have the power to disquiet thee? A poor fly did more
disturb Domitian in his Chamber, then an Army of an hundred thousand Men could
trouble Alexander, when he was in the field ready to assault them.

But what thing will these poor spirits find out to wish for, that is wholly
free from trouble? The Garden requires sweating with a Mattock: Rest and Labor
are the entertainments of Nature, not the destruction. One man scorches under
the heat of the African Sun to catch a few Birds; another freezes upon the Ice
of Scythia to kill Venison: This labor and pains they think well imployd for
so small a matter, and will thou think much to take a little care for the
public good, and that in the view of the whole world? Me thinks thou should
be ashamed of the thought; as I am to speak it.

If Labor were an ill thing, whereof had man greater cause to complain, then
of Virtue? whose actions for the most part consist in the encounter of
difficulties, which to overcome the means, is by taking pains, as the end is
procured by constancy, and magnanimity.

Behold a spectacle worthy of the sight of God himself, Jacob wrestling with
an Angel. Amongst all the Virtues which have their faculties, either act ve or
passive, those actions are always the most excellent, which labor after
matters of greatest difficulty: and consequently they are most proportionable
to a Prince, by reason of the greatness of his power. A great soul cannot
desire but great things, and cannot but emulate those, that have done great
actions; which made Themistocles say, that the Victories of Milciades would
never let him sleep.

What a difference was there betwixt two souls? Seleucus complains of the
pain of commanding, and Alexander is grieved, that his Fathers Victories had
not left him work enough. Nothing is sweeter, then glory, nor is there any
straighter way to it, then Virtue, and the way to Virtue is not without pain.

Ask Hercules, whether he was deified for any thing, but his Labors?
Alexander said, that business was the nourishment of generous spirits: A noble
courage cannot endure, that operative Virtue should consume in idleness, as a
Sword is spoiled with rust. In the end, I should conclude labor a gift from
Heaven, did I not incline to their opinion, that esteem it no pain to a Noble
soul.

He is only in pain, that is inferior to the work he undertakes, which a
generous person cannot be. Corolianus, being invited to rest after a Battle,
answered, that the Conqueror was never weary: And Canus that played upon the
Flute, told those that heard him, that if they knew how great a pleasure he
took in his own Music, they might justly pretend to a reward for hearkening
to him: so true is it, that Nature facilitates, and sweetens all things, to
which the will inclines.

Thou say, this Scepter weighs heavy; I tell thee thou want as Royal
strength: Poison can do no hurt, when it meets with a temper hot enough to
resists its cold, whereof Mithridates was a testimony. He that groans under a
burden, ought not to accuse the weight, but his own weakness: an Ox is not
too heavy for a man that dares compare his strength with Mile.

But perhaps, you will say, that to Reign is a word that implies Tyranny, a
troublesome and dangerous thing, and I must answer that no man is afraid, but
he that has an ill conscience; he that fears confesses, he has cause so to
do; and that which we call Evils in things, are rather Vices in men.

That Prince (who, out of love to his pleasures, neglects the care he ows to
his People,) cannot be ignorant of his crime, even whilst he is in the act, and
in that sense may truly say, he feels the weight of a crown. In truth, he that
has cause to fear, in his Kingdom, is no King, but a Tyrant; and he that
complains of Constancy, Fortitude, Justice, and Prudence, is grieved to see
himself bound to act constantly, valiantly, justly, and wisely; what can be
more just and pleasing then the performance of good, honorable and virtuous
actions? and where can they be acted with more honor and advantage, then upon
the Royal throne? Is it possible for us to believe that thing detestable,
which is always accompanied with justice, and power? which always proposes
the public good for its end, and whose principal employment is, to exalt
Virtue, and suppress Vice?

It Is true, a Kingdom is a matter of great consequence, and requires the whole
Man: But the greatness of this Engine ought to provoke his care, that is to
move it, not his fear.

How many times have we seen Masses of sione of a vast bigness lifted up into
the air by a small Vice, which giving motion to a wheel, and that
communicating it to other lesser wheels have been able (if I may so say) to
remove mountains.

Seleucus might have said with much more justice, that he was unworthy of a
crown, then that a Kingdom was of no value. The King is the head of the
State, and it ought not to be troublesome to him to act for such a Body,
whereof all the Members combine to do him service.

The King is the tie by which the Commonwealth is united, and that very breath
of life which is sucked in by so many persons: The Throne is the Theater of
glory, and those Virtues, which in a private man were but simply Virtues, when
they are in a King, they are a light and splendor, by whose beams other men
are warmed, enlightened, and guided. Who would have known the virtues of Cyrus,
and Alexander, if they had been buried under a private fortune?

As a Kingdom is a large field, where Virtue has room enough to exercise her
self: so does the Throne by its Eminence, render all good qualities the more
visible, and makes Kings appear like mortal gods, encompassed with
magnificence, justice, and power, attributes sit for adoration and only proper
to Divinity. I observe (with great admiration) that God having resolved the
Creation of the World from all eternity, and framed the Idea thereof in that
most pure intellect, which has only it self for intelligence, and it self
for intelligible: I (observe I say) in the sacred Writ, that God having
resolved the Creation of man, and desiring to let all things take notice of his
great inclination, to make that Creature wholly like himself, he cries out,
Let us make Man after our own image: and as if that expression had been short
of that so much desired resemblance, he adds, and after our likeness.

I must confess the vehemence and earnestness, wherewith God was pleased to
publish his desire, astonished me: so that inquiring further, to find out how
those words were put into actions, I discovered, that, after that the Divine
Majesty had created this man, and given him a reasonable soul, worthy this
noble resemblance, immediately thereupon he made him Master of all things,
saying unto him, Have dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Foul of
the Air, and over every living thing that moves upon the Earth: as if he
should say, the understanding as reasonable shall be the Image of God in
operation: But because I think that too little for my Creature, I will hove
him likewise resemble me in power, and therefore bids him, have dominion, etc.
that I may truly say, ye are gods, and the sons of the most high.

Who then sees not (most noble Auditors) that Royalty and Sovereign power are
acknowledged by God himself for the last, and most excellent strokes of his
Pensill, by which the all powerful hand of the Creator did intend to mark
Mankind with a most eminent, and indelible Character of Divinity.

And for this we find a man, who repines at this excellent condition, which in
truth is rather worthy of that desire, with which the Angels burn incessantly
in love to God, then of this earthly man, who has so little generosity, that
he had rather enjoy his solitude in a Wood, like wild Beasts, then the splendid
throne of a King to operate like a God: For indeed to be a King, what is it
else, but to be the object of all men, the rule of all desires, the
Looking-glass for all eyes, and the example for all inferior persons?

He is the soul of the Republique, the living Law of the People, the light of
his Kingdom, and the Image of God upon his Throne. He that accounts this
condition unhappy, esteems it a misfortune to have the honor to partake of
divinity, and thinks it a misery to be able to make his people prosperous:
He Is a Monster, borne only for himself, and unusefull to all Mankind, unless
it be to such, as, considering his errors, resolve not to be like him.

Alexander though himself poor, because he was master but of one World; and
this Coward repmes at one Kingdom only, as if Atlas had placed all his
burden upon his shoulders.

All earthly things are so imperfect, that the soul which aspires to infinity,
not being content with any thing that is corruptible, is as easily cloyed with
every particular, as it can desire all.

It Is very true, there is a vast difference betwixt one man's heart, and
another; for to Alexanders (which was great in all things) a Crown seemed not
so burdensome, as to Seleucus; because the Magnanimity of Alexander rejoiced
in so ample a field to exercise his Virtue, whereas the other was so weak,
that the least weight suppressed it. And upon this Reason that famous Conqueror
was angry at Senocrates, because when he offered him fifty talents, he refused
it, as not needing so much.

This generous Prince cried out (all amazed) why then Senocrates has no need of
a friend; to Senocates fifty Talents are a supersluity, and to me all the
wealth of Darius was too little? But the true reason was, not, that this
Treasure was too great for Senocrates, or Seleucus, but that Senocrates, and
Seleucus were of such poor spirits, that wanting magnanimity, friendship,
magnificence, and liberality, they thought those riches burdensome, which they
had not the hearts either to spend or give away. How is it possible this Crown
should seem a burden to thee, which furnishes thee with opportunity to do
good to the people, which gives thee power to relieve the oppressed, to punish
wickedness, and uphold Virtue, and to make thy self reverenced as a divine
Power?

For indeed were it not for death, which as a tribute upon all Mankind, makes
no distinction, by what Argument could we prove, that a King were not a God,
and the Throne Heaven?

But if a wicked Prince perceive a sword hanging by a slender thread over his
head, ready to fall, and punish him for his crimes, let him find fault with
himself, and not his Kingdom, with himself (I say) who making Royalty
degenerate into Tyranny, exposes himself to the dangers that follow it.

But to speak the truth, I am not so much delighted with the occasion of
exclaiming against the baseness of Seleucus, who could not be pleased with
being a King, as I am satisfied with the opportunity of speaking of Alexander,
whose very memory fills me with joy: That Alexander, whose liberality emptied
all the Treasures of Asia, and tired out the fertility of the Erythraean Sea,
by the abundance of precious things, which he gave away: of that generous
Alexander, for whom the whole world was too little: of that brave courage,
whose greatest labors were his chiefest pleasures: of that brave, Lion I would
call him, but that I remember, Lions are to derive honor from him by the
Comparison, since he showed himself braver then a Lion by killing one hand to
hand.

But what consequence can we possibly draw from the opinion of Seleucus? If we
consider Alexander, complaining that he was not able to be confined within
the limits of one World from a parallel of their different conceptions, we
might give judgment and determine, which of them is most to be esteemed.

But 'twill be sufficient to say only, that Seleucus had so much gallantry,
as to contemn a Crown, as supposing himself burdened, and buried under it;
but that Alexander was so weak, and unsatisfied, that he endeavored to fancy
new Worlds, believing himself too straightly imprisoned within the compass of
the whole Earth.

But should they hear Seleucus, what would Casar, Anthony, and Pompey say, and
so many others, who have ventured to ruin the World, to obtain what he
despises? I will conclude, and leave you to judge, being willing to spare you
the remiander of this day, that you may employ it in the praise of Alexanders
generosity, whose glorious memory will cleanse your souls from all those base
Idea's, which your conversation, with the Pusillanimity of Seleucus might have
imprinted in them.

The effect of this Oration.
ALL the Academy inclined to Manzinies judgment: they thought it a great
weakness to repine at so glorious a trouble; and the miserable Seleucus moved
so much compassion, that there was not one man amongst the Auditory, who would
not have been content to have taken his heavy burden, and laid it upon his
own shoulders.

The Funerals of Beauty.
The Argument.
All the Swans of Liguria wept for the death of Emilia Adorn, who was the
Venus of Lyguria, but! what do I say the Venus? pardon me chaste soul, if I
have injured thee by this comparison. Reader, this fair one died because she
would not be like Venus, no not in immortality; the doleful Orasons which
followed were, the Torch, the dismal Bough, and the Crown, which you seem
here carry to the Funeral of Beauty, this is the Argument that Manzinie has
placed before his Discourse.

IS it then true (O illustrious Auditors) that you are resolved I shall speak
to you of Emilia? O god! of Emilia? that fair Emilia, for whom heretofore this
place (alas! my tears already begin to hinder my Speech) served as a pompous
Theater; the wound is too great, and too sensible to be touched without extreme
pain; a regular Disccurse, and passions irregular are not consistent.

What? must I speak of Emilia? of fair Emilia? but who can deny any thing to
those to whom they are so much obliged as I to you? be it so then, since you
will have it so; yet you must not expect an Oration in her praise from a man,
who is fit for nothing but weeping; there is nothing more hand ^hen to find
words proportional to an extreme passion, and what passion is it? O god! an
unbridled, an irregular, and an imperious passion, but withal a reasonable
one; but I imagine that your selves, being infinitely afficted, for so great a
loss, ha^ made your Election of me, for no other reason, but to ease your own
griefs by seeing mine; for if you had intended only the praises of Emilia, you
would have thought of some other person, then me, who am altogether uncabable
of so high an undertaking; yes, yes! this Discourse ought to be all grief,
the subject requires it; is it not a Panegerick above all Panegericks for this
fair soul, to see in so honorable an Assembly a thousand Catoes melt into
tears at the only remembrance of her rare beauty? but what do I say of her
Beauty? no, it is thus (me thinks you interrupt me) for I know, my Lords, that
if you that were Associates, Admirers, and, I dare say, Adorers of the Virtues
of Emilia, should hear me declare, that I intend only to be wail the loss
of Emilia, for regard to her Beauty, you would be very ill satisfied, or to say
better, scandalized.

But what would you have me do? dare I undertake to speak of that piety,
which rendered her an Example of Devotion? of that Modesty which was never
equaliz'd? of that Chastity which not only exceeded Lucretia's, but would have
frighted Tarquin from attempting her? of such a sweetness as charmed her
inferiors? of such an obedience as satisfied her superiors? of such a courtesy
as gained the hearts of her equals?

Would you have my Exordium to be of the sublimity of her spirit, which rendered
her knowing in all studies, made her speak al, and raised her above all, in
quickness of apprehension, solidity of Judgment, and eloquence? would you have
me call to your remembrance, how excellent she was at giving life to her
Designs with her Needle, and in sorting her colors? with what a grace she
danced? and when she sung, how she ravished the souls of the hearers, with
the harmony of her Voice? when shall I make an end? or how can I? and who
already knows not these things?

No! no, my Lords, it must be tears, it must be tears only, I am capable of no
other thing, and no other thing but tears can suit with your grief; yes, it
must be only tears, and tears for her beauty, which being the least of the
perfections of this excellent person, will make known to posterity, what that
exalted creature Emilia was, since so transcendant a Beauty was the least
accomplishment which rendered her considerable.

If I am not worthy to put the Crown upon her head, it suffices me, that I
have power to lay it at her feet; if I speak poorly, the violence of my
grief must excuse me; for he that grieves indeed, is not obliged to grieve
by Rule; the more weak and languishing my Eloquence is, the more strong will
my affection appear; if I speak like an Orator, it must be attributed to my
subject.

Those Nightingals, that made their Nests nearest the Tomb of Orpheus sung
sweetest, as Pansonius says, and what (my Lords) do you think it easy for a
person of my mean faculties to speak of a Sun? never believe (I beseech you)
the comparison which I make with the Sun, and this fair Creature to be a
vulgar one, I use it because certain Platonicks held, that the Sun was the
soul of the World, and in that manner naming her Sun, I have found the way to
describe to you, that Beauty which was truly the soul of the World, I mean
the reasonable World, and how can I better oblige you to bewail her departure,
then in stiling her the Sun? the Sun is no sooner set, but the earth is bedewed
all over with tears: lament then! lament, the Rocks themselves lament, yea, and
the Statua's of Memnon; it is no new thing to see Marble weep for the departure
of the Sun; Ah Sun! Ah departure! Ah Emilia! Ah dear Auditors! in what place,
just Heaven! in what place shall we ever behold this Beauty which elevated our
spirits, and which left in us impressions of light? that Beauty, whose Idea
served as a Rule to our souls, which reigned without Tyranny, which charmed
the eyes and the soul, and which never raised rebellion in the senses, that
Beauty which produced Reverence, and not Love, because not having in it any
other proportion, then that which is between Inferiors, and superiors; it
could not be beloved upon Earth, where we love not good, as good, if we did,
all that is good would be beloved; but every one loves as good, that which he
believes suitable to himself.

If that which we call Beauty be not a Deity, it is at least adored as such, as
the Pythagoreans said Wealth, Strength, Wisdom, Greatness of Courage, and all
other adornments which may render a person remarkable, are objects of the
ambition and Envy of men; but Beauty alone, the Devils themselves have not
only reverence, but affection for: The Histories and Traditions of our Fathers
have often told us, the veneration they had for beauty.

And what stronger Argument have you, that Beauty is Divine, then to say, the
Devil who is nothing but a Spirit, and a Spirit, that has enjoyed the sight of
all the eternal Beauties, is for all that capable of being pleased and
astonished at that Beauty which we call mortal?

For my part, I am forced to believe, that this precious advantage, is a mark
of predestination to those who possess it; and to what other place then Heaven
can that person be destined, who carries so much light and splendour in her
eyes, that some one (as I have already said) has called them Suns?

Sure if it be then true that God has dispensed that celestial light to a
mortal, can it be then believed, that he will deny it admittance into Heaven?

You know (my Lords) in what degree of perfection our incomparable Emilia was
heightened with this Beauty, and not only you, but the very streets (if I may
be allowed to speak thus) are not ignorant, seeing they were more filled by
the confluence of People, who thronged to see Emilia, then of these, whom their
necessary affairs enfore'd abroad, there was never found a heart so
rebellious, which was not proud to be constrained by the force of her Eyes to
render themselves Vassalls to those though Tyrants (yet worthy of adoration)
their power was too great to be resisted, we must submit to the mercy of such
Conquerors, and yield when there is no possibility of longer dispute; the
Zenocratii, and the Aristarchi, the most severe, celebrated her Beauty, and by
the universal homage, which all men yielded unto her, it was easy to know,
that it appertained to none, but the Emilia's to triumph.

Her Eyes were not such cruel Tyrants, that we drew from thence fear, and
servitude only, and not love: on the contrary, all their Slaves were their
Adorers, and all their Captives became their Captives willingly, and the cause
of their thraldom was the object of their veneration.

O fair eyes eternally to be desired! O tyrants to be adored! Into what
place are you retired? and why have you so soon left us? and yet for all that
we ought not to wonder, for since they were tyrants, they could not be long
endured in a Commonwealth; but what do we say of that fair mouth, where all
graces were assembled, her smiles and our ravishments were inseparable, she
was the delight of our eyes, and the charm to all our senses, and that which
is not common the pleasingnesse of her discourse was, in the length of it, she
spoke always with a grace and in such a manner, that we apprehended nothing
like her silence, eloquence and persuasions were always in that sayre mouth,
insomuch as we may style it the Temple of the God of the Lydians, where we
ever found consolation for all our griefs, and to borrow a little from the
liberty of Poesy, since the sincerity of prose, is not full enough to express
it, I can assure you that the graces were the least Deity, that resyded in that
cave of pearls, this lovely Emilia had a certain way of expression, that made
so powerful an impression upon the soul, that it could never be razed out;
her discourse imprinted it self in the memory, without design to Emilia's
conversation could not be lost, though no care were used to preserve it, there
remained always something in our souls, and by that marvelous effect, we may
collect, she was a creature all divine: Cicero said that the mouth of
Aristotle was a stream of Gold, I will not say so of Emilia, for it would too
poorly express her excellence; O God! what charms? what allurements? What
astonishments are left me to describe? call to remembrance that angelical
voice which ravished all the hearers; no, no! divine voice I remember thee not,
retire from my memory, go! come no more near me, for if thou do I shall
never arive to the end, which I propose to my self in this Oration.

The Corinthian Demeratus weeping, exclaymed out of an excusse of affection,
what pleasure have they mist who are dead and never saw Alexander; But O my
Lords! I may well say how unhappy are those who never saw nor heard of the
incomparable Emilia, I can assure them they never knew perfect felicity, she
dyed too soon: not that the Heavens thought her deserving a prec^p^tated
death, but because they esteemed her too deerly, to let her continue any long
time mortal; let me be condemned after this for bewayling her departure and
loss, but what have I to do but to make her Elegy? ought I to describe her
as she was? that will but increase your tears the more, if it present her
perfect, and accomplished, the more subject we have of affliction, to be for
ever deprived of so unparalleld a creature, and since the least of her rare
endowments enforces me to confess I am not able to describe it, how do you
think so numerous a stock of Marvayles, which surmount not only all I can
say, but all I can comprehend, can according to their dignity be treated of by
me? If I were to give you but a slight Idea of Emilia, or present you with a
first draught only of a picture, I might peradventure undertake it, but you
must exp^ct no more; for an hour is not an age, and a Kind of Ballad Poet.
Cherillus is not Homer, the Cradell, and the Seru'cher of Emilia, were even
upon the Verge of the Sea, that she might h^ve the nearer in this I understa^d
not his meaning.
conformity with the Sun, and enjoy the same prerogativs; and as Genova for
many ages ha^h had precedence, and stitled the treasure of the world, it was it
Genova that the Heavens diposited this inestimable treasure; he that can doubt
that Emilia should not be called a treasure, shows he never had the honor to
see that invaluable person, whose beauty, wit, and virtue, were more worth then
all the Treasures of the Universe, and who knows not that cur Poets have so
celebrated her? they have given her a bosom of Alablaster, lips of Corrall,
teeth of Pearl, and for hair, a deluge of animated Gold; but to turn to my
discou^se Emilia was borne, not only in that City, which is the miracle of the
world, but in that street, which is the miracle of that City, to the intent
that even the place, wherein she first saw the Light, should not be unworthy of
her; she lived as one that was to be responsable for the obligations she
received from Heaven, for giving her so many glorious advantages: she was borne
in the house of the Adornes, whose least ornaments and smallest honors was the
command of kingdoms; she was also born in the House of an Anthony, who has
enlarged the limits of his Country, who has received humble supplications
from the chief of Christendom, and not without the success of an Anthony,
whose Virtue and courage being seconded by England, and France, have fore'd the
Saracenes to yield us Victory, together with their Kingdoms: she was borne in
the house, where sometimes lived one Raphiel, who after the triumph over the
whole Nation, triumphed over himself; and in what other house then in that of
Adornes, was there ever found a man who willingly resigned the supreme power,
and with as much joy as others received it? but these are not all the
illustrious persons that this house has furnished us with.

Who is there that remembers not the Eloquence of Dominique? the Prudence of
Gabriel? the Valor of Prospere? Renown speaks of nothing more then of their
Virtue, and our Histories are full of their generous actions.

And thus now, ye see (my Lords) where our fair Emilia had her birth, and
lived until her nineteenth year, beloved of her kindred, upon so just ground,
that the name of Daughter, Wife, and Sister, was the least motive that induced
their affection to her: but (my Lords) she was no sooner of the age, that by
custom ye marry your Daughters, but they thought of choosing her a Husband,
worthy to be the Son in Law of John Baptista Adorn, of Baptista, I say, whose
wisdom is uncontrolable in Counsel, whose courage is undefatigable in
execution, whose magnificence is supreme, who sacrificed to the public good,
as if he were the Son of his Country, and treated private persons, as if he
were their Father, who is regarded by all the World, as if he were the
splendour of the Commonwealth, and as a man, whose honor effaced all the glory
of his Predecessors.

I dare say no more, as not being ignorant, that this illustrious person is
living, if he may be said to live, who has lost the most dear part of
himself, however I believed it no indecorum to speak something of him; for I
thought, if I should be altogether silent in expressing the excellent
indowments of the Father of Emilia, I should deprive her of one of the
remarkable Causes, which rendered her considerable (if I may be permitted to
speak thus) even before she was borne.

In fine, Emilia was married, more by the public vows, then by the diligence
of her parents, but who ever saw the like disaster? her Marriage was but as a
flash of happiness, it was soon extinguished: Alas! who could believe it?
Emilia passed, from her Nuptials, to her Funeral, from her Bridal bed, to her
grave; yes (my Lords) that fair person, whose youth, health, and beauty,
seemed to be immortal, is shut up in a Tomb, and with her all the glories of
her time.

What rigor of destinies, or what malignant influence of the stars have
caused this loss? I know not I vow, but I think it pertinent to say, that this
was a beauty too Celestial to remain upon the Earth, our Age is too depraved
to enjoy any long time such a donative from Heaven: for to speak truth, the Age
wherein we live, is full of too much enoimity, to deserve the fruition of the
incomparable Emilia.

Who amongst you has not observed the discomposure of these times, by the
transversion which we see in all parts of the World? at this day, Spain, is in
Flanders, Almaine, is found in Mount Ferrat, and the North, in Germany: We live
in days, where there is nothing spoken but insurrections of the people, an
innundation of Barbarians, and the destruction of Kingdoms, which are made
infamous by the ruin of so many Kings: And no, no, Emilia could not live long,
in a place, where the affl^ct^d found no compassion, where none opposes
impiety, where the sole desire of men is to subdue one another, where gains and
crime are inseparable; she was too religious, too wise, too just, too modest,
and too accomplished to stay in a place where Virtue was so little reverenced.

Who can lose the remembrance of that sweeping plague, which making one
sepulcher of a hundred. Provinces, has sacrificed to death (if I may say so)
one Hecatombe inure of Kingdoms? and who is there amongst you that yet remains
with a Soul (...) unaff^ighted at the apprehension of those prodigious flames
of Vesuvia, which no long ago threatened to come and burn us, though on this
side that great extent of Sea that parts us; peradventure it was never heard
before this time, that the Earth angry with her self, did ever undertake to
burn the whole World, beginning with the Sea; and yet (Sirs) it is true, that
it is our Fortune to be borne in such an Age.

Can we say after this, that it was an abode sit for that Person, in whom
sweetness, goodness, humility, and Majesty of soul equally resided? what
Province can boast to be exempted from the effects, that the malignant stars
have so universally dispersed? only Liguria seemed to be priviledg'd, when
unexpectedly the death of Emilia has rendered us more miserable then all
others; that fair, chaste, and wise Emilia dying, carried with her a treasure
which cannot be sufficiently expressed, but by those that consider we have
suffered this loss in the same time, when all the world receives chastisements
from an Almighty, and an incensed power, to show to us that of Emilia, being
our only misfortune, the loss of whom is more considerable then either
plague, war, or flames which we have seen devour our Neighbors territories; O
unhappiness! O calamity worthy to have been presaged by the revolution of half
the Universe; if all our lives are sometimes compared but to one day? we may say
of the fair Emilia, that the world saw but the first dawning of her morning,
perhaps the Heavens (foreseeing that if she arrived but to her Noone, the Rays
of her bright beauty might have burned all the Earth) had pity of the World.

No, no! I mistake, I rather belive the Heaven's jealous of the Honors, which
were rendered to the fair Emilia, took from men the object of the Veneration
due to themselves: for what ought not those Eyes expect, carrying more splendour
then imagination can comprehend? those Eyes of a luster which certainly was not
deemed mortal? wonder not (my Lords) if after we have seen the mavelous
Emilia die, contrary to our expectation, or desires, I dare assure you, she was
not mortal; pardon this bold expression and impute it to my grief, and permit
me to speak to you what, that suggests to me.

We have lost Emilia, but what Arms has death made use of, to conquer her? of
all the violent Diseases, most mortal to mankind, none ever attatch'd her;
for the time she l^v'd in the world, she enjoyed a perfect health, her temper
was never altered, and death, accustomed to overcome all things, could not with
that subtilty that gives him entrance into all places, give him means to
assault Emilia, she is ravished from us by a sickness which never killed
before, by a sickness, so without symptoms, that the Physicians never searched
for a remedy, and in such a manner, that it visibly appears that the loss of
Emilia is not arrived to us by the hand of death; she has been taken hence,
but for all that she is not dead; we have lost her but by that supreme power
from whom death borrows his.

Let us then conclude, that this beauty has not yielded to the power of
sickness, but she was lifted up to Heaven, and yet for all this we must
confess, that it is a misfortune to us that ever we had a sight of this Lady,
if b^th living and dead she was appointed for a disturbance to the quiet of
our souls.

The eleventh of May was the day destined for this sad Catastrophe, and as if
the Heavens would not enforce Aurora to assist at the death of this newborn
Sun, before she had blancht the Clouds in the East, Emilia, the fair Emilia
departed, yet though she has not been the booty of death, as I have already
expressed, her last minutes had for all that, all the marks of mortality,
deformity took place of her Graces and beauties: and sure the Heavens ordained
it thus, for the honor and merit of Emilia, to show to the world, that Emilia
without Graces, and without Beauty, was yet desirable, and desired.

O strange revolution of things upon earth! O vain hopes of the world! unhappy
to those who trust in you; who would ever have thought, that this day whereon
heertofore Manna (incomparable for sweetness) fell from Heaven in the
wilderness, that this very same day, we should cast a bitterness able to
make us detest the Sun, and curse his return? who ever saw a rigor, and
cruelty more dierful? Emilia in the most serene season of her days, and in the
sweetest season of the year is vanished from our eyes, let us then for
consolation say with these Poets that the Sun was in the sign of Taurus, fatal
in ravishing from us the beauty of Europe.

I see my Lords, you also support your selves with much impatience, for the
loss of so precious a Treasure, and certainly it is not without reason, we
have need to live many ages, ere we shall see Heaven give to the Earth a
person so accomplished, we have lost more then we can bewail, but the
instabilitie of earthly things will have it so; this accident justifies, but
too well, the discourses of those who preach to us daily the continual
vicissitude of all sublunary things, for who would have thought that one so
fair, so adored, who received the vows, and the acclamations of all the
world, should have been so quickly, and so equally unhappy, as we to lose her
light, and leave us in so great an obscurity? yes my Lords, those eyes are
extinct, those eyes so radient, that, but one of their regards, dissipated the
clouds of sadness, and consolated the most sharp griefs; those eyes, which
we may call the glory of their age, and the miracles of nature; but without
aggravating their beauty.

You my Lords, know what they were; in the mean time they are extinguished, in
the midst of their triumphs, but I feel my heart rebel against my judgment,
and say that it betrays its affections, it desires that I not only lament
Emilia, but that I make imprecations, against the rigor of the stars, whose
mallignant influences have so hastily ravished from us Emilia; what say you my
Lords, do you consent to this motion of my grief? will you that I follow it?
if you will permit it? I will begin, but I see your prudence corrects this
sentiment, and certainly not without reason, we must not permit passion,
which measures all things by it self, to hurry us out of the bounds of reason,
to change the name of things, and to envy the felicity of another; for indeed
to speak truly, it is not an unhappiness, but a high beatitude to Emilia,
that she finished her days in the supreme degree of her felicities, she has
ceased to live without knowing either grief, misfortune, or old age; and
Nature would not, that the mavelous Emilia, (whom she might allow to be her
most exquisi^e workmanship) should herself be constrained if she had lived,
to be wayle the change that tim^ might have wrought upon her person.

Indeed my Lords, I suppose the death of Emilia, to be the accomplishment of
Emilias felicity. I repeat this once more to accustom your griefs to hear
truths she could not die more advantageously, then in the midst of her
flourishing prosperity, and conquests, what was there left for her to expect
further? when things are arrived to their highest, they must of necessity,
either be established for ever there, or descend, and fall, if it may be said
of him who has lived long and glorious that he lived but a short time who can
be said to have lived long enough.

No no! my Lords, death has not terminated the glories of Emilia, but
confirmed them, she has been 19 years the delight of our eyes, for her
supreme beauty, and the object of admiration, to all men, for the vivacity of
her spirit; when she sung, she charmed not only our ears, but our hearts
also, all tongues spoake to the advantage of Emilia, all pens cellebrated her
large endowments; if works in silk, and Gold (at which she was unimitable)
retained her in her house, being desired in all assemblies, she was searched
for through the streets, and her absence complaind of by the whole world; we
may say that Virtue placed her above the ordinary rules of nature, and custom;
for she was reverenced by her Parents, she reigned over our Citizens, and that
which is more strange, all our women yielded to her without murmur, and without
envy, what was there left to desire more, but a husband? which, Fortune gave
her young, sprightly, courageous, rich, and by his family illustrious; what
could she pretend too, or wish beyond this? certainly nothing, who can then
doubt that since she could be exalted no higher she must (as I have already
said) either return the same way, or fall? there was nothing more, left for
her, of glory, there might be of vexation, which being begun by the loss of
her liberty (by matrimony) would quickly have been followed, with the loss of
her beauty, and then acclamations, and applauses ceasing, sadness, sorrow, and
melancholy must have succeeded; these changes were not far off; the cares of
marriage began to busy her mind, the incommodities of child bearing would
perhaps have made her pensive, and amongst what sort of inquietudes of soul
(dear Auditors) do you account the instability of Fortune, and the
inclination of children? are these incidents new? have I invented them? where
can we live without feeling the^? but if there were no other discomposures in
this life then the whole term of it, exc^pt only that part (which in
considerations of youth covers us, as it were with flowers, and seems to us
what indeed it is not) would it not be a felicity to be freed early from this
prison of life? and when did a Pilot complain for arriving sooner into his
Port then he expected.

Quem amat Deus moritur Javenis. Says Menander, and Saint Basil holds that it
is a mark of the perfection of the soul, to go out betimes from the body
which she animates, for (to use his own words) if men proportion the durance
of the prison, to the greatness of the crimes of the guilty, and that
according to the value, and merit of the operations of the soul, it is more,
or less shut up in that corporal prison to enjoy a life which we would never
so much esteem, if we perfectly knew it in the effects; what thing is that
life whose infancy is almost without reason, whose youth is nothing but folly;
old age but infirmity, Riches but perturbation, Poverty but anxiety, and whose
whole business is but pain, and travail? and yet for all this, man who is
borne for heaven, enclines himself to this life, as to his sovereign good;
and if by chance we find some one, that knows how to employ his time in
acting noble, and glorious things, he is then the Butt for all the darts of
envy, fallhood, and wickedness; and if we see another, who spends his days
in idleness, without doing either good, or hurt, he fills up the room of a
brave man, and is but an unprofitable burden to the earth, and no other thing
(as I may say) but only a name; let us examine a little, what are the
Consolations of this life, which can get a desire in the soul (that can fear
nothing after this life, if it has done well) to continue in this prison, and
complain of being set free, it may be they are those souls that inhabit in
those persons, who can betray in the same moment, when they make most
protestations of faith, who value not Friendships, but for their profits, who
regard nothing but their own ends, who leave us with our fortunes, and who,
many times, hate us for having too much obliged them; behold (my Lords) the
blessings which Emilia is deprived of; whereas now (he injoys the happiness she
deserves, being gone betimes to the enjoyment of the supreme felicity: No, no! I
neither care, nor wish for the honor of her society, with the condition that
should suspend her from the joys of Heaven, and the light of a Sun which never
sets, and which never was eclipsed, and of an abode in a place where death
never enters, there are no complaints heard, where there are no griefs, where
pains, and cares afflict no body, where hunger and thirst, and the rigor of
the seasons have no power, and where blessed Rhaptures are so incomprehensible,
that eyes cannot see, nor ears hear, nor have ever entered into the soul of
Man.

Let us therefore endeavor (O dear Auditors) to raise ou^ thoughts to
consider our Emilia in a felicity, which can never end, in the enjoyment of a
good, which has eternity for bound, infinity for measure, and God himself for
the end; those, who are partakers of the happiness with Emilia, are Seraphins,
burning with Love, and Charity, and Angels, those very Angels, whom she so much
heretofore resembled; those, who now make a harmonious Consort, chanting
together incessantly the praises of the very sacred, the very high, and the
very powerful divinity, which by an excess of infinite charity, being all at a
time Lovers, and beloved, compleats the fullness of joy, and of felicity,
assisted by the eternal Love, which he beats to them, and which they have for
him, and this makes this eternity so desirable, that if it were true, that they
could hope to possess it but one hour only, scules would rather expose
themselves to all the torments of Hell, then not enjoy it.

After this, would you that I lament the happiness of Emilia, as the greatest
misfortune that could betide her? if I should, the Heavens would be angry, and
that fair Soul it self, which draws so many advantages from so hasty a
death, would complain of my complaints, why then do you shed tears? I will
tell you, at least I imagine I can! but indeed, who knows not? have not I said
to you in the beginning of this discourse, that you prepare to follow one
desperate, who pressed with the violence of his passion, runs blindly whither
an unbridled grief conducts him? It is certain, that it is a happiness for
Emilia to go so quickly out of so troublesome an abode, as this Life, as this
Age, as this World, but it is an infelicity for our Eyes, no more to see
Emilia: Alas! that Emilia, of whom all that I have yet said, is but a small
R^ver to a bottomless Ocean.

Alas! when shall we see again that Beauty worthy our adoration, of whom we
may say, that she was a Sun too soon eclipsed?

When shall we hear again that charming tongue, whose eloquence reigned over
our hearts? Alas! in depriving us of her, death has ravished from us the
sweetest harmony that ever charmed the Senses; and were it possible for my
voice to speak over again the words of her that I admire, I should inflame
not only the hearts of men alone, but of very Tygres and Bears with her sweet
discourse.

But we shall never more see that fair and desirable Emilia; all supply that
is left us in this case, is to say, happy those Eyes that saw her living.

To conclude, it is just, we bewail our less in lasting sighs, we should be
too ungrateful if we could forget her; what will that Academy do now, it is
deprived of her, where she so often has been rather an agreeable spectacle to
the eyes of the Assembly, then a Spectatrix, though she came to be a Hearer,
can it ever forget the light it has received from her enlightening Eyes?

O sad adventure! able to make the very stones melt with grief; go my Lords!
go, if affliction will give you leave, search for that conversation whereof
Emilia was the whole delight, Emilia which we may say was either the cause or
object of all pleasure.

But what do you here languishing and sad, deprived not only of contentments,
but of souls; you shall confess your loss, when what you have lost, makes you
see it was a thing, which a whole Empire cannot redeem, nor all the Gold and
Pearl of the East.

Could it be possible not to lament this loss? if at the death of Caesar the
Sun was darkened for some Months; as to testify his grief? why not at the
death of Emilia, who has triumphed over more Caesar's, then Caesar overcame
Enemies? is it not then just to shed tears? assist me (dear Auditors) to
bewail this misfortune, and remember you have lost the richest treasure of
your Country, and that not only you wear mourning garments, but the very
walls are yet hung with black; it being just, that the eclipse of a Sun should
cause a Universal darkness.

What? my Lords* we are depriv^d of a Sun which enlightened our souls, inflamed
our hearts with the love of honor, and may be said to be the cause of all the
learned works, since it appeared: Who shall be any more the subject of our
praises? who shall entry us to noble Actions? who shall be from henceforth the
occasion and the recompense of our Studies?

Ah Death! thou have destroyed all the World with this unparalled loss;
deprived of its Sun, the whole Universe is in darkness, and by this ravishment
of her from the World, thou have totally disarmed the Quiver of Love: when this
fair one died, Beauty and Virtue died with her.

Let us weep then, (my Lords) let us weep, and never be comforted, and to
continue our griefs, I will say no new thing, but only repeat these sad words,
Emilia is dead: do you expect (my dear Auditors) that I give you any
consolation? I vow for my part, I am not capable of giving you any other
consolation, then that, which is to be found in persons, who bemoan as much as
your selves the loss which we sustain hereby; and what loss is it, but that
of the mavelous Emilia? but as none can weep and speak any long time
together, so I must stop my words, and let my tears flow.

THE effect of this sad Oration was Sighs and Tears; and as an Orator being
himself persuaded, easily persuades others* so the Grief, and Eloquence of
Manzinie moved them all to weep with him: there was never seen so many Tears
shed, and if to Vrnes and ancient Vessels which the ancient Romans called
Lacrimines had been yet in use, it had been no hard matter to have filled
them; In fine, everyone that looked on the Grave of Emilia, looked upon it as
the Grave of Virtue and Beauty, all unanimouss aggravated the unimitable
perfections of Emilia; every tongue spoke of Emilia, the name of Emilia founded
in all Ears; and to follow the Sentiments of that illustrious Assembly, and
those of Manzinie, I will finish this Volume with the fair name of Emilia.

FINIS.

