THE KINGS CENSURE UPON RECUSANTS, THAT Refuse the SACRAMENT of the Lords
Supper. Delivered in three SERMONS, CONTAINING A Refutation of some dangerous
common errors, And a Remonstration of the Duties of Administration and
Participation of that Holy Sacrament.

Proving the Necessity of receiving it. Reproving the Neglect and contempt of
it. Disproving the Exceptions and excuses alleged against either the giving or
taking of it. Set forth to public view for the hungry and thirsty Souls sake
that desire to be satisfied.
By Thomas Marshal Minister of the Doctrine and Sacraments of the Gospel.

6. Ioh. 53. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye
have no life in you.

22. Luke 19. This do in remembrance of me.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Cowles in the Old Bailey, 1654.

To the ancient standing Clergy of our Church, Presbyterians, Independents, or
by what other Names and Titles else they be distinguished.
Reverend and Beloved Brethren,
LEt it not offend you, if after so many years distraction and contention to
find out a Reformation of things in the Church, I mind you to return again to
your selves, and enter into serious consideration, how little good we have done
in that, and with what ill success we have managed our undertakings, whereby,
through our manifold divisions, we have brought contempt upon our persons,
almost to the levelling of the Ministerial function, disolv'd the Unity, and
defaced the Beauty of the fairest of all the Reformed Churches, even in the
judgment of Flore^tissima Anglia ocellus Ecclesiarum peculium Christiani
singular, etc. Horrore toti concutimur ad versam hanc pulcherrimam Ecclesiae
inter vos faciem, etc. in the Letter penned by Dr. Deodate to the late Assembly
of Divines. 1 Cor. 11.
Geneva, from whence we were to take our pattern; exposed the essential marks
of the Church to be shot at and beaten down; The Doctrine which was pure
obscured with many errors; The Sacrament; which were rightly and duly
administered, to be many ways abused and disused, even those (...), those
reverend mysteries, as the ancients termed the Elements in the Eucharist, to
be undervalued and vilified by some, as Christ's blood and the chalices given by
Constantine, were by that unhappy Foelix, which God avenged with vomitting
blood night and day until he dyed: These things, as they cannot but sadly
afflict the Souls of all good Christians; so should they excite all faithful
Ministers in their several places, to endeavor their Reformation according to
the Primitive pattern and institution: more particularly for redress of things
amiss in and about the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper (which is the subject
of this ensuing discourse) to look to the first Institution (as St. Paul did in
the same case) of our Savior; wherein he straightly charged his Apostles and
their Successors, hoc agere, to do this in remembrance of him; In which word he
gave us a Commission for two things, Immitation and Intention, Imitation of all
his Sacrament alactions, blessing, taking, breaking, giving, eating and
drinking the Bread and Wine; and the Intention to do these in remembrance of
him, or to continue a memorial of his death and passion. This was our Lord and
Saviors last Will and Testament at his death; thus to give himself body and
blood to poor hungry and thirsty Souls under the figures of Bread and Wine, and
shall we his Ministers take on us to be his Executors and not perform the will
of him that dyed? profess our selves his Stewards (of whom as St. Paul says, it
is required that they be men faithfu) and not dispense the Bread he gave to his
family in due season? 1 Cor. 4.2.
Or shall we take on us to be Christ's Amanuenses, his Secretaries to draw the
Articles of the Covenant betwixt him and his people, which we do in our daily
Preaching, and not confirm it to their souls and consciences? if we administer
the Gospel without the Sacraments which are the Seals (as too many do) we give
the handwriting of the Covenant cancelled, and defraud the people of their
right. This they do which follow not the example of his Sacramental actions.
And besides these, others fail in the main Intention. Christ bids do this in
remembrance of him, or of his death and passion, which they simply do not,
which give the Sacrament to none but Proselites of their own Schism and
faction, and so use the Seal of the Covenant as a badge or cognizance to
distinguish the members of their own gathered Churches or Conventicles. If both
the one and the other, he that fails in the action, and he that diverts the
intention, would impartially communicate this holy mystery of Christ's Body to
the Body of Christ's Congregation, our rents and Schisms would be sooner drawn
up together, and the people return to a better union in points of Religion,
which is the chief scope and endeavor of this following tractat; which I
present you with to peruse, and submit to your impartial censure; besecching
him that gave the increase to what Paul planted, and Apollos watered, to crown
your studies with such happy success, that you may by them knit the peoples
hearts again in the union of Religion, and the Communion of Christian love and
affection; that the Doctrine every where may from the leven of error and Heresy
be refined, the Sacraments to the right use and administration be restored, the
rod of Discipline may like Aarons blossom again and be replanted, and the face
of the Church, which is now clouded and obscured, may appear again in perfect
beauty, and be presented without spot or wrinckle at the day of our Lord and
Masters second coming; to whose Grace at that great day, and always, he
commends you, who is

Your Brother in all Christian service and love. Tho. Marshal.

The Bridegrooms Invitation to a Wedding Supper etc.
Matthew. 22.8. And he said unto his servants, Truly the wedding is ready, but
they that were bidden are not worthy.


THE word of God comes to us in Parables, 1 Kings 14 3.
like Jeroboams wife to the Prophet Ahijah with Cracknells and Honey, But
disguised and hard to be known. There is in them sweetness of Speech, but
difficulty of Sense; So that as none could expound Sampson's Riddle, 14 Judges
18.
but they that had plowed with his Heifer, so it is given to none to expound
Christ's, the antityped Sampsons Parables, but them which have set their hand to
his plough, from which a looking back makes unfit for the Kingdom of God. 13
Mat. 11, 13.
To you (says he) it is given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven;
but to them all things are spoken in Parables, that seeing they may see and not
perceive.

Now by the general sentence of them that expound these Mysteries, 1 Timothy 1, 17.
The Parable of the King that made a marriagefeast for his Son is this; The
immortal, invisible, and only wise God is the King, His Son, Jesus Christ; 3
Matt,
This is my wellbeloved Son, says he, by a voice from Heaven at his Baptism,
and again at his Transfiguration. 17 Matt.
This Son is the Bridgroom; His Spouse, the Church; The Marriage, the spiritual
Union betwixt them; The wedding dinner, the merry cheer which the faithful
perceive in the Doctrine and Sacraments of the Gospel. The Guests invited are
of three sorts; they which lie in the highways and hedges, are Separatists
and schismatics, August. in Epist. 50. Intelligemus vias Haereses, schismata
saepes. Idem l. 2. cont. 2 Epist. Gaudensii tom 7. and in Sermon. 53. de verb.
Do^. Venant de saepibus Haeretici nam qui construnt saepes divisio nes
quaerunt. Division.
which adhere to the divisions and separations made from the Church of God, and
these the King would have compelled to come in Luke 14.23. They that in the
first place were called and would not come, were the obstinate Jews and all
other Recusants, which refuse the Grace of God offered them in the Gospel.
They that made light of it, and by going another way, to their Farm or
Merchandise, thought to be excused, are the careless and negligent, that
prefer the profits of the World, before the provision of their Souls. The
servants sent to call the Guests to the wedding, are the Ministers of God, at
whose bidding they that come not when it is ready, are by the sentence of God the
King to his servants, said to be unworthy.

And he said unto his servants, Truly, the Wedding is ready, but they that were
bidden are not worthy. Thus have you that Parable unmasked in which my Text is,
which admits of a threefold partition: In the first, stands the Master of the
Feast talking with his servants, And he said unto his servants. In the second,
is the Marriage Feast made ready, truly the Wedding is ready. In the third, the
Guests absent are censured, but they that were bidden are not worthy.

In the first, which is the entrance into the Text, there is quis and quibus to
be considered of, who speaks, and to whom: and thirdly the modus dicendi, the
manner how, he said unto his servants.

In the second, as in the dining Room, there are two things most observable,
Nuptiae and Paratio, or the nature and quality of the Feast, a Wedding; and
secondly the preparation or propensity of it, the wedding is ready.

In the third, as in a Court of Judicature, we hear two things, querela and
censura; a Complaint a nda Censure; The Kings complaint of the guests invited,
they were bidden but came not, (for that is also here implied;) and his Censure
upon them, they were not worthy.

These are the parts of the text, all worthy to be spoken of by me, and
hearkened unto by you in these times; And first of the first, 1 Quis.
the Quis, who it is that speaks this.

And if we mean to find him out, Observation.
we must look back as far as the second verse, where he is styled Rex quidam, a
certain King. God goes often under the name of a King, as Kings sometimes under
the name of Gods: 82 Psalm 6. 47 Psalm 44 51 5 24 3 Esa Use of Information. Hoc
toto tempore us que ad Cae sarem August. qui videtur non adhue vel ipsorum
opinione gloriosam sed contentiosam and exitiosam and plane jam enervem and
languidam libertatem o^nimodo extorsisse Romany and ad regale arbitrium cuncta
revocasse and quasi morbida vetustate collapsam veluti ^nstaurasse and
renovasse rempublicam. Aug. de Civita. Dei. l. 3. c. 21. Exhortation.
The Spirit of God in the Holy Scripture seems to take pleasure in the
Metaphor, and clothes the Deity of Heaven often times with the Majesty of a
King on Earth. God is my King of old, says the Kingly Prophet, God is the King
of all the Earth, a great King above all Gods, my King and my God, the King of
Glory, and many more. The Prophets set him out by the like Epithet, Jehovah is
our King says Esaias. The living God and King, says Jeremiah. King of Kings and
Lord of Lords is one of his names in the Revelation, and in the Parables of the
Gospel he is by Christ compared to a King that took account of his servants:
and here to a certain King that made a marriage feast for his Son.

Surely then the name and Office of a King is not simply noxious and sinful;
God never puts on such Attributes as import sin and mischief to his people; and
therefore the Roman Senators were simply (being Heathen) or knowingly mistaken,
being conscious of what they had done, when after Tarquinius their King was
expelled, they rendered the very name and office of a King, odious unto the
People, whom they gulled of their Liberty, while they pretended to get it for
them; Nor was it ever restored (as St. Augustine, a man as well verst in those
Histories as any man living now is or can be, reports out of his reading)
until Augustus Caesar wrested it out of the hands of the Senators, and brought
back their contentiosam and exitiosam libertatem (as he terms it) ad Regale
arbitrium, reduced their contentious and exitious liberty, to royal rule and
arbitrie.

But to follow that is not my purpose, happily you will think it is no Theme for
this time: yet God is our King, what ever Kings on earth be. Let me and you
keep our selves close unto him, whose Kingdom is everlasting: He is our King,
let us obey him, he rules, and of right ought to rule internally in the hearts
of us all, externally in the Churches of his Saints, and will reign eternally
amongst the Saints and Angels of Heaven. All which rule goes often in the
Gospel under the name of the Kingdom of Heaven, but that may be distinguished
into two, the Kingdom of Heaven in Heaven, and the Kingdom of Heaven on
Earth. In this on earth (the scope of my speech now) the Saints are his
Subjects, the Preachers his Ambassadors, the Temples his Houses of Parliament,
the word and Scriptures his Laws and Statutes, the Spirit his Viceroy, the
Raiment the Robe of Christ's Righteousness, the Food the Sacrament, which is the
marriage feast of his Son, the Ministers of the Gospel the servants and waiters
at the Table. The King said unto his servants,

And here I would have turned over to the Servants (it being beside my purpose
to stay long in the Door and entrance of my text) but that the Rebellious
wickedness, and open Profaneness of our times, calls upon me to vindicate his
Rights, and to stand up in the defense of his Honor and Estate.

1 Against them that say, Of Reproof and Refutation. 1 of the Libertines, that
under a pretense of Liberty will not obey him inwardly in heart: Nor outwardly
in Church. 13 Heb. 17
like those disobedient servants in the Parable, nolumus hunc regnare we will
not have him to Reign over us, will not endure to be guided by the Viceroy of
his Spirit, that rules in the hearts of his Children, nor submit to any
Government that ever yet he set up in the Churches of his Saints; but under a
pretense of liberty of Conscience, obey the unruly Lusts of their own wicked
hearts, and so fall off from God's guidance, to make themselves the servants of
Sin, and slaves to the Devil, and under a pretext of Christian liberty, refuse
to conform to any Order or Discipline in his Church. Count them but
Priestridden, that's their term, that will hearken to St. Paul and obey them
that rule over them, and submit to them that watch over their Souls, that they
may give an account with joy, which they shall never do of such, but with
grief: which looseness and unruliness dissolves all Bands of his Government, who
is set up King in his holy hill of Sion, and brings all Beauty and Order in a
Church to ataxie and confusion.

These deny him obedience, Of Atheists' two sorts. 14. Psalm. 1.
will not have God their King to rule over them; nor is that all, they will
take away another part of his Kingly Office, his Court of Judicature from him,
say he is not Elohim, with David's Fool in the Psalm, no Supreme Judge that
punishes men; but if the ludgments of God befall them, impute it to Fortune
and Chance, with the Epicures of old, or with Astrologers to an unluckie
Constellation at the day of Birth, which carries them on to an unfortunate
death.

How salfe the First is, God tells by his Prophet, that says, Such as
attribute the judgments of God to Fortune and Chance. 10 Matthew. 29
There is no evil in the City (meaning malum poenae, the evil of punishment)
but the Lord has done it. And by his Son, who opposes his Providence against
Fortune and Chance, when he says, a sparrow lights not on the ground, without
the providence of your Heavenly Father: and if Providence be in such light
Accidents, how much more in heavy judgments that befall men's Persons, Families,
and Nations?

But if his word be of no weight with them (for they count it but a device of
man's brain) examples enough may be found in all Ages to demonstrate his justice
upon Sinners. Who could see the Dogs licking up Ahabs blood in the same place
where they had licked the blood of innocent Naboth before, 1 Kings 21, 19.
and not say, it is the just judgment of God upon him for his sin, according to
the word of Eliah? Or look upon that Tyrant Adontbezeck, bleeding under the
table, with his thumbs and great toes cut off, as he had served seventy Kings
before, 1 Judge. 7. 2 Machab. 6, 7, and 9.
and not say with him, as he had done to others, so had the Lord requited him?
Or who can think of the intolerable pains, crawling worms, noysom Vloers,
odious smell of the body of that bloody Antiochus, Iuseb. his Eccl. Hist.
that so cruelly persecuted the people of God, and not acknowledge with him, the
scourg of God upon him for his sin? Or read Josephus or Eusebius of the
cruelties acted, and the miseries endured by Herod, through the burning heat of
his body both within and without, the gnawing in his stomach, the swelling in
his legs and thighs, festering of his Bowels, worms breeding in his flesh
that eat him up, and stinking with putrefaction, and not say, as those that saw
him, these are not diseases incident to human Nature, but the manifest stripes
of divine Anger? Or can any recount the wrongs done by those unrighteous Jews
to their King and Savior? How their King Agrippa was, after the same manner,
mocked, and their Nobles scourged at Alexandria; Thirty of them sold for a
penny, which bought Him for thirty pence; were crucified by hundreds, upon the
Walls, as they crucified Him; besides eleven hundred thousand that were
destroyed by those three devouring Plagues at one time, Famine, Sword, and
Pestilence: and not acknowledge a jus talionis from the revenging hand of the
great King of the World, who orders all things by his Providence, without
giving way to Fortune or Chance.

And to the second, Such as impute them to the influence of the Stars, Hexam
l. 4, c. 14. Lib. 5 de civit. Dei c. 1
that impute their Calamities to Constellations at their Nativities, a thing
which St. Ambrose labors to evince with many Arguments, I shall only in short,
but shoot out the Queries of St. Augustine. If they say the Stars are causes of
human actions and events, Quale judicium de hominum factis Deo relinquitur
quibus Coelestis necessitas adhibetur, What judgment is left to God over humane
affairs, if we attribute the guidance of them to a necessary influence of the
Stars? Or what is the Reason there can no Reason be given why Twinns, born under
the same Figure of the Heavens, as Jacob and Esau, yea one at that time laying
hand on the others heel, should oft-times differ more in Dispositions, Events,
Actions, Professions, Honors, and other things of this life, and in the
manners of Death also, than they which were born of diverse Parents, in diverse
Countries, and at diverse times; Or why should men so diversely born, so often
come to the same ends, perishing by water, or slaughter, as is often seen in
Soldiers and Mariners, if their deaths depend upon the Constellations at their
Births? No sure, there is a King that rules in these things, a God that
judges the earth.

And yet I have not done with the person of this King in my Text, Of Blas
phemers that take the name of God upon themselves.
till I have vindicated him against another sort of Rebels more gross than
these, that would pull the King of Heaven out of his Throne, Vote him down, and
set up themselves in his room, say they are God, so have some done of late, O
Deus bone, in quae nos tempora reservasti! O good God in what an evil age do
we live, to hear of such horrible Blasphemies against the Divine Majesty! If
they did simply deny God's Essence (and yet they do it by consequence, seeing
there is but one God) with the word of God we might put them to silence; Or if
they believe not that to be of Divine inspiration, but, as some say, of humane
invention, we might turn them to the volume of Gods Works, where every
Creature is a Character, in which they may read the Essence and Attributes of
God the Creator. Est Caelum and tellus superos quid quaerimus ultra, There is
an Heaven and an Earth, there is a God, make no more question on it. But to such
a one as says it himself, or his Followers for him that he is God, I know no
better way than to let him blood for his Blasphemies as he deserves, at sight
whereof he will cry peccavi, and say no less than great Alexander, bleeding of
a wound, to them that saluted him by the name of God (...) This is blood as ye
see, Pluta. de adulat. and Amici discrimine.
no such humor flows from the immortal Gods. Or else to secure his person, and
put him in safe custody (as many better than they have been) and then tell him
he is no God, God is nusquam inclusus, never kept within the walls of a Prison.
Cyclops, that derided Ulysses for saying his wine in a Bottle was the God
Bacchus, would never take him for a God that should look out at a Grate: No
such condition is competible to our Sovereign God, no corruption, no
restriction, but rather, the Majesty of a King upon his Throne. And none of
them dare challenge that I am sure: None dare say he is King, though more bold
with God, to say in these times he is God. And our God is even so, Rex quidam,
The certain King, that made the Marriage Feast for his Son.

I have been somewhat long in the person of the King, The mo^ dus dicendi how he
speaks.
his Rights now in question required it, I will be brief in the next, His
Speech unto his servants, He said unto his servants. God speaks three manner of
ways: First verbis creantibus, with creating words: Secondly verbis vocalibus,
with vocal words; Thirdly, verbis mentalibus, with mental words, to the minds
and understandings of men.

After the first manner he spoke when he made the Worlds. He spoke the word and
they were made says the Psalmist, 148 Psalm 5. 4 Deuteronomy. 15.
He commanded and they were created. Said after the second manner, when he gave
the Law, The Lord spoke unto you out of the midst of the fire, says Moses, and
ye heard the Voice of the words. And after the third way he sake to the
Prophets, informing their minds and understandings. Prophecy came not of old
time by the will of man, says St. Peter, 2 Pet. 1.21
but holy men spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

And this last way he speaks still to his servants under the Gospel; not with
words of his voice unto their ears, but with words of his mind or Spirit to
their hearts. The Spirit testifies to our spirit, says St. Paul, 8 Romans 16.
that we are the Sons of God. Dicuntur tibi quaedam verba arcana intrinsecus ut
dubitare non possis quin juxta te sit Spiritus, says St. Cyprian. There are
certain words spoken to thee inwardly, so that thou can not choose but know
the Spirit speaks unto thee. These are the good motions of the Spirit that
speaks to inform thee in the truth, perform good duties, reform ill manners, 30
Esaias 21.
and admonish thee of dangers. Thou shall hear a voice behind thee saying, This
is the way, walk in it, when thou turnest to the Right hand or the left. And
after this way the King intimates his pleasure now, concerning the Feast and
the Guests, when he says to his servants, The Wedding is ready, but they that
were bidden are not worthy.

And of this manner of speaking, Application to two sorts
I should now say no more, but for those of our times that forge the Mandats of
this great Monarch, and wrest the words of his letters Patent, and say Sic
dicit Dominus, thus says the Lord, when the Lord has not so spoken. And they
are of two sorts, some public Pastors, and others private Professors, as they
have used to style themselves,

And first, To some Preachers. 5 Ier. 30, 31.
some Pastors there are, or Prophets, that do so. In the Jewish Church were
such, A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the Land, the Prophets
prophecy falsely, says Jeremie, and the People love to have it so. And a
Conspiracy of such Prophets Ezekiel speaks of, 22 Ezekiel. 25.
that destroyed Souls for love of Luore, made many Widows, and dawbed the
Princes with untempered mortar, 28.
divining lies and seeing vanity, and saying, Thus says the Lord, when the Lord
had not spoken.

But there are no such in our Church, if every one may be heard speak for
himself, They will say every one with Saul to Samuel, when God sent him against
the Amalekites, I have obeyed the voice of the Lord: 1 Samuel 15.
But what mean the bleating of the Sheep, and the lowing of the Oxen which I
hear in mine cares? said Samuel; So what mean the crying Sins and Blasphemous
Heresies of the times, which we hear in our ears? God sends thee to cut down
these, as he sent Saul to slay them: But they spare them as Saul did the
Amalekites for favor or fear, love of Lucre and Preferment, whereby they
spread and increase. 22 Numb.
Oh that we had no such Balaams among us, that will be hired with promotions to
curse Israel, and yet say they will not speak more or less than the word of the
Lord for an house full of Silver and Gold. But they are not to be trusted upon
their word in a matter of that moment, as is the everlasting estate of your
Souls, that will be drawn with the bias of by-respect from the scope and mark
that they are chiefly to aim at. Such as are the cause of Schisms and Sins
contrary to the sound Doctrine ye have learned, St. Paul bids, Mark and avoid.

Neither is this the fault of some public Preachers only, To some Professors.
but of some private Professors too, who of late have learnt a way to
counterfeit the King's Coin, and set his own stamp upon their own base
adulterate Metal; put a Verbum Domini, or a Sic dicit Deus, upon the thoughts
and imaginations of their own hearts; A conceit so full of deceit and delusion,
as nothing can be more. Ger. 6.5.
Every imagination of the thoughts of Man's heart is evil continually, said
God. Not the suggestions of Satan only, but what imagination proceeds from
Man's heart, is evil; not some thoughts only, but every imagination of the
thoughts; not sometimes neither, but so continually. Out of the heart proceed
evil thoughts, murders, Mat. 15.19.
adulteries, fornications, false-witness, blasphemies, says our Savior: No
such ungodly motions can be of God, unless they mean another God, the God of
this World (an expression of St. Paul's, wherewith he dignifies the Devil, 2
Cor. 4.4.) Prava cogitatio Sathanae seminatio, Evil cogitation is the Devil's
suggestion; Mat. 16.23.
who as he spoke in Peter an Apostle to Christ, to favor himself, so may
better be thought to speak in People apostate, to prompt them on to error and
sin. A strong delusion it is which God justly sends upon some of this Nation to
their damnation, for their wilful descrtion of the Truth, which was so plent
fully preached among them. And so St. Paul says, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12.
That for this cause God shall send a strong delusion, that they shall believe
(...), an untruth, falsehood, or heresy, or lie, to this end, that they all
might be damned which believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in
Unrighteousness.

Whether the thoughts of Men's hearts be the dictates of God's Spirit, they must
prove, by comparing them with what the Spirit of Truth writes in holy
Scriptures: And if the Spirit that speaks in thee, contradicts the Spirit that
writes in that, it is not of God, neither are they his Servants that obey that;
his Servants hear his voice that is the Master of the Feast; And so from him
now we come to them, He said unto his Servants.

And they are mentioned before, Quibus to his Servants.
verse 3. the Men he sent out to call the Guests to the Wedding. They ran not
before they were sent, as did the false Prophets, but staid for their Mission,
and that was their Commission, (...), the verb the same from whence the name
Apostle springs. And again, Luke 10. Mat. 28.
in the 9 verse, he says, (...), Go, a word of Authority, wherewith Christ
sent out his Apostles in other places. Observation.
Without Letters of Orders to take the Ministerial Office upon us, is in the
Church but disorder. None ought (...), to call the Guests by preaching of the
Word, or wait on the Table of the Lord, but whom he appoints to that Service.

And here the Servants are not to be taken in the common and largest sense, for
all that worship him, and serve him as the People do, but in a stricter and
more peculiar way for them that officiate in his service, as the Priests and
Ministers do. Kings make a difference in their Servants; some wait more nearly
upon their Persons, some in Offices further off: So does God the King here, who
makes a distinction betwixt his Ministers and his People; though all serve him
together, yet they in a nearer way. Number. 16.9.
God has separated them to be near himself in the service of the Tabernacle,
and to stand before the Congregation to minister unto him. They are his
Stewards, the People his Household; they his Ambassadors, but those their
Auditors; they his Servitors, those his Guests. The Guests are sent for, the
Servants sent; the Guests called, the Servants call them. Verse. 3.
He sent out his Servants to call them that were bidden.

A distinction then sure must be betwixt these two, Use 1. of Instruction.
Priest and People, Clergy and Laity; God has ordained it so, and gives no
license to private men to take upon them the public Ministering without a
Lawful, yea and an External Calling. To do so upon presumption of Gifts and
Abilities, is as great disorder in the Church, as for the Common Soldier, upon
pretense of his skill and valor, to usurp his Captains or chief Commanders
place in the Camp; or for the Common Lawyer upon pretense of his Learning and
Judgment, to set him down in the Judges place in the Court. This to do,
without Commission, brings all in all the three into confusion.

But for private men to officiate in the Priests room, Of Con^
So (...) though a Heathen, yet a Wise Man, so abhorred that he counted it
(...), a deed deserving many deaths. He it may be you will think was severe:
But God, who is gentle and merciful, censured it worthy a foul Disease, when
he, for offering Incense in the Priests office, punished Vzziah the King with
the Leprosy; Worthy of deprivation in King Saul, 1 Samuel 13.11, 12, 13, 14.
who but once played the Sacrificer in case of necessity, yet for this was cast
out of the Throne, both he and his Posterity. Nay more than so, worthy of
death, and that a strange death too, Numb. 16.40.
in the 250 Princes of the Congregation, that for offering Incense were
consumed with strange Fire that came out from the Lord. And that for a
memorandum, That no Stranger which is not of the Seed of Aaron come near to
offer Incense before the Lord, that he be not as Corah and his Company. And
these all had the natural gift, sufficient abilities to act those parts of the
Priests Office they enterprised: But God, that was not therewithal pleased,
severely punished it as a profanation for want of lawful Calling and
Consecration.

If private men for their practice of unlicensed preaching pretend there is
more liberty under the Gospel to take on them the public Ministry, they are
deceived, there is no such warrant from the Word of God.

Not from the Prophecy of those times by Joel, Joel 2.28.
which St. Peter says was fulfilled in the Apostles speaking with Tongues
those Magnalia Dei upon the day of Pentecost; Act. 2.16, 17.
This is that, says he, which was spoken by the Prophet Joel, that in the last
days (meaning the days of the Gospel at the beginning of them, not the last
days before the end of the World) God will pour out his Spirit upon all Flesh,
and your Sons and Daughters shall prophecy (as did the Daughters of Philip the
Evangelist) for this was a prediction of the holy Spirits emanation at the
first plantation of the Gospel, Act. 21.9.
not of phanatique spirits eruption toward the end of the World, when false
Christ's and false Prophets shall arise, Mat. 24.
and Mockers be in the last times, which walk after their own lusts. And these
are they, says St. Jude, which separate themselves, Jude 18, 19
and are sensual, having not the Spirit.

Nor have they precept, as they pretend, for their practice. That of St. Paul,
That all may prophecy one by one, 1 Cor. 13.31.
will not patronize them in it. That is not to be understood of all the People,
private Men and Women, which he forbids elsewhere to speak in the Church, 1 Cor.
14.34.
but of all the Prophets or Preachers lawfully called to instruct the Church of
God, as appears by the Context.

It Is great boldness then, without an external Calling from Men, to assume that
high Calling under God, and to be, as St. Basil terms it, (...), a Man's
self-ordainer. Yea a madness, Lib. 4. Instit. cap. 3. sect. 14.
says Calvin, Vt ab hominibus designetur Episcopus omnino ex ordine legitimae
vocationis esse nemo sobrius inficiabitur, That a Bishop or Minister should be
designed of Men, none but a mad Man will deny to be a lawful Ordination. Heb.
5.4. Exodus 29.1.
St. Paul says, No man assumed the honor of the Priesthood, unless he was
called of God, as Aaron was, who was consecrated by Moses with a great deal of
Ceremony.

But that none should upon a conceit of an internal Calling, or Gift of the
Spirit, go out to preach, without the external Consecration by Imposition of
Hands, the Holy Ghost has given us a plain direction, Act. 13.3.
saying, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called
them: Called they were to the work of the Ministry by the Holy Ghost, it
appears by the words (whereto I have called them) and yet he says, Separate
them for the work, which was done accordingly in the next verse, 4.
They fasted, and prayed, and laid their hands on them, and so sent them away.
Where you see the orderly proceeding of the Holy Ghost in making the Ministers
of the Gospel, when he appoints them that were internally called by him, to
receive an external Calling by the hands of Men.

For a Man then to run from his Shop, and rush into the Pulpit; to leave the
Cart, and leap into the Chair of Moses; to live by the Sword of War, and handle
the Word, the Gospel of Peace, and that without Authority, is such a
presumption as was scarce heard of in the Primitive times, (...), For Laymen to
preach, says a Bishop in Eusebius, is a thing not heard of before; and yet he
spoke it of Origin, a Man of extraordinary gifts and learning; and some judge
(and that not without cause) his many Errors to be Gods just judgment upon
him for that his presumption. No marvel then if illiterate Idiots. Men and
Women in our times, become the Broachers of so many blasphemous Errors and
Heresies, usurping that holy Function, in which, without a lawful Calling,
none can expect a blessing.

I have been long going through the entry of my Text, The second partition of
the Text.
but you see what crowds of Opposites stood in my way; which now having passed,
I shall bring you to the Dining Room, the second Partition; where are Nuptiae
and Paratio, the Quality of the Feast, a Wedding, and the fitting and making
it ready for the Guests, He said unto his Servants, The Wedding is ready.

And first, of the Quality of the Feast, The Quality of the Feast, A Wedding.
which he intimates in the Wedding, more plainly explicates in the fourth
verse, saying, I have prepared my Dinner, (...), in the Greek, the best thing
that I have; and that is the sacrifice of Christ's Body, sometimes called the
Paschal Lamb, and the fatted Calf in the Parable of the Prodigal, here figured
by his Oxen and Fatlings that were made ready; for in the sacrifice of these
things was Christ's death shadowed under the Law. So that Christ crucified, is
all that is here understood, and made a Feast for our Souls, he being in the
Sacrament both Sponsus and Convivium, Bridegroom and Feast, as he was at his
Death both Sacerdos and Sacrificium, both Sacrifice and Priest.

But before we come to the Dinner, How the Bride and Bridegroom were coupled.
Ephesians. 5.12. Christus ex purissimis and sanctissimis Virginis sanguinibus
copulavit sibi carnem animatam anima rationali per Spiritum Sanctum creans.
Pet. Lomb. lib. 3. dis. 3. c. 1. Hos. 2.19.
it is meet I speak first of the Marriage, and show how the Bride and
Bridegroom were coupled together; and that is (...), (St. Paul says) a great
Mystery, for I speak of Christ and his Church. Jesus Christ, the only
begotten, and dearly beloved Son of God, is the Son of the great King (as you
heard) He came forth as a Bridegroom out of his Chamber of Heaven, and took to
Wife the Catholic Church here on Earth; Of which mystical Match, and
matchless Union, that Royal Preacher, King Solomon, made that Nuptial Song of
the Canticles. The sanctified Womb of the Virgin was the Chapel where the
Matrimonial Knot was tied. The Holy Ghost the Priest that joined them together
by uniting to the Son of God the Humane Nature. This his Conception was the
inception of the Wedding. The Communion betwixt Christ and his Church, the
Continuation, which lasts with his Spouse so long as the World endures. I will
marry thee to me in faithfulness (says he) and in righteousness,
lovingkindness, and mercy. And at the end of the World shall be the
Consummation of this Marriage, when Christ shall come again, and take his Bride
home to his Fathers house, to live with him for ever in Heaven. And then it
shall be said, Let us be glad and rejoice, Rev. 19.7.
for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready.

For this Wedding great feasting was made in Heaven and on Earth, The Marriage
feasts.
public and private.

The Angels, the Friends of the Bridegroom, held a Festival of Joy and Gladness
in Heaven, when they saw this Match go forward, Luke 2.
and sung that Nuptial Hymn, Glory be to God on high, on Earth peace, and good
will among Men.

At the Conversion of a Sinner, which to the Bridegroom is the uniting of a
Member to his Church, Luke 15. Rev. 3.20. Salmeron. tract. 23. de parab. hac.
Hic est sensus literalis hujus parabolae, quae ad coenam Eucharistiae ad quam
vocati sunt omnes, pauci acccdunt extendi potest. Orig. Euthym. Author
imperfecti operis, etc. sec undum Terinum in Iocum. Luke 14.16 1 Cor. 11.10. 1
Cor. 11.24. Do this in ^emem^rance of ^e. ^ev. 19.7.8.
is merry cheer in Heart and in Heaven; Joy in Heaven among the Angels over one
Sinner that repents; and joy in the heart of the penitent Sinner, which is
that the Bridegroom means, when he says, He stands at the door (of the
heart) and knocks, by the Finger of his Spirit, and if any will open to let him
in, he will sup with him, bringing good cheer with him, even the comfort that
comes of the free pardon of his sins.

In Heaven and in Heart this Cheer is made: but the Marriage Feast of my Text
may best be applied to the spiritual refreshing of Souls by means of the
Ministry of the Word, and Sacraments of the Gospel in the Temple. And that
chiefly of the Eucharist, by the consent of many Interpreters; the Sacrament of
Christ's Body and Blood exhibited under the signs of Bread and Wine to nourish
our Souls to Everlasting Life. This is the Feast of Fat things, full of Marrow,
and of Wine upon the Lees, which the Lord promised to make to all People in
the Mountain of the Lord of Hoasts, which is his Church, Isa. 25.9. St. Luke
calls it, (...), a great Supper, and St. Paul, the Supper of the Lord, because
first instituted and administered by the Lord himself at Supper-time. Of which
he gave a special charge to his Apostles and their Successors to act over the
mysterious rites thereof for a memorial of him, till his coming again at the
end of the World, when he shall take his Bride, and lead her in a Triumphant
manner into the Bridechamber of Heaven, where the marriage feast of the Lamb
shall be consummated, To which the Bride shall dress her self with fine white
Linen, which is the Righteousness of the Saints; and all the Congregation of
Heaven shall sing Allelujah, and say, Let us (...) of the Lamb is come, and his
Wife has made her self ready.

But till this his second coming to call us to that Supper of the Lamb in the
Temple of Heaven, he calls us to celebrate the Supper of the Lord in his Church
here on Earth; 1 Cor. 11.24.
Do this, says he, in remembrance of me; and that is the great Sacramental
Feast of the Gospel, and solemnization of the Wedding made ready.

And here I might to these most high and excellent Feasts annex those
subordinate Solemnities which the Spouse out of her devotion has thought fit
to observe in memorial of her Bridegrooms transcendent acts of grace in the
assumption of our humane nature from the immaculate Virgin, Application.
in his Birth into the World; in his Circumcision, and Obedience to the Law for
us; in his Passion for our Sins, Resurrection from the Dead, Ascension into
Heaven, and his Mission of the Holy Ghost. For the Catholic Church was not
anciently of the Presbyterian Reformers minds, that take away the special
memorials of these never-to-be-forgotten Favors, and under a pretense of
pulling down Superstition, shake the Foundation, and leave the Frame in a
tottering condition. (...), said Ignatius, Epist. ad Philip. Lib. 5. cap. 3 a.
b.
Dishonor not those holy Feasts. And if that be suspected, Socrates the
Historian tells us of a certain, that they did in those times, (...), in several
Countries abstain from labor, and observe (...), the Feast of Easter, and
other Feasts; and that of Custom they held (...), a Commemoration of the
soul-saving Passion of Jesus Christ. And St. August. in ep. ad Janu. 118.
says, they observed a Day to the memorial of our Savior's Nativity, and other
Festivals, vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel a plenariis Conciliis. No doubt the
Church has power to show her gratitude and love to her Savior in these
Festival remembrances; and though precept she has none in the New Testament
for it, yet is she not left without precedents in the Old. The Jewish Church
yearly observed, for her temporal deliverance, Hest. 9.2.22.
the Feast of Purim, and so they did the Feast of Dedication after the building
of the second Temple, Ioh. 10.2
to which our Savior himself resorted, approving it by his own example.

But I forbear to press the observance of these, but cannot choose but breath
out in sighs, the words of Jeremie's Lamentation, for the other, Lam. 1.4.
and say, The ways of Sion do mourn, because Men come not to the Solemn
Feasts: For so it is in too many Places and Parishes, that the Oracle for
Doctrine is silenced, the Table for the holy Communion sequestered, the Temple
for the Congregation desolate, and made a detestation. The Food of Souls, in
the Doctrine of the Gospel, Multitudes of People relish not, unless it be
leavened with unwholesome Errors, which best please their distempered Palats;
loath the Manna which their Fathers liked so well, cry out, Our Soul is we ary
of this dry Bread, and wish for the Onions, Leeks and Melons of Heresies and
Errors; or else reject altogether the wholesome nourishment of their Souls, to
feed upon the corrupt and crude humors of their own stomachs, for which they
shall eat in the end the fruit of their own Inventions. They that forsake that
Word which was to David a Light unto his feet, Psalm. 119.
and a Lanthorn unto his paths, to follow the Ignis Fatuus of their own idle
brains, will fall into the Ditch at last, when they dye, from whence will be no
redemption.

Nor is this all, but, which is more grievous to think of, that holy Feast, the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which all Christians have had in so high and
honorable estimation, is counted with many but a needless Ceremony, and the
Table of the Lord in the Church valued no better worth than the Dresser-board
in their Kitchen; the Cups and Chalices become useless, or put to profane
uses, and the precious Blood of Christ trampled under foot through contempt.
And is this a Reformation in Church? or rather, is it not the abomination of
desolation standing in the Holy Place? the fore-running sign (as our Savior
said) when seen in the Temple of Jerusalem, Mat. 24.
of that Nations total ruin and subversion. Which to prevent here, let us
honor God's Ordinances better, and make provision for these holy Feasts of the
Gospel; where we have with God on Earth the nearest Communion. Let the
Servants, the Ministers, prepare, and the Guests, the Communicants, draw near,
and all things be in readiness; which comes next to our handling, in the
preparation and making ready of the Feast; He said unto his Servants, truly the
Wedding is ready. Of which I shall say no more at present, but have your
attention in readiness for it against the next day.

THE SECOND SERMON.
IN the second Partition of the Text where I left off, two things were
observed, Nuptiae, and Paratto, or the quality of the Feast, a Wedding, and
its preparation, it is ready. Of the First, the Wedding, I have spoken: now let
your attention wait upon the second, The preparation, Observation.
The Wedding is ready. And that represents to us the good will and pleasure of
God toward his people, that he would not have them stay out of time for the
Ordinances of the Gospel: He would have the bread of life, the Word of God,
ready for them, though they be not ready for it; Ezeck. 2.7
Bids the Prophet speak his Word, though the people will not hear. And by his
Apostle laid that charge on Timothy, and in him, 2 Timothy 4.2.
on us all, to preach the Word, and be instant in season and out of season.
Volentibus and nolentibus, Whither they will hear or not, he would have it
always in a readiness, and I think none doubts of that; I need not press it.

The Feast now most in question, is that of the holy Communion at the Table of
the Lord; For which also provision ought to be made, that all things may be in
a readiness for the Receivers. The Table spread, the Wine and Bread set on, the
Ministers waiting on their Office; All employed in that the King so often
replied to his servants, saying, I have prepared my Dinner, the Wedding is
ready.

And that not so to be taken, that it will serve once, or seldom to be eaten;
but that usually it be prepared, otherwise how can it be ready? The night
before Christ's Passion, two days before Easter, was the first institution:
Preparation was then made for the Passover, and that; the old Sacrament of the
Law, and the new one of the Gospel: But the Apostles thought not this
sufficient to sustain them ever, or for the whole year after; But they, at or
upon the day of Pentecost next ensuing, prepare for themselves again, Acts 2.41
42.
and their new Congregation of three thousand Souls which they had converted;
these they admitted into Communion with them in their Doctrine and fellowship,
breaking of bread and prayers. Christ's sufferring once is sufficient for ever,
Once he appeared in the end of the World to put away sin, by the sacrifice of
himself. Heb. 9.26.
But his Supper, that signifies his suftering is often to be iterated. The
Sacrifices under the Law were the daly Figures of his Death to the people till
he came into the World: So ought this Sacrament to be since he suffered, till
he comes again at the end of the World. 2 Cor. 11, 26.
As often as you eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord, you show the
Lords death till he come. Where (...) as often implies (...) an often and not a
seldom receiving.

This did the Apostles daily at first make ready this Feast for their
Congregation: Acts 2.12.46.
For they continued daily with one accord in the Apostles Doctrine, Communion,
breaking of Bread, and Prayers; where breaking of bread is not meant of Common,
but consecrated Bread, by the common consent of Interpreters: Calvin's Reason
amongst the rest, gives good satisfaction, St Luke here relates those things
(says he) quibus publicus Ecclesiae status continetur; Acts 2.
wherein the public state of the Church consists. Imo hic quatuor not as
exprimit, ex quibus vera and genuina facies Ecclesiae dijudicare queat, Nay
here the Evangelist fets down Four Marks or Notes whereby the true genuine
Face of the Church may be discerned, that is, Apostolical Doctrine, Communion
among the Members, the breaking of Bread in the Sacrament, and public prayers
in the Church. Hic nobis ad vivum depicta est Ecclesiae imago, Here is set out
to the life the Image of Christ's Church. What face of a Church is there then
in all Conventicles, and many Congregations, where the essential marks of
Apostolical Doctrine and Sacraments are wanting? Acts 20.7.
These two, as they met at often in the weekday as to their daily bread, so
chiefly on the Lord's Day as to their Sundaies meal. Upon the First day of the
week (which is the Lord's Day) when the Disciples met together to break Bread,
St. Paul preached unto them. The two principal duties of Religion wherewith a
Christian Sabbath is Sanctified, we find they there exercised, the ministry of
the Word, and the administration of the Sacrament. The primitive Christians
after them, in times of persecution, made their breakfast of this bread and
wine every morning, and called it their Viaticum, their wayfaring f^re, to
strengthen the inward man for the long journey in case they chanced that day to
die and depart this World into another; This Sacrament, says Tertullian,
commanded of God to all, Decoron-Militis.
we take in antelucanis coetibus, in our meetings before Day, at the hands of
none but the President of the Congregation. In Epist.
And in times of Peace, they made it their Sunday dinner, and took it every
Lord's Day. St. Basil says they communicated in his time four days in the
week, (...), on the Lords Day, (...), on the Wednesday, (...), on the Friday
and on the Saturday, which was the Jews Sabbath; however before his time he
says they received (...), every Day in the Week.

St. Augustine's judgment upon the Case of often communicating is worthy to be
followed. Quotidie Eucharistiam accipere nec laudo nec vitupero, to receive the
Holy Eucharist every day, I neither praise it nor dispraise it; Omnibus tamen
diebus Dominicis communicandum hortor, But I advise that there be a Communion
every Lord's Day; Qui vero in Natali Domini, in Paschate and Pentecoste non
communicaverint vix catholici credantur, But they which shall not communicate
at Easter, Pentecost, and Christmas, are scarce to be counted good Christian
Catholics.

Our Protestant Church of England following the steps of the Primitive, had
formerly a Communion service for every Lords day in the year, and enjoined
every Communicant to appear before the Lord at his Table 3 times a year at
least, and in most great Congregations it was made ready 12 times a year, and
so held as a monthly Feast. Monthly, Weekly, and Daily, in former ages and
better times, it was made ready,

And great reason is there for the frequent participation, Reasons.
if we consider hut the Prerogative of this Feast, and the Privileges we have
by it. First for Prerogative, it is above all Feasts, Civil, Legal, or
Evangelical, that ever were; being all way since the first institution
accounted the highest and holiest part of Divine service in the Church; and had
in greatest Honor and Reverence of all Christians, for that it sets forth unto
us the great Mystery of our Redemption, lively representing before our eyes
that great and effectual Sacrifice, whereof all legal Offerings before were
but types and shadows, even the suffering of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
upon the Cross for our sins. The breaking of whose Body there, is figured in
the breaking of Bread here, and the effusion of his Blood there, expressed in
the pouring out of the Wine here, His Death and Passion all wholly represented
in the Sacramental actions: To which to be admitted, though upon our knees we
eat it, is greater honor than to sit at meat with a King or Emperor. The high
prerogative of this Feast, is one special motive to stir up the devout
servants of the great King to prepare it; another is the happy Privileges we
have by it.

As first, the nearest Communion with God the King, and his Son Jesus Christ,
and the Saints and Angels, that can be here on Earth. Contemplare obsecro,
adstat mensa Regia, adest Rex ipse, adsunt Angeli ministri, and tu oscitabundus
adstas. Consider and behold the Royal Table is before thee, God the King is
there present with thee, the Angels waiting on him, and thou poor hungry Soul
art admitted to eat among them. O cogita quali sis insignitus honor, quali
mensa fruaris, O do but think then what honor thou have to be admitted to
feast at a Table with Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Diet for our dying Souls. My Flesh is meat indeed, and my Blood is
drink indeed (says our Savior) and he that eats my Flesh, John 6.55.
and drinks my Blood, shall live for ever; And there is no such ready way to
do that, as to eat and drink in this Sacrament, where the outward Elements are
not only Figures to present, but also Instruments which the Lord has ordained
to convey the things signified, Christ and all his benefits,

Thirdly, a renewing the Copy of our Pardon. We daily sin and had need of a
Pardon; and that is here offered to be signed and sealed to our Souls and
Consciences by the Blood of Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, increase of Grace. Faith is here strengthened, Hope enlarged,
Charity confirmed, Patience relieved, Temperance prooved, Chastity
corroborated, and all other virtues which they that come to this feast contend
for, either granted or augmented. Pet. Lomb. l. 4. did. 4.
Adjutrix Gratia omnisque virtus augetur, and fomes peccati debilitatur. As he
said of the other, so may (...) of this, all virtue is increased by it, and
concupisence diminished. Briefly, there is peace of Conscience, freedom from
the fear of Death, the bondage of sin and Satan, and the pain of condemnation;
there is strength against temptation, and certain hope and assurance of eternal
life and salvation, purchased by Christ's death and suffering here signified,
and by this Sacrament signed and sealed,

He that dusy prepares himself for this Feast, communes with his own heart,
calls himself to account for his bypast actions and errors, examines his own
state, and resolves upon amendment of life, so that he must needs grow in Grace
and the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. But where this mystical marriage
Feast is not made ready, sin increases, error and Heresy springs up,
Profaneness spreads, Religion withers, Faith fades, Hope faints, Charity
dies, true knowledge of God decays, Reformation goes backward, and the
danger of Death and Damnation is incurred.

And thus having made known the good pleasure of the great King to have the
Wedding in readiness for his Guests; Application. First to the Ministers of the
feast.
I shall now for application address my self first to the Servants that
minister, and expostulate with them the reason of their remisness, or rather
refusal to do that part of their office in making the Feast ready; and then
after that speak a word or two to the Guests, to make themselves ready for the
Feast when it is ready for them.

And the servants I mean, are not all that minister about Holy things, but only
those which have polluted the Commemorative Sacrifice of the Lord, saying with
those profaning Priests, Malac. 1.7. The Table of the Lord is not to be
regarded. They had no regard to the sacrifice, these to the sacrament (both
figurative Feasts of Christ's death) they cared not what was offerred, these
care not though nothing be ministered at all to the people.

And these are they who have sequestered the bodily bread from the Pastors, the
right owners; and since they came into their places, have sequestered, at their
pleasure also, the bread of Christ's Body, which is the life of their Souls,
from the Parishioners which were their charges, and debarred them quite of that
right, since the Bars that were an offense to some were taken away. From
henceforth then let them enveigh no more against the Priests of Rome for
abridging the Laity of the Cup, one half of the Feast, when we have them in
England that do a great deal worse, and deprive them of all, both Cup and Bread
too.

And what is the cause we might not know a long time, but as if we were in a
confusion, like those tumultuous Ephesians, Acts 19. The Presbyterians plea
against giving the Sacrament answered.
some cried one thing, and some another; and as they knew not the cause why
they were met together, so the people might not know the cause why they might
not meet together. Pretenses we hear of some, rather than causes, which have
more of will than weight in them.

One, is the peoples unworthiness; but this will not excuse their willfullness
in not doing their office. First touching the peoples unworthiness through sin
and ignorance.
The King makes ready his dinner, and sends out his servants to call the
Guests, though they that were bidden, he says, were not worthy. And they that
are unworthy in one respect, may be worthy in another, as you shall hear
hereafter. If we demand wherein lies their unworthiness now, which they
themselves counted worthy before, they usually pretend (though somewhat
prejudicial to their late preaching) the peoples sin and Ignorance, which will
not be rectified by this long abstinence from the food of their Souls, which
would make them grow in Grace and the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; but
Ignorance in part, Note.
and sin, whereof men repent, hinder not any of the efficacy of Christ's death,
nor make them unworthy of that Sacrament.

The Disciples were ignorant of many things, had many infirmities and sins, yet
Christ made ready this Feast for them. They were ignorant of Christ's Kingdom,
dreamed of a temporal Kingdom, hoping to atchieve to themselves great Offices
and Honors, and this bred great emulation among them: Ignorant they were of
Christ's Resurrection, knew not as yet that Christ must rise from the dead, nay
I question whether they well understood his Passion. The Son of man, John 20.9.
says he, shall be delivered up to the Gentiles, and shall be mocked and
spitefully entreated, and spitted on, and they shall scourg him, and put him to
death, and the third day he shall rise again; Luke 18.32, 33.
Of which St. Luke says, they understood none of these things, and the saying
was hid from their eyes.

Nay among these was one worse than any is or can be among us, Judas the
Traitor, a Thief, a Devil. Our Church seemed to say so, that he was there, in
the Exhortation before the Communion. Take heed lest after the taking of that
holy Sacrament, the Devil enter not into you as he entered into Judas, and
fill you full of all iniquity, and bring you to destruction of Body and Soul.
St. Augustine says it, and that with reason for it, Tunc intravit in eum
Satanas, quando indigne Corpus Christi suscipiens, judicium sibi manducavit and
bibit, Then entered the Devil into Judas, when receiving the Body of the Lord
unworthily, he eat and drank his own damnation. And the Evangelists include him
among the rest, making no mention of his departing till supper was ended. When
Even was come, Jesus sat down with the twelve, says Matthew, Matthew. 26.25 Mark
14.20.
of which number Jndas was one, and bade them all drink, not Judas excepted.
Mark says, the Betrayer dipped with him in the dish; But St. Luke makes
express mention of his remaining after the Sacrament, For after Jesus had given
the Bread and the Wine, Luke 22.19, 20. it follows in 21. The hand of him that
betrayeth me is on the Table.

Surely then they that profess Christianity may be admitted to this holy Feast,
Note.
though unworthy by reason of sin and ignorance, yet this may be done without
prejudice to the Minister or Communicants. 1 Cor. 11.29.
The worst is to themselves who thereby eat and drink their own damnation. No
Communicants are to be debarred unless openly scandalous and detected, That's
St. Augustine's Rule in this case. Note.
Si Christus ipse Judam passus est quem sciebat furem esse, nec eum qui
accusatus non est abjecit, hoc exemplo uti oportet, nec eum abjicere, qui
public detectus non est, If Christ suffered Judas whom he knew a Thief and
should betray him, and did not refuse him, because none did accuse him, this
example must we make use of, and reject none that are not openly detected of
sin, and scandalous to the Congregations. Many were faulty among the
Corinthians, but none excommunicated but the Incestuous, who was scandalous.
Tripart. hist. lib. 9. cap. 30.
St Ambrose would not connive in this case at the great Emperor Theodosius,
who by his rash Edict spilt the blood of seven thousand Citizens, the Innocent
perishing together with the guilty, but excluded him (though not in a
compulsive but a persuasive way) from the Lords Table and Temple for eight
Months space, till he had with tears washed the stain of Blood from his
Conscience, and given good testimony of his Repentance. And so ought the
Governors of the Church indeed to use the power of the Keys, and inflict their
Censure upon blood-shedders, Fornicators, and other open scandalous livers, to
bring them to a sense of their Sins, and repentance of the same. But to exclude
all, the Godly and religious, as well as the openly vicious and notorious, is
an act of as little mercy and discretion to the souls of poor Christians, as
that of Theodosius was to the lives and bodies of his Citizens, he caused the
innocent with the nocent to be put to death, and these the worthy with the
unworthy to be deprived of the bread of life.

If we had power to raise the faithful Samuels of our Church which are dead
and gone, or recall a Council of the ancient fathers, I verily believe that
none of them upon these grounds would consent to this long suspension of the
Sacrament. Ours urged much (ye know) the due and fitting preparation to it, and
the frequent participation of it, excluding none but the ignorant and
offensive. But the Ancients less scrupling simplicity and ignorance gave it to
Children and infants. That they did so is not unknown in the time of Cyprian,
Innocentius, Augustine, and others, and that they did as well in Europe as in
Africa and Asia, That which moved them to it, was the saying of our Savior, 6
Joh. 53. Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink his Blood, ye
have no life in you, from whence they concluded not only the spiritual, but
also the sacramental eating and drinking necessary for Children, and all that
would live the life of Grace: Besides other reasons they rendered. That Children
are capable of the benefits of Christ's death, and therefore ought partake of
the signs of it in the Sacrament. That they are members of Christ's mystical
body, and therefore not to be abridged of that Communion whereby we are all one
body. Nay Christ (say they) invited them to his bodily presence, Mark 10.
saying, Suffer little Children to come unto me and forbid them not, why should
they not then be admitted to the sign of his body?

And though the modern Divines in all our Churches have changed that custom
upon Consideration of St. Paul's examination, which he prescribes every
Communicant, 1 Cor. 11.28. Which Children for want of the use of reason and
discretion cannot do, yet that may be answered like the Anabaptists argument
against their Baptism, when they plead they are incapable through the want of
says and repentance; namely, That such things are required before Sacraments
only in them that have the use of reason, and are grown up to years of
discretion, not in Children.

I deny not that Children have all the benefits of Christ's death in their
Baptism, which is the proper Sacrament for them: But for my part I should
rather follow the practice of the Fathers in their charitable judging Children
worthy, than our Presbyters in their uncharitable censuring all Men and Women
under their charge, unworthy of that sacred Mystery Christ ordained to be a
means to convey his merits, and they at their entrance upon their Ministry
undertook to dispense to them in that Sacrament.

But this is not all the Peoples unworthiness, The second pretense, Not to give
the Sacrament for want of due Fxamination, answered.
but another Exception is, they come not to them to Examination; and St. Paul
says, Let a Man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink
of that Cup.

Mr. Calvin and his Fellows, whom the Presbyterian Reformadoes follow,
perceiving what a Jewel they have lost of Auricular Confession, which hangs
still at the Priests ears in the Church of Rome, would fain recover this loss,
and by strict examination before the Communion, unlock the Cabinets of
counsels, and skrew themselves into the secrets of their Peoples hearts, the
best way that can be devised to keep them in awe under their new Discipline.
But to make any imperious search or scrutinie into other Men's Consciences, is
not St. Paul's sense, but that every Man should look into his own. He says
not, Let the Pastors examine the Parishioners (that indeed was an ancient and
useful way to instruct and prepare the younger sort, and such as were to be
catechized) but as speaking to well-grounded Communicants, he says, Let every
one examine himself, 1 Cor. 11.28.
and so eat of this Bread, etc.

In the new constituted Church of Corinth there were Offenders of many sorts,
and them that had need of purgation as well as we; Some that were ignorant, 1
Cor. 15.34.
Some have not the knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame; Some that said
there was no Resurrection; 5.1.
Fornicators there were, and Contentious persons, 6.1.
that went to Law before Infidels; 1 Cor. 3.3.4.
11.21.
Carnal persons, that were makers of Sects and Schisms, given to envy, strife,
and divisions; and some that he taxes for Drunkenness, and irreverence at the
Lords Table: And for remedy of these iniquities and enormities, he prescribes
not an Enquiry to be made by the Presbyters into the Lives and Consciences of
these Sinners, but that every one, who best knows his own iniquity, should
examine his own heart; 11.28.
Let every Man examine himself, etc.

And that to teach and exhort the People to do, with the manner how, is the
duty of them that have the charge of Souls, and to admonish them of the danger,
if they suspect them unworthy, but not to refuse to make preparation of the
Feast for their sakes; unless first they come all to them to Catechize and
Examination before their Elders.

A thing which most of themselves are loath to do, and turn the point of
Examination upon themselves (which is the hindrance rather, as some suppose)
For how can he that has thrust himself into another Place and Possession
without a rightful Investiture, put that subsequent Interrogatory in the Text
to himself, Quomodo huc intrasti? which the King did here to him that came
without his Wedding Garment, and say to his own Soul, How came thou in
hither? This before that be received, which we speak of, is a thing to be
thought of, must be repented of, and what is wrongfully detained, Augustine.
must be restored. Si res aliena reddi potest, and non redditur, poenitentia
non agitur, sed fingitur; He that repents before he receives, and restores not,
if he have it in his power, is no true Penitent, but an Hypocrite, and cannot,
without danger of damnation to his Soul, take that holy Sacrament.

But if we had power to examine them as they would others, Their chiefest
reason for the cause of their Discipline, answered.
and search the depth of their hearts for the cause of their suspension of the
Sacrament all this while from the People, we should find it is for the
promoting of their intended Discipline. Of which they would beget such a
reverend esteem in the hearts of Men while they delay it, till their Lay Elders
be elected, and their Classes erected; as if the right Administration of this
Sacrament depended only on that rigid Government, and all Christians for 1500
years together, and more, were in some error to follow Christ's first
Institution, before Geneva found out this new Invention.

And how false a Supposition that is, will plainly appear, if we examine all
those Texts in the New Testament, wherein the Administration of the Sacrament
is recorded, without the least mention of this pretended Discipline.

We have the first Institution of it by our Savior, Matthew. 26.26, 27. Luke
22.16, 17. where none will say any needful rite was wanting for the more
effectual receiving; and we find the Master and his Disciples there, with a
precept to do this in remembrance of him: but no Lay Elders to take the
Disciples into examination. And yet it may be supposed, some there had need to
be searched, and by the strict rules of their ruling Elders, to be secluded for
their ignorance (as was before intimated) and their ambition and emulation.
This was a pattern for all succeeding Administrations; and yet we find neither
expression in the Text, nor collection from the Text, of any Elders doing this
office, either of admission of any to, or of suspension of any from, that
Sacrament. If they have any unwritten Tradition for it, they may produce it,
and we will promise them, for affinities sake in Doctrine, to be more inclined
to credit it, than those proofs of that nature which our Adversaries of Rome
sometimes make their refuge, when they are hard put to it in Disputation.

From the first, go along to the second; from the Master's first Institution,
to the Apostles his Ministers first Administration, set down Act. 2.42. They
continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, in breaking of
Bread, and in Prayer; Where breaking of Bread, by the common consent of
Expositors, is not understood of Common, but Bread consecrated. And now the
Apostles had a full Congregation of 3000 Souls newly converted, ver. 41. in
which number there was choice enough for such Church-Officens, if their
Examination and Approbation had been so absolutely necessary before the
Communion a but we find not a word there to make good their Assertion, who
suspend the Sacrament for want of a settled Eldership, to prove and approve of
them that are fit to receive it.

No nor in the third place, Act. 20.7. where the first day of the week seems to
be set apart for this service of the Sacrament; Upon the first day of the week
the Disciples met together to break Bread; which is there mentioned, tanquan^
opus diei in die suo, as the proper business of the day, and yet not a tittle
that inferrs a censure passed before by the Elders upon the Receivers. The
Evangelist tells, how upon that day the Disciples came together to break Bread,
but says nothing of ruling Elders that appoint who shall eat it.

And lastly, if we consult the faithful Apostle, more copious in 1 Cor. 11.20.
than any of the Evangelists, in this Mystery, we find him silent in this
Office of Eldership; for which he had been blameworthy, undertaking as he
does, ver. 23. to make a true relation of that he had received from the Lord
Jesus Christ touching this holy Communion, if he had left out so needful a
preparative as that of the Elders: whereon the whole Administration depends.

Nay, I shall say more; it is apparent from that Epistle, that there was then
no such order in the Church: For there was an Incestuous person suffered to
come into their Assemblyes, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5.
till St. Paul sent out his Excommunication against him, which they were to put
in execution in a full Congregation; 6.1.
There were Contentious persons, that went to Law before Infidels; Sectaries,
1.12.
that cried up their several Teachers; Idolaters, 8.10.
that eat in the Idols Temple; Heretics, that denied a Fundamental of Faith, 15.
the Resurrection of the Body. And an instance there is of some overtaken with
Drunkenness (one of their great exceptions) not that fell through infirmity
into that sin at some time before, but even when they came to that reverend
Mystery; 11.21.
Some come hungry, and some come drunken. Now where were the Lay Elders, whose
Office it is to keep the Door, and prevent such profanation? None appear in
the Text, no, nor were at all in that time, which makes the Apostle take
another course to redress these abuses, and apply the remedy to the Conscience
of every Communicant, 11.28.
saying, Let every Man examine himself before he eat of that Bread, and drink of
that Cup. He advises not the Ministers, in this mixture of many unworthy
Receivers, to suspend the Sacrament altogether till the Congregation be purged
by the assistance of Elders in a Court of Judicature, but puts the Case over to
the Court of Conscience, wherein every Communicant is to censure himself, and
upon his repentance and purpose of amendment take that holy Sacrament. Every
word in holy Writ that sounded but that way, they wrest to maintain their
Covenant; and, if there were any such Warrant, the Pulpits would ring on it to
defend their denial of this Sacrament.

But no Text of Scripture is found for Ministers to deprive their People of
this Sacrament for want of Discipline, no more than for Parents to withhold
Bread from their Children till they have made ready for them a Rod to their
minds. But though Scripture they have none, yet Reasons they have devised, some
to defend their Supposition, which when they are removed, there will be no Bar
to the Lord's Board, but they must come and dispense this Sacrament as well as
we.

And the chiefest of their Reasons I have met with, may be reduced under three
heads; for they are, either ex part Sacramenti, ex part Ministri, vel ex
part Convivarum; They have relation either to the Sacrament, or to the Giver,
or to the Receivers. To the Sacrament, lest that should be profaned; to the
Giver, lest he should be prejudiced; to the Receivers, which are of two sorts,
worthy and unworthy, lest the one should be scandalized, and the other be
condemned. All which mischief they make account would be prevented, if their
Presbytery were but stated. Fair Pretenses all.

1. The Presbyterians Reasons for stating of their Discipline before their
Administration of this Sacrament answered. 1. In regard. of the Sacrament. In
3. part. Thom. disp. 17. sec. 2.
The Sacrament it self they say will be profaned by the intrusion of lewd
Livers among the Receivers. And we will grant their Discipline would make a
difference in admission, though not always with discretion. But if some
unprepared Persons, whom we have neither the skill to discern, nor power to
restrain, press in among the rest (a thing that must be tolerated, because it
cannot be avoided) the Sacrament for all this is not in it self profaned, but
in them is of none effect, and so is said to be profaned in that respect. In
receiving the Sacrament, two things are to be considered (says Suarez) Vnum ex
part Sacramenti, ut vere, integre, and cum debit is circumstanti is fiat;
aliud ex part effectus Sacramenti, and consequenter ex part dispositionis
suscipient is quae ad effectum est necessaria. One in respect of the Sacrament
it self, that it be truly, wholly, and with all the rites and circumstances
administered; another in respect of the effect of the Sacrament, and
consequently of the disposition of the Receiver, which to that effect is
necessary. More plainly, Profanation is twofold, Material and Personal;
Material, when any abuse is offered to the Elements, or any part of the
Ordinance, at the time of Administration; Personal, when the Persons which
communicate are not fitted with pre-requisite qualifications. The Profanation
then, to speak properly, is not in the Supper, but in the Receiver; and this
latter, not we, nor their Elders, can always tell how to prevent.

That Sentence of our Savior, Nolite dare sanotum Canibus, Math. 7.6.
Give not that which is holy to Dogs, neither cast your Pearls before Swine.
many of them take as a Precept prohibiting this Sacrament to the profane and
ignorant: but they mistake the sense there intended, which our Savior
understood of Admonition or Reproof, as appears by the words foregoing, and the
reasons following ( lest they turn again and tear you) which never happened,
never was offered to the Dispensers of this Sacrament from the prophanest
Wretches that ever received it. And though we ought not to cast away holy
things upon them that regard them not, Yet here is no pretense for them which
peremptorily deny the holy Eucharist to all, because they suppose some such are
in their Congregations. Math. 13.45.46.
The Gospel is an holy thing, a Pearl in the Parable, and must not we cast that
among such as they count Dogs and Swine? beastly livers that regard it not?
Surely the Apostles were not so scrupulous; they preached Christ crucified, 1
Cor. 1.23
though to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles foolishness. If we
should stand upon these terms, and not preach the Gospel, because holy, till
we come into a Congregation wholly sanctified and pure, we must preach no more
on Earth to convert and win Souls to Heaven.

But enough to this first Reason, The second Reason answered.
which respects the purity of the Sacrament. The second is for the safety of
the Minister that gives it, That he be not guilty of the unworthy Receivers
sin, nor accessory to their damnation, they must first establish their
Discipline.

And the Ministers might have thought themselves beholding to them for the care
they pretend of their Souls safety in giving the Sacrament, if they had not
showed so little pity on their Souls, in pressing them against Conscience to
take their Covenant. But they need not thank them for this favor; for the
damnation that is endangered (St. Paul says) is not to the Giver, but to the
Receiver; 1 Cor. 11.29.
He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks (...), judgment
or damnation to himself, not to the Minister.

Nor is the sin his that gives it to him that unworthily takes it: He does but
his duty which Christ commanded; Luke 22.19
and that is not sin in him, but in the Receiver which does not his duty in due
preparation. Now if others sinning follow accidentally through their own
default upon the performing of any duty which Christ's commands me, I am not in
fault, nor any ways accessory to their sin.

If it be replied; A Minister that gives this Supper to an unworthy Receiver,
cooperates to his taking it; for how can a Man cooperate more to the taking of
a thing, than by giving it? Then we say he cooperates in the action, but not to
the obliquity of the action. Nor is his giving a cause of his unworthiness in
receiving, but of his receiving only; which is the determination of the
Schoolman upon that Question; In 3. part. Tho. disp. 18. sec. 2.
It may so fall out (says Suarez) that a Minister cannot deny the Sacrament to
an unworthy Communicant, for fear of giving offense; Et tunc quamvis ille det,
non cooperatur iniquae receptioni, ut iniqua est, sed solum ut receptio
Sacramenti est; He has no hand by his giving, in the Peoples receiving as it
is sinful, but as it is a reception only of the Sacrament. And again, Disp.
67. sec. 4.
Actio dandi non est mala ex part dantis, and intentio bona, quamvis ex part
recipientis receptio sit mala; The Ministers action of giving is good, as is
his intention, although the Receivers be naught in his unsanctified reception.
His sin then that receives, cannot be imputed to the Minister that gives, so
long as his unworthiness in receiving does not depend upon his Ministerial
action of giving. There is then no cooperation of sin in the Minister, but only
a permission; of which, when he has done what he can for prevention, he is
clear from the Blood of their Souls which eat and drink Damnation to
themselves. So that for this cause of the Ministers there is no such absolute
necessity of a total forbearance of the holy Ordinance, for want of Elders to
exclude unprepared Receivers.

No, Nor 3ly. for the cause of Communicants, lest some ignorant, or unprepared,
should participate to the offense of others, and the prejudice of their own
Souls. Indeed it were good if all such could be discerned and debarred. But
where there is no power to do that, the Minister must not neglect his duty to
do this which Christ commands, for want of that Discipline. Luke 22.19.
And yet, if that they so much stand upon, were stated, Hypocrites would
communicate among true Believers. Christ's Fold here on Earth consists of Goats
and Sheep, his Barn contains Wheat and Chaff, which will not be severed till
the winnowing, and separating the Goats from the Sheep at the Day of Judgment;
the Bad will be mingled with the Good, the Reprobate with the Elect, when they
have done all they can. And can the Dispensers of the Sacrament then argue from
hence a necessity of a continual suspension of the Sacrament? Note.
No sure; a total omission of a Duty by Christ commanded, cannot be warranted
by the contingency of an Offense that may causlesly be apprehended. 1 Cor. 8.13.
St. Paul says indeed, he would not cat while the World stands, rather than
offend his Brother: but he meant it not of an Offense causlesly taken, but of
giving him the occasion of sinning. But if any will take offense if I feed my
Body with Nutriment, or my Soul with Sacrament, I may not for this starve
either, that I be not accessory to my own death and famishment.

Nor may the Pastor forbear to feed his Flock and starve the Souls under his
charge, for some of their sakes that should not eat. The good Steward does not
contrary to his Lords will, deny the household their provision, for fear some
undeserving servants should have amongst the rest their portion. Nor did the
Jewish shephards starve their sheep for fear the goats should commune in their
pasture. In point of Charity it were better to give alms to ten Counterfeits,
than to suffer one member of Christ to perish for want of food and raiment, and
in execution of our. Ministry we were better suffer some hypocrites to eat at
Christ's supper, than for their sakes starve the souls of our flocks al-together.

A Minister ought to have a care what he can, that the profain and ignorant eat
not of this Sacrament to their souls prejudice, but he can do no more than
admonish them of the danger and instruct them in the duty of preparation. He
must exclude none of himself, Matthew. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 2, 6.
he has no such absolute power; That belongs to a court of Judicature, by the
rule of Christ and his Apostles, and the pattern of the Primitive Church. So
that though a person be known to be culpable to the Minister, or openly
detected of a crime to the Congregation, he is not to be excluded by the
Minister alone, but must first be sentenced by the judges Ecclesiastical: who
ought proceed no otherwise against him, but secundum allegata and probata: and
not censure him but upon good proof of others, or his own confession. August.
l. 4 de medi. pen. Aquin. p. 3. Quest. 80.
Nos a Communione quempiam prohibere non possumus nisi sponte confessum (say
Augustine and Aquin. both) aut in aliquo judicio Ecclesiastico vel saeculari
convictam. We can prohibit none the Communion unless upon his own confession,
or else in open Court upon manifest conviction.

If the profain and ignorant then, press into the Lords presence at this feast
it is at their own perrill, see they to it, Oeat. 6.
we must not disobey our Masters Command. Do this in remembrance of me; Luke
22.19.
Nor starve the souls of our flock to keep them back, that by their own default
and folly turn the bread of life into their own bane. Christ did it not to the
rest of the Disciples for Judas his sake, who after he had eaten fell presently
into destruction of body and soul. If there come in a man to this marriage
feast without his wedding garment. They are not the servants that wait, but the
King himself that watches over all; that takes an order with him for his
rudeness, he checks him and condemns him for it to infernal imprisonment. Take
him away (says he) bind him hand and foot and cast him into utter darkness.
Matthew. 22.13.


And so neither on the Sacraments part, nor yet the Givers nor the Receivers
can any just plea be taken for this long stay and suspension the presbyters
make of the Eucharist for want of Elders to order their Communicants.

A Government which I believe they may wait for long enough and never see it,
now set up on our English soil. Note.
It is worth the Observation how the foundation of this new Church-frame has
been thrice laid on English ground. First in Queen Elizabeth's reign when this
Discipline was suffered to take some footing. In the beginning of King Jameses,
and now in the latter end of King Charles, when there was a power sufficient to
rear it and uphold it, but all with as little Success in this Island, as had
that building of the temple at Jerusalem, which the Jews so often attempted to
rear a third time, upon the ground, where it formerly stood, at the Instigation
of apostate Julian, who would have it done in opposition to those words of our
Savior. Just Mart. 2 Apo. adves. Julian.
That said, one stone should not be left there upon another that should not be
cast down: For these men by the tempests of troubles and Wars in our times have
been scattered and their work cast down, as the Jews and their work was then by
thunder and lightning and tempests from Heaven.

It Is never like now to be established in this State. It Is too strict to stand
with our looseness and liberty, too sharp a bridle to curb in all sorts of
Sectaries, that would have the reigns of Religion laid in their necks, to run
if they please to the Devil. I would to God these reverend Presbyters would
seriously think of these things, and stand no longer, now they are past all
hopes in the expectation of that, while they suffer the souls under their
charge to pine for want of this. Christ said, Luke 22.19.
Hoc agite, do this in remembrance of me, but never bid them stay for that,
till that be established.

We may all without that Discipline supply our places, discharge our
consciences, do God good service, and save souls if we feed the flock of Christ
whereof the holy Ghost has made us Overseers; but if we suffer them to starve
for want of this bread of life, what account shall we Stewards of the household
of God give? Or what answer shall we make to our Master at the last day, that
for neglecting to feed the hungry and give drink to the thirsty will denounce
the sentence of Condemnation.

Our dear Savior recommended this care with which I conclude, Matthew. 25.
at this time and gave it the last thing in charge before he left the world;
when he so conjured Peter, and in him every one of us Pastors, by his love to
feed his flock thrice iterating it for a sureness. Simon son of Jonah love
thou me? Yea Lord, says he, thou know that I love thee, Joh. 21.15.16.1.
pasce agnos meos, then feed my lambs. Again Christ says, Simon love thou
me? Yea Lord, fayes Peter, thou know that I love thee. Then Pasce oves meas,
feed my sheep: Christ said to him the third time, Simon love thou me? Yea
Lord, says Peter, thou know all things, thou know that I love thee,
then, says he, feed my sheep. Nothing but feed, feed, feed, three times over;
feed my lambs, feed my sheep, feed my flock, and that for the love of him. And
now shall the Apostles Successors under a pretense of Reformation, teach only
and not feed? Understand all these pasce's of feeding ( Ore) with the Doctrine
of the mouth, none of them ( opere) with the example of the works, or if that
None re Sacramenti with the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood which is the
only proper feeding indeed.

Such Pastors are Ministers of Gods word only and not of the Sacrament at
least not of the supper of the Lord. They have forgotten one part of their
function these twelve years together whereby they starve the souls, they have
taken in Charge. The Lord amend it, that it be not laid to their charge in the
day of judgment.

THE THIRD SERMON.
IN my last I made known the good pleasure of God the King, to have the
marriage feast of his son or the Sacrament of his body and blood duly made
ready for his people, according to the practice of the Primitive Church, in the
purest times. After which I made my address to those Ministers, that neglect or
refuse to make ready this feast, and answered their plea on their peoples
behalf. Now I shall have the opportunity (my beloved in Christ) to make my
application to you.

You have heard what the readiness of the wedding requires at the Ministers
hands. Use to the Communicants.
Now more briefly say what will be expected from thence, of you the
Communicants. And that is a readiness also in you that are called to come to
the feast. The King said unto his servants, Tell them that are bidden. I have
prepared my dinner and all things are ready, come to the marriage. ver. 4.
A readiness, there must be of mind to accept his kindness, without running
another way to the farm on Merchandice: And more then that too. There must be a
Dressing and making of your selves ready, answerable to the solemnity of the
wedding. The King overlooks the guests, when they are come in, and finding one
there without his wedding Garment, checks him for it. How came thou in hither
not having made thy self ready, 11.
with thy wedding Garment; 12.
Nay more then checks, condemns him to be manacled and fettered, 13.
and so cast into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
The heaviest censure that can be pronounced; to be excommunicated, and cast out
into that horrid place of hellish torments. No porticipation, no presentation
ought to be at this feast, without due and fitting preparation. Genesis 41.14.
Joseph changed his garments, when he came out of prison, to appear before
Pharaoh King of Egypt; put of his sorded habit and put on sweeter. So must they
do that appear at this banquet, before the King of Glory. They must deponere and
aponere, put off and put on, put off the forded habits of their sins, and put
on a resolution of reformation of life, Ephesians. 4: 22.24.
or as St. Paul has it, put off the Old man with the deceiveable lusts, and by
faith put on the new man Christ Jesus, which is after God created in
righteousness and holiness: Colos. 3.
12.
Put off all these (says he) anger, wrath, malice, 13:
and filthy Communication out of your mouths, 14.
and put on as the Elect of God the bowels of mercy, tenderness, humbleness of
mind, meekness, long suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another, but above all things put on Charity which is the bond of perfection.
Of which virtues and graces, the wedding Garment of Sanctification is woven and
wrought, though some frame it of Charity, and some of faith only, yet the most
make it the ornament of the spirits, virtues and graces in the conversation
without, joined with a good conscience cleansed from sin, within.

When God was to come down upon mount Sinai, Exodus 19.
to give the Law he commanded Moses to sanctify the people, two days before
and charge them to wash their clothes, and to be ready on the third day. So
when the Lord comes to make us a feast of sat things and refined Wine in mount
Sion, his Evangelicall Church: They that set in Moses chair are to teach the
people, to sanctify themselves by prayer and examination, and charge them to
wash themselves by tears of repentance, and contrition, and so be ready against
the time, which if they do accordingly, they shall not be Shent for coming
without their wedding garment.

As guests, thus must we all fit and prepare our selves, and not only so; but
more precisely than ordinary guests, Every soul is here at this wedding to
present it self, as a Bride ready trimmed to meet with her Bridgroom, decked
with the costly ornaments of Christ's active and passive merits which he has
given it, and with those precious Jewels of the spirits, gists and graces: In a
word adorned we must be with the righteousness of Justification and
Sanctification.

But without these how disguised and disfigured do people appear in Gods sight,
when they come before him with ulcerous sores upon their consciences, and in
the uncleanly rags of their own unrighteousness. And if they shall come as men
go now adays, with the halting feet of Newtrality, eyes blinded through errors
and ignorauce, ears dear to Gods truth, tongues dumb in his praises, with the
wry-neck of aversness, black-mouths through blasphemy, blew-teeth of envy,
hands full of blood and bribery. They must look for no better welcome than the
five foolish Vergins, to whom the Bridegroom said. Depart from me ye workers of
Iniquity, I know you not; Or the guest here that wanted his wedding garment
whom the King commanded, to be bound in chains and cast into utter darkness,
where is weeping and gnashing of teeth.

But I would be loath to tire out your Attension with a matter of such ordinary
Observation; you are not unacquainted with the danger of unworthy Receiving,
which there is no way to prevent but by preparation before you come, not by
Renegation when you are called. They that do so and absent themselves to
prevent the danger of unworthiness, in Receiving fall into another as bad, and
incur the Kings censure, of unworthiness for Refusing; who said unto his
Servants the wedding is ready, but they that were bidden were not worthy. Which
leads to the third partition of the text, where the King sits in Judicature
upon the Recusants. Of whom there is, The third Partition. Observation how
dangerous it is to refuse the grace offered in the word preached. Zach. 7.
Querela and Censura. The Kings Complaint and his Censure.

His complaint is, that they were biden, intimating that they came not, or else
why should he complain that they were biden, when God sends to call us he looks
we should come, is grieved if we come not. The son of God sighed that the
tender of his Grace was not accepted: Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem that killest and
stonest the Prophets, how often would I have gathered thee as an hen does her
chickens, under her wings and they would not come, is angered and offended at
Recusancy. 11.
12.
They refused to harken pulled away the shoulder and stopped their ears, that
they might not hear (and it follows) Therefore came great wrath from the Lord
of hosts, 13.
who scattered them with a wherlwind among the nations: Numb. 16.12.
Yea so provoked when murmurring and insurrection against his Messemgers is
joined with it, 14.
that wrath comes out from the Lord for it against Corah and his confederats
that said we will not come up, 40.
which consumed part of them with strange, fire that came out from the Lord, and
the rest the earth swal owed up alive for an example to all seditious
Separatists. And though in our days it be free for any so long as there is no
penalty to mock Gods messengers, Cron. 2.36.16.
despise his word, and abuse his Prophets, yet for this the wrath of the Lord
arose against his people; Israel till there was no remedy, but a ruin of their
nation. To resuse the grace and abuse the means, and not come when called is
dangerous though counted among us, but a thing indifferent God give you all the
understanding to consider it.

But that I aim at chifly at this time, The danger of refusing the Sacrament.
Sam. 1.20.
is to show the danger of denying grace offered in the Sacrament, God expects
they should come that are bidden to it. You see that in the Text, he misses
them that absent themselves from it, and makes their empty seats as Saul did
David's at the feast. And as he put the Question here; Quomodo huc intrasti? how
came thou in hither, to him that came unready without his wedding Garment. So
will he inquire, for him that absents himself from his presence there, as he
did for Adam, Genesis 3.9.
for that sault in the garden when he said. Adam ubi es? Adam where art thou?
God takes notice of men's absence at this feast. Nor is that all the prejudice
but a further danger, for if we look into the text we shall find they were but
dead men, that denied and came not when they were bidden. They made light of
it, v. 5.6.
and went one to his Farm another to his Merchandise, and evilly entreated the
servants that were sent (such usage as many of us have found at Recusants
hands) But when the king heard of it, he was wroth and sent forth his men of
war, and slew those murderers, and burnt up their City; whereby appears Gods
anger and their danger, who either out of neglect or contempt come not when
they are called to that Sacrament.

Judge in your selves brethren, If a King (as in the text) or great statesman
shall prepare a costly feast for his poor neighbors, send out his servants
that wait on his person first to invite, then again to call them at the hour,
and they slight him and his cheer, will it not be taken as an Indignity to him
and a just cause of indignation against them? So is it when you are bidden to
the Supper of the Lord, if ye accept not the Grace, there is indignity done to
that and indignation to be feared against you: ver. 7.
Nay more than Indignation. The men that made light on it and went another way,
were put to fire and sword for it, and that was Execution. And the fathers for
this feared more than that too, more than a temporal death and destruction,
even eternal death and damnation; Joh. 6.53.
for they understanding, the saying of our Savior ( Except ye eat the flesh of
the Son of man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you) not simply of a
spiritual eating and drinking but (which is more safe to do) of a Sacramental
also, for it is a figurative speech says St. Augustine, commanding in passione
Pomini communicandam and mente suaviter recondendum: Lib. 3. de doct.
Christiana.
to communicate in the Lords passion and to lay up in our memories, how Christ's
flesh was Crucified for our sakes. And therefore held they it necessary for all
to takes it Sacramentally upon pain of death and damnation which to prevent,
Cypre de lapsis.
They gave it for a sureness to sucking children and infants.

And indeed what man that is wise unto Salvation, will hazard his soul on his
spiritual eating by says only, and from time to time neglect to eat
Sacramentally with the mouth also, which is a fruit of that faith that must
save and a means to increase it, and without which it can hardly be, counted
any other but a dead faith: for faith without the work is but dead Jam. 2.26.
But a lively faith will make this effectual application to thy soul, to bring
thee hither and say, (when the Minister gives warning to prepare for a
Communion) he is the servant of the great King, sent to invite the guests to
the marriage feast of his Son, shall I not make ready and go? and at the time
of administration, say Christ's flesh and blood, with all the benefits of his
Passion are now offered under the Elements, of bread and wine, shall I not
taste and take? the copy of my pardon is there to be renewed signed, and sealed
to my soul and conscience, shall I not accept it? The earnest of Salvation is
there given and shall I refuse it? If I do I may not have the like opportunity
again, and so resolve with thy self to come when thou art bidden, that the King
complain not of thee among the rest, which for none appearance are censured not
worthy. The recusants plea for absence answered. Luke 14.18.


But before we come to that to the Censure; It is fit we hear the Recusants
plea or give them leave to speak for themselves St. Luke says, They all with
one consent began to make Excuses, to the Servant that invited them, one said I
have bought a Farm and go to see it, 19.
I pray thee have me excused: 20.
another I have bought five yoke of Oxen and I go to prove them, The excuses of
them in the not.
I pray thee have me excused: a third I have married a Wife, and cannot come.
Sr. Matthew in short sales, They made light on it, and went their way, one to
his Farm, Verse. ^.
another to his Merchandise. Bad excuses all, and not satisfactory. For shall
the marrying of a carnal Wife stay thee from the wedding of thy Soul to Christ?
Shall the Conjugal Society in House or Family be preferred before the
comfortable communion with the Bridegroom of thy Soul in the Sacrament? Or
shall the Countryfarm be prized above the Kingdom of Heaven? And a company of
Oxen, Horses, and Swine, be more desired than the communion of the Saints and
Angels? God calls thee to come to him then, Et post ponitur Deus Bovibus, qui
te aequavit Angelis? And shall God be served after the Oxen and Beasts, that
has made thee equal with the Angels? Or will your Merchandise answer for your
absence? and your pennyworths of Earthly Gain countervail the loss of Heavenly
Grace? Your buying bodily provision excuse the neglect of thy Souls
nourishment? Your gathering up Dross and Dung (as St. Paul terms the riches of
the World) satisfy for your loss of Christ? or what shall it advantage a Man
to win the World by a Bargain, and lose his own Soul by barring that of the
means of his Salvation?

But so long as all these buying and selling, farming and wiving, may be done
at other times, the six days God allows for them, the plea will not hold in
his Court to excuse their absence, who requires their presence at his Feast on
another day and time set apart for the same. No pretense of worldly cares and
business can excuse them that are bidden.

These we have in the Text. Next these, The Excuses of some in our time. Of
Military Men.
we will weigh the excuses of some in our time. The Military Man's, in the first
place, who attends the service of War that disquiets the mind, and therefore
says he must be excused: Yet such came to John's Baptism, the Sacrament of
Regeneration; and why not then to Christ's Supper, the Sacrament of Nutrition?
If the War be warranted by God's Word, and managed with a good Conscience, they
may eat Bread and drink Wine with the Priest after it to their comfort, as
Abram did with Melchizedec, the Priest of the most high God, Genesis 14.18.
who brought him forth Bread and Wine, and blessed him, at his return from the
rescue of Lot, and the slaughter of Chedor loamer the Tyrant, and the Kings
with him. But when it is otherwise, and the Conscience accuses, God's Word
condemns, and Blood cries up for vengeance: then let Men forbear, for fear
of Judas the Traitor's judgment; Abi retro eum sacellis tuis qui lucris
inhiaes (says St. Cyprian) and cujus manus sunt sanguinae plenae, De Coena
Domini.
Come back thou with thy bags full of spoils, whose mouth gapeth after ill
gotten goods, and whose hands are full of blood: In this case an
Excommunication is fitter than a Communion, and an eight months exclusion from
the Table and Temple both: As St. Ambrose prescribed the great Emperor
Theodosius for the good of his Soul, after his rash Decree, which cost the
lives of 7000 Thessalonians. Or such a strait penance as St. Cyprian enjoined
the lapsed Christians, De Lapsis.
whom he bids, Orare impensius, and rogare, to seek God by prayer more
instantly and earnestly; Diem luctu transigere vigiliis, noctes and fletibus
ducere, to spend the day in mourning, and the night in watching and weeping;
Stratos adhaerere eineri, and cilicio, and sordibus volutari, to lie and wallow
in sackcloth and ashes; Eleemosynis frequenter insistere, quibus animae a morte
liberantur, to break off their sins, Dan. 4.27.
as Daniel said to Nebuchadnezzar, by righteousness, and showing mercy to the
poor; Justis operibus incumbere, quibus peccata purgantur, and to make
restitution, and do good works, whereby through God's mercy their sins may be
purged and pardoned. A course must be taken for this to make ready for the
Communion, or how shall Men ever think to be ready, if they dye, for the day of
doom? and dye they must, there is no remedy; and if they cannot be prepared to
meet Christ in the Sacrament, how shall they be able to look him in the face at
the day of Judgment?

Next, Excuse of Malicious Men.
the Militant may come in the plea of the malicious, who is vexed with
Injuries, Arrests, Suits or Slanders, and therefore says he must be excused:
But how can he expect that at his hands, Mat. 5.44.
who commands us to love our Enemies? gives not leave to live one day without
Charity. St. Paul limits Wrath within the time of Sunset, Ephesians. 4.26.
Let not the Sun go down upon your Wrath; and Christ our Savior bids, Agree
with thy Adversary quickly, and be reconciled to thy Brother, Mat. 5.25.
and so offer thy Gift at the Altar. We daily offend God, and would not have
him angry with us; shall we so soon and so long be angry with them that so
seldom offend us? We pray God to forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us, and if we forgive not them that trespass against us,
how can we look to be forgiven all our trespasses at Gods hands?

If there be any then in whose heart lies the venom of inveterate Malice, or
the poison of Asps under his lips, let him imitate the wise Serpent, which
leaves Venenum in latibulo, casts up his Poison, and leaves it in his Den
behind him, when he goes to drink, that he bane not himself: So must the
spiteful and malicious do; leave his Venom of Hatred and Malice when he comes
to the Sacrament, that he drink not his own damnation, and not return like the
Dog to the Vomit, to resume it again. Catiline, to make his Conspirators with
him of one mind, caused them all to drink to each other Bowls of Wine mingled
with Man's Blood: Much rather should that Cup of Wine, which Christ has mingled
with his precious Blood, work that effect, and combine our hearts in brotherly
love.

After these we may take the Return of them which keep away for the cause of
Schism and Heresy, who answer with Contumacy, say not so much as have us
excused, with them in the Text, but with Corah and his Companions, Numb. 16.
when they were sent for by Moses, We will not come up: Whose first Schism they
made in the Church, was for an example punished with such a Schism of the
Earth, that it rent asunder, and they sank down into Hell.

It is not a causless separation from Christ's Body, the Communion, as St. Paul
calls it, or the Congregation, that can excuse. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.
It excludes outwardly, and, which is worse, separates inwardly, and causes a
substraction of the Spirit of Grace, that is, the Soul that enlivens the whole
Mystical Body of Christ, and so leaves the divided member in a dead or dying
condition. Augustine.
Membrum amputatum amittit Spiritum, dum in corpore erat vivebat praecisum vero
amittet Spiritum; A member of the Church cut off by wilful Schism, or deserved
Excommunication, loses the Spirit. While it remained in the Body, it is
actuated and animated by the Spirit, but cut off, the Spirit leaves it, as the
Soul does the Limb divided from the Body. Which is plainly seen in many of
those self-conceited Separatists, who because they like not to retain the
knowledge they had of God in their minds, Romans 1.28.
are given over of God to a reprobate mind, as he did the Gentiles, to do
things not convenient.

These cannot if they would communicate, and eat Christ's crucified Body,
unless they renounce and repent their erroneous and blasphemous opinions, and
return to the union of the Church, August. de Civ. Dei, lib. 21. cap. 25.
which is his Mystical Body. Non dicendum est eum manducare corpus Christi, qui
in corpore non est Christi; He cannot be said truly to eat Christ's body, that
is out of Christ's body.

I might spend time to discuss their excuse, The Excuse of them that receive
seldom.
that often, though not always, absent themselves from this holy Feast, or
come but once a year, at Easter only; like some Retainers, that were wont to
wait at their Masters Table at a Christmas, and so bid farewell all the year
after. And these think it is enough if they come once at our bidding thrice, or
oftener. Their Reasons; First, Baptism, whereby also Christ is signified and
received, is not iterated; and secondly, Men may feed on Christ spiritually by
faith, though they eat him not sacramentally with the mouth.

But in short, I shall give satisfaction to both. To their first, That there is
not the same reason of this and the other Sacrament; That Is the Sacrament of
our new birth, and admission into the Church; This of our Nutrition; we are but
once born, once admitted into the Congregation, therefore that Sacrament is but
once to be received: But we must often take food and nourishment to preserve
life and health, and therefore this Sacrament of feeding and refreshing our
Souls is often to be iterated. And to the last, which pretends a spiritual
eating to evade the Sacramental; though that be it which nourishes to eternal
life, and not the eating of the outward Element without that. Yet the Element
being sanctified to this use, to signify and convey Christ, with all the
benefits of his suffering to our Souls. We do by this means feed on him more
sensibly, fully, and effectually, and the oftener (if reverently and devoutly
taken) the more strengthening in all Grace and Salvation: For every sacramental
action conveyes Grace to the well-prepared person; though not ex opere operato,
as they said at Trent Council, yet ex Det beneplacito, of God's good pleasure,
who has ordained the Sacraments to be used, Pet. Lomb. lib. 4. did. 1.
Non solum signisicandi, sed etiam sanctificandi gratia, Not for signification
only, but for sanctification also, and that by the means of them his graces
may be conveyed.

Carelessly to neglect, or wilfully to contemn the grace offered at this
Banquet, is dangerous, it argues a man dead in sins and trespasses; for if he
had the life of Grace in him, he would as living men do, hunger and thirst
after that which nourishes and maintains it.

You have heard their Excuses discussed, and found unsatisfactory; I know no
reason but we may now from the Complaint proceed to the Censure of them that
were bidden: The Censure.
But they that were bidden, (...), were not worthy.

And that is no easy Censure to undergo, It Is a great disgrace to be counted and
called unworthy, as bad as ungrateful, and that is as bad as any thing, Si
ingratum dixeris; omnia dixeris, say that, and say any thing. But the Text
implies something more particularly that they are not worthy of, as of Christ
the Son, the Bridegroom: And he says so in another place, He that will not
forsake Father and Mother, House and Land for my sake, me non dignus est, is
not worthy of me, or rather, not worthy of his Supper, which is more consonant
to the Text. The King said such words, Luke 14.24. None of them that were
bidden shall taste of my Supper. And what follows then, but if they by refusing
that, as the Jews did the preaching of the Gospel, the other means of
salvation, they render themselves indignos vita, Act. 13.46
unworthy of eternal life; and what follows then, but that with those that call
Death to them with hands and words, they are digging in morte, worthy to be
partakers of it; Wisd. 1.15, 16.
and that not of the first death only, but of the second too, to be bound with
him that went without his Wedding Garment to the Feast, and cast into utter
darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth. They that will not taste the
Supper of the Lord (says Salmeron) shall taste the Supper of the Devil, who
feeds his Guests with biting their tongues, bitter tears, and gnashing of teeth.

This is a Censure of unworthiness none would come under; yet who dare say,
when he comes before God, I am worthy? The Prodigal, who represents a penitent
Sinner, falls down before his Father, and cries out, Non sum dignus, I am no
more worthy to be called thy Son. The Centurion, a good man, Luke 15.
whom the People reported worthy to Christ, and had built God a Synagogue, a
Roof for him to dwell under on Earth, says to the Son of God, I am not worthy
thou should come under my roof. John Baptist, Mat. 8.8.
greater in Christ's judgment than any of the Prophets, confesses himself not
worthy to untye Christ's Shoes. Mark. 1.7.
And we were wont to acknowledge as much of our selves when we came to
communicate, in our Grace before and after Meat; before, we be not worthy so
much as to gather up the crumbs under the Table, and after we be unworthy, by
reason of our manifold sins, to offer thee any sacrifice. It is an axiom in
Divinity, (...), that no man is worthy in Gods sight. 1 Cor. 11.29. The
Objection of the danger in unworthy receiving, answered.


And here then, what shall we say to that of St. Paul's, He that cateth and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation to himself; how shall we
reconcile that with this? Indeed that Text is now made a stumbling block in the
way to this Feast by many, who say to us calling them to this Marriage, as the
Disciples did to their Master, discoursing of Marriage, If the case be so
betwixt a Man and his Wife, Mat. 19.10
it is not good to marry: So say these, If the case be so with them that
receive unworthily, then it is best to refrain.

And yet for all that difficulty (which answers this doubt) Men must marry, or
do worse; and as for all the Danger that is in Diet, whereby some have been
surfetted, choked, or poisoned, Men must eat and drink, or else famish: So
notwithstanding the danger of Damnation that is in eating and drinking
unworthily. They must feed on Christ in the Sacrament; or their Souls starve
and perish.

I shall remove this Obstacle then, and show you the way plain, which is a
middle way that we must take to avoid both the danger of unworthiness in
receiving on the one side, and this Censure of unworthiness in refusing on the
other; and that is, by coming thither sanctified and prepared, as you heard
before: For by coming when ye are called ye shall escape the Censure of
unworthiness in my Text; and by preparation before you come, the eating and
drinking unworthily at the Table; for such are daigned worthy that come so,
though not simply and absolutely, (in which sense the Saints acknowledge their
unworthiness) yet in respect of Divine acceptance and mercy; For to your
comfort I tell you, There is in the Book of God a threefold worthiness or
dignity.

1. There is Dignitas meriti, the same the Schoolmen call Meritum condigia, a
worthiness of merit. And such a worthiness of Christ in the Sacrament no Saint
on Earth ever had. Jacob, Genesis 32.10
whom God loved, and with whom he so familiarly wrestled, confesses himself not
worthy of the least of his mercies; much less is any worthy of this, the
greatest of all his graces and favors.

2. Dignitas Congruitatis, which they call Meritum Congrui, a worthiness of
fitness or Congruity; when, though a Man be not worthy of himself, yet has
fitted and prepared himself meet for this Solemnity. Col. 1.10. Ephesians. 4.1. Phil.
1.27.
In this sense St. Paul says, Walk worthy of the Lord, worthy of your Calling,
worthy of the Gospel of Christ; and that is, so near as you can, walk worthy of
these, or as it becomes them; and in this acception you may be worthy Guests
at this Feast.

3. Besides these, there is Dignitas dignationis Divinae, the worthiness of
Divine acceptance, when a Man counts not himself worthy, dignitate sua, by his
own merit and worth, but, dignationem Divina, by God's mercy and favor; God
proves the righteous, says Solomon, and finds them, dignos seipso, worthy
of himself. Wisd. 3.5.
They that labored in the Vineyard but one hour, had wages alike with them
that bare the burden and heat of the day; not for that they were so worthy, but
'twas their Lord's will, Mat. 20.12
I will give to this last, as unto thee. And it is the good will and pleasure of
God to account them worthy, and make them welcome, that labor truly to make
themselves ready with them that have lead a life more strict and holy. Come to
the Marriage then, and bring with you the worthiness of fitness and
convenience, and God will vouchsafe you the worthiness of welcome, and gracious
acceptance.

I have delivered the message of my Text, Application.
and invited you to the Marriage; Know now, that all things are ready, and the
King expects your company. Do not make light of this Lesson, and so soon as I
have made an end of speaking, forget all you have heard, and so go your way,
one to his Farm, another to his Merchandise, but come to the Marriage; Neglect
not the opportunity, like the five foolish Virgins, that wanted Oil in their
Lamps, and went out to buy while the Bridegroom came, and for their long
tarrying were answered, when they called to enter, with a fearful Decedite,
the Bridegroom saying to them, Mat. 25.
Depart from me ye workers of iniquity. I know you not. Trim up your Lamps with
the Oil of Faith and Repentance; have your Lights burning, your Devotion to
God, and Charity to Man, burning, and your Light of Good Works shining; and now
the Bridegroom of your Souls is ready to descend into the Sacrament, Go in with
him.

But one thing more before I let you go; Behave your selves there with all the
reverence that may be, toward God and that holy Mystery. God looks for an
awful regard to his Majesty in all places, but most of all when we come
before the Figures of his Presence, such as the burning Bush was to Moses, Exodus
3.2, 5.
wherefore God bid him put off the shoes from his feet, for the place where he
stood was holy ground; and the Tabernacle and Temple to the Jews, wherefore he
commanded to reverence them. Levit. 19.30.
But most reverence of all is expected when we approach near the Figure of his
Presence, the Table of the Lord, to touch and taste the sanctified signs of his
Body and Blood, which is the highest mystery of our Christian Religion, and
the nearest presence and Communion we Sinners can have with God in our Flesh. O
cast down your selves there then, as becomes you, with greatest humility of
heart, and the reverentest gesture of body that may be. And so go your way, 2 Samuel 24.23.
and the Lord your God (as Araunah said to David going to sacrifice) accept you
all that appear before him, and that for the merit and worthiness of his Son
Jesus Christ, the Bridegroom of your Souls, To whom, with the King his Father,
and the Holy Ghost the Comforter, be all glory, and honor, thanks, praise, and
prayer, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

