AN ARGUMENT OR, DEBATE IN LAW: OF THE GREAT QVESTION CONCERNING THE MILITIA;
As it is now settled by ORDINANCE of both the HOUSES of PARLIAMENT. By which,
it is endeavored, to prove the Legalitie of it, and to make it warrantable by
the fundamental Laws of the Land. In which, Answer is also given to all
Objections that do arise, either directly, or collaterally concerning the same.
All which is referred to the judicious Reader.

By J. Marsh C. L.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Pain, and M. Simmons, for Tho. Underhill, at the
Bible in Wood-street, 1642.

TO THE READER.
Courteous READER,
THat which I framed for my own private satisfaction only, in these distracted
times, in which every man (that resolves not to stand Neuter) ought to have his
conscience poysed by good grounds and principles, l^st that it suffer shipwreck
in the conclusion; I do here (though unwillingly) present to the public view;
in which weak and poor endeavor, I have borrowed some of the Parliaments
grounds to exspatiate my self upon, that I might the better convince thy
judgment, and mine own: but the greater part are mine; which I hope will not
blast the rest, nor make it unfruitful to thee; but rather more fully inform,
satisfy and convince thee of the truth of the Parliaments assertions: and to
this end I have not used any affected style, but have (to the utmost of my
endeavor) invested the Law with its own plainness and integrity: for I have
always raised this conclusion to my self, that where I look for words, there I
expect least Law, which is confirmed unto thee, as a truth, in these days. Now
Reader, shortly to conclude this, (for the Work does not deserve a Preface or
Epistle) if happily there may be any thing in it, that may merit thy more
serious consideration, and make thee a true Subject to the King, by being
faithful to the Parliament; I shall expect no greater areward of my labor,
then that, confidently believing that the issue of it will be, thine, and my
happiness, Farewell.

Thine to love and serve thee, J. Marsh.

AN ARGUMENT IN MAINTENANCE OF THE MILITIA, Settled by ORDINANCE of PARLIAMENT.
THe general Question is but shortly this; Whether the Militia, as it is now
settled by both the Houses of Parliament, be warrantable by Law, or not?

The Case, with the Circumstances, upon which this general Question is stated,
depends upon these two Quaeres:

1. Whether the King by his Prerogative has the sole and only power of
ordering and disposing of the Militia of his Kingdom or not? Admitting that he
has: then the next and maine scruple is: 2. Whether both the Houses of
Parliament, in time of imminent danger, (the King refusing to settle the
Militia for the defense and security of his people) may by an Ordinance of
Parliament, without his Majesty's consent, settle the Militia, and put the
Kingdom into a posture of defense or not?
1. For the first point, I conceive very clearly, that the King by his
Prerogative, warrantable by the Laws of the Land, performing the trust reposed
in him, has the only power of disposing of the Militia of this Kingdom; and
therefore I shall not debate this, so much out of scruple or doubt, as to give
satisfaction to the unlearned; and I shall prove it in reason thus: The King is
Caput Reipublicae, and pater patriae, that is, the head of the Commonwealth,
and Father of his Country; and has this great trust committed to him by God,
and his people, of governing of them in peace and happiness, by maintaining
and defending of their Religion, Laws, and Liberties; which, that he may be
the more obliged to do, he takes a solemn Oath at his Coronation, that he
will do and perform this, according to the trust reposed in him; the due
execution whereof, being of so high consequence to this Kingdom, and of so
great difficulty to himself, and therefore not to be executed without great
care, circumspection, and trouble; the Laws and Constitutions of this Realm,
has in favor and aid of his Majesty (who is intended always to be employed
and negotiated Cirea ardua regni, about the high things of the Kingdom)
allowed unto him, many prerogatives, privileges, and exemptions, above all his
Subjects. Among which, I take this in our Case to be one; for as our Religion,
Laws, and Liberties, are committed in trust to the King, so are our lives
also: which he is bound to defend as well by the materall sword, if occasion be,
as by the sword of Justice, and therefore as it is well known, all
prosecutions by way of Indictment against any man, for the taking away of the
life of another, are at the suite of the King, and the King only can pardon
the offense, and no other. For he alone has the charge of the lives of his
Subjects committed to him, and this is such an inseparable trust, that the King
cannot grant this over to another, as it is resolved in 20. H. 7. where it is
said, ^^. H. 7. fo. 8. a.
That a grant of power to pardon Felons, by the King to another, is not good,
for that it is a prerogative annexed to the Crown, and cannot be severed: But
here it is not to be understood that no prerogative of the King can be severed
from the Crown, for some may, as I shall afterward show, and that by grant of
the King too: but that this among others, is such a prerogative as cannot be
severed, and the reason of this, is, as I conceive, for that the life of a man
is of so high and puissant nature, that none less then God, or the King, ought
to have interest and power in; and though the Commonwealth loose a member, it
is the King only who loses a Subject, and therefore the killing of a man, is
said in the Indictment to be against his Crown and dignity, and not against
the Commonwealth; for though mediately it be an offense against the
Commonwealth too: yet it is a more near and immediate offense against the
King: for that he is entrusted with the lives of his Subjects.

Now as the King is bound to defend his Subjects by the Law, so in like manner
he is bound to defend and protect them by the Sword, if occasion be, as I have
said before, from all danger, both of foreign and domesticke enemies. And
therefore, as there is a Leigeance, that is, a faithful and true obedience of
the Subject due to his Sovereign, as it is interpreted in the 7. Rep. Calvines
case: ^ Rep. Calvin's ^^se.
So there is a protection due from the Sovereign to the Subject; for he ought
not only regere, to rule, but also Protegere subditos suos, to protect his
Subjects. So as between the Sovereign and Subject, there is Duplex and
reciprocum ligamen, that is, a double and reciprocal bond; Quia sicut subditus
regi tenetur, ad obedientiam, ita Rex subdito tenetur ad protectionem, for as
the Subject is bound to obey the King, so the King is bound to protect his
Subject; and therefore in 20. H. 7. it is holden, that there is a Liege or
Leigeance between the King and the Subject: 20. H. 7. 8.
and Fortescue cap. 13. says, Rex ad tutelam legis, corporum and bonorum
erectus est, that is, he is erected King, to defend the Law, the bodies, and
goods of his Subjects: and in the Acts of Parliament of 10. R. 2. 11. R. 2. and
14. H. 8. etc. Subjects are called Liege people. 10. R. 2. ca. ^ 11. R. 2. ca.
^ 14. H. 8. ca. ^
And in the Acts of Parliament of 34. H. 8. and 35. H. 8. etc. the King is
called the Liege Lord of his Subjects; 34. H. 8. ca. ^ 35. H. 8. ca. ^
and with this agrees Master Skene in his Book de expositione verborum, that
Leigeance is the mutual bond and obligation betwixt the King and his Subjects,
by which Subjects are called his liege Subjects, for that they are bound to
obey and serve him: and he is called their Liege Lord, for that he ought to
maintain and defend them: Wherefore it is truly said, that Protectio trahit
subjectionem, and subjectio protectionem, Protection draws subjection, and
subjection protection.

By all which it is manifest, as also by the Oath of the King, taken at his
Coronation, lately published by the Parliament, that the King is bound to
protect the lives and liberties of his Subjects, so long as the Subject is
obedient to the King; for protection and leigeance are relatives, and have a
necessary and reciprocal dependence the one upon the other: and this is the
reason that we say that a man outlawed, is out of the protection of the King;
so that heretofore a man outlawed was said to have Caput Lupinum, that is, a
Wolfes head: so that any man might then have killed him, as Fleta says, Fleta.
lib. ^ cap. 27.
and other old Books: because that by his disobedience to the King, he had
deprived himself of the benefit of the regal and legal protection. I do not
say, that if the King withdraw his regal protection from his Subjects, that
his Subjects may withhold their obedience from their Sovereign: yet I am
certain, that the Books before cited imply as much. Besides, reason will arm
every man thus far, as to conclude, that the cause and ground of his
obedience, is his Sovereigns protection, and therefore if his Sovereign
withdraw the one, he may deny the other. Again, denying to protect his
Subjects, is a plain refusal to be ruled by Law, and this, as Bracton says,
makes him a Tyrant no King, and my obedience is due to him, as a King, not as a
Tyrant. But I pass this over, as a matter of so great consequence at this
time, considering the bad principles of many men, that I had rather offend in
withholding of my judgment, then in publishing of it.

But yet more fully, that the King is bound to protect his Subjects, F. N. B.
is express. F. N. B. fo. 232.
Nota, says the Book, that the King is bound of right by the Laws, to defend
his Subjects, and their goods and chattels, lands and tenements, and therefore
by the Law; every lawful Subject is taken to be within the protection of the
King, and if he be put out of protection for his offense, then every man may
do with him as with an enemy of the King: Here note, that the Subject cannot
loose his protection due to him by his Sovereign, but by his own default.

And in F. N. B. fol. 113. a. it is there said, ^. N. B. fo. ^13. a.
that the King ought of right to save and defend his Realm, as well against
the Sea, as against enemies, that it be not surrounded or wasted: and to
provide remedy for it; and also to provide that his Subjects have their passage
throughout the Realm by all high ways in safeguard. And this is warranted by
the Commission of Sewers, which is directed by the King to Commissioners, to
inquire of, etc. and to hear and determine all faults and breaches of Walls,
Ditches, etc. Sea-bankes, etc. in the beginning of which Commission, the
fractions of the Walls, or Sea-bankes, is cited, and in the body of it, the
King says, Nos pro eo quod ratione dignitatis nostrae regiae ad providendum
salvationi regni nostri circumquaque sumus astrcti, volentes in ha^ part
congruum and festinum remedium adhiberi, assignavimus vos, (...). Here the King
himself says expressly, in this Commission, that he is every way bound, by
reason of his royal function, and Kingly ^ffice, Providere salvationi regni
sui, that is, to provide safety for his Kingdom. And is the Law thus, that the
King is bound to protect and defend his Subjects, Permare, per terras? By the
Sea, from all Pirates and Robbers, as also from the invasions of foreign
enemies: and by the Land, from any domesticke dangers, either by inbred
rebellions, or civil Commotions? Why then the Conclusion that I raise upon
these premises, is but this; That it is consonant and agreeable to all reason,
that the King executing of the trust reposed in him, should not be denied the
means, by which he may respond that great confidence placed in him, by his own
care and fidelity: and God forbid, that we should requir^ the due execution of
this great function, of his Majesty's part, and yet that we should withdraw
from him the means, by which he should perfor^e it; for if so, to be a King,
would be sarre worse, then an Egyptian servitude.

Wherefore I conceive that it stands with all the justice and equity in the
world, that the King (who has so great a charge upon him, that greater cannot
be, by which, he, as Vicarius Dei, that is, Gods Vicar, as Bracton speaks, is
obliged to defend the persons and property of his Subjects) should have all the
Castles, Forts and strong holds, and all the Ports and Havens at his rule and
disposition, and that generally he should have the ordering of the Militia
throughout the Realm: so that by this means he may be enabled to discharge that
great trust that is committed to him (without which he cannot be) and at the
last to render a just account to God, of his Stewardship.

And this certainly Bracton li. 2. de acquirendo rerum dominio, intends, when
he says, Bract. l. 2. c. 2
that the King, Habet ea quae sunt pacis, ut populus sibi traditus, in pace
sileat and quiescat, etc. that is, he has those things, which belong to peace,
that he may govern his people committed to his charge in peace and quietness.
For as the King has ordinariam jurisdictionem, that is, ordinary jurisdiction,
as Bracton says before, and this to govern his Subjects according to Law and
right: so, Habet ea quae pacis sunt; that is, not only the Law to maintain
peace among his Subjects: but also, Ea quae belli sunt, all those things, which
conduce to the protecting and defending of his Subjects from any foreign
invasion, or domesticke danger, or otherwise he could not possibly maintain
peace according to the saying of Bracton, and as by his Oath he is bound.

The King by the Law has this Prerogative allowed unto him, that he only may
proclaim war, and he only can establish peace among his people, as the 7.
Rep. is: 7. Rep. fo. 25.
why then I argue thus, It is a greater prerogative to have power to proclaim
war: then it is, to have the only means to maintain it: and therefore it is
not to be conceived, that the Law, that would allow the King the greater power,
would deny him the less. For, Qui majora concedit, minora non denegabit: He
that grants the greater, will not deny the less. Again, to allow the King
power to proclaim war, and to deny him the means to maintain war, were
absurd, and the Law will not admit of any absurdity. Wherefore I conceive, for
these reasons also, that the King by the Law, has likewise this prerogative of
the sole ordering and disposing of the Militia of the Kingdom.

Now to conclude this point, I shall parallel this case, to one case only in
the Law, and that is to Mittons case in the 4. Rep. where the case is thus: 4.
Rep. fo. 3^ Mittons cas^
Queen Elizabeth by her Letters Patents under the great Seal, granted the
Office of the Clerk of the County Court, of the County of Somerset, to Mitton,
with all Fees, etc. for term of his life: and after the Queen constituted
Arthur Hopton Esquire, Sheriff of the same County, who interrupted Mitton,
claiming this Office, as incident to his Office of Sheriff, and upon this he
appointed a Clerk himself of the County Court; and here the sole question was,
whether this grant by the Queen, were good, or not? And it was adjudged upon
solemn debate, that it was not, and the principal reason given wherefore the
grant was naught, was, because that great inconveniences might follow to
Sheriffs, who are great and ancient Officers and Ministers of Justice, if such
grants should be of validity, for that there is great trust reposed in them,
for which they are responsible, as it is there said: whereupon it is concluded,
that Law, and reason requires, that Sheriffs who are public Officers and
Ministers of justice, and who have an office of so great eminency, confidence,
peril and charge, that they ought to have all rights appertaining to their
office. And in this case there is cited another case, to this purpose, Mich.
39. and 40. of the Queen resolved by all the Judges of England, as my Lord Coke
says, that the grants of the custodies of Goales, of the Counties, either by
King H. 8. or afterward, were utterly void: and the like reason is given in
this case, as in Mittons case: for that custodies of Goales belong to the
office of Sheriff, who being immediate Officer to the Courts of the King, must
answer for escapes, and shall be subject to amerciaments, if he has not the
body in Court upon process to him directed, etc. and therefore it is reason,
that he should put in such keepers of the said Goals; for whom he should
answer, according to the purvieu of the Act of 14. E. 3. ^4. E. 3. c. 10.
For otherwise against the rule of reason and equity, Alius offendet, alius
plectitur: that is, one man should offend, another should be punished. Now if
the Law be thus, in these cases, that you shall not take away these offices
from the Sheriff, who is an Officer of trust, and only chargeable for any
misdemeanor, in the executing of the same; for that by this means, you should
disable him to execute his Office, according to the confidence reposed in him,
and yet should punish him for the not doing of his duty; which should be
against all reason: a fortiori, I say in this case, you shall not deny the
King, who has the greatest Office of trust, and charge, that can be, the means
and way to perform this trust, and to undergo this charge, which cannot be
otherwise done, then by allowing of the King this prerogative (so long as he
does perform the trust that runs along with it) of having the sole disposing
and ordering of the Militia of his Kingdom.

And without question Bracton when he says, that the King has Gladium
materiale, that is, the material sword, can intend nothing else by this, but
Gladium belli, which is the Militia, and gladium by a Synecdoche, may well
comprehend and be set pro omnibus rebus milititaribus, that is, for all things
military; And it is usual in holy Writ, when God threatens the heavy judgment
of war upon any Nation, to do it under the notion and expression of a sword,
by this intending, Bellum, that is, war, with all its sad effects. Wherefore
I conclude this point, that the King has this prerogative allowed unto him by
the Law: for these preceding reasons. 1. For that it were inconvenient for the
King, who by the Law is bound to protect and defend his subjects, if he should
not have this power. 2. For that the Law has given unto him a greater
prerogative, and therefore will not deny him the less: and thirdly and lastly,
for that it would be absurd, that the King should have power to proclaim
war, but not to maintain it.

Second part.
For the second question, which is, as I conceive, much more difficult, then the
former, and which is the great doubt and dilemma of the time, which is but
thus: whether the two Houses of Parliament, the Kingdom being in imminent
danger, and the King refusing to put it into a posture of defense, may by their
Ordinance, without the consent of the King, settle the Militia, and put the
Kingdom into a posture of defense, or not?

And I do conceive, under favor, in some clearness, that they may, and that
in so doing, they have done no more then what is warrantable by the Law. And
this I ground in the first place upon the imminent danger, and extreme
necessity, that the kingdom is in: and therefore though it should be admitted,
that they could not do it, at another time, yet I conceive that by reason of
the necessity, it is warranted by the Law for them to do it at this time.

It is a rule in our Law, first cited in Bracton, Bract. fo. 247 a.
and remembered in the 10. Rep. 10. Rep. fo. 61. a.
that illud quod alias licitum non est, necessitas facit licitum, and
necessitas inducit privilegium, quod jure privatur. In time of necessity,
illegal acts, are made legal: and things utterly against Law, justifiable;
Upon this rule I might multiply cases, but because I do not affect, via trita
obambulare, to go in the common road, therefore I shall only put some of the
most material cases, which I find to this purpose, and the others I shall omit.

In Pl. Com. it is said, Pl. Com. fo. 13. b.
that when Laws or Statutes are made, yet there are some things, which are
excepted, and forseprised out of the provision of them, by the Law of reason,
though that they are not expressed by words. As breaking of a prison is Felony
in a prisoner himself by the Statute De frangentibus prisonam: yet if the
prison be burnt, and they which are in, break the prison for salvation of their
lives, this shall be excused by the Law of reason, and yet the words of the
Statute are against it.

And 14. H. 7. Jurors who were sworn upon the issue, 14. H. 7. fo. 29
and by the Law ought not to depart, until they are agreed of their Verdict,
for fear of a great tempest departed, and severed themselves: and it was there
held that they should not be amerced, and that their verdict afterward was
good. And this was thus holden (says the book) for the necessity of the
chance; but otherwise they should have been grievously punished. So by the Law,
for the salvation of my own life, I may kill another. And as the Law makes that
lawful, in case of necessity, which otherwise would not be lawful, when it
concerns any man's private: so a fortiori, when it concerns the Commonweal,
and therefore as the book is in 29. H. 8. Dyer, 29. H. 8 Dyer. fo. 36. b. 8. E
^4. 23. Br Custom 45.
a man may justify the making of Bulwarks, in another man's soil, without
license; and the razing of a house which burns, for safeguard of the houses of
the neighbors. So it is if the Sheriff pursue a Felon to a house, and for to
have the Felon, he breaks the door of the house, this is justifiable. So in
13. H. 8. 13. H. 8. 16. ^. E. 4. 35 b.
the inhabitants of a City in time of war, if they conceive that the Suburbs
may endanger the taking thereof, may lawfully burn or destroy the suburbs, for
the Towns or Cities preservation, and the common safety. And in these cases,
necessity, and the good of the republic, makes that lawful, which otherwise
would not be lawful.

It is a certain rule, that all Laws ought to receive an equitable and
favorable construction, according as opportunity and the necessity of the
case, administers occasion: for, Summum jus, est summa injuria: that is,
over-strict observance of the Law, may sometimes be unlawful. And a fortiori,
they shall receive such a construction, where it concerns the Commonwealth:
and accordingly the Judges in all ages, as they ought, so they have always
made such interpretation and declaration of the Laws, that the Commonwealth
should not be prejudiced. And this is the reason of these cases, which have
been often adjudged, that if a man bind himself, that he will not exercise his
trade, or that he will not manure his land, or that he will not marry, that the
Obligation in these cases is void, for that it is against the weal public.

And this is the reason also, that has made the Judges always to adjudge all
the Grants of the King, of Monopolies, or Impositions upon the Subject, without
Act of Parliament, to be against the Law, for that they were against the good
of the Commonwealth, and liberty of the Subject. ^. H. 3. ca. 29.
And this is grounded upon Magna Charta, which says, Quod nullus libor, homo,
etc. that no freeman shall be taken and imprisoned, or be disseised of his
Freehold or liberties, but by lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of
the land.

And if the Law be such, that the King by such grants, which are against Law,
and the weal public, cannot take away my freehold or livelihood from me, but
that such grants shall rather be adjudged to be void, (against the opinion of
Bracton who says, Bract. fo. 34. ^. b. 2.
De chartis Regiis and factis regum, non debent, nec possunt justiciarii, nec
privatae personae disturbare: that is, of the Kings Charters, and his deeds,
neither Justices, nor private persons, may, or ought to dispute: which clearly
is against the known and established Law at this day) why then certainly, it
will follow, that if the King, either by action, or omission, go about to
endanger the weal public, and endeavor the destruction of it, which ex
consequenti, must of necessity bring ruin to every individual person of it:
that in such case, those who are entrusted with the common good, (as the
Parliament at this time is) may by all means possible, endeavor the
preservation of it: but I do not here intend by violent opposing or deposing
of his sacred Majesty, of which I shall speak a word afterward, but by
settling of the Kingdom, into such a state and condition, as our sage
Parliament has now done, that it may be able to defend his sacred Person, and
it self, against any foreign or domesticke surprise or invasion.

It is a true Rule, that Interest Reipublicae, ne sua re, quis male utabur, a
man (contrary to the opinion of the vulgar) may not do with his property as
he pleases; for that the Commonwealth has an interest peramount the
property of any private man, and there is no Subject, but that, either more or
less, according to his Talent, or place, that God has put him in, either in
Church, or State, is entrusted with the common good: and therefore if he does
contrary to his trust, use his Talent or place, against that end for which it
was given unto him, he is punishable by the Law for it.

And therefore if a man will destroy his woods, cast his money into the Sea,
burn his Corn upon the Land, or in his Barnes, or the like, clearly by the
Law he is punishable for it: and agreeing with this Trin. 4o Jac. many were
indicted of a Riot in the Star Chamber, for putting in of their Beasts into
Corn, claiming their Common there, and in this case, the Lord Chancellor said,
that though they had good title to the Common, yet that they should be here
punished, for that they had destroyed the Corn, which is against the weal
public.

And without question, the rigor of all Laws, ought to receive such
qualification, and equitable construction, that the Commonwealth do not
suffer or be indamaged. The Law was made to support the common good, and
therefore that Law is against Law, that is against the common good. Nemo sibi
nascitur, no man was borne for himself; all men both Rulers and people, were
borne to this end, to contribute, and confer some good to the Republique: and
therefore Qui sibi solum vivit, he that lives to himself only, does not live
to that end, for which he was created, much less he, which makes construction
of the Law against that end, for that were to destroy both Law, and government,
which every man was borne to defend.

It is a Rule in the Law, that Judges ought always to make such construction
of the Deeds of men, and of their Grants, Vt res magis valeat, quam pereat,
that is, that they should rather take effect, then perish: so I say, it may
well be taken for a Rule, that the Judges should not so construe the Law, that
the Law should destroy it self, which will necessarily follow in the
destruction of the Commonwealth; but that they should so interpret it, V^
respublica magis valeat and floreat, quam p^reat and destruatur, that the
Commonwealth should rather flourish, then perish, and be destroyed.

I agree, that in the case in question, by the strict Rule and Law of
Prerogative, the governing and disposing of the Militia of the Kingdom is
only in the King, and that he only may proclaim war, and he alone
establish peace amongst his people: yet we ought not so t^ construe this Law,
that it is so in the King, that it cannot be severed from him, and that no
other can intermeddle with it, without the consent of the King though that it
be for the Weal public, and for the securing of the Kingdom, being in
imminent danger, the King refusing to settle it, as in right he ought, upon the
prayer of his people, represented in the defires of the Parliament. For to make
such a construction were utterly to confound, and destroy, both Law, and Common
wealth, as I have said before, and therefore ought not to be admitted.

The King has this Prerogative allowed him by the Law, that he shall not be
bound by any Statute, except that he be expressly named in the Statute, yet it
is resolved in the 5. Rep. ^ Rep. fo. 14. b.
that all Statutes, which are made to suppress wrong, to take away fraud, or
to prevent the decay of Religion, shall bind the King, though he be not named
in them; for, says the Book, Religion, Justice, and Truth, are the sure
Supporters of the Crowns and Diadems of Kings. So I say in this case, the King
by his Prerogative (as I have said before) ought to have the sole disposing of
the Militia: But if in imminent danger, he refuse to settle this for the
safety of himself, and his Kingdom, according to the trust reposed in him,
his Prerogative ought then to give way for the securing of his Crown, that
those who are entrusted with the Weal public, as the Parliament is, may
settle this for the defense of the King, and Kingdom, according, as in truth,
they are bound, as I shall afterward show.

It is a Rule in our Law, That the King can do no wrong; and with this accords
Bracton, ^^acton fo. 107.
Nihil aliud potest Rex in terris, cum sit Dei minister and vicarius, nisi id
solum, quod de jure potest, nec quod principi placet, legis habet vigorem, the
King can do nothing upon earth, seeing that he is Gods minister and Vicar, but
that only which of right he ought to do, neither ought the Kings will, to
have the force and vigor of a Law. Here note, that the will of the King, ought
to subscribe to the Law; and not the Law to the will of the King.

And in Pl. Com. 1. Rep. and 5. Rep. it is said, ^^. Com. fo. 246.
^ Rep. fo. 44. b. ^ Rep. fo. 55. b.
That the King cannot do a wrong, neither will his Prerogative be any warrant
to him to do injury to another: and if the King cannot injure one single
person, without question, he cannot injure all the Commonwealth, which he
should do in this case, if both the Houses of Parliament, in this time of
imminent danger, the King refusing to join with them, should not have this
power of settling the Militia, in defense of the Kingdom, without his consent.

I agree with Bracton, Bracton fo. 5^
that the King, Parem non habet in regno, nec superiorem, He has no equal,
nor superior in his Kingdom; but that is to be understood, that there is no
man above or equal with his Majesty; for he says afterward; Bracton fo. 3^
Rex non debet esse sub homine, sed sub Deo, and sub lege, that the King ought
not to be under man, but under God, and under the Law: and after fo. 34. a, he
says, Rex habet superiorem, Deum, scilicet, item legem, per quam factus est
Rex, item Curiam suam, viz. Comites Barons, etc. the King has a superior, to
wit, God, in like manner, the Law, which made him King, and also his Court, to
wit, the Earls, Barons, etc. which cannot be understood of any other, then the
high Court of Parliament. And in the places before cited, he says, Quod non
est Rex, ubi dominatur voluntas, non Lex, He is not King, when his will rules,
not the Law. Then if it be thus, as Bracton says, that the Law, and the two
Houses of Parliament, are above the King: and that the King is as no King, when
he does not submit to the Law, (which will of necessity follow, for that the
same Law, which made him King, injoynes and obliges him also to defend his
people committed to his charge; and without doubt, the one as just as the
other, and if he refuse to protect his people, which is a dispising, and a
depressing of that Law which gave him this Soveraigntie: certainly, the Law
will not defend him in this his tyranny) I conceive, that in this case, the Law
will in its own defense, and in default of the King, who ought to have
maintained the Law, enable the two Houses of Parliament, to put the Kingdom
into a posture of war, in defense of the King, his Laws and Subjects.

But now the great Question is, What, and where is the ground of our fears,
and jealousies, and where is the imminent danger; for, many say, that they
cannot see it, and then it not being visible, and obvious to every eye: a
Question as great in show as the former, arises upon this, Who is, or may be
the proper Judge of this imminent danger. To the first, I answer, that our
fear, and the imminent danger pretended, is no Phantasme or Chimera, as some
would have it, but it is a real and visible cause of fear, Et talis metus qui
cadere potest in virum constantem, such a fear, as may befall a constant man,
as my Lord Cook describes a fear, Instit. fo. 253.
that may possess a generous and settled spirit. And that it is thus, I
appeal to the conscience of any wise and indifferent man, whether that the
Commune incendium, the common fire, or calamity in our neighbor Nation of
Ireland, clothed with these three circumstances, as I shall set it forth, will
not cause, and justly too, a wise man to fear, and doubt, what the event will
be.

As first, that they are our Neighbors, and when my Neighbors house is on
fire: will any man adjudge this to be a phantasme or an effeminate fear in me,
to provide for the securing of my person and estate, from perishing in the
common ruin?

Secondly, It is Religion, that these cruel, barbarous, and unheard of
Tyrants, make for a ground of their horrid Rebellion: and what stronger
engagement can there be, then this, for to encourage and spur men forward, in
any desperate design? Especially, those of the Popish faction, who may have a
pardon beforehand, for the act they shall commit, be it never so desperate:
And do we not think, that this will be a strong incitement to men, who
conceive themselves tied in conscience to undertake that which they do, to
wade through any misery, for the accomplishment of their desired end, knowing
beforehand, that they have a pardon for the most horrid act or attempt that
they can do, conducing to the perfecting of the same? And then as this
obliges all Nations besides, of the Popish party, ought not we to think, and
believe, that such an opportunity, must of necessity, stimulate them forward,
to be ayding and assisting to such a design, which will infallibly at the
last, merit either Heaven or Hell? I am confident (and it stands with all
reason that it should be so, for that they have not for a long time, praised be
God, had the like opportunity) that the Pope, with all his adherents, are now
plotting, and contriving, with their holy Father the Devil, to operate the
ruin of the Protestant Religion: and shall this engage them to fight against
God, under a pretense of being on his side? And shall it not invite us, who
fight for God, and his truth, which we have so long time, happily and peaceably
through Gods goodness enjoyed, to prepare our selves, and all that we have,
for the desence of the same? To conclude this, we who have the greatest part of
the world our enemies, may justly fear, that they are now plotting and
contriving that for England, that is already acted in Ireland. And let us not
say, that they are at enmity one with another, and therefore, are not at
leisure, to harm us: for we may be sure, that they will shake hands, to do us
a mischief: according to that in holy Writ, of Pilate and Herod, who though
they were utter enemies one to another, yet they were made friends, to combine
against Christ. ^uke 23. 12.


Thirdly, and lastly, who is able to say, that either he, or his children,
shall live to see an end of that bloody persecution and rebellion, and what the
success of it will be? True it is, that God has hitherto gone forth with our
Armies, and has in an exceeding measure, and above all expectation, blessed
their endeavors, and crowned their actions with a happy success, God be
praised for it, but yet who knows, whether they shall ever be able to root
out this rebellious Tribe? I speak not this out of any diffidence of Gods
continued favor and goodness toward us, or to make others mistrust; but
only to demonstrate, that there is a just cause of fear; for who can divine
what the event of war will be: Exitus belli incertus, that is, the issue of
war is uncertain. Besides (and which brings me to my second ground of our
just and dreadful fears) if the distractions of this Kingdom continue, which
God defend, what aid can they expect from us, who are like to be surrounded
with the like misery: so that their necessity, may cut them short of their
hopes, and by this much add to our fears.

Seco^ndly, having showed our just cause of fear, which rises ab extra, from
our deplorable brethren, and neighbors; now I shall show, our cause of fear,
that arises ab intra: from the unhappy distractions, which are risen amongst
our selves. Who is it, that does not see, the sad divisions and general
sidings throughout the Realm? which has grown upon this unhappy division of
the King and Parliament; which when it will be reconciled, God knows. And if
this (which adds much to our misery) had not happened, we could not before
have been secure, without a just cause of fear: for what divellish plots, and
fearful designs, have been discovered through Gods mercy, and the vigilant
eye of the Parliament; tending to the destruction of our best birthright and
inheritance, the privileges and freedom of Parliaments? Without the
continuance of which, that which is nearest and dearest unto thee, whether it
be thy Religion, life, or liberty: what ever it be, that thou most blessest thy
self withal, will then depend upon the Arbitrary will of thy Sovereign; so
that thou may not then, style ought that God has given thee, thy own: which
heavy judgment I beseech God to divert from this sinful Land and Nation; for
we may truly acknowledge, that it were just upon us, that we who have so much
abused Gods blessings, should now be deprived of them: and that we, who have so
much abused the freedom of conscience, of our laws, lives, liberties, and
estates, should now be subjected to a perpetual slavery. Now to conclude this
likewise, divide the Kingdom into four parts, and I am confident, that the
Papist. Newter, and Cavalier (I might add likewise the domineering proud
Clergy, who would fain reduce all things to their late condition) who lie
perdue, and wait for an opportunity, for to bring a speedy destruction upon
this Commonwealth, will make two parts, I think I might, without any
imputation, or prejudice to judgment, say three parts of the four, and now
put all these things together, and I believe, that no indifferent understanding
man, but will be forced to confess, that there was, and still is, a just cause
of fear, and of putting of the Kingdom, into a posture of war. And then the
imminent danger being pregnant, and demonstrable to all the world: the last
question is taken away.

But admitting that it were not prospicuous, and visible to all, then the
question is, who is the proper Judge of this imminent danger, and I conceive
plainly, under favor, that the Parliament ought to be, and no other: and my
first reason is grounded upon the rule of Law, viz. that the Parliament can do
no wrong, which is warranted by the 9. Rep. the 6. Rep. ^. Rep. 106. b. ^07. a.
^. Rep. 27. b. ^. a.
and many other books. And in Pl. Com. it is said, Pl. Com. fo. 398
that the Parliament is a Court of thrice great honor and justice, of which
none ought to imagine a dishonorable thing. And this I conceive to be grounded
upon the Writ of Summons to Parliament, which wills, that the elections should
be De gravioribus and discretioribus viris, etc. of the most grave and discreet
men. And Fortescue speaking of the Parliament, says, Fortes. ca. 18.
We ought necessarily to think, that the Statutes of this Realm are made with
great wisdom and prudence, Dum non unius aut centum solum consultorum virorum,
sed plus quam trecentorum electorum hominum, quali numero olim Senatus
Romanorum regebatur, ipsa sunt edita. For that they are not made by one, or an
hundred only of sage judicious men, but by more then three hundred of chosen
men: by such a number, as in times past, the Senate of Rome was used to be
ruled.





For, as all our books agree, the Parliament is as one body: and the chief or
head of this body, is the King: and with this agrees, Dyer, fo. 60. a. who
says, ^yer fo. 60. 2.
that the Estate of Parliament consists of three parts: viz. of the King, as
the chief Head; and of the Lords, the chief and principal Members of the Body;
and of the Commons, Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, the inferior Members:
and these make the body of the Parliament. Now if it be thus, that the King,
Lords and Commons make but one body, and that the King is the Head of this
body, as in truth the Law is: then it will thus in reason follow, that no more
then you can divide the head from the natural body, and yet preserve the body
alive, can you divide the King from the Parliament, and yet have the Parliament
continue, as in truth it does: and I hope that there is none so void of reason,
as to think, that the Kings dividing of himself from his Parliament, (for the
case is utterly mistaken, to say that the Parliament, severs the King from
them) shall destroy his Parliament, though I suppose, that many, who dare not
bring their actions to the test, would have it so.

Now if it be so, that, notwithstanding this unhappy division, the Parliament
does vertually, and actually continue, (which, God defend it should be
otherwise, for then Parliament, and no Parliament would be all one) then, of
necessity, it must follow, that the King, who is the head of this great body,
is not divided in Law, though he be in distance, for if so it must needs be,
that the body would be destroyed, for that a Body (as I have said before)
cannot subsist without a Head. And it must likewise follow, that they usurp no
honor or power to themselves, more then by the Law is due, to style themselves
the Parliament. And therefore whatsoever imputations, or dishonorable
invectives (things too common in the mouths of many, who have not common
reason, much less Law, to discover a truth) are imposed and cast upon the two
Houses of Parliament, reflect upon the honor of the King, and are a great
stain and blemish to it.

Then if it be thus, that the Parliament, in judgment of Law, can do no wrong,
and that no dishonorable thing ought to be imagined of them; certainly, they
are the most proper Judges of this imminent danger. But to this it will be
objected that the King likewise, in judgment of Law, can do no wrong, and
therefore he notwithstanding this reason, may be as proper a Judge of the
imminent danger, as any one, and upon this ground his judgment ought rather to
be received then the judgment of any, yea of the Parliament it self; and he
tells us, that there is no imminent danger, what then means this great
contention about the Militia? To this I answer, that it is true, the rule of
Law likewise is, That the King can do no wrong; but the reason of this is, for
that it is presumed, that what the King does, he does upon the advice, and
seducement of evil Counselors, who with a spetious show, pretend nothing more
then the good of the Commonwealth; whereas, in truth, they intend nothing
less. And has it not been frequent, for Kings, seduced by wicked and
malignant Counselors, to do those things which have been a dishonor to
themselves, and a great gravamen and prejudice to the public: and if so, my
conclusion is, that I would as willing a man should do me injury, upon his
own principles, as by the advice of others; for though happily the wrong may
not be so great, as to himself, yet the damage is all one to me. But now on
the other side, who can tell, or what Story is able to relate, that ever a
Parliament did do that thing, that was prejudicial to the Commonwealth? Why
then if this position hold true, That Kings seduced, may injure the
Commonwealth, but that Parliaments cannot: I conclude, notwithstanding this
objection, that the Parliament, for this reason, are the most proper Judges of
this imminent danger.

Again, they are the most proper Judges of an imminent danger, who in
probability may have the best cognizance, and information of it: but the
Parliament (which is the representative body of the whole Realm, and the eyes
of all the Kingdom) must of necessity have the best cognizance and
information of any imminent and approaching danger: Ergo, they are the best and
most competent Judges of it.

Last of all, the Parliament are the most proper Judges of an imminent danger;
for that they are those, whom the Commonwealth has entrusted with its future
happiness, they are our Judges, those whose judgment we have bound our selves
by our own free Election, to stand to, and therefore we cannot now recede from
it, or see with other eyes then they see; if they say, that they see an
imminent and approaching danger, we ought not to say, that there is no such
matter; and if they say, that the Militia is well and legally settled, we
cannot, nor ought not to say, that it is against the Law; for that our
judgment is bound up in, and superseded by theirs. But to this it will be
said, that this were a kind of implicit faith, or if I may so speak, a kind
of Heresy in Law; for a man to be tide to subscribe to other men's judgments,
and to believe that whatsoever they do, is lawful: To this I answer shortly,
that there is a great difference, between a subscription of compulsion, and a
subscription of consent; for volenti non fit injuria, that is, he that co^sents
to the doing of a thing, is not injured by the thing done. Again, the
Parliament would not have us to pin our faith upon their judgments, to
believe without reason; for, as it is well known, they have published the
justice and integrity of their cause, to the whole world, and have left their
proceedings to the judgment and determination of every private conscience; so
that clearly this objection holds not.

Then if the judgment of Parliament, be our judgment; what else do they then
oppose their own judgment, who dare oppose the judgment of Parliament, which
is folly? and what else do they but prefer their proper and private
judgment, before the judgment of the whole Parliament? which is an extreme
insolency; for that they represent the whole Kingdom: and are the most worthy
part of it, and for that, we have, as I have said before, bound our selves by
our own consent and election, to stand to their judgment and determination.
Wherefore, for all these preceding reasons, I conclude this point, that
admitting the imminent danger were not perspicuous and manifest to every eye,
that the Parliament as they are the most proper Judges, so they ought to be the
only Judges of it, and no other person whatsoever.

Now for the Objection, that many of the Lords and Commons, did never consent
to the Ordinance of Parliament, for that they were with his Majesty, and that
therefore this should make their determination invalid, and ineffectuall: This
is a more strange objection then the other, for that it is against the rule of
Law, that any man should take advantage of his own wrong; and it is clear,
that after the Parliament is once begun, their personal attendance is so
necessary, and of such importance to the Parliament, that they ought not by the
Law, for any business whatsoever, to be absent, and so is Dyer. Dyer. fo. 6^
And by the Stat. of 6. H. 8. it is enacted, 6. H. 8. ca. ^
that no Knight, Citizen, or Burges, absent himself, without license of the
Speaker and Commons, under the pain of the loss of their wages. And in 3. E.
2. Fitz: Corone 61. cited in Crompton Jur. 3. E. 2. Fit^ Corone 6^ Crompt. Iu^
Courts. fo. ^
the Bishop of Winton was arraigned in the Kings Bench, for that he came to the
Parliament, and departed without license. Why then is it so, that their
withdrawing of themselves, is a crime in them? Shall they then take advantage
of this offense and neglect of theirs, of the Weal public; for the good of
which, they were called and assembled together, to avise? certainly not.
Besides, if this objection might hold, who is it that does not see, what the
inconvenience might be, Et argumentum ab inconvenienti est bonum in lege, an
argument drawn from inconvenience, is good in Law. For by this invention, the
conclusions and determinations of those who are present, intending the Weal
public, (as in duty they are bound) should be all frustrated, and
annihilated, by the absence of those, who voluntarily and against Law, withdraw
themselves; which would be destructive to all Parliaments.

For posito that all the Lords or all the Commons, should voluntarily and out
of an indisposednesse to the common good, withdraw themselves, and utterly
refuse to perform that trust, which is reposed in them, of counselling and
consenting to such Laws, which might establish peace, and a settled condition
in Church and State: will any man think, that if in this time of dissertion of
the Lords or Commons, there be an apparent and imminent danger, threatening
ruin to the Commonwealth, if it be not in an opportune and seasonable time
prevented, that in this case, it lies not in the power of the King and Lords,
or of the King and Commons only, as the case is, by way of Ordinance, to
settle the Kingdom in such a state and temper, as may prevent any approaching
misery? Without question it does, or otherwise this conclusion (as I have said
before) would be destructive to all Parliaments.

I agree, that an Act of Parliament cannot be made, by which a new Law should
be enacted, that should be obligatory to the Subject for ever, (I mean until
it were repealed by another Act) but by the consent of the King, Lords, and
Commons; and with this accords the Books, 4. H. 7 ^ H. 7. 18.
there an Act was made by the King and Lords, but nothing was spoken of the
Commons; and by all the Judges, this is no act of Parliament. 7 H. 7. ^ H. 7 14.
No Statute except that the Lords and Commons assent to it. And 11. H. 7. ^ H.
7. 27.
it is no act of Parliament, except it be made by the King Lords, and Commons.
By this it is manifest, that all the three Estates ought to join in the making
of an act of Parliament: and this is so clear, that I need not cite any other
authority in proof of it, for ou^ Books are plentiful in this point. Only I
shall remember one remarkable case, which I find in our Law, to prove that the
Books which say, That an Act of Parliament cannot be made, without the consent
of the Lords, that this ought to be intended of the Lords Temporal only, and
not of the Lords Spiritual: and therefore it is resolved by the Judges in 7.
H. 8. Keilway. ^ H. 8. Keil^^y. fo. 184. b.
that the King may well hold his Parliament, by him, his Temporal Lords and
Commons, without the Spiritual Lords: so that by this it was manifest, that
they were not essentially necessary to a Parliament; for that the King might
have holden a Parliament without them: and therefore it is not now so much to
be wondered at, that they are totally excluded by Act of Parliament.

But now on the other side, I conceive as clearly, under favor, that if the
King do utterly forsake them, and decline their advice and counsel, to which
he ought to adhere during Parliament, that in such case they may (as I have
said before) make such Ordinances, without him, for the securing of the
Kingdom, in case of exigency and extremity, as shall be obligatory to all the
Realm, pending Parliament: for otherwise, they should have the name of a
Parliament only, and not the power and virtue of it.

But now it may be objected, that the King by his Prerogative, may call a
Parliament when he pleases, and also adjourne and dissolve it when he
pleases: and that the power given by the Writ of Summons, of the Lords to
Parliament, is only ad tractandum and consulendum, etc. and therefore it will
be concluded, that by the same power the King may command his Counselors
whither he pleases. To this I answer, and agree, that the King may call or
dissolve a Parliament when he pleases, and so totally toll their power; but
yet under favor, pending Parliament, unadjourned, the King can neither retarde
their proceedings, nor take away their persons: and that I shall prove thus:
the King, as fons Justitiae, the fountain of Justice, from whom all Judiciary
power is derived, may likewise make, whom he pleases, to be a Judge, to
dispense the Laws in justice and equity unto his people; but will it
therefore follow, that when he has made such and such to be his Judges, that
he may either retarde their proceedings, or countermand their judgments, under
favor, nothing less. Again, as I have showed before, they are punishable by
the Law, for withdrawing of themselves: and it were hard, that the King should
have power to command me that act, which being done, subjects me to a severe
punishment. Now for that part of the objection, that they are but his
Counselors, and not his Judges: to that I shall give, as I hope, a full and
satisfactory answer afterward.

And now I shall conclude this first ground or reason, with another answer to
the objection, against the imminent danger, and this I ground upon the words in
the Kings Writ, by which he summons the Lords to Parliament; in the body of
which Writ he says, Mandamus quod consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate
and periculis imminentibus, cessante excusatione quacunque, dictis die and loco
personaliter intersitis nobiscum, etc. that is, we command you, that
considering the greatness of the business, and the imminent dangers, laying
afide all excuse, you be personally with us, the said day and place, etc. Here
the King by his Writ says expressly, that at the time of the calling of this
Parliament, there was an imminent danger; and as now it should be dishonorable
for the King to contradict himself, so I do not conceive, that he shall be
received to deny that extrajudicially, which he has confessed by his Writ
judicially.

But to this it will be said, that the Writ, Est breve formatum, that is, it is
a formed Writ, or a Writ of course, and that there is no other, and that from
this there is no varying; so that be the occasion of calling of the Parliament,
what it will, the same form ought to be pu^sued, and no other; and therefore it
is no concluding reason, that there is an imminent danger, because the Writ
says so. To this I answer, that we ought not to presume, that the King will
speak any thing in a judicial way, as here he does, which should be vain and
superfluous; besides, if you consider the time in which this Parliament was
called, when that the Scottish Army was in England, and at which time such
distractions, and rumors of wars, did I say rumors of wars? I might have
said War it self; was amongst us: when that the extreme insolency and pride
of the Clergy; together with the darkness of superstition and Popery, had
almost overwhelmed this Nation with imminent destruction and misery: the fear
of which does yet cloud the face of the poor Commonalty, I say, these things
considered, we may justly conclude, that the King, at that time, spoke as he
intended, and therefore certainly now, he shall not be received to contradict
it. Wherefore I conclude this first reason, that by reason of the imminent
danger which threatens the Commonwealth, the King refusing to settle the
Militia, the Parliament may well do it.

Fortescue, ca. 13. cited before, ^^^tesc. ca. 13.
Rex ad tutelem legis, corporum, and bonorum, erectus est: he is erected King,
for this purpose, and intent, to defend the Law, the bodies and goods of his
Subjects. And he says himself (as I have likewise showed before) in the
Commission directed to Commissioners of Sewers, that by reason of his royal
dignity, Astrictus est ad providendum salvationi regni sui; He is bound to
secure his kingdom. And this he is bound to do by the Law, and Justice: for he
ought to rule according to Law, and for this purpose he is entrusted with the
Law also: and therefore in 8. H. 7. it is said, (...) 7. fo. 1. 2.
that the King is conservator of the Law, the which is the Commonweal. As if
it had been said, the Commonweal, depends upon the Kings well keeping, and
observing, of the Law. And in many places of Bracton, amongst which, this is
one: fo. 55. b. he says, ^^^ct. fo. 55. b.
Sciendum quod ipse Dominus Rex, ordinariam habet jurisdictionem, and
dignitatem, and potestatem, super omnes, qui in regno suo sunt, habet enim
omnia jura in manu sua quae ad Coronam, and laicam pertinent potestatem, and
materialem gladium, qui pertinet ad regni gubernaculum, habet etiam iustitiam
and iudicium, quae sunt iurisdictiones, ut ex jurisdiction sua, sicut Dei
Minister, tribuat unicuique quod suum fuerit: that is, we must know, that the
King has ordinary jurisdiction, and dignity, and power, above all which are
in his kingdom; for he has all the Laws in his hand, which do pertain to the
Crown, and lay power; and the material sword, which belongs to the
government of his kingdom; he has also justice, and judgment, which are
jurisdictions, that by his jurisdiction, as Gods Minister, he may give to every
one, that which is his own. Here you may see, that the King is entrusted, with
the Laws, and Justice, as also with the material Sword, to this end, that he
may defend his people committed to his charge, as well by force, if occasion
be, as by righteous judgment. And to this also he is bound by his Oath, as I
have said before, which I find in Bracton, fo. 107. Bract. fo. 107 a. ca. 9.
by which he swears that In omnibus iudiciis aequitatem praecipiet, etc. ut
per Justitiam suam firma gaudent pace universi: that is, that he will use
equity in all his judgments, that all, men may enjoy a firm peace, by his
justice. And there he further says, that ad hoc creatus est and electus, ut
iustitiam faciat universis, etc. and quod just iudicaverit, sustineat, and
defendet, etc. He is created, and elected King, for this purpose, and intent,
to do justice to all men, and that he should judge justly, sustain and defend
them. And with this accords 6. H. 7. where it is said, 6. H. 7. 16.
that the King is bound for to do right to parties. And as he ought to rule
according to Law, so he himself, ought to be governed by the Law, as I have
showed before. And as Bracton says, Bract. fo. 5. b.
fol. 5. b. Ipse autem Rex, non debet esse sub homine, sed sub Deo, and sub
Lege, quia L^x facit Legem: The King ought not to be under man, but under God,
and the Law. Now I conceive that it is manifest, that the King is entrusted
with the Laws, lives, liberties, and estates of his Subjects, all which he of
right ought to defend in peace and tranquillity, as he also by his Oath is
bound; and therefore Bracton says, Bract. fo. 55. ^
Est Corona Regis facere iustitiam, and iudicium, and tenere pacem, sine quibus
corona consistere non potest nec tenere: It is the Crown of the King to do
justice, and judgment, and to maintain peace; without which, his Crown cannot
stand and continue: as if he had said, it is so essential to the King to do
justice and judgment; and to maintain peace, that you destroy the Crown, if
you take away these.

Now I shall prove, that the King has made a breach of this great trust
committed to him, four ways. First, by denying of his Protection to his
people. Secondly, by not supporting of the Laws, and the Privileges of
Parliament. Thirdly, by not endeavoring to maintain peace amongst his people.
And fourthly and lastly, by denying of Justice; and in all these particulars I
shall prove, that the King has broken the trust committed to him.

Militia, by the advice of his great Counsel, according to Law: by whom only,
during Parliament, he ought to be advised, for during the continuance of this
great Counsel, all inferior Counsels ought to cease: and therefore the
Counsel of others neither can, nor ought to countermand theirs: but of this I
shall speak more fully afterward. 2. The King has denied his Royal
protection to his people, in taking up of Arms against his Parliament, who is
the representative Body of the whole Kingdom: and this is the most strong
refusal of his protection, of all others, for by this he does not refuse only
to protect them, but he goes about to destroy them, whom, by the Law, and his
Oath, he is bound to preserve and defend. And thirdly and lastly, he has
denied his royal protection to his people in this, that in time of imminent
danger to the Kingdom, he has denied to settle the Militia; and he that denies
the means, denies the end. For it is a rule with us in our Law, that Qui tollit
medium, tollit quoque finem: He that takes away the means, takes away the end.
And it is all one in effect, to deny a thing, as to deny the means per quod
pervenitur ad illud: by which you may come to the thing. Now it is clear, that
the sole means, under God, to defend this kingdom, in time of imminent danger,
from its enemies, either foreign or domestic, is, by settling of the Militia,
and by putting of the Forts, and Magazine of the kingdom, into faithful and
true hands, such as may be confided in, being a matter of so great consequence,
and of so high importance to the whole Commonweal. Now the King refusing to do
this, does he not in effect, deny his protection to his people? for denying of
the means, it is all one as if he had denied the end: so that I conceive, for
these reasons, the King has denied to protect his people, as by the Law he is
bound, and therefore has made a breach of the trust that is reposed in him.

sub homine, under man; yet he is sub Lege, under the Law, as I have showed
before, and therefore ought to be governed by it. And what is this but a
refusing to be ruled by Law, when he refuses upon the prayer of his Parliament
to settle the Militia for the defense of his Kingdom, and people, according to
Law? And that the King has broken the Privileges of Parliament, what more
plain? I might instance in many things, but I shall instance in only one or
two: And here I appeal to all the world, whether his withdrawing of himself
from his Parliament; and not only so, but his endeavoring, by his many
detractions and imputations laid upon his Parliament, to withdraw all the
hearts of his people from them likewise: and, which is yet worse, his
supporting and maintaining of such men, and keeping of them from justice and
their condign punishment, who are Delinquents in a high nature, against his
Parliament: I say, that I appeal to all the world, whether these be not great
breaches of the Privileges of Parliament? and what greater breach of the
privileges of Parliament can there be? then to protect and defend them,
without any color of Law, or justice, who endeavor nothing, but the ruin of
Parliament, and in this, of our Laws, lives, and liberties: so I conceive, that
this also is a breach of that great trust which is reposed in his Majesty, by
God, his people, and the Laws of the Land.

Bracton, Bract. fo. 107.
that the King first swears, Se esse praecepturum, and pro viribus opem
impensurum ut Ecclesiae Dei and omni populo Christiano, vera pax, omni suo
tempore, observetur, that is, that he will endeavor to the utmost of his
power, that true peace may be kept and observed, to the Church of God, and to
all Christian people, all his days.

Militia, by and according to the advice of his great Counsel the Parliament.
Now that the King is obliged to do Justice, it is without question, for his
very Oath (as I have showed before) ties him expressly to it, and so is 6. H.
7. cited before, and Bracton, fo. 107. a. where he says, Bracton fo. 10^
that Ad hoe creatus est and electus ut justitiam faciat universis, etc. He is
created and elected King, for this purpose and intent, that he may do justice
to all men. And what greater act of Justice can there be, then for the King to
defend his people in peace? or what greater act of Justice can there be, then
for the King, at the request of his people, represented by the body of
Parliament, to enact such Laws, which conduce to the maintaining of peace?
Certainly none. And this Bracton seems to intimate, Bracton. fo. 10^
Sinon esset qui justitiam faceret, pax de facili potest exterminari, etc. If
there were not one who would do Justice, peace might easily be extirminated.
Here note, that he does not say, that our lives, Laws, Liberties, or Estates,
for want of Justice might easily be extirminated; but our peace, by this, as it
were, concentering all Justice in this act of maintaining peace: and without
question, all our happiness, under God, consists in the supporting and
maintaining of peace: for, take that away, and all things fall to utter ruin
and destruction. And certainly, if it be thus, that the greatest act of Justice
in the King that can be, consists in maintaining of peace, and in granting of
such Laws, which conduce unto this end, without question the denying of this
by the King, must needs be the greatest act of injustice in the King that can
be, and by consequence, a breach of that trust, that is reposed in his
Majesty. And therefore I do conceive, that at the least in this, the King can
have no negative voice: and I do not conceive, that the King can have any
negative voice in Parliament, in other things; for if the King, by his Oath,
and the Law of the Land, be obliged to do Justice, (as in truth he is) and if
it be as great an act of Justice in the King, as can be, not only justly to
dispense the Laws in esse, in being, to his people; but also to grant such new
Laws unto them as conduce to the well governing of them, in peace and
happiness. Why then certainly it must of necessity follow, that the King can
have no negative voice; but is bound under this heavy sin, of the breach of
his Oath, and the Laws of the Land, to grant such Laws as are requested of
him by his people.

But here it may be objected, that the King had this Prerogative by the Law,
that he might have called a Parliament when he pleased, and there was no
positive Law to the contrary, before this Parliament, in which the King has
divested himself of this power; and if before at the request of his people, he
had not been pleased to grant them a Parliament, why, this in effect, was a
denier of Justice, for that the King denied the means by which it might be
obtained, and yet this was lawful for him to do; therefore it will be
concluded, that by the same reason he may have a negative voice in Parliament.
And Cromp. Jur. of Courts says expressly, Cro. Iur. fo. 7. b.
that when the King does assent to a Bill, then he writes upon the Bill, L' Roy
veult, that is, the King will have it so; and if he does not assent, then it is
indorsed L'Roy advisera, that the King will advise; here it does appear how
the King has a negative voice allowed him by the Law. To this I answer, and
agree, these Prerogatives de facto to be in the King, but whether in truth,
they be such as are compatible, and may stand with the Oath and Justice of the
King: this may be questionable, and under favor, I conceive that they cannot;
for that, as I have showed, his Oath and the Laws of the Land, ties his
Majesty to do Justice to his people, and the granting of new Laws unto them,
upon their request, is an Act of Justice, and therefore he cannot deny them
without breach of his Oath, and the Laws of the Land; and by consequence,
these prerogatives are not compatible, with the Oath and Justice of the King;
and though peradventure the Law may dispense with it self, yet it cannot with
the Oath of the King. Wherefore I conceive, notwithstanding this objection,
that the King can have no negative voice: but of this only by the way.

And is it thus, that the King has made a breach of that trust reposed in him,
by God and his people? as in truth, I have cleared it unto you: then none so
proper to supply this defect, in his Majesty, by the disposing of the Militia,
for the defense and protection of the King and Kingdom, as the Parliament, who
are at this time entrusted, under God, not only with our esse, with our being,
but with our been esse, with our well-being also.

But here it may be objected, that the King derives his Crown and regal power
from God, and that therefore he is responsible to God alone for his actions,
and not to man: To this I answer, that it is a most strange Episcopal and
illegal objection; for what is this but the attributing of a power to the King
above Law? and the giving of him such a prerogative that should not be subject
to those Constitutions, which his predecessors before him had been, and though
it should be admitted, that as all power is derived originally from God, so
especially this; yet it does not follow, that it was therefore conferred by an
extraordinary and immediate hand of God, as it was upon Saul and David, 1 Samuel
9. and 24.
yet they likewise were confirmed and approved by the people, as you may read
in holy Writ. Besides, Saul and David, lived not under any Municipall or
positive Constitutions of men, which they were bound to maintain and observe,
as the King of England does, and therefore it must needs be, that their power
must be more absolute, which was not circumscribed within the bounds and limits
of any humane Laws. But now the Kings of England having subjected themselves
to the Law of the Land, and received their Crowns with that trust and tacit
condition, of defending of the Laws, lives, and liberties of their Subjects:
the Law were idle and vain, if there should be none that should have this
power, for the breach of this trust by his Majesty, to interpose for the
securing of him, his Laws, and people. And if this divine prerogative, which
the Bishops do so buzze into the Kings ears, should be admitted, I would
feign know what difference would be made, betwixt an absolute Monarke, and the
King of England: and clearly this was never reputed for other, nor can be (the
Crown being subject to the Law as well as the people) then a mixed Monarchy:
but I shall conclude this, that they who so much defend and exalt this divine
prerogative, would in the conclusion (if they might have their way) upon the
same ground, advance the Miter above the Crown. God open the Kings eyes, that
he may see and acknowledge himself subject to the Laws, and may rule his
people accordingly: and grant that he may detest such advice, as dangerous to
the State, and the suggesters of it, as Pests and Traitors to the same.

But it may be again objected, that this was a conquered Nation, and therefore
by the Law of Conquest, the Conqueror might have made what alterations in the
Law, or State, he pleased; but he retaining the Law, and subjecting himself to
it (who might have advanced himself above it) will it therefore follow, that
in so doing, he has subjected himself to his people likewise? if he
transgress it, Deum habet ultorem, God will revenge it, but it was never his
intent to give his people that power.

To this I answer, that retaining of the Law, and subjecting of himself unto
it, he is bound by it, and all his Successors after him; and it were in vain
(as I have touched it before) to establish a Law, and to give none power to put
it in execution: Wherefore I conceive, that that Law that binds the King, will
for the breach of the same, authorize his Parliament, though not to inflict any
penalty upon his sacred person, God forbid, yet to provide for the securing of
him and his Kingdom; for otherwise (as the sad consequence of it would make it
good) it would be, in effect, but as a dead Letter.

But now further it may be objected; Shall they have such an arbitrary way of
power, as this is, to do any thing by way of Ordinance, without the King? If
this may be suffered, they may Metamorphise and change the Law, into what shape
they please, or which best agrees with their humors: so that if they order,
that land shall from henceforth descend to the youngest son, contrary to the
course of common Law, (as I think the case was put) if this ordinance should
bind the Subject, he should here at once be deprived of a double birthright
and inheritance, viz. of his land as heir, and of the Law as a Subject; which
would be very hard and unreasonable.

For that part of the objection, of their arbitrary way of proceeding, I shall
in part here answer it; but more fully afterward: for the objection, that they
cannot do it by way of Ordinance, without the King: To this I answer, that in
case of imminent danger (as now) the Kingdom must needs perish, if they should
not have this power, for they have no other way to aid the Kingdom in time of
imminent danger, by settling the Militia of it, but by way of Act, or Ordinance,
and if the King refuse, by their advice, to settle it, by way of act (as in
truth he does now) then we must of necessity, allow a power in the Parliament,
Ne pereat regnum, least that the Kingdom perish, by way of Ordinance to settle
the Militia, for the defense of the same; for otherwise, the King should have
power, when he pleases, to destroy his Kingdom, and the people should be left
naked of any ability, to preserve and defend themselves; which were very
unreasonable, and unnatural; for nature it self, has not only established
it as a Law, that all creatures may defend themselves from unnatural violence,
but has armed them accordingly.

And now I shall prove, that as the Parliament are the most proper and only
power, to provide for the securing of the Kingdom: and a^ they have no other
way to do it: so they are obliged to take this way: and this they are tied to
by their Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, and their late Protestation; for by
these they have all sworn, vowed, and protested, to defend the King, his royal
person, and estate, and to be true and faithful to him; now it is impossible
for them to defend the King, and to be true and faithful to him, if they, in
time of imminent danger, do not endeavor, as much as in them lies, to defend
his kingdom; for there is such a reciprocal and dependent relation, betwixt
the King and his Kingdom, that the one cannot subsist without the other: for if
they permit the kingdom to be destroyed, the King must of necessity be ruined
also. If the Master die, the relation of a servant must needs cease: for that
relatives cannot subsist, the one, without the other. And if the kingdom fail,
the King and Scepter must needs fall to the ground. And this is, in part, the
reason of that pollity of Law, in the 7. Rep. Calvin's case, 7. Rep. 12. Calvin's
C.
that the King is a body politic, lest there should be an interregnum; for
that a body politic never dies.

Why then is it so, that they are bound by their Oaths to defend the kingdom,
as well as the King? as in truth they are, for that the King cannot subsist
without the kingdom; then the consequence must of necessity be, that the
Parliament, in this time of imminent danger, has well done in settling of the
Militia, for the defense and welfare of the King and kingdom: and that in so
doing, they have not only not done more then what they might do, but they have
done no more then what they were bound to do, and this under the heavy sin
of perjurie.

But here it may be objected, that this is a corrupting and dividing of the
Text; for that the Oath of Supremacy does not only bind us to be true, and
faithful to the King, but also to defend, all Jurisdictions, Privileges,
preheminences, and authorities, granted, or belonging to his Highness, etc.
And the having of the sole disposing of the Militia is one of the privileges
of the Crown, and appertaining to his Highness: and therefore we are bound
likewise, by this Oath, to defend this privilege of the Kings, against any who
shall endeavor the taking it away from his Majesty.

To this I answer, and agree, that the King (as I have showed before) has this
privilege and prerogative given unto him, and with him entrusted by the Law
for the good of the Commonwealth: but I never heard that he had it allowed
him, for the destruction of the same. Again, I agree that the Oath of Supremacy
obliges every man to defend the privileges and preheminences of the King: but
I do not conceive, or believe, that this ought to be so construed, that any man
by the Oath of Supremacy, is bound to defend the privileges of the King,
against the weal public: for if the weal public, and privileges of the King,
stand in competition, without question the public interest and welfare ought
to be preferred. And therefore if the King do not employ and use his
privileges according to the trust reposed in him, but rather contrary to it:
certainly this does disoblige every man from that tie and engagement in this
particular, with which he was bound by the Oath of Supremacy. For so to
construe the Oath, that I should defend the pr^viledges of the King, though it
be in destruction of the commonwealth: were to make the Oath the most hard and
unreasonable tie in the world: whereas, every Oath, amongst other
qualifications, ought especially to have these two: viz. that it be explicit,
I mean, without implications, or etcetera's: and reasonable; and it would be
very unreasonable for a man to swear to such a thing as would be his own
destruction: but a fortiori, where it would be the destruction of the
Commonwealth. And as it is said, Pereat unus, ne pereant omnes; let one
perish, that all may not perish: So I say, Pereant privilegia Regis ne pereat
Regnum: it were much better, that the privileges of the King should totally
cease, or at the least, be suspended for a time, then that the kingdom should
be endangered.

But now I shall demand of any man an answer to this question: whether does
most stand for and defend the privileges of the King: either he that
endeavors to the utmost of his power to defend and support the Commonweal,
in imminent danger: or he that indeavoureth the destruction and ruin of the
same: this is the very difference, between the Parliament and the Malignant
party: the Parliament use all means possible to defend the King and kingdom
from ruin; and the malignant party use all their skill to make both for ever
miserable; This question is in it self pregnant of an answer: and the very
putting of the case, is a solution of the question: For, no doubt, every wise
and ingenious man must needs conclude within himself, that they most defend the
privileges of the King, who most endeavor the safety of the King and
kingdom, and that is the Parliament: so that this Objection fails in the very
foundation of it.

And now having answered that part of the Objection, that we ought not to
defend the privileges of the King against the Commonweal: and having likewise
showed, that he most endeavors the defense of the privileges of the King, who
seeks most the good and prosperity of the Commonweal. I shall now answer the
latter part of the Objection, that there is none that goes about the taking
away of the privileges of the King: but only to employ them in defect of the
King, according to the trust reposed in his Majesty. For as I have showed
before the King is tied to protect his Subjects from any foreign invasion, or
domestic danger: and now the King refusing to do this, by putting of the
kingdom into a posture of defense; the Parliament, according to the trust
reposed in them, have, in defect of the King, and in his right, assumed to
themselves this great charge, of settling of the Militia, for the security of
the King, and people. And here I shall bid malice it self speak, whether it
has been employed to any other end or purpose, then that for which it has
been always pretended: viz. for the defense of the King and kingdom? or
whether the Magazine (which is pretended to be taken from the King) whereas in
truth it is employed by the King, and for the safety of him, and his kingdom
(as I shall afterward show) has been converted to any private property: or
otherwise disposed of, then for the common good? and if so, certainly here is
no devesting of the pretended property of the King: but that it still remains
in statu qu^ prius: in the same state that it was at the first. But if it
should be admitted, that this privilege of the King is at this time taken from
him: I conceive that it may be so, as this case is: For, as I have said before,
it were better that the King should loose his privilege, then that the kingdom
should perish. I agree the rule of Law, that the King, regularly, cannot grant
over his Prerogative; and with this accords 4. Rep. 7. Rep. 14. H. 4. 2. H. 7.
20. H. 7. 4. Rep. 73. 2. 7. Rep. 25. b. 14. H. 4. 9. 2. H. 7. fo. 13. 20. H. 7.
fo. 8.
and many other books: except in some special cases, as in the 2. Rep. and the
5. Rep. 2. Rep. fo. 44. a. 5. Rep. fo. 56. b
and the difference upon the books may be this, where the Prerogative is merely
personal, and where not: where it is merely personal, there it is not
grantable; but where it is not merely personal, there it is: Now in our case I
do conceive, and shall agree, that the ordering of the Militia of the kingdom,
is a prerogative, so merely personal in the King, that it cannot be granted
over to another. But it does not therefore follow, that it can by no means be
severed; especially, as in this case, when it so much concerns the good of
the Commonweal. Wherefore, I conceive clearly, that the King cannot grant this
prerogative over to another, for that he only is entrusted with it for the
weal public: and as we well know, parties entrusted, cannot grant their trust
over: for that a trust is merely personal, and therefore not severable. And
the King can no more grant over his prerogative of protection, or power of
ordering of the Militia, to another, then he can dispose of his Crown, or
royal dignity, to another: and that he cannot do, for King John surrendered
his Crown to the Pope, and this was adjudged to be void, for that it was given
to him by God, and the Law, in trust, for the well governing of his people.
Rot. Parl. An. 40. E. 3. Nu. 8.
And therefore by his own act, or grant, cannot be severed from him: For an
office of trust, by the Law, is not grantable over. But on the other side, we
see, how that Crowns of Kings have been taken from them, by the people, as in
case of R. 2. and others: I do not speak this in justification of the deposing
of Princes, God forbid that I should, their persons are sacred: for that they
are Gods anointed, and his Vicegerents, or Vicarii Dei, that is, Gods Vicars,
as Bracton styles them: against whom, God has laid an inhibition, that we use
not any violence, Touch not mine anointed: and therefore for my part, I
conceive, that that damned opinion of the Spencers, in the reign of E. 2. that
if the King did not demean himself, by reason in the right of his Crown, that
his Lieges were bound by oath to remove the King: and that if the King could
not be reformed by suit of Law, that it ought to be done per aspertee, I say
that, I conceive that this was justly damned, as in truth it was afterward by
two Acts of Parliament; the one in the Reign of E. 2. called Exilium Hugonis de
Spencer: and the other in 1. E. 3. ca. 1. Stat. E. 2. cal^ed exilium Hugonis de
Spencer. 1. E. ^. ca. 1.


But now, though that the King cannot grant this Prerogative over, as I have
said before yet, under favor, I conceive clearly, that it li^th in the power
of the Parliament, for the prefervation of the Kingdom, in case of imminent
danger, as now, to settle the Militia in hands to be confided in; for, as I
have said before, the prerogative of the King must give way to the weal
public, and not the weal public to the Prerogative of the King. For if the
Prerogative of the King ought not to be advanced to the prejudice and wrong of
the interest of any private man, as I have showed before, much less, to the
wrong and injury of the re-publique. And with this difference ought Bracton to
be understood, who says, Bract. fo. 55. b.
that, Ea quae jurisdictionis sunt, and pacis, and ea quae sunt justitiae and
paci annexa, ad nullum pertinent, nisi ad Coronam and dignitatem Regiam, nec a
Corona seperari poterunt, cum faciunt ipsam Coronam. Those things that belong
to jurisdiction and peace, or are annexed to them, appertain to none, but the
Crown, and Royal Dignity, neither can they be severed from it, for that they
make the Crown it self. Now as I have showed before, these words of Bracton, Ea
quae pacis sunt, etc. those things that belong to peace, must necessarily
intend Ea quae bel^^ sunt, those things that belong to war also, for that it
is impossible for the King, Absquerebus Militaribus, that is, without the
Militia, to defend his people in peace and safety; And for that, that he says,
that this cannot be severed from the Crown: this ought to be understood, by his
own act only: and not that it cannot be severed from him, though in his own
default, by his Parliament. For, to make such a construction, were to make a
Law, destructive to that, for which it was principally, and in the first place,
made to preserve; and that is the Commonwealth. And the like construction and
explanation of his words, Bracton makes afterward, for he says, Ad personas,
vel ten^me^ta transferri non poterunt, nec a privata persona possid^ri: they
cannot be transferred to persons, or Tenements, nor be possessed of a private
person; which cannot be otherwise intended, then of the grant of the King, for
transfer, that is, to transfer, is no other then concedere, that is, to
grant. And I agree with Bracton in this, that the King cannot grant over this
prerogative: but this position, does no way conclude against the power of the
Parliament, as our case is.

But here Mittons case in the fourth Rep. 4. Rep. Mittons case.
cited before to another purpose, may be objected against me, where it is
resolved, that the Queen could not take away the grant of the Office of the
Clerk of the County Court from the Sheriff: in which case, there is another
case also cited to be adjudged by all the Judges of England, viz. that the
grants of the custodies of Goals of the Counties, by the King are void; and
the reason that is given for both these Cases, is, that the Sheriff having
these Offices appendent to his Office (as in truth they are) is by the Law
responsible for all misdemeanors done in those Offices, and therefore it is
against all reason, that the grant of them should be taken from him; but that
he should have power, to put in such into those Offices, for whom he should
answer. Now the force of the objection stands thus; if these Offices cannot be
severed from the Sheriff, because that by this he should be disabled to
perform the trust reposed in him, and yet should be responsible for all
misdemeanors done in those offices, which would be very unreasonable: a
fortiori, you shall not take away this privilege from the King, for by this he
should be disabled, either to protect and defend his people, as by Law he is
bound, or faithfully to discharge this great trust reposed in him, as God
requires. To which I answer, that there is a great and wide difference betwixt
the cases; for first, in the case of the Sheriff, the depriving him of the
grant of these Offices, concerns only his private interest, and not the
Commonweal; I mean, the Commonweal stands not in competition with the
Sheriffs right, as in our case; and therefore in this, the difference is
great. But, which makes the cases much more to differ: in the case of the
Sheriff, there was no act or default in him, for which to deprive him of this
benefit; and it is a rule in our Law, that Quod nostrum est, sine facto, sive
defectu nostro, amitti, seu ad alium transferri, non potest; a man shall never
be divested of his property, without his own act, or default. But otherwise
it is here in the case of the King, for, if there be no act, yet I am certain,
that there is a defect or default in the King, in refusing, in this time of
imminent danger, to put the Kingdom, according to the advice of his great
Counsel, in a posture of defense.

And it is no new thing, for a man to loose his interest in his own default:
Upon this I might multiply cases; but I will put only one or two familiar and
ordinary cases in our Books. If I make an estate for life, or years, to
another, without condition expressed, yet the Lessee has not the estate so
absolute in him, but that by a tacit condition in Law, running with every such
particular estate, he may, by his own default, loose his estate; and therefore
if he commit wast, he subjects his estate to be evicted by the Lessor; or if he
assumeth to himself, to grant a greater estate to another, then he himself
has, by this he forfeiteth his estate. But you will peradventure say, that
this case does not agree with the case in question, for that the King has an
estate of inheritance in his Crown, which goes in succession to his
posterity, as well as the private interest of any Subject: This I agree, but
under favor, he has this committed to him in trust; this tacit condition
runs along with it, that he use his regal power and authority, for the
good of the public; or if he does not, that then his great Counsel for
breach of this trust, and nonperformance of this tacit condition (though that
they cannot meddle with his sacred person, by dethroning of him, or devesting
of him of the regal Scepter) may provide for the securing of him and his
Kingdom.

Again, it is clear by the Law, that misuser or non-user of any Franchises,
Privileges, or Offices, is a forfeiture of them; but especially of any
public Offices, which concern the administration of Justice, or the
Commonwealth: and with this agrees 5. E. 4. 8. H. 4. 20. E. 4. and my Lord
Cook in his Comment upon Littleton: 5. E. 4. 5. 8. H. 4. 18. 20. E. 4. 6.
Instit. 233. a.
and many other Books. Now it is as clear, that to be a King, is an Office,
though it be the greatest Office that any one, under God, can have: and what
Office so much concerns the administration of Justice, and the good of the
Commonwealth, as this does? and therefore, though this great office, be no
more forfeitable, then it is grantable by the King: for I conceive that to be
regularly true in the Law, that that which is not grantable, is not
forfeitable: yet, God forbid, that his great Counsel, for his misuser, or
non-user of his Kingly function, should not have power, for the breach of this
tacit condition, to apply themselves, by all lawful means, for the securing
of him and his Kingdom.

I shall compare this case, to one case only, lately adjudged, viz. Hill. 17.
Car. in the Kings Bench, Langhams case, Hill. 17. Car. in Banco Regis Langhams
case
where the case was thus; Langham a Citizen and freeman of London, was elected
Alderman of the City, and being called to take his Oath, refused, for which he
was committed to prison by the Court of Aldermen: upon which he prayed his
Habeas corpus in the Kings Bench, and it was granted unto him: and upon the
return of the Writ, they did allege, that they had this custom, that if any
man were elected Alderman of the City, and refused to take the Oath, that the
Court of Aldermen had used, time out of mind, to imprison the party so
refusing: and then they set forth, de facto, how that Langham being a Citizen
and freeman of London, was duly elected Alderman, of such a Ward; and that he
being called to take the Oath, refused, and that therefore he was committed by
the Court of Aldermen: and the question here was, whether the custom to
imprison the body of a freeman, were a good custom, or not? and it was
resolved upon solemn debate, by all the Judges of the Kings Bench, that the
custom, as this case is, is a good custom: and this is the difference that
was taken by them, that a custom generally for a Court of Record to imprison
the body of a freeman, is no good custom, for that it is against the liberty
of the Subject, and Magna Charta, by which it is enacted, Quod nullus liber
homo capiatur, aut imprisonetur, etc. that is, that no freeman be taken or
imprisoned; 9. H. 3. ca ^
but Per^legem terrae, etc. by the Law of the Land. But a custom, as in this
case, for to imprison the body of a freeman, for refusing to take an office
upon him, which is for the support of government, and without which government
cannot subsist, which by consequence, strikes at the very esse, and foundation
of the Commonwealth; for that it cannot stand without government: such a
custom was resolved to be a good custom. Now I shall compare this case, with
the case in question: it is here resolved, that a custom for to imprison the
body of a freeman, for refusing to do such a thing, which by consequence
reflects upon the Common wealth, and may endanger it, that this is a good
custom: now thus stands the parallel: and as the rule of Law is, Vbi eadem
ratio, ibi idem jus, where there is the same reason, there ought to be the same
Law. Now the same Law, that defends the Kings prerogative from violation, or
separation from the Crown, does as strongly, Et eodem jure, by the same right,
defend the liberty and freedom of every private man's person from imprisonment;
for, though the interest and privilege of the King, do far transcend any
singular and private persons, being compared with them, yet they stand in
equipage, In equali jure, that is, in equal right, being compared with the
Commonweal; and therefore as well the interest of the King, as of his Subject,
Debent cedere Republicae, ought to give way to the Commonwealth: And yet we
see, that as a man's person, for the good of the Commonwealth, shall be set at
large, and free from imprisonment, as it is resolved in 36. and 37. H. 8. Dyer.
36. and 37. ^ Dyer. fo ^ Trewynni^ Case.
Where a man was elected a Burges of Parliament, and being in execution was let
at large, by a Writ of privilege, and adjudged that his enlargement was
lawful, and that the Sheriff was by this excused: So on the other side, a
freemans person, by a private custom, contrary to Magna Charta, may for the
good of the Common wealth be imprisoned: and without question, the Subject may
as justly demand of the Law, the freedom of his person from imprisonment, as
the King, of his prerogative, from violation, or separation; and yet no
privilege, no, not of the person it self, of a common person, ought to be
preferred before the common good: and by the same reason, not any privilege of
the King; for, though the King be much greater, and much to be preferred,
before many thousands, of individual or particular persons; yet, without
question, the universe or Commonwealth, is to be preferred before the King, or
any interest or privilege whatsoever of his: so that, for all these reasons, I
conceive, that the prerogative of the King, may, as this case is, be severed
from him: and therefore, that the Parliament (admitting that they have taken it
from his Majesty) have done no more then what is warrantable by the Law.

Militia: I shall add a third reason to prove, that what they have done, is
lawful: and that is this; what they declare to be Law, binds the King, by an
inclusive judgment, and then their judgemennt, being the judgment of the
King, and their Votes and Declarations of the Law, including the royal assent
and declaration: the King cannot afterward by a subsequent Declaration
countermand his own judgment, tacitly included in theirs: and by consequence,
the prerogative of the King suffers no violence; for Volenti non fit injuria,
that is, a man that consents to the doing of a thing, is not injured by the
thing being done. Now that their Declarations of the Law, includes the King,
and shall bind him, I shall presently prove it: First, it is clear, that the
Parliament consisting of the three estates: viz. of the King, Lords, and
Commons, are a Court; and it is as clear, that they are the greatest and
highest Court in England; in which, Justice is administered by the King, in
those Worthies, unto his people, in the most high and transcendent way that can
be: for the King does not appear with that splendor and brightness of
Justice and integrity; neither is he so true and clearly represented to his
people, in those glorious rays of his, in any Court of Justice whatsoever, as
he is, in his thrice great and honorable Court of Parliament. Now that it is a
Court, and that the greatest Court in England, in the 9. Rep. Epist. ibidem,
^p. Epist (...)
my Lord Cook says, that among other appellations, it is called by the name
Magnae Curiae, etc. of the great Court. and in Pl. Com. fo. 388. (...) fo. 388.
the Parliament is a Court of thrice great honor and justice, etc. and Bracton
34. a. (...) fo. 34. a.
Rex habet etc. Curiam suam, viz. Comites Barons, etc. the King has his
Court, to wit, Earls, Barons, etc. and Fleta lib. 2. ca. 2. (...) li. 2. ca. 2.
Habet etiam Rex Curiam suam, in Consilio suo, in Parliamentis suis, etc. the
King has his Court, in his Counsel, in his Parliaments, etc. and Crompton in
his Jurisdiction of Courts, ^p. ^ur. d' ^s. fo. 1. 2.
begins with the description of the high Court of Parliament, giving it the
precedence in act, as well as in words: where he says, that the said Court,
is, L'treshaulte Court d' Engliterre, that is, the thrice high Court of
England: in which, says he, the Prince himself sits in person, etc. And I
shall conclude this with Dyer, who says, Dyer fo. ^
that this Court of Parliament, is the highest C^u^t, and has more privileges
then any other Court of the Realm, etc. And all this is made clear, without
further saying, by this, that no ^ppeale lies from this Court; no reversall of
their judgment, but by the judgment of a subsequent Parliament.

Then this being admitted, that the Parliament is the greatest Court in
England, I shall argue thus: is the King by intendment of Law, present in all
his other inferior Courts? as in truth he is, as 21. H. 7. and 2 and 3. Eliz.
Dyer. 21. H. 7. f^ 2. and 3. Dyer fo. 1^
and many other books are: which certainly is the reason of the heavy judgment
of these cases, of killing of a Judge upon the Bench; that that is Treason: Or
of drawing of a sword to strike a Justice sitting in judgment: or of striking
of a Juror in the presence of Justice, that these incur the heavy judgment,
of cutting off the right hand, perpetual imprisonment, and the loss of lands,
and goods, as the books are, of 22. E. 3. and F. Judgment, 174. 22. E. 3. ^
Fitz. Ju^ 174.
or of killing of a Messenger of the King, that goes to execute his
commandment, that this likewise is Treason, as the book is, in 22. Ass. 22.
Ass. P^
I say, I conceive, that the reason of these cases is, for that he that offers
violence to his Minister, when he is doing the service of his great Master the
King: offers violence to the King himself, whose person he represents, and who
by intendment of Law, is there present giving judgment: and he that strikes
another in the presence of Justice, does it as in the presence of the King
himself: for that what the Judge, or Minister of the King does, in pursuance of
the lawful commands of the King, or in executing Justice, is the act or
judgment of the King himself, according to that rule of Law, Qui per alium
facit, per seipsum facere videtur: the act of a man's minister or servant, is
the act of the Master himself. And this Bracton himself says, Bract. fo. ^
treating of jurisdiction, delegated by the King, to inferior Judges, and
withal showing and directing of those Judges Delegates, to execute righteous
judgment, says he, Tale judicium diligit honor Regis, cujus p^rsonam in
judicio and judicando representant. Such a judgment the honor of the King
delights in, whose person, in judgment, they represent. Why then, I say, is it
thus, that the King by intendment of Law, is present in all his other Courts;
and that what they do, or judge, is the act or judgment of the King himself?
then certainly it must of necessity follow, (as indeed the Law is) that their
judgment cannot be count manded by the King: for this were to put Caesar
against Caesar, the King against himself, which cannot be; for that when a
Judge has once given his judgment, he cannot afterward countermand this
judgment.

Again, is the King (as I have said) by intendment of Law present in his
inferior Courts; and is their judgment his judgment, so that by this his
Majesty is estopped and concluded by his own inclusive judgment, to
countermand theirs. Then, I say, a fortiori, the King, though he disunite
himself from his Parliament, yet by intendment of Law, and virtually he is
present in his high Court of Parliament: and therefore their judgment is his
judgment: and what they declare to be Law, the King by an inclusive judgment
declares to be Law also. And if so, the conclusion must of necessity be, that
the King can no more countermand their judgment, then he can the judgment of
his Judges: for when Transit in rem judicatam, that is, when a thing is once
adjudged, it can never after be repealed by the same judgment (as I have said)
for that were a way to make judgment upon judgment, and so ad insinitum, and
insinitum in iure reprobatur: the Law detests infinites. And as the King
himself, cannot repeal this judgment pronounced by his Parliament: so neither
can he do it, by any other advise or judgment, power, or jurisdiction
whatsoever, no not by the advice, though of all the Judges of England, for that
there is no power or judgment whatsoever, but is inferior to the judgment of
the high Court of Parliament; which is plain, by that, that no appeal lies
from them: and then the rule of Law binds up and supersedeth all inferior
judgments: In presentia maioris, cessat potestas minoris. In the presence of
the great, the power of the less cease. And therefore according to this
rule, it is resolved in 21. Ass. Ass. Pl. 1.
that because that the Kings Bench is Eier, and more then Eier: if a Commission
of Eier sit in a County, and the Kings Bench comes thither; the Eier cease.
And this is the reason, that when it was enacted by the Statute of 28 E. 1.
(...) 1. ca. 5.
that the Kings Bench should follow the King, that the power of the Steward of
the Kings Household, to determine Pleas of the Crown, did cease: and that in
Term time, when the Kings Bench sits, in the same County, all Commissions
cease, as it is resolved in the 10. Rep. and in the 9. Rep. ^ Rep. fo. 73. ^
Rep. fo. b.
And this is the reason likewise, that when the Pope exercised jurisdiction
here in England, whatsoever the Ordinary of any Diocese might do, that the
Pope, who challenged to himself supreme jurisdiction, over all Ordinaries, used
to do within this Realm, as supreme Ordinary: and so he used to make
Visitations, corrections, dispensations, and tolerations, within every Diocese
of this Realm, as the Ordinaries used: so he used to make Appropriations,
without the Bishop: and this was held good, and was never contradicted by the
Bishop, who was accounted but the inferior Ordinary. Upon this ground, as it
is said by Manwood Justice in Pl. Com. ^ Com. fo. ^ a.
In presentia maioris, cessat potestas minoris.

So I say, in the case in question, for that the high Court of Parliament, are
the most supreme jurisdiction in England; what they declare to be Law, cannot
be countermanded, by the judgment of any power or Counsel whatsoever: because
that in the presence of the most supreme jurisdiction, the inferior cease. I
do not hereby intend, that the power of the Judges, in their several Courts,
for the dispensation and execution of justice, should cease in the Term, for
that the Parliament is sitting at the same time, And the reason is obvious, for
that these Courts have their proper and distinct jurisdictions, from the
Parliament; and therefore cannot be superseded by it. I intend by this only
that what the Parliament has declared to be Law, cannot, as I have said
before, be countermanded by any other inferior judgment whatsoever: for that
where the powers exercise the same jurisdiction, they cannot both stand
together, but the greater will cashere and suspend the less: so I say in our
case.

But here it may be objected, that the King is fons Justitiae, that is, the
fountain of Justice; and that he only, as Bracton says, Bract. fo. 55. b.
Ordinariam habet iurisdictionem, and dignitatem and potestatem super omnes qui
in regno suo sunt, habet enim omnia iura in manu sua, etc. And a little after
he says, Ea quae iurisdictionis sunt, etc. and ea quae sunt Justitie, etc.
annexa, ad nullum pertinent, nisi ad Coronam and dignitatem Regiam: that is,
those things which appertain to jurisdiction, and justice, belong to no body,
but the Crown, and royal dignity. And as all justice and jurisdiction is
primarily and originally in the King, so they cannot be exercised by any other,
except that they be first delegated to them by the King; And so says Bracton a
little after, Jurisdictiones, etc. non possunt a privata persona possideri, nec
usus, nec executio iuris, nisi hoc datum fuorit ei desuper: that is, no
jurisdiction, nor execution of the Law, can be exercised by any private person,
except that this power be first given unto him from the King. So Bracton
treating of jurisdiction, says; Bract. fo. 107. ^
Videndum, etc. quis primo and principaliter possit and debet iudicare: that
is, let us see, who first, and principally, may, and ought to judge. And then
he answers, Sciendum, quod ipse Rex, and non alius, si solus ad hoc sufficere
possit; eum ad hoc virtute sacramenti teneatur astrictus: that is, we must
know, that the King only, and no other, if he alone may suffice: For that he
is bound to do it, by virtue of his Oath. And after in the next Chapter
speaking of jurisdiction delegated, he says, Bract fo. 108. a
Si ipse Dominus Rex ad singulas causas terminandas, non sufficiat, ut levior
sit illi labor, etc. he may, says he, Constituere Justiciarios, etc. quibus
referantur tam quaestiones super dubiis, quam quaerimoniae super iniuriis, etc.
that is, if the King alone cannot suffice to determine all causes, that his
labor may be the more easy, he may constitute Justices, to whom, as well
doubts in Law may be referred, as complaints, upon injuries. And in pursuance
of this, the King, not possibly suffi^ing to exercise all jurisdiction himself,
has in all ages, delegated power and jurisdiction to a certain number of men;
and has constituted them Judges, and dispensers of the Law under his Majesty,
and in his right an (...) to his people.

Now all this being admitted, as in truth it cannot be denied, the force of the
objection stands thus: is it so that no jurisdiction can be exercised by any,
except that it be first delegated to them by the King, and that the King has
constituted certain persons, to be his Judges of the Law? why then it lies not
in the power of the two Houses of Parliament, to declare what is Law, and what
not. First, because that they are not the proper Judges of it. And secondly,
because that they have no such power given unto them by the King: for what
power they have it is derived by their Writ, by which the King calls them to
Parliament: and this only requires their presence, Super dictis negotiis
tractaturis: and tractare is only to treat of or debate the Law, not to
declare, or give judgment what the Law is; Besides, this word tractare is
contained only in the Writ by which the Lords are summoned to Parliament, and
not in the Writ of the Commons, for by that they are called only (as I
remember the Writ is) ad faciendum and consentiendum, to do, and agree; why
then they have no such power to intermeddle with the debating of the Law, much
less to declare what the Law is.

To which I answer: That the two Houses of Parliament conjoined (for I speak
not of the power of the House of Commons distinct, and by it self) may not
only declare what the Law is, but are the best and most proper Judges of it.
Are not they the ne plus ultra; that the Subject has for redress in matter of
Law? are not they (as common experience teaches us) the supreme Seat of
Judicature? and do not they exercise a superintendent jurisdiction over all
other Courts? and have not they power by a Writ of Error, brought before them,
to reverse Judgments erroniously given in other Courts? Without doubt they
have; witness that case of the Ship Money: which Judgment could not possibly
have been reversed, but by the Parliament; who upon debate, declared that
Judgment to be against the Law; and how miserable this Commonwealth had been:
if they had not had this power, the lamentable success, of devesting of the
Subjects property, without his consent, by that damnable judgment, contrary to
all Law, would have in short time, been manifested to the whole world. But to
this it may be said, that in these cases, the Judges advise, who sit as
assistants in Parliament, is demanded: and that in such case, the King, by his
Judges, does declare what the Law is. To this I answer, that because the
Parliament may demand the advice of the Judges, who sit there to that intent,
will it therefore follow that they are tied to it? or having demanded their
advise: must the consequence be, that they are bound to follow it? without
question nothing less: for this were to tie my judgment to another man's
principles, which ought not to be. And it were absurd for to think, that the
Parliament, who are the supreme seat of Judicature, should be tied to subscribe
to the judgment of any inferior power whatsoever. And now I shall put you one
case: posito, that all the Judges of England, assembled together in the Chequer
Chamber to give judgment in a point of Law, should all concur in their
judgments, and should give judgment accordingly; and after in a Writ of Error
brought in Parliament, this judgment should be reversed: do not the
Parliament only, in this case, declare what the Law is? Without question they
do; for, I suppose, that there is none so stupid, as to think, that the
Judges advice or judgment ought or can be received in this case; for this
were, upon the matter, to appeal a Caesare, ad Caesarem, and to reverse that
Judgment (though not by the same power) yet by the same advise that gave it:
which, as I conceive, by the Law ought not to be.

But here peradventure it will be again objected, that no Writ of error can be
brought in Parliament, but that the King first signs to it: 1. H. 7. 19: ^
and this is a consent by the King, and a giving of them power to proceed and
declare what the Law is: but in our case there is no such thing, for here is
nothing judicially before them, by which to authorize them to give any such
judgment, and therefore they have no such power to declare what the Law is, in
this case; and if they do, their proceeding is extrajudiciall and arbitrary.

To this I answer, that true it is, that they cannot, nor ought not to take
notice of any thing which concerns any private persons, or their interest;
neither can they, in any such case, give Judgment, or declare what the Law is,
except they have something judicially pending before them, upon which to ground
their judgment; but otherwise it is where it concerns the Commonwealth, for
there, I conceive, under favor, (especially, as in this case, in time of
imminent danger) they are not tied to any legal way of proceeding, but they
may, and are bound, as well by their Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, and their
late Protestation, as by their Writ, by which they are called to Parliament, to
take notice of all things, which may be obnoxious and prejudicall to the
Commonwealth: and to debate, determine, and declare the Law concerning them,
though that they have nothing judicially before them; for if they should, in
this case, expect a complainant, the Commonwealth might perish, before that
they could yield any aid or assistance, for the securing of it. Now by their
Oaths, they are bound to defend the King and Kingdom (as I have before said)
and by their Writ they have power and authority given them, De imminentibus
periculis tractare: and tractare, does not only signify to handle, treat of,
or debate; but likewise it signifies, as the learned observe, to order, to
govern, to write of, or to describe; and, without question, these words have
weight, sense, and power enough in them, not only to enable them to debate
what the Law is, but also to declare what it is, after that it is debated: so
that I conceive, by this it is clear, that the Parliament do not exercise,
practice, or endeavor any arbitrary way of proceeding. And the difference (as
I concelve) upon the whole matter, will be this; that the two Houses of
Parliament cannot (as I have showed before) make a new Law, or alter the old
Law, without the consent of the King, and this by Act of Parliament; but they
may declare what the Common Law is, and this shall be obliging to his Majesty;
for otherwise, this great Court, which so far transcends all others, in other
things, should be less in power, in this particular, then any other; Which
ought not to be conceived, or imagined.

Now this being Law, which I have delivered, as I conceive it is; from hence
these Conclusions may necessarily, and by consequence, be deduced; First, that
the declaration of the Law, to be otherwise by the Proclamation, or other
Declaration of the King, does not change the Law; for that it is a Rule in the
Law, that the King can neither create a Law, nor alter the Law, by his Patent
or Proclamation: And with this agrees 49. Ass. 37. H. 8. Br. Patents 100. 11.
H. 4. 10. H. 7. 5. Rep. 49. Ass. Pl. 8. 37. H. 8. Br. Pat. 100. 11. H. 4. 37.
10. H. 7. 23. 5. Rep. fo. 55.
and many other Books. Secondly, Hence a good argument may be deduced, to prove
the Commission of Array, at this time illegal; for that the King, with the
advice of his great Counsel the Parliament, has by a tacit and inclusive
consent (as I have made it good before) established the Militia; why then
clearly it lies not in his Majesty's power, without their consent, to
countermand this by any other Commission; for the Rule of Law is, that Eodem
modo, quo, quid constetuitur, dissolvitur, that is, every thing ought to be
dissolved by a matter of as high nature, as it was created: and that is the
reason, that an Act of Parliament, cannot be repealed but by an Act of
Parliament; for that no power or jurisdiction whatsoever, is so great as it
self: and it is without question, that the Kings power or authority, by it
self, is not of so high and excellent a nature, as it is joined with his
Parliament: Wherefore I do conceive, for this reason, that the Commission of
Array is absolutely unlawful, and therefore ought not to be submitted unto.
Thirdly, and lastly, Hence may be concluded, that the Kings declaration of the
Law, to be contrary to what the Parliament have declared the Law to be, is
Coram non Judice; that is, by one that has not jurisdiction of the cause.
First, Because (as I have said) that the King himself cannot declare the Law
to be contrary to their judgment, for that his Majesty's judgment is
superseded, and bound up in theirs: and secondly, For that he cannot contradict
their judgment, by any other advice or judgment, for that, that advice or
judgment is inferior to the Court of Parliament; and therefore in their
presence, as to this purpose, ought to cease. And I shall compare this case, to
one case only, which is in the 10. Rep. in the case of the Marshallsea, 10.
Rep. fo. 7^ the case of Marshallsea
where the case is thus; The Sheriff who is prescribed by the Law to hold his
Turn within the Month after Mich. etc. held his Turn after the Month, and
took an indictment of Robbery at the same Turn, and the Indictment being
removed by a Cerciorari into the Kings Bench, by the advice of all the
Justices, the party so indicted, was discharged, for that the Indictment was
utterly void, and Coram non Judice, because at this time the Sheriff had no
authority to hold his Court: so I say, in this case, the Declaration or
Proclamation of the King, is Coram non Judice, for that though the King
properly, and only, ought to declare the Law, by the advice of his Judges, at
another time, yet at this time he cannot, for that their judgment is estopped
and superseded, by the superintendency of the high Court of Parliament: Then
the Law being thus, this justifies the proceedings of Parliament, in punishing
of such, who dare adventure, against Law, to execute the Commission of Array,
or to proclaim, or declare any thing in his Majesty's name, against his own
judgment, and the judgment of his Parliament; for the Rule of Law is; Extra
territorium jus dicenti, non paretur, impune; he that obeys the command of any
power, out of its jurisdiction, shall be punished for it: So I conclude this
point also, and conceive, that for this reason likewise, the Parliament has
done no more then what is warranted by the Laws of the Land.

Basis and end of all Law) viz. the common good and safety: but of this only
a word, for that I have touched it before. That Law which is above all Law, and
to which all Law ought to subscribe, is Salus Populi, the safety of the
people. True it is, that the Law was made to defend every man's private
interest, as well as the Republique, but primarily and principally the
Republique: it is the Rule of Law (as I have showed before) Quod bonum
publicum, privato anteferri debet; that the public good ought to be preferred
before the private. And again, we have another Rule, Quod magis dignum, trahit
ad se quod est minus dignum, that the more worthy does draw to it the less
worthy: and without controversy, the magis dignum, the more worthy, is the
Commonwealth; why then the minus dignum, the less worthy, which is every man's
private concernment, must subscribe to that.

And the reason, wherefore the good and safotio of the Republi^que, ought
principally and in the first place to be maintained, and therefore is styled
Suprema Lex, that is, the most supream^ Law, or, if you will, a Law above all
Laws, is, for that as in the natural body, if the body be in health, the
members must needs be well also, and if the body be sick, the members must
needs sympathise with it^ so it is in the body politic, if the body be well,
the members fare all the better for it, if the body be in distemper, the
members cannot but be distempered also; so the happiness, or misery, of every
individual person, h^^geth upon the good or ill success of the Commonwealth
and therefore the good of the Commonwealth ought to have the first and chie^e
endeavor, of every true and faithful member of it.

In 18. E. 2. which you shall sind cited in the 10. Rep. Keighleyes C. ^8. E.
2. 27. ^0. Rep. 139. b. Keighleyes C.
a man brought an Action upon the case, against another, and the ground of the
Action was, for suffering of a Wall of the Sea, that the Defendant was bound by
prescription to repair, when need should be, ^^repaired, so that for default of
reparation, the water entered, and surrounded the lands of the Plaintiff; The
Defendant traversed the prescription, upon which they were at issue, and it was
found for the Plaintiff; and that there was a default in the wall, for not
repairing, for which the Plaintiff recovered his Damages, and a Writ was
awarded to the Sheriff, to distrain the Defendant to repair the wall, where
need was, ^and d^sault: Upon which my Lord Cook makes a special observation;
Not a Reader, says he, this judgment, and the reason of it, is, pro bono
publico, for the common good. For, says he, Salus* populi, est suprema Lex:
the safety of the people is the most supreme Law: and therefore it is part of
the judgment, in this Action, that the Defendant should be restrained to
repair the wall. As if he had said, this Action is brought by the Plaintiff,
for his special da^^ification only, and this he has restored to him by the
judgment: (But yet note, for that it concerns the weal-publique, the Judges
considering themselves to be tied both in Law and conscience, to provide for
the securing of the same, made this part of their judgment likewise, that the
Desendant be compelled to repair the same; lest in defect of this the
Commonwealth should suffer also. Here you may see, the car^ that the Judges
then had of the common good: It were well that this were pondered on in those
days, in which I doubt, men are too ready and prone to prefer their own
private concernment in their endeavors, I mean their honor, before the
public safety.

In Davis Reports Da. Rep. fo. 32. b.
it is (...) to the interest of one particular person, and yet reasonable,
where it is for the benefit of the Commonwealth in general; as a custom to
make Balwarks upon the land of another for the defense of the Realm, 36. H. 8.
Dyer, and to raze houses in publico incendi^, in a common fire, 29. H. 8. Dyer,
(these cases I have remembered before) so to turn the plough upon the head-land
of another, in favor of husbandry, 21. E. 4. and to dry Nets upon the land of
another, in favor of fishing, and navigation, 8. E. 4 36. H. 8. Dyer fo. 60^
29. H. 8. Dyer fo 36^ 21. E. 4. 28^ 8. E. 4. 18.
But says the book, a custom which is contrary to the public good, which is
the scope and general end of all Laws (for salus populi, suprema lex) or
injurious and prejudicial to the multitude, and beneficial only to some
particular person, such a custom is repugnant to the Law of reason, which is
above all positive Laws, etc. Here note, that it is said, that the Law of
reason is above all positive Laws: and no doubt but it is, for that Law, which
is against reason, is rather a mystery of iniquity, then Law: and in truth, it
is no Law, which is not grounded upon the Law of reason. For as some will have
it, the word (Lex) is derived, a ligando, quoniam ad observandas leges, homines
ligat: and no question a Law, which is unreasonable, does not oblige men to
obedience: so that it is no Law, if it be not warranted by the Law of reason.
Now to apply this to the case in question; the King, by his Prerogative, ought
to have the sole disposing of the Militia: the kingdom being in imminent
danger, the King refuses to settle it, by the advice of his great Counsel,
for the securing of himself and his people; Now the doubt is, whether the
Parliament may without the consent of the King, assume this power to
themselves, for the securing of his Majesty, and his kingdom? or whether they
ought to subscribe to the Prerogative of the King, though it be to the apparent
destruction of the Commonweal; which of these two is the reasonable Law, is
the question? Why no doubt, Salus populi, the safety of the people: for these
reasons. First, for that the Law was made for the people, and not the people
for the Law. And secondly, for that the whole ought to be preferred before any
part: wherefore I conclude that it is Suprema Lex; the most supreme Law, and
therefore the Prerogative of the King ought to give way to this; and not this,
to the Prerogative of the King: for if you preserve and maintain the common
good, you preserve and maintain the Kings Majesty, his Prerogative, your Laws,
and your selves; and if you do otherwise, you destroy all. And therefore I
conclude all with this, Non solum conveniens est, sed necesse est, ut salus
populi, sit suprema Lex: That it is not only convenient, but nenessary, that
the safety of the people, should be the most supreme Law: And therefore the
Parliament have done that which is agreeable both to Law and reason, in
preferring of the public safety.

FINIS.

