Die Mercurii April. 30. 1645.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, that Sir William Massam, do
from this House give thanks to Mr. Marshall for the great pains he took in
the Sermon he Preached this day at the entreaty of this House, at St.
Margarets Westminster (it being the day of public humiliation) and to desire
him to Print his Sermon. And it is Ordered, that none shall presume to Print
his Sermon, not being authorized under his handwriting.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint Stephen Bowtell to Print my Sermon,

Stephen Marshall.



THE STRONG HELPER OR, The interest, and power of the Prayers of the destitute,
for the building up of Sion. Opened in A SERMON BEFORE The Honorable House of
COMMONS Assembled in Parliament, upon the solemn day of their Monthly Fast,
April 30. 1645.

BY Stephen Marshall, B.D. Minister of Gods Word, at Finching-field in Essex.

JER. 29. 12. Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me,
and I will hearken unto you.

PSALM. 10. 17. Lord thou have heard the desire of the humble, thou will prepare
their heart, thou will cause thy ear to hear.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, for Stephen Bowtell, and are to be sold at
the sign of the Bible in Pope's Head Alley, 1645.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THE Lord that now makes it his great work to build up Zion, and settle his
Arc there, in its place, has made it your great honor, that he has taken
you into a partnership in so blessed a work; He make it your happiness, that
your Faithful indevours being crowned with a blessed success, both the
present and after Ages may deservedly call you the Repairers of the breach, and
restorers Esa. 58. 12.
of paths to dwell in. It is pity such builders should want either fair
weather, or a sure Scaffold to build on; but you will not be discouraged,
whilst you think how in great repaires, all use to lie on heaps, and remember,
what the ablest of Gods Master Builders in this kind have met with, it is
enough that Jerusalems Wall may be built in troubleous times. God can lay the
beams of Dan. 9. 25. Psalm. 104 3. Luke 17. 6.
his Chambers in the water, and Faith can plant Sycamines in the Sea; it was a
confused Chaos, without form and void, full of darkness, which this goodly
Fabric of Heaven and Earth was at first made out of, and there were Evenings
as well as Mornings all along in the Work, however it went on, each day adding
distinction and beauty, and the last, perfection, so that God beheld all and
saw it to be very good. It is the same creating God, that must order our
present confusions, and raise up our ruins, in which your humble and faithful
Prayers, will be more useful then your ablest Counsels. Moses, Elias, our
Savior, the great builders and repairers of the Church, are every one of them
recorded to have fasted forty days and nights, when they were upon that Work,
it much commends Prayer and Fasting to all who are at any time engaged in a
like service; that was your business, when this Sermon was Preached, which, if
either in the delivery it did any whit help your Spirits then in prayer, or in
the publishing, it may now or hereafter, engage you, when you most diligently
look to your Work, more earnestly to look up to God in it, it will be the joy,
as it is the prayer of

Your Servant in this great Work, STEPHEN MARSHALL.

A SERMON PREACHED To the Honorable House of COMMONS at their Monthly Fast,
April 30. 1645.
PSALM. 102. 17. He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise
their prayer.
I Began the handling of this portion Intreduction. Showing the scope of the
Text to be a Circumstance which highly magnifies the work of Gods bullding up
of Sion.
of Scripture the last public solemn Fast, before the Honorable House of
Peers, and I then showed, that these two Verses do contain two such
remarkable circumstances, which always accompany the building up of Zion, as
do justly render it the most glorious and excellent work in all the world,
most worthy of all men's observation and admiration, so that all the Kings and
all the Nations might well stand amazed at it, and it deserves to be written,
that all the Generations to come may praise God for it; the first is, that when
ever the Lord does build up Zion, he does appear in his glory, he never
shows himself more like himself, never more magnifies those excellent
perfections of his Wisdom, and Power, and Mercy, and Holiness, and Truth, then
he does when he builds up his Church; This I handled before that Honorable
House the last day, at large, and now this Honorable House having commanded my
poor labors, to be a furtherance of your humiliation, and prayer, that you
may be the assistance of God be carried on the better in your great work of
helping the Lord in building the Church, while like so many Nehemiahs, you are
building with the Trowell in one hand and the Sword in the other; I could not
think of any more fitter, more suitable, or seasonable Theme, then to go on
to open the second Circumstance, which accompanies the building up of Zion,
which you have in these words, When the Lord does build up Zion, he will
regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer; All the
prayers that his forlorn and desolate people had been offering up many years
before, when (it may be) they despaired of ever meeting with any comfortable
return, And contains I a plomise of Gods regarding his peoples prayers.
they should now find their Jubilee, they should now have a full crop, of all
their seed gathered in with joy; when the Lord does build up Zion, he regards
his peoples Prayers: The sum of the Text is, A gracious promise of Gods
hearing his peoples Prayers; He will regard the prayers of the destitute, or
he will turn to them, What it is for God to regard prayer, what not to despise.
or he will look upon them, he will behold them; the meaning plainly is, he
will grant them thus, that is, first positively laid down: secondly, it is also
laid down negatively, He will not despise them; and in this negative, there is
another affirmation, rather stronger then the former; for when God is said not
to despise, the meaning is, he does highly value it; with God, non spernere is
magnifacere, as An humble and a broken heart, O God, thou will not despise,
that is, thou do highly esteem it; so also here Psalm. 51. 17.
however these poor afflicted ones had imagined, because God had made them no
return that he did scorn them and their prayers, he would now let them to
their comfort know, that all their prayers lay before him, and were very highly
regarded by him; They had sown in tears, they must now reap in joy, now they
should find that their prayers were like so many Talents put into Gods bank,
which they should receive into their bosom with advantage, he would no longer
cause their heart to faint with deferring their hope, he would now regard the
prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer.

Which gracious promise of God, to regard the prayers 2 This promise respects,
of his people, has in this place a threefold aspect; First,

We are to consider it in relation to the persons, whose prayers shall be
regarded, and that you have in this 1 The persons, who.
word, he will regard the prayer of the destitute; And Secondly,

This regarding of prayer does respect the Time, when 2 The time, when.
he will regard it; When the Lord does build up Zion, he will regard the
prayers of the destitute; And Thirdly,

This regarding of the prayers of his people, has an 3 The matter, wherein
their prayer shall be regarded.
aspect upon the matter, wherein he will regard them; when he builds up Zion,
he will regard their prayer, that is, (as God willing you shall hear anon)
that their prayers shall be the means of building Zion, he will build Zion, as
that which their prayers have been the means of, and have drawn from him; when
the Lord shall build up Zion, he will regard the prayers of the destitute; I
begin with the first of them:

The persons, they are here called the destitute; he will The Persons, who:
regard the prayer of the destitute: the Hebrew word, which is here translated
destitute, does properly signify 1.
Myrica, a low shrub, humilesque Myricae, low shrubs The destitute who they are.
that grow in Wildernesses, some think they were Juniper shrubs, some a kind
of wild Tamyris, but a base low shrub, that grew no where but in a desolate
forlorn place; and sometimes the word in the Text is used, to signify the
Deserts of Arabia, the sandy desert place of Arabia, which was a miserable
wilderness; Now when this word is applied to men, it always means, such as
were forsaken men, despised men; such men as are stripped of all that is
comfortable to them, either they never had children, or else all their children
are taken away from them, and all comforts banished, and themselves left
utterly forlorn, like the barren heath in a desolate howling Wilderness;
these are the people of whom my Text speaks, that the Lord will regard the
prayer of the destitute: and this was now the state of the Church of God, when
they offered up this prayer, and yet by faith did foretell that God would grant
such a gracious answer.

And this promise as relating to these persons, affords Hence two lessons.
us two excellent lessons.

First, Into what a miserable low and forlorn condition, God often lets his
Church fall, before he do appear for their deliverante; Observat. 1. The
Church often brought very low before deliverance. Psalm, 102, 6, 7, 8, 9.
They are desolate and forsaken, left like the Deserts of Arabia, like the
broken shrub of a tree, that no body regards: Such was their present condition;
you have it in all the former part of the Psalm, Like a Pelican, like an Owl,
as a desolate Widow, they eat their meat with ashes, and mingle their drink
with weeping: to this condition did God let his Church come, before he did
appear as a succourer, and a helper of her; I confess God does not always so,
sometimes he does keep the feet of his people from falling: sometimes as soon
as ever they fall, he snatches them up with his right hand; sometimes he lets
heaviness fall upon them for a night, and sends them joy and deliverance the
next morning; but frequently, yea, and ordinarily, before the greatest mercies,
he lets them be brought into a most miserable condition, so that they shall
have no humane hope ever to come out of it; So they were in Egypt wasted out in
an iron furnace; so they were in Babylon, when their bones Psalm. 141. 7.
lay scattered upon the earth, as Chips in a timber-yard; and it was ordinary
for the Church to complain before her deliverance, that she was like a bird in
the fowlers snare, as a Lamb fallen into a Wolves, or Lions den; and Psalm. 124.
7.
ordinary for God to acknowledge, that when he comes to deliver them, he
chooses them, and finds them in a Efa. 48. 10.
furnace of affliction. And this is true not only of the Church in general,
but you may read the same of abundance of Gods dearest Saints, who have been
brought and reduced to extremity of misery, before ever he appeared for their
succor: Thus it was with David and Daniel, and the three Children, and Paul,
and multitudes of others. And this the Lord does for these two causes: First,

It usually thus betides Gods people through their own Reason 1. From their own
folly. Psalm. 38*5.
foolishness; themselves are the causes why they come so low; David in the
name of the Church, confessed, I am brought into great heaviness, I lie
roaring all the night long, my wounds stink and are corrupt, because of my own
foolishness; for first they offend God, their gracious God, and when they have
offended him, they continue impenitently in sin; and when God appears, and
begins to correct them, they kick with the heel against him, and will not take
notice of his hand, but go on obstinately; They impute it to any thing rather
then Gods displeasure, will not confess their sin, their uncircumsized heart
is not humbled in them, when they lie as a wild bull in a net, Esa 51. 20.
full of the fury of the Lord; they kick and fling, fret and vex themselves,
suffer and murmr, smart and repine, but will not renounce their own counsel,
nor lay down their arms of rebellion; and thus like foolish sons, they stay
longer then they need, in the place of the breaking forth of children; and this
God will not bear from them, but now by long and tedious trials, and by being
thus brought to great extremities, their hearts are softened and melted, the
pride of their spirits broken; they search and try their ways, their foul
stomachs are emptyed of that glut which lay upon them, they cast off their
carnal confidence, and self-conceitednesse; when they have been bound in
fetters, and holden in cords of affliction, then they see their own works, then
their ears are opened to Job 36. 8, 9, 10
Discipline, when with the Prodigal, they have eat husks with the Swine, and
are ready to dye with hunger, then they think seriously of returning to their
Fathers house, and so hereby are made the fitter for their deliverance. Luke
15. 17.
And Secondly,

He likewise does it for his own glory; for the lower they are before he
appear for their succor, the more Reason 2. For Gods greater glory in their
deliverance. Joh. 11. 34.
honor does he gain to himself in their deliverance: This reason Christ
himself gave it, in the 11 of John, when they told him that Lazarus was sick,
and Christ knew he was sick to death, yea, that he was dead, but This
sickness (said Christ) is not unto death, but that the Son of God might be
magnifyed; as if he had said, Lazarus shall dye, and go to the grave, and lie
while he is ready to stink there, not that I delight to have Lazarus brought
low, and looked upon as a dead man, but that my glory might the more appear in
raising him up; so when the Lord has brought his people into such a low,
forlorn condition, that all help and strength seems to be gone, then for him to
come in and succor, this advances his glory many ways, the glory of his
wisdom, and of his love and of his power, etc. for such causes as these does
God let his Church come to be destitute, before he seems to regard their
prayers.

I note this only to this end, that it might teach you all Use. To teach us to
judgeour selves of our present distresses.
to be charitable Judges of the strange and various administrations of our God
toward almost all the Churches in Christendom at this day: indeed if we look
upon the state of almost all the Christian world, we cannot but say it is very
low: Germany has now for six or seven and twenty years been an Aceldama, a
field of blood; in Ireland the slain not to be numbered, their widows multiplied
Jer. 15. 8.
like the sand of the Sea shore; Scotland been shaken, and harrassed,
miserably; and England which has been as a Garden of God, now is conflicting
with the saddest of all judgments, and bleeds and melts away, and sinks deeper
into the quicksands of desolation every day then other; All our Physicians
have hitherto proved of no value: no balm yet found to cure our wound, no
plaster will as yet cleave to our soar, the storm still increases, our
Anchors all come home, and we are even at our wits end, and every where the
displeasure of the Lord seems to be on all the Churches, as if he would bring
such a Nahum 19.
desolation upon them, that affliction should not rise up the second time. Now
(beloved) in these deep and deplorable extremities, learn to judge wisely of
the state of Christ's Church and people, think it no more strange to see the
Church of God tossed and afflicted, then it is to see the Sea tossed with
waves, or the lower region to be full of storms, and tempests; but when you do
see these things, be you withal assured, that the Lord loves his Church, and
all his Saints too dear, to be lavish of any one drop of their blood; he
prefers the meanest of his people before all the Kingdoms of the world, and
will give them for ransomes for his redeemed ones, he thought it not too much
to redeem them with the blood of his own Son; Esa. 43. 34.
be you therefore fully assured that it is not out of any slighting of them,
that these troubles are upon them, but rather that in all these conflicts he
has holy aims, and ends, which it may be we cannot yet dive into; and let us
not look too much upon the dark side of the cloud of Gods providence, when we
cannot see the bottom of his Counsels; let us not hang down despairing hands;
Let us be contented that we are of his Court, though we be not admitted to be
of his Privy Counsel; and let us set this down for an assured conclusion, That
how low soever the Lord brings his people, he will bring them back again from
the depth of their miseries; let us in the mean Psalm. 68. 22.
time, as the Prophet said, he would do, Search and try our ways, and be
humbled before him, but let us also believe upon plain trust, and wait upon
God, who at this day Lam. 3. 40.
hides his face from the house of Jacob, and let us look for him until he
please to return again.

Secondly, As the Lord sometimes makes them destitute before he regards them,
so he will regard the prayers of the destitute; this sad title, that they are
destitute, is set down here as an argument that God would regard their
prayers, which affords us this instruction.

That the prayers of the most forlorn, and despised, and Obser. 2. The prayers
of the destitute are highly regarded by God.
abased, of all Gods people, are in the highest regard with him: Whose
petitions soever are laid aside, God will be sure to regard and read over the
petitions offered up by the desolate, their prayers are most prevalent, and
most acceptable with God. I might give you an hundred places, where God says
it expressly, he hears the poor, he regards Isa. 49. 13. Job 34. 28.
the despised, he will save the afflicted, he will comfort the distressed, his
ears are open to their cry. David, who well understood all the topics of
Prayer, all places from whence any argument might be drawn to prevail with
God in prayer, made this his usual argument, Hear me Lord, for I Psalm. 18. 4,
5, 6. Psalm. 143. 1, 2.
am desolate; attend to my cry, for I am brought very low; hear me speedily,
my spirit is overwhelmed; as if he could lay such a claim to be regarded when
he was destitute, that God must fail of his word, if he failed then to regard
his prayers. And there is good reason why they above all others should have
their prayers regarded by God.

Because they pray in their prayers: Prayer is the pouring Reason 1. They pray
indeed. Psalm. 101. title.
out of the soul to God; so says the title of this Psalm, A prayer of the
afflicted when he powers out his soul. Now even Gods own people, when they
have ease and liberty, and are in no straits, it is too ordinary with them to
power out words, when they do not power out prayers, and to be in a bodily
posture of prayer, when the inward man is little affected; they often pray
without a heart; but Prove. 18. 22.
the poor and destitute speak supplications before God, they pour out their
soul and spirit, and that is prayer indeed. And secondly.

The destitute and forsaken have no other to fly to but Reason 2. They look
for help from God only.
God only, all other succor fails them, and he has much engaged himself in
his Word, never to desert the soul that betakes it self to him; He shall
deliver the needy when he cries, the poor also, and him that has no helper:
Now Psalm. 142. 4.
this forlorn and desolate wretch looks on his right hand, and none will know
him, other refuge fails him, no other cares for his soul, he has only a
melting heart, and a mourning eye, and these are fixed upon God alone; and
therefore no wonder though he be regarded. And then thirdly,

The desolate, of all others, will value an answer of prayer; Reason 3. They
will prize an answer.
let God do any thing for a poor forsaken wretch, it is highly prized: any
alms to a Beggar at the door, who is ready to starve, if it be but a crust fit
for the dogs, yet (I say) to a starving Beggar it is a greatefull thing: When
the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, when their tongue Esa 41.
17, 18.
fails for thirst, and the Lord pleases to open rivers to them in the
wilderness, O how acceptable and welcome is it! And fourthly,

God will regard the destitute, because in truth his fatherly bowels know that
there is more need that he should Reason 4. They most stand in need of favor.
succor them, then any other: he has put those bowels into earthly parents,
that if any of them have many children, the sickest, the weakest, the simplest,
the most despicable of all the rest, has the greatest care from the father,
and from the tenderhearted mother; among all the test of the children, there
is not such an Orator to prevail for themselves or others, as the sickest
babe: And even so it is with our good God, he knows the condition of the poor,
how every one treads upon a worm, he well considers, that he who is so weak
that he is ready to slip with his feet, is as a lamp despised in the thought of
him who Job. 12. 5.
is at ease: he knows that few will look to the destitute, unless it be to
scorn, despise them, brow-beat them, and turn the back upon them; and
therefore he himself will regard them: he commands us to deal our bread to the
hungry; to bring the poor, who are cast out, to our house; when we see the
naked, that we cloth him; that we draw out our soul to the hungry, and that
we satisfy the afflicted soul; yea, he commands his very enemies to regard
his outcast and afflicted; let my outcast dwell with thee Moab, be thou a
covert to them from the face of Isa. 18. 7 10.
the spoiler; how much more will his own tender bowels yerne toward them?

This also is a lesson of singular comfort to every afflicted Use 2. To
encourage such to pray.
soul, to assure them their prayers and supplications are tenderly regarded
before God: I have often observed such poor forsaken ones, who in their own
eyes are brought very low, that of all other people they are most desirous to
beg and obtain the prayers of their friends, when they see any that has
gifts, and peace, and cheerfulness of spirit, and liberty, and abilities to
perform duties, O how glad they are to get such a man's prayers! I beseech you,
will you pray for me, will you please to remember me at the throne of grace?
whereas in truth, if we could give a right judgment, all such would rather
desire the poor, and the desolute, to be mediators for them; for certainly,
whomsoever God neglects, he will listen to the cry of those that are forsaken
and destitute. And therefore, O thou afflicted and tossed with tempests, who
think thou art wholly rejected by the Lord, continue to pour out thy soul
to him, thou have a faithful promise from him to be rewarded, he will regard
the prayer of the destitute.

Why then do they so long go without their answer? Quest.
why are they and their prayers destitute?

To this you will have a satisfying answer in the next branch of my Text, which
is the aspect that this promise Ans.
of Gods regarding prayer, has unto the time, when he will do it; when the
Lord does build up Zion, he will then regard the prayer of the destitute.

At another time it may be he seems not to regard them, while he lets Zion lie
waste, he seemed to despise their 2 Consider this text in relation to the time,
when God will regard his peoples prayers*
prayers; but when once the time is come, that the Lord will build up Zion, he
will then regard the prayer of the destitute; then it shall well appear he
will not despise their cry any longer: There you will have a full answer to
this doubt, and I conceive these words, not despise, are added purposely to
prevent or answer this doubt; poor afflicted ones are ready to suspect Gods
good will, and to think they are despised, because they have not a speedy
answer, but in that day, it shall appear how far God is from it.

And this circumstance of the time, when God regards them, affords us two other
notable lessons, which because And thence,
they are exceeding seasonable, I shall (the Lord assisting me) enlarge my
Discourse upon them; whereof the first is this.

That the prayers of Gods afflicted people, which may seem for a long time to
be slighted, and despised by the Lord, are Observe. 1. That prayers which seem
long despised, are yet highly regarded, and will bring a timely answer.
yet highly regarded by him, and will bring a timely answer.

This I think lies plain in the Text before you in the beginning of the Psalm;
There was crying for audience, and that his face might not continue hid, that
he would incline his ear, but there was no audience to be obtained; but now
when the Lord builds up Zion, he will regard them, he will despise their
prayers no longer, that is the first: And in this Lesson there are two branches
Cleared in two branches. 1 The prayers of Gods people may seem to be despised.
to be cleared before I come to apply it.

First, That the prayers of Gods own servants may for a long time seem to be
despised.

Secondly, However they may seem so to be, yet they are highly regarded, and
will bring a timely answer.

First, they may seem to be despised: despising, especially from God, is a very
sad word, and sinks very deep, it implies three things, which all may betide
the prayers of Gods own people.

First, A silence in God, a sitting still, taking no notice of their prayers,
to let them power out their souls, and the Lord be as if their prayer never
came to his ear; that is one thing in despising, and the best of it so the
Church complains, O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear Psalm 23. 2.
not; and elsewhere, Keep silence no longer, lest if thou be as one that
hears not, I become like unto him that goes down into the pit: very often
shall you hear the people of God complaining, that they pray, and pray, and
the Lord regarded not; this is very sad, as if a child should lie sick, mourn,
and cry to the Mother, and she sit by it, and not so much as cast an eye
toward it; enough to break the childs heart; But

Secondly, In despising, there is more and worse, when their prayers are
entertained with a distaste and displeasure, expressing a manifest dislike
against them; and even that sometimes betides the prayers of Gods people; so
Asaph complained in the name of the whole Church, How long Lord, will thou be
angry with the prayer Psalm. 80. 4.
of thy people? And this the Lord sometimes shows, by bringing upon them the
very thing which they pray against; as if a Child should beg pardon, and then
the Mother take it up, and whip it; when Retro omnia, when all things go
cross to their prayers, when they ask bread and God gives them a stone; Job
found it so, the very thing that he feared and prayed against, came upon him;
Thus also it proved to Israel in Egypt, when they cried to God, because of
their burdens, their burdens were increased upon them: but in despising,
there is a third thing which is sadder then all this.

Thirdly, Not only silence, or expressing some distaste, but doing this with
scorn and indignation; as he did to Miriam, when he spit in her face; so the
Lord does often seem at the prayers of his own people, not only to be angry,
but even with scorn to shut the door against them; This Heman felt, Psalm. 88.
who cried day and night before God, when his Soul was full of trouble, and
Psalm. 88. 17. 14.
yet then God vexed him, and afflicted him with all his waves, and seemed to
abhor and cast him off; As a man would take an unwelcome guest by the head
and shoulders, and turn him out of doors, and bolt them after him; and thus
the whole Church of God complains, that she did cry to the Lord, and complained
of her sin and sorrow, and the Lord then set her as a But to Lam. 3. 44.
shoot his Arrows at; and so also Job professed God did unto him, not only
bolt the door against his prayer, but when he mourned and complained, the Lord
did then take his Arrows of indignation, and shoot at his very heart, and
gnashed his teeth upon him; and so did our Savior Christ to the poor woman,
when she came and prayed, Lord help me; thou Son of David help me. Mat^h.
15. 26.
At first he seemed not to regard her, would not answer, the next time he
stayed, and when she had delivered her petition, he called her Dog, to her
face; enough to have cut the woman's heart in pieces: This is woeful indeed,
this cuts to the quick, and comes near to one of the saddest judgments
threatened against his enemies: You shall call and I will not answer, but will
laugh at your calamity, and Prove. 1. 26, 27.
mock when your fear comes. So you see the prayers of Gods own people may for
a long time seem despised: But then the second branch is:

That even then are they highly regarded, and will bring 2 Yet then they are
highly regarded.
a timely answer. That they are so, I might give you abundance of proof; David
observed it in the 31 Psalm, one time he prayed, and God gave him such an
answer, that he thought himself despised, I said, (says he) I am cast out of
the sight of Gods eyes, when he prayed, God turned Psalm. 21. 23.
him out of his presence, yet follows: Nevertheless thou heardest the voice of
my prayer, when I called upon thee. And so in Egypt how long did Gods people
mourn there? and their burdens increasing, it is like they thought God had
wholly rejected them, yet God told Moses, Exodus 3. I have heard the cry of my
people in Egypt; But this will abundantly clear it, that the prayers of the
afflicted are said to be upon Gods file, before God, Let these my prayers 1
Kin. 8. 59.
be nigh unto the Lord night and day, they lie leiger before God, they are
called a memorial, they are always in his sight, and he is therefore called
in the Scripture, The Acts 10. 4. Luke 1. 13. Genesis 19. 29. 30 22. Psalm. 20. 3.
Psalm. 65. 2. And will bring a timely answer
God hearing Prayer, God hearing Prayer is one of his attributes, hearing is a
participle of the present tense, as if you cannot speak to him, under the
notion of God, but you must conceive him hearing prayer; hearing the prayers of
his people at all times: he is said likewise to remember the prayers of his
people, to carry them in his mind, to have them in his thoughts, and which
makes all more Esa. 49. 8. 2 Cor. 6. 2.
clear, he has promised not only to hear, but in the best time to answer
them, in an accepted time I have heard thee; The Lord would thereby intimate
that hearing is one thing, and answering is another thing, and there often is a
distance between them, but all that distance of time, God is but consulting as
it were of the fittest opportunity, and the best way to answer the prayers of
his people.

The examples are not to be numbered, of the timely answer of such prayers:
David in the 22 Psalm in his own name, in the person of Christ, in the name
and person of the whole Church, begins with a sad complaint, O my God I cry in
the day time, but thou hear not; but in the same Psalm. 22. 2. with verse 24.
Psalm concludes as comfortably, he has not despised nor abhorred the
affliction of the afflicted, neither has he hid his face from him, but when he
cried unto him he heard. Abraham had long prayed for a son before any answer
came, yet when in all probability he had given over praying, he received a full
answer: So did Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1. so did Cornelius, Act. 10. and
those slaughtered souls, Luke 1. 14.
Rev. 6. who cried, How long Lord, holy and true, etc. at last Acts 10. 3, 4.
Rev. 6. 10, 11. with Rev. 8. 3, 4.
received a full return. The building of the Temple after the 70 years
captivity, was a work long on the wheel, even the time of 7 Princes reign,
yet the prayers for the accomplishment and perfecting of it, were all answered
and fulfilled in their season, and came (as God promises the return of prayer
shall be) like the former and the latter Hosea 6. Joel 2. 2, 3. Jer. 3. 3.
rain in due season. And you will grant that this is so, and must be so, that
their prayers must be thus regarded, if you consider but these five things
which meet in them.

First, when the afflicted people of God do power out Reasons of it.
their prayers to the Lord, they do that which he commands 1.
them to do, they have his express commandment They do his commandments
herein. Psalm. 50. 15.
to do it, Gall upon me in the day of trouble, now that which Gods people do
in obedience to his command, cannot be despised by him: it would reflect upon
his honor, if duties and performances of his own will should not be regarded.

Secondly, when the afflicted soul prays, Gods own 2.
Spirit prays in them; for they know not how to pray as they His Spirit prays
in them. Romans 8. 26.
ought, but it is the Spirit of God in them that makes intercession; and
however the Lord might be thought to quench the spirit of his poor sinful
ones, he will never quench his own spirit, he must needs regard that.

And thirdly, when ever Gods people do thus pray, 3.
Jesus Christ intercedes for them, as his Spirit makes intercession Christ
mediares for them. Rev 8. 3.
within them upon earth, so Christ makes intercession for them in heaven; He
is the Angel of Gods presence; and the Lord cannot but regard that which is
presented unto him, by the hand of one whom he always loves. And fourthly,

They themselves are very dear to God, they are infinitely 4.
beloved, even those despised ones; he has none They are dearly belo^ed of God.
in heaven or earth dearer to him, then his afflicted ones are: This argument
Christ himself uses to assure them their Prayers will be regarded; in the 16.
of John, You Joh. 16. 26.
shall ask in my name (said he) and I say not unto you that I will pray the
Father for you, for the Father himself loves you: when you come to pray to
him, you come not as to an enemy; and though I be your Mediator, it is between
you and a friend, not between you and an enemy, My Father loves you dearly: we
that are evil can give Luke 18. 7.
good things to our Children, because we love them; how much more will our
heavenly Father do it? This argument our Savior also presses most sweetly in
the parable of the unrighteous Judge, who through importunity did right to a
poor Widow, and shall not God much more do it for his Elect ones, his beloved
ones? And fifthly, 5.


He has engaged himself by innumerable promises, to He has promised to hear
them. Psalm. 50. 15. Isa. 49. 1 King. 8. 33. ad finem.
the poor, the desolate, and the afflicted, that they shall be answered by him,
Call upon me, and I will answer thee, in an accepted time I will answer thee;
many a time has God engaged himself for it; and he that commands his own
servants, if they look Psalm. 15. 4.
for his favor, that they keep their promises, though it be to their
hinderance, though it should be to an enemy; certainly Psalm. 89. 34.
himself will never alter the thing, the word that is come out of his mouth, to
them who are so dear to him, as his Saints are; and therefore their prayers
must needs be before him: But it may be demanded, Why then do they seem to be
despised? and why does the Lord defer Quest. Why then does he defer and seem
to despise them?
to answer them?

I Answer, First, God does not always defer them; sometimes before they call
he does answer them, and while Answ. He does not always so. Iso. 65. 24. Genesis
24. 45. Dan. 9. 23.
they are speaking he does hear; and as Abraham's servant noted of himself,
even while he was praying Rebekah came: so have many of Gods servants found; so
did Daniel, as soon as he had done praying, about the time of the Evening
Sacrifice, the Angel Gabriel being caused to fly swiftly, brought him a
gracious answer, and told him that in the beginning of his supplication he
received his answer: sometimes the harvest overtakes the seed-time; especially,
when their prayers are offered up Jer. 29. 11.
when Gods appointed time is come, or when their need is instant and extreme,
when the fluctus decumanus, when the tenth and terrible wave is ready to
overwhelm them, Psalm. 143. 7.
he gives them leave to say, Hear me speedily, and he will not fail them: when
Peter is ready to sink, he no sooner cries Lord save me, but Christ presently
gives him his helping Mat. 14. 30.
and saving hand.

But, secondly, it is not always ask and have, after asking must be seeking
and knocking, and seeking and knocking again; and when it is so, God defers
them for two excellent ends: The one is his own glory, the other When he does
it is for the glory of his Sovereignty.
is the good of his people.

First, his own glory is exceedingly advanced by it; for in dealing after this
manner he does assert; First, his own Sovereignty in dispensing his mercies, so
as it may appear that it belongs to him to dispose of things and times at his
own pleasure. You know great Lords and Princes make it a great part of their
Sovereignty, to have Suitors wait upon them; and it is the great glory of the
Lord Jehovah to have his people lie long before him, with their petitions in
their hands: and withal it asserts his Free Grace, it manifests, that whenever
he does answer the prayers of His Free Grace.
his people, that it is free favor, were it their due; his Justice would not
let him keep the laborers hire an hour from him; he commands us not to do
it, but that we Lev. 19. 13.
may know that all is free, he will have us wait his leisure; And thirdly,

Herein he likewise manifests his own wisdom, that he And his Wisdom.
can and will make both the prayers of his people, and his answers to them,
when they come together, each of them appear beautiful in their season, that
as his wisdom is manifested in giving them an heart to pray in their season:
so you shall see it manifested, in giving his answer in his best season. But
besides, in the second place,

Hereby he does marvailous good unto his people who 2 For their good many ways.
thus wait upon him. For, first,

He does hereby prepare them for their answer. And secondly,

He thereby prepares the answer to be the better for them.

First, he prepares them to be the fitter for an answer: he trains them up in
these three or four excellent things, while he seems to despise their prayer.
First, 1 Hereby he teaches them to pray.


Hereby they grow marvailously dexterous in the art of prayer, he teaches them
to pray by suspending his answer to prayer; you shall find in the Scripture,
that those men, who have been the greatest wrastlers with God, have been such,
whom God has longest put off, before Psalm. 88. Mat. 15. 22. Genesis 32. 24, 25. 1 Samuel 2.
he has answered them; Heman, and David, and Hannah, and I know not how many
of them that have offered up most soul ravishing prayers, were such as have
prayed till their throats have been dry, and their voice hoarse, and complained
from years end to years end; God hereby makes them skillful, and excellent
Artists at it. And then, Secondly,

Hereby does the Lord train them up in humility; there 2 Trains them up in
humility.
is nothing in the world humbles a Soul more, then to be long mourning before
the Lord for a mercy, and the Lord not to relieve him in it; nor is any Soul
so fit for any thing, as an humble Soul; David that had been long without his
Kingdom, when he came to have it, Psalm. 131. 1, 2. 2 Samuel 6.
could say, O Lord, my Soul is like a weaned child, and very vile and base in
his own eyes: by being long delayed, they come to be privy to the wickedness
of their own hearts; even as a horse that has any infirmity, he will show it
in a long journey; a leg that has any imperfection will discover it in a long
walk, and so will the secret corruptions of our hearts discover themselves when
God delays us, hereby we shall discover the pride, murmuring, discontent,
self-ishnesse, and what ever else is naught in our spirits, and thereby come to
be made wondrous low in our own eyes: and Thirdly,

Hereby the Lord likewise trains them up both in Faith 3 Exercise their Faith
and Hope.
and Hope: he hereby exercises; and thereby increases both these excellent
Graces in them. Thus was it with Abraham, Romans 4. Thus with the poor woman,
Mat. Romans 4. 19. Mat. 15. 2 Cor. 1. 8. Esa. 8. 17.
15. Thus with Paul, 2 Cor. 1. brought even to despair of life, brought under
the sentence of death, that he might learn to trust and hope in God. Thus Esaias,
in the name of the whole Church, Esaias 8. and innumerable others, have learned
both to believe and wait, when God has seemed to hide his face from them. And
then, Secondly,

By this long delaying of them, as he fits them the better Makes the answer of
their prayer more comfortable.
for the answer; so he fits his answer the better for them, for then is the
mercy always both the greater, and the sweeter: great ships that go long
voyages, before they come home, are usually most richly laden; an Oak is long
growing, but proves a great tree, and long-lived, whereas a Gourd which grows
up in a night, in another night is smitten with a worm and dies; a blessing
that is long a coming, is ordinarily a great one when it does come; The Lord
makes the mercy the sweeter when it comes. Isaac that has been begging many a
year, when he comes, he is an Isaac, a Son of laughter; When Hannah had long
wept for a Child, when he comes, he is a Samuel, and he proves a very sweet
child to her; Solomon was a child of tears, a son of his Mothers Prove. 31. 2.
vows, but was a pleasant Child indeed; so was John Baptist, to his Parents,
who were past children before he was born: much prayer, many tears laid out for
Luke 1. Prove. 13. 22.
a mercy before it comes, are all abundantly repaid in the greatness and
sweetness of it, when it does come, Hope deferred, makes the heart sick, but
when the desire comes, it is a tree of life. But whether I have answered the
case of Conscience fully, or no, sure I am, the Lesson is most plain, that
though God may seem to despise his peoples prayers, they are all before him;
and will bring an answer in due time.

This is a most comfortable Doctrine.

And I shall only make a comfortable use of it in two Branches. Application.
.

The one is to our selves, in respect of our present distresses. This present
lesson may more refresh and establish 1 Consolation in relation to our present
work and troubles.
our hearts, in assurance of a good issue in this great work wherein we are
engaged, then a million of Gold, or the assistance of a potent Army. We have a
huge conflict, we grapple with enemies, that are strong, wise, vigilant, that
are many, who have all the Antichristian, and Malignant part of the Christian
world joined with them; and besides all this, I am persuaded, we now grapple
with the revenging hand of God, for the sins which this Nation has lien in,
this hundred years; God does now remember them, and visits the Kingdom for
them, the idolatry, the blood, the Apostasy, and innumerable other evils, and
abominations, our troubles are very great, and the event may seem very
difficult, and doubtful; but let me tell you, here is that, may counterpoise
all, and support us against all discouragements, and make us comfortably
conclude of a good issue; We shall over-master all that are against us, we
shall over-match them, because the spirit and power of prayer is on our side;
we have had (these three or four years especially) the spirit of prayer powered
out, (I am persuaded) in the greatest measure that has been, since the
Apostles of Christ lived upon earth; and our prayers have not been in vain,
though the full return be not yet made, we have had the first fruits, many a
sweet in-come we have had already; But know (Honorable and beloved) they are
all filed up before God, there is not one of them lost; they will bring another
manner of return then yet they have done. And not our prayers only, but the
prayers of all the Christian world are before God in our behalf, our cause is
Gods, the work we are engaged in is the building up of Zion, and therefore
there is not a good man in the world, no not at Oxford, who prays, Thy
Kingdom come, but prays for us, who are indevouring the raising up of Christ's
Kingdom; now these prayers are all before God, and must bring a comfortable
answer in due time; Nay, this comfort reaches yet further, not only we that
are now alive, and our prayers, but all the Worthies who are now with God,
their Prayers pray for us; Though we must say of them as the Church did of
Abraham, they know us not; they are ignorant of our condition, yet their
prayers which they offered up while they were on earth, and longed to see this
work proceed, are now really assistant to us; Daniel and Jeremiah did as really
build the Temple and City, as Zerubbabel, and Nehemiah, though they were dead
long before; That look as the blood of the Martyrs cried for vengeance from
Abel to Zacharias, and thereby reach a present persecuting generation; so the
prayers of those who loved Zion, do bless and reach all the workmen now
employed in the rearing up of the Church, their prayers speak as Abels Faith
did when he was dead, and rotten, insomuch that I may confidently conclude,
that the two Houses of Parliament, and our Armies (as unworthy as we are) are
daily carried upon the wings of many millions of prayers, that have been
offered up to God these many years, they are all before God night and day; God
is only waiting the fit time; and therefore, I beseech you bear up your spirits
against all other discouragements, the Lord will in the most accepted time let
you know, that all that have ever said to him, Lord, remember England; Lord,
purge thy Church in England; Lord, set it up there; down with Prelacy; stablish
Liberty; make way for Christ; they are all before God, and must prevail; and
therefore certainly our comfort may be greater, ten to one, then our discomfort
need be, though all the Nations of the world were sworn against us: You shall,
God willing, have more of this before I dismiss you, let this taste suffice at
the present. And Secondly,

It is also a most comfortable lesson to poor, afflicted, dejected spirits,
who mourn and wrestle with God for Use. 2.
their own distresses: There may be many such in this Assembly 2 Consolation to
particular distressed souls
this day, who pray every day, it may be with David seven times in a day, ten
times in a day, but the heart sinkes for want of an answer; as wicked men
think, they shall never be reckoned with for their sins, because divine
vengeance seems to sleep, so do poor souls conceive Psalm. 50. 21.
that because God at present seems to slight them, he will never regard them.

I have often heard many a sad soul lament after this manner: Did but God hear
my prayers, did he but accept me, I would with David, call upon him as long as
I did live, might but my prayer come up before him, and Psalm. 116. 2.
be looked upon; but to be thus as a despised reed, a scorned poor creature,
(as I confess I deserve to be) this daunts my soul, that I dare not pray, I
am even ready to give over; O (says the sad heart) I beg mercies, and I taste
wrath, I beg grace, and I feel corruption, I beg ease, and I endure torment, I
beg love, and I find displeasure, all goes backwards; God casts my prayer out,
shuts it out from him, and this, this wounds the soul; let me to such a sad
soul speak a few comfortable words from the Lord; I take this for granted,
that the things thou do beg, are according to Gods will; thou dare not beg
an unlawful thing; I take it also for granted, that thou that do call upon
God, do endeavor to depart from iniquity, that thou dare not call upon the
name of God, and walk in sinful ways, but thou would be his servant; and I
likewise take it for granted, that thou do not expect or desire audience for
any ones sake, but for Christ Jesus thy Savior, to whom thou look; this I
hope God witnesses with thee: Why, if so, then it seems the only evil that
oppresses thy spirit, is, God does not answer thee, he does not give thee such
a return of thy prayer, as thou desire: But know thou, Gods answering of thy
prayer must not be measured by thy sad apprehensions, but by his own word,
which word assures me that all thy prayers are before God night and day; and
for his present answering of thee, it is no token of his displeasure, that he
does not give thee a sudden answer; his forbearance is no denial, the best of
all his Saints have cried and prayed, till their throat has been dry, and God
has seemed not to answer: David had prayed long for an answer, Psalm. 69. 3.
when he complained, He was weary of his crying, his throat was dry, Psalm. 69.
3. and 119. 123. Cant. 3. 4. 2 Cor. 12.
his eyes failed while he did wait for his God. The whole Church long sought
him whom her soul loved, and found him not; and Paul thrice, that is, many
times besought God to remove the messenger of Satan, which was sent to buffet
him, and was fain to wait still, so that thou art not alone in being thus
delayed: Nay, I tell thee further, God has many ways of regarding and
answering Prayer; Sometimes he may regard a prayer, which he absolutely denies,
when the thing would not be good for him that begs it; So he peremptorily
denied Moses his prayer to go into the Land of Canaan; But if the thing be
good, and according to his will, deferring of it, is no denying of it; if in
the mean time, while before God answer thee, he vouchsafe to uphold thy heart
by his Spirit, as he did David's, Psalm. 73. 22. I was as a beast before thee,
nevertheless thou upholdest me by thy right hand. If he now and then dart in
a beam of love, which is as the fire from Heaven to assure thee thou art
accepted, if he stablish 2 Chronicles. 7. 1. Psalm. 35. 13.
thee, nay, if he do but draw thy heart out to continue to pray to him, if he
make thy Soul more humble, and vile in thy own eyes, if he more wean thee from
the creature, and train thee up to wait upon him, truly (friend) it is ten
thousand times better, then all the time that thou spendest, thou have a large
recompense in Gods doing thus much for thee; this is to be preferred before
thousands of gold and silver: but I tell thee more, not one of thy suites will
be lost, no they are all before God, he reads them over every day, and what
thou have been begging this seven years, this twenty years, he daily remembers
them, and in his heart answers them all; Whatever thou have sown in tears, thou
shall reap in joy; be content, though at present thou see nothing but
darkness, do as Elia's servant did, who went seven times to look for rain,
till the seventh time he saw nothing, and then but a very little, yet that
little soon proved a great deal.

It may be thou shall not see the answer a great while; possibly not till thy
death come; Old Simeon a good gracious man had many years begged of God, that
he might see his Salvation, yet he never got Christ in his arms, till he was
ready to depart the world, then he got his full answer; so it may be when thou
come to die, thou shall have hosts of answers stand round about thee, nay,
peradventure the greatest returns of thy prayers shall be when thou art dead
and rotten in thy grave; what thou have begged for Gods Church, thy prayers
shall produce it, when thou art gone; what thou have begged for thy husband,
wife and children, it may be God will give thee the greatest return of them
when thou have no being in this world; and for thy self while thou live, when
it may be, thy heart is dull, and thou art unfit for prayer, and can not
pray; the quickening prayers which thou did offer up many years ago, God is
then remembering them, when peradventure thou fear he is taking advantage of
thy present dullness and distemper.

Therefore go thy ways on, and wait upon him, treasure up thy suits, be it
against corruption, against temptation, for thy Family, for the Church, wait
Gods time, the vision is for an appointed time, it will come in the end, that
is certain; every tear, every sigh, every short ejaculation, is continually
before him, he has a bottle for thy tears, as well as a bag for wicked men's
sins, a treasury for thy prayers, as well as for their blasphemies: let his
present answer be what it will, believe any thing of him rather then a
rejecting of the supplications of the poor who seek him in his Sons name,
he has promised it, and is faithful and cannot deny himself.

Another thing I observe from this circumstance the time when, the time of
regarding them, is, when he builds up Zion, and that affords us another lesson
as seasonable for this present auditory, viz.

That when the Lord does build up his Church, he does Obser. 2. The Lord
answers all his peoples prayers when he builds up Zion. Jer. 14. 11. Rev. 6. 10.
then answer all his afflicted peoples prayers. Sometimes God will not be
prayed to, or if he do, his answer shall be, wait a while; but when he
builds up Zion, then the Lord answers his peoples prayers, then he sits in his
Court of Request to hear petitions, then he holds out his golden Scepter to
every poor supplicant.

There are three things that God is laid in the Scripture to remember when he
builds the Church; He then remembers his enemies, when the new Jerusalem comes
down from heaven, then great Babylon comes into mind before God, that she may
be repaid: then secondly, God uses to remember his Covenant, he remembered for
them his Covenant; and thirdly, then also does God remember the prayers of his
people, and this God willing I shall make good to you, for the truth of it, you
shall find it fully expressed in the 29. of Jeremiah 10. 11. speaking of the
time when he would bring them back to build Jer. 29. 11.
the Temple, then (says the Lord) shall you call upon me, and I will answer
you; then, it may be, now he would not, but then I Will answer you; then you
shall seek me with your whole heart, and you shall find me: so in the 25. of
Isaiah, in the day that God builds up his Church for that Esaias 25. 9.
is the great promise of that Chapter, the Prophet tells you that his people
should then sing a song of praise, whereof this is one part, Lo, this is our
God, we have waited for him, lo, this is our God, and he has saved us; we
have waited, that is, we have prayed, and attended his leisure, now we have an
answer of all. To make this lesson more clear I shall endeavor to clear
these two things. Cleared in two branches.


First, when the Lord does build up Zion, he does then remember the particular
wants, the particular requests, which his Saints have offered up to him; the
Lord casts it so, as Then God relieves their particular wants.
to make Zions refreshing time, concurrent with the relieving of the wants of
his particular people, that as in executing of vengeance, when he is to execute
vengeance upon a nation, he will remember particular malefactors, what they
have done in their persons; so when he comes to build up his Church, he
remembers the particular fuites, that his holy ones have offered up to him; and
of this I could give you many testimonies; In that day he will let every
prisoner out of prison, he will bind up the wounds of every wounded soul; he
will make the blind Esa. 61. 2, 3.
to see, the lame to walk, the deaf to hear; In that day, in the 31 of
Jeremiah, the Lord will satiate every weary Jer. 31. 25.
soul, and replenish every sorrowful soul, in that day when the Lord erects
his new Jerusalem, there shall be a tree of life, the leaves of it shall heal
the diseases of all the Nations; In that day he gives strength to the Esa. 25.
4. Esa. 35. 3.
needy in his distress, a shadow from the storm, then he strengthens weak
hands and confirms feeble knees, then every wilderness is filled with pooles
of water, then Christ will power out abundance of his Spirit, as David at his
Coronation remembered all his friends, and dealt to all the people every one a
bottle of Wine: So the Lord at that day delights to make their personal
comforts join with the public and Common weal of his Church and Kingdom.
This is one way how this Doctrine is true, that then the Lord regards the
prayers of his people, when he builds up Zion. But the second is the main.

Secondly, The Lord does then answer the prayers of This building up of Zion,
is the sum of all their prayers.
his people, when he builds up Zion, because in truth the building up of Zion,
is the all in all, of all his peoples prayers; that is, as Solomon says, Money
answers all; so whatsoever particular suites Gods people have offered up, the
building up of Zion has been such a request, that the answering of that,
answers all others; whatsoever he denies them, it skils not, they have enough,
they are abundantly satisfied, they will clear all books, and break all Tallies
with God, they will give in all other bills whatsoever, if this be but done;
that this is so, observe I beseech you, wheresoever in the Scripture you read
of the Deuteronomy. 32. 1 Kin. 8. 2 Chronicles. 20 Esa. 62. Dan. 9. Ezra 8. Neh. 1. 12. 14.
prayers of Gods people, (as by the way, you shall hardly read of any godly
man, but you shall read of his prayer) you will find that the strain and the
stream of all their prayers runs for Zion, read Moses his prayers, Joshuahs
prayers, go on to David, to Solomon, to Ezra, to Nehemiah, and the several
Prophets; read all their prayers, and you shall find that Zion is the bulk of
them all; In thy good pleasure do good to Zion; and though there are many
particular suites to themselves, yet what they beg to themselves, is only
begged as a means, but when they beg for Zion, they beg it as an end: Thy
Kingdom come, to Gods people, is next to Hallowed be thy name; It is more to
them then all the rest of the Lords Prayer, Give us our daily bread, Forgive us
our trespasses, Lead us not into temptation, Deliver us from evil: They are
all inferior to Thy Kingdom come; the building up of Gods Church, is that
which has swayed all with the Saints in all their prayers; And it must be so,
it can be no otherwise with true godly men, if you consider either the relation
that the Church has to God, or that which they have to the Church.

First, that of the Church, to Christ, it is his Love, his Dove, his Fair one,
his Spouse, his Jewel, that which he has laid all his own glory upon; one to
whom he stands in all relations, which argues intimative dearnesse, and
tenderness, whatever is done to them, is done to himself, Ye did it to them,
therefore ye did it to me. The Churches cause is his; Her rising is his
glory, her reproach Matthew. 25.
is his dishonor: Arise, O Lord, plead thy own cause, remember how the foolish
people reproach thee, forget not the Psalm. 74. 22 2^.
voice of thy enemies, when the Synagogues of the Church was pulled down, when
the Church was wasted; And to themselves likewise, it is their Mother, in whose
womb they have lain, whose breasts they have sucked, it is the Magazine
wherein all their treasure is laid up, a vessel wherein all their wealth sinkes
and swims, if the Church be safe they are safe, and no thought of safety if it
miscarry; salva Ecclesia salva omnia, as they were wont to say of Rome, Salva
Roma, salva patria, salva omnia; so next unto God the Church is their all, and
therefore the building up of Zion, the welfare of the Church of God, must needs
be the answer to all their prayers. Give me leave to present you with a twofold
Use of this Lesson, and then I hasten to that which I chiefly intended.

First, this Lesson may serve to every of you for one of Use 1. For
examination, a notable discovery whose hearts are right with God.
the greatest discoveries of your own spirits that can be, whether in truth
your hearts be right with God? think how you could answer this one question,
Would the Lords building up of the Church, the settling and establishing of
Religion in purity and peace, would that be to thy soul the answer of all thy
prayers? art thou able to say it before God, Build but up Zion and I have
enough? No man under heaven can say it but a Saint, and there is not a Saint
upon earth but may say it, I know it lies in the bottom of his soul. But how
shall we know it? I Will give you but one way of trial; If the welfare of Zion,
the building up of the Church be the sum of all thy prayers, then it is
likewise the sum of all thy endeavors, thy studies, thy time, thy wit, thy
parts, thy interest, what ever may be called thine, are mainly laid out in
promoving, in helping forward the welfare of Zion. This you shall find clear
in the book of God, that as all the prayers of Gods people run upon Zions
welfare, so now (I say) in the second place, all the endeavors of all that
prayed for Zion run to help it forward, Zion was the sum of all their
prayers, and of all their joys, and cares; no joy to them, like the joy they
had in the prosperity of Zion, when the Lord at any time turned back the
captivity of his people, they were like men that dreamed, their mouth was
filled with laughter, and their Psalm. 126. 1, 2.
tongue withjoy; and no sorrow like that which was caused by the affictions of
Jacob, then they would even dye with 1 Samuel 4 13, 18 19. Neh. 1. 4. Dan 9 Psalm.
13. 7. Esa. 22. 4.
grief, then they would name their children Ichabod, then they would mourn
and not be comforted; and consequently all they had or could contribute was
most readily afforded. The Prophets and Apostles cold preach as well as pray,
and all their Sermons were for Zion; Kings could plot, project, counsel, etc.
as well as pray, all their plots and projects were to build up Zion; Soldiers
could fight as well as pray, all their wars were the wars of God; Rich men
could lay out money as well as pray, all their wealth was a Sacrum to God, a
devoted thing to him, when the Church needed it, their penny went as willingly
as their Pater noster: other learned men, if any man could write histories, if
any Poet could make songs, all was laid our about the Church, about furthering
the welfare of it; or if any were found among them who would profess love to
it, and join in prayer for it, yet mind their own affairs, build their own
houses, and let Gods house lie wast, they are branded for degenerate,
hypocritical, ignoble spirits, These were the Potters, and those who dwelt
among hedges, there they dwelt with the King for his work; a base people,
Haggai 1. 4. 1 Cllto. 4 23.
who would tarry in Babylon to get wealth, and not go up with their brethren to
build the house of God; and even thus may we judge of our selves. And therefore
I say to you, Honorable Senators, that are Noblemen and Gentlemen engaged in
this great work, the present service you are called to, if really you do make
the building of Zion to be the answer of your prayers, it is the great
Parliament project this day, to settle the Church; I know when Nehemiahs work
was to build the walls of Jerusalem, one half of his servants were feign to
carry the Arms Neh. 4. 16, 17.
while the other built, and many times those that built were feign to have a
sword in one hand, as well as a trowoll in the other hand, but the swords and
atmes were to defend the trowell, the work of the trowell was the great
project: So will it be with you, you will with that Emperor, Ezra 6. 7, 8.
Ezra 6. 7, 8. provide that all things shall be provided speedily and care
fully for this house of God, that government be settled, Ministers provided,
encouraged, maintained, the Sacraments and other Ordinances kept pure, and not
be at quiet till the Cap-stone be sot upon the head of this building. I know
Armies must be provided for, and Garrisons secured, yet they will be looked
upon but as meaner; Religion, the establishing of it, will be the end, yea your
Liberties will be but as means, Religion will be the Cap-stone, the Cream,
and Oil, which swims on the top of all, if your hearts be but right with God:
Therefore (I beseech you) consider in secret what answer you could make,
whether you can call in your souls to witness, that after all your
combustions, labors, and losses, if God would but establish England a
beautiful habitatien, the people made holy, that the Lord might own them, and
the three Nations joined in a Covenant might be one stick in the hand of the
Lord, in a holy, plous, religious Esa. 4. last.
way, that the flocks might have every one their shepherd, and the glory of
God the defense on every congregation; if for these things you sweat, and
toil, and care, it is an evident token your hearts are right with God.

And if any of you, the rest of the Assembly, do make account that the building
of Zion is the answers of all your prayers, then if it have your prayer it will
have your penny, you will go, ride, run, and travel, and nothing will stick
with you, if this be your main suit: Indeed in the true notion and
interpretation of prayer, it is nothing but the craving of Gods blessing upon
our endeavors in those things which he has appointed us to do, toward the
obtaining of any mercy, we little better then mock him, if we only pray, and
set not our shoulder to the wheel. And were this carried close to men's
consciences, how sadly would it speak to many, who can abundantly satisfy
themselves with joining in a few dry prayers for the Church, and in the mean
while they grudge the bestowing of any other cost? they can find work enough to
build their own houses, and drive on their own projects, let God (if he
please) take care to build his house, and do his own work himself; let all
such hypocrites know, that God will indeed do his work without them, and their
formal prayers will return, not with comfort into their bosoms, but with
vengeance upon their heads. But much more sadly does it speak against those,
whose lives and subtle machinations retard this work, who to their utmost
hinder the work of reformation, and would not have it go on, for fear their
lusts should be yoaked, and yet set out Prayers, and themselves seem to join
with them, that God would build up Zion; this is most abominable hypocrisy. I
remember I have read of one of the Emperors of Germany, that had taken the
Pope prisoner, who commanded throughout the Empire solemn prayers to be made
to God for the Popes deliverance out of prison, and he himself kept him in
prison at the same time: so these wretched men say, O pray for the peace of
Zion, pray that God would build up Zion, and themselves waste it, some by their
wicked lives, others by their pernicious counsels, some by their lusts, some
for fear the Word of God and Ordinances should yoke them; they pretend to
build the walls of it, and yet endeavor to undermine the foundations of it: God
in mercy grant that no such be found among our selves; but if in truth this be
our great care, and study, and endeavor, to see the work go forward, that we
count nothing of ours so well disposed of, as what is cast into this common
treasury, it speaks the heart indeed to be right with God.

Is it so, that when God builds up Zion he answers all his peoples prayers,
even their private prayers, as well as Use 2. Exhortarion to all to promote
this work
this great one? then (I beseech you) let this move every one of you to help
forward this work, even out of holy self-love; you do not know what a watered
Garden God may make your soul and family, when he builds up his Church.
Certainly, if a man were sure not to get any good to his own soul, yet if he
might see the prosperity of Zion and Jerusalem, he should think it a very
blessed sight; so thought he who penned the 106 Psalm, Remember Psalm. 106. 4, 5.
me, O Lord, with the favor thou bear unto thy people, that I may see the
good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice with the gladness of thy Nation, that I
may glory with thine inheritance: So thought John the Baptist, though he was
sure he should decrease when Christ did increase, yet to him it John 3. 29, 30.
was the fulfilling of his joy, to see the people flow in unto Christ, when (as
the Bridegrooms friend) he could hear the Bride-groomes voice rejoicing with
his Bride: But, which is more, thy peace shall be concurrent with Zions peace,
the Lord will satiate every afflicted soul, in the day when he refreshes Zion;
let this therefore draw out all your hearts and bowels. Remember an argument
God uses in the 29 of Jeremy, to them that were captives in Babylon, Seek the
peace of the City whither I have caused you Jer. 29. 7.
to be carried captives, and pray unto the Lord for it, for in the peace
thereof ye shall have peace* What, must they pray for Babylons peace? for
Nebuchadnezzars peace? that like a Dragon had swallowed them, and like a Lion
had crushed their bones? Yes, pray for the peace of that kingdom, because in
the peace of that Kingdom you shall have peace. O how much more should every
one help forward Zions peace, thy mothers peace, the Spouse of Christ's peace,
because thy soul shall never have so much grace, thou shall never be so holy,
thy children never so blessed, all about thee never made so happy, as when the
Lord God shall build up Zion; therefore O pray for the Peace of Zion, they
Psalm. 1. 32. 6, 7.
shall all prosper who love her, as he said there, For my brethren and
companions sake, I will now say, Peace be within thee: So say thou, for my own
sake, for my children and companions sake, I will seek to do thee good:
especially let it prevail with you, Honorable and Beloved, you noble Patriots
and Parliament men, further it with all your might, Go up into the mountain,
cut down wood, build the house, that Haggai 1. 8. Mal. 3. 10.
God may take pleasure in it, and prove God, whether upon your selves and
families he pour not out a blessing without measure: you little imagine what a
blessing the Lord will give, when once this work is done; it may shatter and
hazard some things, carnal friends and secret enemies may fall off from you,
but your labor will be rewarded abundantly. I humbly commend this to your
wisdoms and faithfulness, God has called you to this work, it would be your
great glory to have it done in your hands, and it would not be for your honor
to have it done by other hands, but done it will be, I assure you, the Church
will be reformed; If you should altogether neglect it, sit still and hold your
peace, or if you should make but a half work of it, a patched reformation,
help and deliverance will come Hester. 4. 14.
from some other place: No stone great enough could be laid in the mouth of
Christ's sepulcher to keep him from rising, nor can any power prevent the
building of Zion, when the appointed time is come, no not though all the
Nations of the earth should be gathered together against it, The remnant of
Jacob shall be as a dew from the Lord, as the showers upon the grass, that
tarryeth not for man, nor waits Zach, 12. 3. Micah 58.
for the Sons of men; the work is upon the wheels, and there is one engine at
work that will effect it, if all others fail, and that is the spirit of
Prayer; which what efficacy it has for the building of Zion, will appear in
the last branch of my Text.

And that is the matter wherein God will regard their 3 Consider this promise
of Gods regarding the prayers of the destiture, in respect of the thing wherein
they shall be regarded.
prayer, When the Lord builds up Zion, he will regard the prayer of the
destitute, that is, hereby it shall appear, that he regards their prayer,
because at their prayer he will do it; it shall be done as the fruit and
effect of his peoples prayers: which affords us this Doctrine.

That the Lord will have the building of Zion, the reforming, Last Doctr. The
building up of Zion, the fruit of Gods peoples prayers, proved,
and repairing of the Church, to be the fruit of his peoples prayers; this is
the main scope, then God regarded their Prayers, when he makes all the world
know that at their request, and for their prayers sake, he did now arise in
glory to build up Zion; the truth of this excellent lesson will appear, even to
a demonstration, if you please but briefly to consider these three things:

First, Gods Providence speak it so. Secondly, and so do his Commands. And
Thirdly, his Promises.

First, His Providence speak it; there are two Providence 1 From Gods
Providence.
of God, use to appear at the building of Zion; which alone were sufficient to
show that Prayer is the great builder on our part, that it is indeed all that
we can do; God usually lets it come to such irrecoverable ruin, that nothing
we can do, besides prayer, is able to do any thing, that it may appear that on
our part prayer does all, Nil nisi vota supersunt. When all other Anchors are
come home, when all other Cables are brok, when all other friends have
forsaken, and all props snapped apeeces, that either prayer must do it, or
they have nothing; that is the time he ordinarily chooses to build up Zion, as
himself said Deuteronomy. 32. When he saw Deuteronomy. 32. 36.
their strength was gone, there was none shut up or left, who might be a
helper, then he himself would judge his people and repent him for his
servants. So when they were as a woman with child, near the time of delivery,
the children come to the birth, and no strength to bring forth, not any in the
earth to be a deliverer, then they cry unto the Lord, and he delivers them;
this is so plentifully Esa. 16, 17, 18.
to be found in the Scripture, that I may forbear (especially in these
straights of time) to produce particular instances.

Secondly, The other providence is this:

That when God builds up Zion, he then uses to power out the Spirit of Prayer
upon his people, more then at any other times, he then fills them with his
Spirit, which inclines their hearts to be vehement, and earnest with him for
that very thing. Zephyrus vere flat, this gale never blows so sweetly as at
such times, Jer. 29. Then you Jer. 29. 11.
shall pray, and I will answer; In that day he powers out the Spirit of
supplication and mourning upon all his people; Then he makes all his people say
with them, Esa. 62. 1. For Zions sake I will not hold my peace, and for
Hierusalems Zach, 12. Esa. 62. 1.
sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as
brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burns. And this is so
sure a note of it, that Gods people durst make Prophetical conclusions out of
the Spirit of Prayer powered out, as in this very Psalm, The Psalm. 102. 13.
time to deliver her, the set time is come; How know you that? Thy servants
pity the dust of it, thy servants are weeping and mourning before thee;
therefore the time of Zions deliverance is come; take all the times of building
the Church, and you shall see that great builders have been great praying men;
Moses the great builder could fall down before God forty days and forty nights
together; Deuteronomy. 9. 8.
David, Solomon, Elias, Ezra, Nehemiah, all their prayers built more then their
hands did; Luther a mighty man in it, and the Ministers who joined with him,
indefatigable and potent in prayer; yea, the Spirit of Prayer uses to ebb and
flow in the Church, according as God purposes to retard, or hasten the work of
the building of the Church; insomuch as the Spirit of God, drawing out the
hearts of his people, to do that which he would have done, does Prophecy or
foretell what God means to do.

There uses to be such a concord and harmony between Gods secret purposes and
his peoples Prayers, their prayers as such expressions of his sacred will, that
they even seem to decree a thing by Prayer, and God establishes it in Heaven:
the prayers of Gods people for the building of Zion, is as a John Baptist
before Christ, only makes way for him, as the Morning star, which assures you
the morning is at hand: Now these two Providence, Gods doing it at such a
time, as they have nothing left but prayer, and this pouring out the Spirit of
prayer at that time, do sufficiently tell us, that God will have prayer to be
the great Builder on our part.

Secondly, His Commands speak it as plainly; this is a good rule in Divinity;
Look whatsoever God Almighty 2 From his command.
commands us chiefly to do in reference or relation to such a work, that
would he have us look upon as the great instrument on our part, to effect it:
as when God commands us to believe, for the forgiveness of sins, you may
thence conclude that Faith is the great instrument of our Justification; So
when God commands us to attend upon the word, for our Spiritual life, for our
comfort, for our edification, you may boldly conclude, that the ministry of
the Word, is to be the great instrument of all these things; And therefore
because God above all that we can do, commands that his people should pray for
the building of Zion, you may conclude that he will have prayer the great
instrument on their part, for the building of it. And God has abundantly
enjoined his people that they call upon him for it; You shall call upon me,
Jeremiah 29. Then you shall call upon me, and I will do it at your call; and
the 36 of Ezekiel; All Jer. 29. 11.
this will I do, (says God) but for all this, you shall pray to me, I will
be sought at your hands for them; So again, Psalm. 122. Oh pray for the peace
of Jerusalem, and Jer. 51. 50. Let Jerusalem come into your mind, and Esa.
62. You Psalm. 122. 6. Jer. 51. 50.
that make mention of the Lord, give him no rest till he establish, and till
he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. And then*

Thirdly, His Promises are innumerable, he has said 3 From his promises.
directly, when they do pray for it, he will not fail to perform it to them;
then you shall call, and I will answer, and then, you shall seek me, and I
will be found of you, says the Lord, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, They
shall prosper. 1 King. 8. 46. If Gods people be carried away captive, etc. and
in their bondage pray to him, he will hear, he will return them, His eyes
shall be open night and day, to their supplication, to hearken unto them in
all that they call for. Insomuch that by virtue of these promises, which God
has made to prayer, for the building of Zion, we may conclude a kind of
Omnipotency in prayer; because it can rule that hand that is Omnipotent; Prayer
can wrestle with God, and by his own Hose. 12. 4 with Genesis 32. 26.
strength prevail over him, and (with reverence we speak it) he cannot stand
before the power of it, he could not waste his Church unless Moses would give
Exo. 32. 10. 14
over praying, Let me alone that I may destroy them, and when he would not
let him alone, he yielded to him. And therefore himself says, if it concern
my Sons and Daughters, command me, ask me any thing. The time would fail,
and I might weary you with delight, to tell you what admirable effects prayer
has had in this kind, what Armies it has overthrown, what unexpected
blessings it has seasonably brought in, what dry bones it has raised, what
weak builders it has helped, when they have been reforming the Church; how it
has stayed the Sun, turned the Sea backward, chained Kings and their Nobles,
with fetters of iron; There is nothing that the hand of God can do, but when
the spirit stirs his people to pray, in relation to the Church, all shall be
done; insomuch as it is noted of Luther, that when once in great danger, God
powered upon him, and the rest of his company, a spirit to pray instantly and
servently, when they had done praying, he cried out, Vicimus, we have got the
day; for he knew that God was engaged; so that if you lay these things
together, the Providence of God ordering it so, that there uses to be no
other means left but prayer, and furnishing them with abundance of the spirit
of prayer, and commanding them to use it, and engaging himself to do it, you
may boldly conclude that the Lord will have prayer the great means of the
Churches building.

Now if you demand, Why, or wherefore is it that prayer should be able to do
so much?

I answer, The truth is, it is God alone does all, and he takes none in to help
him, propter indigentiam, but propter mun-ficentiam, it is not for his need,
but for his glory, that he will have any helpers: Now besides all you hear
before, concerning the prayers of the afflicted, that it is Gods Spirit prays
in them, and they are his Children, and Christ their Mediator, and his
promises are made to them, I say, besides all these, there are two other great
Reasons, why God has made over the building of the Church, unto Prayer; so far
as the Creature shall have any thing to do with it.

One is, because this way only is suitable with his glory, Reason 1. This way
God provides, that himself alone shall have the glory.
he cannot take any to be partners with him in any work, with preservation of
his own Majesty and glory, save only humble supplicants, any partner but prayer
would lessen him; But this well-becomes the Majesty and greatness of God to
take in such helpers.

For first, it magnifies his free grace wonderfully, that he will please to do
it, when his partners in the work shall not be able to plead any thing they
have contributed, but tears and supplications; And whereas some demand whether
freegrace would not be more magnifyed, if God did it without prayer?

I Answer, Gods free grace is many ways manifested, and magnifyed in his
regarding of his peoples prayers, sometimes his free grace prevents our
prayers, vouchsafing us what we never prayed for or thought of, He does above
what we are able to ask or think, sometimes in exceeding our prayers, He
asked life of thee, and thou gave him Ephesians. 3. 20. Psalm. 21. 3. 1 Kin. 3.
12. 13.
length of days for ever and ever, Solomon asked wisdom, and God gave him
wisdom, riches, and honor, sometimes he as much magnifies his free grace in
crossing our prayers. So he did Moses in his suite to go over Jordan, and
Paul's in being delivered from the messenger of satan, it being best for them
both to be denied. But oftentimes God manifests and magnifies his free grace
more, by doing it at the prayers of his people, then if he did it without them;
because he does thereby show his free grace as well to their requests, as to
their need; As if a friend should supply my need, it is a great favor, but if
he will please to show his love to my petition, as well as his compassion to my
need, it is a double favor; So God shows a double free grace, when he is
pleased to let such a great work be done at the request of poor contemptible
sinners, that are fit for nothing but death and destruction. With men (it may
be) he who asks often and long for such things as men can give, pays very dear
for them, but it is not so betwixt God and man: the least favor which God can
give (though granted upon long suite) must needs be acknowledged a free favor
to such ill-deserving creatures as we are, and to have his favors conveyed
in a way of prayer, no ways derogates from the freeness of the mercy,
especially because our prayers are so weak and poor, and the mercies of God
(especially this of building up of Zion) so great, that I cannot say whether he
be a more silly or proud fool, that will not confess that God casts in the
mercy gratis, though he have cast in his prayers: yea, that the mercy is the
greater, when it is done with any respect to his supplications.

And then besides, God provides for his glory herein for time come; for you
shall find, the Lord is wonderful jealous of using any instruments, who will
be prone to come to share with him in his glory; he loves not to set such
instruments a work, as will ingrave their own name into the work that shall be
erected: and therefore when Gideon had an Army of two and thirty thousand, I
will not use these, (says God) they will be like enough to say, Our own hand
has saved us; He will have such instruments of whom he will be sure they shall
not offer to lay claim to his glory; Now brethren) God is wholly confident of
Prayer, that it will never undermine him in his glory, he has no jealousy of
it; but what he does to the weeping eye, and the mourning heart, at their
humble request, when they have got the thing, all the glory which they will
desire is, to come back again, and cry, Grace, Grace, all was grace, all was
favor. Thus praying David, when he had dedicated one thousand three hundred
cart load of silver and gold, toward the building of Gods house, all the glory
he took to himself, was but to admire Gods goodness in giving him a heart to
offer it, and that God was pleased to accept it at his hands. who am I Lord,
that I should have a heart to give any thing to thee? of thy own have I given
thee; Thus will Prayer give God all the glory; But when mercies are not fetched
in by prayer, ordinarily God has little praise for them, either they are
imputed to chance or industry, friends, or wit, or one creature or other, these
rather wears the glory then God, but mercies wone by prayer, are worn with
thankfulness, it always lays the creature low, and exalts free grace highly:
This is one reason why prayer is so effectual in this great work. Another is,

Hereby he does greatly honor his people, he puts a great deal of glory
upon his Servants, when he Reason 2. For his servants glory.
is pleased as at their request, to lay the foundation of a new Heaven, and a
new Earth: This is a great honor to them, to be thus owned by him to be such
powerful advocates; When Job friends came to make their peace with God, and
God would not accept them, until Job prayed for them; Go to my Servant Job,
and he shall pray Job. 42. 8.
for you, for him will I accept, else I shall deal with you according to your
folly. Was not this a mighty honor put upon Job? When God told Abimelech that
he and his Genesis 20* 7.
house were but dead men, unless Abraham prayed for them, did he not thereby
highly honor his servant? When Ahashuerosh takes Queen Esther to him, and bids
her ask to the half of his Kingdom, and at her request grants her her life,
and the lives of all her people, it was a great honor he put upon her; So God
hereby magnifies his love to his: that they may have his ear, and be able to
do such great things with him.

And besides, as it is a glory to them, so it makes the building up of Zion,
infinitely more comfortable and useful And benefit.
to them; any thing that a gracious heart has obtained by prayer, it prizes so
much the more, we will know how we part with what we came hardly by; When
Moses could tell the people, such a time I fell down before God for you, forty
days and forty nights, and such a time I besought the Lord for you; he knew
the worth of those mercies, and tasted the comfort of them; When the Saints can
say: this we begged at Gods hands, and this we sought God for, it will
infinitely engage their spirits to value it, and walk worthy of it: And not
only so, but their sweetness and comfort in the use of it, will be the
greater when they shall see the travail of their soul, it is a great
satisfaction to them; Bathsheba much rejoiced in Solomon, and Hannah in Samuel,
and Sarah in Isaac, because they were the Sons of their vows, Prove. 31. 2. 1 Samuel 2.
of their prayers, as well as of their womb.

Many excellent Uses may be made of this Doctrine, I shall endeavor to press
two or three which are most seasonable, and then I have done.

Is the building up of Zion the fruit of Gods peoples Application. 1.
Instruction, what under God has been our greatest help, even the prayers of
Gods people.
prayers? Is prayer the great Master Builder on earth? then I beseech you learn
to whom and what under God, we may most of all attribute the several mercies
and deliverances which we have received. It is true, God only has been our
help, every stone which has been laid into this building is an Eben-Ezer; we
may write upon every stone, Hitherto God has helped us, but among all our
friends on earth none to be compared with prayer. God has poured out a Spirit
of prayer upon his people, Old men, Maids, and Servants, as well as Ministers,
and Gentlemen, and Noblemen, all that fear God, have been knocking at heaven
gates with all intensenesse of Spirit, with all earnestness, that God would
save poor England, and build up his Church amongst us; and give me leave to say
it, without derogating from any of your worth, under God we have been most
beholding to prayer: Mistake me not, I know there are worthy ones amongst us,
that have done excellently; many of our Nobles have done worthily, many of this
honorable Assembly have been excellent instruments, many of our Soldiers,
Counselors, Ministers, Citizens, and Commons, have willingly put all they have
into this great Lottery, and when the Lord comes to reckon up his helpers, not
one of them shall be forgotten, not a night they have watched, not a journey
you have took, not a drop of blood they have spent, not an estate any of you
have hazzarded, not any pains you have took, which the Lord God will forget,
but he will remember all; and your selves in heaven, and it may be your
posterity on earth, shall know that God has associated you with himself to
help forward this great work; but for all this, when all is done, let us say,
Saul has slain his thousands, but David his ten thousands; All these have
done worthily, but among all prayer has done the greatest of all the rest: How
often has prayer fetched God into our Armies, and rallied them again after
they were routed, and given us the day after we had lost it? How often have
Moses hands lift up upon the Mount, helped Joshua fighting in the valley, and
covered his head in the day of battle? How often has prayer brought God
amongst our Counselors, when they have been at a loss, and directed them,
and discovered some desperate plot, turned the counsels of Achitophel into
foolishness? How many in every place (who have served the Lord in this great
work) has prayer helped at a dead lift? Prayer has hitherto saved the
kingdom. I remember a proud boast of our enemies, when we had lost Bristoll
and the Vies, they then sent abroad even into other kingdoms, a triumphant
paper, wherein they concluded all was now fubdued to them, and among many other
confident expressions there was one to this purpose, Nil restat superare Regem,
etc. which might be construed two ways, either thus, There remains nothing
for the King to conquer, but only the prayers of a few fanatic people; or
thus, There is nothing left to conquer the King, but the prayers of a few
fanatic people, every thing else was lost, all was now their own: And indeed
we were then in a very low condition, our strong holds taken, our Armies melted
away, our hearts generally failing us for fear, multitudes flying out of the
Kingdom, and many deserting the cause as desperate, making their peace at
Oxford, nothing almost left us but preces and lachrymae; but blessed be God,
prayer was not conquered, they have found it the hardest wall to climb, the
strongest Brigade to overthrow, it has hitherto preserved us, it has raised
up unexpected helps, and brought many unhoped for successes and deliverances;
let us therefore under God let the Crown upon the head of prayer, ye Nobles
and Worthies, be ye all content to have it so, it will wrong none of you in
your deserved praise, God and man will give you your due, Many of you have done
worthily, but prayer surpasses you all: and this is no new thing, prayer has
always had the pre-eminence in the building of Zion, God has reserved
several works for several men and several ages, but in all ages, and among
all men, prayer has been the chiefest instrument, especially in the building
up of Zion.

Let me in the next place show you what esteem you should all have of prayer,
and praying men, who have liberty Use 2. In what high esteem prayer and praying
men ought to be.
to have the Lords ear, who have the Spirit of prayer powered down upon them;
while you live have them in high esteem: what David said of Goliahs sword,
There is none to it, is true here, No help like the help of prayer. There are
four things wherein prayer is beyond all other Four things wherein prayer is
more excellent then all other helps.
helps whatsoever: The one is,

It is the most absolute, the most universal medicine in the World, it is a
Catholicon, it is good for every thing, it is offensive and defensive, it will
do good in the Army, in 1.
the Parliament house, in the Assembly, in the City, every It is a most
universal remedy. 1 Kings 8 33, ad fir em.
where: Solomon teaches this 1 Kings 8. from the 33 to the latter end of it:
whatsoever plague, whatsoever sickness, whatsoever other evil, of pestilence,
war, famine, if they pray, help will come; it is of such a large extent, there
is no enemy but it will conquer, no sore but it will cure, no misery but it
will heal, no danger but it will prevent or remove; the healing tongue of
prayer is like the Tree of Life, which heals every disease: Others may Pro.
15. 4.
be good for something, but Prayer for every thing.

Nay, secondly, it is not only a help in any evil, but in 2.
any extremity of evil: A man, a State, a Church, a People, It will help in any
extrem^ty.
can be in no such extremity, as to be past prayers help; if prayer takes them
in hand there is help for them: if God pour out the Spirit of prayer, if Esaias
can lift up a Prayer, when the child is come to the birth, and no strength to
bring forth, prayer will do it. I have read of a stone, I think they call it
Dioscordis, that if it be put into the mouth of one newly dead, it will revive
him again: I know not how true that is, but certainly there is no extremity so
great but prayer may help, if any help may be found in heaven or earth. And
then thirdly,

It will help at any distance: They talk of some kind of Weapon-salve, that
will cure at a great distance, but 3.
It helps at any distance.
prayer will do any thing at any distance. Look what is said of God in the 139
Psalm, If you go into heaven, or Psalm. 139. 8, 9.
hell, or the utmost parts of the sea, or any of the corners of the earth, Gods
hand reaches there, and elsewhere; he is a God afar off as well as a God at
hand: the same may we say of prayer, it will pass through sea and land, relieve
any distressed garrison, strengthen any of our Armies. They say Archimedes
could sit in his Study, and with his Engines defend Syracusa both by sea and
land; this may a praying man do upon his knees in his Closet, he may bring
help unto the uttermost parts of the world. And then

It is speedy, it will help at an instant; it is like Elias his 4.
cloud, which his man saw when he was at prayer for rain, It is the most speedy
help.
a little cloud like a hand, which presently spread over all the heavens: the
Angel Gabriel could not fly more swiftly, then prayer will fly to help at any
extremity, at any distance. O that these things were studied and believed, how
highly should we then esteem it! what encouragement then should we give to
prayer and praying men! how much would we then endeavor to have our Armies
furnished with praying Ministers and Soldiers? all your Garrisons, Assemblies,
Committees, well stocked and stored with praying Saints? nothing would be too
hard for them: you would, if you rightly consider this, be more careful to
keep them all in a posture of prayer, then in a posture of defense.

Lastly, with which I shall end, because God will have prayer the great means
of building up the Church, I most Use 3. Exhortation to all who can pray, to
ply the throne of grace
earnestly beseech you that this means may never be wanting in any of you, who
have it to contribute: O, pray, pray, pray, do not withdraw from it, use it as
the first, and last, and best remedy of all others, turn not your back upon
it: O do not as (men say) some great ones do, make the days of prayer, and
the times of prayer, the times they choose for their own pleasures, or
business, and thereby plainly discover themselves to be of Machiavels
religion, who counsels a Prince to set up a show of Religion ad captandum
populum, to awe their people, but themselves not to be under such rules: let us
really attend it, and give God no rest night nor day, until he establish our
Jerusalem a praise in the earth; and this every one of you who are godly may
do: Every one has not money to contribute, nor strength, nor wisdom, but
every gracious heart can pray; there is not a Maid, not an Apprentice, not a
Servant, not the meanest in the Congregation, that has the Spirit of God in
them, but is this thing, you may come in to be Master Builders; you may do as
much as any Parliament Man, or Assembly-man, or any whatsoever, if the Lord
give you but a praying heart; therefore I beseech you follow this work. Two
Motives I propound to quicken you, the one is, 1.


We may justly say, our prayers hitherto have not had Motives thereunto.
a miscarrying womb, nor dry breasts, we may say with the Psalmist, Verily God
has heard us, he has attended to 1.
Prayer has done much already. Psalm. 66. 19. Jonah 2. 7.
the voice of our prayers: and with Johan, When our soul fainted within us we
remembered God, and our prayer came in unto him. Never had an unworthy people
more experience of the power of prayer then we have had: The Romans once in a
great distress, took the weapons out of the Temple of their God, and with them
got a glorious victory over their enemies; O how many victories have these
Sanctuary-weapons obtained for us! he is a blind man who sees not visible
returns of prayer; and God has so ordered our affairs, that what the noble
General said at the first victory we obtained at Edgehill, That there was
never any thing wherein there was less of man, and more of God: So in most of
our businesses we may truly say, Man has failed, and God has helped, that
is, prayer has prevailed: you have a good handsell; a good encouragement to
go on. Secondly,

And truly our extremities and difficulties are such, which yet remain to be
conquered, as can be overcome 2.
Our need as great as ever.
by nothing but prayer: All your Learning, Counsel, Strength, your Wisdom,
your Treasure, and what ever else you have to contribute, are not like to
deliver us, unless prayer bring God in for our helper. You know the Kingdom
is brought low, and though we have a considerable strength both in the Army,
the City, and the Navy, yet you know divided Kingdoms do not stand, and God
has for our sins brought this great judgment upon us, that we are divided and
subdivided into minutula frustula, into the least bits of all, in Church and
State, every where there are heart-burnings, divisions among our selves, and a
potent enemy very vigilant to take advantage, and many Malignants every where,
ready to blow up and increase our distractions; many men's estates undone, and
brought to poverty and beggary, and if these bloody wars continue, ere long
famine and desolation will come upon us, beside all the guilt of our former and
later provocations: these all are visible before your eyes, and all your helps
are not like to do it suddenly, unless God come in, unless prayers fetch him
down: Therefore pray (I beseech you Noblemen, Gentle-women, and all other)
pray, pray, follow the Lord, and remember this is the Strong helper, which must
save, or we perish; we have as much need of prayer as ever we had, therefore
you who are the Lords remembrancers, and have his ear, ply the Throne of grace
diligently, let not your heart grow sluggish, remember what the Prophet said
unto the King, who smote with the arrows three times, and then stayed, Thou
should have smitten five or 2 King. 13. 19
six times, and then thou should utterly have smitten Syria, till thou
had consumed it: Say thou so to thy own heart, Thou should in these days
have prayed 10000 times more then thou have done, go on now with it, humbly
spread our sad condition before him, plead with him daily, thou can not want
arguments; tell him it is his own cause, we are engaged by him, and for him;
tell him how long, and how much his people have suffered under their
oppressors, and how violently they rise up still to spoil all; that there are
abundance of his Saints engaged in this work, and they will never give him
rest, till he have set up Jerusalem to be a praise upon the whole earth: and
when the unworthiness of the Kingdom comes in, and objects against us, that
we are a sinful wretched Kingdom, fit to be destroyed, you may still find
answers and arguments enough in Gods grace and favor: He has begun to build,
and surely he will not be like the foolish builder, that begun and then gave
over; he himself blames them who go about a work and not go through with it;
tell him, we will give him all the glory of it, and serve him better if he will
give us grace; that if our enemies prevail it will be worse with his people
then ever, his name will be more dishonored then ever. Thus follow him with a
mourning heart, and a melting eye, and do it constantly, do it daily; I
confess these monthly Fasts are grown to a most wretched formality in many
places, the Lord of heaven teach us how we may be more quickened in this great
work of prayer; and let every one who has any interest in heaven, remember
Bradfords usual Motto and exhortation, Pray, pray, pray.

But before I dismiss you, I must put in this caution; A caution to be
remembered, not every man, not every prayer will do it.
You must not think every man, and every prayer will be thus effectual; Alas,
no: here are (it may be) three or four thousand people at Church, God only
knows whether every fourth man has a praying Spirit; It is 1. Not every Man.
not every man who will pretend to pray, whom God will accept: When they fast
(says God of the wicked Israelites, Jeremy chap. 4.) I will not hear their
cry; when Jer. 14. 12.
they offer an oblation I will not accept them, but I will consume them: Do
not (I beseech you) think that the prayers of Blasphemers, and Drunkards, and
Whoremasters, and Scorners of God and Religion, of those that pretend to be for
him and are against him, do not (I say) imagine that God will regard such as
these are, though they cry, Arise and save us; I will not say to these men,
Pray not, but I will say to them as Peter did to Simon Magus, Pray, if it may
be possible, that the thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee, for thou art
in the gall of bitterness; but be you assured that these men's prayers will not
come into the shot of those that shall build Gods Church, or deliver us; No,
no, the Philosopher could teach thus much, who when they were at Sea in a
Tempest, and all went to their prayers, and among the rest a profligate wicked
wretch amongst them went to his prayers, the Philosopher called to him, Hold
thy peace, lest the Gods hear thee, and drown us all for thy sake. He who
would be one of this number whose prayers shall come before God, must be
acquainted with God; Acquaint thy self with God, be at peace with him, then
thou shall make thy prayer to Job. 22. 21, 27.
him, and he shall hear thee, but these men have no acquaintance with him, he
will say to them as the evil Spirit said to the sons of Sceva, Paul I know,
but who are ye? so the Lord will say, Prayer I know, but what are ye? Do you
whore, and drink, and swear, and lie, and abuse my Name and Ordinances, and
think you of praying? No, no (beloved) these are not the people, believe it
they are not, they are the prayers of his Saints, and of his Saints only,
which he regards. 2. Not every Prayer.
And then secondly, as it is not every man, so it is not every prayer will do
it; I know it may be a weak prayer, a prayer where there may be very weak
utterance, weak gifts, and weak judgment and memory, yet it may be accepted,
God knows how to interpret the meaning of his own Spirit in them; but they
must not be dead prayers, livelesse, formal, slight, perfunctory, customary
prayers, not the saying over of prayer, as if a Lesson were only read out of a
book, without spirit, understanding, devotion; but prayer must be prayer, it
must be the pouring out the soul, it must be fervent prayer, it must be humble
Psalm. 102. Title Jam. 5. 6. 1 Timothy 2. 8. Heb. 10. 22. Psalm. 66. 19. Ezekiel. 14, 4.
prayer, it must be from a pure heart, and faith unfeigned, it must be prayer
offered up in the name of Christ, in the strength of the Covenant of grace;
these things must at least be aimed at and endeavored in prevailing prayers.
These things deserve to be prosecuted more fully, but I fear I have already
transgressed upon your patience by the length of my Sermon, I commend it to
your thoughts, and let us by prayer commend it and our selves to God, that we
may join with them, and be numbered among them whose prayers he will hear for
the building up of Zion.

FINIS.

