The just measure of A Personal Treaty BETWEEN The KINGS Majesty, And both
Houses of PARLIAMENT.

Grounded on Divinity, Reason, History, Divine and Humane, Common and Civil
Laws; with many other authentic Authors.

By R. M. of the middle Temple, Esquire.

Printed in the Year 1648.

The just measure of a personal Treaty between the Kings Majesty, and both
Houses of Parliament.
There are these only ways to reform these innovations, and to prevent the
ruin of the Kingdom.

1. By a personal Treaty, and how conditioned. 2. If that may not be obtained
so qualified from the Houses, it is lawful to levy War against them, and
that War is hereby proved just.
A Personal Treaty between His Majesty and the two Houses of Parliament,
would be a Sovereign remedy against the innovations and growing evils of this
Kingdom, and an assured means to settle a firm peace in it; provided, that
this Treaty be thus qualified, both for the manner and matter of it; for if it
be otherwise, I am much afraid it will prove both unprofitable and
ineffectuall. First, it ought to be when his Majesty is free and at liberty,
without any preingagement on his Majesty's part, either by concession of any
thing which they demand, as an inducement thereunto, at least of the most
material things which the Treaty should consist of, such as the Militia, the
settling of Presbyteriall Government, and the rest now lately offered to his
Majesty to be granted unto them; for until his Majesty be set free and at
liberty, without any conditions preceding unto it, His Majesty cannot properly
or securely (for the good of the people) treat of any matter conducing to a
Peace; Grotius de jure belli and pacis, lib. 3. cap. 10. sect 3.
Nam (as learned Grotius says) Rex qui aetatis est ejus quae judicii
maturitatem non habet, qui imminutae mentis est, qui captivus, aut exul, pacem
facere non potost. A King that is under age of an infirm mind, a captive or an
exile, cannot treat of, or conclude a peace: And else where, Grotius lib. 3.
cap. 20. sect. 2
Sicut Rex infans jus habet, sed imperium exercere non potest, sic furiosus and
captivus: As a King that is an infant has right to govern, but cannot exercise
his dominion, no more can a King that is a mad man, or a Prisoner; and without
the King there can be no peace made, treated on, or concluded in this Kingdom:
for the King having by the Law of England the Sovereign or supreme power of
the Realm, as is amply manifested by the precedent discourse, he has the only
power to make peace and war, as the same Author observes, Grot. l. 3. c. 20.
Sect. 2
Pactiones inire quae bellum finiant, eorum est, quorum est bellum, Rei enim
suae quisque est moderator, unde sequitur, ut in bello utroque publico, hoc
eorum sit qui summum imperii exercendi jus habent: Regis igitur hoc erit in
statu vere regio, modo is Rex etiam jus non habet impeditum; It is their
office, and to them it belongs to make leagues or pactions to end a war, to
whom the right of making war belongs; for every one ought to be a moderator
in his own affair; from whence it follows, that in every public war, it
is their right to make war or peace which have the right to exercise the
sovereign power, therefore it is the Kings right only to make war or peace in
his Kingdom, so that the Kings right be not hindered in the exercise of it, that
is, by infancy, imprisonment, or the like infirmities aforesaid: this is the
judgment of a most learned man: what fruit then can be expected of or from a
Treaty with his Majesty dureing his restreint or imprisonment? certainly none:
nay if his Majesty should grant what they desire dureing his imprisonment, and
being enforced thereunto for his enlargement, what validity were there in such
a grant? certainly none, it being a clear truth as that great Lawyer Bracton
observes, Bract. l. 2 c. 5 sect. 14. f. 17.
Quod in nullo casu valet donatio cum quis fuerit in Prisona, vel quia hoc
facit per coactionem, and quia potestatem sui non habet, nec eorum quae sua
esse debent, potestatem habebit; and sicut ille qui in servitute fuerit, nihil
possidere poterit, quia possidetur; ita nec ille qui possidetur ab hostibus vel
detentus fuerit: a concession or grant is in no case valid so long as a man is
in prison, where he is in prison by force and not by right, where he is
enforced to make such grant, because he has not then the power of himself,
and having not power of himself he has not power of any thing that is his,
for as he which is in servitude can possess nothing because he is possessed, so
neither can he which is in the possession of his enemies or detained by them in
prison: neither can we from any rule of policy expect, that whatsoever the
King is enforced to grant by any restraint or coertion, if the grant were in it
self good, the thing could be of any continuance, since the nature of all
grants and accords is to be voluntary, therefore Clement Edmonds, in his
observations upon Caesar's Commentaries well notes; Clem. Edm. p. 629.
That no accord made by force can be truly kept, and Machiavel plainly excuses
the breach of them, saying, Match. Discourse upon Livy page 629.
that it is no dishonor to violate those promises, grants or accords, which by
force a man is constreined to make, and that promises or accords extorted
regarding the public, will be broken without the disgrace of him that breaks
them; upon this ground did the Estates g of France refuse to submit to that
accord and treaty of Peace made between K. Edward of England, and John King of
France, who was taken at the battle of Poitiers, and brought by King Edward
Prisoner into England; where the said treaty and accord was made during his
imprisonment; upon the like ground did King Francis the first of that name,
King of France, avoid his treaty and accord made which Charles the Emperor,
whilst he was Prisoner at Madrill in Spain, by which treaty he was obliged to
grant unto the Emperor all his right in the Duchy of Burgundy, which after he
was set at liberty he refused to do, because that accord was made during his
restreint. By these authorities and presidents I conclude, that it is necessary
that the King should be set at liberty before he can be in a condition to grant
or treat of any thing concerning the public order for the good of the
subject. The place where the treaty must be is also of consideration, for the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament can treat with the King in no other
place then in the Lords house at Westminster, the King sitting upon the Throne
or chair of State, they being no way enabled by the Law to treat with him in
any other place or manner; and in this place they are by the tenor of their
Writ, it being thus: Regist. Bri. Cooks Instit. 4. par. p.
Rex Vicecomiti salutem, quia nos de avisamento and assessensu Concilii nostri
pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis nostris, statum and defensionem
regni nostri Angliae, and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus, quoddam
Parliamentum apud Westmonast* teneri ordinaverimus, and sbid. cum Praelatis,
magnatibus and proceribus dicti regni nostri colloquium habere, and tractatum
etc. by this Writ the Lords have a power to treat with the King sitting in
their House, of matters concerning the defense of the Realm, and of the Church
of England, and the Commons may be present, and are to consent to what the King
and Lords shall agree of, and in no other manner or place can they legally, or
with their own safety treat with the King; for as free Princes or equals they
cannot treat with him, the Law having invested them with no such powers or
dignities, the King being caput Regni, and by the Law endowed with the
Sovereign power of the Realm, and they being but Subjects; and inferior to
him in all degrees, either of power or abilities whatsoever: In this capacity
therefore as free Princes or equals, they cannot treat with him, if they treat
with the King any where but in Parliament, and that of making of peace, which
is the ending of war already begun by them, and yet prosecuted against him
and his loyal Subjects. They must treat with him as his Subjects, and if as
his Subjects, they therein will accuse themselves to be Traitors, or Rebels,
in that they must treat of laying down those Arms that they have unlawfully
raised against him: Therefore if they would follow mine advice, they should
treat with His Majesty in no other place then the Lords House, and only of
those things that by their Writ they are enabled to, viz. De arduis and
urgentibus negotiis, Regem, statum and defensionem Regni Angliae, and Ecclesiae
Anglicanae concernentibus: Of those things that cencerne the preservation and
defense of the King, his state and dignity, and of the Realm and Church of
England, and not to consult of a means, or to demand those things that tend to
the ruin and destruction of them all. But in case the two Houses will not
admit the King to come to the Lords House to treat with them, or that if they
should, they demand of him those things that he neither can or ought to grant
or part withal, (as the Militia, his Negative voice, or the destruction of the
Church) being entrusted with them by God, and the Laws, for the good of the
people committed to his charge, and for whom he must give an account to God:
The Question will then properly fall out to be in the next place, Whether the
people of England may not justly levy War against them? and whether the War
be not just? which Question I shall hold affirmatively: Each War ought to
have its foundation in reason, and force employed to a right use is no other
then a servant to reason; if then the two Houses shall deny a personal Treaty
to his Majesty so qualified as aforesaid, whereby the Kingdom may be
preserved from ruin, it is agreeable to right reason, that the people should
use force, and levy war upon them, to enforce them thereunto: for when
ordinary remedies do fail, by the rule of right reason men are warranted and
bound for their own preservation, to recurre to extraordinary means,
provided, that they be in themselves lawful; and therefore since the Houses
have denied the King a personal Treaty de integro, tying him up to terms of
condescension to the most weighty matters, which should be the subject of the
Treaty, before they will entertain a Treaty with him for the rest, (which can
be only of matters of small or no importance) His Majesty having granted the
things they demand of him beforehand, the people may aid the King, who is by
the Law their only protector, with their Arms, for regaining their own
lawful Liberties, and His Majesty's just Rights, which will never be restored
unto them by petitioning, or any other civil course, and therefore Grotius
says, Vbi judicia deficiunt, incipit bellum, Gro. l. 2. c. 1. sect. 2.
where legal or civil remedies are wanting, or denied, War may justly begin:
Plerique (says the same Author) bellorum tres statunnt causas justas,
defensionem, recuperationem rerum, and punitionem: Most men do determine these
three causes of War to be just, defense of themselves, recovery of their
goods, or estates, and punishment for injuries done; for as S. Augustine Aug de
fivit Dei, l. 4.
says, Injuria partis adversae, justa bella ingerit; an injury done by the
Adverse Party does ground a just War; and what are just Wars, he tells us
in another place, Aug. l. 6. 9, 10.
Justa bella definiri solent, quae ulciscuntur injurias; those are just wars
which are levied to punish great injuries: let all the world then judge,
whether according to these rules, the Prince and the people of England, have
not just cause to take Arms; the injury done to the person of his Royal
Father, is reputed to be done to the Prince himself; the Prince then in
defense of his Fathers person by force oppressed, for the redemption of it forth
of prison, for their recovery of the rights and revenues of the Crown, usurped
and violated against all law and right, by those what were called together to
advise the best they could for it, and have no manner or color of Title unto
it, for the restoring of the people unto their ancient Laws and Liberties, so
much trodden upon and trampled under foot by those men, who should be the
chief preservers of them, and for the resetling of men in their own proper
offices, estates and goods, whereof they have been so illegally disseised,
sequestered, divested, robbed, and dispossessed of. And last of all, to bring
the Ringleaders of these so great evils, innovations, iniquities, and
injuries, to restitution and condign punishment; and as the Prince, so have
the People, justifiable cause and warrant to take arms, and make war against
those robbers, oppressors, and usurpers, who have not only brought in all the
innovations and injuries aforesaid, imprisonments, taxes, arbitrary powers,
Excizes, contributions, impositions, benevolences, and myriads of evils, only
to enrich themselves, contrary to the known established and fundamental Laws
of England, and contrary to their promises and engagements to the people, to
whom they promised that their welfare should be their supreme Law, and care:
for as Plato says, Plato in Alcib.
Justa bella geri possunt, non modo si quis vi opprimatur aut expiletur,
verumetiam si deceptus fuerit: Just wars may be waged, not only, where a man
is oppressed by force or plunder of all he has, but also where he has been
cheated and cozened; have any people under heaven been so cheated and cozened
as the people of this nation have been cheated and cozened by those that usurp
the present Government? Did they not at first so creep and insinuate themselves
into the affections of the people, give out that they would make his Majesty
the most potent, rich and glorious King in Christendom, that they would make
the people a mighty, wealthy and flourishing people? that they would reform
all the abuses both in Church and State, and settle the three Kingdoms in a
firm and lasting peace? and have they not contrary to all their promises,
Protestations, and Declarations to this purpose, imprisoned his Majesty's
sacred person, deprived him of his power, robbed him of his Royal revenue, and
as much as in them lay, sought to weaken his Majesty's reputation, both with
his allies abroad, and amongst foreign Nations and Princes, and at home
amongst all his Subjects of his three Kingdoms, Have they not instead of
making the people of this Land a flourishing and wealthy people, weakened them
with a long barbarous and civil War, exhausted them with Contributions,
laden them with Taxes, polled them with Excize and benevolences, wearied them
with continual Impositions, and almost lost the reputation of the Nation in
all foreign parts? Have they not instead of reforming the abuses in Church
and State almost destroyed both, instead of Monarchy brought in an Anarchy in
the State, and instead of unity, and uniformity in the Church, let in accursed
Heresy, ugly multiformity, and fantastical unstable Independency? Nay, I
might say almost Turcisme, or Atheism. And to conclude, instead of settling the
peace of the three Kingdoms, have they not (though petitioned thereunto by many
Counties) refused to restore His Majesty, to disband their Army, by which they
resolve to govern and conquer the Kingdom, to keep the people in thraldom all
their lives; yea and cut the throats of all such, as shall come to Petition
them, as they did Surrey-mens, and do they not now make war upon Kent and
Essex in order to these ends? Let this be denied by any sober and indifferent
man, if he can: and being granted, I conclude infallibly upon all the rules and
grounds aforesaid, that it is lawful both for the Prince and people, if they
shall deny His Majesty a personal Treaty so qualified, as aforesaid, to make
war against them, and that such a war is just, Sapienti Sal. in orar. ad
Caesar.
est, says Salust, pacis causa bellum gerere, wise men make war to obtain
peace; and S. Augustine, Aug Ep. 1. ad Bonifac.
Non pacem quari ut bellum exerceatur, sed bellum geri, ut pax acquiratur, men
must not seek peace, to the end they may exercise war: but men must make
war that peace may be obtained. And to deal heartily with the world in this
point, mine own private opinion is, that a good and firm peace can never be
obtained in this Kingdom without a vigorous war well prosecuted on his
Majesty's behalf.

That by the Laws of God, of nature, and of England, the Subjects of England
are bound to rise, and join in Arms for the rescue and relief of the King out
of prison, and to follow the Prince or any other of the Kings Subjects, or
friends that shall take Arms for the King, and lead an Army to that purpose;
notwithstanding that they have not the Kings actual Commission.
FOr Subjects to imprison their King it is against all Laws, and especially the
Laws of England, and not only an injury to the Person of the King, but the
greatest prejudice that may be, to the right and interest of the Subject, for
since the Laws do tell us that, Hobarts Reports p. 218.
Rex est centrum and stabilimentum justitiae, the King is the Center and
support of justice, Plow. Com. 242. 12. H. 7. f. 17.
and that all administration of justice is both derived from him, and belongs
to him originally, Case de pen. Statutis. Cooks Repor.
and is inseparable from him, since the King is Beverleyes case. Cooks 4.
Reports. so. 124.
Caput and salus reipublicae, and a Capite bona valetudo transit in omnes; the
head and health of the Commonwealth, and from this head the health of all the
people is derived, Calvin's case. 7. par. Cooks Reports.
since that all protection of the people must come from the King, and none
other can protect the Subjects of the Kingdom, but the King alone, Hobarts
Reports. f. 112.
since the Law tells us that the reformation of all wrongs and injuries done to
the people belongs to the King, Plow. Com. 268.
since the King is the chief Captain of Chivalry within the Kingdom, Cooks
Com. sur Littleton. f. 75, 76. Calvin's case ubi supra.
since that the Militia does wholly belong unto him, and has so done to his
Royal Progenitors, ever sithence the reign of King Edward the Confessor,
Cooks Inst. 3. par. f 160. 201. Stat. of Northampton. ^. E. 3. c. 13.
and that no men may arm themselves in this Kingdom without the Kings assent,
Cooks Instit. 4. par. p. 91.
since that the King is subject to none within this realm, since that the Law
speaks it Hobarts Reports.
that access to the King may not be shut up from the Subjects, Cooks Instit.
4. par. p. 93.
which to do is a great presumption, since as Fortescue says, Fortescue c. 13.
Rex ad tutelam legis, corporum and bonorum erectus est, the King is ordained
for the preservation and defense of the Laws, and of men's bodies and goods,
and as Bracton notes, Bracton l. 2. p. 55. ch 24. Bract. l. 3. de astionibus.
Vt populus sibi traditus a Deo in pace sileat and quiescat, ne quis alterum
verberet, vel male tractet, ne quis alienam rem per vim vel per roberiam
auferet vel asportet, ne quis hominem mahemiet vel occidat; That the people
committed unto him by God may rest in peace and quiet, that one beat not, nor
evil entreat another, nor take and carry away another man's goods by force or
robbery, now called plunder, nor that any one of them kill and maime another;
and since, as the same Author says, Bract l. 2 ubi supra
Rex habet, etc. the King has all rights in his hand which belong unto the
Crown, all temporal power, that is the Militia, or the power over the people,
and the material Sword, which is necessary to the Government of the Kingdom,
and since that the King has the only Jurisdiction of Judgment within this
Kingdom, that thereby, as the Minister and Vicar or Vicegerent of God, he may
give and deliver to every man that which of right belongs unto him. It is not
only a most presumptuous offense against God and his Laws, a most injurious
violation to the Laws of this Realm, nay even to the Laws of nature, a most
barbarous and unparalleled affront to, and usurpation upon the Royal and
sacreo Majesty, but the most prodigious and destructive mischief to the
general peace, and public safety of his Majesty's Dominions, and the people
inhabiting in them, to imprison the King, to detain him in prison under strong
and military guards, to deny a personal Treaty with his Majesty for the
setting of the Kingdoms, though his Majesty has often sought it; and to vote
an order, that none of his Subjects shall make address unto him upon pain to
incur the punishment of High Treason: what is this but to displace Gods
Substitute? to rob the Almighty of the honor of appointing his own Deputy?
What is it but to subvert and overthrow the ancient and fundamental Laws of
England? to take away and utterly to destroy the Liberty and property of the
people of England? to strip and rob them of the Kings protection, the only
means to preserve them, their families and posterities in a desired peace and
an assured plenty, to the end, that they may pillage and plunder them of their
goods, disseize them of their estates and Lands, deprive them of their offices
and promotions, imprison their persons, nay take away their lives at pleasure
without impunity of the King* Bract. l. 4. c. 24. sect. 1.
Qui solam habet jurisdictionem ut delinquentes puniat and castiget, as
Braction for good Law assures us; Who has the only jurisdiction to punish and
chastise such Delinquents, and to protect his good people from such violence
and rapine: or without the reprehension of the ancient and established Laws of
England, which I am too much afraid they intend to lay aside, and subvert, and
never more to observe, as being oppositely contrary to all their actions and
purposes; What then? is there no legal remedy to prevent the Kingdoms
destruction? Yes there is, and if there were no more to be said in it or for
it, then that which these men laid down for a Maxim to ground all their
rebellious practices upon (falsely supposing causes of misgovernment in the
King, which the Kingdom now too sensibly feels under them, raising of
jealousies, and fomenting of fear where no fear was, yea even of the utter
ruin and destruction of the Kingdom, by the King, as they then falsely
alleged; but by their own actions have assured us will follow from
themselves) this their own Maxim I say might serve, Declar.
that a Kingdom must not be left without a means to preserve it self. This
mysterious rule were sufficient to warrant the whole Kingdom, in case they
will not admit the King to a personal Treaty, and restore him to his Rights,
Prerogatives, and Power of protecting his people, (to whom as a learned Author
in the Laws of England observes, Gervas. Tilburiensis in praefat. ad Hen. 2.
Ab ipso Deo singulariter ost credila cura subditorum: Even from God himself
the care of his Subjects are credited and committed) to rise up in Arms to
suppress and subdue them; but there are known Laws of England, and
sufficient Presidents to warrant such a proceeding: and without this manner of
acting, the work will never be done, but the Kingdom must ruin, Salus populi
est suprema Lex, the welfare of the people is the supreme Law, it is their own
Maxim, and we agree to it; but withal we say, with that learned Sir Edw. Cook
Cooks Reports Beverl. case ubi supra
Rex est caput and salus reipublicae, and a capite bona valetudo transit in
omnes; The King is the head and health of the Commonwealth, from whom all
welfare is derived to the people; therefore the welfare of the King is the
chief Law to preserve him, to serve him, which is the health of all; all men
by nature are bound to it, as is well observed by learned, Gerv. Tilbur. ubi
supra.
Oportet Regibus servire, non in conservandis tantum dignitatibus per quas
gloria regiae Majestatis elucet, verumetiam mundanarum facultatum copiis, quae
eis sui status ratione contingunt; All Subjects ought to serve their King, not
only in maintaining those dignities by which the glory of the Kingly Majesty
does appear, but also in the strength and abundance of all those worldly
faculties and powers which belong unto him by reason of their degrees, Illa
enim illustrant, haec subveniunt, the former do serve to make him famous, but
the latter ought to be aiding and assisting unto him, (says he) we ought not
only that are subjects to the King to pity him and to speak well of him, to
honor him with our lips and words only, but we ought to honor him with our
substance, assist him with our arms, for the recovery of his rights, and of
his liberty, and for the subduing and suppressing of his enemies, and of those
that traitorously rise up and rebel against him. The law Plow. Com. c. 319.
does not make the Subject greater then the King, nor the servant then the
Master, the Law here compares the King to a Master, a subject to a servant, yet
all men know that the Prerogative of the King over his Subject is larger and
greater then the praeeminence of a Master over his servant, even as much as the
Law of Nature, has precedence of the civil Law, or Law of Nations; the
Allegiance due from a Subject to the King, being due Calvin's case ubi supra.
by the Law of Nature, the duty that a servant owes to his Master being but
grounded either upon his own contract, the Law of his country, or at most the
Law of Nations. The duty then that a Subject owes to his King, is more
obligatory to him, then that which a servant or a slave owes his Master, and
the Law does more exact it at his hands, and justify him in the performance of
it. The law of England tells us, that 35. H. 6. f. 50, 51.
a servant by the Law may justify the battery or beating a man in defense of
his Master, and to take bows and arrows, or other invasive weapons, 9. Ed. 4.
f. 28. 19. H. 6 f. 31
nay a servant may justify the beating of any man for the defense of his
Masters goods; Nay yet more, 21. H. 7. f. 39. 3. Ed. 3. Fits. Coron. pl. 303.
305. 26. ass. pl. 23.
a servant may justify by the Law the killing of any man in defense of the
life of his Master, of his house or goods. Does the Law protect a servant in
his Masters defense to perform this duty, and shall it not a Subject in the
performance of his toward his King? yes surely a fortiori, therefore by the
Law every man has power given him z to seize upon the goods of those that are
the Kings Enemies; 27 Ed. 4. f. 5. 9. Ed. 4 f. 26. Cooks Reports 5. par f. 92.
Semaines case.
every man has power by the Law to arrest Felons, Rebels, and Traitors; Nay
it is their duty so to do: who those Traitors and Rebels are, the Law
informs every man, and Commands him to pursue them, holding him indempnified
if he do it, and if he do it not, one way or other the Law condemns him to
punishment, because it is for the weal public to take and suppress Rebels
and Traitors, every man 12. H. 7. f 17.
nay all men (say our books) are bound to go with the King into the wars,
and there to 11. H. 7. f. 18.
aid him. Horns Mirror de Justices cap. 1. Stat. peche del Majest p. 20. M. 8.
They are guilty of perjury (says a learned Author of our Laws) which bear
arms against the King, or that stie from his battles, or from his lawful
host, and those Ministers that disavowablement, viz. unlawfully stop men, or
counsel men that they go not into war with the King, where they are bound
to go, or are summoned thereunto: this is the ancient Common Law of England,
and shows that it is the duty of every Subject to be aiding and assisting to
the King, in his wars. Stat. 11. H. 7. c. 1.
By Statute Law all men are bound to attend the King in his wars, and to aid
him with their true and faithful service, and it matters not whether the King
be in person in the field or not; for if he be any where by the Kings command,
that is acting by the Kings Commission, or by his power, or in preservation of
the Kings Royal Person, Crown and dignity, for that his service and doing, no
man by the Law can or ought to be questioned, molested or impeached, and the
reason of it is, because the Law says Stat. 7. E. 1. de de. fensione portandi
arma.
that to the King it belongs to preserve the peace of the Realm, and to
suppress all force that shall be raised without him in the Kingdom at all
times when it shall please him: Cowells Instit. in Proem.
Nam in Rege necessaria sunt duo haec, arma, viz. and leges, quibus utrumque
tempus bollorum and pacis recte possit gubernare: For as the learned in our
Laws say. Two things are necessary for a King, that is to say, the power of
Arms and Laws, by which he may rightly govern both in time of peace and
war; Plow. Com. f. 268. Bract. 1. 2. p. 55. cap. 24.
for being the chief Captain of Chivalry as before is remembered, he has all
rights in his hands which belong to the Crown and his Kingly power, especially
the material sword, which inables him to the government of his Kingdom:
therefore are all his Subjects bound to assist him in his Wars, to repel
foreign enemies, to suppress and subdue Rebels, and such disloyal Subjects
as rise in Arms against him, and to assist him to chastise all traiterous
Conspirators that seek to destroy his life, deflowre his Crown, and subvert
his Government. Rebellion has ever been so odious in Law, that in all ages
Stat 17. R 2. c. 8. Stat 13. H. 4. c. 7. Stat. 2. H. 5. c. 8. 9. Stat. 19. H.
7. c. 13. Stat. 3. Ed. 6. c. 5. Stat. 7. Ed. 6. c. 11 Stat 1. Mar. c. 12. Sta.
1. Eliz. c. 17. Brief de assistance, de Ches. vic. de County.
good Laws have been made in Parliament for the suppressing and punishing of
it, by which Statutes every Subject of England, be he never so great in degree
of honor or estate, or be he never so mean, be he Farmer, Artificer, Yeoman,
Husbandman, Labourer, or other, being of the age of 18. years or more, and
under the age of threescore years, being able to serve, and not sick, lame, or
impotent, ought to be aiding and assisting to the suppression of it, and if he
or they kill any of such as are in Rebellion, of that fact they ought to be
free, discharged and unpunished. Dalton Justice de Peace p. 206.
The King is the head, life and rule of the Commonwealth, against him only
there may be Rebellion, and not against any other, pretend they never so much
power, as to be a Parliament or State, every rising in Arms against the King,
(without his power immediate or mediately derived) either by sound of Drum or
Trumpet, ringing of bells, or otherwise, In terrorem populi, to do any
unlawful act, which in it self contains and is high Treason, be there
assembled to the number of 12. persons or above, is rebellion by the known
Laws of England, and every loyal Subject of the King is bound to be aiding
and assisting to the utmost of his power to the suppression of it. Cooks Inst.
3. par. p. 12.
Now to raise arms to imprison the King, or to detain him in prison, is
rebellion, 43. Eliz. Earl of Essex case. Cooks Instit. 3. par. f. 62.
to make war against the King, upon pretense to remove evil Counselors from
him is rebellion, Hill 1. Iac. the Lord Cobhams case. Cooks Instit. 3. par. p.
9. 39. Eliz. Bradfords case. Brook Treason. p. 24.
or to depose him, or to alter the established Laws, or Religion by force, or
with intent to surprise, take, detain or keep from the King any of his
Castles, Forts, or shipping, or to impose unlawful Taxes, or impose new Oaths
without the Kings assent; these and many other of the same nature are
Rebellions, which every Sheriff, Justice of Peace, and Constable in England,
yea and every man when he shall be summoned thereunto, without expecting any
particular Writ, or Commission, is bound to use his utmost power by force of
Arms to suppress, and the sooner the better, taking this advice of the Poet,

Principiis obsta, sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas convaluere morat.
But here it may be objected, that it is not lawful for any man to rise in
defense of the King, and in aid of him to relieve him out of prison without the
Kings Commission or command: if any such objection be made, it must needs
proceed from one that has been heretofore, or still is of that party, which
usually is called the Parliament party. To him I answer, that it is much more
lawful for the Kings loyal Subjects to fight for him, to set him at liberty,
and to restore him to his rights, which is the only means to preserve the
Kingdom, then it was either for the E. of Essex or the L Fairfax to fight for
him without his Commission, to imprison his royal person and there to deteine
him, to the apparent ruin and destruction of the Realm. This is, I hope, a
sufficient argument ad hominem, to convince any of that side concerning this
truth. But I desire that it may be remembered, that it is proved before to be
the duty of every loyal Subject, to arrest Traitors, and suppress Rebels;
and withal that the King is a close prisoner, that all address to him is
blocked up by Vote and Ordinance, that he cannot send his Commissions abroad,
that it is impossible that he should, that per legem nemo tenetur ad
impossibilia; and it being impossible to obtain the Kings Commission to
chastise Traitors and suppress Rebels, it is as justifiable for the
preservation of the King and Kingdom to raise arms in this case, as it is in
case a foreign enemy were landed, and ready to possess one of the strongest
holds in the Kingdom, and the people within it should make resistance against
that enemy without the Kings Commission; or that one seeing a conspirator ready
to stab the King, and should prevent the stroke before he asked the Kings
authority, to preserve him from murder; which if he should stay to do, it might
be too late to save his life's; for as the Poet says,

Ignis ab exigua nascens extinguitur unda, Ovid.

Sed postquam crevit, volitantque ad sidera flammae,
Vix putei, fontes, fluvii succurrere possint:
Therefore we must not expect to see the King at Liberty to grant his
Commissions, before they act for the preservation of the King and Kingdom, but
must make a virtue of necessity, always taking this for an authentic
Maxim, in Law, Quod id semper justum est quod omnino est necessarium, It is
necessary the Kingdom should be preserved, it is therefore lawful, it matters
not which way. But the case of those that shall engage in this war will be
much better; The certainty of the Royal line (says that great Lawyer Hobarts
Reports, f. 332.
the Lord Hobart (is the peace of the realm; The most excellent Prince of
Wales; Qui coruscat radiis Regis, and censetur una persona cum Rege, as the Law
says; 8. Rep. Cook, the Princes case. 21. Ed. 3. Fitzh. Praerog. 16.
who is the perfect Image of his Father, and shines with the glistering beams
of Kingly Majesty, and is esteemed one person with the King, Stat. 25* Ed. 3.
c. 2. 1. H. 5. f. 7.
and who ought to enjoy all the ancient Prerogatives of the Crown, whose death
to imagine, compass or conspire, is as high a treason, as it is the Kings, Br.
Treason. pl. 27.
and against whom to fight, he coming in aid of the King Stamf. pl. de Coron.
f. 1. I.
his father, or to fight against those that shall assist him therein, is also
High Treason: He, I say, is sufficient Commission in himself, had he not the
Kings Commission: but to avoid all scruples, he has the Kings warrant and
authority, and issues out Commissions to such as require them in his own name
as Generalissimo (under his Royal Father) of the three Kingdoms of England*
Scotland and Ireland, to all such as defire them, whereby all that scruple may
be satisfied in the Justice and formality of their engagements, though there*
needs no such wary caution for men's undertakeings in so just and necessary a
war, unless it be that they desire to support this rule; Abundans cautela non
nocet, which speaks more of curiosity then of necessity, wherein not only the
safety of the Royal person of his sacred Majesty their Royal Sovereign, the
preservation of his Crown and dignity, (wherein all the peoples protection and
safety is included,) the maintenance of the Laws of the Land, the Liberties
and properties of the free people of England is so much concerned; Nay I may
justly say, the health, welfare and being of three famous Kingdoms lies at
stake, they being now in a way of ruin and destruction. But to leave it
without scruple, that if the Prince had not Commission from the King, yet both
he and all the Subjects of England in his assistance may lawfully take arms in
defense and preservation of the Kings cause and person, and for his redemption
forth of prison; and this I shall prove both by sufficient presidents, and the
most uncontrollable Laws that are. We read in the Chronicles of England,
Daniels Chron. p. 152. Sir Rich. Bakers Chron. p. 86.
That Anno Christi Incarnationis 1256. in the 49. year of his reign, King
Hen. 3. of that name King of England, and Prince Edward his eldest son and
heir apparent to the Crown, afterward King Edward the first, were taken
Prisoners by the douze Peers, or the twelve Governors of the Kingdom, and
their adherents, at the battle of Lewis in Sussex, King Hen. himself was
conveyed by them Prisoner to the Tower of London, and Prince Edward to the
Castle of Hereford, the King remaining still a Prsoner, the Prince made an
escape forth of the Castle of Hereford, and in Wales and the parts adjacent,
raised an army and at Evesham in Worcestershire fought with these douze Peers,
the chief whereof was Simon Monfort Earl of Leicester, who thinking to make
their party the stronger, thereby declared for the King, took him out of the
Tower, and brought him to the battle, but kept him as a Prisoner: But the
Prince declaring also for the King his Father, the people rise in arms with
him and defeated the Earls army, killing him in the place, with many others of
his confederates, and redeemed the person of his Royal Father from his
imprisonment, restored him to his Crown, who enjoyed it in peace afterward
till his death, the fact of the Prince was approved of by the Law, but those
that fought against him were declared traitors and Rebels by act of
Parliament, Dictum de Kenilworth an. 51. H. 3.
and paid their fines and forfeitures. The like president we find in King Hen.
6. his time, which is thus, Anno Domini 1459. King Hen. the 6. was taken
Prisoner Martins Chron. p. p. 258, 259, 260.
at the battle of Northampton, by Edward Earl of March, eldest son to
Richard Duke of York, (afterward King Edward the fourth) and by his then
assistant Nevell the great Earl of Warwick, the King was conveyed as a prisoner
to the Tower of London, and afterward enlarged from thence and committed to
the custody of the Duke of Norfolk: Queen Margaret wife to King Hen. 6. and his
eldest son Prince Edward levied an Army, overthrew the Duke of York at
Wakefield, and afterward defeated the Duke of Norfolk, to whom the King was a
prisoner, redeemed the Person of the King, and re-established him in his
Throne, notwithstanding that neither of them were armed with either of the
Kings Commissions for the doing thereof: these presidents we have of the like
undertakings, many others I could produce out of the Annalls of France, and
Scotland, if desire of brevity did not prevent me; but both these, and all
others of this nature are warranted by the immutable and dispensable Laws of
God and nature, Exodus 10. 11. and 21. 17.
God has commanded children to honor their father and mother, this is a
Moral and an eternal Law ever to be performed by children to their Parents,
Matthew. 15. 4.
our most blessed Savior has so declared it, upon which place Iunius and
Tremellius. Arrias Montanus
Junius and Tremellius and others agree, that Honoris nomine, intelligitur
officii omne genus, quod a liberis parentibus debetur, hic vero juxta
proprietatem sermonis Hebraicae magis pertinet ad subsidium quam ad
salutationem, ac civilia illa vitae officia: By the word Honor, say they, is
meant all kind of duty that is due from children to their Parents, but in this
place by reason of the propriety of the Hebrew Speech it rather signifies aid
or assistance, then salutation or other civil duties of life; so then in this
case by the Law of God, the Prince is bound to aid the King his Father by every
possible means he can both in civil and military affairs, and by the equity
of this Law all the Kings Subjects are bound to do the like, as the King is
Pater patriae, the Father of the Country and common Parent of us all, and as
children, servants, and Subjects are bound by the Law of God to aid and assist
their Father, and King, so are they no less bound by the Law of nature, for
both are by the same Law obliged to be isntrumental to their Father, Master or
Common Parent in all cases of aid in time of necessity, were there no
inducement of their own profit inviting them thereunto; for as learned Grotius
has it, Grotius de jure belli and pacis l. 2. c 5 sect. 2. and 3.
Sunt diversa hominum inter se vincula, quae ad opem superiorum invitant, tale
instrumentum est Patri filius, pars ejus quippe naturaliter, tale and servus
quasi ex lege, quale autem in familiis est servus, tale in republica est
subditus, ac proinde instrumenta imperantis ut bellum licite gerant: There are
says he, by the Law of nature diverse bonds between men which invite them to
the aid of their Superiors, such an instrument ought the son be to the father,
because he is naturally a part of him; such an instrument ought the servant be
to the master, because he is bound thereunto by the Law of Nations, (which is
the part of the law of nature) and such an instrument as a servant is in a
family, such a one ought a Subject of a Kingdom be to his King, that is, an
instrument of his Sovereign, that may lawfully wage war for him: From these
premises I gather this irrefragable argument, That whatsoever men are bound and
enjoined to do by the Laws of God and Nature, is lawful for every man to do
without further Commission. But Children are bound to assist their Parents and
Sovereigns in all matters, either civil or military; therefore it is* lawful
for the Prince to assist his Father, and all the Subjects of England to rise in
Arms to aid their King and his urgent necessities against his oppressors,
notwithstanding that they have not his actual Commissions, or any other
derived from his power. Agreeable to this are those rules of the Common Law of
England, Cooks Rep. 5. par. f. 115. Wades case.
Quando aliquid mandatur, mandatur and omne quod pertinetur ad illud: When a
man has command to do his duty, every means that is conducing thereunto is
warranted unto him, by the Law, and likewise, Cooks Rep. 5. par. f. 12.
Saunders case.
Quando Lex aliquid al^^ui concedit, conceditur and id sine quo res ipsa esse
non potest; when the Law gives a liberty to any man to do any act, it gives him
all the necessary means to effect that, without which it cannot be brought to
pass. The Law commands and gives license to all the Kings Subjects to aid,
relieve, succor and redeem the King out of Prison (from whom they can expect
no actual Commission,) therefore the Law supplies that defect by her own
power, by a necessary means conducing to that end, the Kings and Kingdoms
preservation. This is warrantable and justifiable by all the Laws aforesaid,
let all good English men therefore take hold of the present opportunity, laying
a side detestable Newtrality, and redeem their King, Laws and Liberties, or be
slaves for ever.

FINIS.

