A BLOODY FIGHT IN SCOTLAND WITHIN Two miles of Edinburgh, since Lieut. Genesis
Cromwell returned into England. The Malignants rize and fell upon Col. Genesis
Lamberts men, but were repulsed and routed.

Also instructions for the Lord Libberton, and Col. Innis, to treat with Col.
Lambert. With a Commission for diverse Lords to give satisfaction to the ENGLISH

And a Proclamation published through the Kingdom of Scotland for such, their
goods to be confiscate, and themselves punished with Death.

October. 15. 1648.
WE do command and Ordain these presents to be published at the Market
Cross of Edinburgh, Haddington, Dunbarre, Lenilithgow, and Peebles, That none
pretend Ignorance.

THO. HENDERSON.



EDINBURGH, First printed by Evan Tylar Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. And Reprinted at London by Robert Ibbitson, 1648.

A Bloody Fight in Scotland, within two miles of Edinburgh, since Lieut Genesis
Cromwell returned into England.
SIR,
I Believe that you have seen the Declaration of the Committee of Estates,
concerning the late Engagement, being (as I understand) sent from Edinburgh by
the last Post, so that I need not acquaint you therewith. Diverse of our
Soldiers have lately had particular injuries offered to them, by being set
upon in the highways, and other places, by some loose and desperate persons,
in this kingdom. Many of their horses have been taken away, stolen, etc. and
other things, and truly there is such watchings, and way-laying of us, that
we dare not stir without a good company together, nor then neither without
being cock't and prim'd, and resolute to meet with some encounter, before we
come to our journeys end. Particularly, 6 of Major Genesis Lamberts Regiment, with
one Quartermaster Dimond, that commanded them, were set upon by 14 or 15 of
these Rogues, at the shutting up of the Evening, within 2 miles of Edinburgh,
the other as soon as they discovered ours to be English having the advantage of
their swords ready drawn under their cloaks, imediately fell upon them with
sword and Pistol, ours not much unready, nor turning their backs because of
their number, presently fell to defending themselves, they fought with them
about a quarter of an hour, laid three of them sprawling upon the ground,
wounded most of the rest, routed them and came off without any hurt, save only
their defensive Arms were soundly wounded, and one that had a cut on his hand.

Many of the like happen, but our men being now upon their constant watch
seldom come off with the worst, you see in what danger notwithstanding we are
in by such private lurking Enemies as these are. Nevertheless the Committee of
Estates have taken these things into consideration, and used means to give
satisfaction to all our losses in this kind, and to prevent the like for the
future, as by the enclosed paper you will perceive, which has given us some
encouragement.

But we hope our stay here will not be long now, about 14 days may give us a
dismission, though those that are well affected to this Committee of Estates
are jealous that the Malignant party watch but the oppertunity of our departure
and then to show themselves again, and that is the cause that by the advantage
of our presence the Committee of Estates think fit to put themselves into a
posture of defense by continuing a standing force for the suppressing and
keeping down of that party, in case they do attempt any such thing, Within
this 14 days they will have completed about 600 Horse in several Troops,
4000 Foot, and it is conceived old Lesle^ will have the command in chief. The
next convention of Parliament begins in January, for which the Members in the
several Shires are already most of them elected, and those that are well
affected to the present Committee say they are most of them well chosen, so
that the crushed party must expect to be more trampled on.

This Post I received none from you, but by the last I did receive one after I
had sent mine away. I beleave some letters both of yours and mine have
miscarried,

Seatoun 18. October. 1648 I am, Sir Your assured Friend, Tho. Margetts.

October 10. 1648.
Instructions for the Lord of Libberton, and Colonel Innis.
YOu shall repair to Major General Lambert, and other Officers of the English
Troop, and endeavor to keep a right correspondence betwixt this Committee and
them, And communicate their Demands to us, and our Desires to them, as occasion
shall require.

You shall likewise endeavor to keep a right understanding betwixt them and the
Country, and prevent all occasions of complaint or discontent.

You shall take care that the Quarterings be ordered in such manner as may be
best for our occasions, and where they may be best accommodated, and that you
have special regard to give as much ease as can be to such as are
well-affected, and have borne most burden in the former Leavies and Quarterings.

A. Henderson.

Edinburgh 13 of October, 1648.
THese are to give power and Warrant to the Lord of Suinton, Lord of Arnot,
and the Lord of Libberton, to see such of the English Forces as have had their
Horses plundered, or suffered any other wrong, repaired out of the Estates of
those who have been in the late Engagement, and have not submitted to the
Agreement. And to take special care to keep a good correspondency betwixt
this Committee and them, and betwixt them and the Country people where they are
quartered.

A. Henderson.

At Edinburgh October. 15. 1648.
WHereas the Honorable Houses of the Parliament of England, have bin pleased to
offer assistance to us for suppressing the common Enemy, We have thought fit
that some Regiments of their Horses do stay in this kingdom for a short time,
And whereas diverse abuses has been lately committed, and for preventing of
which abuses that may be done to any of the Soldiers under the Command of
Major Genesis Lambert: We do Command and Ordain the Committees of War, of the
Shires where the said Forces are now, or shall be hereafter Quartered, to take
special care that the Country people do readily afford them the best Quarter
and accommodation they can, during their stay, And we do further declare, that
whosoever within this kingdom shall do any wrongs or injuries in taking away
their horses or Arms, or shall offer violence to their persons, that Order
shall be given to the Troops that are kept up for the service of the Kingdom,
that their whole moveable goods shall be confiscated, and themselves imprisoned
or punished with death, according as they shall deserve, and if any of the
Country people receive wrong or injury from any of the English Forces, they are
to address themselves and complain to this Committee, or Major Genesis Lambert,
from whom they shall receive due satisfaction.

Ordains these presents to be published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh,
Haddingtoune, Dunbar, Linlithgow, Peebles, that none pretend Ignorance.

THO. HENDERSON.

FINIS.

