Fifteen CONSIDERATIONS, Stirring us up to the watchfulness of these Dangerous
Times.

WITH, Fourteen Directions to every Godly Christian, who is desirous to go out
to fight the Lords Battles against Antichrist.

ALSO, Thirteen Principles of Religion; By Mr. PERKINS: By way of Question and
Answer.

Showing, What necessity there is for all that are for Reformation, and are
desirous to venture life, fortune and estate, for Religion, King, Parliament,
laws and liberties; against those who (if they prevail) will blot out Religion,
and utterly destroy us all.

Published by RICHARD MARSAL Minister of Gods Word.

Published by Authority, and printed with Order.

June 10th LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop. 1645.

Thirteen Principles of Religion; taught by Mr. WILLIAM PERKINS, Preacher of
Gods Word in Cambridge; (deceased) and sent to his Son in Law John Hind,
resident in London in the Borough of Southwark.
Q.

Answ. To know God and my self.

Quest. What is God?

Answ. A spiritual substance, every way infinite; goodness it self, creator
and governor of all things: Distinguished into the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost.

Q. What art thou by Creation?

Answ. A creature endued with the image of God, which stands in
righteousness and true holiness.

Q. What art thou by the fall of Adam?

Answ. A sinner, and by my sins I have deserved everlasting doath, which is the
destruction both of body and soul for ever, in the pit of Hell.

Quest. What are thy principal sins?

Answ. Guiltiness in Adams first offense, and the disposition of my heart to
every evil, with the innumerable fruits thereof in thought, speech and action.

Quest. What is the remedy of these sins?

Answ. JESUS CHRIST the son of God made man, who was crucified upon the
cross to redeem all mankind, that was lost in Adams disobedience in eating
the forbidden fruit.

Quest. Sinner how do thou know that Christ was crucified for thee?

Answ. By faith I believe that Christ was crucified for me and all believers,
and that he was made unto me, wisdom, justification, sanctification, and
redemption.

Quest. When does this Faith begin to be bred in thy heart?

Answ. When I begin to be settled in the knowledge of the love and mercies of
God in Christ, and to hunger and thirst after Christ and his righteousness,
above all the things of this world.

Quest. What is the means to begin and confirm this faith?

Answ. The preaching of the Word of God, reading, reverent receiving the
sacraments, and prayer.

Quest. What is a Sacrament?

Answ. A sign to represent Christ till he come, a seal to confirm unto me his
death and resurrection, an instrument to exhibit Christ with all his benefits,
to all believers.

Quest. What is Prayer?

Answ. A speech to God made in faith, wherein I ask in the Name of Christ,
things wanting, and give thanks for blessings received.

Q. What owe thou to God for thy Redemption?

Answ. All thankfulness.

Q. Wherein stands thankfulness?

Answ. In new obedience; which is to carry in my heart a constant puspose never
to sin any more, but to endeavor to do the will of God, and that within the
compass of my calling.

An Exposition on Mr. Perkins his Thirteen Principles.
THe high calling that every child of God is called unto, is not this
temporal calling which God has placed us in, but our Election stands in
obedience to know Gods will, and to know what we are by nature, the children of
wrath, and firebrarnds of hell, if we labor not to know God, and to be assured
that Christ has redeemed us from the second death, and that the gates of Hell
should not prevail against us: therefore our true happiness is, to labor
while we have time, to know our duty to God and man, and to labor to know,
that of our selves we are lost in Adams transgression, and that Christ has
made us free citizens by his death and resurrection. For man by nature in
himself, out of Christ, is the unhappiest of all creatures that God made:
therefore in these sad and perilous times, we must fit our selves for a better
life, and whilst it is to day, harden not your hearts, but redeem your
misspent time, for the days are evil: Broad is the way that leads to
destruction, and many there be that find it; but narrow is the way that
leads to everlasting life, and few there be that find that strait gate.

Therefore to labor to knw Christ crucified that you may be sealed for the day
of redemption,

First, taste not as Adam tasted in eating the forbidden fruit, for which he
lost Paradise, for in this world Paradise is won or lost: Man's life is short,
and frail, in comparison but a span long, therefore Christ bids us come buy
milk without money or price. Gods Word is sweeter then the honey or the honey
comb: therefore let us taste the benefit that we have by Christ, and let us
relish that by belief, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the Patriarchs, were
justified: It wet not Arons beard alone, but drencht his beard throughout, and
finally it did rain down his rich attire. How precious it is and joyful, for
to see Brethren to hold together in the love of Christ, in the bonds of Unity:
and he that created us for this thing is God, who has given us the earnest of
his spirit: For he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth
live unto themselves, but unto him; which died for us and rose again.

Therefore all they that desire to be in Christ, let them deny themselves, and
hunger and thirst after Him and His righteousness above all the things in the
world: For old things are past away, behold all things are become new. Now is
the axe laid to the root of the Tree, every tree that brings not forth fruit,
shall be hewn down and cast into the fire. Therefore let us deny our own
righteousness, and cry out with Saint Paul; O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death?

Therefore these thirteen Principles holds forth our happiness to know what
the essence of God is, in creating the world.

Secondly, to know what we are by Adams disobedience in eating the forbidden
fruit, the which all Mankind stands guilty of (which is our original sin
which we brought into this world) till we are grafted and baptized into Christ's
stock, and made lively members of the same.

Thirdly, the mercies of God in Christ, that the Seed of the woman should
bruise the serpents head, and pierce his heel. All that by the eye of Faith
lay hold upon this promise, are justified. And in fullness of time, God sent
his only b^gotten son born of the Virgin, which was conceived by the Holy
Ghost; of whose Life, Death, and Resurrection, his twelve Apostles are
witnesses: And to confirm his Death and Resurrection, the night before he was
betrayed, instituted (at the eating of his Passeovor) the Sacrament as a pledge.

First, in the breaking of Bread, which sets forth the breaking of his Body.

Secondly, he took the cup, drink ye all of this in remembrance that my Body
was broken, and my blood shed for you, and for many, for the remission of sins.

Christ's sufferings upon the cross is our glorification, which frees us from
the second death: Therefore while we have time, let us have recourse to God in
his Ordinances, for the righteous man sinned seven times in a day, Nay seventy
seven times in a day: Therefore how much need have we to renew our covenant
with God, and to forsake our sins, and to loath them, and condition with God
to become new creatures, that the guilt of sin may be taken away.

For Christ pressed upon man, so often as you take this sacrament, by belief you
are healed, and renew your covenant with God to become New creatures. Let us
take heed that we put not off this precious time, lest we be numbered with the
Foolish Virgins that while they went to buy Oil, the Wise Virgins entered into
the Wedding chamber with the Bridegroom: so many put off this duty, excusing
themselves that they are not fitted; that is the Devils policy: First, labor
to try your selves what you are by Nature, then the benefit you have by Christ;
He bids us, To day if you will hear my voice, harden not your hearts, to morrow
is not ours again: Christ says, Come unto me, all that are weary and h^avie
laden, and I will ease you. Therefore we ought to crave a blessing of God b^
prayer on all our endeavors, whether in our callings, or in our walking
abroad, or what ever we take in hand, we ought always to pray to God for his
blessing, and to desire his Kingdom to come, and his will to be done. For God
requires nothing of us but thankfulness, and obedience to walk with him, with
a purpose of newness of life: Therefore let us beseech the Lord, in mercy to
open our blind understanding, and to guide us in the right way, that the
Commandments, the Articles of our Belief, and the Lords Prayer, may be a
savor of life unto life, and not a savor of death unto death.

Therefore let us remember our creator in the days of our youth or adversity,
before the evil days come or the years approach, when we shall have no joy
in them, and to cast off our sins by repentance. For the Lord has promised,
he will not leave us nor forsake us, though we suffer for a season.

Considerations exciting to watchfulness against Temptations, and motions to
sin.
1 COnsider the glorious and dreadful Majesty of that God with whom thou have
to do, he is a consuming fire, his commandments are to be obeyed, his
threatenings to be feared, his service not to be slighted, but to be perofrmed
with watch-fulnesse and sear, etc 2 Consider thy sins, that in number exceed
the hairs of thy head, in weight and measure the sand of the sea, the vileness
of sin, the unthankfulness of thy sin in respect of that good God who has
done more for thee then for others. 3 Weigh the fearful curses and punishments
threatened against sin, and misery of this life, eternal inconceivable torments
hereafter. 4 Nothing melts the heart like love, ponder therefore the infinite
love of God, and the rich grace of Christ taking thy sin upon himself, and
bearing the wrath of his Father, which was due to thee. 5 Awaken thy soul with
meditation of the small number of those that shall be saved, the multitude of
those that shall perish, the certainty of their damnation who carelessly
despise, or wilfully abuse the grace of Jesus Christ to carnal security, or
wilful continuance in known sin. 6 Ever call to mind the Devils unwearied
malice, violence and subtilty, how he goes up and down like a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour, to whom it is easy to become a prey. 7 Know the
desperate corruption that is in thy heart, ready to betray thee to the bafest
lust, and most abominable wickedness. 8 What terrors of conscience, what
sharp and stinging scourges of outward crosses, sickness, pains, poverty, may
God inflict to rouse thee out of thy spiritual slumber, if other means avail
not. 9 How unworthily have thou rejected the commandment of God, whose mercies
have been, and are so abundant and free toward thee, with promise of more and
larger mercies then for the present thou enjoyest. 10 What snares and
temptations thou art every day exposed to, by occasions ministered from the
flesh within, from the world without, sometimes from the godly as well as from
the wicked. 11 Consider thy latter end, the shortness of life, how it is subject
to a thousand calamities, and nothing to be done for God, or thy soul, after
death. 12 Meditate on the nobleness and excellency of thine immortal soul, it
is born to a higher employment then the service of a base lust, or of the
vanishing world, that is not fit to put pibbles in a golden casket. 13 Often
revolve in thy mind the infinite glory of heaven, and that eternal happiness
there kept in store for them that fight the good fight of says and finish
their course, and keep the faith, and look for the appearing of Jesus Christ.
14 Be every day drowing some sweetness from the precious promises of all sorts
for comforts of this life to them that love God, and forsake any thing for
Christ, that all things shall work together for good to them, no good thing
shall be withheld from them; and for any thing thou have forsaken, thou
shall receive even in this world in the midst of persecutions, an hundred sold
more, and eternal life in the world to come. 15 Be hold the experience of the
sweet peace of conscience, and blessed contentation, and spiritual rejoicing
even in the midst of tribulations and persecutions that is fonud in many of
the servants of God, and withal protesse to be certainly attainable by those
that watch and pray, and are sober, and exercise that faith and grace which the
Lord has imparted to them.
Christian directions concerning duties in evil times.
1 BE diligent to examine thy self whether thou art in the state of grace or
no, when we are like to be tried, it is wisdom to do it before hand. 2 Strive
with God to get thine heart weaned from the love of this present world; a thing
which is but hanged on a pin, is soon heaved off: things glued together are
hardly sondred, excessive love to the world makes the cross ten times heavier.
3 Be much with God in holy duties: when Judas plotted against our Savior, he
prepared lot the Passover, and last Supper: let us be moved with reverence to
use the means to have our selves and our families say to God, Thou art my
hiding place, enter into thy closet, shut the door to thee, hide thy self with
God, until the indignation be over-passed. 4 Pray earnestly that thou may
enjoy the favor of God, which is better then life. It is intolerable to fear
the wrath of God, and to be deprived of all comforts of the creature at once.
5 Exercise thy self to keep a clear conscience toward God and man, that if
crosses and troubles come to molest the outward man, yet thou may have sweet
peace within. 6 Acquaint thy self with the precious promises: they will be as
strong water to keep thee from fainting in the day of trial. 7 Get into thy
heart the experimental knowledge and love of the truth: you can never suffer
for that you know not, much less for that you love not. 8 In evil times be
forward to comfort and encourage others: for God has a book of remembrance to
write their names in, Mal. 3.16. who often meet to commune together of the
ways of God. 9 Set before your eyes the joys of heaven, as Jesus Christ did,
and Moses, and Paul, 2 Cor. 4.17. and all the Martyrs, who for the name of
Christ suffered tormenting deaths; our momentany sufferings shall be
recompensed with eternal refreshings. 10 Spare not one sin unmortified: for
the love of any one sin will work us more woe then all our enemies, and raise
doubts and fears in us when others shall have comfort. 11 Cast away all
confidence in thy self, trust not to any righteousness or work of thine own;
in his own strength shall no man prevail: boast not thy self of any thing in
thee, but be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10. 12
Take heed unto thy wordr, The prudent shall keep silence in evil times: It is
their wisdom to know before whom, and what, and to what end they speak. 13
Exercise your self in works of mercy, Cast thy bread upon the face of the
waters, though it seem to be lost for the present, yet afterward thou shall
find it, Again, Give a portion to seven, and also to eight, because thou
know not what days may come, take the present season to do good in, the
merciful have the promise of mercy. 14 Prepare for a judgment before it come,
forewarned by Gods faithful watchmen, forearmed: meditate upon the miseries
which have befaln our neighbor nations, the Sword, famine, pestilence,
devouring thousands, and what do we know how God will deal with us.
Those who slight God and religion in prosperity, take up religion for credit,
and will not endure small trials, they will not suffer the power of Religion to
come into their hearts, nor will for religion and the truth, lay down their
lives.

FINIS.

