The Humble ANSWER Of the DIVINES Attending the Honorable COMMISSIONERS OF
Parliament, At the TREATY at Newport in the Isle of WIGHT. To the second Paper
delivered to them by his MAJESTY, October. 6. 1648. About Episcopal Government.
Delivered to his Majesty, October 17.

I appoint Abel Roper to Print this Copy, entitled The Humble Answer of the
Divines, etc.

Richard Vines,

London, Printed for Abel Roper, at the Sign of the Sun over against S.
Dunstans Church in Fleet Street. 1648.

The humble ANSWER of the Divines attending the Honorable Commissioners of
PARLIAMENT at the Treaty at Newport in the Isle of Wight, To the second Paper
delivered to them by his MAJESTY, October. 6. 1648. Delivered to his MAJESTY,
October. 17.
May it please your Majestly,
AS in our Paper of October the third, in Answer to your Majesty's of October
the second We did, so now again we do acknowledge, that the Scriptures cited
in the Margin of your Majesty's Paper do prove, that the Apostles in their own
persons; That Timothy, and Titus, and the Angels of the Churches, had power
respectively, to do those things, which are in those places of Scripture
specified; But as then, so now also we humbly do deny, that any of the persons
or Officers forementioned were Bishops, as district from Presbyters, or did
exercise Episcopal Government in that sense; Or that this was in the least
measure proved by the alleged Scriptures, and therefore our Negative not
being to the same point, or state of the Question which was affirmed; We humby
conceive that we should not be interpreted, to have in effect, denied the very
same thing, which we had before granted, or to have acknowledged that the
several Scriptures do prove the thing, for which they are cited by your
Majesty; And, if that, which we granted were all, that, by the Scriptures cited
in your Margin, your Majesty intended to prove; It will follow, That nothing
has yet been proved on your Majesty's part, to make up that conclusion which
is pretended.

As then we stood upon the Negative to that assertion, so we now crave leave to
represent to your Majesty, that your reply does not infirm the Evidence given
in maintenance thereof. The Reason given by your Majesty in this Paper, to
support your assertion: That the persons that exercised the power aforesaid
were Bishops in distinct sense, is taken from a description of Episcopal
Government; which is (as your Majesty says) nothing else, but the Government
of the Churches within a certain Precinct (commonly called a Diocese)
committed to one single person, with sufficient authority over the Presbyters,
and people of those Churches for that end; which Government so described, being
for substance of the thing it self in all the three forementioned particulars,
(Ordaining, giving rules of Discipline, and Censures) found in Scriptures,
except we will contend about names and words, must be acknowledged in the sense
aforesaid to be sufficiently proved from Scriptures: and your Majesty says
further, that the Bishops do not challeng more, or other power to belong to
them, in respect of their Episcopal office, as it is distinct from that of
Presbyters, then what properly falls under one of those three.

We desire to speak both to the Bishops challenge, and to your Majesty's
description of Episcopal government. And first to their Challenge; because it
is first expressed in your Majesty's reply.

The Challenge we undertake in two respects: 1. In respect of the Power
challenged, 2. In respect of that ground, or Tenure upon which the claim is
laid. The Power challenged consists of three particulars; Ordaining, giving
Rules of Discipline, and Censures. No more, no other, in respect of their
Episcopal office. We see not, by what warrant this Writ of partition is taken
forth, by which the Apostolical office is thus sha^ed or divided; The Governing
part into the Bishops hands; the Teaching, and administering Sacraments, into
the Pr^^byters. For besides that the Scripture makes no such enclosure, or
partition wall; it appears, the challenge is grown to more then was pretended
unto in the times of grown Episcopacie. Jerome, and Chrysostom do both
acknowledge for their time, that the Bishop and Presbyter differed only in the
matter of Ordination: and learned Doctor Bilson makes some abatement in the
claim of three, saying, the things proper to Bishops, which might not be common
to Presbyters, are singularly of Succeeding, and superiority in Ordaining.

The tenure or ground upon which the claim is made is Apostolical, which with
us is all one with Divine Institution. And this, as far as we have learned,
has not been anciently, openly, or generally avowed in this Church of England,
either in time of Popery, or of the first Reformation; and whenever the
pretension has been made, it was not without the contradiction of learned, and
godly men. The abettors of the challenge, that they might resolve it at last
into the Scripture, did choose the most plausible way of ascending by the scale
of Succession; going up the River to find the Head: but when they came to
Scriptures, and found it like the head of Nile (which cannot be found) they
shrouded it under the name and countenance of the Angels of the Churches, and
of Timothy and Titus. Those that would carry it higher, endeavored to impe it
into the Apostolical office, and so at last called it a Divine Institution, not
in force of any express precept, but implicit practice of the Apostles; and
so the Apostolical office (excepting the gifts, or enablements confessed only
extraordinary) is brought down to be Episcopal, and the Episcopal raised up to
be Apostolical. Whereupon it follows, that the highest Officers in the Church
are put into a lower orb; an extraordinary office turned into an ordinary
distinct office, confounded with that which in the Scripture is not found; a
temporary, and an extinct office revived. And indeed if the definitions of both
be rightly made, they are so incompatible to the same subject, that he that
will take both must lose the one: aut Apostolus Episcopatum, aut Apostolatum
Episcopus. For the Apostles, though they did not in many things ut aliud, yet
they acted alio nomine and alio munere, then Presbyters, or Bishops can do: and
if they were indeed Bishops, and their government properly Episcopal in
distinct sense, then it is not needful to go so far about to prove Episcopal
government of Divine institution, because they practiced it; but to assert
expressly, that Christ instituted it immediately in them.

For your Majesty's definition of Episcopal government, it is extracted out of
the Bishops of later date, then Scripture times, and does not suit to that
Meridian, under which there were more Bishops then one in a Precinct, or
Church; and it is as fully competent to Archiepiscopal, and Patriarchal
government, as Episcopal. The parts of this definition, materially, and
abstractly considered, may be found in Scripture. The Apostles, Timothy and
Titus, were single persons, but not limited to a Precinct: The government of
the Angels was limited to a Precinct, but not in single persons. In several
offices, not to be confounded, the parts of this definition may be ^ound; but
the aggregation of them altogether into one ordinary Officer cannot be ^ound.
And if that word, ordinary, and standing Government, had been made the genus in
your Majesty's definition (as it ought to be) We should crave leave to say it
would be gratis dictum, if not petitio principii: for the Scripture does not
put all these parts together in a Bishop, who never borrowed of Apostles,
Evangelists and Angels, the matter of Governing and Ordaining, and left the
other of Teaching, dispensing Sacraments and dealing only in foro interno, to
Presbyters, until after times. By this that has been said, it is manifest
enough, that we contend not first de nomine: about the name of Episcopal
Government: which yet (though names serve for distinction) is not called or
distinguished by that name in Scripture. Nor secondly de opere about the work,
whether the work of Governing, ordering, preaching etc. be of continuance in
the Church, Which we clearly acknowledge; But thirdly de munere, about the
Office, it being a greatfallacy to argue, That the Apostles did the same work
which Bishops or Presbyters are to do in ordinary. Therefore they were of the
same Office: for as it is said of the liberal, and learned Arts one and the
same thing may be handled in diverse of them, and yet these Arts are
distinguished by the formalis ratio of handling of them, so we say of Offices,
they are distinguished by their callings and Commissions, though not by the
work, as all those that are named, (Ephesians. 4. 11.) Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, are designed to one and the same general
and common work: The work of the Ministry, ver. 12. And yet they are not
therefore all one, for ^ts said, some Apostles, some Prophets, some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers; A Dictator in Rome and an ordinary
Tribune. Moses and the subordinate governors of Israel. The Court of
Parliament and of the King's Bench, an Apostle and a Presbyter or Deacon may
agree in some common work, and yet no confusion of Offices follows thereupon.

To that which your Majesty conceives, that the most that can be proved from
all, or any of those places, by us alleged (to prove that the Name, Office,
and work of Bishops and Presbyters is one and the same in all things, and not
in the least distinguished) Is that the word Bishop is used in them to signify
a Presbyter, and that consequently the Offi^, and work mentioned in these
places as the Office and work of a Bishop are the Office of a Presbyter, which
is confessed on all sides. We make this humble return, that though there be no
supposition, so much as employed, that the Office of a Bishop and a Presbyter,
are distinct in any thing (for the names are mutually reciprocal,) yet we take
your Majesty's concession, that in these times of the Church, and places of
Scripture, there was no distinct Office of Bishops and Presbyters; and
consequently that the identity of the Office must stand, until there can be
found a clear distinction or division in the Scriptures; And if we had argued
the identity of Functions from the Community of names, and some part of the
work, the Argument might have been justly termed a fallacy, but we proved them
the same Office from the fame work, per omnia, being allowed so to do by the
fullness of those two words used in the Acts and St. Peter his Epistle (...)
and (...) under the force of which words the Bishops claim their whole power
of Government and Jurisdiction, and we found no little weight added to our
Argument from that in the Acts, where the Apostle departing from the Ephesian
Presbyters or Bishops, as never to see their faces more, commits (as by a
final charge) the Government of that Church, both over particular Presbyters
and people; not to Timothy who then stood at his elbow, but to the Presbyters
under the name of Bishops, made by the Holy Ghost, whom we read to have set
many Bishops over one Church, not one over either one or many, and the Apostles
arguing from the same qualification of a Presbyter and of a Bishop in order to
ordination or putting him into Office, fully proves them to be two names of the
same order or function: the diverse Orders of Presbyter and Deacon, being
diversely characterised, upon these grounds (we hope without fallacy) we
conceive it justly proved, that a Bishop and a Presbyter are wholly the same.
That Timothy and Titus were single persons, having authority of Government, we
acknowledge; but deny, that from thence any argument can be made unto either
single Bishop or Presbyter: for though a single Presbyter by the power of his
Order (as they call it) may preach the Word and dispense the Sacraments; yet by
that example of the Presbytery, their Laying on of hands, and that Rule of
Telling the Church in matter of scandal, it seems manifest, that Ordination and
Censures are not to be exercised by a single Presbyter; neither has your
Majesty hitherto proved, either the names of Bishops and Presbyters, or the
function, to be in other places of Scripture at all distinguished; You having
wholly waved the notice or answer of that we did assert (and do yet desire some
demonstration of the contrary) viz. That the Scripture does not afford us the
least notice of any qualification, any ordination, any work or duty, any honor
peculiarly belonging to a Bishop distinct from a Presbyter; the assignment of
which, or any of them unto a Bishop, by the Scripture, would put this question
near to an issue. That GOD should intend a distinct and highest kind of Officer
for Government in the Church, and yet not express any qualification, work, or
way of constituting and ordaining of him, seems unto us improbable. Concerning
the signification of the word Episcopus, importing an Overseer, or one that
has a charge committed to him, for instance of watching a Beacon, or keeping
sheep, and the application of the name to such persons as have inspection of
the Churches of Christ committed to them in spiritualibus: We also give our
suffrage, but not to that distinction of Episcopus gregis, and Episcopus
pastorum and gregis; both because it is the (...) or point in question; and
also because your Majesty having signified that Episcopus imports a keeper of
sheep, yet you have not said that it signifies also a keeper of shepherds. As
to that which is affirmed by your Majesty, that the peculiar of the function of
Bishops is Church Government; and that the reason why the word Episcopus is
usually applied to Presbytery, was because Church Governors had then another
title of greater eminency, to wit, that of Apostle; until the Government of
the Church came into the hands of their successors; and then the names were by
common usage very soon appropriated; That of Episcopus to Ecclesiastical
Governors, That of Presbyter to the ordinary Ministers. This asser^ion your
Majesty is pleased to make without any demonstration; for whom the Scripture
calls Presbyters, Rulers, and Pastors and Teachers, it calls Governors; and
commits to them the charge of feeding and inspection as we have proved, and
that without any mention of Church Government peculiar to a Bishop; we deny
not, but some of the Fathers have conceived the notion that Bishops were called
Apostles, till the names of Presbyter and Episcopus became appropriate, which
is either an allusion or conceit, without Evidence of Scripture; for, while
the Function was one, the names were not divided; when the Function was
divided, the name was divided also, and indeed impropriate; but we that look
for the same warrant, for the division of an Office, as for the Constitution,
cannot find that this appropriation of names, was made till afterward, or in
process of time, as Theodoret (one of the Fathers of this conceit) affirms,
whose saying, when it is run out of the pale of Scripture time, we can no
further follow; from which premises laid altogether, we did conclude the
cleernes of our assertion, that in the Scriptures of the New Testament, a
Bishop distinct from a Presbyter in Qualification, Ordination, Office or
dignity is not found, the contrary whereof, though your Majesty says, that you
have seen confirmed by great variety of credible Testimony, yet we believe
those testimonies are rather strong in asserting, then in demonstrating the
Scriptures Original of a Bishop, which is declared against by a cloud of
witnesses, named in the latter end of our former Answer, unto which we should
refer if matter of right were not properly tryable by Scripture, as matter of
Fact is by Testimony.

We said that the Apostles were the highest order of Officers of the Church,
that they were extraordinary, that they were distinguished from all other
Officers, and that their Government was not Episcopal, but Apostolical; to
which Answer, your Majesty being not satisfied, does oppose certain
assertions, That Christ himself and the Apostles received their Authority by
Mission, their Ability by Unction; That the Mission of the Apostles was
ordinary, and to continue to the end of the world; but the Unction, whereby they
were enabled to both Offices and Functions, Teaching and Governing was indeed
extraordiry, That in their Unction they were not necessarily to have
successors, but necessarily in their Mission or Office of Teaching and
Governing, That in these two ordinary Offices, their ordinary successors are
Presbyters and Bishops, That Presbyters qua Presbyters do immediately succeed
them in the Office of Teaching, and Bishops qua Bishops immediately in the
Office of Governing; The demonstration of which last alone, would have carried
in it more conviction then all these Assertions put together; Officers are
distinguished by that whereby they are constituted, their Commission, which
being produced, Signed by one place of Scripture, gives surer evidence, then a
Pedigree drawn forth by such a series of distinctions as do not distinguish
him into another Officer from a Presbyter; whether this chain of distinction
be strong, and the links of it sufficiciently tackt together, we crave leave to
examine, Christ says, your Majesty, was the Apostle and Bishop of our souls,
and he made the Apostles both Apostles and Bishops; we do not conceive that
your Majesty means that the Apostles succeeded Christ as the chief Apostle,
and that as Bishops, they succeed Christ as a Bishop, least thereby Christ his
Mission as an Apostle and Bishop might be conceived as ordinary as their
Mission is said to be; But we apprehend your Majesty to mean, that the Office
of Apostle and Bishop, was eminently contained in Christ's office, as the office
of a Bishop was eminently contained in that of Apostleship; but thence it will
not follow that inferior offices being contained in the superior eminently, are
therefore existent in it formally; For because all honors and dignities are
eminently contained in your Majesty, would it therefore follow that your
Majesty is formally and distinctly a Baron of the Realm, as it is asserted the
Apostles to have been Bishops in distinct sense; That Mission refers to Office
and authority, and Unction only to Ability, we cannot consent: for besides that
the breathing of Christ upon his Disciples, saying, Receive ye the Holy Ghost,
does refer to mission as well as unction; we conceive that in the proper
anointing of Kings, or other Officers, the natural use and effect of the oil
upon the body, was not so much intended, as the solemn and ceremonious use of
it in the inauguration of them; so there is relation to Office in unction, as
well as to conferring of abilities; else how are Kings or Priests or Prophets
said to be anointed? And what good sense could be made of that expression in
Scripture, of anointing one in another room: to omit, that Christ by this
construction should be called the Messiah in respect of abilities only. And
although we should grant your Majesty's explication of Mission and Unction, yet
it will not follow that the mission of the Apostles was ordinary, and their
unction only extraordinary: That into which there is succession, was ordinary;
That into which there is no succession, (for succession is not unto abilities
or gifts) extraordinary; and so the Apostles were ordinary officers in all
whereunto there is properly any succession, and that is office. They differed
from Bishops in that wherein one Apostle or Officer of the same order might
differ from another, to wit, in abilities and measure of Spirit, but not in
that wherein one order of officers is above another by their office; To which
we cannot give consent, for since no man is denominated an officer from his
mere abilities or gifts, so neither can the Apostles be called extraordinary
officers, because of extraordinary gifts, but that the Apostles mission and
office (as well as their abilities) was extraordinary and temporay, does
appear in that it was by immediate Commission from Christ without any
intervention, of men, either in Election or Ordination, for planting an
authoritative governing of all Churches through the World, comprehending in it
all other Officers of the Church whatsoever, and therefore it seems to us very
unreasonable that the Office and authority of the Apostles should be drawn down
to an ordinary, thereby to make it, as it were, a fit stock, into which the
ordinary Office of a Bishop may be ingrafted, nor does the continuance of
Teaching and Governing in the Church more render the office of teaching and
governing in the Apostles an ordinary office, then the office of teaching, and
governing in Christ himself, render his Office therefore Ordinary. The reason
given, That the Office of Teaching and Governing, was ordinary in the Apostles,
because of the continuance of them in the Church (we crave leave to say) is
that great mistake which runs through the whole file of your Majesty's
discourse, for though there be a Succession in the work of Teaching and
Governing, yet there is no Succession in the Commission or Office by which the
Apostles performed them; for the Office of Christ, of Apostles, of Evangelists,
of Prophets, is thence also concluded Ordinary, as to Teaching and Governing,
and the distinction of Offices Extraordinary and Ordinary eatenus destroyed;
The Succession may be into the same work, not into the same Commission and
Office, the Ordinary Officers, which are to manage the work of Teaching and
Government, are constituted, settled and limited by warrant of Scripture, as by
another Commission then that which the Apostles had; And if your Majesty had
shown us some Record out of Scripture, warranting the division of the office of
teaching and governing into two hands, and the appropriation of teaching to
Presbyters, of governing to Bishops, the question had been determined,
otherwise we must look upon the dissolving of the Apostolical Office, and
distribution of it into these two hands, as the dictate of men who have a
mind, by such a precarious Argument, to challenge to themselves the Keys of
Authority, and leave the Word to the Presbyters.

In our answer to the instances of Timothy and Titus (which Doctor Bilson
acknowledges to be the maine erection of Episcopal power, if the proofs of
their being Bishops, do stand, or subversion, if the answer that they were
Evangelists be good) Your Majesty finds very little satisfaction though all
that is said therein could be proved.

First, because the Scriptures no where implies any such things at all, that
Titus was an Evangelist, neither does the text clearly prove, that Timothy was
so.

1. The name of Bishop, the Scripture neither expressly nor by implication gives
to either, the work which they are enjoined to do is common to Apostles,
Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, and cannot of it self make a character of
one distinct and proper office; But that there was such an order of Officers in
the Church as Evangelists reckoned amongst the extraordinary and temporary
Offices and that Timothy was one of that Order, and that both Timethy and Titus
were not ordained to one particular Church, but were companions and fellow
Laborers with the Apostles, sent abroad to several Churches as occasion did
require, it is as we (humbly conceive) clear enough in Scripture, and not
denied by the learned defenders of Episcopal Government nor (as we remember)
by Scultetus himself during the time of their travailes.

2. To that which Your Majesty secondly says, That we cannot make it appear
by any Text of Scripture that the Office of Evangelist is such as we have
discribed, his work seeming, 2 Timothy 2. 4, 5. to be nothing else but diligence
in preaching the word, notwithstanding all impediments and oppositions, We
humbly Answer, That exact definitions of these or other Church Officers are
hard to be found in any Text of Scripture, but by comparing one place of
Scripture with another, it may be proved as well that they were, as what the
Apostles and Presbyters were, the description by us given being a Character
made up by collation of Scriptures, from which Mr. Hooker does not much vary,
saying that Evangelists were Presbyters of Principal sufficiency whom Eccle.
Pol l. b. 5
the Apostles sent abroad and used as Agents in Ecclesiastical Affairs,
wheresoever they saw need. And that Pastors and Teachers, were settled in some
certain charge and thereby differed from Evangelists, whose work that it should
be nothing but diligence in preaching, etc, which is common to Apostles,
Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, and so not distinctive of this particular
Office, argues to us, that as the Apostles Office was divided into Episcopal
and Apostolical, so this also is to be divided in Episcopal and
Evangelistical, Ordination and Censures belonging to Timothy as a Bishop, and
diligence in Preaching only being left to the Evangelists, which division (as
we humbly conceive) is not warranted by the Scripture.

Thirdly, Your Majesty says that that which we so confidently affirm of
Timothy and Titus, their acting as Evangelists is by some denied and refuted,
yea even with scorn rejected by some rigid Presbyterians, and that which we so
confidently deny, that they were Bishops, is consirmed by the consentient
testimony of all antiquity, recorded by Jerome himself that they were Bishops
of Paul's ordination, acknowledged by very many late Divines, and that a
Catalogue of 27 Bishops of Ephesus lineally succeeding from Timothy out of good
Record is vouched by Dr. Reynolds and other Writers.

Our confidence (as Your Majesty is pleased to call it) was in our Answer
expressed in these words, we cannot say that Timothy and Titus were Bishops in
the sense of Your Majesty, but extraordinary officers or Evangelists, in which
opinion we were then clear, not out of a total ignorance of those Testimonies
which might be alleged against it, but from intrinsic arguments out of
Scripture, from which Your Majesty has not produced any one to the contrary,
nor is our confidence weakened by such replys as these, the Scripture never calls
them Bishops, but the Fathers do, the Scripture calls Timothy an Evangelist,
some of late have refuted it, and rejected it with scorn, the Scripture relates
their motions from Church to Church, but some affirm them to be fixed at
Ephesus and in Creet, the Scripture makes distinction of Evangelists and
Pastors, but some say that Timothy and Titus were both, we cannot give Your
Majesty a present account of Scultetus and Gherards Arguments, but do believe
that M. Gillespi and Rutherford are able with greater strength to refute that
opinion of Timothy and Titus their being Bishops, then they do (if they do)
with scorn reject this of their being Evangelists; As for testimonies and
catalogues though we undervalue them not, yet Your Majesty will be pleased to
allow us the use of our Reason, so far as not to erect an office in the Church,
which is not found in Scripture, upon general appellations or titles and
allusions frequently found in the Fathers, especially when they speak
vulgarly, and not as to a point in debate, for even Jerome who as Your Majesty
says does Record that Timothy and Titus were made Bishops, and that of St.
Paul's Ordination, does when he speaks to the point between Your Majesty and us,
give the Bishops to understand that they are superior to Presbyters
consueitudine magis quam Dominicae veritatis dispositione; for catalogues their
creditrests upon the first witnesses from whom they are reported by tradition
from hand to hand, whose writings are many times suppositions, dubious or not
extant, besides that these catalogues do resolve themselves into some Apostle
or Evangelist as the first Bishop, as the catalogue of Jerusalem into the
Apostle James, that of Antioch into Peter, that of Rome into Peter and Paul,
that of Alexandria into Mark, that of Ephesus into Timothy, which Apostles and
Evangelists can neither themselves be degraded by being made Bishops, nor be
succeeded in their proper calling or office, and it is easy for us to proceed
the same way and to find many ancient rites and customs generally received in
the Church (counted by the ancients Apostolical traditions) as near the
Apostles times as Bishops, which yet are, confessedly, not of Divine
institution; and further, if Timothy and the rest that are first in the
catalogue were Bishops with such sole Power of Ordination and Censures, as is
asserted, how came their pretended successors, who were but Primi Presbyterorum
(as the Fathers themselves call them) to lose so much Episcopal power as was
in their Predecessors, and as was not recovered in 300 years? and therefore we
cannot upon any thing yet said, recide from that of our Savior, ab initio non
fuit sic, from the beginning is was not so.

Your Majesty says, that we affirm but upon very weak proofs, that they
were from Ephesus and Crete removed to other places, the contrary whereunto
has been demonstrated by some, who have exactly out of Scripture, compared the
times, and order of the several journeyes, and stations of Paul and Timothy.

It is confessed that our assertion, that Timothy and Titus were Evangelists,
lies with some stresse upon this, that they removed from place to place, as
they were sent by or accompanied the Apostles, the proof whereof appears to
us, to be of greaten strength then can be taken off by the comparison which
your Majesty makes of the Divines of the Assembly at Westminster. We begin
with the Travailes of Timothy, as we find them in order recorded in the
Scripture-places cited in the Margin, and we set forth from Acts 17. 14.
Berea, where we find Timothy, then next at 15.
Athens, fromwhence Paul sends him to 1 Thessalonians. 3. 1, 2.
Thessalonica, afteward having been in Macedonia, he came to Paul at Acts 18. 5.
Corinth, and after that, he is with Paul at Ephesus, and thence sent by him
into Acts 19. 22.
Macedonia, whether Paul went after him, and was by Timothy accompanied into
Acts ^0. 4
Asia, who was with him at 5. 6.
Troas and 17.
Miletus, to which place Saint Paul sent for the Presbyters of the Church in
Ephesus, and gave them that solemn charge to take heed unto themselves, and
to all the flock, over which the holy Ghost has made them Bishops, not
speaking a word of recommendation of that Church to Timothy, or of him to the
Elders. And if Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus, he must be so when the first
Epistle was sent to him, in which he is pretended to receive the charge of
exercising his Episcopal power in Ordination and government; but it is
manifest that after this Epistle sent to him, he was in continual journeyes,
or absent from Ephesus. For Paul left him at Ephesus when he went into 1 Timothy
1. 3.
Macedonia, and he left him there to exercise his Office, in regulating and
ordering that Church and in ordaining; but it was after this time that Timothy
is found with Paul at Miletus, for aftur Paul had been at Miletus, he went to
Jerusalem, whence he was sent prisoner to Rome, and never came more into
Macedonia, and at Heb. 13. 23. Phil. 1. 1. Philem. ver. 1. Col. 1. 1. Heb. 13.
23.
Rome we find Timothy a prisoner with him, and these Epistles which Paul wrote
while he was prisoner at Rome, namely the Epistle to the Philippians, to
Philemon, to the Colossians, to the Hebrews, do make mention of Timothy as
his companion at these times, nor do we ever find him again at Ephesus, for
we find that after all this, toward the end of Saint Paul's life, after his
first answering before Nero, and when he said his departing was at hand, he
sent for Timothy to Rome, not from Ephesus; for it seems that Timothy was not
there, because Paul giving Timothy 2 Timothy 4. 6. 10. 11. 12. 16.
an account of the absence of most of his companions sent into diverse parts, he
says, Tychicus have I sent to Ephesus. Now if your Majesty shall be pleased,
to cast up into one total that which is said; the several journeyes and
stations of Timothy, the order of them, the time spent in them, the nature of
his employment, to negotiate the affairs of Christ in several Churches and
places, the silence of the Scriptures, as touching his being Bishop of any one
Church, you will acknowledge that such a man was not a Bishop fixed to one
Church or precinct, and then by assuming that Timothy was such a man, you will
conclude that he was not Bishop of Ephesus.

The like conclusion may be enforced from the like premises, from the instance
of Titus, whom we find at Galat. 1. 2.
Jerusalem before he came to Crete, from whence he is sent for to Titus 3. 12.
Nicopolis, and after that he is sent to Corinth, from whence he is expected at
2 Cor. 2. 12.
Troas, and met with Paul in 2 Cor. 5. 6.
Macedonia, whence he is sent again to 2 Cor. ^. 6.
Corinth, and after all this is near the time of Paul's death at Rome, from
whence he went not into Crete, but unto 2 Timothy 4. 10.
Dalmatia, and after this is not heard on in the Scripture; and so we hope your
Majesty does conceive, that we affirm not upon very weak proofs, that Tymothy
and Titus were from Ephesus and Crete removed to other places.

In the fifth exception your Majesty takes notice of two places of Scripture
cited by us, to prove that they were called away from those places of Ephesus
and Crete, which if they do not conclude much of themselves, yet being
accompanied by two other places which your Majesty takes no notice of, may
seem to conclude more, and these are 1 Timothy v. 1. 3. Titus 1. 5. As I be
sought thee to abide still at Ephesus, for this cause left I thee in Creete, in
both which is specifed the occasional employment, for which they made stay in
those places: and the expressions used, I besought thee to abide still at
Ephesus, I left thee in Crete, do not sound like words of installment of a man
into a Bishopric, but of an intendment to call them away again, and if the
first and last be put together, his actual revocation of them both, the
intimation of his intention, that they should not stay there for continuance,
and the reason of his beseeching the one to stay, and of his leaving the other
behind him, which was some present defects and distempers in those Churches,
they will put fair to prove that the Apostle intended not to establish them
Bishops of those places, and therefore did not; For the Postscripts, because
your Majesty lays no great weight upon them, We shall not be solicitous in
producing evidence against them, though they do bear witness in a matter of
fact, which in our opinion never was, and in your Majesty's Judgment was long
before they were borne, and so we conclude this discourse about Timothy and
Titus with this observation, that in the same very Epistle of Paul to Timothy,
out of which your Majesty has endeavored to prove that he was a Bishop, and
did exercise Episcopal Government, there is clear evidence both for
Presbyters imposing hands, in ordination, and for their Ruling.

In the next point concerning the Angels of the Churches, though your Majesty
says, that you lay no weight upon the Allegory or Mystery of the denomination,
yet you assert, that the persons bearing that name were personae singulares,
and in a word Bishops, who yet are never so called in Scripture, and the
allegorical denomination of Angels or Stars, which in the Judgment of ancient
and modern Writers does belong to the faithful Ministers and Preachers of the
word in general, is appropriate (as we may so say) to the Myter and
Crosierstaffe, and so opposed to many express testimonies of Scripture;And if
your Majesty had been particular in that, wherein you say the strength of your
instance lies, viz. the Judgment of all ancient, and of the best modern
Writers, and many probabilities in the text it self, we hope to have made it
apparent, that many ancient and eminent Writers, many probabilities out of the
text it self do give evidence to the contrary. To that which is asserted, That
these singular persons were Bishops in distinct sense, whether we brought any
thing of moment to infirm this we humbly submit to Your Majesty's judgment,
and shall only represent to you that in Your Reply you have not taken notice of
that which in our answer seems to us of moment, which is this, that in
Mysterious and prophetic writings or visionall representations (such as this
of the stars and golden Candlesticks is) a number of things or persons is
usually expressed in singulars, and this in visions is the usual way of
Representation of things, a thousand persons making up one Church, is
represented by one Candlestick; Many Ministers making up one Presbytery by one
Angel. And because Your Majesty seems to call upon us to be particular,
though we cannot name the Angels, nor are satisfied in our judgment, that
those whom some do undertake to name were intended by the name of Angels in
those Epistles; yet we say, First, that these Epistles were sent unto the
Churches, and that under the expression of this thou do, or this thou have,
and the like, the Churches are respectively intended, for the sin reproved, the
Repentance commanded, the punishments threatened, are to be referred to the
Churches and not to the singular Angels only, and yet we do not think that
Salmatius did intend, nor do we, that in formal denomination the Angels and
Candlesticks are the same;

Secondly; The Angels of these Churches or Rulers were a Collective body, which
we endeavored to prove by such Probabilities as your Majesty takes no notice
of, namely the instance of the Church of Ephesus, where there were many
Bishops, to whom the charg of that Church was by Saint Paul at his final
departure from them committed; as also by that expression Revel. 2. 24. To you,
and to the rest in Thiatyra; Which distinction makes it very probable, that the
Angel is explained under that Plurality to you; the like to which many
expressions may be found in these Epistles, which to interpret according to the
Consentient Evidence of other Scriptures of the New Testament, is not Safe
only, but Solid and Evidentiall.

Thirdly, these Writings are directed as Epistolary, Letters, to Collective
Bodies, usually are (that is) to One, but intended to the Body; which your
Majesty illustrateth by your sending a Message to your. Two Houses, and
directing it to the Speaker of the House of Peers; which as it does not hinder
(we confess) but that the Speaker is one single Person; so it does not prove
at all, that the Speaker is always the same Person; or if he were, that the
refore because your Message is directed to him he is the Governor or Ruler of
the Two Houses in the least, and so your Majesty has given clear instance,
that though these Letters be directed to the Angels, yet that notwithstanding
they might neither be Bishops, not yet perpetual Moderators. For the several
opinions specified in your Majesty's Paper, three of them, by easy and fair
accommodati^n (as we declared before) are soon reduced and united amongst
themselves, and may be holden without ecesse from the received Judgment of the
Christian Church* by such as are far from m^^iting that Aspersion, which is
cast upon the Reformed Divines, by Popish Writers, that they have divided
themselves from the Common and received Judgment of the Christian Church; which
Imputation, we hope, was not in your Majesty's intention to lay upon us,
until it be made clear that it is the common and received Judgment of the
Christian Church that now is, or of that in former Ages, that the Angels of the
Churches were Bishops having Prelacy as well over Pastors as People within
their Churches.

In the following Discourse we did deny, that the Apostles were to have any
Successors in their Office, and affirmed only (...) Orders of Ordinary and
Standing Officers in the Church, vizt. Presbiters and Deacons. Concerning the
former of which your Majesty refers to what you had in part already declared:
That in those things which were extraordinary in the Apostles, as namely, the
Measure of their Gifts, etc. They had no Sucessors in cundem graedum; but in
those things which were not extraordinary, as the Office of Teaching and Power
of Governing (which are necessary for the Service of the Church in all times)
they were to have and had no Successors: Where your Majesty deli^^^s a
Doctrine new to us. Namely, that the Apopost^es had Successors into their
Offices, not into their (...): For (besides that, Succession is not (...) into
Abiliti^s* but into Offic^* We cannot say, that one (...) another in his (...)*
o^ (...), or Patts, but into his Room and Function, (...) ^^nceive, that the
Office Apostolical was (...) in whole, because their Mission and (...) was ^o,
and the service or work of* Teaching and Governing being to continue in all
times does not render their Office Ordinary; as the Office of Moses was not
rendered Ordinary, because many works of Government exercised by him, were
re-committed to the standing Elders of Israel: And if they have Successors, it
must be, either into their whole Office, or into some parts: Their Successors
into the whole (however differing from them in measure of Gifts and peculiar
Qualifications) must be called Apostles, the same Office gives the (...)
Denomination, and then we shall confess that Bishops, if they be their
Successors in Office, (...) of Divine Institution, because the Apostolical
Office him so; if their Successors come into part of their Office only, the
Presbiters may as well be called their (...)* ^^ the Bishops, and so indeed
they are called by (...) of the ancient Fathers, (...), Origin, (...), and
others: Whereas in much the Apostle^ (...) not properly Successors into Office,
but the ordin^ry Power of Teaching and Governing (which (...) the Church for
(...)) is (...) and (...) in the hands of ordinary Officers by a (...) and
Commission according to the rules of (...) and calling in the word, (...) the
Bishop has (...) yet produced for himself, and without which he cannot
challenge it upon the (...) by the (...) without (...).

And whereas your (...) of their work (...) in the Apostles, we could wish that
you had declared whether it belong to their Mission or Unction; for we humbly
conceive, that their Authorative Power to do their Work in all places of the
world did properly belong to their Mission, and consequently that their Office,
as well as their Abilities was extraordinary and so by your Majesty's own
concession not to be succeeded into by the Bishops.

As to the Orders of standing Officers of the Church your Majesty does reply,
That although in the places cited, Phil. 1. 1. 1 Timothy 3. 8. there be no mention
but of the two Orders only of Bishops or Presbiters, and Deacons, Yet it is not
thereby proved that there is no other standing Office in the Church besides,
which we humbly conceive is justly proved, not only because there are no other
named, but because there is no rule of Ordeyning any third, no Warrant or way
of Mission, and so the Argument is as good, as can be made, a non cause ad non
effectum; sor we do not yet apprehend that the Bishops pretending to the
Apostolic Office do also pretend to the same manner of Mission, nor do we know
hat those very many Divines that have afferted two orders only, have concluded
it from any other grounds then the Scriptures cited.

There appears (as your Majesty says) two other manifest reasons why the
Office of Bishops might not be so proper to be mentioned in those places. And
we humbly conceive there is a third more manifest then those two, vizt,
because, It was not.

The one reasun given by your Majesty, is because in the Churches which the
Appostles themselves planted; they placed Presbiters under them for the Office
of Teaching, but reserved in their own hands the Power of Governing those
Churches for a longer, or shorter time before they set Bishops over them. Which
under your Majesty's favor is not so much a reason why Bishops are not
mentiioned to be in those places as that they indeed were not; the variety of
reasons (may we say or conjectures) rendered why Bishops were not set up at
first, as namely because fit men could not be so soon found out, which is
Epiphanius his reason, or for remedy of Schism, which is Jeromes reason, or
because the Apostles saw it not expedient, which is your Majesty's reason does
show that this cause labors under a manifest weakness; for the Apostles
reserving in their own hands the power of Governing, we grant it, they could no
more divest themselves of power of Governing, then (as Dr. Bilson says) they
could loose their Apostleship: had they set up Bishops in all Churches, they
had no more pa^ted with their power of Governing, then they did in seting up
the Presbyters, for we have proved that Presbyters, being called Rulers,
Governors, Bishops, had the power of Governing in Ordinary, committed to them,
as well as the Office of Teaching, and that both the Keys (as they are called)
being by our Savior committed into one hand, were not by the Apostles divided
into two: Nor do we see, how the Apostles could, reasonably commit the
Government of the Church to the Presbyters of Ephesus, Act. 20, and yet reserve
the power of Governing (viz. in Ordinary) in his own hands, who took his solemn
leave of them, as never to see their faces more. As that part of the power of
Government, which for distinction sa^e may be called Legis-Lative, and which is
one of the three forementioned things challenged by the Bishops, viz giving
Rules, the reserving of it in the Apostles hands hindered not, but that in your
Majesty's Judgment Timothy and Titus were Bishops of (...) and Creete, to whom
the Apostles gives Rules for ^^^ring and Governing of the Church: Nor is there
^^y more reason, that the Apostles reserving that part of the Power of
Governing which is called E^^cuti^^ in such cases, and upon such occasions as
they thought (...) should hinder the setting up of Bishops, if they had
intended it; and therefore the reserving of Power in their hands can be no
greater reason why they did not set up Bishops at the first, then that they
never did. And since (by your Majesty's Concession) the Presbiters were placed
by the Apostles first, in the Churches by them planted, and that with Power of
Governi^^, as we prove by Scripture, you must prove the (...) of a Bishop over
the Presbyters by the Apostles in some after times, or else we must conclude
that the Bishop got both his Name and Power of Government out of the Presbyters
hand, as the Tree in the ^^ll m^ns out the stones by little and little as i^
(...) grows*

As touching Phillippi, where you Majesty says, it may be probable there was
yet (...) Bishop, it is certain there were many, like them, (...) at Epheful,
to whom if only the Office of Teaching did belong they had the most labori^us
and honorable part that which was less honorable being reserved in the Apostles
hands and the Churches left in the mean time without ordinary Government.

The other reason given why two Orders only a^^ mentioned in those places is,
because he wrote in the (...) to Timothy and Titus to them that were Bishops, ^^
there was no need to writ any thing concerning the (...) Qualification of any
other sort of (...) then such, as belonged to their Ordination, or inspection,
which were Presbyters and Deacons only, and no Bishops. The former reason why
two only Orders are mentioned in the Epistle to the Philip^^ans, was, because
there was yet ^^ Bishop* this latter reason why the same two only are
mentioned in these Epistles, is because there was no Bishop i^ ^^ Ordained we
might own the reason for good, if there may be found any rule for the
Ordination of the other order of Bishops in some other place of Scripture, but
if the Ordination cannot be found, how should we find the Order? and it is
reasonable to think, that the Apostle in the Chapter formerly alleged, 1 Timothy
3. where he passes immediately from the Bish to the De^^on, would have (...)
expressed, or at least hinted what sort of Bishop he meant whither the Bishop
^ver Presbyters, or the Presbiter Bishop, to have avoided the confusion of the
name, and to have set as it were some mark of difference in the (...) of the
Presbiter-Bish. if there had bin some other Bishop of (...). And whereas your
Man. says there was no need to writ to them about (...) in a distinct sense,
who belonged not to their Ordination and inspection* We conceive that in your
Majesty's judgment, Bishops might then have Ordained Bishops like themselves;
for there was then no Ca^^^ forbiding one single Bish to ordain another of his
own rank, and there being many Cities in Creete, Titus might have found it
expedient (as those ancient Fathers that call him Archbishop think he did) to
have set up Bishops in some of those Cities* So that this reasoning his against
the principles, of those (...) to have been Bishops, for our part we believe
that ^Word-^ belonged unto (...) and Titus with (...) Churches where they might
(...) any time have the Office of Ordeyning and Governing, as it is written in
the same Chapter, 1 Timothy 3. 14, 15. Those things I have written unto th^^, etc.
that thou may know how to be have thy self in the House of God, which is
the Church; and therefore if there had been any proper Character or
Qualification of a Bishop distinct from a Presbyter, if any Ordination or
Office, we think the Apostle would have signified it, but because he did not,
we conclude (and the more strongly from the insufficiency of your Majesty's two
reasons) that there are only two Orders of Officers, and consequently that a
Bishop is not superior to a Presbyter, for we find not (as we said in our
Answer) that one Officer is superior to another, who is of the same Order.

Concerning the Ages succeeding the Apostles.
Your Majesty having in your first Paper said, that you could not in Conscience
consent to Abolish Episcopal Government, because you did conceive it to be of
Apostolical Institution, Practiced by the Apostles themselves, and by them
committed and derived to particular persons as their Successors, and have ever
since til these last times bin exercised by Bishops in all the Churchs of
Christ: We thought it necessary in our Answer, to subjoyne to that we had said
out of the Scriptures, the Judgment of diverse ancient ^riters and Fathers, by
whom Bishops were not acknowledged as a Divine, but as an Ecclesias^ticall
Institution, as that which might very much conduce both to the easing of your
Majesty's scruple, to consider that howsoever Episcopal Government was
generally current, yet the superscription was not jugded Divine, by some of
those that either were themselves Bishops, or lived under that Government, and
to the vindication of the opinion which we hold, from the prejudice of
Novellisme, or of recesse from the Judgment of all Antiquity.

We do as firmly believe (as to matter of fact) that Chrysostom and Austin
were Bishops, as that Aristotle was a Philosopher, Cicer^ an Orator; though we
should rather call out Faith and belief thereof ^^rtaine in matter of fact,
upon humane Testimonies uncontrouled, then infallible, in respect of the
Testimonies themselves. But where is your Majesty says, That the darkness of
the History of the Church, in the time succeeding the Apostles, is a strong
Argument for Episcopacie, which notwithstanding that darkness has found so
full proof by unquestioned Catalogues, as scarce any other matter of fact has
found the like: We humbly conceive, that those forementioned times were dark
to the Catalogue-makers, who must derive the series of Succession from, and
through those Historical darknesses, and so make up their Catalogues very much
from Tradition and Reports, which can give no great Evidence, because they
agree not amongst themselves: and that which is the great blemish of their
Evidence is, that the nearer they come to the Apostles times (wherein they
should be most of all clear, to establish the succession firm and clear at
first) the more doubtful, uncertain, and indeed contradictorie to one
another; are the Testimonies. Some say, that Clemens was first Bishop of Rome,
after Peter; some say, the third: and the intricacies about the Order of
Succession, in Lin^s, Anacletus, Clemens, and another called Cletus (as some
affirm) are inextricable. Some say, that Titus was Bishop of Crate; some say,
Archbishop; and some, Bishop of Dalmatia. Some say, that Timothy was Bishop of
Ephesus; and some say, that John was Bishop of Ephesus at the same time. Some
say, that Polycarpus was first Bishop of Smyrna: another says, that he
succeeded one B^colus; and another, that Arist^ was first. Some say, that
Alexandria had but one Bishop, and other Cities two; and others, that there was
but one Bishop of one City at the same time. And how should those Catalogues
be unquestionable, which must be made up out of Testimonies that fight one with
another? We confess, that the Ancient Fathers, Tertulltan, Irenaus, etc. made
use of Succession, as an Argument against Heretics, or Innovators, to prove
that they had the traduces Apostoliei seminis, and that the Godly and Orthodox
Fathers were on their side. But that which we now have in hand, is Succession
in Office; which, according to the Catalogues, resolves it self into some
Apostle, or Evangelist, as the first Bishop of such a City, or Place, who (as
we conceive) could not be Bishops of those places, being of an higher Office;
though, according to the language of aftertimes, they might by them that drew
up the Catalogues, be so called, because they planted and founded, or watered
those Churches to which they are entitled, and had their greatest residence in
them; or else the Catalogues are drawn from some eminent men that were of
great veneration and reverence in the times and places where they lived, and
Presidents or Moderators of the Presbyteries, whereof themselves were Members:
from whom, to pretend the Succession of after -Bishops, is as if it should be
said, that Caesar was Successor to the Roman Consuls. And we humbly conceive,
that there are some Rites and Ceremonies used continually in the Church of old,
which are asserted to be found in the Apostolical and Primitive times, and yet
have no color of Divine Institution; and, which is Argument above all other,
the Fathers, whose Names we exhibited to your Majesty in our Answer, were
doubtless acquainted with the Catalogues of Bishops who had been before them,
and yet did hold them to be of Ecclesiastical Institution.

And lest your Majesty might reply, That however the Testimonies and
Catalogues may vary, or be mistaken, in the order, or times, or names of those
persons that succeeded the Apostles, yet all agree, that there was a Succession
of some persons; and so, though the credit of the Catalogues be infirmed, yet
the thing intended is confirmed thereby: We grant, that Succession of men to
feed and govern those Churches, while they continued Churches, cannot be
denied, and that the Apostles and Evangelists, that planted and watered those
Churches (though extraordinary and temporary Officers) were by
Ecclesiastical Writers, in compliance with the Language and usage of their
own times, called Bishops; and so were other eminent men, of chief note,
presiding in the Presbyteries of the Cities or Churches, called by such Writers
as wrote after the division or distinction of the names of Presbyters, and
Bishops: But that those first and ancientest Presbyters were Bishops in proper
sense, according to your Majesty's description, invested with power over
Presbyters and people, to whom (as distinct from Presbyters) did belong the
power of Ordaining, giving Rules and Censures; we humbly conceive can never be
proved by authentike or competent Testimonies. And granting, that your Majesty
should prove the Succession of Bishops from the Primitive times seriatim; yet
if these from whom you draw, and through whom you derive it, be found either
more then Bishops, as Apostles, and extraordinary persons, or less then
Bishops, as merely first Presbyters, having not one of the three essentials to
Episcopal Government (mentioned by your Majesty) in their own hand; it will
follow, that all that your Majesty has proved by this Succession, is the
Homonymy and equivocall acceptance of the word Episcopus.

For Clemens his Testimony, which your Majesty conceives to be made use of,
as our old fallacy, from the promiscuous use of the words to infer the
indistinction of the things; we refer our selves to himself in his Epistle,
now in all men's hands, whose Testimony we think cannot be eluded, but by the
old Artifice, of hiding the Bishop under the Presbyters name: for they that
have read his whole Epistle, and have considered, that himself is called a
Bishop, may doubt of Clemens opinion, concerning the distinct offices of
Bishops and Presbyters, or rather not doubt of it, if only his one Epistle,
may be impaneld upon the Inquest. Concerning Ignatius his Epistles, your
Majesty is pleased to use some earnestness of expression, charging some of
late, without any regard of ingenuity or truth, out of their partial
disaffection to Bishops, to have endeavored to discredit his writings. One of
those cited by us, cannot (as we conceive) be suspected of disaffection to
Bishops; and there are great Arguments drawn out of those Epistles themselves,
betraying their insincerity, adulterate mixtures, and interpolations; So that
Ignatius cannot be distinctly known in Ignatius. And if we take him in gross,
we make him the Patron (as Baronious, and the rest of the Popish writers do) of
such rites and observations, as the Church in his time cannot be thought to
have owned. He does indeed give te^timonie to the Prelacy of a Bishop above a
Presbyter, that which may justly render him suspected, is that he gives too
much. Honor (says he) the Bishop as Gods high Priest, and after him you must
honor the King. He was indeed a holy Martyr, and his writings have suffered
Martyrdom, as well as he; Corruptions could not go current, but under the credit
of worthy Names.

That which your Majesty says in Your fourth Paragraph, That we might have
added, (if we had pleased) That James, Timothy, Titus, etc. were constituted
and ordained Bishops, of the forementioned places respectively, and that all
the Bishops of those times, were reputed successors to the Apos^les in their
Episcopal office: We could not have added it without prejudice (as we humbly
conceive) to the truth; for the Apostles did not ordein any of themselves
Bishops, nor could they do it, for even by your Majesty's concession, they were
Bishops before, viz. as they were Apostles, nor could any Apostle his choice of
a certain Region or Place to exercise his function in, whilst he pleased,
render him a Bishop, any more then Paul was Bishop of the Gentiles, Peter of
the Circumcision. Neither did the Apostles ordein the Evangelists Bishops of
those Places unto which they sent them; Nor were the Bishops of those times any
more then as your Majesty says, reputed successors to the Apostles in their
Episcopal office, they came after the Apostles in the Churches by them
planted, so might Presbyters do; but that's not properly succession, at least
not succession into office; and this we say with a Salv^ to our assertion, that
in those times there were no such Bishops distinct from Presbyters: Neither do
we understand, whether the words Episcopal office, in this Section, refer to
the Bishops or Apostles; for in referrence to Apostles, it insinuates a
distinction of the Apostles office, into Apostolical and Episcopal, or that
the office Apostolical, was wholly Episcopal, unto neither of which we can
give our consent for reasons forementioned. To the testimonies by us recited in
proof of two only Orders, Your Majesty answers first, that the promiscuous use
of the names of Bishops and Presbyters, is imported; That which your Majesty
not long ago called our old fallacy, is now Your answer, only with this
difference, We under promiscuous names hold the same office: Your Majesty under
promiscuous names supposes two, which if as it is often asserted, was but once
proved* We should take it for a determination of this controversy. Secondly,
that they relate to a School-point, or a nicety, utrum Episcopat^^ sit ordo vel
gradus, both sides of the questionists or disputants in the mean time
acknowledging the right of Church Government in the Bishops alone; It is
confessed by us, that that question as it is stated by Popish Authors, is a
curious nicety, to which we have no eye or reference; for though the same
officers may differ fromand excel others of the same order in gifts or
qualifications, Yet the office it self, is one and the same, without difference
or degrees, as one Apostle or Presbyter, is not superior to another in degree
of office; they that are of the same order are of the same degree, in respect
of office, as having Power and Authority to the same Acts. Nor does the
Scripture warrant or allow, any superiority of one over another of the same
order; and therefore the proving of two orders only in the Church, is a
demonstration, that Presbyters and Bishops are the same. In which point, the
Scripture will counter-ballance the testimonies of those that assert three
degrees or orders, though ten for one. But for easing of your Majesty of the
trouble of producing testimonies against those cited by us, We make this humble
motion, that the Regiments on both sides may be discharged out of the field,
and the point disputed by Dint of holy Scripture, id verum quod primum. Having
passed through the Argumentative parts of your Majesty's Reply, wherein we
should account it a great happiness, to have given your Majesty any
satisfaction, in order whereunto You pleased to honor us with this employment,
We shall contract our selves in the remainder, craving your Majesty's pardon,
if You shall conceive us to have been too much in the former, and too little in
that which follows. We honor the Pious intentions and munificence of Your
Royal Progenitors, and do acknowledge that ornamentall accessions granted to
the Person, do not make any substantial change in the office; the real
difference between that Episcopal Government, which first obtained in the
Church, and the present Hierarchy, consists in ipso regimine and modo
regiminis, which cannot be clearly demonstrated in particulars, until it be
agreed on both sides, what that Episcopacy was then, and what the Hierarchy is
now, and then it would appear, whether these three forementioned essentialls of
Episcopal Government, were the same in both: For the power under Christian
Princes, and under Pagan, is one and the same, though the exercise be not. And
we humbly receive your Majesty's Pious advertisement, (not unlike that of
Constantines) stirring us up as men unbyassed with private interests, to study
the nearest accommodation and best resemblance to the Apostolical and
Primitive times. But for your Majesty's Salve to the Bishops sole Power, of
Ordination and Jurisdiction, and that distinction of Ordination, Authoritative
in the Bishop, and Concomitant in the Presbytery, which You seem to found upon
these two Texts, 2 Timothy 1. 6. 1 Timothy 4. 14. and which is used by D. Bilson, and
other defenders of Episcopacy, in explication of that Cannon of the fourth
Council of Carthage, which enjoins the joins imposition of the Bishops and
Presbyters hands, We shall give your Majesty an account, when we shall be
called to the disquisition thereof; Albeit that we do not for the present see,
but that this Proviso of your Majesty, renders our accommodation to the
Apostolical and Primitive times (where unto You did exhort us) unseasonable.
We not withstanding, do fully profess our acknowledgement of subordination of
the outward exercise of Jurisdiction, to the Sovereign Power, and our
accomptablenesse to the Laws of the Land. As for your Majesty's three questions
of great importance, Whether there be a certain form of Government left by
Christ or his Apostles, to be observed by all Christian Churches; Whether it
bind perpetually, or be upon occasion alterable in whole, or in part; Whether
that certain form of Government, be the Episcopal, Presbyterian, or some
other, differing from them both: The whole volume of Ecclesiastical Policy, is
contained in them; and we hope that neither your Majesty expected of us a
particular answer to them at this time, nor will take offense at us, if we hold
only to that which is the question, in order to the Bill of Abolition; for we
humbly profess our readiness to serve your Majesty, answering these or any
other questions, within our proper Cognizance, according to the proportion of
our mean abilities.

For your Majesty's condescension, in vouchsafing us the liberty and honor of
examining Your learned Reply, clothed in such excellency of style, and for Your
exceeding candor, showed to such men as we are; and for the acceptance of our
humble duty, we render to your Majesty most humble thanks, and shall pray, That
such a pen in the hand of such abilities, may ever be employed in a subject
worthy of it.

That your Majesty would please to consider, that in this point under debate,
succession is not the best clew, and most certain, and ready way to find out
the Original; for to go that way, is to go the furthest way about, yea, to go
backward; and when You are at the spring, viz. the Scripture it self* You go to
the rivers end, that You may seek the spring.

And that the Lord would guide your Majesty, and the two Houses of Parliament,
by the right hand of his Council, and show You a happy way of healing our
unhappy differences, and of settling the Commonwealth of Jesus Christ, which
is the Church; so as all the members thereof, may live under You in all
Godliness, Peace, and Honesty.

Imprimatur Ia. Cranford.

October. 19. 1648.

FINIS.

