A Short TREATISE DISCOVERING THE prevailing Excellency of the death of Christ
with the Father, by way of opposition to that DOCTRINE, That Christ dyed alike
for All.

Declaring in whom only the Saints happiness does consist by means of this
their purchased REDEMPTION: ALSO THEIR FREEDOM FROM the (...) and (...) of the
LAW.

Written for the satisfaction of some, if it may be.

BY RICHARD MARRYAT.

And one of the Elders said unto me, weep not, behold the Lion which is of the
Tribe of Juda, the root of David, b^th obtained to open the Book, and to
unloose the Seals thereof. Rev. 5.5. And they sang a new Song, saying, thou
art worthy to take the Book, and to unloose the Seals thereof, because thou
wast killed, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every Kindred and
Tongue, and People, and Nation. Rev. 5.9. But none could learn that Song but
the Hundred Forty and Four Thousand which were bought from the Earth. Rev.
14.3. London Printed for William Larnar, and are to be sold at his Shop in
little Eastcheape, 1642.

To the Christian Reader.
JEsus Christ, who is the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express
Image and Character of his Person, of whose fullness all the Saints receive,
and grace for grace, is the only bright and morning Star, that brings in all
light and understanding in divine mysteries, so that where he withholds (who
shuts and none can open) there is nothing but groping in Egyptian darkness:
Hence have the great Rabbis and learned Doctors so in all ages stumbled at the
stumbling stone, even at this Jesus, he not unvailing himself, who is as a
sealed fountain, and a hidden vision, which neither learned nor unlearned can
read, but to whom he opens (who opens and none can shut) there is the
knowledge of good sayings, and dark Parables, which are as Paradoxes to the
world, which in wisdom know not him who is God over all, blessed for ever,
Amen. So that hence Christian Reader, who art thus taught of God, and
comprehended in the glory of Christ: I may duly challenge, yea, and cannot but
expect, and be persuaded of thy compassion and brotherly pity, in case I have
in any wise miscarryed, who am privy to my self of exceeding insufficiency in
these high affairs of the Son of glory; who while on earth, was in heaven,
dwelt in that light that no man ever could, or had he all the abilities and
prudence of the first Adam, which indeed would the more blind him, being that
thy proud imaginations are subjected to Jesus Christ, knowing that thou have
nothing but what thou have received, and by grace thou art that thou art: as
for others that have not seen his Glory, which is as a consuming fire,
destroying and devouring the proud thoughts of the flesh, I cannot expect that
such should be transformed, but there will proceed from the spirit of pride
and blindness, swelling words, bitterness, evil and malicious reports,
judging and condemning me; as many, by reason of this matter in hand have
already done, but I pass not to be judged by man, knowing that there is one
that beholds all the children of men, and judges righteous judgment, who
notwithstanding their words are and shall be as drawn swords, yet will keep
me and all the sons of mercy from every evil word and work unto his
everlasting Kingdom.

Secondly, Hence also have thou cause to take a view of, and well weigh and
consider this Treatise, notwithstanding any insufficiency of the Writer,
knowing that the Lord commits his treasures into earthen vessels, and not
knowing but that this testimony may be the Lords, who breathes where he
lists, and usually manifests himself by weak and unlikely instruments, that
so the excellency may be of himself and not of man.

Thirdly, Neither do I fear that thou will charge me with presumption, for if
he be the only day star, there then lies an especial engagement on such
that are taught by him, that they sound forth and declare what they have
received, which is one principal end of this communicating unto them which are
his witnesses, his Vials, his Trumpets, his mouth whereby he utters, powers
out, and testifies his great affairs and high Acts, and he gives in charge,
when thou art converted, strengthen thy brother; what ye have seen in secret,
proclaim on the house top; he never lighted a candle to be put under the
bushel, but still wrought up his servauts into a spirit of Testimony, We
cannot but speak the things (says the Apostles) that we have seen and heard.

When Jesus Christ ascended on high, he gave gifts unto men, not that they
should be held in unrighteousness, but for the building up of the Saints, and
perfecting his body, and only the evil servant that looks on God, as reaping
where be sowed not, hides his Talent, did he know him as the true God, sowing
and communicating all, he would have improved his Talent, to the honor of God;
and this is one prevailing cause with me to make me speak thus openly.

Another cause also, being that false record which some have given concerning
my Judgment, and this matter following, being, as they say, one and the same
with the doctrines of universal Redemption, which is the only and maine thing
that is in this matter contended against, as I doubt not but any indifferent
Reader will easily discern and soon perceive, that such Reporters were too
willing to speak perverse things against me; men always have, and still do
run upon extremes, as in many other things, so in this concerning the death
of Christ: some say that Christ died alike for all, others that he died only
for the Elect; against these two I have hear to deal, both of which do fail
in answering the Scriptures, and the mind of God in them, we must distinguish
concerning the outward Court and the inner; the outward is for the Gentiles,
that is, such as are not converted to the faith; for we are not to conceive
that there is a difference between the believing Gentle and the believing
Jews, both being one in Christ Jesus, and especially subjects of Grace; but
the Gentles were once a people out of the Covenant of Grace, and rejected, in
comparison of the Jews, and to a people in such a state, in which all are,
notwithstanding they have the means and ministry of grace amonst them, till
converted to the faith, does the Spirit allude under the expression of
Gentiles, but yet to them belongs an outward Court, through which the passage
is into the inner Court or Temple, by it being meant the outward dispensation,
or the letter that speaks to Reason, through which God works, accompanying it
with his mighty power, in raising the soul to faith, for says the Scripture,
How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard: now this being given
to the Gentiles, here are hatched many errors by such as are the inhabitants
thereof, as Free Will, and Falling away from the state of the peculiar love of
God, and likewese this of universal redemption whereby they do tread down
the holy City, which is the dwelling place only of the heirs of life, it being
the mystery hid in God, or the invisihle truth, or temple whereinto only such
that God by the spirit of wisdom and Revelation opens unto, and by a mighty
arm reaches in, do enter and sit down, and worship it; being the perfection
if beauty, or the Lamb it self, which is that great mystery the Apostle
speaks of, and Angels pry into, into which not one could ever enter or pass
one jot beyond the outward Court, did not the Holy Ghost it self over-shaddow
the soul and make it a cirizen of this holy city.

Herewith agrees this following testimony, but that I may the more fully and
plainly witness to the truth against the judgment of such that say Christ
died only for the Elect, and to uphold, that do affirm, that by the world in
many places is meant the Elect, and by such general expressions as (All) and
every one is meant only some: I shall here apply my self having spoke but
little thereof in the following Treatise, principally dealing against that of
his dying alike for All, to show the ungroundednesse of such expressions.

As first concerning those general expressions, 2 Cor. 5.14.15. Heb. 2.9. and
many other places, we may not restrain and limit them; for is it not flatly to
oppose God, that when he says All, we should answer and say no, but some,
when he says every one, we should say no, not every one, and so too much like
James and Jambres, to withstand the Lord; is it not as equal a crime to add,
as to diminish; but yet is there not as good ground to affirm that by some is
meant All, and when God restifies but a remnant shall be saved, we may as well
say all shall be saved, does not such a limitation of such generals, open a
door to the over turning and rasing out all direct, absolute, and positive
truths of God; yea doubtless for as for that part of the new Covenant which is
firm and everlasting, they shall be all taught of God, no may we say upon as
equal a ground, but some shall be taught of God, some shall believe and know
his mysteries without his teaching even by the light, of Nature; so likewise
when the Scripture declares the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin, and
by him we have the forgiveness of all iniquity; may not this be contradicted
in the same manner, by all, is meant some, therefore we have but the
forgiveness of some iniquity by the blood of Christ, some we must procure the
forgiveness of by our ^^re, or mourning, or prayers; so when the Spirit also
witnesses concerning the Body and Church of Christ, that by the effectual
working of every part the body receives increase, as Ephesians. 4.16. No, may it
be answered, by Every, we must not understand every member of the Church of
Christ, some are, and may be dead, unusefull and unprofitable, though truly
and really members of the body of Christ, which in a body natural is not so; a
good, or rather unsound Argument indeed for such who would maintain Infants to
be members of the Church of Christ, but by such manner of Arguments, how shall
we destroy the truth and sit down in darkness.



Judea and the Regions round about came out to John's Baptism;

And the Regions, now by Regions it were rediculous to understand People;
therefore not all the people, but people out of all parts came, etc. and so all
Judea came to John's Baptism.

Concerning the word World, we may not conceive it to be meant the number of
Elect in any Nation, John 17.9. 20. But secondly, World in such places, as Joh.
3.16. Joh. 12.47. and others of the like nature, be meant the Elect, then do
these places plainly declare, that even the heirs of special love, and
chosen people may, yea, and shall perish, and be damned, as in the following
Discourse is discovered; but how highly abusive are such Arguments, wounding
and staining all the glory of God, who rests in his Love, and repentance is hid
from his eyes, who has made known to the heirs of salvation, the
immutability of his counsel, with whom there is no variableness, neither
shadow by turning, so that he, who is the hope and Savior of Israel, cannot be
as a wayfaring man that tarries for a night.

How greatly does it then concern such that profess knowledge of the true God
and to plead his honor, as it beseemes indeed the sons of Grace to have
care of dealing perversely with the Lord; were it not better if we cannot
sound his wisdom and see his footesteps in many things, to cry out with Paul,
Romans 11.33. Oh the deepenesse both of the riches and knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his judgments, and ways past finding out; rather than thwart
his truth, which indeed devils hate, men persecute, the wise and learned
after the flesh blaspheme, and nature stands astonished and amazed at; but is
it not the life, the joy, the crown of the Saints? with which, so as they have
union, so have they strength in their souls, eat of the fatness of Gods
House, have fellowship with the Son, and read the Mysteries of the Lamb, in
the knowledge whereof, that thou with all the Saints may increase with the
increase of God, and grow up to a perfect man in Christ, is the desire and
hearty request of

Richard Marryat.

A TREATISE DISCOVERING The prevailing Excellency of the DEATH of CHRIST with
the FATHER, by way of Opposition To that Doctrine, That CHRIST dyed a like for
all.
IN the Epistle to the Romans, Chapter the Seventh: Paul that able Minister of
the righteousness of Faith, applying himself to inform the Church of her
freedom from the Law, shows how long the Law stands in force, in these words
contained in the first verse, The Law has dominion over a man so long as he
lives, or rather, as we shall see by the following matter, so long as it
(meaning the Law) lives, which may indeed, without wrong to the seope of the
Apostle concerning the substance he alludes unto, be taken up according to the
former, only that his allusion in the second and third Verses cannot be so
proper.

For so long as a man lives, the Law is his Lord, that is, till he become dead
to himself and live in another, as it was with the Apostle himself, and is
with all believing Saints, according to that, Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, and the life that I live is by the Faith of the Son of
God, even till this new life be breathed in, the Law exercises dominion over a
man, but when he no longer lives, Christ is his life, as Col. 3.4. Ioh. 11.25.
1 Ioh. 5.12. then the Law cannot have dominion over him, for now he is a new
creature, and walks in newness of life, 2 Cor. 5.17. Esaias 43.19. Rev. 21.5.
and therefore the Law, which is the Lord, the Husband, the Rule, the Line, for
the old Man, the Natural Man, the Carnal Man cannot have to do with him, it
being not answerable to that new creature, that is, of such a heavenly, divine,
Spiritual, and Evangelicall being, and is above the Law, as much as heaven is
above the earth, yea, the new Adam above the old. 1 Cor. 15.47, 48. For as is
the heavenly, so are they that are heavenly, and therefore they cannot have
union with the Law, or it have dominion over them, they being highly advanced
above Dominions, Principalities and Powers, sitting with Christ in heavenly
places Ephe. 2.6. Rev. 12.5. and therefore, says the Church, Other Lords have
had dominion over us, but now are they dead unto us, and we are called by thy
Name;

So that the force of the Apostles Argument must needs lie here, that if it be
so that these Romans are dead to the Law, that their old man is crucified,
Gal. 2.19. that they are ingrafted into the new and true Olive, Romans 11.17.
that they are made alive in Christ, so as that now he is become their Lord,
their Husband, Psalm. 45.11. 2 Cor. 11.2, 3. then the Law cannot exercise
authority or Lordship over them.

So that the matter the Apostle here drives at, stands good, the word being
lively taken up, but we shall find this interrupts the Apostles method of
expressing himself, for he in this first verse, sets forth the Law, as having
a dominion belonging to it where it is in force, in the next verse, that he may
illustrate his mind, he compares it to the husband, who is the party to whom
dominion belongs, and the wife the party in subjection; then to set forth to
these believing Romans their feedome from the Law, he argues the case thus,
that if the husband be dead, then the wife she is no longer held under his
power, but is delivered from the law of the man that was her husband; so also
the Law being dead, which is the husband, the Lord over the earthly and
natural man, then are such to whom it is become thus dead, free from the power
or sovereignty thereof, therefore in the 6. Ver. of the 7. to the Romans, he
says thus, But now we are delivered from the Law, that being dead, wherein we
were held, meaning the Law being dead, so also 2 Cor. 3.7.11. and Gal. 4.24.
and 30. verses, so Heb. 10.9. where he shows the taking away the Law which is
abolished. In respect of ministration toward all, that the Gospel, the glad
tidings, the righteousness of Faith, not the Law, the killing letter, the
righteousness of man is to be preached to all people and to all persons, and
not only so, but to be abolished, in respect of its power and dominion over
the body and Spouse of Christ: so that such as live and move in the Law they
are none of his, none of the childten of promise, they are but Ishmaels sons
of the bond woman, and shall not be heirs with the sons of the free woman,
as Gal. 4.30. and Genesis 21.10. and then also the husband being dead to the wife,
that he carmot direct, injoyne or command her, even the wife also is as dead
to such a husband, as not in any wise to stand under his power; and so the case
stands between the Law and the believer, that it being dead to him he also
becomes dead to it, that whenever it speaks, it is as the voice of a
stranger which he will not hear, John 10.5. though it came in never so smooth
a language, and with words as soft as butter to draw him from his Virgin and
upright affection, Cant. 1.2. etc. and therefore does the Apostle change his
voice in that manner; one while he says the Law is become dead to the
believer, another while that the believer is dead to it, for the mighty power
that works the death of the Law to the man, must needs work the death of the
man to it, and therefore in the 4. verse, the Apostle says, So you are become
dead to the Law.

Then having by clear and strong consequence showed their freedom from
servitude or bondage, he falls upon a discovery how this freedom is brought
about, which he says is by the body of Christ, for no other way is there
benefit arising to any.

The first thing I shall mind, is, that it must needs be by a mighty working
of the power and Spirit of God, that his death to the Law must be wrought.

Man, as he lies in himself, spends and lays out his strength, and all his
endeavors in obedience to the Law, working out a right eousnesse to commend
himself before God, and to raise a relation of being a Son and a Servant to
him; Thus Paul pressed after a righteousness, being under the Law, as himself
testifies, Galat. 1.14. Acts 9.1. Phil. 3.6. And was blameless concerning the
Law, had a hot zeal, but not according to knowledge, till it pleased the Lord
to open his eyes, and reveal his Son Christ Jesus to him, and to show him the
fellowship of the Mystery of his glorious Gospel, which no man naturally can
ever see or discern, John 3.5. and verse. 31. 1 Cor. 2.14. This the Jews were
so zealous after, seeking to establish their own righteousness, Romans 10.2, 3.
And this many sons of Hagar, who have high thoughts of their being believers,
and beloved ones in the sight of God, do rise early, and lie down late,
eating the bread of carfulness, must present fair Jewels to this Calfe, and
their Children even the fruit, vigor, and strength of their Souls to this
Molech, it is their glory, their riches, yea, their life, for take away their
righteousness, then goes all their hope, all their comfort; therefore skin for
skin, and all they have will they give for this: So that such as bring them the
doctrine of the Law, they are the soundest Ministers, and the wellcommest to
them, as Christ says, If one come in his own name, him ye will receive, but
he that shall come forth with the message of the most High, even in the Gospel
of Jesus Chrift, which will in no wise give the creature the least glory, but
spoils him, and makes his comeliness become rottenness, proclaiming the rest
of the Lord, as Isa. 30.15. burning up all their pride, and consuming all their
honor, Mal. 4.1. Declaring their righteousness to be the greatest
wickedness, such a one, unless the Lord in grace open the mystery, which
neither learned nor unlearned can read or understand, Isa. 29.11, 12. They
look upon such a person as a pestilent, mischievous person, as an imposter, and
deceiver, as an Heretic, yea, a Libertine, and what not: so dear and
precious is their own excellency, and so fast and strong a league is there
between the Law and themselves, and therefore did the Scribes and Pharisees so
storm and rage against Christ Jesus, when he declared that Publicans and
Harlots should inherit the Kingdom of heaven before them, nothing filled them
with malignity so, as did the clear doctrine of the Gospel, which did trample
down, vilify, and count as dross and dung their righteousness: and no
greater denial has the Gospel at any time, then from such persons who have
the greatest possessions of this nature, so that to make men become dead to
this their Crown and glory, it must needs be by a supernatural, heavenly, and
divine power coming into the soul, presenting a surpassing glory, even the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, the shining forth whereof, causes repentance
from such dead works, as it is written, He that believes, has ceased from
his own works, Heb. brings a man with Elisha, from his plough, and draws out
the soul in hungring and thirsting after the fatness of Gods house, breathing
after the person of Christ, the fairest of ten thousands, even as the Heart
pants after the Rivers of water, causes him then with Paul, to count all but
dross and dung, which was before of so high esteem, Phil. 3.7. and that that
was his glory, becomes his shame, and he sees it then to be as a menstruous
cloth, and filthy rags, Zach. 3.4. This cannot be effected but by the mighty
power of God, which raised Christ from the dead, as Ephesians. 1.19, 20. Col. 2.12,
13. The which power that raised him from the grave, can cause things to be that
were not, and dead things to live; so giving eyes to the blind, ears to the
deaf, that they may see and hear those things which the eye of man has not
seen, neither the ear of man heard, as 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. and to this agrees
that testimony in Galat. 5.16. If you walk in the Spirit, ye shall not fulfill
the lusts of the flesh: The which amongst the rest, are the works of the Law,
Phil. 3.3. The Apostle says, We rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no
confidence in the flesh, and then manisests what he means by the flesh, and
amongst the rest he brings in verse. 6. The righteousness of the Law as a
fleshly thing, or the work of the flesh, and therefore in that foresaid place,
Call. 5. v. 18. having spoken those foregoing words, verse. 16. he interprets
what he means by the flesh, for says he, if ye be led by the Spirit, you are
not under the Law, so that to take a man off from the Law, or to make him to be
dead unto it, must needs be by the commings in of the Spirit of God, that must
exercise power, parting relations, though never so near, and dear, revealing
a surpassing more excellent glory, and so transforming from glory to glory, as
2. Cor. 3. etc,

So that it most plainly appears, in that the Apostle says, You are become
dead to the Law by the body of Christ, That all his spiritual power is
communicated to the sons of glory, through the Sacrifice of the body of
Christ, and to this, largely answer many places of Scripture with a joint
harmony, as Romans 6.6. Our old man is crucified with Christ, whereby the Spirit
of God commends to us, that in the crucifying of Christ, all his body or Spouse
was crucified also; That in the sacrificing of himself there was a prevailing
with God, that the old Adam might be destroyed in his people, that they might
live in him; he gave himself, that he might procure to himself a peculiar
people, zealous, of good worth; to be a peculiar people, is to be differenced
from the world, bearing the Image of Christ, being heavenly, as is the Lord
from heaven, neither can any be zealous of good works, tell they know what is
the good and acceptable will of God, which no natural man can know, now all
this Christ gave himself for, so again, 1 Pet. 1.18. There it is manifested,
that the redemption from the vain conversation, comes by the blood of Christ,
for the vain conversation cannot be taken away, but by the mighty operation of
the Spirit of God, destroying the body of sin, as Romans 8.13. Even this also is
imparted through the blood of Christ, so also, Heb. 9.15. How much more shall
the blood of Christ purge your Conscience from dead works, to serve the living
God, to purge from dead works, must needs be by the breathing in the Spirit of
Life, which produces living works from the creature to a living Creator, till
then all works are but dead works, though performed with abundant zeal and
strength, the person himself being dead from whom they proceed, this also
comes by the blood of Christ, so perfecting of the faith is through it also
communicated, Heb. 13.20, 21. Yea, all that grace which is so full of life and
power to the Saints, comes by Jesus Christ, John 1.17. and 16.14. verses, The
which grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Apostle still in all his Epistles,
says that the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ may be with them all, 2 Thessalonians.
3.17, 18.

To this end if we consider the nature of Redemption, what it commends unto us,
and then how it is brought about, we shall see the same cleared up, that all
spiritual strength is communicated in, by, and through Jesus Christ, in Isa.
35.9. Isa. 51.11. Psalm. 107.2. Rev. 14.3. All which places do lively set
forth, that as there is but a number redeemed, some being unclean, some
ravenous beasts, some the earth, which are not redeemed, so also that all these
redeemed, either are, or shall be able to sing, to give thanks to God, and to
the Lamb that sits on the Throne for evermore, and only the redeemed shall
learn this new song, Rev. 14.3. And walk in the way of holiness, which none
can do, till made alive in Jesus Christ, for a dead thing can do none of
these things, as all men by nature, being but as a rotten carcass, in respect
of spiritual services, with which we have to do, and of which only the Lord
accounts, as 1 Pet. 2.5. John 4.24. 2 Cor. 3.17. All the services of natural
men, being but fleshly, unclean, and dead services, though accompanied with
never so much zeal, but this redemption that is accompanied with this
everlasting power, comes only by the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14.
Where the testimony of the Apostle is this, That the believers have their
redemption by the blood of Christ, he says not they have part of their
redemption by this blood, but whatsoever may be said to be redemption, so that
if faith, if believing, and knowing of the mystery of the Gospel be any part
of redemption, or make redemption to be redemption, he declares plainly, that
this they have by the blood of Christ, and so more fully, in Rev. 5. Where thus
expressly speaks the Spirit, Thou have redeemed us out of every kindred, and
tongue, and nation, and herein commends to us, that they are a people
differenced from, and redeemed out of others, which cannot be but by faith, and
fellowship in the mystery of the Gospel, and this faith, or difference from
others, is only wrought by the blood of Christ, as before is proved, therefore
is the Spirit that dwells in believers, called the Spirit of the Son God,
Gal. 4.6.

Object. But some are said to be bought, which deny the Lord that bought them,
2 Pet. 2.1. and therefore all are redeemed, the which words cannot stand in
relation to the Church, for then he should have said, denying the Lord that
bought you.

Answ. That all men are bonght by Jesus Christ, but how? Not in respect of the
redemption from the guilt of sin, and wrath to come, but in respect of their
enjoying their lives and being, for all men have their natural subsistence by
him, by him do all things consist, and thus he bought them, in that he holds
the hands of wrath and justice for a season, and therefore these now by the Law
of equity ought to honor him, for God would have all men to honor the Son as
they honor the Father; Now for these to deny him, trample him under foot by
whom they have all the mercies that ever they enjoyed, how then shall these
escape swift damnation? Thus may we see clearly that such as are the proper
subjects of wrath to come, do receive mercy, are clothed and sed in this life
as well, yea, commonly beyond the Sons of promise, who are as clearly
differenced from them, notwithstanding the poverty of one for a moment, and the
barn filled with Corn for a night with the other; the one sort being out of
Christ Jesus, are out of the promise, the other being in Christ Jesus, are
under the promise, yea, all the promises are yea and Amen to them, yea, they
are in Christ Jesus, all that are not Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13.5. and therefore
freed from condemnation, Romans 8.1. Romans 8, 9, 10. yea, the knowledge of the
mystery of the hidden Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.7. which are as a sealed Book to
others, is opened to them, Rev. 5. Isa. 29.11. the which, all the wisdom and
learning of the flesh cannot in the least measure reach unto, Luke 10.21. 1
Cor. 11.19, 20, 21. but it must be brought into the soul by the revelation and
teaching of the Spirit, John 16.13, 14, 15. 1 Cor. 2.11, 12, 14. 1 John 2.27.
then this knowledge comes by the blood of Christ, who thereby has prevailed to
open the book, Rev. 5.5. and therefore is he faidito give his people an
understanding, whereby they know him that is true, 1 John 5.20. the like is
testisied concerning Faith, that he is the author thereof, Acts 3.16. Heb.
12.2. Looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our Faith, that Jesus that
endured the Cross, as in the same verse, the Spirit witnesses even Jesus to
him that was born and so called, Mat. 1.21. So that it is not as some would
have it, that the Godhead only or simply, he as God is the Author, that is, the
causer of faith, that gives the first being to it, but looking to Jesus, giving
us to understand, that as the Godhead is the Author thereof, so likewise is the
Manhood this so prevailing with the Father in the Sacrifice thereof, so as that
now, he that was borne, is set down in the Fathers Throne, as he himself
says, I over came and sat down in my Fathers Throne, Rev. 3.21. which
overcomming is by worth and excellency of his death, as Christ says concerning
his Spouse, Cant. 6.4. Psalm. 45.11. and she overcomes him through her beauty,
Cant. 7.10. and perfect comeliness which he has put upon her, Ezekiel. 16.14. so
that as the Manhood works not at all without the Godhead, so neither does the
Godhead work without the Manhood, as he himself says, The Father works
hitherto, and I work, so that as the Father quickneth whom he will, so the Son
quickens whom he will likewise, which shows their ioynt-working, that
whatsoever the Father wills, the Son wills, and whatsoever the Son wills, the
Father wills also, as in this he manifests, I and my Father are one, and the
Spirit shall take of mine and show unto you, for all that the Father has is
mine, even as all the Son has is the Fathers, John 16.15. John 17.10. Now in
that all life, faith, spiritoall knowledge comes by the Son, how comes he to be
thus highly exalted, but by reason of the prevailing excellency of the
Sacrifice of himself, as Phil. 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. and he has a purchased
possession, which consists not in meat and drink, but is a Kingdom full of
joy; and peace of the Holy Ghost, and shall for ever remain, now the Spirit
makes all this appear to be purchased by Jesus Christ, Therefore are believers
said to be Gods workmanship, created in Christ Jesus: God moves not the least
out of his Son.

Object. That Faith cannot be the purchase of Christ, because Faith is by the
Spirit of God, which is too high to be purchased by the blood of CHRIST, and
therefore it must proceed from a higher cause, even the mere good pleasure of
God.

Answ. To which by way of answer.

1. To show what may be understood concerning this word purchase, by which I
understand no more then according to that in Revel. 5.5. where it is said, The
Lion of the Tribe of Judah obtained to open the book, which is Christ Jesus,
it being of singular worth and excellency, God so accepting of it, the spirit
and power of working into the hands of Christ, for which end CHRIST gave
himself, as 1 Pet. 3.18. The just for the unjust, that be might bring us to
God, which cannot be without putting life into us, and therefore are we said to
be made nigh unto God by the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 2.13. so that in Tit. 2.14
also Ephesians. 5.26, 27. Declaring the ends that Christ had in his eye, in giving
himself to death, which were as the recompense of reward, and as a means of
comfort and refreshing to him, that by his death he should bring forth such
glorious effects as are there mentioned; and therefore these things being
denied to come by this gift of himself, as effects thereof, and as a thing
purchased thereby, must needs frustrate the end, and aim, and desire of
Christ, and make his death void, as not being of worth or sufficiency to
compass things so glorious, as to bring to God, to purchase to himself a
peculiar people, to sanctify, to cleanse, to perfect, and to make them
spotless and unblameable, all which are cut off, and fall to the ground, if
the Spirit of God which begets faith, and sets down the soul in the holiness
and innocence of Christ come not by this giving himself.

And a second thing by way of answer, to be minded, is, what this Spirit is,
wherein, though I am infinitely short in the comprehending of the height
thereof, and deepnesse of Christ's unfadom'd mysteries, yet I conceive there is
several mistakes, as that the Spirit that dwells in believers, by which they
believe, see, and know the mystery of Christ is the person of the Godhead,
whereas under the word Father sets forth the whole Godhead, as John 14.7, 8, 9,
10. where Christ declares that he that has seen him, has seen the Father, and
shows that all his works of power, and words of wisdom and knowledge were
wrought in him by the Father, and proceeded from none else but from him alone,
and this he teaches us more largely, when he says, the Son does nothing of
himself, but what he sees the Father do, that does he, and the Son knows
not of that day, but the Father only, though he was not ignorant, as he was in
union with the Father, as he says, I in the Father, and he in me; yet as the
Son begotten, and borne, knew not.

Now by the Spirit that has its indwelling and abode in Regenerate persons, is
that breathing forth of power from the Essence of the Godhead, which begets
forms, and raises dead things to life, makes darkness light, sometimes called
seven spirits, by reason of the more abounding, and large breathing, or working
of God and this Spirit that is full of power and life in revealing the true
God, and him whom he has sent, is also the Spirit of the Son, in that God
works not any thing in the new creation, but wholly by, in, and through Jesus
Christ, and therefore this new Spirit reveals both the Father and the Son,
that there is no true knowledge of the one without the other; yea indeed, if we
consider Gods proceeding toward man in the old and first Creation, we shall
find he never moved in the least, but through, and in the Son, Let us make
man: By him were all things made that were made: He upholds all through, and by
the word of his power: So that laying, Before Abraham was, I am, stands true
concerning the Manhood of Christ, all things having their being with God,
things not manifested to us, and so likewise, That I was daily his delight,
Prove. 8. For God ever moved in, and through, and for the excellency of Christ:
much more are all his goings forth according to the new Creation; so that now
the Spirit is thus purchased by Christ, that the worth and virtue of the
Sacrifice of that spotless Lamb did prevail with God to bring forth all his
treasury of grace, and all his glorious works of the new Creation: Or thus, in
that God could in no wise give his spirit of Faith, wisdom and revelation, but
in, and through Christ, by reason that is could not stand with his infinite
holiness and purity to do any thing toward vile and sinful flesh, but in
that holy thing Jesus, and indeed it must needs argue want of the knowledge of
God and his name, which Christ says he has manifested: and why he? but that
in all his testimony declares the Fathers co-working with, and in him, that
conceive that God should give any mercy but wholly in, by, and through Christ.
Again, whereas it is said, these things come from a higher cause then the blood
of Christ, even the mere good pleasure of God.

I answer, that we have cause then without doubt to judge that God would have
given us all things else without him, for if he give the greater, even the
Spirit of faith and wisdom, which is the glory of salvation, that makes
salvation to be salvation, heaven to be heaven, yea God to be God, minding in
relation to the soul; much more would he have given the less, even that which
is a thing of no force, and falls to the ground without any effect, without his
Spirit, so that he would then surely have spared his only, yea, welbeloved Son
from that bitterness and severity of his unexpressible wrath, which made him
cry out, My God my God, why have thou forsaken me? Again, If it be possible,
let this cup pass from me: But it was impossible, for God could not do any
mercy, all the work of Salvation would be spoiled if he drunk it not.

Object. Likewise where it is objected, that Faith is no more the purchase of
Christ then Election.

Answ. I answer, Christ was the first begotten of God, even the first in the
beginning of the Creation, so that Election never entered into the breast of God
before his Christ suffered, so that all his love in Election moved in him, so
as it is said he chose us in him, so that as we have minded, he purchased that
as well as any thing else.

Object. If Faith be purchased by the blood of Christ, then it cannot be the
gift of God, but Ephesians. 2.8 it is said to be the gift of God.

Answ. First, that Christ himself is the gift of God, and therefore whatsoever
comes by him, must needs be given also, shall we therefore say nothing is
purchased by him.

Secondly, we shall find that that which is purchased, is also given, and said
to be given, as Ephesians. 1.14. a possession purchased, yet says Christ, Fear
not little flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you a Kingdom, so
Heb. 2. Behold I and the children which God gave me are for signs and wonders,
yet he says, Feed the flock which Christ has purchased with his blood, Act.
20.28.

Object. But Christ dyed alike for all, therefore Faith is not the purchase of
Christ, for all have not faith: 2. The Gospel is to be preached alike to all:
3. Unbelief is a great sin, and of a high condemning nature.

Answ. First, it is impossible but the death of Christ should fully effect all
things that were thereby intended, for the Manhood that dyed was acted by the
Godhead, Heb. 9.15. He offered himself by the Eternal Spirit; the Son does
nothing of himself, the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper his handiworke,
Isa. 53.10. So that the will of God can in no wise be frustrated, unless there
ware a superior power, and then should he indeed cease to be God, who is from
all Eternity, to Everlasting: But more,

To the first, That he dyed for all, I answer by way of grant, That he did die
for all, even all taken at the largest extent, yet not alike for all; and that
this may appear, considering Christ in his Offices, we shall find they reach
to all, but in a different manner and nature, which will much clear up the
matter of difference.

And first, for his Kingly Office, the Scripture witnesses concerning him,
that the government of all things is in his hands, and that all are subjected
under his power, if we should mind this in respect of his Godhead, so
doubtless none will gainsay: but these testimonies wherein he says, The
Father loves the Son, and has committed all things into his hands, Ioh. 3.35.
Mat. 28.18. so Heb. 2.8. where he says, That all power is mine, both in Heaven
and Earth, and that all things are put in subjection under his feet, Romans
14.9. Though we see not yet all things subdued, this must needs have reference
also to his Manhood, as is declared, Psalm. 2.8. He has given him the Heathen
for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession,
so ver. 10. Be wise now therefore ye Kings, and Learned; kiss the Son lest he
be angry, ye that judge the earth: Why so? Why he is King of kings, and Lord
of lords, he has power in his hands over you all, and this shall one day more
fully appear, that all power and judgment is in his hands, for he shall be
Judge of all, Mat. 16.27. Act. 17.31. so that he has still steered the course
of all things, though his Church has been trampled under foot, and the
adversaries thereof have been drunk with the blood of the Saints, for not
worshipping the Dragon, yet in all these things his will was but fulfilled,
though as these things were done by the adversaries, he was opposed, and they
wager war against him: but now in respect of the vessels of mercy prepared for
glory, he is a King of another nature, and in another manner, subjecting them
to the Scepter of grace, redeeming them out of bondage from Satan, leading
captivity captive, binding the strong man, and setting up his Throne in their
souls, thus is he only King of Saints, riding forth upon the word of truth,
Psalm. 45.4. brings his Church into obedience to himself, sitting upon the
Throne of David, being that one Lord, and one Lawgiver to his spiritual
Subjects, upon whose shoulders the government is laid, Isa. 9. Therefore
commands he all his servants as they tender his honor and Sovereignty, and
their allegiance unto him, not to call any man Lord and Master, or to be the
sertants of men, 1. Cor. 7.23.

Secondly, in respect of his Priestly office, we shall find this of the like
extent, minding it after this different nature also, as first concerning the
enjoyment of natural life, as before was minded, this is one benesit by his
death, otherwise justice must needs break forth in a moment on all the
children of wickedness; but secondly, that he might be the Standard of
Salvation to the world, and an Ensign to the Nations, lift up as the brazen
Serpent in the Wilderdernes, to be preached and propounded to all, to this end
he dyed for all; now he could not be thus preached and propounded to all,
unless he had all fullness in himself, and he would not have all fullness in
himself; if his death was limited to the elect, then his fullness could not
extend any further: but it plainly appears that he has a fullness which in
it self is sufficient for more then the elect, for else God could not without
mockery, which be it far from us once so to imagine; tender him in the
means, the means being tendered alike to all, therefore in this respect he
tasted death for every man, Heb. 2.9. that he might have all fullness in
himself for all men, and thus for all men, to wit, to be preached to all, and
that he might invite all men unto him for life; thus preparing a feast for some
that never tasted thereof, Matthew, 22. having in himself all fullness of life,
satisfaction, and reconciliation for all sin and sinners, as 1 John 2.2. he
means not that he has reconciled all persons, for that in stead of
comforting the failing Christians, the which the Apostle endeavors would
discomfort, for how can this be matter of consolation, that not only I, but all
the world are reconciled, being the greatest number, which shall be subjects of
wrath, and therefore upon that ground, so may I also, if the words were to be
applied so, but the thing there intended is, that he has all fullness of
propitiation in himself for all sins whatsoever, and therefore upon this
ground may ye, and ought the Gospel to be preached unto all people, and
persons whatsoever, according to the command of grace, saying, whatsoever City
or House ye enter into, say peace be unto it; go preach the Gospel to every
Creature, and in this sense, namely concerning the ministry and lifting up of
this Standard in the preaching, speaks the Apostle when he says the free gift
came upon all men unto Justification of life, Romans 5. and 2.5. he has
committed to us the ministry of reconciliation, that is to say, God was in
Christ, reconciling the world to himself, in which he opposes the ministry of
the Gospel to the ministry of the Law, for that was not a ministry of
reconciliation, but of wrath and vengeance, a killing letter, strictly judging
sin, and arraigning the creature, whereas the Gospel, let sin be never so
enormous unto them, yea, though Harlots, the Gospel does not threaten
damnation to such, but freely tenders, propounds, and preaches righteousness,
and salvation, and remission of sins by Jesus Christ, and thus Christ takes
away the sins of the world, and is reconciling the world, not remitting their
sins, not in respect of having freed all from the guilt thereof, for if we
should so understand, imputing then the whole world must needs come under the
blessing, Psalm. 32.1, 2. which is impossible, but in respect of the ministry it
stands true, for if God should come forth and charge sin upon the creature, and
threaten it, how then could it be a ministry, of reconciliation? and according
to this are we likewise to conceive of that Joh. 3. God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever, etc. That God having
provided all fullness in his Son, he now gives him as a Standard to the world,
as the brazen Sepent, to be lift up to all, preached to all, to invite, to
persuade, and to beseech all to come to him, where we must distinguish of a
twofold gift of Christ, the one according to this, which is to the world,
which is but outward, and in the means only; the other, which is that special
gift of Christ to his people, being by an effectual power exhibited to their
souls, thereby partaking of his fullness, but he is not thus given to the
world, for how shall he not with him give (us) all things else, in mating, tht
nothing shall be withheld from those to whom he is thus given; Alluding to
that tharryed estate wherein he has freely extended his Son to them, and
therefore will much more give the dowry even as there is a two fold love also,
one outward, in respect of that special love, which sets all that power and
wisdom that is in God aworke toward the hyer of that love; but he not so
loves the world, and that it may appear so, let us consider these words, that
notwithstanding that love, and that gift, that world shall perish; so that by
world cannot be meant, as some conceive, the Elect, for they shall not perish,
nor by that love, a special love, nor by that gift of Christ, such a gift as
the Apostle in the foregoing place speaks of: for if so, then the words must
be thus read, God so loved the Elect, that whosoever of the Elect should
believe, should be saved: which plainly infers then, that some of the Elect
shall not believe, but perish, and that the special love of God were mutable,
notwithstanding he has said he will reft in his love, and repentance is hid
from his eyes, and that he had given all to some before they were, having made
known to the heirs of salvation the immutability of his Counsel, and albeit
God had in a peculiar manner given his Son, yet he would not give the dowry,
even Faith, Justification, and Remission of sins, all which in any indifferent
eye, naturally goes out of such an Exposition of that Scripture, and so raseth
out the glorious Gospel, and glory of God, and his people.

Object. If it be objected, that that is not a love to give Christ so only in
the means, or in the ministry, because no power going along to cause them to
embrace it, turns to their destruction, and the greater aggravation of wrath.

Answ. I answer, this evil effect proceeds from the mighty workings of the
Serpent in them, and not from the means of grace, which in it self is simply
good, and the case stands alike concerning worldly blessings, the which in
themselves are good, yet through abuse, become curses in respect of the
punishment is thereby produced, yet in themselves they are blessings and
mercies; so to give the ministry of Reconciliation, is in it self an act of
love, and the like is held forth in that John 12.47. If any man says Christ
hear my words, and will not believe, I judge him not, then comes the reason,
For I came not to judge the world, but to save the world, in the which reason
he plainly infers, that he judges not him, but came to save him, and he that
will not believe that, at the last shall be judged by the word which he has
spoken; to which upon the same ground might be objected, that he came not to
save, but to condemn, by reason that man has not power to believe these his
words by which he must be judged; whereas indeed in that he uses that means
toward him and to the world that tends to salvation, so he might truly be
said to come to save the world.

But now he is in a different nature a Savior, and in another manner unto his
Spouse, having perfectly and fully sanctified and cleansed them in himself, for
says the Scripture, he gave himself for his Church, that he might sanctify
and cleanse it, and present it without spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, had
he so given himself for the world, then should the state of none been
different from, but as happy as his spouse, and why does he say he gave
himself for his Church, unless he put a difference between persons in his
death, and also in that he says that he might present it spotless and
unblameable, then if the world lies under blame for not believing, as indeed
it does, and fall into all sin as he says, because ye believe not in me you
shall die in your sins, then has he for his Church purchased or obtained
faith and whatsoever makes for her happiness or happy condition beyond the
worlds, so he in a peculiar manner sacrificed for his Church as the nearest
and dearest to him, and to this agrees that saying, That he perfected for ever
by one offering them whom he sanctified, that is, them that he set apart to
sanctify, even his Spouse, which was ever in union with him even before she
was, and was chosen in him, imboweled in him, these he perfected for ever, he
perfected, performing and providing all that conduced to their perfection by
that one offering also; yea when we were enemies we were reconciled, therefore
in a special and peculiar manner he offered himself for his body, and
therefore is it that he is not only as a Treasury or an Ensign, but he is a
treasury opened to them, that he does not only call them as he does others to
come to him for life, but he opens himself to them, so as that virtue or life
goes out of his Ensign to them and brings them unto him, for if all life be in
the son, how shall they indeed come unless he fetch them, how can such that
by wallowing in their blood live, till he says live, Ez^k 16. and therefore
does the Scriptur speak so variously, one while that he dyed for all, tasted
death for every man, and other time, that he laid down his life for his
Sheep, that he came to save his people from their sins, and offend not thy
brother for whom Christ dyed, feed the fl^cke that he has purchased with his
blood, Act. 20.28. proclayming his death to a remnant, this blood of the New
Testament for remission of their sins.

So in respect of his prophetical office it evidently appears he spoke to
many which heard him not, both by his Prophets and Apostles, all the day long
have I stretched out my hand to a stiff necked and gainesaying people, and
Lord, who has believed our report, and O Jerusalem how often would I have
gathered, etc. Isa. 49. sending my Prophets early and late, I have spent my
strength in vain, which is true in respect of any good or benefit that his
preaching has wrought by his uttering his voice to some, as Wisdom often
complains, Prove. so also that in Matthew. 13. he casts his seed on diverse sorts
of ground only one brought forth fruit; So Acts 13.46. and Act. 3.23. Matthew.
22.4, 5. in all which places it appears that he goes forth to teach and preach
to more then to the Elect, calling and inviting them to come to him, yet
notwithstanding he is not so a Prophet to any, as to his Spouse, though he
preaches to more then them, as has been said before, the which he does for
diverse reasons, as first he invites all to come to him, which abundantly
commends to his people his fullness, and that in their fathers house is bread
enough, there being enough for others that perish, could they come to him there
must needs be enough for them. 2. Being that he invites so many and so freely,
yea wooing and beseeching them to be reconciled, and this swallows up those
fears and doubts that arise in Gods people, that God is not so ready to
embrace, freely to give his Christ with all his treasury, of which, namely that
God is ready and willing to extend him who is in himself so precious, unless
the soul be persuaded it cannot sit down in the rest of God, and triumph in
Jesus Christ, for it is not enough to know Christ to be a mighty Savior, but
also a possible Savior, as I may say, or a Savior to be interessed in, or to
be enjoyed; notwithstanding all unrighteousness, which must be by Gods
declaring of himself in Christ, in the ministry, by the power of the Spirit,
that he freely gives a true fight thereof, and saves thee only for his names
sake, not for thy righteousness which stinkes in his nostrills; and thus the
soul being taught by such a ministration, great is the peace thereof, Esa.
Thirdly, to have such as perish without excuse, who had matter to have pleaded
with God that they could have believed in his Christ (man naturally having high
thoughts of himself) if he had been preached unto them, but thus comes their
mouths to be stopped, and they shall hereby sit down in silence at the day of
wrath, quarrelling with themselves, and not with God, justifying him in their
condemnation, for he proffered his Christ to them, beseeching them (so stooping
to vile man to be reconciled) but they would none of him, but rejected him; but
now he is so a Prophet unto his people that were in him from all eternity,
that he not only speaks, but causes them to hear, he gives them wisdom
and understanding, 1 Cor. 1.30. 1 John 5.20. Joh. 5.23. let them be never so
dead, yet he that could raise Lazarus out of the grave, will make them to hear
his voice and live; did he speak so to the world, not one should miscarry,
therefore we must take up these things by way of distinction, and the Scripture
bears it out, it is said, many are called but few chosen, yet he says, Romans
8.30. whom he predestinate, them he also called, wherein is held forth a
twofold call, the one outward, the other inward, and accompanied with mighty
workings, of God: So Rev. 19.9. blessed are they that are bidden to the Lambs
Supper, yet he invited many, Luke 14.16, 17. which were not blessed, so that
here I understand to the one there went forth only the ministry, to the other
the power accompanying that ministry, which compelled them to come, being a
bidding, with a voice of power, Luke 14.23. according to the tenor of the new
Covenant, they shall be all taught of God, informing us, that notwithstanding
all the teachings by man, there can be no availing without Gods going forth
with power, as says the Apostle, Paul may plant and Apollos may water, but it
is God that gives the increase: What is Paul or Cephas, but Ministers of your
joy, and according as God gave to every man the measure of faith, 1 Cor. 3.5,
6, 7. But that these things may be the better cleared up, the difference lies
thus: Concerning the going forth of Christ in his Offices; For this Kingly
office of Christ, as it is exercised to some, may be opposed; bring forth those
my enemies that will not have me to reign over them. But as it goes forth to
the Vessels of mercy, so it is not, nor can be opposed, for there he works in
his mighty power, binding the strong man, and taking possession, leading the
soul a glorious Captivity to himself, giving Repentance, whereby they recover
themselves out of the snare of the devil, which is a work of his Princeship
or Kingly office, to cause repentance, it consisting not as some conceive, in
the forsaking of sin, and reforming the life, but even a turning the creature
from that that is the glory and beauty of such Reformers, even their own
righteousness, that they no longer glory in themselves, but alone in him; So
also in the Prophetical office, He so teaches some, that they may, and do
resist, Ye have always resisted the Holy Ghost, Acts 7.51. How often would I have
gathered you, but you would not: I said, in rest and quietness shall you
believe, as confidence and assurance shall be your strength, but you would not,
by reason that he opens his mouth in Parables, no power going along to unvaile
the hidden mystery, Luke 2.43. But now the preaching the Gospel by the Holy
Ghost, 1 Pet. 1.12. Sending strength along with the Ministry to such as were
chosen in him, and ordained to be heirs of life, to be presented spotless in
him, being made perfect through Christ, that he might bring many Sons to
glory, Herein is it given to them to know the mysteries.

So also that concerns his Priestly office, that Salvation which he brings
into the world, and tenders some putting from them, judging themselves unworthy
of eternal life, no lasting salvation, Acts 13.46. compared with Act. 28.28.
Heb. 2.3. whereas such as were from all eternity encompast in the salvation and
righteousness of Christ, whom he also foretold, and gave himself for, that he
might cleanse by one offering: Salvation cannot be tendered in vain, but shall
in due time break forth upon them: To conclude and sum up all, if he dyed
alike for all, then would he teach all alike, and reign over, and exercise
Sovereignty over all alike: for is Christ divided: If he made no difference in
his death, he would make no difference in his life: But he dyed for our sins,
and rose again for our Instification, where the Apostle particularizeth his
death; to some he offering himself with a peculiar relation, to some persons
which were the dearest to him, and were sanctified or set apart by the Eternal
decree, to be his peculiar treasure, and the wife of his bosom; whereas for
others he no way sacrificed himself, then as providing a fullness in himself,
and not in relation of salvation to their persons, as he did for his Spouse,
and so many as he dyed for, he rose again for their justification; that the
one is of as large extent as the other, even his rising to justify, as well as
his dying for sin; and therefore being he so dyed, not only that they might
have sanctification by his death, but that he might sanctify a people, he is
risen to see that effected, which he bought at so dear a rate: and thus says
the Scripture, we are begotten by his Resurrection, 1. Pet. 1.3. Saved by his
Resurrection, 1 Pet. 3.21. He being risen to that end, to make good that he
dyed for, so that it cannot be that he dyed for all alike.

Likewise if faith be the purchase of Christ, or come by his death, therein it
also appears that that doctrine cannot be true: If unbelief be a sin, and a
condemning sin is maintained by such as conceive he dyed alike for all, be
forgiven by the blood of Christ, as it wholly must, for without shedding of
blood there is no remission, and by his blood we have forgiveness of all sin,
Ephesians. 1.7. Even the sin of unbelief. Which Paul and all the rest are guilty
of, then it cannot be that he dyed for all alike, by reason that many have not
the forgiveness of this sin, and consequently of none, and if it be so, that
this sin of unbelief be forgiven without satisfaction by the blood of Christ,
for it amongst the rest, then God could forgive that high condemning sin of
unbelief, without impeachment of his Justice as well as any other, this being
of as deep a dye.

Again, if faith also be not the purchase of Christ, then is he not in a
special manner a Savior, albeit it is said of God, that he is the Savior of
all, especially of them that believe, the same, as due honor ought to be
applied to Christ, for he would have all men honor the Son, as they honor the
Father; but he cannot be a special Savior to believers, unless he has done
something more for them, then for the world, and if faith come not by him, then
has he done no more, for whatsoever he has done, can be of no advantage, the
which stains all his glory; and it concerns all, well to consider that
saying, He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father; His soul has
traveled for a people, and for that which is the glory and the life of that
people, and he will be satisfied in the travel of his soul; either then it is
matter of satisfaction to him, that his people should be raised up to the life
of faith, or else faith is the travel of his soul, for he is fully satisfied
in that which is his own travel, and therefore in nothing else but that.

Thus Christian Reader, I have briefly endeavored to declare unto thee the
extent of the death of the Lord Jesus Christ: If thou shall reap any benefit
thereby, let the Lord of heaven have all the glory of it. Farewell.

Richard Marryat.


