MANY WONDERFVL AND VERY REMAKEABLE PASSAGES, WHICH HAS come to pass within
the Memory of Man here in this our Nation.

And also of the manifold deliverencies we have had by the power of God from
the devowring Sword.

Humbly presented to the consideration of the Honorable House of Commons, now
assembled in PARLIAMENT, and to all the loving people of Great Britain.

I will prais the Lord with all my heart: I will declare all thy wonderful
wo^ke^, Psalm. 9. verse 1. By a well wisher both of Church and State.

London, Printed for George Thompson. 1642.

Wonderful Deliverances of England from the Sword since the memory of Man.
By the Power of GOD only, to whom be Praise.
THe first was in the year of our Lord Christ 1588. When the Pope and the King
of Spain with his in vinsible Navy (so called by them) consisting of 160.
great ships of War, with Men and Ammunition for 40000. land Soldiers, did
attempt to invade this Land: with whom our Navy consisting of but 50. English
ships and 30 Dutch under conduct of Charles Earl of Notingham, Sir Francis
Drake, and sir Martine Furbisher, did meet (not far from the Coast of
Plymouth) and fought with them valiantly (although they were much inferior in
Number and strength unto them) for the space of two days and more, until they
came over against Callis, where the Spaniard expected to meet an other fleet
with 30000. more land forces from the Duke of Parma the General for the King
of Spain in the Low Countries, where at Callis the Spanish Fleet remained at
Ancor, until it pleased God to put into the mind of Sir Frances Drake to set
3 old ships or Hoyes stuffed with combustible matter, and set them on Sea in
the Tide way, and they drove with the tide upon the Spanish Navy being at
Ancor in form of a half Moon, upon the sudden view whereof, every Spanish
ship did think himself in danger, and every one cut their Cables to give
room to the burning ships, whereat the English ships taking advantage of the
Southerly winds, did join most corragiously, and followed them Northwards two
days, when and where the LORD OF HOSTS by a stormy wind sent them beyond and
among the Isles Orcades, where they perished to their great confusion, in so
much as scarce 20. of 160. returned home to Spain: And thus by the mighty hand
of the Lord England was delivered under the conduct of the aforesaid
Commanders, and assistance of the Noble Seamen of England and Holland, such as
is the Honorable Lord Sesscild Earl of Moltgrave, William Lord Harvie, and
poor Matthew Dale now one of Suttons Hospital being yet living eye witnesses
of that great deliverance of God, to whom be everlasting praise.

The second was in the year of our Lord 1597. being the year after Cales
voyage: at what time Robert Earl of Essex, Thomas Lord Howard, and Sir Walter
Raghly had the command of 100. Ships English and D^tch, with all the valiant
active Gentry of England, being put to Sea, for some great design against the
professed enemy of Spain, in the Bay of Portugal meeting with a cross wind
were driven back to Plymouth (as it were sent to secure Home) where being
repaired of the Sea losses, they put to sea again; and casting by the land of
Portugal, taking some Orange Carvills were advertised by them that there was
an Hundred sail of great ships of war Spanish and Easterlings prepared at
the Groynd, and lay close moored up under the Castle thereof, which the English
Gentry hearing, they conceived that it was for fear of them, but it proved
otherwise, for when the English were departed from the Coast of Spain westward
to the Isle of Terceres, to wait for the West Indie fleet. Then did the King
of Spain intend with the help of the Popish faction to invade and conquer
England, and even at the time when the English Fleet was returning homeward,
God Almighty sent a very great storm at Sea, which kept the English fleet
back with a most tempestuous cross wind for 3 days, that they could not
(though they had Sea Room) get one mile homewards, which wind and storm was
by God appointed to be a deliverance to the Realm of England, for even then
were the 100. sail of Ships (that lay mored in the Harbor of the Groyne)
ready to land in Enland, and were entered into the narrow Sea called the Sleeve
when the tempest did begin, and some of them were entered so far into the
Sleeve, as they could not play back again, but three of them were met by the
Lord Thomas Howard and his squadron, and were taken prisoners, and were brought
into England, among whom was taken the field Marshalls Concubine and put into
Bridewell London, where many resorted to see her, that be yet living, and were
in the voyage and remember well that this was the merciful deliverance of God
by the blast of his nostrils to scatter the enemies of his people of England,
for which also let us praise the Lord our God for ever. At that time were the
noble Soldiers Sir Nicolus Parker and sir Fardinando Gorges made governors of
Plymouth and Famouth Castles. We pray God as good men be in them now.

The third was Anno Dom. 1605. and in the second year of King James, when that
most execrable massacree of King, Nobles and Commons in Parliament, and the
royal issue, (even his Majesty that now is, whom God preserve) should have
been at one blow, blown up into the Aaire, if God had not been our deliverer
by the discovery of a Letter sent unto the Lord Mounteagle, though darkly
expressed, yet found out by the wise genius of that ever blessed peace lover
King James, whose fame never dye, whose race never fail, nor praise never
cease to be given to God therefore. This cursed and hellish powder Treason,
let it ever be abhord in heart, but never depart out of the mouth and memory of
them that love the Lord and his people, that God may have his due praise for
ever.

The fourth delivery was in the year 1639. When Noble Van Trump met with the
Spanish Navy, consisting of 66. Huge Ships, besides a great many of Carvills,
and small Ships going to Dunkirke, at which time our Gracious King was incensed
against the Scottish nation, and through false and deceaveable incenduaries, was
provoked to prepare an army royal able to distract and tear in pieces, if
not to destroy that ancient and noble Nation, one of the beautiful flowers of
his Diadem, at this time was prepared a great and impenitrable Navy, if it had
met with the Navy of Dunkirke impenitrable, because many of their great Ships
were made free from the shoot of the cannon bullet; but God derided their
strength therein, and found means by the valiant Dutch Nation to dissipate
them, and sincke many of them by fire works, setting them on fire from above
the water to burn downwards, to their confusion and the lasting memory of
the Hollanders, and the memorable praise of their valiant Commanded Van Trumpe
against the Spaniard and Dunkerkers, whose intentions both by Sea and Land was
by this fleet to effect a double feate. First if they had landed at Dunkirke
being joined both fleets together, to have left those novice Soldiers that
were aboard the Fleet at the fight with Van Trumpe in the Low Countries, and
thereto have stuffed both their fleets with old Soldiers, and brought them
over to England, to have joined with the power of the Papists in the South,
when our army was in the North ready to encounter with the Scottish Nation, and
so to have infested us with a double war, which being done this fleet was to
depart to the Baltic Sea, to have made themselves Masters of that Sea; and to
have commanded the Straight of Elsenver, which if they had effected by this
means, they had kept both the Swedes in Germany from releife out of their own
Country, and set such a combustion in England and Scotland, as would not have
been soon nor easily quenched, and thereto Ireland would not have been idle,
as this present revolt does manifest, how dangerous a design would this have
been, if the Almighty had not been our deliverer and Protector both by Sea and
Land; by Sea, by the help of that blessed Nation the Hollanders; and by Land
God himself inclyned the heart of our Gracious King to forbear arms or blood
in his own inheritance, to entertain a truce, and now to conclude a blessed
peace with that our brother Nation, which the God of Heaven continue forever,
and let both Nations yield continual thanks for this never to be forgotten
mercy, and cursed be the wit of that Architophell which shall counsel, go
about, or effect the division of these two Nations at any time hereafter.

The fifth and last, but not the least deliverance from bloodshead and slaughter
of the Kings own Sacred person, amongst his dearly beloved and most loving
Subjects the house of Commons in Parliament assembled, was upon the 4th day of
Iannuary 1641. When the King was incensed by Sinister Practices of Sycophanting
and detracting Earewiggs to provoke him to go in person to the House of
Commons, where never King was before him, to do that which never King did
before, to require in his own person in a formidable manner ad terrorem
Populi, the delivery of certain worthy members of the House of Commons, even
against the Privilege of the House, as witnesses the whole house of
Parliament (since in a declaration of theirs) which if this had taken the
intended purpose, and if any the parties required, had been there found, what
direful effect might this have wrought, what lamentable issue would have
followed, God alone knows. For put the case the House of Commons had refused
to give up their fellow Members to Prison, or worse; which might be expected
from them, and at that time have stood upon their Privilege, as at this time
they do, what then had bin the sequel but contention, Coertion, and slaughter,
which if it had come to that, how should the sacred person of his Majesty have
escaped violence, what slaughter of the House of Commons, who would have
warranted the Nobles and Peers, and how far this slaughter would have
spread, or was intended secretly, God has not yet revealed. But surely this
may be presumed that whosoever advised his Majesty to put his person into such
a hazard, would prove no better then Traitors, if they were put upon the trial
of their Peers: but God of his wonted mercy has dealt better with us then our
merrits deserve, for he stirred up the hearts of some well willing Subjects to
run in have before his coming, to advertise them thereof, and God moved again
the friends of the Gentlemen pursued, to persuade them that were there, to
depart before the Kings coming; which falling out so, that the King found none
of them there, his gentle Nature and unwilling disposition to that business
did easily let fall this enterprise, and so returned in peace, for which, and
also for the former deliverances, let us render everlasting thanksgiving, to
that most great and good God which has done all this for us, and also upon all
our solemn fasts and feast days, let us in a special manner make it our
business to put on another in mind how gracious God has been to this Nation in
our days, that we may love God for his goodness, and love one another truly
for Gods sake, that we all being united in the love of God, may be so
strengthened thereby, that all the malice envy rage and conspi^acies of the
Devil and devilish people may not prevail against us, for the time to come,
to the Glory of God throughout all the world, and through all ages, for
evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

