A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF M. CHRISTOPHER LOVE, IN St. LAVRENCE
CHVRCH, August, 25. 1651.

By THOMAS MANTON, Minister of the Gospel at Stoak-Newington near London.

ISAIAH 517. The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and
merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come. London: Printed by J B. 1651.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THou have here presented to thy view a short, but yet a sweet Sermon; in it is
comprehended among other things, the right way of dying well. If ever you would
die comfortably, you must first live holily, get an assurance that your sins
are pardoned, that God is reconciled unto you through Jesus Christ, that so you
may be persuaded by the holy Spirit of God, as soon as ever you go out of this
world, you shall then be received into an eternal. Reader, if this Sermon may
prove for thy spiritual advantage, for the mortifying of sin, and the
renewing of Grace in thy heart, bless God for it. Thou may be confident it
shall be the daily Prayer of him that is thy friend in the Lord,

D. R.

A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of M. Christopher Love in St. Laurence
Church, August 25. 1651.
1 COR. 15. 57. But thanks be to God which gives us the victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ.
THE words in themselves needs no explication; they are the triumphing song of
S. Paul, partly directed to the enemies themselves, and partly to the giver of
victory, Thanks be to God, that gives us victory through Jesus Christ.

1. It is sin that is the sting of death, when the conscience is awakened,
and all disguises are taken away, then sin will be sin indeed.

2. In regard of the Obligation, the Law binds us over unto death.

3. Sin aggravated labors to strengthen sin, and sets them all in order in
their proper colors before our face. But now the great question will be, What
shall we do that we may come out of this horror and terror? The Apostle tells
us, Christ has given us victory in Christ's victory; he has overcome the law,
death, and hell; he foiled death in his own person, when he was upon the
Cross; he left death in the grave, when he himself arose again; he has
given us victory through Jesus Christ; and yet all Christ's work was not done
upon the Cross, there is much to be done in our hearts, the God of peace shall
bruise Satan under your feet shortly, Rom 16. 20. he will make you
fellow-Conquerors with his Son Jesus Christ; Christ has got a victory for
us, and he will get also a victory in us. From the words observe this Doctrine:

That Christ's victory over death may serve for the incomparable comfort of all
true Believers. Death is either temporal or eternal; now wicked men are
subject unto both; the wicked man's temporal death it makes way for his
eternal; the taking them away out of this life, is but the bringing them into
eternal woe and misery.

For the opening of the point, he would 1. show how Christ delivers us from
death.

2. How far he has delivered us from death.

For the first, that Christ has delivered us from death, Heb. 2. 14. By death
he destroyed him that had the power of death: If you consider Christ's death by
way of merit, or if you consider him as a Conqueror, by his death he destroyed
death, he grapled and overcome death.

Whether you look upon it as the Act of a Redeemer in dying for our sins,
Christ died in our room, or in our stead, he died that the creature might be
spared, Job. 33. 19. Deliver him from going down into the pit, for I have found
a ransom; the sinner must die, or else the Surety must die; by Christ's death
the wrath of God is expiated, the Law of God is satisfied, the Justice of God
fulfilled, and the jaws of death are broken.

2. Look upon it as the act of a Conqueror, and so Christ has foiled death in
his own person; for Christ is called the first fruits of them that sleep in
the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 20. yea, he is called the firstborn of the
dead; death is Satan's last beast of prey, and Christ has grapled this beast.
1. Be pleased to consider, the quality of the Grave is quite altered to wicked
men; it is the King of terror; but to every believer it is a bed of ease, Isai.
57. 2. The righteous are taken from the evil to come, and rest in their beds.

2. The second question is, how far he has delivered us from death; I might
answer, that it is sufficient the second death has no power over us; there is
no condemnation unto them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. But this is not
all, the very nature and habit of death is changed; death is not a destruction,
but a deliverance; we are apt to have wrong thoughts of death, death is to us a
blessing, it is one of Christ's legacies bequeathed to his Church; while death
was in the Devils hand, it was our enemy; but now it is in Christ's hand, it is
our friend; it is now but our passage into the Land of Canaan, our entrance
into the heavenly Jerusalem: a wicked man's death is his executioner, but to the
Godly; it does but fever us from our friends upon earth, and then we are united
unto Jesus Christ our head; now let thou thy servant depart in peace,
wicked men are taken away. This night shall thy soul be taken away, Luke 12.
20. Now what hope can a wicked man have when God takes away his soul? the
godly man resignes up his soul unto Jesus Christ. The believer dies not
because he must dye, but because he would dye: the Funerals of the Godly are
but the Funerals of their sins; it is not the man that dies, but his misery
and his sins that dies. When God justifies a sinner, he takes away the
condemning power of sin; when he sanctifies, he takes away the reigning
power of sin; but when he takes him away by death unto himself, he takes
away the very being of sin: Death is our cure, sin brings in death, and
death by way of revenge destroys sin. 2. By death there is way made for a
present union of the soul with Jesus Christ; I desire to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ, says St. Paul; it is better the soul should be separated from
the body, then to be absent from Christ, we have an union here, but whether is
it better to be present with your friends, or present with Jesus Christ? the
soul goes away to God that gave it, immediately as soon as ever the body is
destroyed; the body came from Adam, and must be purified in the grave, but the
soul is a supernatural Light and flies to God again.

3. The Body that seems most to suffer, has great advantage. A Shed is taken
down to raise up a better Structure; It is sowed a Natural body, but it is
raised a Spiritual body; here it is not capable of high enjoyments, it is
humbled by diseases; it is sowed a Corruptable body, but it shall be raised an
Incorruptable body, 1 Corinthians. 15. 54.

The next degree is, how far Christ has conquered death, the hurt of death is
taken away. Death may kill you, but it cannot hurt you; it cannot have any
power over your better part, Jesus Christ is your head in the grave; ye are
raised by the Spirit of holiness, Romans 8. 11. The Holy Ghost can never leave
his Temple; you belong to Christ in the grave.

1. Oh consider what ground of comfort we have against the mortality of the
body: Christ has united body and soul, Christ's mystical Body shall not want
the least Member or Joint.

2. God is in Covenant with your body and soul, God is the God of your flesh,
though it remain with the dust of the wicked.

3. Christ has purchased your body and soul, 1 Corinthians. 6. 20. Yea are bought
with a price, Therefore glorify Christ in your bodies; Christ will not loose
one whit of his purchase: Therefore here is your comfort against the Mortality
of the Body; God will call the grave to an account, What is become of my
Abraham? my Isaac? and my Jacob? The grave shall give up their dead, when
Christ's commands it: the grave is but a chest (and with reference be it spoken)
Christ wares the Keys at his own Girdle; God has a special care of your dust,
when your friends and neighbors have left you in the grave, yet Christ has
not left you there.

4. We are eased from the terror and horror of death. Now death is terrible, as
it is a natural evil, a dissolution of the soul from the body. Death is the
King of terrors, Morral Philosophy could never find any remedy against the
fear of death. But God by his holy Spirit, he fills the soul with a hope of a
better life, by which it is strenthened against the fear of death; nature may
shrink when we see the pail horse approaching, yet we way rejoice in this it is
but to carry us home to our Fathers house, And who would be afraid to be
happy? Let them be afraid to dye, which are loath to go to Christ. St. Stephen
saw the Heavens opened for him, when he was stoned to death, at the very hour
of their departure they are exempted from fear and terror, by reason of that
comfortable persuasion, which they have in their breast, that their sins are
pardoned through the blood of Jesus Christ; that God is reconciled unto their
souls, that as soon as they go out of this miserable would, they shall be
received into eternal Glory: The sting of death is sin, the day of death is a
black and glomy day to wicked men; Wicked men they drop like rotten Apples into
that Lake that burns with fire and brimstone for evermore; Wicked men have many
accusations laid to their charge, many sins that fly in their face, which most
commonly perplex a dying soul; but godly men are freed from all this: This made
Luther cry out Percule domine percule, peccata remissa sunt, strike Lord
strike, my sins are pardoned: So may every true believer say, Lord do what thou will with me, my sins are forgiven.

5. Christ has utterly abolished death, 1 Cor, 5. 16. Then death shall be
utterly abolished to the Elect, the Dominion and Power of death is overcome,
but for the wicked they must be kept under a dying, and yet under a living
death, death shall be no more unto Gods people, they may then triumphantly say,
Oh death, where is thy sting?

Thus much for the Doctrinal part of the Text: There remains nothing but the
useful Application unto our Souls.

Use. First let this serve for terror to wicked men, Jesus Christ has
conquered death only for his Elect: for the present wicked men's condition is
sad, in Death it is worse, and in Hell it is worst of all.

1. For the present their condition must needs be sad; they cannot so much as
think of death or hell without a great deal of terror and fear: It is like the
hand writing against Belshazer upon the wall, it will mar all their Jovial
company, but with the righteous death makes way for their eternal happiness,
Though I walk in the vale and shadow of death, says David, yet will I fear
none ill. It is a sad walk to walk at Deaths right hand.

2. In Death it will be worse, the nearer you come to your everlasting estate,
the more your Conscience will be troubled, and your sins will fly in your face:
Every man does not dye thus sensible, some there are that sacrifice their
bodies with great courage, but mark this in them all, they oftentimes dye
anxious of their spiritual condition: A wicked man is like one that leaps over
a great Gulf in the dark, but usually their death is full of terror. Oh
consider what a sad case you will be in, when your sins shall stare you in the
face, your conscience accuse you, the law bind you over to hell, hell open her
mouth for you, and heaven be shut up against you; how will you be able to
appear before the Judgment Seat? what a hideous cry will it be to hear the
sinner curse his body, and his body to curse his soul, because he did not make
sure of heaven. It is quite contrary when the godly man dies, he takes fare
leave of his flesh, flesh farewell, and rest in hope, God will not suffer his
holy One to see corruption.

3. In Hell it will be worst of all, Envy will be a part of your sorrow, as
well as dispare, when you shall see the godly in heaven, whom you have scorned,
despised, and thought not worthy to love among you, when your selves shall be
tormented in hell fire with the Devil and his Angels for ever, there is a
special conviction upon the damned soul in hell.

Here you would not live, and their you shall not dye: Oh miserable will be
your condition! when conscience, that worm that never dies, shall gnaw your
soul to all eternity. You are now fallen into the hands of a living God, who
lives for ever to see vengeance executed upon his enemies.

The second Use is to labor to get an Interest.

1. In Jesus Christ, and first you must take care to get your sins pardoned;
all the power of the Devil and Death, depends upon this particular, you can
never have any true or real solid comfort, when you come to dye, unless you are
assured that your sins are pardoned, unless that you are confidently assured by
the spirit of God, that when you go out of this Life, you shall be received
into a Better. There are two pits which God has dug, that are deep enough
to bury your sins in that they shall never beable to hint you, vid. the Ocean
of Divine mercy, and the grave of Jesus Christ, see your sins buried in one of
those graves, and then be sure they shall never trouble your soul again. It is
the great fault of Christians, that when they come to dye, they come altogether
naked: it is an ill favored thing to see a man stark naked; Christians should
come clothed with the White Robes of Christ's Righteousness, for the grave has
no power over them.

2. Strive for an assurance of Gods love; mine eyes have seen thy salvation,
therefore now let thy servant depart in peace; now let me dye says old Jacob,
when he had seen his son Joseph; when you have seen Jesus Christ, when you can
say experimentally he is my portion; then you may bid welcome to any death:
death never comes untimely to such a man, though he may be cut off by some
sudden stroke, if he has an interest in Jesus Christ. A sinner though he live
to be an old man, yet he is accursed.

3. Mortify Corruption: he dies well that mortifieth corruption first; see
your sins dead before you come to dye: Either sin must dye, or we must dye,
What should an unmortified man do with heaven? that would be no place for his
abode, because there are no carnal Bestial delights there; when wicked men go
howling to hell, then might God say, go see whether your vain delights can save
you.

4. There must be a holy Life and Conversation. Men live as though they never
thought to dye, and then they dye as if they never thought to live; they that
are not ashamed to live are not afraid to dye. We have a singular instance of
this in our deceased brother, Balaam would fain dye the death of the righteous,
but he would not live the life of the righteous: if we are careful to observe
these directions, then our last hour will be our best hour.

The third Use is to improve the comfort of Christ's Victory, 1. Improve it for
your friends, that are departed in the Lord: Why should we weep in the day of
their preferment? Christians in the primitive times, at the solemnizing of
their friends Funerals, had wont to light Tapar, sing Psalms, and rejoice in
the Lord (but may some say) Sir do you not read, when Stephen was stoned to
death, that certain devout men carried him, and made great lamentation for him,
Acts 8. 2. But for answer to this, mourn for your friends deceased, but not
distractedly mourn for them as those that know they shall meet their friends in
glory: when you weep for your friends it should be like rain upon earth, when
the Sun shines.

2. Improve it for your selves, and that in your life time.

1. In your resolutions, that you may be willing to dye: we are apt to linger
and linger, and fain we would live a little longer; but alas what Prince would
be willing to be uncrowned: this argues a great deal of carnallity. Christians
are begotten to a lively hope.

2. Improve it in your death against the fear of death: death it self startles
the Creature. When once you come to Heaven, death shall molest you no more,
Believers, when they come to heaven, shall have the same welcome that Jesus
Christ had, the Angels shall carry your soul into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. 22,
there shall a train of Angels carry your soul into eternal Glory.

Lastly, Bless your Redeemer, that has freed you from the fear of death. Jesus
Christ has given himself a ransom for thy soul; he has satisfied Divine
Vengeance for thy sins: Many men give their lives to death for their Prince;
but here is a Prince, that gives his life for his People.

It remains that we speak a little concerning this our deceased Brother: I
might speak much concerning those ravishing Comforts, that he had in his soul:
What a rare assurance he had of heaven, as a pattern most worthy of your
imitation. He was a man eminent in Grace, A man of a singular Life and
Conversation. When he was to dye, he professed high thoughts of his
Congregation; Therefore I pray do not frustrate his expectations; when he looks
to find you among the sheep, the Lord grant you be not found among the goats;
do not think that now he is gone, his truths are gone too? for God will require
them at your hands. God takes an exact account, how long a Minister has been
in such a place, what good a people has got under his Ministry: The Lord
grant that you may now reap the fruit of all his labors. I might speak much
more, but I will forbear.

The Lord bless what you have heard, and give you understanding in all things.

FINIS.
August 30, 1651.
Imprimatur

JOHN DOWNAME.


