GODS MASTERPIECE. A SERMON Tending to manifest Gods glorious appearing in the
building up of Zion: PREACHED To the Right Honorable the House of Peers, in
the Abbey Church of Westminster, March 26. 1645. Being the day of the Monthly
public Fast, BY Stephen Marshall, B. D. Minister of Gods Word, at
Finching-field in Essex.

Published by Order of the House of Peers.

Esa. 60. 14. They shall call thee the City of the Lord, the Zion of the Holy
One of Israel. Psalm. 68. 24. They have seen thy goings, O God; the goings of my
God, my King, in the Sanctuary. LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, for Stephen
Bowtell, and are to be sold at the sign of the Bible in Pope's Head Alley, 1645.

To the Right HONORABLE THE House of Peers Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
THis plain Sermon, when preached, was entertained by Your Lordships with
singular attention; and now comes to public view by Your command. I shall not
presume now to make another trial of Your patience, by a long Epistle, as I
did then in a long Sermon: I only present it unto You, and (since You please
to have it so) to the eye of the World, humbly beseeching the Lord to accompany
it with his blessing, that all who read it, (especially Your Lordships) may in
it behold, as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, and be changed into the same
Image by the Spirit of the Lord; thatso they may account it their greatest
Honor to promote this Work; to beautify the place of Gods Sanctuary, Esa.
60. 13.
and to make the place of his feet glorious. So prays

Your unworthy Servant, Stephen Marshall.

A SERMON PREACHED To the Right Honorable the House of LORDS at the Monthly
Fast, March 26. 1645.
PSALM. 102. 16, 17. When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in
his glory he will regard the Prayer of the destitute, and not despise their
prayer.
I Have chosen a Text (Right Honorable The Introduction showing the tenor, and
occasion, and scope of this Psalm.
and Beloved) which is neither difficult in it self, nor (which is the lot of
many plain Texts) made to seem obscure by the variety of glosses and
interpretations put upon it: There is a general agreement concerning the scope
and meaning of the Spirit of God in this Psalm; some little difference is found
amongst Interpreters concerning the time, and the Penman of it: Some conceiving
it was about the time when the Jews were stopped and interrupted in the works of
building the Temple by their ill neighbors; but most do agree that the time
was about the end of the seventy years captivity, when God had raised up the
spirits of the Prophets to encourage the people to expect this mercy, according
to that of Esaias 40. Comfort ye, comfort ye my Esa. 40. 1, 2.
people, says the Lord, speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her,
that her warfare is accomplished: and also stirred up the spirits of the people
to pray to the Lord, to accomplish his good word for their return, according
to that of Jer. 29. Then shall ye call upon me, and I will Jer. 29. 12, 13.
hearken unto you. And as for the Penman of it, who ever it was, (for that is
altogether unknown) most certain it is, that he neither penned nor spoke these
things in his own name, or of his own condition, but in the name of the whole
Church of God, like another Jeremy writing a book of Lamentations, for the
desolations of Zion; bemoaning them before the Lord, and most earnestly begging
mercy and deliverance. In the 11 first Verses you may behold the afflicted
Church of God sitting alone like a desolate widow, with her tears on her
cheeks, her belly cleaving to the dust, her heart smitten and withered like
grass, eating ashes for bread, mingling her drink with weeping; as a Pelican
in the wilderness, as an Owl in the desert; her enemies many and raging
against her, she looking round about, and all her Lovers and friends departed
from her; enquiring after succor and comfort, and it is far removed: Behold
to what a sad condition the sins of Gods own people do often times bring them!
and that is the first part of the Psalm. But in this dark and tempestuous
night of calamity and desolation, this afflicted soul, with Jonah in the whales
belly with weeds-wrapped about his head, looks up to God, begins to remember
those everlasting mercies that may be found in the Lord Jehovah; and presently
there darts in a beam (as from a new created Statre) of light and comfort in
the 12, and 13 Verse, which shines into the soul, and inables this poor
desolate creature to conclude very comfortably, that that God who had broken
her would yet again heal her, that his wrath should not always continue, but
he would return and revive, and quicken them, after all the days wherein he Esa.
40. 31.
had afflicted them, and so suddenly begins to renew its strength, and mount up
with wings of comfort, as an Eagle: And from the 12 Verse to the end of the
Psalm, after all this sad lamentation, there is a comfortable prophetical
story of all the good that God did mean to do fot this afflicted Church, which
now lay in the dust and rubble: wherein there are three remarkable things,

The first is, A strong confident prophetical conclusion, that the deliverance
of Gods Church was nigh at hand, in these words, Thou shall arise and have
mercy upon Zion, for the time to deliver her; yea, the set time is come: that is
her conclusion, that it must of necessity be, the Lord was resolved speedily to
raise them out of their low condition.

Secondly, you have the Argument which satisfied this afflicted desolate soul,
that the time of Zions deliverance was at hand; because all Gods servants took
pleasure in the dust of it, and pityed the very stones, and the rubbish of it;
their hearts were deeply humbled for Zions miseries; they had set themselves
earnestly to pray to the Lord; to give him no rest night nor day till he had
set it up; and this spirit of prayer powered out upon the Church, was to her as
sure a token of approaching deliverance, as the day star is a token of an
approaching morning: That is the second.

The third part of this prophecy is, the use or fruit, which he does foretell
should be made of this great work of Gods raising and building up of Zion,
which is very excellent; partly the use that the rest of the Nations of the
world should make of it, all the heathen should stand and wonder at it, and
praise Gods name for it; yea, their Kings, even all the Kings should behold the
glory of the Lord, and come in and worship, and honor him who had wrought such
a great work, as the raising Zion out of the dust: and then for the Church, the
people that are created on purpose to be for Gods glory, it should be written
for them from generation to generation, that they and all their posterities
should perpetually love and serve the Lord, who did thus remember his people in
their low condition. Now lest some body might wonder why the Prophet should
make such a stupendous business of it, and demand a reason why all the world
must thus take such notice of the building of Zion: what is Zion? and what is
the work? as he said of Abana and Parphar, were they not better rivers then all
the rivers of Samaria? Are there not other Empires and States, more pompous,
and powerful, and glorious, and excellent then Zion? what is Zion to Nineveh
or Babylon, that all must so stand amazed at the reparation of it? To satisfy
all the world about it, that the work of building up of Zion, is indeed
admirable and wonderful, and deserves all the praises that the hearts and
tongues of men can utter, the Prophet in the 2 Verses which I have read, does
setdown two remarkable Circumstances which perpetually accompany this work,
which if they but interpreted, and rightly understood, will satisfy all the
World, that And of these words.
this alone is the work deserving admiration, and these they are.

The first is, It is such a work, that when ever the Lord goes about it, He
does appear in his glory; when the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear
in his glory.

The second is, when the Lord does build up Zion, He does then return an answer
to all the prayers of his afflicted people: Whatsoever they had been begging
from year to year, from generation to generation, now was the Jubilee, now
comes the return of all into their bosoms, full measure, thrust together,
shaken, and running over: When the Lord does build up Zion, he does then regard
the prayer of the afflicted, and however before he might seem to despise ehem,
now he does no longer despise their cry: The first of these is that, which by
the Lords assistance I shall this day clear unto you; this remarkable
circumstance which accompanies the building and reparation of Zion: When the
Lord shall build up Zion he shall appear in his glory; and in it observe and
handle these two lessons.

That the building of Zion is the Lords work, and the Lords only. Doct. 1.


When the Lord shall build up Zion; the second and main (the which I shall
insist upon) is:

That when ever the Lord goes about this work, he does appear Doct. 2.
in his glory.

The first I shall only touch, and that but to make way for the second.

That the building of Zion is the Lords own work; There is nothing difficult,
Zion you know is in the Scripture taken Doct. 1.
The building up o^ Zion is a work peculiar to God alone.
sometimes in a literal, but ordinarily in a mystical and a spiritual sense:
Zion in a literal sense was that strong part of the City of Jerusalem, which
David did take from the Jebusites, and fortified it, and beautified it with
excellent buildings, and called it the City of David, the most beautiful part
of Jerusalem; this is Zion literal: And this Zion may besaid to be built, when
it is furnished with stately houses, with strong walls, and replenished with
people, accomplished with Magistrates, and good Civil laws: But this Zion I
have nothing at the present to do with; the Zion which my text means is
spiritual Zion, mystical Zion, the Zion, whereof this City of David 2 Samuel 5.
7. What is meant by Zion, and the building of it.
was a type (as David himself was a type of Christ) and that is, the Church of
God, which in a hundred places at least in the Old and New Testament is called
by the name of Zion, he reason why Zion this part of Jerusalem, was such 2 Samuel
6. 12. compared with 1 King. 8. 1.
a celebrated type, is, because all David's time, and until Solomon's Temple was
built upon mount Moriah, the Ark of God was placed in Zion, where he is
therefore said to dwell: this is the Zion that we are to speak of; and this
Zion, this Church of God is then built, when the doctrine of Jesus Christ is
made known, the new and living way to life by him is opened; when Ministers and
Ordinances are given, the elect called in, Churches gathered, and established,
the worship and government of Christ set up, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the Ephesians 4. 11, 12. 13.
edifying of the body of Christ, till all the Saints come in the unity of the
Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ: when the Curtains of the
Church are thus enlarged, and the Tents of it made firm; when God does thus
prosper and bless the Church of Christ, then does he build up Zion: This I
say is, first, Gods own work: and secondly, a work which when ever he Proved
by Scriptures.
goes about, he does appear in his glory.

That the building up of the Church is a work peculiar to 1.
God only, I might easily prove out of many Scriptures: Mat. 16. 28. Psalm. 32.
13, 14, etc. and 48. 12. and 51. 18. and 69. 35. and 126. 1
aedificabo Ecclesiam, I will build my Church, is a speech to be uttered by
none, but by Jehovah himself; and I know you will grant the truth of it, by
that time I have cleared unto you these two things.

First, that the building of Zion is such a peace of Esa. 14. 32. and 28. 16.
Zach. 8. 3, 4. Psalm. 121. 1, 2. And by reason, 1. because no other builders
have any skill to do it.
work as no other workmen have any skill to do.

And, secondly, as they have no skill, so they have no will to do it; and if
no other have either power nor heart, neither skill nor will, it must needs be
done by God, if ever it be done at all.

First, I say, no other workmen have any skill to build 2.
Zion but God alone; there is not one piece of Timber 1
Psalm. 49. 1. 8. Though God use them as his instruments.
belongs unto it, not one Cord, not one pin, not one nail, not any one thing
from the foundation to the Capstone, but it is beyond the understanding, the
value, skill or artifice of any created Nature; that what God said in the 49.
Psalm concerning the keeping of a man from death, is most true of this work:
great men can build houses, and purchase Lands, but there is not one of them
can redeem his brothers soul from death, no, he must let that alone for ever,
that is too hard a task for him, to keep a man that he should not go down to
the grave: Men may build Houses, make Kingdoms, erect Commonwealths,
Corporations, etc. But as for the building of the Church of God, all mortal
men must let that alone for ever. In this work our help is only from Psalm.
121. 12. Esa. 63. 5.
the Lord which made Heaven and Earth. I looked, said, Christ but there was no
help, there was none to uphold; therefore my own arm brought salvation, neither
could they, were all their perfections joynd into one, when man is dead in sins
and trespasses, sticks fast in the miry clay of ignorance and iniquity, not
able to think a good thought, or speak a good word, a voluntary bondslave of
Satan, under the power of Hell, and the curse of God; what men, what Angels
have any gifts or strength, to help him out of this condition? It is true
indeed, that in the building of it, God does make use of mortal men, and other
creatures, visible and invisible, he calls Ministers, Apostles, Prophets,
Pastors, and Teachers, to be the Guides, the Leaders, the Instructors, Yet
they contribute nothing to this work.
and the Shepherds of his people, and he calls Kings and Princes, and Nobles,
to be nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers to it; he gives Paul to plant and
Apollo to water, but its neither for his need, nor their aptness for this
employment; no, no, when all is done, he that plants 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7.
is nothing, and he that waters is nothing; Clay and spittle did as much to
the opening of the blind man's eyes, Peter's shadow did as much to the healing of
Diseases, Abana and Parphar, did as much to the curing and cleansing of the
Leper, as all instruments whatsoever are able to do toward the building of
the Church of God; all their very being, and motions, and operations, and the
success of their whole endeavors depend wholly upon the Lord alone.

Secondly, As all other builders have no skill, so neither have any of them any
will to the building of Zion, if Zion 2.
once lie in the dust, the common vote of them all is, This is Nor secondly
have they any will to do it. Jer. 30. 7. Psalm. 35. 21. Psalm. 118. 22.
an outcast, this is Zion whom no man cares for, there it lies, and there let
it lie, Aha, aha! our eye has seen it, so would we have it: This stone how
precious soever is refused of all builders: Indeed their will is so far from
building it, that it is ever bent to the utmost to ruin it; the gates of hell
do always oppose it, and all the Princes and great men of the earth set
themselves against it, with all their strength and Ps. ^.
cunning; There is an everlasting enmity in them all against it, not only,
because their principles, laws and manners differ one from the other, but also
because Zions rearing is their spoiling, their glory and beauty is blasted and
withered before the beauty of this; yea, this stone cut out of the mountain
without hands, must one day (and Satan Dan. 2. 35, 42.
who rules in them all knows it well enough) break in pieces and consume them
all, and make them like the chafe of the Summer threshing floores, and the
wind shall carry them away, that no place shall be found for them; they will
therefore Ezra 4 2.
do all they can, with the Samaritans, to hinder the building of this City so
prejudicial to them; if ever they show themselves forward, it is but with such
a mind as they had, when they offered to build with them purposely to betray
and hinder them: So then because none else have any power, or will to do it,
whenever this work is to be done, it must be the work of God alone; Paul
expresses Heb. 3. 4.
it excellently to the Hebrews, when he speaks of the building of the Church,
other houses are built by men, every house must have a Carpenter, but he that
builds the Church, is he that built all things, no other hand can do it, but
only he who laid the Foundation of the Heavens and the Earth, that is,
Almighty God alone.

For Application of this, It may serve for singular consolation Application.
Therefore we may comfortably conclude that this work must go on; though other
helps do fail.
unto all those who wish well unto Zion, and may fortify their Faith against
that which to our carnal heart is the greatest stumbling block, and greatest
discouragement that ever we meet with, and that is when outward helps and means
do fail, for the carrying on of this work, when the enemies are strong and
many, the Friends few and weak, the instruments employed in it fail, some by
death, some possibly prove treacherous, turning against it, seeking to betray
it, then presently are we ready to conclude, all will come to nothing, the
work will fail, it will never be carried on: but (Beloved) remember this one
Rule, in all other things that are done in the world, you may lawfully make
such kind of Prognostications, as to foretell by the Instruments that are
employed, and by the Preparations which are made, what the fruit and the event
of the work is like to be. If you see a poor man gather together a few
Willow-sticks, and set a bungerly Luke 14. 28, etc.
Carpenter out of them to rear up a house, you may conclude it must be nothing
but a poor shed or cottage: If you see poor men enterprise a warfare without
counsel, without any money, against a wise Prince that is too mighty for them,
you may conclude, that they must either be overthrown, or make shameful
conditions of peace; and you judge aright when you judge so, because in all
these things God seldom puts out his power, otherwise then according to the
virtue and power which he has given to second causes, and according to them he
works, (though sometime to show his sovereignty he disappoints them, and causes
the race not to be always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong:) Sow a
bad piece of ground, God does not use to give a strong crop there; but it is
quite otherwise in the building of the Church, whatsoever the tools or
instruments are, it skills not one whit: Great instruments do not further it,
weak instruments cannot retard it: If he will fight, it is indifferent whether
his weapon be a sword, or the jaw bone of an Ass: If he mean to Judge. 15. 15.
take a City, it is all one whether the battering engines be great Guns, or
Trumpets made of Rams-horns; any thing will serve the turn in the hand of this
Workman; if he intend to thrash mountains small, and beat the hills to dusty
chafe, a worm will serve to do it, as well as a Esa. 41. 14, 15.
great sharp threshing instrument having teeth: And therefore because God has
begun this work of Reformation, and manifested that he intends to bring out a
new Edition of his Church, and to set it out in a fairer Letter then ever it
has yet been seen among us, and declared by wonderful signs and tokens, that
his heart is set upon this work, resolve you upon it, that this work must
proceed: and when you hear any of our enemies despise it, because it is a day
of small things, remember it is God who works all Esa. 26. 12.
for us, and answer their scoffs as he did them, who wondered that Saul the son
of Kish should be found among the 1 Samuel 10.
Prophets; it seems they had known him to have been a young Roister, and when
they saw him prophecy, they cried out, it may be not without a scoff, What is
befallen to the Son of Kish? Is Saul amongst the Prophets? But says one, Who
is the Father of the Prophets? remember but who undertakes to be the Master and
Father of the Prophets, and you need not wonder who is the Scholar; so you may
all conclude of this work, never be afraid of the carrying on this work, fear
not the instruments how weak soever; resolve, whatsoever God means to do, he
will never want tools or instruments, who with the speaking of a word can lay
the foundations of a new heaven and earth; who needs no more, then to say to
Zion, Be thou inhabited; Esa. 44. 28. 65. 18.
to Jerusalem, Thou shall be built; and to the Temple, Thy foundation shall be
laid, and it is done; who with one word speaking can create his Church a
rejoicing, and her people a joy.

But all this will be more clear in the second Doctrine, Doct. 2.
to which I now proceed, and to which this is only a The maine Doctrine, God
does always appear in his glory when be builds up his Church.
Porch or Preface: That when the Lord does build up Zion, he does appear in
glory. They are the words of the Text, and therefore need no other proof: In
handling whereof I shall endeavor these two things; First, to make a full and
clear demonstration of the truth of it, that God does appear in his glory
when he comes to build his Church. Secondly, I shall make application of it.
And for the clearing the truth of it there are four things to be opened.

First, what it is to appear in glory. 1.


Secondly, To prove the truth of it out of the Scripture. 2.


Thirdly, and which is that that I most aim at, How God 3.
does appear in his glory when he comes to build up Zion.

And fourthly, why he is pleased thus to appear in his 4.
glory, when he undertakes this work. For the first.

First, what it is to appear in Glory. Glory and Excellency 1. What it is to
appear in glory.
do thus differ one from another: Excellency is the intrinsecall worth or
value of any thing; Glory is the manifestation of this Excellency: Glory is
nothing but the irradiation or shining out of Excellency. Take a true Diamond
stone when it is first found, and looks but like a common stone, there is even
then all the excellency of a Diamond in it; but when it is filed, and the
curious Artist has done his part to set it off in its luster, then appears
the glory of the Diamond: or amongst men, it may be a man has admirable
abilities of wisdom, learning, power, strength, activity, or whatsoever else
might argue him to be eminent, so long as all these are hidden, this man is
really an excellent man, but when by some work worthy of all these inward
excellencies the world comes to know him to be such a one as indeed he is, then
does the man appear in his glory: So that to appear in glory, is nothing but
to appear to be as excellent as indeed one is. Therefore for God to appear in
glory, is his manifesting himself to be such a God as he is, when all those
eminent, excellent attributes and perfections which are in him, come to
irradiate, shine forth, that others must necessarily acknowledge God to be that
which he is; when he appears like himself, then does God appear in his glory.

Now secondly, it is clear in the Scripture that God does so, that he does
manifest himself to be such a God as he 2.
That God does thus appear when he builds up Zion, proved. Psalm. 87. 3. Esa 4.
5. and 60. 1 and 66. 18. and 59. 19. and 11. 10. Psalm. 142. 8. Psalm. 93. opened.
is, when he undertakes the work of building his Church; many glorious things
are spoken of this City of God, and of God in his building of this City, it is
ordinarily called his glory, his throne of glory, his glorious work, his
glorious rest: Consider seriously these few Texts. The whole 93 Psalm; it is a
short Psalm, yet a large proof and full interpretation of my Text:
Interpretors do generally agree, that it is a Prophecy of Christ's kingdom,
his ruling and building up the Church; and mark how the expressions run, The
Lord reigns, he is clothed with Majesty, the Lord is clothed with strength,
he has girded himself, his throne is established, the Lord is mightier then
the mighty waves of the sea: all these glorious expressions set forth the Lords
manifestation of himself in his edifying and building his Church, as may
appear in the last verse, Holiness becomes thine house O Lord for ever:
this holy house of God, is that Throne which is thus established, upon which he
sits in this glory and majesty, where he Luke 12. 35.
girds himself, as being ever in a readiness to go on with his work; and
this is such glory or manifestation of his excellency, that it causes not
only his Church and People to acknowledge it, but you shall find verse 3,
that the floods, the floods lift up their voice, the floods lift up their
waves: What is that? Sometimes floods and waves signify the tumultuous people,
that make a noise of sedition, mutiny, trouble, and violence; but here, the
floods which signify People and Nations, lift up their voice of wonderment and
acknowledgment of that which was set down before, viz. that God was clothed
with Majesty and glory, when he comes to establish his Throne, and adorn his
house with holiness; there is one evidence.

Another you shall see in the 68. Psalm; The whole Psalm is a most stately
strain of divine Rhetorique, the Psalm. 68. 1. 2. opened.
beginning of it is very high and lofty: Let God arise, let him show himself,
let his enemies be scattered, them that hate him, fly before him; as smoke is
driven away, as wax melts before the fire, so must wicked men perish at this
presence of God: and every where throughout the Psalm, you may observe such a
glorious presence of God, as made the earth shake, the heavens drop, the hills
leap, the mountains moved, the Saints rejoice and sing, Armies to be routed,
Kings and Princes to flee: all this is nothing but a description of Gods manner
of appearing, when he builds up Zion, when he redeems his Church out of
bondage, and subdues people unto him by the Scepter of Christ, the Preaching of
the word, which is the rod of his power, as is most manifest by one place in
the Verse 18. compared with Ephesians. 4. 8.
midst of the Psalm, which is as a key to open all. Thou have ascended up on
high, thou have led captivity captive, thou have received gifts for men, even
for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them. This is
meant of Christ's ascending to the right hand of God, to take possession of the
rule and government of the Church; when he thus ascended up on high, he led
captivity captive, led all the enemies of the Church, as captives at his
Chariot wheels, and gave gifts to men, such gifts as should build his Church;
which Paul interprets in the fourth of the Ephesians, to be the offices and
gifts which the Lord Christ gave, when he ascended up to heaven, for the
gathering, and building up of the Church; he then gave some Apostles, and some
Evangelists, some Prophets, some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of
the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of
Christ.

Another notable passage is in the 63 of Isaiah, Mark how rhetorically and
elegantly the Spirit of God sets it Esa. 63. 1, 2. etc. opened.
down; The Prophet stands amazed at the sight of one that drew nigh unto him;
Who is this (says he) that comes from Edom, with dyed Garments from Bozrah?
that is thus glorious in his apparel: traveling in the greatness of his
strength? who is this? what is he that appears in thus much glory? the answer
is made, in the name and person of Christ, It is I the Lord, mighty to save.
And what was the work that he did there? what was the glory? why truly, Jesus
Christ then came to rescue his Church from thraldom, from Egypt, Babylon, from
Verse. 9. Chap. 64. 4.
Idumea and other evil Neighbors, in the type, and literal sense, but
especially from Satan, death, and Hell, in the spiritual sense, to pardon
them, call them in, and build them upon himself, the rock against which the
gates of hell should never prevail; This was the work which occasioned him
thus to put on his glorious apparel. Many other Scriptures speak the same;
Exodus 15. 1. When God did deliver his Church out of Egypt, he triumphed
gloriously. But I forbear, because the third branch will clear it all more
fully, and that is,

Thirdly, to discover How, and wherein the Lord does appear in glory, when he
builds up his Church: and 3
How God appears in, his glory when he builds his Church.
for this I shall lay down this one conclusion, and endeavor to make it good to
you in the following Discourse; That although all the works of God are great
and glorious, and worthy to be sought into by all his people, there is not the
least atome, the least Ant, but proves this, quaelibet herba, every little
herb, but shows it to be Gods workmanship, Psalm. 19. 12. The heavens declare
his glory, and the firmament shows his handy work.

Yet this work of gathering and building of the Church This work carried on in
a way differing from all other his works. Manifested.
of Christ, is a work, which is carried in a quite differing strain, and way,
from all other works, which ever the Lord puts his own hand to. Look upon all
his other works, and you shall seldom find that the work goes beyond what
the matter and the instruments may promise, and within the compass and fadome
of second causes, may you find the sum of all that does appear in any other
work of Gods hands; so that although every thing that is done, may truly be
said to be the Lords, and to be wrought (if I may speak with reverence) in
his shop; yet because God carries them on by a concatenation and subordination
of second causes, every one working according to their nature, (though secretly
carried by his own hand) these works of God may truly be said, to be
wrought by Gods servants, by his apprentises and inferior servants; but the
whole carriage of the business of the Church of God is reserved for Gods own
hand, as his Master piece; carried in such a way as none may lay any claim to
have any thing to do in it, unless he can challenge to have the perfections of
Jehovah in him; and this I am certain you will acknowledge, if you please to lend
me your reverent attention, while I clear these four things unto you:

First, the Materials out of which the Lord uses to build his Church.

Secondly, the Instruments by which he uses to build it.

Thirdly, the Time when he does it.

And Fourthly, and chiefly, the Manner how he does it. 1.
For the first. From the unfit materials out of which it is builded.


1. For the Materials, out of which this stately piece is to be erected; you
know that in all other buildings, if the work be to be a glorious work, the
materials are the excellentest that can be found; and Mercury must not be made
of common wood: When Solomon means to build a Temple, it must be with Cedar
Trees over-layed with Gold: If Noah be to build an Arc, it shall be of Gophir
wood, firm and strong substantial Timber: No man would imagine that a stately
fabric should be erected out of rotten Willowes, and broken sticks, and
refuse chips etc. But now the materials out of which God builds the Church, are
the very refuse, out of as arrant refuse stuff as is in all the world, is this
goodly building erected: Satan's kingdom, the damned in Hell, that cursed state
of darkness, is not built out of worser stuff then the Kingdom of Christ is,
take the materials as they are when he first finds them. When God took the
Nation of the Jews to be his people, some people say, they were the
ill-favouredst people in all the world, a loathsome people to look upon; but
it is certain, they were as cross and perverse in Deuteronomy. 9 23, 23. 3. 26.
their spirits as any living; the Lord told them often, that they were the
unworthiest of all Nations when he chose them, bids them never think that they
were chose out to be his before the rest of the world, for any thing that was
in them, for he protested there was nothing to allure him: And for the Church
which Christ now ownes and builds, the same things are manifest. In the 11 of
Isaiah, you have Esa. 11.
a Prophecy of Christ's Church, what they are by nature, till his grace change
them; Lions, and Tigers, and Bears, and Wolves, and Cockatrices, and Aspes, and
such kind of Vermin, are the creatures out of which Christ Jesus chooses and
makes up his Flock of Sheep: Read Paul's Epistles, and you will find that all
the Saints (the excellentest of the earth, whom Christ thought not himself and
all his glory too good for) were Mancipia Satanae, Bond-flaves, and
Hell Hounds, going on in their wicked ways: A description you have in the 16
of Ezekiel that fits every one of them, where the Lord tells the Church, what
kind Ezekiel. 16. 1, etc.
of people they were when he fell in love with them; their Navell not cut, cast
out in the day of their birth, lying in their mothers blood, no eye to pity
her, nor no hand to do her any friendly office; and when he past by her in
that pickle, then did he fall in love with her, and spread the skirt of his
garment over her: And if you take another place of Scripture, to see what kind
of Spouse he Ezekiel. 23.
had; Aholah and Aholibah, two Whores, were the Spouses that he did choose;
plainly showing to us, that this glorious work, that which all eternity shall
give honor to him for, that the materials out of which it is built, are as bad
as any are who go to Hell and destruction. And this is one great part of a
demonstration, to let you see, that when God does such a work as this is, he
does appear in his glory: It must needs be an excellent Workman, who can
raise so glorious a piece out of such base stuff.

Secondly, and by what Instruments do you think the 2. From the weak
instruments and tools by which it is builded.
Lord does build it? and what are their Tools? who are his Workmen? you will
wonder by that time I have told you a little about them. God has sometimes
strong Cities of his enemies to overthrow, from which he means to rescue his
people, and then the Armies which he brings Exodus 7, 8, 9, 10 chap. Josh. 6.
Esa. 41.
to do it, are Rams horns, Worms, and Lice, and Mice, and Frogs, and
Locusts, and Caterpillars, etc. by such as these does the Lord sometimes
overthrow whole Kingdoms; when he pleases to break all their Iron bars
asunder, to fetch his poor captived people from amongst them; and when in a
spiritual way he sends his Instruments to subdue people unto him, he goes not
to the Schools, to find out the learned and excellent parted men, but a few
Fishermen (poor despicable men, brought up in no Arts or Learning) shall be
the Champions, who shall go and subdue the great, and the wise men of the
world, unto the Throne of Christ: and ordinarily, the men whom he does choose to
work the greatest matters by, are men of a mean presence, of weak parts, and
contemptible gifts, (though God will have some that are eminent, to let you
see, that his grace can make use of any, but yet) the greatest services that
have been done in the Church of Christ, have been most-what done by
instruments from whom man's wisdom would promise very little: so that in them
is usually fulfilled that of the Prophet, A woman does compass a Jer. 31. 22.
man, the weak prevail over the strong, and the simple over the wise: and
that of the Apostle Paul, God has chosen 1 Cor. 1. 27.
the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, weak things ^o confound
the things which are mighty, and things which are not to bring to naught things
that are: And that also of the 8 Psalm, Out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings Psalm. 8.
have thou ordained strength, to quell the enemy and the avenger. And truly
their Tools wherewith they work are no more promising then the Workmen; The
great Engine whereby Satan must be fetched from his strong hold, and made to
fall like lightning down from heaven, whereby captived souls shall be
delivered from his power and snares, whereby the dead in sin shall be raised,
the prison doors opened, the blind made to see, the deaf to hear, the food
whereby the Saints shall be nourished, the Rod whereby they shall be guided and
ordered; what are all these? even the Foolishness of preaching shall do all
this, and washing with water, in name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost;
Eating of Bread and drinking Wine in a Sacrament; Praying to God: such kind of
Tools as these are, are the instruments wherewith these unlikely Workmen are
furnished; far more ludibrious things in reference to this work, then a
Shepherds boy with his sling and his bag were to the Philistian Giant.

Thirdly, take likewise the Time, for that is as remarkable 3.
as any of the rest: The time when the Lord uses to At a most unlikely time.
build his Church, hear in this 102 Psalm, it was when the Church professed
her bones were burnt up like a hearth, her belly cleaved to the dust, she was
like an Owl, like a Pelican, like a Swallow, fed on ashes; and my Text in the
next words says, God would regard the prayer of this poor destitute Church:
The Hebrew word here translated destitute, signifies either the shrub of a
broken Tree, or the Heath that grows in the barren Wilderness; such were Gods
people at this time: Now here is the time which God chooses, when the enemies of
the Church have them in the greatest bondage, when his Church and people are in
most utter incapacity of doing any thing toward their deliverance, or
expecting any thing to be done for them; that time he ordinarily chooses for the
rescuing of his people. When he fetched them first out of Egypt, when they
were worn out there with making brickes, and the tale of their brickes was
do^bled, then did God send a Shepherd to fetch them out: When in the 70 years
captivity they complained Psalm. 141. 7. Ezekiel. 37.
that their bones lay scattered, as one should hew chips on the face of the
earth; and in another place compared to dry bones; that was the time he chose
to raise them up a glorious Army, and to bring them out for himself: And so it
is observed by Historians, that when the Lord came to deliver his Church from
the terrible persecutions under Nero and the rest of the persecuting Roman
Emperors; and now lately from Antichrist, when Cardinal Cajetan said, that
the Germans were so devoted to the Pope, that they were ready to eat grass and
hay, more pecudum, like brute beasts, at the Popes command, for the redemption
of their souls; and all the rest of the Christian world stood in the same
condition, the Kings having given their Crowns to the Whore, and laid their
heads in her lap, Rev. chap. 17, 18, and 19.
and their glory at her feet, and all the people Vassals and Slaves wondering
after that enchanted Beast; then by a few Monks and Shavelings did the Lord
break the power of this great enemy in pieces, and began the rearing up of that
great work, which he is carrying on at this day: And such like times does he
choose in planting grace, and building of his kingdom in the conversion of
particular men, plucking them out of Satan's claws, when they are most
desperately wicked: when Manasseh wallowes in blood of 2 King. 21. Luke 82.
Matthew. 9. 9. Ezekiel. 16. 23. Acts 9. Ephesians. 2. 3 Col. 1. 21.
Innocents; when Mary Magdalene is prostituting her self; when Paul is mad
against the Church; when Matthew sits at the receipt of Custom, every one of
them wallowing in their blood, carried headlongly to destruction, fulfilling
the lusts of the flesh with greediness, loving their bondage, not suspecting
or understanding their danger, not so much as desiring a better condition: this
is the time the Lord chooses. Now to do it by such instruments, out of such
stuff, at such a time, this adds much to his glory. I remember it is spoke of
one of David's Worthies, in the 2 of Samuel 23. it was Benajah the son of
Jehojada, that among all his valiant acts this was one, that he slew a Lion; 2 Samuel 23. 20.
but that which magnifies it is, the Time when he slew it, it was a Lion that
was got into a pit, in the time of a great snow: a Lion in a pit is most
desperate, most rampant, because there is no flying away, especially in a snow,
the cold of the weather making all the heat of the beast gather about his
heart, and so increases his courage and strength; and in the time of a snow,
when a man has hardly any footing to stand where he must fight; this
magnified, the time when Benajah slew the Lion: So for the Lord to do it by
such instruments, and out of such stuff, and at such a time, if I had no other
thing to say, I know you would by this acknowledge that the Lord appears in
his glory. But the fourth is the maine proof of all, and that is

The manner how the Lord does it, which my Text most aims at; it is in such a
manner as shows him abundantly to 4.
The manner is most glorious wherein he uses to magnify.
be that which he is: those excellent and eminent perfections of
All Sufficiency, which are in God, do marvellously irradiate and shine out,
when God builds the Church. Among many others, which may be observed, permit me
to speak a little of these 5 excellent Attributes, which do in their eminency
shine out, when he undertakes the building of the Church: First, his
unsearchable wisdom. Secondly, his almighty power. Thirdly, his excellent
holiness. Fourthly, his his infinite grace and bounty. And fifthly, his
admirable justice. These five Attributes does the Lord ordinarily magnify in
the highest degree, when he is pleased to arise to build up Zion.

First, I say, his unsearchable Wisdom: The Prophet speaks aright of all Gods
works, O Lord how manifola are 1.
His unsearchable wisdom. Psalm. 104. 24.
thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all; the whole world is full of Gods
wisdom, but never does the wisdom of God so shine out, as in the admirable
contrivances that he has for the building up, for the repairing and restoring
of his Church. It is said, that the spirit of wisdom Esa. 11. 2. etc.
does rest upon Christ, when he is given to be the Ruler of his Church,
carrying it in a way beyond all humane comprehension his way being in the sea,
his path in the great waters, and his footsteps not known, when yet he leads
Psalm. 77. 19.
his people as a flock: Conceive a little of it by this. The Lord does so
contrive it, that all the cross and excentricall motions of all creatures do
all concur to further this work, though they work according to their several
principles, and for their own several ends, most of them intending mischief
and ruin to the Church, yet he orders them all to be as directly subservient,
to carry on the work of building the Church, as if they all studied it, and
intended it with their whole might: The plots of the enemies, Acts 15. 39.
Psalm. 1. 12.
their strength, their cunning, their cruelty, persecutions, and the
weaknesses, faults, corruptions, and even divisions of his servants, all
contribute toward the building up of the Church, though they seem all contrary
to it: God seems to me to lay a tax not only upon Heaven, but upon Hell it
self, and all the powers of darkness, and all their servants, that every one
of them should bring in their utmost power to carry on this work. You have an
excellent instance in the 60 chapter of Esaias, where God Esa. 60. per totum.
orders it, that the Islands and Kingdoms, the Princes and Nobles, the Beasts
and Birds, the Forests and Rivers, the Gold, Silver, Brass, and Iron, all kind
of creatures and things, shall contribute their uttermost to raise up and
beautify this building; yea, though they intend it not, Micah 4. 11, 12, 13.
though they intend the contrary, to ruin and spoil it, as is clearly
expressed. Many Nations gathered together against Zion, that say, let her be
defiled, and let our eye look upon Zion, when in the mean time the wisdom of
God has contrived it, that they come but to be threshed out, and to be made a
crop for Zion to feed upon. Never does the Lord so magnify his wisdom, as in
his excellent contrivances about the Churches welfare, suiting all providence
and occurrences of things, and endeavors of all people, though they have a
thousand several ends, yet every one to contribute their best, as if one soul
dwelt in them all: which made Paul, when he considered of this point, to be
even swallowed up with admiration, O the Romans 11. 33. 34.
depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! who has known
the mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor?

Another is, his almighty power, which is so eminently 2.
seen in this work, that it is Gods ordinary expression, to His almighty power.
Esa. 17.
call it the creating of a new heaven and a new earth; Behold, I create a new
heaven and a new earth; he creates it: And in the 59 of Isaiah, where God
speaks of the Church, Esa. 59. 19.
I create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace: the fruit of the lips, is the
preaching of the Word, but it is done in a way of creation; he creates
Ministers, creates Ordinances, creates Esa. 4. 5. and 45. 7. Psalm. 102. 18 Esa.
43. 1. Jer. 41. 21. Ephesians. 2. 10. * 14, 24.
means and helps, creates deliverances, creates graces, comforts, all done in
an almighty way of creation. Now creation, you know, first, fit
irresistibiliter, there is no power able to stand against a Creation: So it is
here, when God pleases to build the Church, the Mountains 1.
flow down; thus you have it Esaias 64. 1, 2, 3. Oh that thou Raising his Church
irresistibly. Esa. 64. 1, 2, 3.
would rent the heavens, that thou would come down, that the mountains
might flew down at thy presence, as when the melting fire burns, to cause
the waters to boil, when thou did terrible things, which we looked not for.
And the like has the Prophet Zachary, What art thou, O great mountain? before
my servant Zerubbabel, thou shall become a plain: that Zach 4. 7.
is, all oppositions, all Kingdoms, all Empires, all the gates of Hell, and
whosoever stand against it, they are all broke in pieces, when once God is
pleased to undertake the building of the Church; I Will build my Church, and the
Matthew. 16.
gates of Hell shall not prevail against it: What are these gates of hell?
Christ speaks according to the manner of those Countries, the gates of a City
were the place where there was both the wisdom and the strength of a City: In
their gates sat their noble and wise Consellours; there were their Courts
kept, in their gates lay their Ammunition, out of their gates went all their
Commanders: All the wisdom and power of Hell, that is, of Satan's kingdom,
must all be broken, if God please to build his Church: he speaks the word and
it is done, done irresistibly.

Secondly, Creation sit ex nihilo, it rises out of nothing; though there be no
preparative, though you cannot imagine 2.
Out of nothing.
what shall be the materia ex qua, the thing out of which the work should
arise, yet if Creation comes, it does it out of nothing: Thus the Lord brings
in the Church at one time, wondering at her own increase, Esa. 49. 2^.
when she had sat long as a desolate widow, a captive without children,
forsaken of her husband, and an innumerable multitude of children suddenly
saying in her ears, The place is too narrow for us, where shall we have room
to dwell? Who has hegotten me these? who has brought up these? these, where
have they been? Unthought of means and mercies usually appear in this work, to
magnify the power of God.

Thirdly, Creatio fit in instanti; as it is done out of nothing, 3.
so it is done in a trice, in the twinkling of an eye: Who has heard such a
thing as this? who has seen such Esa. 66. 7, 8.
things? (says the Prophet in the 66 of Isaiah:) What is that? of a Nation
that was borne in a day: Shall the earth be made to bring forth in a day? must
there not be a space between seed-time and harvest? or shall a child be
begotten and born in a day? yet Zion does so, brings forth before she
travailes, delivered of a man-child in an instant, yea of a Nation, and that
before her pain came: and elsewhere the sudden increase of the Church is
compared to whole flights of Doves, and to the clouds flying swiftly and in
abundance through the air; Who are these Esa. 60. 8.
that fly like the clouds, and as Doves to their windows? But most fully this
is promised in the 110 Psalm, where the Psalm. 110.
Churches increase is compared to the dew which in innumerable drops comes
suddenly out of the womb of the morning: there is another glorious Attribute of
God shining out, his almighty power. Then thirdly,

His Holiness: Never does the Lord appear so holy 3.
a God, as he does in this work of building the Church. His Holiness.
Holiness is not only a glorious Attribute, but in truth it is glory it
self, it is the very face of God; and therefore holy men are said to bear the
image of God, because they are like his very face, when, Holy, Holy, Holy, is
the Lord of Hosts, may be sung unto him, the whole earth is full Esa. 6. 3.
of his glory, with that work which causes his holiness to appear, then like
the Sun he shows his glorious face, when he appears in his holiness. Now this
excellent Attribute is celebrated to the height in the Churches building: Rev.
4.
This is clear in that solemn and glorious representation of Christ, ruling
in, and beautifying of his Church Revel. 4. the four Beasts representing the
Catholic Church in the four quarters of the world, when night and day they
give glory to Christ, the head and King, the Builder and Ruler of his Church;
their Song is only this, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty: and that
triumphant Song of the Church, recorded Revel. 15. for the victory Rev. 15.
Psalm. 89, 18. and 99. 5. Esa. 17. 7. 1 Samuel 2. 2.
obtained over the Beast, wherein they celebrate his greatness, truth, and
justice, the Church sets this as the rise of all, For thou only art holy: and
in truth, the usual name he takes to himself, and by which his people call
him in reference to this work, is, The Holy One of Israel; and it is fit it
should be so, for then he shows how little he can endure iniquity, then he
purges away the sin of his people, then he makes them a peculiar people,
zealous of good works, then he separates their dross and their rubbish from
them, then he makes them like unto himself: never does God beautify his
holiness so, as he does when he builds the Church. That is the third.

Fourthly, and that which is one of the sweetest, the Lord never magnifies nor
glorifies his free grace and his love so 4.
His free grace and love.
as he does in this work of building the Church; all the treasures of love and
favor, which before lay hid in his breast, do gloriously shine out; then he
marries her, or keeps his Wedding-feast, and makes all the world to know how
dear she is unto him; there and then, and no where else, does he bestow his
choice favors. When he gives Kingdoms and Empires, he gives nothing but a
piece of clay, what he cares not for; but when he builds the Church, there he
lays out his Treasure. The time would fail me to number the gifts which he
then gives: Great Princes ordinarily have their Almoners with them wheresoever
they go, and they give this or that piece of silver or gold to ordinary
Petitioners; but when they will appear in their glory, and give such gifts as
shall magnify them, then it may be they create Earls, and Lords, and great
Officers of State, which are peculiar and discriminating pledges of their love:
So does God, when he builds up other Nations with outward mercies, with
fruitful seasons, health, wealth, and pomp, etc. he esteems them as nothing,
he cares not a shoo-latchet for these common gifts, they are his common alms;
but when he builds his Church, then he gives his Ordinances, then he gives his
Ministers, then he gives them the Graces of his Spirit, these are his
Chrysolites, his Emeralds, his Pearls, and Diamonds, then he makes all the
world stand amazed, (as my Text says) and all the Kings to wonder, at the love
and beauty which he shows to his people in the day he builds up Zion: then
they who despised her shall wonder at her, Who is this that comes out of the
wilderness leaning upon Cant. 8. 2. Esa. 60. 14. and 62. ^.
her beloved? and bow down at her feet and confess, that she is now to be
called Heph-zibab and Beulah, because her God delights in her. And lastly,

The Lord uses more then at any other time, to glorify 5.
that excellent Attribute of his Justice, because then he His Justice.
takes vengeance upon his Churches enemies: You shall find in the Scripture,
that these two things ever go together, the Lambs marrying, and the Whores
burning; Zions building, and Babels ruin; his Servants exalting, his enemies
falling; his People raised up, his adversaries spoiled; then does the Lord call
them to account, and pay them, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, breach for breach:
the day of Zions deliverance, and redemption, and fury and recompense to her
adversaries, ever go together: Behold Esa. 59. 17, 18. and 34. 8. Zeph. 3. 19.
Esa. 49. 26. Joel 3.
(says the Lord) in that day I will undo all that afflict thee, and will save
and gather thee: in one and the same day the spoiled Church shall be rescued,
and they who oppressed her shall be fed with their own flesh, and made drunk
with their own blood: The Church militant and malignant are as a pair of
balances, or Buckets at a Well, when the one goes up the other still goes
down. And by this time I hope you see how the Lord appears in his glory when
he builds up Zion; I have but the fourth question to answer, and this will be
fit for Application; and that is,

Why the Lord appears thus glorious in this work, rather 4.
then in any other? There are these two reasons of it: Why he thus appears in
glory when he builds his Church.
First, because it is a work that infinitely pleases him: Men choose to
appear in their clothes and behavior suitable to the work that they are to be
employed in: the woman 1.
Because he dearly loves his Church.
of Tekoah must feign her self to be a mourner, when she goes on a mournful
message; and David, when he goes on a doleful journey, covers his face, and
puts on mourning apparel; but when Solomon is to be crowned, he goes in all
his royalty; and a Bride adorns her self gloriously when she is to be married:
Verily so does the Lord: when he goes about a work he takes no pleasure in, he
puts on his mourning apparel, he covers himself with a cloud, and the heavens
with blackness; when he is to do his strange work of judgment, then he
mournes, How shall I give thee up Ephraim? how shall I make thee as Sodom? my
bowels rolled within me, my compassions are turned: but the Jer. 31. 34. Psalm
132. 13. and 87. 2.
building of Zion does infinitely please him, because Zion is as the apple of
his eye to him; he bought Zion at a dear rate, with his own blood; he lays
Zion in his bosom, he is ravished with Zion, Zion is his Love, his Dove, his
fair one; he has chosen Zion, and loves the gates of it, better then all the
Palaces of Jacob; and being so pleasing to him, no marvel if he put on all his
glorious apparel, when he is to adorn and build up Zion. And se^ondly, it is

Because all the glory that he looks for to eternity, must 2.
arise out of this one work of building Zion; this one work He expects most
glory from this work.
shall be the only monument of his glory to eternity: this goodly world, this
heaven and earth, that you see and enjoy the use of, is set up only as a shop,
as a Work-shop to stand only for a week, for six or 7000 years, (a thousand
years is with the Lord but as a day) and when his work is done he will throw
this piece of clay down again; and out of this he looks for no other glory
then from a Cabul, a land of dirt, or a shepherds cottage, or a goard which
springs up in a night and withers in a day: but this piece Psalm. 87. per to^um.
Esa. 31. 9. Psalm. 132. Ier. 17. 12. Rev. 4. Esa. 6. 1.
he sets up for a higher end, to be the eternal mansion of his holiness and
honor; this is his Metropolis, his Temple, his house where his fire and
furnace is, his Court, his glorious high Throne, and therefore his glory is
much concerned in this work: when Nebuchadnezzar would have a City for the
honor of his kingdom, and the glory of Dan. 4. 30.
his Majesty, he will make it a stately piece; Solomon made 1 King. 10. 18, 27.
all his Kingdom very rich and glorious, but he made his Court, and especially
his Throne, another manner of thing, so stately, that the like was not to be
seen in any other kingdom: and therefore no wonder though he appear in his
glory in building up of that, which we may boldly say must one day be made as
glorious as his wisdom can contrive, and his power bring to pass.

Having thus plainly opened and proved this excellent Doctrine, give me leave
in the Application to present you Application.
with some matter, first, of Joy and consolation; secondly, of Reproof and
Terror; thirdly, of Exhortation and Duty.

Here is a further excellent encouragement and strengthening of our comfort, in
that which I touched before, Use 1. For consolation.
viz. an assurance that this work must go on; do all the world what they can,
they can never hinder the building up of Gods Church, because God has so set
his heart upon it, that for the doing thereof he has clothed himself with
his glory, and girded himself with strength; and will he be hindered in it,
though all the Nations of the world should rise up against him to hinder it? It
is true, the gates of Hell do always appear with all their wisdom and
strength against it, but what of that? it is his glory to build it, and can we
imagine that any shall be able to spoil him of his glory, that any can pull
down what he will build, or root up his pleasant plant; when he has called it
his house of glory, which he will glorify, that poor Esa. 60. 7.
worms shall be able to defile or deface it? No, no, this work must be carried
on, fear it not. He has evidently begun it among our selves, and we are often
discouraged in it; there is yet much to be done, much rubbish still remains to
be carried out, and we are very low, our estates wasted, the builders
discouraged, their hands weakened: but not by might, or an Army, but by my
Spirit (says the Lord) must this work proceed, and then what art thou, O great
mountain, thou great mountain of Popery, Prelacy, superstition, oppression,
division, heresy, schism? what art thou before my servants the builders? thou
shall flow down, thou shall be made a plain: Be strong therefore, ye Nobles
and servants of God, whose hearts are set upon this work, you shall
notwithstanding all opposition see the cap-stone set upon the head of it, and
cry Grace, Grace, unto it. The Lord uses an excellent similitude in Esaias 31.
4. when he came down to rescue his people, and they Esa 31. 4.
were discouraged (just as we are now) with a multitude of oppositions, he
compares himself to a Lion, or a young Lion, that has caught his prey, when
the multitude of shepherds are called out against him, he scorns to mend his
pace, or be afraid of their voice; So will the Lord of Hosts do in building of
Zion, let all the world rise up against this work, and he scorns to draw back
from them, or be afraid of the shepherds or their dogs, he can worry them
and all their dogs to pieces: And therefore I beseech you, who are engaged in
this great work of God, when any discouragements fall out before you, remember
the errand that God bids Hezekiah send to Senacharib, who came with some two or
300000 fighting men, and sent him a very proud, scornful, and threatening
message; tell him (said God) the daughter of Zion sits and laughes at him,
shakes her head, and scorns him, bids him do his worst, and well she might,
for these proud mountains soon flowed down, for in in one night one of God
servants Esa. 37.
killed 180000, even all his Captains and great men were all killed; so say
thou, when great difficulties rise up, and thou beginnest to think, Lord, by
whom shall Jacob arise? for he is small, our money fails us, our Trade is
gone, yea, in many places Ordinances fail us, men's hearts are discouraged;
what shall we do? say, the Lord has put on his glorious apparel, and he must
and will carry on this work, he will never undergo that reproach, This man
began to build, and was not able to make an end. Luke 14.


But why does he then so delay it? alas, it is worse with Objection.
us then it was two or three years ago, the summer is past* the harvest is
come, and yet we are not delivered; much blood is shed, the enemy is yet strong
and potent, our hearts fail, our instruments decay, and yet the work hangs;
if God did appear in his glory, why would it come on thus heavily?

I answer, the Lord is a God of judgment, he is a wise Answ. Esa. 30. 18.
God, he knows the fittest time: That he does delay is neither because he is
weary of the work, or because he is not able to do it, or because the enemy is
strong; No, no, the Holy One of Israel never fainted, neither is he weary, but
it is only because his best time is not yet come; he Ier. 14. 8, 9. Esa. 40.
28.
will (it may be) more fit the enemies for destruction, and us for deliverance;
it may be he will hunt us yet more from all our self-confidence, and lay us
low; but in the fittest and best time of all, this work must proceed, no weapon
can prosper that is forged against it, the Lord will carry it on and finish it:
whether we live to see it, it is no matter, if we dye and go to heaven we are
well enough, let us serve God in our generation, in this work which himself
will own in all generations.

Is it the Lords glory to build up Zion, then miserable, and wretched, and
cursed are all they that are the enemies Use 2. Terror to all who would hinder
it.
of Zion, who would pull Zion down; who with the children of Edom, who cry,
Down with it, down with it, even to the very foundation; who with Sanballat
and Tobiah, do strive all they can to keep it low, to hinder the Workmen that
they may not carry it on; what do you think will become of these? I Will tell you
how you shall guess; you shall find in the sixth of Ezra, when a great
Emperor of Ezra 6. 11, 12.
Persia came to understand a decree of Cyrus, wherein it appeared he was
stirred up of God to build his house at Jerusalem, he wrote a Letter to Tatnai
and Shethar-boznai, and many others who were enemies to the Jews, and had writ
to the Emperor to know, whether they should hinder these men from the work,
the Emperor writes back to this purpose; You Tatnai and Shethar-boznai keep
far from them, meddle not with them, I make a decree, that whosoever he be that
offers to hinder this work, his house be pulled down, and timber be taken
down and set up for a gallows, and himself hanged thereon; and the Goa that
has caused his name to dwell there, root out from the face of the earth all
Kings and Princes that offer to alter this work, or destroy this house. Here
was a brave speech of a Heathen, of a Pagan Emperor: the like must be said to
these men, whoever offers to hinder the building of Gods house, the reformation
of the Church, the decree of the great King will reach them, it is ratified in
heaven, the God that has caused his name to dwell in the Church, will cut off
all Kings and Princes, Lords and Ladies, rich and poor, and whosoever dare
offer to hinder the building of it.

But who is he, or where is he, that in his heart dare think Quest.
such a thing?

I tell you, their number is numberless; God grant there Answ.
be none such present: I Will name some of them, not only the Antichristian,
Prelaticall, Malignant party, who are in arms against us, and endeavor with
all their power and cunning to destroy us, and so cause this work to cease, but
even all who secretly affect and assist them, or stand as Neuters, and hang
off, when this work of God is in hand, Nehem. 3. 5.
and like the Nobles of Tekoah refuse to put their shoulders to the work, are
all enemies to it, and do dash against this rock: and all whose wicked lives
are contrary to it, all whose ill examples discourage, and lie like
stumbling blocks in the way, who refuse to be hewn, and framed, and laid like
living stones into the building of God, who are unwilling to bear Christ's
yoke; who by counsels, by power, or otherwise, hinder the spreading of the
Gospel, (which is the rod of his power, and the great engine whereby he reares
the Church, and subdues his enemies) or that have ill will to the preaching of
it; all that spread corrupt Doctrines, licentious opinions, who seek to rend
and divide the people of God, all you and your works are enemies to it,
whatsoever you think of your selves, and whosoever you are, whether great or
small, you all kick against pricks; and believe it, you must all come under the
curse of it: you are all wretched and miserable creatures, to oppose that work
which must prosper, and to stumble at that stone, which will fall upon you, and
grind you to powder: you must all perish who have ill will at Zion; not only
your weapons must be unprosperous, which are forged against it, but this is the
plague wherewith the Lord will smite you, your flesh must consume away, your
eyes Esa. 54. 17. Zach. 14. 12 Luke 19. 27. Rev. 19. ult.
rot in their holes, your tongues consume away in your mouths, and to conclude
your misery, you must all be slain before his face, and cast into a Lake
burning with fire and brimstone: Repent therefore of this not only your folly,
but madness, which now is your shame, and is like to prove your confusion.

Does the Lord appear in his glory when he builds up Use 3. Exhortation in two
branches.
Zion? then I beseech you all give God the glory of his work: you can never
grieve a man more, then to neglect him in that which he makes his glory; to
slight or throw 1.
Since be appears in his glory, to acknowledge his glory in it.
aside a Work-mans masterpiece, as if it were a toy, is taken very heinously
among men; now I tell you, that although every work of God is excellent, and
his praise may be found in it, the works of the Lord are all great, and worthy
to be had in remembrance, yet this work of building the Church is his
Masterpiece, every pin, every stone, from the foundation to the cap-stone, is
so enameld, and checkerd, with Rubies, Saphires, Emeralds, Chrysolites,
Carbuncles, with all manner of precious stones, such admirable, curious
workman-ship, that Ahabs Ivory Palace, and Solomon's Cedar house, the Pyramids
of Egypt, all humane Artifices, yea all the rarities and secrets of nature,
have no glory, when compared with the glory of this one work, of Christ's
gathering, building, protecting, and beautifying of Zion; this you would soon
acknowledge, if you could look upon it with spiritual discerning eyes: get
therefore your Bibles, and the Stories of the Church, and read them, and in
reading labor to the utmost to understand this piece of Gods work; consider,
how ever since he has had a Church upon earth, what a strange way he has took
to govern it, from what small beginnings he has multiplied it, from what dead
low ebbes he has brought it, by what unlikely instruments he has built it,
what potent enemies he has subdued before it, with what rare privileges he
has enriched it, by what unthought of ways and providence he has done good
it; ponder these things, and you can hardly read one Paragraph of the Story of
Gods Church, but you must with admiration cry out, This is the Lords doing, and
it is wonderful in my eyes; O that there were in us such a heart, that could
be thus raised up, thus enlightened, as to see nothing excellent, but only Gods
going in the Sanctuary! they have seen the goings of my God and King in the
Sanctuary: Psalm. 68. 24.
such an heart would be according to Gods own heart, a spirit which the Lord
would delight in: more especially study and behold the glory of this last piece
of his work, this new edition of the Church which he is now about to set forth,
wherein I hope he will vouchsafe to make his Churches, even amongst us, a
praise in the earth. O read over the admirable dealings of God toward us, in
these four or five last years, I am assured it will be the wonderment of
succeeding generations, God will have it written by one hand or other, and when
these things shall be told they will be wondered at indeed: when it shall be
written what a low ebb we were at, how we were tantum non swallowed with
Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Arminianisme, Tyranny, Oppression all things
concurring to undo us, and then the Lord broke those Iron yokes, and has
called this Parliament, which after he has sitted, and tried, and humbled, he
has put upon the repairing of his Church, and building the walls of his City,
in a troublesome time, when they build with the Trowell in one hand, and the
Sword in another, when huge potent Enemies are risen up to destroy them, and
yet he carries on this work, exercising and manifesting such rare wisdom in
the midst of our folly, such admirable power in the midst of our weakness,
such holiness in the midst of our corruptions, such love in the midst of our
unworthiness, such justice to our enemies in the midst of their pride, carries
it on after such a manner, that they who read these things must stand amazed,
and cry out, O how wonderful are thy doings O Lord toward thy poor unworthy
flock in the kingdom of England! Now could we get our hearts raised thus to
give God the glory due to his name, it would please him better then a bullock
that has horns and hoofes; never could we live to better purpose, it were an
excellent work to have these ways and goings of our God and King written for
the generations to come, that the people who shall be created may praise the
Lord: I have often begged of him, to put it into the heart of some wise
observer of his dealings, to collect and digest them, and I hope it will be
done; in the mean time let us that live forget none of his doings, but keep
them all in thankful mind and memory, and praise the Lord on the Harp, and
sing praise to him every day, for the wonders that he has wrought, since he
arose to build up our Zion. This is the first Exhortation, to praise God for
his glorious work: another follows, with which I will end, and that is

To you (right Honorable) for whose sakes this meeting is in this place; that
seeing it is the Lords glory to Use 2. Exhortation to the right Honorable
Lords, to imitate Christ, to make this work their glory.
build up the Church, you would make it your glory, that you would be like unto
God, that you would esteem your selves never so truly in your glory, as when
you come out with all that you have, or are, to help forward this work: I
humbly pray you look upon our desolations, look upon the enemies of the Church,
how infinitely industrious they are to ruin it, how few of them drive any
private design, but join in this common work and design, to ruin the work
of Reformation; how they lay out all their wit, power, and interest, which they
have in Court, in Country, in City, by Letters, by Travels, by Blood, by any
thing, that they might (with Sanballat and Tobiah) cause this work of God to
cease; you know this. Consider also how poor desolate Zion does even stretch
out her hands unto you, and pray you, that in this sad time of her calamity, if
there be any love in your hearts and bosoms toward her, you would come out,
and give her some help, to rear her out of the dust and the rubble: I beseech
your Lordships set this work to heart, and up and be doing, do your best to
carry this work on. To this end there are two things I shall humbly offer unto
you: First, to tell you what you may do, and what God expects you should do:
Secondly, to give you some quickening Motives to warm and inflame your hearts,
with a purpose and resolution to do what God would have you do.

First, you may possibly demand, what may or can we Quest.
do, or what can any creature do, seeing you were taught that the building of
Zion is Gods work alone?

I answer, it is very true, the work is Gods, and Gods Answ.
alone, and you may truly say of Zion, when ever it is What Magistrates and
great men may do.
built, it is not by might, nor by an Army, but by Christ and his Spirit; yet
were not great men, Princes, and Nobles, to be very great instruments in this
work, God would never have promised it, as one of the great privileges of the
Church, that Kings and Princes should be her nursing Fathers, and that she
should suck the breasts of Kings: And truly Esa. 49. 23. and 60. 16. 1 Timothy 2.
26.
it is much you may do by your examples, and by causing your great families to
serve the Lord; I and my Family (said Joshua) will serve the Lord: and all the
great men we Josh. 24. 15. Genesis 18. 19. and 35. 2. Matthew. 8 5. 2 Timothy 4. 19.
Acts 16. 15.
read of in the Scripture to have been converted, presently their families were
converted with them: The Ruler of the Synagogue and his family, the Centurion
and his family, Onesiphorus and his family, Crispus and his family, Lydia and
her family, and many others: Thus in a spiritual and moral way you may help
to build the Church; but that is not all, your authority and power may do very
much in this work: It is very true, that your power (who are Nobles,
Magistrates, and Rulers of States) in the Commonwealth, in the building of a
Civil State, and the building of the Church, do extremely differ one from
another: In building the Civil State, you do it ad modum imperii, by way of
rule and command; therein you have authority; Meum and Tuum, the things of this
life, are by the Lord committed into the hands of a State, and the light of
Nature and humane Prudence are sufficient to direct you in them, and in these
things you have power and authority, according to your own reason and will, to
make Laws about them; you may erect new Laws, and new Offices, and new
Officers, and you may impose new burdens, and people may lawfully submit to
your discretion, without seeking any further for a particular warrant out of
the Word, in the things that concern this present life: but (my Lords) it is
not so in the building of Zion, matters of Religion are spiritual and heavenly
things, Heb. 3. 1.
which pertain only to God, the souls and consciences of men, and the
communion of Saints, their end is Gods glory, men's conversion, edification, and
eternal salvation; these are things which cannot be carried along by natural
reason, or civil prudence, but only by the light of that spiritual and
heavenly Rule, the Word of God; and therefore in these things you have no
Lordly rule; Unum Luther.
Dominum habemus qui animas nostras gubernat; all your power in these things
must be ad modum ministerii, not imperii; you must carry your selves, not as
the Churches Masters, but as Christ's servants, yea and as servants to the
Church for Christ's sake, not as Lords, to dispose of the affairs of it at your
own pleasure, but at the direction of his Word only: This then must you set
down for a Rule, That you are limited to the Word, and men under your aurhority
must, before they obey your Orders, examine them by the Word, and find them to
be both lawful in their nature, and expedient in their use, for edification,
peace, order, etc. But (my Lords) though you have not such an imperium here, as
in humane things, yet the power and authority that Gods Word has given you for
the carrying on of this work, is exceeding great, and it may be reduced to
these two heads: First, the Lord would have you his instruments for the
purgation and reformation; secondly, for the preservation of the Church, when
you have brought it into a state of reformation.

First, for the purgation and reformation of it; all the 1.
rubbish, all the dross, the Antichristian pelf and garbidge For the
reformation of Religion.
that the house of God is defiled with, you are to throw it all out, with
Josiah, into the brook Kidron; to sweep it all out, and to bring back the
people, who have been misled into Arminianisme, to Popery, to Superstition, to
any of these abominable ways, you are to remove all these stumbling blocks,
and to bring them back again unto the knowledge of the Lord their God: this
God requires at the hands of Princes; thus did Jehoshaphat, thus did Hezekiah,
thus did Josiah, thus did Ezra and Nehemiah, all 2 Chronicles. 17. 2 Chronicles. 29. 2 Chronicles. 34. Ezra 10. Nehem 9. 10.
the good Kings of old, they all made it their care to command the people, to
make them enter into an Oath, and a Curse; and none might live under their
privilege and protection, who would not return to the God of their Fathers: I
confess, I think it is not in the power of Magistrates to compel a people
(unto whom God can lay no claim by Covenant) to alter from a heathenish
Religion to be the Lords people, yet they should be careful to send Ministers
to preach unto them, and try if by any means they may be brought to receive
the truth in love; yea and to punish them severely, if they blaspheme, or seek
to draw away Gods people to Idolatry, etc. When the Jews, David, or Solomon,
or any of their Kings, conquered the Nations round about them, they never
compelled any of them to forsake their false Gods, and to turn Proselytes,
because those people never had chosen God to be their God; but a people who
once had in Covenant made themselves the Lords, and so the Lord by virtue of
the Covenant could lay claim to them and their posterity, his Princes and
servants have ever (according to his will) compelled these to stand to their
Covenant, or else they should not enjoy their protection; and therefore Josiah,
and those good Kings put them all to death who followed Baal, and returned not
unto the Lord their God. For our selves, our Plantations ought never to
endeavor to convert Infidels by violence, Christ's people must be a willing
people, we leave such conversions to the Spaniards, who worried the Indians to
death with dogs, and drove them into the river like cattle, and compelled
them to be baptized: but Revel. 17. 16.
for a people who have received Christianity, and have been seduced to
Anti-christianity, to whom still the Lord continues his claim, by the same
right that Jehu destroyed Baal, and other good Kings Jeroboams Calves, and the
rest of their Idols, and compelled them to stand to the Lords Covenant and
Oath, by the same warrant and rule may you root out Popery and Heresy, and
proceed against incorrigible Papists, Heretics, Blasphemers, and such as have
apostatized from the Lord, and refuse to return: This power the Lord has
given you for the purgation of Religion, to remove and cast out the things that
are abominable. You have power also, and it is your duty, to set up all Gods
Ordinances; Ordinances for Worship, Ordinances for Government; thus did all the
good Kings you shall read of: You are also to find out fit Ministers for the
house of God, to see that they be regularly called, tried, and ordained, and
sent forth, in the way of the Gospel; all this the Lord has put into your
hands. This for the Reformation; and when you have set the house of God in a
good state, the Lord calls you further to take care for the preservation of it,
by providing Seminaries of learning and piety, that the Sons of the Prophets
may be bred, that there may never want a seed to furnish the house of God; with
able, faithful, and skillful Workmen, and to provide and continue sufficient
maintenance to them: And so likewise to convocate Synods, Assemblies, and to
encourage Ministers, with putting them upon their duties, quickening them up to
it, etc. providing that the mouth of the Ox be not muzled, that treads out the
Corn; that the Levites be not compelled to leave their Cities: All these
things for the preservation of Religion has the And the preservation of it.
Lord put into your hands, and these things God requires at your hands: yea (I
say further) the Lord would have you look to it, that as none shall rob Gods
people of the liberties Christ has given them, nor take away any of their
privileges from them; yea, and that the weak, both in knowledge, faith, and
practice, be born with, so far as the Apostles Canons do require: so on the
other side to provide that Heretics and false Teachers, who would Ezra 6. 11,
12, 1 King. 2. 26. Romans 13. 4. Deuteronomy. 13.
withdraw the people from their God, who would steal them away from the
knowledge, and worship, and service of God, to licenciousnesse, to profanesse,
to ungodliness, to idolatry, to blasphemy, and to such things as overthrow
Religion; the Lord requires it at your hands, not to permit such Wolves to live
amongst them; surely such are Rev. 2. 14, 20. Vide Beza de Hereticis mor^e
plectendis.
no more to be born with, who thus murder souls, then they who murder men's
bodies. Now (my Lords) these are admirable duties and dignities, these are such
things to be employed in, that there is not an Angel in heaven, not an Apostle
now with God, nor a Minister on earth, but would as willingly be employed in
this work, as to be in the glory of heaven it self; and seeing God himself
appears in his glory when he builds up Zion, my humble suit is, that your
Lordships would count it your glory, and think with David you never are so
gallant and glorious, as when you are dancing before the Ark of God.

And to stir you up to it, I shall use two sorts of Motives; Motives
thereunto.
one taken from your selves, from your own present standing and condition: the
other, from the consequence and benefit of the work it self.

First, your own standing and condition affords you many notable arguments,
such as might even compel you to Motive 1.
make it your glory to help forward this great building of the Church of God.

You are great men, lifted up above your Brethren: God 1.
has done that for you, which he has denied to millions They are great men.
in the Kingdom; you know your states, blood, birth, dignities, privileges,
so well, that I need not reckon them: Now God having made you greater then
others, he expects, and certainly it would be a very comely thing, that you
should be the forwardest of all to help forward this work, that God is so well
pleased with.

And secondly, God has also put into your hands more talents and abilities,
and opportunities to do this work, 2.
Have many opportunities.
then into the hands of others: many willing men, who would lay down all,
would do all, and give all they have to further it, yet are not able to do so
much as one Vote of yours may do; one I, or one No, given by you, may more
forward the building of this work, then the lives and states of many thousands:
Now when such an opportunity is in your hands, when you are so furnished and
enabled to do it, how sad a thing would it prove if you should not improve it?

Nay thirdly, (my Lords) you are Noblemen, and therefore you cannot out of
true Nobility but desire to 3.
(...) a glorious work, and will be their greatest honor.
have your hands in noble and honorable imploiments; sure I am, since you were
borne, or since this generation begun, never was it in the hand or opportunity
of men, to be laid out more honorably, then you may in cordially helping
forward this great work: never can you be so glorious in the eyes of God and
his Angels, no such glory or Nobility as to be employed in this work; had
Isa. 60. 12, 13.
you all Acts of Parliament, to entaile all your Lands, Honors, Names and
Fortunes, all that you are, and all else that you wish for, would never make
you so honorable, as to be numbered amongst these that built up the Church of
God; that when the Lord shall reckon up the people, who were by him employed in
the work, as he says once Psalm. 87.6.
of Zion, This and that man was borne there; so for God to say, for the
Registers of his acts and worthy deeds to say, Such a Nobleman, such an Earl,
such a Lord, stood out in my cause and work, when the Nobles of Tekoah Nehem.
3. 5. Nehem. 6. 17.
would not put their hands to it: When some of the Nobles of Judah kept
intelligence with Sanballat and Tobiah, when some others discouraged the
well-affected; such a man, like another Nehemiah, wrought for me night and
Nehem. 4. 23.
day, and never put off his clothes except it were to wash them; never could
such an honor be put upon you; look not while you live in this world, though
you might live an hundred years, ever to have the like opportunity. O that it
might sink deep into your hearts! that you did understand what an honor it is
to be a helper of God, in laying the foundation of a new heaven and earth! Nay
(my Lords) consider in the fourth place,

God has called you to it, as expressly as he did call Bezaleel 4.
and Aholiab, as he called Hiram, when Solomon sent for him, to help him build
the Temple: he could have cast your lot to be mean men, or in his providence
have left you among them who have deserted him and his cause, (who shall
therefore one day be clothed in confusion) but he has kept you here, while
these great matters of Religion Isa. 58.
are in hand, things which I hope will prove the foundations of many
gnerations: This work he has called Esa. 44. ult.
you unto, and has said to you, as once he said to Cyrus, Build my house; and
when God calls, you may be bold to follow him, rely upon him for wisdom,
counsel, strength, success, etc. according to that promise Esa. 45. 2. I will
go Esa. 45. 2.
before thee, I will break in pieces gates of brass, and bars of iron, I am
the Lord who calls thee, and will bless thee.

Yea, fifthly, the Lord has already blessed you in it: 5.
Remember (I beseech you) at what a miserable low ebb God has already blessed
them in this work.
we were, when your Lordships, and the Honorable House of Commons, entered into
an Oath and Covenant with God Almighty, and swear unto him with your hands
lifted up to heaven, that you would endeavor the reformation of Religion; what
our state was then, and how this work was derided and scorned, yet ever since,
though you have been building in a very troublesome time, and have for our
sins met with many a stop, many a Perez-Vzzah in bringing-in the Ark of God,
a blessed alteration has God made in our affairs; since we have owned his
cause, how has he owned us? what deep conspiracies has he detected? what
victories has he bestowed? how many ways has he blessed us, and carried the
work on, notwithstanding our weaknesses, our follies, our not taking advantage
of the opportunities, yet the Lord has carried it on, because he does own it.

Nay, give me leave to add, your forwardness and hearty affection to it, may
make the work easy to all 6. Their example will encourage others. Judge. 7. 17.
others; if you as so many Gedeons go before them, and say to the people, Do
what you see us do, Look on us and do likewise; in this cause of God you are
like the first sheet of an Impression, when that is printed, it is a pattern
for thousands to be wrought off afterward with ease.

Nay lastly, know it for certain, that in this point of the 7. And Gods*
servants will live and dye with them in this work and cause. 1 Chro. 28. 21.
purgation and reformation of Religion, all the well-affected of England will
live and die with you: what David said to Solomon, My Son, up and build, all
the Nobles, and Princes, and the courses of the Priests, will be at thy
command, I may boldly apply to you, Go on in this work, and you shall find
England will never desert you, the State of England, the well-affected, the
Gentry, the People, the Ministers will live and die with you, while you will
live and die cordial to Gods cause. It is an old observation, when Princes and
great men leave God, they lose their Names, Friends, Glory: while Joash was
for Religion, they all stuck to him; when he listened to the Princes who drew
him off from God, he lost his life and glory all at once: even famous Solomon
himself, who built the Temple, when he forsook God, he lost ten of his twelve
Tribes: and it is as true here at home, among them whose hearts remain
faithful to God and his cause, either in the house of Lords or Commons,
although some clouds do sometimes rise over them, some jealousies and
surmises, (which soon blow over again) few of them are forsaken; but let any
tacke about, and forsake God, and they are blasted presently, they are
irrecoverably lost. My Lords, consider of these things seriously, and let these
arguments, taken from your own condition and standing, provoke you to go on
resolutely in this glorious work. There is one Motive more, and that is taken
from

The fruit and the gain that will come of this great work Motive 2. From the
gain of this work.
of your building up the Church of God: Take it in two branches, in two things,
both which (I am assured) are very dear to you; the one concerns your selves,
the other the State.

For your selves, your Honors, and Families, and Posterities, 1.
are certainly very dear to you; men of great To themselves. In this world God
will build their houses.
blood, and birth, and estate, make the preservation and establishing of their
Family, ordinarily next to the salvation of their souls: Now (my Lords) you
may take this for a certain Rule, Build you Gods house, God will build yours;
Jehu, though not sound at heart, entailed the Crown of Israel to the fourth
generation upon his posterity, 2 King. 10. 30.
for sticking to God in the cause of Baal, in rooting Baal out of Israel; and
God promised concerning Solomon, 2 Samuel 7. 11, 13
he shall build my house, and I will establish his Throne; mark it, those two
go together, he shall build my house, and I will establish his Throne; and God
said to David in the same chapter, because he had but a purpose to build a
house for the Lord, because it was in thy heart to do it, I will build thy
house for ever; and even the very Midwives in Egypt, who loved Exodus 1. 20.
Gods people, God built them houses. So that if ever you would eternize your
names, and bring Gods blessing upon your families, know certainly this is the
only way, other projects will not do it, he can cut off families and houses
in their greatest glory: Shebna thought by pride, and pomp, and state, to carry
it out, but shall thou reign (says God) because thou have built thee a brave
house? I Will kick thee like a ball in strange countries: It is no thinking to
continue greatness in despite of God, who at his pleasure pulls down and
raises up. But in this work you have him engaged, build you Gods house, and
he will build yours, give his blessing to your posterity, or in case they
fail, give you a name that is better then of Sons and Daughters. And in
another world, a better house prepared
But I Will tell you that which is better for you, better to your souls, when you
have served him herein this glorious work, when the day of account and reward
comes, they who faithfully work most in this building, shall have the best
wages, they shall sit upon thrones there, and shine even as the Sun in the
firmament, for ever.

Secondly, The benefit of this work for the public 2. This would settle the
State.
State.

The public State (my Lords) is that, that you have sweat and toiled for
hitherto, and you would rejoice to see it well settled, to see poor England,
buoide out of these quicksands, into which it is fallen: What a blessed man
would he be, that could but put us into the way, how to pacify Gods wrath
kindled against the Nation, and secure it for the time to come; Now (my Lords)
this will do both, this will pacify the wrath of God. No such way under
Heaven, to remove it, as to go on faithfully in Reforming the House of God, in
settling Religion according to the Word: That Heathen King Artaxerxes, sent a
letter by Ezra, to all the Governors, and bids them, that they should let Ezra
have all that he would Pacify Gods wrath at present.
desire for the House of God, so much Gold and Silver, and Wheat, and Oil, and
Salt, as much as he would, and bids him go on, and set all in order; and what
was the great Motive? For (says he) Why should there be wrath upon the Realm
of the King, and his Sons? mark it, if all Ezra 7. 23.
was not done that was requisite for the House of God, there would be wrath;
and let it be done, and there would be no wrath; so I say to you, that God who
has cast us into these combustions, can easily quiet them: how often when we
have been ready to strike sail in the harbor, has some Euroclydon cast us
out into the sea again? and on the other side, when ready to sink, how
unexpectedly has he raised our hopes? Our work lies with him, and with him
only, pacify God and all is done; this black storm will be blown over, if he
but speak all will be quiet: you may see this clearly in the prophecy of
Haggai, God was very much displeased with them, and blasted and Haggai, per
totum.
cursed every thing they took in hand, but as soon as they cordially set upon
this work, his spirit was pacifyed toward them. And then for time to come,
(with which I end) The doing of this work will be the readiest way to secure
England against the like danger; I am persuaded, you all think that the seeds
of deadly and continual feuds are now rooted between Family and Family,
Neighbor and Neighbor, such are the plunders and havocks made out of cruel
spite, and God knows whether the child but new born will ever live to see an
end of them; these I think are your fears, but carry you on this work, and
this will secure the peace of the State for the time to come, I say again, the
doing of this shall secure all, so that no Enemy shall be able to hurt you.
It Is said of the Trojans Palladium, and the Romans Ancile, that they were the
protection of those Cities, that while they were safe, no Enemy could hurt
them; when they were stolen and gone, the City was lost; Certainly the
establishing of this, will be the Palladium and Ancile of England; you have a
promise in the fourth of Isaiah, the latter end of it, The Esa. 4. 5.
Lord would create upon every dwelling of Mount Zion, a pillar of a cloud, and
a pillar of fire, for Upon all the glory there shall be a defense, mark, a
defense upon all the glory; Keligion is the glory, the ordering of Gods House,
is his glory, and that is a defense even a wall of fire; And you have had good
experience of the fruit of Religion, in this huge conflict we have had these
three or four years together for our Religion, and Liberty; mark, who are
they that have left you, and who adheard unto you, whether the Counties that
have forsaken you, have not generally been the dark places, the Cities, and
corners of the Land, where nothing but superstition, Prelacy, Ignorance, and
profaneness have dwelt, and whether the City of London, and the Counties which
have had the Gospel, where Christ has been soundly preached, have not been the
men, who to the exhausting of all, have adheared to you in your righteous
defense; and it is hard to name one Town that has been against you, where the
people are subdued to the Gospel of Christ, and you find the generality of
godly men thorow-out the Kingdom resolved to sink or swim with you, because
Jesus Christ has put it into your hearts, to reform and build up Zion. I will
conclude with that promise, in the 58 of Isaiah, the latter end, where the Lord
exhorts his people to build the old waste places, and repair the Cities for
the generations, etc. The great encouragement which the Lord there gives them
is, The glory of the Lord shall be their Esa. 58. 8.
Rereward; not their reward only, but their rereward, their reserve; that that
shall back them; the glory of the Lord is Religion, the Ark and Ordinances: Set
up Religion, beautify Esa 60 13.
the place of his Sanctuary, make the place of his feet glorious, that will
keep God among you, and keep the people faithful to God and your selves, and
establish you so, that the Enemy shall not be able to rise up, or if he do,
and come one way, he shall fly seven ways; And this is the first Circumstance
from which the Prophet so magnifies this work of building up Zion, because when
the Lord does build up Zion, he appears in his glory: Consider what I have
said, and the Lord give you understanding in althings.

FINIS.

