A DEFENSE OF INFANT BAPTISM: IN Answer to two Treatises, and an Appendix to
them concerning it; Lately published by Mr. Jo. Tombs. Wherein that
Controversy is fully discussed, the ancient and generally received use of it
from the Apostles days, until the Anabaptists sprung up in Germany,
manifested. The Arguments for it from the holy Scriptures maintained, and the
objections against it answered.

By Steven Marshall B. D. Minister of the Gospel, at Finchingfield in Essex.

The promise is made to you and to your Children,

Acts 2. 39. (...),

Greg. Naztanzenus. (...),

Basilius Magnus. Hoc (viz. infantium baptisma) Ecclesia semper habuit, semper
tenuit; hoc a majorum fide accepit, hoc usque in finem perseveranter custodit,

August. Printed at London by Ric. Cotes, for Steven Bowtell, and are to be
sold at his Shop, at the Bible in Pope's Head Alley, 1646.

TO THE Reverend Assembly of Divines and Commissioners of the Church of
Scotland now sitting at Westminster.
Reverend Sirs,
WHereas all of you in general are concerned, and some of you particularly
named in the Book I deal with, the world might happily have expected a joint
endeavor, where there was a common interest: That I therefore (whilst you are
otherwise fully employed) should undertake this task, I desire may not be
imputed by you or any to an over weening conceit of mine own abilities: for
had it fallen to some of your lots, I should have hoped the Church of Christ
might have reaped more fruit, then it is like to do by my poor and weak
endeavors. But my personal engagement to assert that truth of God which I had
held forth in a Printed Sermon, which my Learned Antagonist (passing by other
books written by other men on the same argument) was pleased to single out to
combat with, and to lay out his strength upon, has called me forth to stand
up in this controversy, not as your Champion, but as an affectionate friend to
the truth, which we are all called upon earnestly to contend for; in which Jude
3.
conflict as I cannot but fear that you will easily discover my weakness; so
I cannot but hope that you will not find me either so foiled by mine
adversary, or deserted by God, whose cause I plead, as not to have sufficiently
answered that book, which has obtained to be called in Print, The strongest
Shield and Mr. John Goodwins answer to Mr. Edwards Ga^gr. p. 20. Psalm. 76. 3.
Buckler wherewith that cause was ever protected; but in Salem God of old brake
both Sword and Shield, and if he has done the like now, the weak hand which
he has made use of, serves only to point at that mighty arm of his, which
has gotten himself the victory. Truth, triumph and the Churches peace I have
had in mine eye, and have desired to carry meekness and love even to him,
whose opinion I fight with, all along in my heart and pen: what ever measure my
former writing met with from him, I have endeavored to look upon his with a
neither bloodshot nor lofty eye; passion blinds the one, and pride makes the
other oft-times overlook that truth which a lowly eye sees clearly at a nearer
distance: sure I am, the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God,
whilst James 1. 20.
the meek he will guide in judgment, and teach his way. What herein God
has enabled Psalm. 25. 9.
me to do, I willingly submit to the Churches censure, and humbly present to
you, not as any way worthy of you, but only as a public testimony of my
reverence and gratitude for all the refreshings of spirit, and that abundance
of spiritual grace I have found from the hand of God, whilst I have had the
happiness to sit among you; for a yet more plentiful effusion whereof upon
you, to the happy settling at length of these distracted Churches in truth and
peace, is the prayer of

Your unworthy brother, and servant in the Lords work Steven Marshall.
April 2. 1646.
A Table of Scriptures vindicated and explained.
Genesis 17. 9. 10, 14, p. 92. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. p. 128. Deuteronomy. ^3. 2. vindicated, p.
149 Esaias 19. 24. explained, 210. Esaias 44. 2. p. 128 Esaias 59. 21. p. 128. Malac.
2. 15. vindicated, p. 156 Mat. 18. explained and answered, p. 209, 226, etc.
Mar. 10. vindicated, p. 221 John 15. 2. p. 138. Acts 2. 38, 39. vindicated, p.
124. Proves Infant Baptism by consequence, p. 218. Acts 15. 10. explained and
vindicated, p. 217. Acts 19. 5. 6. vindicated, p. 69. Romans 11. 6. vindicated,
p. 134. 1 Cor 7. 14. vindicated, p. 145, 153, 154, 157, etc. maintained
against, p. 148. Verse 17, p. 161. ver. 34. vindicated, p. 151. 1 Cor. 10. 3,
4. explained, p. 199. 2 Cor. 3. 10. vindicated, 188. Gal. 3. 27, 28. opened, p.
189. Ephesians. 6. 1, 2. explained, p. 200. Coloss. 2. 8, 9, 10. vindicated, p.
169, 174. Heb. 8. vindicated, 188. 1 Timothy 4. 5. vindicated, p. 152.
INFANT BAPTISM NO LATE INNOVATION. But cleared to be as Ancient as is
pretended.
SIR,
I Received your Book about the time mentioned by your self: which when I had
read over, and thereby perceived how mean an esteem you had not only of my
Sermon, but of all other things extant, in defense of Infant Baptism; and
indeed of all Men whose judgment differs from your own; and how highly you
value your own performance in this piece: I concluded you would have no rest in
your spirit until it saw the light; and the rather, because you so earnestly
press me To call in to my assistance all the rest who are engaged in this
Cause, that so you might have an adversary fit to deal with, that as a mighty
man you might encounter with an Host. But when after some friendly conference
with you, you declared to me, that if you might enjoy liberty to exercise your
Ministry, in some place where you should not be put upon the practice of
baptizing of Infants, you could (yea, and intimated to me that you would) keep
this Opinion private to your self, provided only, that if any should preach
in your Pulpit for the Baptizing of them, you should take your self bound in
the same place to preach against it; otherwise Men's preaching or printing
abroad, should be no provocation to you. (In hope whereof, my self endeavored
to help you in to the place where now you are, desiring the Church might not
lose the benefit of those good gifts which God has bestowed upon you.) And
thereupon I took no further thought of any present Examination of your large
Treatise, having my hands full of other employments, because I verily thought
you would have sat quietly down, preached Christ, kept your Opinion to your
self, and not have any further appeared (especially at this time) to increase
the flame of our Divisions and confusions.

But since you think it necessary to deprive the Infants of Believers, of that
which we conceive to be their glorious privilege; yea, and look upon all
other endeavors of Reformation, as things which will come to nothing, till
this opinion of yours prevail (so dearly are you in love with your own Babe)
and come out into the field so bravingly, and gaint-like, to tread down all who
stand against your way: I have (with the Lords assistance) undertaken your
pompous Treatise; and as far as my impaired health, and other services would
permit, endeavored to bring your Examen to the trial, with as much brevity
and clearenesse as I could possibly; and I hope also, with so much evidence of
truth, that there shall be no need of a College to make any further answer
unto you. Wherein I shall not (as you have done) carpe at every phrase or
expression, nor digress into impertinent Discourses, thereby to swell up a
volume; nor amuse the Reader with multitudes of Quotations of Latin and Greek
Authors, and then turn them into English; nor frame as many senses of an
expression as is possible, and then confute them, and so fight with men of
straw of mine own fitting up; nor spend a whole sheet of Paper together, in
confuting what was never intended by my Adversary, as the Reader shall clearly
perceive you have deal^ with me: but plainly grapple with you, and insist only
upon what properly belongs to the cause in hand.

But first give me leave to observe your destructive Artifice. It is the
Socinians way to elude all Texts of Scripture which are urged against them, if
they have been differently expounded by Learned and Godly men, ancient or
modern: to question all conclusions inferred by consequence from Scripture: to
deride the testimonies of any of the Ancients, by discovering the nakedness,
error, and oversight of those Reverend men: and by making themselves merry by
turning the Orations, Epistles, or allusions of the Fathers into Syllogismes:
and by inserting of Ergo, now and then, to make all their Rhetorical passages
seem ridiculous. I appeal to the judicious Reader, whether this plot be not
carried through your Examen and Exercitation. Especially I observe your maine
faculty to lie in framing specious answers to Arguments brought to prove any
thing. Your great Argument in your Exercitation is; if I can answer all
Arguments for baptizing Infants, then etc. And then you form the Argument into
several shapes, and seek to clude them; and herein I confess you are
dextrous. The rest of the Arguments wherein you do assert, or go directly to
prove; alas how inconsequent are they, as will appear when they come to be
examined. The like course you take in your Examen, laying out abundance of
strength in the anosc^uasticall part, waving and eluding the dint of an
argument, by distinctions and several senses, and finding some men of note to
construe a Text otherwise, and the like. So that the Reader may see what you
do not like, but he may stay long enough before you bring satisfying arguments
to settle him in that which you would have, when you have startled him, in what
you would not have. But this kind of disputing never edifies the Church: what
one book was ever written by any of our Divines, even in the great point of
Justification, or Faith; which some learned and subtle Papist has not been
able to cloud and slur in such a way of answering? Well, however I proceed to
your Examen.

And I begin with your Prologue, wherein you declare Reply to the Preface.
the occasion and end of this your writing; the sum whereof you make to be
this. First, you sent (as you say) Nine Arguments drawn up in Latin to a
Committee appointed (as you were informed) to give satisfaction about points of
Paedobaptisme; afterward Three Arguments more, with a supplement of some other
things in writing, which were delivered to Mr. Tuckney, and by him joined to
the other Papers; your intent being either to give or receive satisfaction in
this great point; but to this day (much contrary to your expectactation) you
have had no return from the Committee. Secondly, you are more provoked by some
passages in a Sermon of Mr. Vines. Thirdly, and by a comparison in my Sermon,
between Hazaels cruelty to the Infants of the Israelites, and the principles of
the Anabaptists. Fourthly, you find me too vehement in maintaining of this
point, of which you and others see no ground. Fifthly, yea Mr. Dan. Rogers
confesses himself unconvinced by demonstration of Scripture for it. Sixthly,
that Mr. Ball cuts the sinews of the Argument drawn from Circumcision.
Seventhly, that Musculus at length found 1 Cor. 7. 14. impertinent to prove
this point. Eighthly, to conclude, upon your best search, you are confirmed
that it is an Innovation maintained by dangerous principles, a thing not to be
acquitted from Will Worship; that it has occasioned many errors in Doctrine,
corruptions in Discipline and manners, unnecessary and vain disputes, and
almost quite changed the Ordinance of Baptism, etc.

This is the sum of your Introduction; to which, because it is but a pompous
dumb show, I shall return a very brief answer.

First, for your Latin business sent to the Committee, I thought you had not
been ignorant, that the work of Committees, is but to prepare matter for the
Assembly; but neither Committees nor Assembly have power to answer any thing,
sent from any (except from the honorable Houses) without leave from the
Parliament. And if you please now to take notice of it, you will no longer
wonder why the Committee has made no return to your private Paper; this I
think is sufficient to remove your first stumbling block: only I am further
to tell you from Mr. Tuckney, that he desires you to get better evidence for
what you relate concerning him; for the truth is, he neither mediately nor
immediately received any Papers from you, nor joined your 3 last Arguments to
your 9 first.

Secondly, your offense at a passage in Mr. Vines his Sermon, shall be
considered in the place where you again repeat it, and aggravate it to the
utmost, Part 2. Sect. 6.

Thirdly, as to your exaggerating my allusion to Hazaels practice. I answer, I
compared not their intentions with his, but the fruit of their principles;
casting all believers Children as much out of the Covenant of Grace, as they do
the Children of Turks and Pagans and therein you your self join with them. Now
whether such a comparison might not be used without any further Apology, I
leave the unprejudiced Reader to judge.

Fourthly, whether my proofs for this Doctrine are weak, uncertain,
far-fetch't, shall God willing appear to them, who will impartially read and
compare your book and mine together.

Fifthly, as for what you suggest from my Reverend and Learned Friend, Mr. Dan.
Rogers, although enough might be taken out of his words in that book, to
declare his own meaning; I rather choose to set it down in the very words which
he wrote to me in a Letter, bearing date the 29 of January last past, in way of
answer to a Letter which I wrote to him; wherein I requested of him to know,
what in his name I should answer to this passage of your book: his words are
these; If I were to answer that Anabaptist, I should answer him silentio and
contemptu: for why should I not? since in that very place of my Sacraments,
part 1. p. 78, 79. where I confute those Schismatics, he snatches my words
from their own defense. My words are, I confess my self unconvinced by any
demonstration of Scripture for Paedo-Baptisme, meaning, by any positive Text;
what is that to help him? Except I thought there were no other arguments to
evince it: Now what I think of that, my next words show, page 77. lin. 4, 5,
6, 7. I need not transcribe them. In a mord, this I say, though I know (...),
yet that is no argument for the non-Baptizing of Infants; since so many
Scriptures are sufficiently convincing for it. Therefore this want of a
positive Text must no more exclude Insants, etc. then the like reason should
disanull a Christian Sabbath, or Women-kind not to be partakers of the Supper:
The quoting of mine own Text were enough.

6. If Mr. Ball cut the sinews of the Argument from Circumcision to Baptism,
himself was very much mistaken in his own meaning and intentions, who in the
very same place alleged by you, uses the same Argument, and makes the parallel
to lie in the same things which my Sermon does: you might have done well to
have informed the Reader so much, when you used his authority to overthrow that
Argument: his words are these, Circumcision and Baptism are both Sacraments of
Divine institution, and so they argree in the substance of the things
signified, the Persons to whom they are to be administered, and the order of
administration, if the right proportion be observed: as Circumcision sealed the
entrance into the Covenant, the righteousness of Faith, and Circumcision of
the heart; so does Baptism much more clearly; as, Abraham and his Household,
and the Infants of believing Jews, were to be Circumcised; so the faithful,
their families, and their seed are to be baptized. Circumcision was to be but
once applied by Gods appointment; and the same holds in Baptism, according to
the will and good pleasure of God.

Seventhly, I perceive you glory much that Musculus has deserted 1 Cor. 7. 14.
as an impertinent proof for baptizing of Infants, and you repeat it at least
three or four times in your book: and I observe through out your whole
Treatise, that when any Author joins with you in any particular, you improve
his authority to the utmost; which makes me conceive, that it would be a great
glory to you, to be able to prove a consent of Learned men to concur with you
in your way. And therefore I cannot but wonder that you should so much slight
and undervalue the Judgments of Fathers and Counsels, Harmonies and
Confessions of whole Churches, when they differ from you. As for Musculus,
whether he changed his Judgment upon 1 Cor. 7. on good grounds, shall be
examined in due place: In the mean time I inform the Reader that in the same
place Musculus acknowledges that there are Arguments enough, and sufficiently
strong to prove baptizing of Infants, though this 1 Cor. 7. be left out. And if
Musculus Opinion sway in the one, I hope it is not to be rejected in the other.

Eighthly, whether Dignum tanto tulit hic promissor hiatn; whether your roast be
answerable to your great boast; Whether your Arguments and Answers will make
good this high charge that Paedo-Baptisme is an Innovation, maintained upon
dangerous principles, etc. we proceed now to examine.

And first we shall inquire concerning the Historical Sect. 2. Reply to the
Historical part, vindicating the Antiquity of Infant Baptism.
part, Whether Paedo-Baptisme as it is now taught, be but a late Innovation:
whether it be not as anoient as is pretended.

Because many of the Anabaptists shame not to say, That the Ancients,
especially the Greek Church, rejected Infant Baptism for many hundred years:
I said in the beginning of my Sermon, that the Christian Church has been in
the possession of it for the space of 1500 years and upward, and named a few
testimonies out of the Greek and Latin Fathers, in little more then one page,
to make this good; no ways intending to make the weight of the Question to
hang in any degree upon humane testimonies or consent of authority, but only
upon the evidence of the Word; upon this you have bestowed two or three sheets
of your book, and as if all Antiquity run on your fi^e you confidently affirm:

1. As much may be said for Episcopacy, keeping of Faster, the religious use
of the Cross.

2. That my highest Testimonies reach not so high.

3. That being rightly weighed, they make rather against the present Doctrine
and practice, then for it.

4. That there are many evidences, which do as strongly prove, that from the
beginning it was not so; and therefore is but an Innovation. The first of these
you suppose so clear to Scholars, that it is needless for you to bring any
proof; the other three you undertake to make good in your subsequent discourse.

Truly Sir, your undertaking is very high and confident, and I shall diligently
weigh with what strength you perform it; and shall therefore more fully inquire
into the practice of Antiquity in this point, then else I should have judged
convenient to do. As for that which you took for granted, That there are
plain testimonies for Episcopacy, the Religious use of the Cross, etc. before
any testimonies can be produced for the baptizing of Infants, pardon me that I
forbear to believe you till you have made it good. I have already alleged
some, and shall now (God willing) allege more testimonies to prove that in the
Judgment of the Ancients, the baptizing of Infants was received in all ages,
and from the very Apostles, as a divine Institution. I read no such thing for
Episcopacy, as a distinct order from Presbytery; your self may read in Dr.
Reynolds his Epistle to Sir Francis Knolls, that in the Judgment of Ambrose,
Chrysostom, Augustine, Theodoret, Theophylact, Oecumenius, Primasius,
Sedulius, Gregorius, and many other, that Bishops and Presbyters were all one
by divine Institution, and that Ecclesiastical constitution made the
difference between them. Much less do I read among them, that the Religious
use of the Cross was received in all ages, and that as a divine Institution.
If you can make it out that these things were so, you will do a very acceptable
service to the Papists, Anabaptists, and Prelaticall Party, who no doubt will
return you hearty thanks, if your evidence be correspondent to your confidence.
If you cannot, you should do well to revoke this bold assertion. In the mean
time I shall examine your Examen, of the Antiquity produced to make good the
practice of the Ancient Church in Paedo-Baptisme. The first whereof was taken
from Justine Martyr.

Your first exception put in against this testimony is concerning Justine
Martyr, or the Treatise under his name vindicated.
the year in which he lived: I said 150; thereupon you charge me with
overlashing, because I affirmed, the Church had been in possession of the
privilege of baptizing Infants 1500 years and upwards. Yet my overlashing
herein, is not so much as you would have the world believe; though my
testimonies had pleaded for no higher time then 150 after Christ: Neither have
I overlashed so far in this (as God willing hereafter shall appear) as you
have done more then once. I said the Church was so long in possession of it;
and if you be pleased to subtract 150 from 1645. I hope the remaining number
will show the mistake was not great, as appears in the margent. If the Church
was not all the while in possession of it, it had been your part to have
informed your Reader ^
of the time, wherein the Churches quiet possession was disturbed, and by whom.
It is true, I named Baltazzar Pacommitanus with his associates, who to their
own ruin started up to disturb this possession: but the claim of an unjust
intruder to justle out the true owner, will not carry the Title in any Court
where equity takes place. In pleading the Churches possession of this truth for
so long time, I said not so much as others have affirmed before me; Learned
Augustine (though his judgment be slighted by you) affirmed as much in his
time, and yet I read not of any then that excepted against him for it: The
Church (says he) ever had it, ever held it, they received this from the faith
of their Ancestors, Hoc Ecclesia semper habuit, semper tenuit, hoc a majorum
fide accepit, hoc usque in finem per severanter custodit. Aug. Sermon. 15. de
verbis Apost.
and this will it with perseverance keep unto the end. If he might say that the
Church before his time ever had, and maintained it, and if after his time it
was more clearly h^ld out; then I hope I did not overlash in saying the Church
had bin 1500 years possessed of it. And it were an easy task to produce
abundance of testimonies, giving evidence (not only for their own age, but)
that it was the received custom in all ages even from the Apostles time, and
that this evidence was true, we may hence know, (says Learned Vossius) because
the Pelagians never durst deny it, when the Orthodox Divines used to press it,
who certainly wanted neither Learning nor will to have gainsayed them, if they
could have found them abusing Antiquity: nay, they not only not denied this,
but concurred in it, so says Augustine, lib. 2. contra Caelist. and Pelag.
Caelistus (says he) in a book which he set forth at Rome, grants, That
Infants were baptized for the remission os sins, according to the rule of the
universal Church, and according to the sentence of the Gospel.

In the next place you tell me I know that book from whence this testimony was
taken, was questioned whether it was Justine Martyrs or no. Truly I was not
ignorant thereof; therefore I said, in a Treatise that goes under his name; I
did not confidently aver that he was the Author of it; yet you plainly call
it a bastard Treatise, and never prove it* but whosesoever it was, it is well
known to be ancient; and both Protestants and Papists asserting Paedobaptisme,
cite it.

Thirdly, I take notice that you answer nothing against the truth of the
testimony it self: only you say, that by it I may see that the reason of
baptizing Infants was, not the Covenant of grace made to believers and their
seed, which you make the ground of baptizing Infants at this day. You cannot be
ignorant that this testimony was not alleged by me to prove the ground why it
was administered: I only made use of it to bear witness to the matter of
fact, that Infants were baptized in that age in which that book was written,
which is plainly held out in the answer to the question; you may also remember
what Just. Mart. qu. 56
I said of all the testimonies quoted by me, that I did not relate them to
prove the truth of the thing, but only the practice of it; and so much it does
notwithstanding the answer which yet you have brought unto it: what ground the
Covenant of Grace made to believers and their seed, gives to Baptism, shall
be manifested hereafter, and whether the Ancients used not (at least) some of
the Arguments which we do.

Come we now to consider what you answer to Irenaeus his testimony; here you
speak, 1. Of his Country. 2. Of P. 5. Irenaeus testimony vindicated.
the age he lived in. 3. You question his translation. 4. And in the last place
you speak a little against the testimony it self.

Before you fall upon the examination of the testimony, you say, He was a
Greek, and wrote in Greek; but we have his Works in Latin, except some
fragments: this you conceive to be a reason why we cannot be so certain of his
meaning, as we should be, if we had his own words in the language in which he
wrote: and may not this Objection lie against any Translation whatsoever? and
upon that ground you may slight it. I cannot guess why you add this (...),
that he was a Greek, etc. unless it were to intimate to your Reader that I
could not discern whether he were to be numbered in the Catalogue of Greek or
Latin Fathers: yet you know that I mentioned him in the first rank of those
Renowned Lights of the Church, which wrote in the Greek tongue, to which
afterward I added two other: and when I came to speak of any of the Latin
Fathers; Cyprian was the first in whom this question did occur. But whether
his words in the testimony alleged be truly translated into Latin, shall by
and by be considered.

As for his age, you acknowledge with me, that he lived in the same Century
with Just. Martyr: the year in which he flourished is variously related by the
Authors named by your self; one says 180, the other 183, I may add i^ third
who varies from them both, and says 175, and may Trithem.
not others point at other times also? For ought I know, you needlessly trouble
your self, and your Reader, in naming particular year^ in which these famous
Lights of the Church lived, which I think can hardly with exactness be done:
it is safe to say, about such a time, or in such a Century, such and such
lived, which cannot be prejudicial to the Reader, when we know a Century
includes many years: neither can any man warrantably restrain it to any one
year alone wherein such a man flourished, as if he had flourished one year and
no more.

But I proceed to what you say of the testimony it self, it is extant, Iren.
2. 39. Christus venit salvare (...), etc. Your exceptions against it are many.

First, you question whether re^asuatur there signifies baptism or no, as
Feuardemiur his gloss taken it. Secondly, You say, that neither Christ nor his
Apostles call Baptism a new birth. Thirdly, possibly this was not the word
used by Irenaeus in his own Writing. Fourthly, that the Latin alters Irenaeus
his mind, as learned Rivet says. Lastly, that Irenaeus meant not Baptism in
this place, you go about to prove by his scope therein. These are your
exceptions which now we come to examine.

To begin with the first of them, when, Irenaeus says, Christus venit salvare
omnes qui per eum renasountur, infantes and parvulos and pueros, etc. First you
question the meaning of the word renasountur, whether Baptism is meant
thereby; and you ask me, whether this was any other then Feuardentius P. 6.
his gloss, and add Rivets censure of him.

I take not upon me the defense of Feuardentius, let him go for such a one as
Learned Rivet relates him to be, A corrupter Answ.
of Irenaeus in many things: yet that judicious Man says not that he corrupted
Irenaeus his sense in this place. And that he did not, it is manifest to me;
because Baptism usually is styled by the Greek Fathers a new birth. Learned
Vossini says upon that very place, that to call baptism renascentia, was
^^sitat^ veteribus loquendi forma; which a few instances will make good.
Justine Martyr speaking of the manner of administration of Baptism, says of
the baptized party, He is brought to the place where the water is, Just. Mart.
(...), etc.
and i^ regenerated in the same manner wherein we were regenerated: and to put
it out of all controversy, he is there speaking of Baptism under the name of
Regeneration; he adds, They are then washed in water in the name of our Lord
God Creator of all things, and of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and the
holy Ghost. Here he tells us what he meant by Regeneration mentioned before:
viz. When the Party was in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost washed
with water, that is, baptized. Dionysini Areopag^ta (but you will say he is
questioned, yet no man can question whether he expressed Baptism by
regeneration) speaking of Baptism says, Divine signs of the divine
generation, and what is that (I pray you) but a new birth? (...), Dionys.
Areop. Hierarch. ca. 2. (...).
yea in the same Chapter he adds further of it. The Saorament of our divine
generation as in a sign. And in the beginning of that part, he calls the
Font, or place in which Baptism was administered, (...), the mother of our
adoption. Athanasine De Sab, and Circumcis.
says, (...), we are borne again by washing: and does not Basil call it (...),
the regeneration Basil. exhortatione ad baptismum.
of the soul? Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 40. amongst many other titles he puts on
Baptism, this is one, (...). Now I demand of you, do not all these Authors
call Baptism a new Birth, which you would fasten only on Feuardentius? yea
does not Ambrose call the Fon: Baptisterium regeneration is lavacrum, the
lavacre of Regeneration? Lib. de initiandis ca. 2.
Whatsoever you say of me, I hope by this time you will not think that both
Latin and Greek Fathers learned of Feuardentius his gloss to call Baptism a
new birth.

Secondly, you say, no where does our Lord or the Apostles, P. 6.
call Baptism a new birth. I desire to know of you the meaning of that place,
Tit. 3. 5. I thought the Apostle there had called Baptism (...), the washing
of the new birth, or Regeneration: and what that is but Baptism, yet I know
not. To me the Apostle seems plainly to parallel the washing of regeneration,
and the renewing of the holy Ghost, as type and countertype. And the Analogy
between washing in Baptism, and Regeneration, lies in that custom of washing
Infants from the pollutions of the womb when they are first born. A learned
Critic of Mr. Mede.
our own in his Diatriba upon that place, thinks none will deny that in these
words the washing of Regeneration, the Apostle is speaking of Baptism: sure I
am, most of the Interpreters which I have seen upon that place agree that he
either argues directly from Baptism, or at least alludes to it.

Thirdly, you grant, though the word renascuntur is used for Baptism by the
Ancients (which before you seemed to pin on Feuardentius his sleeve) yet
possibly it was not the word used by Irenaeus in his own writing. It seems,
now you dare not stand upon the strength of the word renascuntur, because you
confess it was used by the Ancients for Baptism; therefore your conjecture
here is, That possibly it was not the word used by Irenaeus for Baptism in his
own writing. I shall go further then you (and yet not wrong the truth) and
say, undoubtedly, renascuntur was not the word used by Irenaeus in his own
writing, for he wrote in Greek, and therefore it may well be conceived he said
not renascuntur, though he might say (...): But to that which you answer, I
add, you know it is commonly said in the Schools, forte ita, solvitur per
forte non: you say, possibly it was not Irenaeus his word. I answer, possible
it is that Irenaeus might use the Greek word, which is well translated
renascuntur: for why might not he being a Grecian, speak of Baptism in the
phrase and style as other Grecians did? yea, that he did speak so, is most
probable, because that other Greek Fathers use the word (...), a new birth, in
the sense in which I alleged it.

As for the altering of Irenaeus his mind by the Latin Translation, not having
his works in his own language, I dare not say so much: when you bring forth
Irenaeus his words in Greek, I shall the better be enabled to judge of it; in
the mean time I accept of the Translation, having made it good by parallel
phrases in other Greek Fathers.

In the last place you labor to prove, That it is not meant of Baptism from
Irenaeus his scope in that place. To this I answer, P. 6.
albeit that be granted which you say was his scope there, yet his words prove
the question in debate before us. I hope you will not deny, but that the scope
of a speech may tend to prove one thing; and yet the expressions used may give
light to otherthings: was not the Prophet Ezekiel his scope by the parable of
dry bones rising again, to prove the restoration of the Jews (who then seemed
to be dead) Ezekiel. 37.
to their former state? that no doubt was the drift, yet he lays it forth by
that parable: and Tertullian by the De resur, ca. 31.
same proves the Resurrection at the last day, if he had not believed that
dead bones were to rise again (says the father) how could he by that Simile
taken from them prove the Resurrection of the Jews? So may I say here, let it
be supposed that Irenaeus his drift is, as you say, to prove that Christ was an
Infant to sanctify Infants, yet he says they were renewed when they were
baptized. As for Irenaeus his judgment of Christ's living upon the earth about
50. years, it was not alleged by me, therefore I leave it to you to help
Irenaeus therein, because you allege it. Now I desire the Reader to cast his
eye back upon all that you have said about this testimony, and see whether you
have brought forth any thing to obscure the light that it gives to our
question: all the strength of what you said lay in the word renascuntur,
whether that signified Baptism or no: which by the usual language of the
Grecians I have made good against your exception, and so I pass from your
examen of this Author and follow you to the next.

In the third place you come to sift Origens testimony: Where, first, you
question the authority of the book; secondly, Origens Test. vindicated.
you say, if it be Origens, yet he calls Paedo-baptisme but an Apostolical
tradition, and from thence you draw forth some conclusions. In all which I hope
to manifest your mistakings, and so to discover the weakness of your premises,
that they shall not in any indifferent man his judgment be able to draw these
conclusions after them.

First, you question the authority of these passages cited out of Origin
whether they are his or no: and you call the Author of them supposed Origin: It
had been your part before you had so branded them, first to have made it
manifest by some undeniable evidence or other, that they were not Origens, you
question but prove not, and I am not the first that has produced these
testimonies to prove Infant Baptism, many learned men handling this question
have done the same before me.

You seek also to weaken the authority of these testimonies by the Censures of
two judicious men, Erasmus and Perkins: the former of them (who was vir
emunctae naris in giving judgment of the writings of the Ancients) says, that
when a man reads his Homilies on Leviticus, and on the Epistle to Romans,
translated by Ruffinus, he cannot be certain whether he reads Ruffinus or
Origin. Yet Erasmus says not that these Homilies set forth under his name were
Ruffinus his Homilies, and not Origens. If Ruffinus had wronged Origin in that
point now in question, why should not that have been laid in his dish by some
of the Ancients discoursing on this question, who no doubt would have been
forward enough to have taken notice of it to Ruffinus his prejudice, as well as
other things which they object against him?

To this you add Reverend Perkins his testimony, who puts his commentary on
the Romans amongst his counterfeit works, as being not faithfully translated by
Ruffinus. It may be Origin might suffer by his Translators, for Translations
are various: some affect in their Translations to follow their Author (...), to
trace the very footsteps of the words they translate: other Translations are
metaphrasticall, or by way of paraphrase, they expound as they translate; thus
several men have their several fancies, though they adhere to the Author
which they translate, even when they keep not in all things to his words:
Hierom gives instance in the Septuagint Hierom ad Pammachium.
Translators, whose testimony I need not name to you. Ruffinus acknowledges, in
translating Origens Homilies on Leviticus, that he added some things to what
Origin said, and what they were he expresses: ea quae ab Origene in auditorio
Ecclesiae ex tempore non tam explanationis quam Ruffini peroratio in Ep. ad Romans
aedificationis intention perorata sunt; the things which were spoken by
Origin to his auditory, he translated them by way of explanation, or did more
fully lay them forth in a popular way and therein Ruffinus dealt heartily,
telling us what were the things he added; in this Erasmus acknowledges his
fair dealing. But as for his Commentary on the Romans, Ruffinus confesses se
hoc opus totum He contracted it half in half. Ruffi. praefat. a^ Romans
ad dimidium traxisse, there was no addition of Ruffinus; Erasmus here blames
him for cutting off what Origin delivered more at large, but neither does
Ruffinus confess, nor Erasmus challenge him here for any addition to what
Origin said: I shall only desire the Reader to take notice that none of the
testimonies by me cited out of Origin, are denied by Erasmus to be Origens:
neither can they be conceived to be any of the additions mentioned before by
Ruffinus: therefore your exception is not proved by Erasmus nor Perkins
testimony.

You add, in the passages which I cite, there are plain expressions in them
against Pelagians, which makes you think they were put in after the Pelagian
heresy was confuted by Hierome and Augustine; though they make against the
Pelagians, yet who can necessarily infer, that all these Homilies in which
these passages occur were written after the Pelagian Heresy was broached?
Just. Martyr maintains the Divinity of Jesus Christ, yet we know he lived
long before Arius the ringleader of that cursed Sect which denied it: can any
man conclude that Just. Martyr did not bear witness to the divine Nature of
Christ, because he lived before Arius started up?

Then you tell us Origin calls Infant-baptizing an Apostolical tradition,
according to the observance of the Church. This cavil I prevented when I
quoted the testimony, which seems to have some weight in it, for you grant
what I said about Traditions, which is warrant enough to me to add no more to
justify it, otherwise (besides the testimony of Scripture which I named in 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15.) many other out of Antiquity may be added, where Tradition is
taken in that sense. Epiphanius calls Baptism and other mysteries observed
Epiph. in s^ne operis.
in the Church, which are brought forth out of the Gospel and settled by
Apostolic authority, (...): where by the way you may see that he grounds the
Baptism, then in use in the Church, (and even then Infants were Baptized) on
the Scriptures and authority of the Apostles, as well as other mysteries of
the Christian; Religion. But I follow you, Because, say you, in neither of
these places taken notice of by me Origin cites any Scripture for baptizing
Infants, therefore it must be understood of an unwritten Traedition: had it
appeared as a new notion not heard of in the Church before, then had it been
fit he should have confirmed what he said: but it being a position, which (as
he says the Church observed) he needed not to prove it. Ignatius presses upon
Hiero to attend to reading and exhortation, and calls those things (...),
traditions, yet adds Ign. ep. ad. Hier.
no Scripture to confirm what he says, because they were things well known to
the Church to be consonant to the Scripture. So Origin tells us
Infant Baptism was generally observed by the Church; and had any appeared to
plead against the lawfulness of it, he would no doubt by Scripture have
maintained it, as well as affirmed it, to come from the Apostles, which he did.

These are your premises which now being answered, your conclusions inferred
from thence, of themselves must fall to the ground: for if Infant Baptism came
from the Apostles, and was generally observed in the Church in Origens time,
then you have no reason to challenge it as a thing not known before his time,
nor delivered over to the Church in his time: albeit he expressed it under the
name of an Apostolical Tradition.

The last Greek Author alleged by me was Gregory Nazianzen, Greg. orat. 40. in
Bapt. Nazian. vindicated.
who calls Baptism signaculum vitae cursum ineuntibus: against which testimony
you have nothing to object: only whereas I added, he seemed afterward to
restrain baptizing Infants to the case of necessity: You ask of me, Does he
seem only to restrain it to the case of necessity? He gives (say you) his P.
8.
reason why they should be baptized, but withal declares his opinion that
others should stay longer: but what of all this, what follows hence more then
this, that in his days Infants were baptized, though his advice was, that they
should defer it, unless there were danger of death?

These are the Greek Authors alleged by me, none of which are denied by you to
testify the practice of the Church in this point in their several ages, only
your exceptions have been all on the by, not against the testimonies
themselves, which yet (notwithstanding what you have answered) I doubt not will
by any judicious Reader be allowed, for clear proofs of the practice of
Paedo-baptisme in the Greek Church.

After your examination of the former Testimonies, you P. 9.
add 3 Arguments to show that Infant Baptism was not known in the Greek
Church.

First, if it had been known among them; you wonder why I find nothing for it
in Eusebius, Ignatius, Clemens Alexandrinus, Athanasius, and Epiphanius? To
this I say, they spoke to the clearing of such questions as were afoot in their
times: had any question been started when they wrote about Paedo-baptisme, no
doubt they would have cleared it, as Cyprian did, and as it was done in the
Council of Neocaesarea. It is enough to me that none of the Authors named by
you speak against it; can we say that the Fathers living before the Pelagians
troubled the Church, denied the traduction of original sin, because they spoke
not clearly of it, before it was denied by those cursed Heretics. Nor is it
any glory to you that your Error was not ancient enough to be confuted by
Eusebius, Ignatius, Clemens Alexandrinus, Athanasius, and Epiphanius: yet
whether any of these named by you spoke for Infant Baptism, shall now be
considered. I find even in some of them which you have named; expressions
which does induce me to believe that they were far from rejecting of
Paedo-baptisme.

I will not search into them all, for if any thing were brought out of
Ignatius, you would tell me that you did not know Ignatius when you see him,
(as you have done with others named before) and I have no time to wrangle. You
desire to know what Clemens Alexandrinus says? why, Vide Clem. Alex. paedagog.
sure he had none but great Infants to his Scholars; if you (who pretend to be
acquainted familiarly with the secrets of antiquity) be acquainted with him,
you will know what I mean: He desired (as it is likely more Greek Fathers who
were converted from Paganism did) to set forth Religion in such a way as might
move other Pagans to come and make confession of the Christian faith, that so
they might be added to the Church by Baptism in such a way as was proper to
the baptizing of grown men. The next (whose testimony you miss) is Athanasius:
you desire me to quote any thing out of him to prove the Greek Church did
admit Infants to Baptism; if that will make you cease wondering, I Will do it:
what say you to that passage in Athanasius? where he is showing how we are
buried with Christ in Baptism, and rise again; he says, the dipping of the
Infant quite under water thrice, and raising Athan. dicta and interpretatio
Script. qu. 94. Athanasiu^ gives testimony to Infant Baptism. (...), etc.
of it up again, does signify the death of Christ, and his resurrection upon
the third day: is not that testimony plain? In his Questions ad Antioch. in
the second question of that book, it is desired to be known, how shall we know
that he was truly baptized, and received the holy Ghost, ((...)) in holy
Baptism when he was a Child? (it seems then it was a custom for Infants to
receive Baptism:) He sets down an answer to it, that is to be known (says he)
by the motions of the Spirit in his heart afterward, as a Woman knows she has
conceived, when she feels the child to stir in her womb; (...), not because his
Parents say so. If that place does not plainly, and in an Orthodoxall way bear
witness to Paedo-baptisme, I know not what can do it.

I could out of the same Book add another testimony, but you will perhaps
tell me, the words next following qu. ad Antioch. 114.
those that I shall cite are questioned. But I shall then reply, 1. The words
that follow may be erroneous, and yet written by Athanasius. 2. The words
which I shall cite may be the words of Athanasius, and the words which follow,
none of his, but added by some other. 3. How do you prove that Tertullian, or
Greg. Nazianzen wrote those words which you cite out of them. 4. You can (more
then once) make this a plea for your self (that your allegations may gain a
favorable construction) That your proofs taken out of Antiquity do ^s
strongly prove the point P. 4.
in hand, as proofs are usually taken in such matters. I doubt not but all
impartial Readers will vouchsafe me the same favorable grains of allowance,
and then this testimony also of Athanasius may pass for current.

These words then which are safe and sound, grounded upon the same Scripture
which I have much insisted on, are read in the works of Athanasius: where the
question is about Infants dying, requiring a resolution that might clearly set
forth, whether they go to be punished, or to the Kingdom? Athan. ad Antioch.
qu. 114.
The answer is, Seeing the Lord said, Suffer little children to come unto me,
for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. And the Apostle says; Now your children
are holy; (observe that Gospel ground, (...)
the same that I build upon) it is manifest that the Infants of believers which
are baptized, do as unspotted and faithful enter into the Kingdom. This
assertion is owned by all the Reformed Churches.

Epiphanius you say, says nothing of it in a place, which you cite: and are
you sure he says nothing any where else? admit he does not, form a
Syllogism, and see how your argument will run, etc. but I desire you at your
leisure to cast your eye upon that expression of Epiphanius, which does induce
me to believe that he did not reject Paedo-baptisme: where he tells us, That
Circumcision had its time, until the great Circumcision came, that is, the
washing of the new birth, as (...), Ephiphan. contr. Cerinthianos.
is manifest to every one. What Is the washing of Regeneration but Baptism?
which he would scarcely have called Circumcision, if he had rejected
Infant Baptism, Epiphanius owned the argument from Circumcision to Baptism.
and denied that the children of believers (who are hopefully capable of
Circumcision made without hands, may lawfully partake of this great
Circumcision: and adds, That this was notoriously known to all; surely then
none denied it in his time.

Secondly, you reason from the continuance of the Questions, The questions put
to the Baptizes, disprove not Insant-Baptisme.
put to persons when they were to be baptized, and answered by them: which I
think because we must conceive children were not able to return an answer to
them, thereby you would infer they were not baptized: But I answer, when the
Gospel went first abroad into the world, such as being of age were first
taught, were then baptized, Act. 2. 41. and Act. 8. 13. 37. After that time
such as were taught are said to be catechized: for (...), the Paedag.
Catechism leads men to faith, says Clem. Alexandrinus. When such were
prepared and made fit to be baptized, certain questions were propounded to them
concerning their faith in Christ, their resolution to forsake the Devil, etc.
which are related by many of the Ancients: when those of age afterward brought
their children to Baptism, these questions were likewise put to them (though
of themselves they were not able to make answer to them) but how warrantably I
will not go about to prove; yet that they were used at Infants Baptism, as
well as at the baptism of such as were of age, it appears by Balsamon in Can.
6. Conc. Neocaesar. Aug. Ep. ad Januarium, etc. To all which questions at
Childrens Baptism, such as undertook their education made answer on their
behalf. Therefore you cannot by these questions infer that Children were not
baptized, seeing these Authors certify that questions were put to them, and
also tell us who answered for them.

Thirdly, you conceive because many children borne of Christian parents were
not baptized when they were young; Therefore it was not their custom to
baptize Infants. For the making good hereof you bring forth instances of
Constantine the Great, Greg. Nazianz. and Chrysostom.

Before I speak of these instances, it will not be impertinent Of old some
deferred their own Baptism, as well as their Infants.
to speak somewhat of the practice of some among the Ancients in deferring
Baptism; and here I find that some Ancient Christians deferred their own
Baptism many times, (as well as their Infants) but upon no good ground, as may
appear by many sharp invectives against them for it, which are extant in the
Greek Fathers: see Basil. exhortat. ad Baptismum, Greg Nazienz. orat. 40. in
Lanct. Bapt. Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in Act. Apo.

From these several Authors and others, may be gathered the grounds upon which
they deferred Baptism. Sometimes they would do it in imitation of Christ, who
was not baptized till he was about thirty years of age; they would Vbi prius.
put off their baptism until they came to the like age. Greg. Naxianz.
disputes against these. Constantine the Great put Eusebius. de vit. Constable. lib 4.
off his Baptism until he should come to the River Jordan in which Christ
was baptized, though he never attained to that desired place, for he dyed at
Nicomedia. Some again Vbi prius.
deferred Baptism, until they should have opportunity to be baptized by some
special Bishop of some eminent place; these Greg. Nazian. reproves at large.
Some also put off their Baptism upon another ground, they conceived it did
wash away all sin; so thought Orig. Hom. 15. in Ihesh. Hom. Aug. Confess. 1. 11.
5. in Ex. Cypr. lib. 3. ad Quirinum. and lib. 4. ep. 7. Whereup-upon it was a
common speech, when they saw one to follow his sinful courses, sine illum,
faciat quod vult, nondum baptizatus est: to the same purpose Greg. Nyssenus in
his exhortation to Baptism, brings in the very same speeches of them, who put
off their Baptism upon this ground; saying, Sine, carne abutar, and turpi
libidine fruar, in caeno voluptatum volutabor, manus sanguine polluam, aliena
auseram, d^lose ambulabo, pejerabo, mentiar: baptismum tum demum suscipiam, cum
a vitiis and iniquitatibus desistam. He speaks much more to that purpose in
that place, to which I refer the Reader: all which testifies what they thought
of Baptism, that it washed away all their sins, therefore they deferred it; for
they would have none abridged of their sinful delights until they were
baptized. Epiphanius tells us that Marcion gave order to have Baptism thrice
administered; first when a man had committed any great sin, after that in his
judgment, he might be baptized for the doing of it away: Again, if after
that Baptism he had renewed his sin, he was the second time to be
baptized; and so the third time, if after the second he had renewed his sin
again. This opinion of the efficacy of Baptism to do away sin, might induce
them to defer it until they were ready to leave the world, that by baptism
then administered to them, in their opinion, all their sins might be done
away. But Naz. confutes such, telling them all times were fit for Baptism;
seeing no time was free from death; So did Greg. Nyssenus also. They were also
led into this error by another, some thought that baptized persons might live
and not sin, for if they did sin after Baptism (in their conceit) there
remained no repentance for them, misunderstanding that place of Heb. 6. 4.
which place also was abused by the Novatians, denying remission of sins to
Christians, ^inning after baptism.

It is clear upon these and the like grounds (but how justly, I leave it to
you to judge) many put off their own baptism. Neither do I see why that
others also may not be thought (even upon no better grounds) to have deferred
the baptism of their Infants; which yet does no ways prejudice the commonly
received, and constantly practiced ordinance of Infants-Baptisme, no more then
the abovenamed practice may be brought to prove that it was not the received
practice of the Church to baptize such as were converted from Paganism to
Christianity, at their first conversion.

Yet here I cannot but add further, that sometimes it might fall out that
Christians might not have the opportunity of bringing their Children to
Baptism, because they dwelt among Infidels, or Paynims, where they could not
enjoy the benefit of the Word and Sacraments for themselves or their children:
therefore in such a case they were necessitated to put off the baptizing of
their Children. Greg. Naz. says expressly, that some may be hindered from
Baptism by some violence, or some unexpected accident, (...): Orat. 40.
that though they would, they could not enjoy the Grace (of baptism whereof he
is speaking;) if by such accidents they themselves might be hindered from
Baptism, why might not the like accidents hinder them also from receiving
Baptism for their children?

Again, sometimes their lot might fall out to live among Heretics, which
corrupted the Faith, and therefore would not have their Children baptized by
them: might they not do herein as that pious man Moses, who refused to receive
imposition of hands from bloody Lucius Sozom. 4. 38. Theod. 4. 14.
that Arian Bishop. Neither would Antiochus be ordained by Jovinian, who
adhered sometimes to the Arians: assuredly, such as scrupled to be ordained
officers in the Church by such, may upon the like grounds be thought rather to
choose to defer the baptizing of their children, then to have them baptized by
such. Many questions were moved in the Church about Baptism administered by
such as were not sound in the Faith: which were agitated so far by Cyprian,
and other Asrieans, that they held their Baptism to be null; and therefore
condemning their dipping, or washing, ordered that such should be baptized.

Some other causes might be found out, why men might defer both their own, and
their childrens Baptism, which yet I will not justify: they might herein do,
as holy Moses, Exodus 4. deferred the Circumcising of his son, yet Moses well
knew it was an Ordinance in Israel, that Genesis 17.
every son of eight days old should be circumcised. Holy men in this might
aliquid humanum pati; I will neither excuse nor aggravate their fault: only I
thought good to speak somewhat in general of the custom of some in deferring
Baptism.

I come to the instances here given by you: the first is Constantine the Great,
(though the son of Helena, who is Constantines Bap. no Argument that Infants
were not then baptized.
reported to have been a zealous Christian) not baptized till he was aged. You
should have done well to have proved her to have been such, when Constantine
was borne, otherwise what gain you if she were converted afterward? The true
cause why he received not Baptism at his Infancy (so near as I can gather it
from the story of his life) was this: Constantius his Father, albeit a man of a
sweet temper, and a Prince wonderful tender of the welfare of all his
Subjects; first out of the mildness of his nature favored Christians; (seeing
and observing their unblameable conversation and faithfulness in all their
employments:) therefore he did not in an hostile way pursue their Religion, as
others Emperors did: yea, at length he grew to a good esteem of it, especially
toward the latter end of his life: in this time his son Constantine the Great,
lived in Dioclesian his Court, from whence (his life being twice in danger) he
suddenly escaping, came to his father then sick, and presently upon his death,
he was by the Army saluted Emperor: These things considered, it is no
marvel if he were not baptized in his Infancy; when, for ought I read, his
Parents had not then embraced the Christian Religion when he returned at his
Fathers death, he was 30 years of age: and whether ever his Father was
baptized, the story is silent. Neither is Helena her affection to Religion in
his Infancy, related in the Story, though afterward it is often mentioned. You
need not then wonder, why when he was an Infant he was not baptized: inasmuch
as it appears not that his Parents were then become Christians; yea, and
himself also was an unbeleever many years, as is apparent in the story.

The next mentioned by you, is Greg. Naz. the son of a Christian Bishop, and
brought up long by him, was not baptized Nor Gregory Nazianzen.
till he came to be a youth. You say he was the son of a Christian Bishop,
but how do you prove it? he that writes his life, tells us, there was a time
when his father was not a Christian; yet afterward, when he had cast of the
superstition and deceit of the Hypsistarians, be appeared a true follower, or
disciple (...), etc.
of the Divine grace; and so first he became a Sheep, and afterward a
skillful Shepherd to the Church. What was the Hypsistarian error, Greg.
himself explaines in his Funeral Oration for his Father. Whether he was
converted from it before Gregory was born, it is not expressed: Yet the
Historians tell us when Naz. was but young, he with Basil were bred in humane
literature at Athens; from thence he past to Antioch, all this while we read
not of his studying the Christian Religion till afterward. For it is to be
remembered, Socr. 4. 21. Soz. 6. 16.
that when he with Basil had spent much time, and well profited in humane
literature, some would have persuaded them to become Teachers of that kind of
learning; others moved them to betake themselves to public pleading of causes;
but refusing that way of study, they beg^n to think how to order their lives
holily, as the rule of Christian Religion did direct them, wherein they
profited much; in the knowledge whereof Origens books were helpful to them.
Greg. Nazianz. having spent 30 years in those studies, he returned to his
Father and was baptized: Greg. vita.
his education was not under his Father, as you relate; and if his parents were
Christians when he was borne, I wonder they should send him to Athens to be
trained up under Heathens; and why he was not baptized as soon as he was
converted to Christianity, if you can lay down the true cause, I desire you to
do it; I dare go no further then I have warrant from the story, and the
relation of his life: Yet I may hint my conjecture from his own words; where he
says there were three sorts of men (besides those which I named before) who
deferred Baptism. 1. Some purposely Orat. 40.
put it off, because they would live in sin; there were others living more
temperately, taking in as it were the mean between virtue and vice, who though
they sinned, yet approved not of their sins, but were overpowered by them.
Lastly, some deferred their Baptism, that they might the better prepare
themselves to receive it; and possibly he for a while might be ranked in the
third sort of them, that for such a thing put off their Baptism: yet himself
reasons strongly against delays of that nature, in that Oration, which
peradventure was after he was better informed.

Thirdly, you bring in Chrysostom among your instances, Nor Chrysostom.
Educated by Meletius a Bishop, yet not baptized till he was past 21 years of
age: If you can make this out, you say somewhat, though it will fall short of
that you intend to evidence thereby. Christian birth, and Episcopal education
might justly give occasion to a man to wonder how such a one came to escape the
privilege, which other Infants so borne, had; if it were the custom to
baptize such. But stay a little, herein you have adhered too far to your
friend Grotius, upon whose credit you have avouched all this, though neither
he, nor you tell us from whence you fetch this relation. I being loath to be
led by an implicit faith, without some ground; after some search I have found
that which makes me think you are deceived both in Chrysostom his Parents and
education. The Ecclesiastical Story (the Penman whereof undertakes to set
forth the place of his birth, his parentage, his call to his Episcopal
dignity, and his removal from it) says he was born of a prime family in
Antioch, and names his parents, Socr. hist. 5. 2. Siz. 8. 2.
but not a word of his Religion nor of his Baptism. I could here tell you that
some others speaking of his Parents and of himself, say, (...), he and they
were Heathens, (for so is the word (...) there to be taken) and they that say
so are Grecians. But however, by Chrysostom his mothers own words it appears
that his father dyed within a very short time after his birth: so much is
manifest from his mother, see Chrysostom. de Sacerdotio lib. 1. the death of thy
Father presently followed upon the sorrows which I had (...), etc.
in thy birth, which unseasonably made thee an Orphan, and me a widow: and
this fell out when Chrysostom (...), was young and could not speak, as she
says; there she puts him in mind of her care of his education, and of the
charge she had been at to improve it; but not a word of his Religion. I
confess it appears from Chrysostom, that about the 20 year of his Orat. ad
viduam juniorem.
age his mother was a Christian: but whether his Father or his mother was so at
his birth, it appears not. His education in his younger time was under
Libanius, who was an enemy to Christianity, and a scoffer at it, until he was
about 20 years of age: then changing his former studies, habit, and profession,
he came to Meletius, by whom being instructed in divine knowledge, within 3
years afterward he was baptized of him. After his mothers death, he betook
himself to a Monastical life, in which time he was much furthered in his
holy studies by Carterius and Diodorus, to whom he often repaired.

These things considered (which Chrysostom his own words make out) you can
hardly persuade your Reader that there is any strength in what you bring forth
from his example to plead against Paedo-baptisme, for you neither prove his
Parents were Christians at his birth, neither was he educated under Meetius,
yet both these you have affirmed, but without ground of evidence.

To all the forenamed instances you add somewhat more Grotius not to be rel^ed
upon in this point.
out of Grotius, which before I do examine, I have something to say to you
concerning Grotius, whom I see you follow in several passages of your Examen.
I cannot but wonder, why you (who pretend to be familiarly acquainted with the
secrets of Antiquity) should have so much correspondency with them who are not
likely to help you with any certain intelligence. Hugo Grotius is the strongest
stake to support your tottering hedge; and sure I am Grotius was a friend to
the Socinians, and it is well known what they think of Baptism. I have
learned from Reverend Doctor Rivet, that Grotius was perverted by Cardinal
Peron, Rivet. Apol. provera pace Ecclesia contr. votum Grotii.
who pleaded the cause of the Anabaptists in his answer to King James. Quae tum
protulerat, congessit, (says Doctor Rivet of the Cardinal) in suam
responsionem ad Regem M. Britan. and Anabaptistarum causam egit, quantum
potuit, strenue. Video eum satisfecisse D. Grotio, qui in talibus satis est
liberalis. Doctor Rivet told Grotius, that learned Vossius had set forth 8
Arguments in Print, to prove the lawful use of Infant Baptism, and desired
him to answer them first, and then Doctor Rivet promised to vindicate Vossius;
but Grotius made a poor excuse in his Votum pro pace Ecclesiastica, Rivet.
exam. animad. Grotii.
and returned no answer at all. Grotius that he might comply with the Papists,
grants that Infant Baptism ought to be received upon the authority of the
Church of Rome: and to please the Socinians also, (for it seems he intended
to gratify both) he puts forth this question: An Christus Grotii votum pro
pace Eccles. ad articulum 9.
ab Joanne baptizatus suit in nomen Patris, Filii, and S. sancti? If any man
desire a full character of Grotius, let him read his Piety, such as it is, in
that subtle piece, entitled, Hugonis Grotii Pietas, or his Annotations upon
Cassander, and his defense of those Annotations, and his Votum pro Pace: and he
will acknowledge that Grotius was no fit man to be trusted, nor likely to
deliver the true sense of the Ancients in this or any other point. I will not
stand to tell you what Laurentius, and Maresius say of him, but sure they prove
enough against him; and therefore I will put an end to this discourse, with
that censure which learned Rivet has passed upon Grotius, in Grotius own
words; Judicat prout amat, aut odit; amat and odit prout libet. In his verbis
exactissime descripsit ingenium suum, says D. Rivet Apologet. pro vera pace
Eccles. Sir. I shall desire you may have a more sure friend to rely upon then
Grotius: how far he has deceived you, and you following him, has wronged the
truth, and both of you your Reader; I will now God willing open.

You say, Grotius (in Annot in Matthew. 19. 14.) adds, That the Canon of the
Synod of Neocaesare a determines, That a Woman P. 9. 10. The Council of
Neocaes. not against baptism of Infants.
with Child might be baptized, because the baptism reached not to the fruit
of her womb; because in the confession made in Baptism, each ones own free
election is showed: from which Ca^on, you say, Balsamon, and Zonaras do
infer, That an Infant cannot be baptized, because it has no power to choose
the confession of divine Baptism. Your inference from the Canon, gives me just
occasion to think that you never read Balsamon whom you name; for if you had,
you would not assert what you do. That this may appear, I will set down the
words of the Canon, the occasion of it, and what the Glossator (mentioned by
you) says of the same. The words of the Canon are these:

Of her that is with Child, (...). Con. 6. Con. Neocaesariensis.
that she may be baptized when she will: for she that brings forth, in
this does not communicate with the birth that is brought forth, because every
one manifests his own free choice in confession.

The occasion of this Canon was this, as both your Glossators observe, it was
propounded to the Fathers in that Council, to know whether a Woman when she
is with child might be baptized or no? some opposed it, because (as they
thought) in her Baptism, the child in her womb was also baptized: and this
they held could not be, because there is required of him that would profess
himself a follower of Christ (as Zonaras expounds the last words of the Canon)
a free election: or (as Balsamon has it) there is required of every one in
Baptism his own promise, which an Infant in its mothers womb cannot do: at
length it is determined in the Canon, the woman in that condition might be
baptized when she would, etc. from whence your friend Grotius infers, That the
child uses Proles baptizari non solere^ nisi propria vo untate, et
professi^ne.
not to be baptized but of its own proper will and profession: and to back
this assertion, he adds some words from Balsamon and Zonaras, as if Balsamon
had denied that any were to be baptized, but such as were able of themselves to
make confession of their faith in Christ.

To vindicate the truth here from Grotius false inference, and yours also in
concurring with him therein; I desire the Reader to take into his consideration
these two things. 1. Of what kind of Women the Canon speaks of. 2. What the
Glossator mentioned by you speaks in the same gloss of Infants baptized in
their Infancy. The first will let us see, that what you would infer from the
Canon* is nothing to the question before us. The second will let all men see
that you deal not fairly with your Reader.

Remember our Question is, Whether Infants of believers P. 3.
are to be baptized with Christ's Baptism, etc. but this Canon, speaks of
children of Women as come out from among Infidells, being then converted when
they are with child; for Balsamon says, Such Women as were with child, and
come from the Church or company of unbeleevers: and (...)
what is this to our Question, which is about children born in the Church of
believing Parents?

Secondly, Balsamon distinguishes of children; some are (...) yet in the womb,
and not brought forth into the world, others are (...), young, but borne into
the world, for the first of these he says, no man can undertake, (he means in
Baptism) but as for children that are borne (...), they affirm by such as
undertake for them, and they being actually Baptized are accounted worthy of
divine illumination: your inference by Balsamons testimony is directly contrary
to Balsamons words, for he rotundis verbis affirms that children born, do in
Baptism answer by such as undertake for them: which words are mentioned
neither by Grotius nor your self: herein you wrong the truth, and labor to
deceive the Reader: in the beginning you charged me with overlashing (which yet
was your haste, and not my error) but here I may safely put you in mind of
docking or Curtalling the Author cited by you.

Lastly, in this Paragraph you tell us that Grotius adds that many of the
Greeks in every age unto this day do keep the custom of deferring the
Baptism of little ones, till they could Page 10.
themselves make confession of their says: you brag much of the Greek
Church, but I will not deal with the Greek Churches as you deal with the
Fathers, I will not put the The Greek Church misreported by Grotius in this
point.
Latin Church, Augustine and those Fathers and Counsels which accord with him
in one scale, and the Greek Church in the other, such comparisons are odious:
But this I can and must say, that when you have searched into the Greek Church
to the utmost, that you and all the Anabaptists in England cannot prove that
the Greek Church did for many hundred years reject the Baptism of Infants;
which is the assertion which I said might well put the Anabaptists to the
blush, and (now I add) your self also for justifying them in so saying.

To return to Grotius his Annotations, who says, that many of the Greeks,
etc. What some of the Greeks may do at this day I know not, but against his
testimony of the Greeks in every age I will produce some testimonies (gathered
by a learned Grecian, to whom the customs of the Greek Church were better
known then to Grotius, or the Anabaptists who rely on Grotius his relation)
whereby it is evident that baptizing Infants was held eeven necessary to be
observed in the Greek Church.

Photius (that learned Grecian) gathering together the Phot. patriarch. Covel.
anno, as some, 845. as others, 849.
Greek Counsels and laws for ordering of Church affairs, and reconciling them
one with another, has many things for Infant Baptism: as first, he brings in
an Imperial Constitution, wherein it was provided, that all baptized
Samaritans and Grecians should be punished, who brought not their wives and
children in their families to holy baptism. (...), Tib. 1. de fide ca. 10.
Here was a Law which required Grecians that were baptized to procure baptism
for their children, otherwise they should be punished.

Again, Tit. 4. ca. ^. he brings forth another Imperial Constitution
concerning Samaritans; such among them as are of age must not rashly be
baptized, but requires they should be trained up in good Doctrine, and then
admitted to Baptism; but their children, though they know not the Doctrine,
are to be baptized. So for Grecians, it is required that all their little ones
without delay be baptized, Conc. in Trullo. Can. 84. Whereupon it was appointed
in that Council, when there were no sure Witnesses to be produced, who were
able to testify little Children (whose baptism was doubted of) were baptized,
neither for their tender age could testify it themselves, without (...)
any offense such should be baptized.

Balsamon in his gloss upon that Canon, relates a story how Children coming
from a Christian Country, were taken by the Scythians and Agarens, and bought
by the Romans: the question was, whether the Children should be baptized or
no? though some pleaded, they came from a Country where Christians dwelt; and
therefore it is to be presumed that they were baptized (...), in their Infancy;
Some pleaded it was the care of their Mothers to procure baptism to them: and
others pleaded other Arguments for their Baptism: yet if they could produce no
witness to make it good, they were to be baptized. All which clearly
testifies that Infant baptism was then generally in use among Christians,
seeing they were so careful to have it testified that they were baptized, and
did presume where Christians dwelt it was in use.

Now see what from these testimonies may be held out for Paedo-baptisme among
the Greeks; if such among them as brought not their Children to Baptism were
punished: if Imperial Laws, as well as Synodicall Canons required
Infant Baptism; which they held so fit, that if there were any Children (of
whose Baptism it was doubted,) they required they should be baptized; may not
I from all this wonder why Grotius, or you from him, do affirm, That in every
age they deferred the baptism of their children till they could make
themselves a confession of their faith? Conc. Carth. ca. 14.
Whereas the former Constitutions about Infants Baptism testify that among
them in those ages it was held an undoubted truth.

I might also add to these one of the eight Canons concluded in Carthage
against the Pelaegians; wherein was affirmed, That whosoever denied Baptism
for the remission of sin, to a newborn Infant, etc. should be anathematized.

All which being duly weighed, it will easily appear, Whether the Anabaptists
need to blush, in saying, that the Ancients, especially the Greek Church,
rejected the Baptism of Infants for many hundred years. Let the several
testimonies of the Ancients in the Greek Church alleged by me, speak
whether the Greeks rejected that ordinance or no: And so we pass from the
Greek Church here, though afterward you give me occasion to search further
into the Grecians.

Come we now to examine whether the Writers of the Latin Church will be more
propitions to you in opposing Paedo-baptisme, then the Greeks have been; here
Cyprian is the first that comes under your Examen; and calculating his age, you
tell us Usher places him in anno 240, Perkins 250; I might tell you that others
take notice of him in other years, as Trithemius 249, Henr. Oc^us 245; so hard
a thing it is to set down prec^sely the particular year; yet all (as I said
before) agree in the Century in which he lived.

You acknowledge with me, that he was one of the anciencest Writers among the
Latin Fathers; only Tertullian, you say, was before him; and who denies that?
here upon your Semi-Socinian Grotius his credit you say, That nothing was
determined in Tertull. his time, concerning the age in which children were
consecrated by their Parents to Christian Discipline; because he disswadeth by
so many Reasons in his Book of Baptism, c. 18. the baptizing of Infants. And
you add, If he did allow it, it was only in case of necessity; as may appear
by his words in his book De Anima. ca. 39. Though my task in this examination
of your Examen, be only to make good what I said before in my Sermon; yet you
shall have my answer to this place quoted by your self* whereby it may appear
there are more witnesses to confirm the same truth, which I avouched but only
by the testimonies of a few.

Tertullian indeed in the former of these places, is persuading Tert. de Bapt.
c. 18. In Tertullians days Infants were baptized.
men to defer both the Baptism of children, and others who are of age. Yet I
beseech you tell me, does he not therein intimate that it was the custom of
the Church in his age to baptize the one as well as the other? otherwise I see
no reason why he should desire that they would defer the one as well as the
other. And what is the reason of his delay? such as did undertake or promise for
children were in danger; whilst they promised on their behalf, that which by
reason of their own mortality, and increase of evil disposition in children,
afterward might make them break, or destroy their promise; his words are
these, Pro cujusque personae condition, de dispositione, etiam aetate,
cunctatio Baptismi utilior est: praecipue tamen circa parvulos. Quid enim
necesse est, si non came necesse, sponsores etiam periculo ingeri? qui et ipsi
per mortalitatem destruere promissiones suas possunt, and proventu malae
indolis falli. Is it not evident by that place, that Baptism was administered
in all ages, even to little ones; and that there were some who undertook that
they should perform the promises made by them on their behalf? only this
custom of baptizing them did not very well please Tertullian: wherefore he
seeks to dissuade from it, but never pleads against it as an unlawful thing,
or an abuse of Christ's institution, as you do; yet how displeasing a delay of
that nature was to others (famous in the Church) has been cleared by several
testimonies before: here may you take notice of one, even before Cyprian in the
Latin Church, that bears witness against you, that in his time children were
baptized. This truth is so perspicuously laid down by him, that you cannot deny
it; and therefore you come with an [if,] and say, If he did allow it, it was
only in ^ert. de Anima, c. 13.
case of necessity; for this you refer me to his book de Anima, c. 39. where
having reckoned up the idolatry, and superstitious fooleries of the heathen at
the birth of their children, he speaks of children, one of whose Parents is
holy; and confesses both by the privilege of their birth and profession they
are designati sanctitatis, ac per hoc etiam salutis, not sancti, till they be
born of water and the Spirit: but in that place is altum silentium, of his
allowing baptism Cyprians testimony vindicated.
to them in case of necessity, as you say: wherein if a man told you that you
did overlash, he should not wrong the truth.

But before we part with Tertullian, give me leave to ask the question,
whether the disswasion which you cite out of Tertullians book de Baptismo, may
not reasonably be interpreted of the Infants of Infidells? because in that
Chapter Tertullian speaks of the baptism of such as were not born of
Christian Parents, (such as the Eunuch, and St. Paul;) and therefore he
desires that the Baptism of such Infants should be deferred, till they came
to years, and were able to make confession of their sins, and profession of
their faith, their Parents being Infidels, and their Sponsors mortal; for what
(says he) though these Infants may have some Sponsors to undertake for their
Christian education? yet their Sponsors may die before they are capable of
instruction; and then that promise is void and of none effect.

And I am very much inclined to believe, that this is the true meaning of the
place, because it is clear and evident by the 39. Chapter of his book de
Anima, that Tertullian did acknowledge that the children of believers had a
kind of privilege (which he calls prerogative) by their birth, besides that
of their education: and therefore in case the Sponsors who undertook for the
education of the Infants of Pagans did live, yea, and give those Infants due
education; yet there was a great difference between them and the Infants of
believers, who had such a birth privilege as gave them right to Baptism; and
by Baptism, and the Spirit, says he, they are made (what they were by God
designed to be) holy indeed. Because I will give you, and the learned Readers
light enough, I will transcribe the passage at large, and give you leave to
judge, for I hope you will make it appear that you are pius Inimicus, and
pass judgment upon my side, when you have received some new light, if it be
new to you: but truly, I fear, that you saw something in this 39 Chapter,
which made against you: and therefore you do barely cite the Chapter, and not
set down the words of the Author, which was not so fairly done: be pleased then
to peruse the testimony in words at length, and not in figures. Hin^ enim
Apostolus ex sanctificato alterutro sexu sanctos procreari ait, tam ex seminis
praerogativa, quam ex institutionis disciplina: caeterum, inquit, immundi
nascerentur, quasi Designatos tamen sanctitatis, ac per hoc etiam salutis
intelligi volens fidelium filios, ut hujus spei pignora matrimoniis, quae
retinenda censuerat, patrocinarentur. Alloquin meminerat Dominicae
definitionis, nisi quis nascatur ex aqua and spiritu, non introibit in regnum
Dei, id est, non erit sanctus. Sir, are you not now convinced that Tertullian
did conceive that the Infants of believers had such a sanctity (as I called
Covenant-holinesse) by the prerogative and privilege of their birth, as gave
them a right to baptism? I would not abuse Tertullian, as you did Origin and
other Reverend and Learned men; and therefore have given you a fair
interpretation out of his own words: I believe by this time you are sick of
Tertullian; let us confer with Cyprian and his 66 Colleagues, upon whom you
have passed a Magisteriall censure.

Cyprian, say you, says enough, and more then enough, except he spoke to
better purpose: if that which he has spoken P. 10.
be weighed in the balance of your judgment, his words, though many will be
found but light: yet you say that Hierom, and especially Augustine relied upon
that Epistle for the proving of baptizing Infants: for my part, I am more
strengthened in my Opinion of the worth of Cyprian's words in that Epistle by
this your confession: for had there not been solidity and truth in what he
said; learned Hierom, and Reverend Augustine (two eminent men in the Church,
though you think great darkness was upon their spirits) would not have
relied on that which has no weight in it; they were well able to ponder the
weight of words, before they would rely upon them, or applaud them. And what
says Augustine of that Epistle? That Cyprian was not devising any new decree,
but followed the most sure faith of the Cyprianus non novum aliquod decretum
condens, sed Ecclesiae fidem firmissimam servans, etc. Aug. Ep. 28. ad Hier.
Church: does he not therein testify that Cyprian maintaining that Infants
might be baptized before the eighth day, did devise no new decree, but
observed faithfully what the Church did before him: whereby it seems, though
Augustine approved Cyprians judgment, yet he relied not upon his reasons to
make good Infant Baptism; this to him is no new doctrine, he had another eye
upon the constant and sure faith of the Church, which in that point he
followed faithfully.

You tell me, I said Fidus denied not Infants Baptism, but thought they ought
not to be baptized before the eighth day: to this you give no answer; and may I
not thereby think that it appears evidently to your self, as well as to
me, that Paedo-baptisme in that age was in use? for this you deny not: and
indeed, that this was the question wherein Fidus craved resolution of Cyprian:
s^il. whether Infants were to be baptized before the eighth day, it appears by
the words of the Epistle: Quantum ad causam pertines, quos dixisti intra
s^cundum, vel tertium diem qu^ (...) constitut^s baptizari non opertere, and
considerandam esse legem circumcisioni^ antiquae, ut intra oct av^m diem, eum
qui natus est baptizandum and sanctifieandum non putares, etc. Fidus question
therefore was, as I said before: this appears also by August. his testimony,
who ad Bonisacium, lib. 4. contr. ^. Ep. Pelag. c. 18. says the same.

So far then we agree: but you say, I might have gone further, and observed
Fidus his reasons; one whereof was drawn from Circumcision, which was done upon
the eighth day after the birth of the child: The other is drawn from the
childs uncleanness in the first days of its birth, which makes men abhor
to kiss it, etc. both which are related by Cyprian, not Vestigium infantis in
primis parus sui diel us constituti mundum non dixisse
as his own judgment, but as reasons of Fidus his scruples, whereof he
sought resolution from him: to both which he gives the judgment of the
Council, assuring him, that none of them agreed with him herein. If Fidus did
Judaize in both these, or either of them, what is that to me, who say he denied
not Baptism to be administered to Infants? if the ground he went upon to tie
it to the eighth day, was unsound, I seek not to justify him in it. Yet let me
tell you, that Fidus was not the only man that reasoned from Circumcision to
Baptism, though they do not tie Baptism to the eighth day, as Fidus did.
Besides the testimonies Ath. de Sab. and Circumcis. Orat. 40.
brought out of Athanasius before, take notice that he calls Circumcision a
type of Baptism. Greg. Nazianz. proves that Children are now to be baptized,
as under the law they were circumcised. August. also says the same, lib. 1.
contra Grescon. Grammaticum, c. 30. and de Bapt. contr. Donatist. lib. 4. c.
23. Where he says, Baptism is as profitable to children now, as Circumcision
was to children of old. Chrysostom. also Hom. 40. in Genes. calls our
Circumcision Baptism. But none of all these holy men tied Baptism to a
certain day, as Circumcision was, as Chrysostom speaks in the same place.

How far these worthy men Judaized in that age, in saying Baptism now comes in
stead of Circumcision, is not now to be considered by us; therefore I leave it.

In the next place, you say, The resolution of this Council is not to be
slighted, because upon your search, you find it the P. 11.
springhead of Infant Baptism. It seems when you cast your lead into the sea
of Antiquity to find out the depth of this ordinance, your line was too short,
and your plummet too light, that it could not reach beyond this Epistle: are
there not diverse instances among the Ancients which make it manifest, that
before that time Infantbaptisme was in use, as has been manifested to you
already? therefore that was not the first time in which it sprung up in the
world.

You say further, I am mistaken about the proofs of their opinion, which you
call not reasons or proofs, but answers to objections. I will not wrangle with
you about words, call them what you please, Arguments or Answers: this is
enough to me, what I have produced is recorded in the Epistle: and all of them
do justify the lawfulness of baptizing Infants, which was the thing which I
went about to clear: neither does any of them enforce Baptism to be tied up
to the eighth day, as Fidus thought.

From the words of that Epistle, you allege 3 things; 1. They thought
baptizing, giving Gods grace, denying it, denying Gods grace. 2. They thought
the souls to be lost, which were not baptized. 3. That all Infants (not
believers only) were to be baptized. The 2 first I grant are rightly
collected from the words of the Epistle; you might, if you pleased, have
collected diverse other things, as that Baptism comes in stead of Circumcision,
etc. But suppose all their grounds which they plead be not to be justified: yet
they do not darken the light which the place gives to our question. If a man
were to make good any assertion of a necessary truth, and use several
arguments to make it out; if one of these arguments be not good, or be weak,
that may be rejected, and yet the truth stand firm, seeing the other
arguments are good and strong to evidence the truth. It is true, when the
Ancients said that Children were to be baptized, sometimes they stood
peremptorily for the necessity of Baptism, as if without it no salvation were
to be excepted; yet they made it out by other Arguments then that: why should
then the truth justified and cleared up by them, be rejected for this? When
they were to prove that men of years instructed in the truth, should receive
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, they made that good by several Reasons; as
sometimes from the necessity of the command which Jesus Christ laid upon all
the Disciples of the Gospel, that they might remember his death till his coming
again. At other times they urged it, lest men should brand themselves with
unthankfulness in not coming to the feast when they are invited. Sometimes
again they pressed the same duty upon the people to come to that ordinance, that
they might have the inward Grace signified and exhibted in the Sacrament, to
be sealed up and confirmed to them. These three ways did they use to press
their Hearers to the frequent receiving of the Sacrament: yet at some other
times also they pleaded the necessity of that Sacrament, as if no man without
the use thereof could be saved. No man can deny the first three Arguments to be
good, though the last is not: and notwithstanding the weakness thereof, this
is a sure truth, That the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is to be received. So
it is here, diverse Arguments are brought to prove that children are to be
baptized; and amongst many, this is one, They conceived the want of it might
be prejudicial to the salvation of Infants, which I will not justify; yet I
dare not reject the truth made out by other media, reasons or arguments. And it
is to be remembered that this Argument was most frequently used by the Ancients
in the heat of disputation, when they had to do with them that denied the
traduction of original sin from Adam to Infants: howsoever, at some other
times they confess with Augustine, that some do receive rem Baptismi Lib. 4.
c. 22. contr. Donat*
absque Sacramento, a man may have the grace given in Baptism, and not be
baptized.

As for the third inference made by you from his words, that not only Infants
of believers, but all Infants are to be baptized: though he lays it down in
general terms, that none are to be hindered from coming to Christ: yet what
he says ought to be understood of the Church, because he speaks of such as God
has cleansed or purified, who were common.

You construe some passages of the Epistle as answers to some objections, which
do no ways weaken, but strengthen what I have said from thence. Only in the
closure of this Section, you would find fault with my gathering up of Cyprians
mind, as if he had meant that Infants are to be baptized, because they are
under Original sin, and need pardon. You say the Argument is rather, that
they have lesser sins then others; and therefore there is lesser hinderance
to them to come to this Grace, remission of sin, and Baptism. Cyprian indeed
says, if Baptism be not denied to men of years, who has committed more
heinous sins then Infants, why should Baptism be denied to Infants, who are
only guilty of Original sin derived to them from Adam: does he not there
mention Original sin, which he says is remitted to Children when they are
baptized: which in his judgment is less then the grievous actual sins of men
of years, added to their Original sin.

In the farewell of your censure of Cyprians judgment, you call it naked, and
say, you would have covered the nakedness thereof, but that the truth suffered
so much thereby: and so can at your pleasure put upon it the title of an absurd
Epistle. P. 12.
Sir, for one man to slight the judgment of 66. men, eminent in their
generation, does not well become a modest disposition taught in the Gospel, to
think better of others then himself. I am afraid, that when Cyprians Epistle,
and your answer shall be compared together; the nakedness of your answer will
rather appear; yea, remember what the Philosopher trampling upon Plato his
neat Carpet, said, calco Platonis superbiam: yet he spying a hole in his
slovenly cloak, answered, and ego per rimam pallii tuam video superbiam, etc.
I cannot but account it your nakedness, that if it be naked, you have not in
your answer laid open the nakedness of it: but though it be absurd in your
eye, yet in the judgment of men renowned for learning and piety, it has ever
been accepted in the Church, notwithstanding some mistakes in it.

Next to Cyprian comes Augustine under your Examen: P. 12.
Whose authority was it (as you say) that carried on Baptism Augustine
vindicated.
of Infants in the following ages almost without control: For which you bring
forth Walfridus Strabo, and Petrus Cluniacensis testimonies, which I here mean
to pass over, and take notice of them in another place.

I confess learned Augustine his authority was great in the Church, both
whilst he lived, and since, and that worthily; not only for his defense of the
truth which you now oppose, but of other greater and more necessary truths
also, which he solidly maintained against the adversaries who labored either
to suppress or corrupt the same: albeit you seem not much to stand upon his
judgment: which with you is of no more value, then his proofs and reasons can
add weight thereunto. Thus you slight him, though what he said is approved by
diverse Fathers and Councels named by your self; and how far your bare single
judgment and censure will outweigh Augustine, Prosper, Fulgentius, and the
Counsels, (which you mention in this Question) let the Reader judge.

It has been an ancient justifiable course in the Church in examining of
controversies in Religion, to look back upon the writings of famous men who
flourished in the Church before: was not Sisinnius his counsel to good
purpose, which he presented to Theodosius (then studying how to put an end to
the unhappy differences which troubled the Church in his time) when he persuaded
him, (...) Soz. 7. 12.
(...): and to demand of them who petitioned him, whether they would not stand
to the judgment of such as were Teachers in the Church before it was divided?
especially when their judgment dissented not from the Scriptures: his counsel
no doubt was good and wholesome; yet I desire that herein I may not be
mistaken. This I speak not, as if I attributed more to Antiquity then to
Verity. I have long since resolved (by Gods assistance) with Hierom, Antiqua
legere, probare singula, ^etinere quae bona sunt, and a fide Catholicae
Ecclesiae non recedere; it were happy for the Church among us, if in this
unruly age, many (who not content with former truth:, are carried on with an
itching disposition after novelties) would do the like.

I return to judicious Augustine: Here I expected your accurate Examen would
have canvast the several testimonies in the places quoted by me; but I am
deceived: Whereby it seems you have nothing to say against them, but that they
evidence what was that Churches practice in his time about our question (which
was the true and only end why I named any testimonies from Antiquity:) for if
they did not, I doubt not you would have said so much: only here you tell us
what your account is of his proofs and reasons of his judgment in this
controversy: all which to you seem to be but light: this you labor to prove
in 6 following Sections, which I will now view; and see whether your weighty
answers will satisfy his light reasons in the judgment of any indifferent
Reader.

Your first exception against his judgment is, because he makes it an
universal Tradition; a shrewd fault, or a dangerous P. 14.
position; which will not down with an Anti-paedo-baptisme. And first you reason
against it to this purpose; If the Church had thought it necessary that all
children of Christians by profession should be baptized in their Infancy; then
none born within the pale of the Church should have miss't of it. But so it is
that many did. Ergo, etc. Your Minor you prove, Augustine himself, Adeodatus
his son, and Alipius his friend were not so baptized; and thus you labor to
prove against Augustine, that Infant Baptism was not universally received in
that Church as he said, which you think to evince by the induction of these
instances.

First, that it was universally used in the Church, testimonies of good
Witnesses recording the practice of the Church make it manifest; and we have
heard of some of them before in their several ages; as, Irenaus lib. 2. cap:
39. (notwithstanding the bar you put in against him;) he tells us that Christ
came to save all sorts of people, whether young or old, for they are
regenerated by him in Baptism. Origin in several places; as, in Luc. 14. lib.
5. in Ep. ad Romans and in Levit. Hom. 80. in which places he tells us, it was
the custom of the Church to give Baptism to little ones; and says, not of
this or that Church: which by a constant course they had observed: therefore in
his time we find it universally practiced in the Church; otherwise he could not
say that the Church observed it. Cypr. Ep. 39. proves (as we have heard) that
Baptism is to be denied to no age: then he adds, quanto magis prohiberi non
debet Infans, etc. this he sets down as no new Doctrine, but faithfully
adhearing to the order of the Church; as we heard from Augustine before: may
we not now from all these say, it was in his time the universal custom of
the Church to baptize Infants?

Shall I add other Witnesses who lived in the same Century with him?
Chrysostom Hom. ad. Neophytos. Ambrose Other ancient testimonies for Infant
baptism.
Ep. ad Demetriadem Virginem. Hieron. ad Laetam, and lib. 3. adv. Pelag. all
which I now pass over: and are not all these Witnesses of the practice of the
Church? which being weighed, who can deny that Augustine might well relate
Paedo-baptism to be universally practiced, having such a cloud of Witnesses to
confirm it.

And to manifest it further, this is somewhat to me; Epiphanius (whose
testimony you looked for) in the end of his work relating what was generally
observed in the Church tells us, The Baptism administered in the Church in his
time, was performed according to the Tradition of the Gospel, and the authority
of the Apostles; as well as other mysteries then in use. And we know that in
his time Baptism was administered to Infants; therefore in his judgment, what
the Church did therein, they had authority for it from the Gospel and the
Apostles: to make that good, he says afterward, That Baptism came in stead of
Circumcision, which then was not in use.

Furthermore, sometimes Historians relating particular customs in some things
which were not in use in some Churches and Countries, (upon which arose some
debat^s in the Church) do not mention that of Infants Baptism as one of these
particular customs observed in some Churches, and not in other; See Socrates
Hist. lib. 5. 22. it is true, he relates some diversities of several Churches
about persons that had power to baptize, and about the time in which Baptism
was commonly administered; but he mentions none that excluded Infants from
Baptism, whilst others baptized them; which no doubt he would have done if
there had been any such custom then afoot in the Church. Sozom. likewise
setting down the several customs of several Churches (though they were of
the same Opinion) Soz. 7. 19.
among all which singular customs, baptizing Infants is not named for one, yet
in use in that age: therefore it is to be conceived as the general practice of
the Church. Indeed there was a different custom (especially in some after
ages) in the manner of baptizing both Infants and grown men; in some places
they dipped them thrice, in some but once: and of this very custom Gregory the
great means, when he says, In una side nil officit ecclesiae diversa Soz. 1.
17.
consuetudo. But in none of these Ancients do I read any such diversity of
customs that some Churches baptized Infants, others baptized them not: if you
know any, I pray you produce them in your next.

Now I come to speak to the particular instances, by which you go about to
disprove this universal practice of the Church: you tell me Augustine was not
baptized till above 30 years, though educated as a Christian by his Mother
Monica. First, I might answer you with the Proverb, una P. 1 ^.
hirundo non facit ver; or that one exception takes not away Augustines
baptism, no argument that Infants were not then baptized.
the general rule: if after ages come to read the stories of the Church, after
the Lord was pleased to begin the Reformation thereof in Luthers time: and then
find that even in that time Baltazzar Pacommitanus with some of his seduced
brethren did withstand Paedo-Baptisme; or if after generations among us shall
find that when God begun so happily to advance that blessed work of Reformation
beyond the pitch it was brought unto in our Ancestors days, if they should
meet with Mr. Tombs Examen of this question, and therein see your Judgment
against the constant and universal practlse of the Church at this day: if such
should from a few particular Examples infer that this was the Doctrine commonly
received in the Reformed Churches (that children should not be baptized:) Or
deny that this was the common received Doctrine that children should be
baptized; assuredly, a man that knows the Doctrine and present practice of the
Church, might with all reason deny the consequence, because some among them did
not stand for Infant Baptism; therefore the generality of them denied it. So
it may be here thought, peradventure some (though born of Christian Parents)
were not in that age baptized in their Infancy; yet that is no way prejudicial
to the universal practice of the Church, in which Paedo-baptisme was received.

But secondly, I answer more particularly: I grant Augustine was not baptized
till he was 30 years old. And I will not take upon me to determine (besides
the general observation of the reasons, upon which Baptism in those days was
deferred by some, which formerly have been hinted) what the particular reason
was of his not being baptized in his Infancy: but I will hold forth unto the
Reader so much as shall clearly show that you have no cause from that example
to say, That children of Christians by profession in that age were not baptized
in their Infancy; because you should first prove that Augustine his parents
were Christians at his birth; otherwise you speak not to the question before
us; What was the profession of his Parents when he was borne? take it from
Augustine himself: who says (though Possidonius in his life seems to say
otherwise) when he was Putr, a child grown, he fell extreme sick, which put
him in fear of death, (then he and his mother also were both troubled that
he was not baptized:) he says of his Father at that time, as yet he believed
Aug. C^nf. l. 1. c. 11. ille nondum erediderat.
not in Christ. When Augustine was about 16 years of age, his father was but
catechumenus, Conf. lib. 2. ca. 6. In another place speaking of his mothers
peaceable cohabitation with him, (though he was a man of a hasty disposition,
and sometimes used her unkindly) yet he says of her, virum suum in extrema
vita temporali ejus lucrata est Confess. 9. 9.
tibi (i. e. Deo,) etc. Does not that testimony plainly hold out, that he was
not gained to the Christian faith until he drew near the end of his life?
and if it was so long before he was truly gained to the Lord; how can it seem
strange to any, that he who believed not in Christ himself, should neglect, or
it may be hinder the baptizing of his Child in the name of Christ?

It is also said of Monica, that when she was but 13 years old, she was
married; her mother taught her to pray, but we read not of her baptism when
she was young: or if she were baptized when he was borne, how shall we know
that her husband would give way to her to have Baptism administered to her son,
she suffered many things of him whilst he continued an Infidel, as Augustine
confesses. Nay more, if she were baptized herself at his birth, why might she
not be conceived to be carried away with the error of some in that time of
deferring Baptism till death, that they might not sin after it? it appears
not, his Parents were Christians (it is out of doubt his Father was not) at his
birth: therefore nothing for the strengthening of your assertion is gained by
this instance.

Afterward Augustine put off his own Baptism till he was about 30 years, and
upward, and what marvel? He was poisoned with the Manichaean heresy, in
which he continued Poss^d. de vita Aug c. 1.
almost 9 years, Conf. lib. 3. c. 11. in which time what account he made of
Baptism, may be seen in his deriding Conf, 4 3.
of it to his dear and intimate friend (who was baptized in his sickness) by
whom he is sharply rebuked for it. I might also add what he confesses, that
the strength of his lustful disposition carried him on to many sins, which
made him make no haste to be baptized; quia post lavacrum illud, major and
periculosior in sordibus delictorum reatus Conf. 1. 11.
sorct: so much may be read in Augustine himself, of the causes of deferring
his baptism, which yet can be no prejudice to the general practice of the
Church in that age; as it is mentioned by himself, and others.

Neither is it any wonder why Adeodatus his son was not baptized in his
Infancy: for how can we seek for Nor his son Adeoda^us.
his Baptism in Infancy when as his father was unbaptized? he being borne when
his father was about some 15. or 16. years of age. When Augustine himself was
baptized, he caused him to be baptized with himself, Adeodatus being Conf. 9.
6.
almost 15. years old. Indeed if Adeodate had continued unbaptized after
Augustine his baptism, your objection drawn from him might have had some
colorable pretense, which now it has not; much less any weight in it to
confirm what you seek to strengthen thereby.

As for Alipius, besides his scandalous conversation, he Conf. 6 7. Conf. 7.
19. Nor Alipius.
was also poisoned by the Manichees: and further it appears also what
mistakings he had concerning the doctrine taught in the Church about Christ's
soul; whereupon it is said of him, ad ipsam Christianam sidem tardius
movebatur: therefore considering how long he continued in his errors, it is not
to be wondered at that he also was so long unbaptized. So much for your three
instances.

Afterward because you fear these instances will not be sufficient to make
good your answer, therefore you grant with Grotius, that Paedo-baptisme was
much more frequented, and with greater opinion of necessity in Africa, then in
Asia, or other parts of the world: I take what you grant, that it was used both
in Africa and Asia: and may I not then with Augustine say it was universal,
both among Greeks and Latins?

And when you say it was more frequented in Africa then in Asia; I know you
would intimate that the received custom was, that some did, others did it not,
each doing what he thought best, but that the Greeks less regarded it then
the Latins: for so I find both Grotius, and the Arminians in their book
Censura censurae, Cap. 23. to affirm confidently, but neither you nor they
must be believed upon your bare assertion against so many witnesses: yet this
sticks with you, that in the Counsels (as Grotius says) you cannot find
ancienter mention Page 14.
of that custom then the council of Carthage: I have formerly told you why
Fathers and Counsels mention not all things which are controverted in our age,
which was this: because their care was to resolve the doubts which troubled the
Church in their days: if there be no Canon concerning it, why may it not be
thought that they did not mention it, because in their times none did scruple
it? yet when any thing relating to childrens Baptism was started, then the
Church maintained it, witness the 66 Bishops assembled in a Council answering
Fidus about that question. I might also put you in mind that Constitutiones
Clementis make mention of it saying, But baptize ye your Children: (...)
albeit for my part I conceive these Constitutions not to be his, under whose
name they go, yet with the best Critics I may affirm this, that they relate
the ancient customs of the Greek Church, gathered into one volume, the
Compiler of them desiring to put credit upon them would have several
Constitutions to come from several Apostles.

And although it was more used in Africa then elsewhere, yet Fulgent* de fide
ad Petrum, ca. 30.
you question whether they did in Africa baptize Infants but in case of
necessity, or for healths sake: I pray remember what Tertullian that learned
African said de Anima. Fulgentius tells us baptism is sufficient to wash away
original sin from Infants, so Hilarious Ep. 2. ad Augustinum mentions it, yet
neither of these speak of Baptism in the danger of death: to which you say
they restrained it.

You mention the distinction of Catechumeni and persons Baptized, and the use
of catechizing before Baptism, that even after Augustine his days the
baptizing of persons of grown age did continue as well as of Infants, etc. Do
you not forget the question before us? you should have proved that Infants were
not baptized, and now you speak of baptizing of men of years, which gives you
occasion to mention the distinction of Catechumeni and others, and that is
nothing to our question; for who ever doubted that even in Augustine his time
many still adhered to Paganism? and when any of them had embraced the faith,
why might they not be catechized, and so prepared for Baptism, and when they
were sound fit baptized? Augustine could us before, that his father was
Catechumenus when he was sixteen years of age.

Then you come to censure baptizing of whole Countries upon the baptizing of
their King, etc. which is nothing to our question, otherwise I might relate
unto you several examples where you might see, what a notable preparation for
the conversion of Nations it has been to have their Governors show them the
way, but I forbear.

In your second Section you except against Augustine his judgment, because he
held that Infants without baptism must Page 15.
be damned by reason of original sin, which is not taken away but by
baptism. I grant that Augustine, and some others of the Ancients pressed
baptizing of Infants upon that ground, but not only upon that ground: and they
did most press that ground when they had to do with Heretics, denying
original sin to be conveyed from parents to their children: yet they
maintained Paedo-Baptisme upon other sound grounds, as formerly I have proved;
therefore this exception is of no vilidity, nor was this Augustines constant
Doctrine: yea it was a Doctrine which he retracted as an error, as shall
afterward appear.

Again you say, that you cannot find among the Ancients the ground that I go
upon: that the Covenant of grace belongs to believers and their seed. What if
you have not found it, will you therefore say it is not to be found in their
writings? Bernardus non vidit omnia: why may not some things in the vast
monuments of Antiquity pass unseene by you? though you have seen much, and
think that you have seen more truth then all the Ancients did, and can
censure what they say at your pleasure: But if you did find this in the
writings of the Ancients, it would make nothing for, or against me, who have
not placed Infant Baptism upon that ground, because they placed it so: I have
asserted that ground from the Scripture, as afterward, God willing, shall be
made good. But that they also, (even many of the ancients) pressed Baptism
upon the sound grounds which we do, I have made it appear out of several
writings.

As for the judgment of Bellarmine, Aquinas and others quoted by you, I will
not trouble my self in answering for them: they were not alleged by me,
neither will I stand to their judgment.

In your third Section you bid me consider of Augustine his judgment, holding
it necessary for Infants to receive the Lords Supper: that opinion is nothing
to our question in debate before us, therefore you can expect no answer from
me to it, for I never pleaded it.

But what is your Argument from hence, Augustine held it fit to give Infants
the Lords Supper, Ergo, What? draw a conclusion to hurt me if you can, our
question being whether Infants were baptized in his days.

Fourthly you tell me that Augustine held a certainety of Page 16.
Regeneration by Baptism, and he makes no question of the Regeneration of
Infants, etc. I confess that sometimes he says so, yet at other times (as I
told you before) he says there are some qui rem baptismi absque Sacramento
baptismi consequentur. So also did Ambrose comforting Valentinian his sisters
upon his death (for he died whilst Ambrose was on his journey coming to
Baptize him) where he said of him, Quem in Evangelio geniturus eram, amisi: sed
ille non amisit gratiam quam poposcit -- vita jam fruitur aeterna -- qui habuit
speculum tuum Sancte p^ter, quomodo non accepit gratiam tuam? he speaks
confidently of his eternal estate, though unbaptized: yet Ambrose as well as
Augustine at other times attributed too much to outward Baptism.

Fifthly, you scorn his judgment in defending questions put to Infants at
their Baptism, and answered by others. That Is enough to me to prove that
Infants were then baptized, though I will not take upon me to justify that
custom of putting forth questions to them, who by reason of their age were not
able to return an answer: possibly I could tell you how, and that many other
customs crept into the Church, but because it is not to our purpose, I
forbear.

Lastly, you say, it is apparent out of that Epistle of Augustine, That
Infants, whether borne of Believers, or of such as had not received the
Christian faith, were baptized, neither do ^^ in that justify him: you may
take notice that here again you confess the question that Infants were
baptized.

But because you make such a great matter of it that it must needs follow that
they rejected covenant-holinesse or the birth-priviledge of believers Infants,
because they baptized other Infants if brought unto them; I reply that you
cannot be ignorant that many learned men deny this consequence, because they
conceive that not only such as are borne of Christian parents might be
baptized, but that other Infants also if any Christian would undertake to
train them up in Christ's School might be admitted into it by Baptism; you
know many of the reformed Divines think this lawful, who yet plead
covenant-holinesse, as further warrant why believers children not only may,
but ought to be Baptized: and Tertullian pleads both these grounds in the place
I quoted at large, both prerogative of birth, and benefit of education.
Furthermore many of the Rabbines say, that the children of Gentiles might be
circumcised if a Jew would bring him up in Religion, yet they all hold a
birth-priviledge of Jews children, for Circumcision; I allege all this to
show that you should not thus vilify and scorn their practice and grounds
without a more clear refutation of them then yet you have made: whether that
which has been spoken out of Cyprians Epistle, and Augustines approbation of
it, do not advantage my cause, whether they have not proved as much as I
alleged them for, I leave to the judicious and impartial Reader.

To all the forenamed Authors I added Hierome and Ambrose his testimonies to
prove the same: here you confess that they were of the same judgment with
Augustine in our question, therefore you conceive your answer to Augustine his
testimony to be a sufficient answer to them also: in like manner I refer you
to my reply to your former answer.

Your last Section of this Chapter is a Recollection of what you have already
alleged both for the invalidating of the testimonies brought by me to prove
the practice of Infant Baptism, as also of what you have brought to induce an
opinion that there was no such thing practiced in the first and best Antiquity.
You must give me leave to recollect what I have already answered to these
exceptions and allegations; as for your Vives and Strabo, I shall give you my
thoughts of them anon.

You confess I brought these testimonies only to prove the practice of
Infant Baptism, and that you cannot deny they prove, only you add they
rather prove the thing an error then a truth, because practiced upon such
erroneous grounds. As the necessity of Baptism to salvation: The certainty
of the Remission of original sin: The denying of Baptism unto none. But are
these the only proofs by which the Ancients did assert the baptizing of
Infants; I have proved, that notwithstanding some of them owned that corrupt
ground (and pleaded it especially in the heat of disputation) yet they
baptized them upon the same grounds which we do. Do not Tertullian, Cyprian,
etc. argue from Circumcision unto Baptism as we now do, and others of them
from Covenant-holinesse? (but this and our other proofs you threaten to
consider hereafter.)

In the mean time this you add, (you should have said repeat) for you add
nothing to what you had spoken before.

That the Testimonies produced prove not that it was in practice, but in case
of supposed necessity. Let the Reader judge whether these Testimonies have not
proved it an universal practice, and so not only in case of supposed
necessity; and let Mr. Tombs but consult that Book, which I perceive he
has made great use of in this Controversy, an Arminian Book commonly known by
the name of Censurae Censurae, and that will tell him that Augustine may be
said to be the first that grounded Infant Baptism upon necessity, Cen. Cen.
cap. 23.

Secondly, you say there was still in practice a constant course of baptizing
the grown children of professed believers when they were at full age: you have
seen already how much you are mistaken in those instances you give of such a
practice, and how much this practice was disavowed by the Fathers of those
times, could you but find as much in Antiquity against the baptizing of
Infants as there is against the deferring Baptism, how would you triumph?

Thirdly, you say they did conceive a like necessity of, and accordingly did
practice the giving of the Lords Supper to Infants. But did all the Fathers
forementioned judge and practice so? you cannot but know that all that plead
for them do not plead for the other, nor can you show that all that practiced
the one practiced the other; I confess some of the Africans did so.

Your fourth, that they made no difference between the Infants of believers
and unbeleevers brought unto them, if it were true, does not disprove the
practice of Baptizing Infants, only it proves an error in that practice. But
(if by unbeleevers you mean Pagans) it is not proved to be their general
practice, I think it was practiced by some of them upon the grounds above
mentioned, but not found in their constant and general practice.

In your fifth you speak cautelously that the Ancientest of Testimonies for
practice [according to any Rule determined] is Cyprian near 300. years after
Christ. Here I must needs take notice of your overlashing, who before
calculating his age acknowledged him to live but 250. years, and here you say
he lived almost 300. years. I see that the Testimonies of Iustine Martyr,
Irenaeus, Origin, Tertullian, (who all lived nearer the times of Christ then
Cyprian) are made good against your exceptions; you find only this evasion,
that their Testimonies do not prove the practice of Infant Baptism, according
to any Rule determined. But Sir remember our controversy at present is
concerning the practice, not the Rule.

In the next place you undertake to prove that it was not so from the
beginning, and that by many evidences. Now I cannot but conceive it likely,
that Augustines Ecclesia semper habuit, semper tenuit, should sway as much with
the intelligent impartial Reader, as Mr. Tombs his Non semper habuit, non
semper tenuit; especially considering that you bring not in all the Antiquity
you have produced one man that does either deny the Baptizing of Infants to
have been the ordinary practice of the Church or that condemn it, only two
you cite that do advise the deferring of it, as they do also the Baptism of
grown men.

As first, the propounding of questions unto Infants, which as Strabo and Vives
did, so any reasonable man say you will think a manifest proof that at first
none were baptized but such as understood the says of Christ.

This supposes these questions to be of as Ancient use in the Church of God
as Baptism it self, which certainly you can never prove from Scripture, and
how can any reasonable man think that a manifest proof to whom Baptism was,
or was not at first administered, that was not in use in the first
administration. I have produced testimonies bearing witness to the baptizing
of children, which plead for it, before you can bring any to witness that
those forms of questions and answers, had any being in the Church.

Secondly, your examples of Greg. Naz. Chrysostom. August. Constantine the Great,
have been already answered. Your mistakes in their parents, education, reasons
of their deferring Baptism, so made manifest, as it is abundantly evident they
are far from proving the Baptizing of Infants of Christian parents not to
have been the received and constant practice of the Church of Christ.

Thirdly, Greg. Nazianzen and Tertullian whom you cite as dissuading; you have
heard even in the places cited to you, the one bearing witness to the practice
of Infant Baptism, the other commanding it.

Fourthly, the Testimony of the Council of Neocaesaerea which you say is
plain against it; of the testimony of this Council, let the Reader look
back and judge, but the gloss upon that Canon to which you referred us, I am
sure is a plain Testimony for it.

Fifthly, the silence which you impute to the chief writers, Eusebius, etc. is
your mistake, not their fault; for Eusebius, what the reason of his silence is
you have heard; and for your, etc. if you mean Tertullian, Athanasius,
Epiphanius, whom before you charged with silence in this cause, I hope you may
now hear them speaking and witnessing for us.

Sixthly, for the many passages in Austine and others that call it an
Apostolical Tradition, in what sense they are to be understood I have already
showed, and am loath to detain the Reader with Tautologies.

For your Triumviri that bring up your reere and shut up this first part of
your Battalia, Grotius, Vives, and Strabo. (to whom I wonder you did not add
Censura Censurae, for you are more beholden to them for your Testimonies of
Chapter 23.
Antiquity, such as they be, then to all your other three, and I dare say,
without disparagement to your reading, whoever looks in Grotius and them,
shall find almost all that you have spoken in this Controversy from Antiquity
collected to your hand.) One of your three Champions I have encountered, and I
hope dispatched already; and for the other two Vives and Strabo, I see they are
men of great account with you. Vives you quote five or six times, and adorn
your Frontispice with a piece of his, and Strabo you mention often. But I
beseech you Sir, must we take the bare word of Vives a man of yesterday, or of
a Strabo in matters of fact in things done so many hundred years before they
were borne, and that against the express witness of so many worthy and
learned men who lived in those times? what evidence do either of them produce
out of Antiquity to make their assertion good? You know well enough that
learned Vossius did take notice of Strabo and Vives, and proves out of Authors
that lived many hundred years before Strabo (for he lived but about 850) that
Infants were baptized in the Church of old, and wonders that Strabo should rely
upon so weak an argument as he does; and I as much wonder that you knowing
all this should boast so much of such broken Reeds. And so I leave you and your
men, and shall expect to see what relief you will be able to give them, for
they can give none to you.

More Testimonies you say you could have added out of sundry Authors: which I
hardly believe seeing you are forced to rake up an old use continued in some
Cities of Italy only upon the hearesay of Vives. But these you say are enough
to you, and you think to any that search into antiquity, to prove that the
custom of Baptizing of Infants was not from the beginning, and therefore is
but an innovation, I verily believe upon your next search into Antiquity, you
will be of another mind.

And for your confident assertion that the Doctrine that Baptism is to be^
given to Infants of Believers only because of Covenant-holinesse, is not elder
then Zuinglius: Zuinglius I confess was a great Patron of this cause, who in a
public dispute did so convince and stop the mouths of the Anabaptists, that
they appearing to the Magistrates unreasonably obstinate were banished the
City. But whereas you say he is the first that you can find that maintained
the Baptism of Infants upon this ground; I shall be glad to help you; peruse
but what is before your eyes, and you shall find Tertullian and Athanasius
pleading the right of Infants to the Kingdom of heaven upon Covenant
holiness: you may find Epiphanius, Cyprian, Nazianzen, Augustine,
Chrysostom, and others pleading Baptism to come in the room of Circumcision,
and diverse of them pleading Infants right to Baptism from the Jews Infants
right to Circumcision, which to me is all one as to plead it from
Covenant-holinesse: you may also find even the Pelagians acknowledging a
Divine Institution for it, secundum sententiam Evangelii. And now I hope it
will not offend you if I say, I am sorry you discover so much either ignorance,
or negligence in the search of Antiquity, as to say, The Tenet and Practice of
Infant Baptism accordingly as we hold and practice, is not much above 100.
years old, so far as you can find.

To conclude this part of my Treatise about the Antiquity of Infant Baptism,
give me leave to add these few things. First, that I should not have judged it
convenient to have made so much search into the practice of antiquity, if you
had not so confidently undertaken to show that the ancients were of your mind,
and that I perceive your fair shows make many begin to think it was as you
affirm, and therefore taking my self bound to give the best account I could
with truth, I have not only made what diligent search I could my self, but
have also (which I willingly acknowledge that no man may think of my reading
above what it is) made use of my friend who is better versed in their writings
then I am, lest the truth in this matter of practice might suffer through my
weakness, who have but just leisure enough to look into these Authors now and
then, and consult them upon occasion. Yet had it been needful, I could have
added many other testimonies out of the Ancients to let you see that they
approved Infant Baptism, and affirmed that Baptism came in the place of
Circumcision, as the Author of the Book De Vocatione Gentium, lib. 1. cap. 7
Cyrill. Alexandrin. in Levis. lib. Isychius Presbyter in Levit. lib. 2. cap. 6.
and many more.

Secondly, in this search I find that the Ancients did not think that all who
died unbaptized were damned, as you usually charge them.

They conceived that Martyrs were baptized with their blood, and therefore
might be saved though they were not baptized with water. When great Basil
discoursed of this point in his Homily of the 40. Martyrs, he says of one
(...); He was baptized not by another (or the says of another) but by his own
faith: not in water, butin his own blood. Here Baptism by water was denied,
and yet salvation attained by a two fold Baptism, by faith, and in blood.

Yea I also observe that they who were no Martyrs, were in the judgment of the
Ancients sufficiently baptized by the holy Ghost, without blood or water: and
for proof of this point, I shall produce a testimony out of Augustine, whom I
cite the rather, because upon second thoughts he did retract his opinion, and
acknowledge that Baptism was not Absolutely necessary to salvation, Martyrdom
might suffice without Baptism, nay faith and conversion of the heart might
suffice without Martyrdom, or Baptism, in case a man were cast into such
straights, that he could not be made partaker of Baptism; Etiam atque etiam
considerans inv^nio (says he) non tantum passionem pro nomine Christi, id
quod ex Baptismo deerat, posse supplere, sed etiam fidem conversionemque
cordis, si forte ad celebrandum Mysterium Baptismi in angustiis temporum
succurri non potest, in his fifth book De Baptismo contra Donatistas; observe
that he says, etiam atque etiam considerans, etc. and therefore I told you
this was his judgment upon second thoughts, and more mature deliberation.

And when this point came to be debated in after ages, the Church took notice
of this Retractation, Bernard discourses upon this subject at large in his 77.
Epistle, and proves clearly out of Ambrose and Augustine that invisible
sanctification was sufficient to salvation without a participation of the
visible Sacrament. Invisibilem sanctificationem quibusdam affuisse, and
profuisse sine visibilibus Sacramentis -- Solam interdum fidem sufficere ad
salutem, et sine ipsa sufficere nihil, etc. Faith alone says he, (that is,
faith without Martyrdom) is sufficient to salvation, and nothing but says:
for though Martyrdom, says Bernard there, may supply the defect of Baptism,
we must not conceive that the punishment or suffering prevails, but the faith
of him that suffers. Sufficient spiritus solus (says Blesensis, one that is as
ancient as Bernard, more ancient then your Walafridus Strabo) quia ipsius
testimonium pondus habet. It is also clear and evident, that after this
opinion prevailed, Infant Baptism was not rejected, and therefore you are
extremely mistaken in this point. Now if (in the opinion of the ancients) men
of grown years might be saved without Baptism, if they were either converts,
or Martyrs, why may not elect Infants who are certainly sanctified, be made
happy without Baptism, when they have been made holy by the spirit of
holiness? could any of the ancients reasonably grant the one, and deny the
other?

Thirdly, you may see that in pleading for this universal practice I speak no
louder then other Reformed Divines, for the antiquity of Infant Baptism.
Judicious Calvin who was well versed in Antiquity, in his instruction against
the Anabaptists has these words; I affirm that this holy Ordinance of
Infant Baptism has been perpetually observed in the Christian Church, for
there is no ancient Doctor, that does not acknowledge that Infant Baptism was
constantly administered by the Apostles.

4. That notwithstanding all this evidence I have brought from Antiquity, yet I
build as little upon Antiquity as any other man. I acknowledge what learned
Rivet says to be very true, that Tradition is in most points uncertain, and
therefore he that will build sure must build upon the Scripture: Proinde
necessario veniendum erat ad argumenta ex Scripturis; quae si rem non evincant,
frustra traditionem advocabimus. Animadv. in Annot. Grotii in Cassandrum, Art.
9. Page 71. And I would have you and every Reader to remember, that I do not
build my faith upon humane Traditions in this Argument, nor did the ancients
build upon humane traditions in this thing: the very Pelagians themselves
acknowledge it upon this ground. Parvulos baptizandos esse concedunt (says
Augustine of the Pelagians) qui contra authoritatem universae Ecclesiae
procul-dubio per Dominum et Apostolos traditam, venire non possunt, lib. 1. de
peccat. merit. et Remiss. cap. 26. Nay, they were forced to their own
prejudice to acknowledge that Infants were baptized secundum regulam
universalis Ecclesiae and Evangelii sententiam, lib. cont. Caelest. and Pelag.
Now that which was pressed from the scope of the Gospel was not pressed as a
Tradition, and that which was acknowledged by the Pelagians to be the practice
of the universal Church, according to the rule of the Gospel, was not built
upon tradition. I will therefore close up my testimonies produced out of the
ancient writers, with that savoury passage of learned Calvin, in his
Instructions against the Anabaptists; Caeterum minime peto, ut in eo probando
nos Antiquit^s ^^llo modo juvet, etc. I do not desire (says he) to borrow
any help from Antiquity for the proof of this point, any whit farther then
the judgment of the Ancients shall be found to be grounded on the Word of
God: for I know full well, that as the custom of men does not give authority
to the Sacraments, so the use of the Sacrament cannot he said to be right, and
regular, because regulated by custom.

PART II.
HAving made good the practice of Antiquity for the Baptizing of Infants, I
follow you in that which Reply to Sect. 1.
you are pleased to make the second part of my Sermon, which you call
prejudices against Antipaedo-baptists, from their noveltie and miscarriages.
Where, first, you blame me for seeking by prefacing and setting down a brief
touch of the Anabaptists carriage in Germany, to create prejudice in my
Auditors.

To which I answer, that I yet never learned that a brief Answ.
setting down the Original History and State of a Controversy, or the weight
and consequence of it, thereby the more to engage the Readers attention, was
against any Rule or Law of Art either divine or humane; but in case it were a
fault, Quis tulerit Gracchos? You who begin your book with telling, how nine
months since you sent thus many Arguments in Latin, drawn up in a
Scholastique way, etc. and never yet received any Answer, and in the end of
your book intimated that though you allowed me but a month, yet I have kept
your book a whole year unanswered: and throughout your whole Treatise strive
to make an ostentation of reading, and put abundance of scoffs and jeeres upon
them who are of a contrary mind to you, and seek to load the opinion you
write against as if it carried all kind of mischiefs in the womb of it. All
which things you know well enough are apt to take the people; but have no
weight with them who use only to weigh Proof with Proof, and Argument with
Argument: you (I say) of all other should pardon such a peccadillo, and might
very well have passed over what either my self or Dr. Featlies Frontispice, or
Mr. Edwards his expressions might seem to be liable to, of exception in this
kind.

In your second Section you blame me for two things, Reply to Sect. 2.
first that I gave you no more light out of Augustine, to know who they were
that questioned Paedo-Baptisme in his days, you have searched and cannot find
any, the Pelagians you acknowledge opposed it not, the custom was so
universal, and esteemed so sacred that they durst not oppose it.

All the further light I shall now give in a matter of no Answ.
greater consequence is, that if you cannot find any in Augustines days who
questioned it, I am contented you shall believe there were none.

Secondly, you blame me for making such a leap from Augustines time, to
Baltazzar Pacommitanus, as if be were the first who opposed it, where as you
allege many who opposed it 400. years before his time. To which I answer, I
said not he Answ.
was the first whose judgment was against it, but the first that made an head
against it, or a division (or Schism) in the Church about it. It is possible
men may hold a private opinion differing from the received doctrine, and yet
never make a rent, or divide the Church into factions about it. That the middle
times between the Fathers and Luther were for Baptizing Infants.


But let us examine your instances; you allege the famous Berengarius as one.
2. The Albingenses. 3. Out of Bernard you mention another namelesse Sect. 4.
Petrus Cluniacensis, charges the same upon the Petro-Brusians.

To all which I answer, first, in general. That (these instances of yours
having occasioned me to make a more dilligent Answ.
search into the doctrine and practice of those middletimes between the
Fathers, and the beginning of Reformation in L^^bers time) I dare confidently
think, that you will have an hard task to prove out of any impartial Authors,
that there were any company of men before the Anabaptists in Germany, who
rejected the baptizing of Infants out of the confession of their faith;
possibly some private man might do it, but I shall desire you to show that any
company or Sect (if you will so call them) have ever denied the lawfulness of
baptizing of Infants: produce if you can any of their confessions, allege any
Acts of any Counsels where this doctrine was charged upon any, and condemned
in that Council: you know, the generality of the visible Christian world was
in those days divided into the followers of the Beast, and the small number of
those who followed the Lamb, who bare witness to the truth of the Gospel in
the times of that Antichristian Apostasy, these were called by several names,
Berengarians, Waldenses, poor men of Lions, Albingenses, Catharists,
Petr-Brusians, and several other names, as may be seen in Bishop Vshers book
of the Succession and State of the Christian Churches. Now all grant that the
Church of Rome even in those days, owned the baptizing of Infants, and so did
all those persecuted Companies or Churches of the Christians, for any thing I
can find to the contrary. Several Catalogues of their confessions and opinions
I find in several Authors, Usher de successione, cap. 6. Sect. 1^. 17. Cap.
8. Sect. 34. Cap. 10. Magdeburg^en^. 12. Cap. 8 col. 1^06.
and more perticularly in that forenamed book De successione Christianarum
Ecclesiarum. But not any one of them denying this point; they indeed denied any
Sacrament to confer grace ex opere operato, and thereupon some of their
adversaries would lay to their charge that they denied gratiam Baptismi, the
grace of Baptism: And others of them denied the trumperies that went along
with Baptism in the Church of Rome: And thereupon some of their adversaries
charged them that they laughed at the Baptism of Infants: but I can find none
who laid to their charge simply that they denied the lawfulness of Baptizing
of Infants, except only such who also charged them with Manicheisme and other
abominable doctrins and practices, which we all believe they utterly abhorred;
Nothing tendes more fully to manifest their doctrine then their own
confessions, one whereof was published by Baltazzar Lidius which was presented
to Vladislaus King of Hungary: In their Apology Baltazzar Lidius, Tom. 2. Page
285. etc.
and defense of their doctrine, they have a whole Chapter wherein they assert
and prove Paedo-Baptisme largely. The confession of the Taborites has not a
word sounding History of the Waldenses. lib. 1. cap. 3. p. 10.
against it. I find also in the History of the Waldenses, this is set down
among the calumnies unjustly cast upon them, That they reject the Baptism of
Infants, for which Bernard is cited in his 66. Hom. in Cant. but of this they
are purged out of their own writings, and there the ground and occasion Lib.
1. cap 4. page 15. Lib. cap. 6. page 43.
of imputing this error to them is expressed line 15. True it is, that having
been constrained some 100. years, etc. The same Author in the third part of his
history, professedly sets down the doctrine of the Waldenses and Albigenses,
and among other things concerning Baptism, he expresses this: And whereas
Baptism is administr^d in a full Congregation -- and for this cause it is that
we present our children in Baptism, which they ought to do, to whom the
children are nearest, as parents, etc. Waldensis against the Wicklevists and
Hussits imputes this heresy to some of the Lollards, that believers Tom. 3.
Tit. 5. cap. 53.
children were not to be baptized, and that Baptism was to no purpose
administered to them, secundum ritum quem servat Ecclesia, but he imputes it not
to Wicklefs followers in general, only ascribes it to some Lollards of the
Highlands in Scotland, and some few of the Diocese of Norwich, and yet in the
same place confesses he had seen none of their writings to that purpose, nor
knew what their grounds were, but only had transiently heard that they used to
produce 1 Cor. 7. Sanctificatus est, etc.

2. I answer to your particular instances, first, for Berengarius, it Usher de
Success. cap. 7. Sect. 37. Berengarius cleared from Anabaptisme.
is true that Deoduinus Leodienses took it up as a common fame, and upon his
credit Guitmund Archbishop of Averse relates it: But says Bishop Usher, in so
many Synods held against Berengarius, we never find any thing of this nature
laid to his charge: and to him it appears that they who in those days were
charged to hold that Baptism did not parvulis proficere ad salutem, held
nothing but this, that Baptism does not confer grace ex opere operato.

The same answer serves for the Albigenses and Waldenses; clear it is that
neither Aene^ Sylvius in his book de Origin Waldenses, Albigenses, etc.
cleared from Anabaptisme.
Bohemorum, when he sets down their opinions, nor the Magdeburgenses, who out
of an ancient Manuscript relate their doctrines, no nor William Reynolds in his
Calvino-Turcismus, wherein he endeavors to reproach them, lays any such thing
to their charge. Sure I am, the confession of the faith of the Albingenses
recorded by Hoveden does enough, Vsh. ubi supr. ca. 8. Sect. 34.
and more then enough own the baptizing of Infants. It Is true, Bernard in the
place cited by you says of those Anonymous people whom he wrote against, (who
were no other then some of the Waldenses) Irrident nos quia baptizamus
Infantes, and the rest of the Doctrines which you mention, but withal in the
same place charges them with Manechisme, and relates how the people threw them
into the water as if they were witches, and when they would not sink they fell
upon them with stones and killed them; and if you believe Bernard slandered
them in these two last, you will forgive the Reader if he believe that he did
no less in the other. And as for what Petrus Cluniacensis writes against Peter
de Bruis and his successor Henry, the truth is, these two men, did for 20.
years together so much spread the Doctrine of the Waldenses, and so plague the
Bishops Miters, and the Monks bellies, that I wonder not though they charged
any thing upon them which might make them odious to the people. He who reads
that railing book of Petrus Cluniacensis, will find that he acknowledges most
of what he lays to their charge to be upon the report of others, and lays
this for one of their Articles, that Children who died before they could
actually believe were damned, and that they would have all Churches demolished,
and encouraged people to pull them down; and that common fame gave out that
they condemned all the Latin Fathers, and not only excluded the Latin
Doctors e Cathedra Doctorum, but e regno Caelorum; that they did not altogether
believe the Prophets, Apostles, nor Christ himself. And no marvel that these
opinions should be charged upon them, though they held them not, seeing we
find this particular charged upon Luther, Calvin, and Beza, who did all in
special manner oppose this error: So that until you or some other do out of
their own confession, Jos. Vicecom. Obser. Eccl. Vol. Lib. 2. cap. 1. p. 103.
or some other impartial and authentic Register give better evidence then
yet you have done, I shall believe that this doctrine of opposing the baptizing
of the Infants of believers, is an Innovation no ancienter then the Anabaptists
in Germany; concerning whose practices we now proceed to inquiry.

In your third Section you take great pains to show out of To Sect. 3.
your reading who first in Germany stirred this question. I shall not stay the
Reader long about it, because your self grant that it is not tanti; I deny not
but Nicholaus Storch, Marcus Stubner, and Thomas Muncer did bring it first upon
the Stage about 1521, or 1522, and that by Muneers doctrine, a sad sedition was
raised in the upper Germany, among the Country people, but because this
Baltazzar Hubmir P acommitanus Pastor of the Waldshut, a Town near the
Helvetians, was a man of greater note for learning, of an active turbulent
spirit, one who both by preaching and writing much fomented their way, and was
in very great repute among them, I feared not (as others have done before me)
to name him as the Antesignanus of that unhappy Sect: of whose seditious
practices, doctrine, recantation, Apostasy, and miserable death, for which he
was esteemed a Martyr by his followers, I might out of many Germane writers
easily inform the Reader, if I affected a needless ostentation of reading.

In this Section upon occasion of the name of Anabaptisme, and reiterating of
Baptism, you desired to have it To Sect. 4.
proved unlawful to repeat Baptism, or for a man that has been baptized
rightly to be baptized again: and afterward in your third part Sect. 12. you
profess you are not satisfied, but that both Circumcision might have been, and
baptism may be reiterated: and here you add that the Argument used against
the repetition of Baptism are insufficient; and that if there were but as much
for baptizing of Infants, as Acts 19. 5, 6. affords for rebaptization, the
controversy were at an end with you.

I answer, you here clearly discover your itch after new Answ.
opinions, your joining with the Marcionites and Aetians, who allowed it to be
done at least thrice. I suppose in your next we shall have your Arguments to
prove the lawful fullness of it, which if you do, I beseech you also to show
how often it may be done, whether as often as the Pharis^es used to wash: at least
(because your answers here seem to imply so much) whether it may not be
repeated as often as we should attend upon the preaching of the word, or as often
as we should endeavor to mortify our corruptions? In the mean time I shall
tell you some of the reasons which have hitherto satisfied Vide Vossii Theses
de Anabaptist. R^asons against rebaptization of such as are rightly baptized.
the Orthodox Church in all ages.

First, Baptism is primarily and properly the Sacrament of our new birth, the
washing of regeneration, which is done but once, the Sacrament of our insition
into Christ, which is done but once; the Sacrament of our admission into the
new Covenant, and partaking of the benefits of it, and (although many of those
benefits and privileges are repeated and augmented, yet) we have but one
admission to them.

Secondly, in no place where the Institution of it is named is there any
mention, directly or by consequence, of any repeating of it, nor any order
taken about it; whereas in the other Sacrament, we have a quotiescunque in the
very Institution: nor in any of the thousands baptized in the Scripture is
there the least hint of any example of rebaptization of such as were rightly
baptized, no not though some of them had played the Apostates, as the
Galatians, some of the Corinthians and many others. And me thinks this
Argument should move you whose principle is, that nothing should be done about
the Sacraments, but what we have either institution, or example for.

Thirdly, Baptism succeeds Circumcision, which was but once administered nor to
be administered any more, as is clear to me not only from the total silence
of the Scripture, but out of Josh. 5. 4. etc. where the holy Ghost is pleased
to give this as a reason, why Joshuah Circumcised the Israelites in Gilgall,
viz. because all the Circumcised were dead; intimating that had they been
Circumcised already, it should not have been done again. Beside, by Gods
institution it was tied to the eighth day and unless you can find another
eighth day after the birth beside the first, you will never be able to
justify it from being a breach of the institution.

Fourthly, to this I might add the uncontradicted custom of all the ancient
Church, with whom it was numbered among Heresies to reiterate a Baptism, which
was acknowledged to be valid: Indeed Cyprian and his fellow Bishops baptized
such as had formerly been baptized by Heretics, but it was only because they
thought the Baptism administered by Heretics not to be true Baptism. What
weight these things have with you I know not; the judicious Reader will
consider of them.

But whereas you add that if you saw but as much for baptizing of Infants as
Acts 19. 5. etc. affords for rebaptization, the controversy were at an end
with you; give me leave to tell Answ.
you that I perceive a small Argument would satisfy you if we could but once
gain your good will. As will easily appear by a serious examination of the
sense of that place, Act. 19. which it seems satisfies you for rebaptization.
I Act. 19. 5, 6. vindicated from favoring rebaptiztion.
acknowledge, Interpreters differ very much concerning the meaning of that
Text, but none of their expositions do in any degree favor that opinion, that
such as were once rightly baptized may be rebaptized: which I thus manifest;
very many Interpreters do judge that those twelve Disciples were not baptized
in that place, and they make the fifth Verse, when they heard this they were
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, to be a part of Paul's speech, not of
Lukes the Historian, and then the sense is this, when those twelve men had told
Paul that they were baptized with John's Baptism, Vid. Vossii Theses de
Baptismo Johan. page 402. etc.
Paul took upon him to explain to them what John's Baptism was, namely that
John's ministry did first exhort men to repentance; and then that they should
believe in Christ, who would give all them who believed in him the gift of the
holy Ghost, which after John had sufficiently instructed them in, he then
baptized them in the name of the Lord Jesus, which say they is a
paraphrasticall interpretation of this fifth Verse: and so Paul having approved
the doctrine and Baptism of John, which these twelve Disciples had received,
he did not rebaptize them, but laid his hands upon them, and then the holy
Ghost immediately came upon them. Other Interpreters think, that these words in
the fifth Verse. are the words of Luke the Historian, and that these twelve
Disciples were then baptized after Paul had done his speech; and of these some
conceive that these were first baptized by some of John's Disciples into John's
name, and not into Christ's: and so their baptism was a nullity; or at least, if
they were baptized into Christ's name, yet they were not instructed in the right
faith of the Trinity, of Jesus Christ, his person, gifts; and offices; and so
consequently that their faith and Baptism were deficient in some fundamental
and essential things; and this way go many of the Fathers, and Schoolmen.
Others think they were rightly baptized with John's baptism, and yet were
baptized again by the Apostle Paul; because they think that John's baptism,
and Christ's did really differ; and that the Lord would have them re baptized,
who were baptized with John's baptism only; but not them who were baptized
with Christ's. And this way generally go the Papists: now whichsoever of these
you take, here is no color of rebaptizing of such who were rightly baptized
with Christ's baptism: and indeed, whoever considers the Text, must needs grant
that if they were rebaptized, it was because of the deficiency of the baptism
which they had recieved. Paul demands of them, Have you received the holy Ghost
since you were baptized? They answ. The holy Ghost: what mean you by the holy
Ghost? we never so much as heard whether there be an holy Ghost: No? (says
Paul) what were you then baptized into? what strange kind of baptism have you
received? what Doctrine, or Faith were you instructed in before your baptism?
if you never so much as heard that there is an holy Ghost. Does not this
plainly hold forth, that if they were rebaptized, it was because Paul thought
their former baptism to be insufficient? Truly Sir, I conceive you might easily
be persuaded, that there are at least as good grounds for Infants baptism, as
this Acts 19. affords for re-baptizing of such as have been rightly baptized.

In this 5. Section, I very much wonder at your spirit; the sum of it is,
That although much of what I speak of the To Sect. 5.
Anabaptists in Germany (especially about Munster) is true; Yet you say, 1.
Perhaps vehemence of opposition has made matters more or worse then they were.
2. No marvel though such things happen, when Reformation of abuses is denied
men by an orderly Synodicall way; and the persons who seek it, declaymed
against, and persecuted as Heretics, etc. 3. That the like things, if not the
same, happened among the Non-conformists, and such as sought to remove
Episcopacy and Ceremonies in Queen Elizabeth's days; that some of them grew to
be a dangerous and turbulent Sect: the practice of Hacket, and his companions
proved like that of John a Leiden at Munster. That miscarriages, divisions, and
persecutions brought the Non-conformists of England as low as the Anabaptists.
That Whitgift and Hooker have long ago compared the Non conformists principles
and practices with the Anabaptists, etc.

To which I answer. First, I am confident you show more Answ.
good will to the Anabaptists, then you intend ill will against those worthy men
who have written these Stories: but the things have been done so lately, and so
many agreeing stories are written of them, and by men of such undoubted faith
and honesty, that the things are not to be questioned. And I think you are the
first of our Divines who have suspected them to overlash in their relations.

Secondly, what you mean by denying Reformation to them who seek it in a
Synodicall way, etc. I can hardly guess: whether you intend it to excuse the
Anabaptists in part, and to blame the Reformed Churches, as laying that
stumbling block in their way, by refusing to hear them, or whether you hint
it as a warning to our selves. As for them, I never read that they sought
Reformation in a regular way, or were denied it, before they fell into these
furies. And as for our selves, you are the only man, who has pretended to
seek Reformation (if it may be so called) in this point; the rest of our
Anabaptists seek not The old Nonconformists in Qu. Elizabeth's days, pleading
against Episcopacy and Ceremonies, il compared with the Anabaptists in Germany.
to our Assembly; unless it be to reproach, and load them with scoffs,
libels, threatenings, etc.

Thirdly, but the rest of this Section is to me extremely scandalous, when I
read your odious comparisons between the Non-conformists in Queen Elizabeth's
days, and the Anabaptists in Germany; it even grieves me to consider, whither
affection to your cause does carry you. Sir, are you persuaded in your own
conscience these things are so? The Anabaptists in Germany rose up, and with
fire and sword pulled down Magistracy, Schools, etc. wrought woeful Tragedies
in upper Germany, in M^ravia, Silesia, Helvetin, and elsewhere; did the like if
not the same things happen here? What did the Non-conformists ever endeavor to
do beyond prayers and tears? what turbulent Sect was ever found among them?
what were those divisions and miscarriages which brought them so low? the
persecutions of the Prelates indeed brought them low; but I profess I am
wholly ignorant of any divisions and miscarriages of theirs in that kind:
Hacket indeed was a blasphemous wretch; and he and his two Companions (for no
more there were of them that I can find:) Coppinger, and Arthington made a
noise in the City of London for a few hours. Hacket was taken and hanged for
his blasphemy, his two Companions laid in prison, where one of them dyed, and
the other (I think) was spared in hope of his repentance But what is this to
your purpose? what had Hacket to do with the Nonconformists, who (you know, if
ever you read that Story) abominated him, and would have nothing to do with
him, even before he fell to those prankes he played in London? Or wherein was
Hacket to be compared with John of Leiden, who overthrew Magistracy at
Munster; set up a King of his own Sect; plundered the Town, gave up all to
Polygamies, Adulteries, etc. And lastly for the parallel which you say
Whitgift, and Hooker made between them and the Anabaptists both in principles,
and practices, (under which reproach you leave them, without speaking a word in
their behalf to vindicate them) I answer only this, that I am persuaded your
self believe, that Whitgift and Hooker abused them in these Comparisons: and
what your aim should be in setting it down, I cannot tell; unless it be to
insinuate, that as the good Nonconformists were thus abused by their
Adversaries; so Sleiden, Bullinger, Calvin, etc. are not too much to be
credited in their relations of the Anabaptists, to whom they were professed
adversaries.

In this Sect your quarrel is against Mr. Vines, for suspecting To Sect. 6.
the Anabaptists will endeavor to undermine Magistracy, if they could once get
strength. To which you answer: 1. You take not Mr. Vines for a Prophet. 2. It
follows not, that because they oppose Paedo. Baptism, out of Mat. 28. 19. that
therefore they will oppose Magistracy out of Romans 12. 19. 3. That you will
undertake to make good that to prove Paedo-baptisme from the equity and reason
of Circumcision, does undermine much of the Magistracy and Laws of this
Kingdom. 4. That some of the enemies of Anabaptists have opposed Magistracy.
5. That since the actions of Muncer and Munster, you find neither their
writings nor actions opposing Magistracy. 6. You bring in Cassander a Papist,
speaking moderately of some of them. And to make your Reader think obaritably
of them in this point; You 7. refer them to the Compassionate Samaritan, and
the London Anabaptists late confossion.

I see how diligent and willing an advocate you are for Answ.
your friends, but few of these things will either help you, To 1, 2 Mr. Vines
vindicated.
or endure the trial. It Is true, Mr. Vines is no Divining Prophet. And 2. it
follows not by Logical argumentation, that because they have opposed the one,
therefore they will oppose the other. But Sir, without a Spirit of Divination,
or necessary consequence of reason, when we see clouds gathering, we may
suspect rainy weather; when we Almost all the Errors of the Germane
Anabaptists, lately drunk in in England.
see multitudes of our Anabaptists, especially those of the last edition, to
have drunk in almost all the rest of the dregs of the Germane Anabaptists; (I
say) in a manner all, except that of opposing Magistracy; may we not fear that
even that also would be embraced if they were fit for it? Read over the whole
Gangrene of their opinions recorded by Bullinger, Calvin, and others; and
lately ^pitomized by Cloppenbergius; and see whether among our Anabaptists in
England, they are not almost all to be found: Do not some of ours, as well as
they, hold blasphemous Opinions about the flesh of Christ's? Have not multitudes
of ours swallowed down all Arminianism, as well as they? Plead not some of ours
for the mortality of the soul, as well as they? have not some of ours laid
down their Arms out of opinion that even in a just cause war is unlawful?
have not many of ours drunk in the conceits of immediate revelations and
Enthysiasmes as much as they? do not many of ours conceit a perfection of
grace? do they not oppose the Christian Sabbath? do they not cry down our
Ministry as no Ministry? our Churches as no Churches? Verily one egg is not
more like another then this brood of new opinions (lately hatched in England,
and entertained among them who are called Anabaptists) is like that Spawne
which so suddenly grew up among the Anabaptists in Germany; and ours plead the
same Arguments which theirs did; and if they flow not from the same Logical or
Theological principles, it is yet their unhappy fate to be led by the same
spirit. I confess I yet hear not much of their denying the Magistrates
authority, but if these men should increase to much strength, I will not take
upon me to divine, but I shall pray that Mr. Vines prove not too true a
Prophet, especially considering the nature of erroneous and heretical spirits
is to grow worse and worse, and not at first to vent all their poison; even the
Anabaptists of Munster in the beginning of their Schism set forth a confession
of faith every way as Orthodox as that which you mention of the seven Churches
of the Anabaptists of London, in their Confession mentioned in the latter end
of this Section, as I am credibly informed by a Reverend and Learned Divine,
Mr. Dury.
who has many years ago both seen and read it in Germany.

To your third and fourth I answer, only this, that I shall wait until you
clear them, as being not able out of my To 3. 4.
small judgment and Reading to conjecture either what proofs you can bring
for the one, or example for the other: you who make your self merry with Mr.
Vines his Logic, will show your own to be supereminent when you make this
consequence good, that pleading baptizing of Infants from Circumcision of
Infants, overthrows much of the Magistracy and Laws of England.

But your fifth seems very strange, that you cannot find, that since Munster
and Mun^er the Anabaptists in Germany have either by writing or action made any
opposition against magistracy: as for their actions, they have of old paid so
dear for their insurrections, that we have not lately heard of any new ones;
but for their writings it is most apparent that their books written by them,
even to this day, do constantly defend, that though Magistracy be an Ordinance
of God, as to them who are not under the kingdom and dominion of Christ, yet
Christ has put an end to it among his own people, taken away all Magistracy
from among them, that no Christian can be a Magistrate with a good conscience,
and that if Christians do live under any such, they are to bear them but as
other plagues and judgments are to be borne.

You oppose Cassanders moderate testimony of some of 6.
them to the Duke of Cleave a Papist, against Mr. Vines his speech before the
Lord Major and City of London; Cassander indeed spoke favorably of some of
their persons, but does not excuse or plead for their doctrine or principles;
and Mr. Vines speaks against their doctrine or principles, but speaks nothing
against the persons of any of them: so that I can see no cause of your bringing
in this long testimony out of Cassander, in the favor of Menno and his
followers, but only to show your good will to the Anabaptists, and your
displeasure against Mr. Vines, who differs from your opinion. One thing more I
add concerning this Menno (whom you plead for by Cassanders pen) that his
whole doctrine is as full of blasphemy about our Saviors taking flesh of the
Virgin Mary, and other Heretical and abominable stuff, as the rest of his
fellows, though I think his spirit was not so seditious as many of theirs.

And as to your allegation out of the compassionate Samaritan, which endeavors
to speak all possible good of 7.
such as oppose Presbyteriall government: pleading to obtain an universal
liberty for all their opinions, and practices, and endeavors to brand as
infamous, and cast all manner of filth in the faces of such, as endeavor to
promote it, I leave such Lettice to their lips who like it. And for what you
allege out of the London Anabaptists confession, I acknowledge it the most
Orthodox of any Anabaptists confession that ever I read, (although there are
sundry Heterodox opinions in it) and such an one as I believe thousands of our
new Anabaptists will be far from owning, as any man may be able to say
without a spirit of divination, knowing that their received and usual
doctrines do much more agree with the Anabaptists in Germany, then with this
handful who made this confession here in London.

In your seventh, you first express your good affection To Sect. 7.
to further Reformation; secondly, you propound what in your judgment is the
best way to promote it In the first you are sensible of your ^ath and Covenant,
declare the sincerity of your desires and prayers to promote it according to
the Word of God, etc.

Your desires, and prayers, and intentions are holy, and Answ.
good, well suiting with the report I have often heard of you before I read
this your book; and would the Lord please to draw out those good Talents he
has given you in the most useful way; I conceive you may be a very profitable
instrument in this great work, and I verily think your abilities greater then
many others, whom you suppose to have been employed more eminently then your
self* But pardon me, that I tell you sadly and freely, that the frame of
spirit which the genius of your book shows forth makes me fear the contrary,
you every where manifest such height of selfe-confidence, you power out such
abundance of scorn upon them who think otherwise then you do, you so
magisterially tread under foot the Arguments and Reasons of those who differ
from your opinion, though they appear never so strong or evident to others;
you so boldly call into question some doctrines which few have ever questioned
before you; you so slight the Authority both of ancient and modern writers,
especially in this point, though you know the generality of all Confessions and
Harmonies (except only the Anabaptists) concur in one against you, that
unless God alter your present temper, I suspect this is not the last trouble
you are like to put the Church unto; and I assure you, very many who willingly
acknowledge your learning, and other abilities and are no whit sorry your book
is extant, (because they conceive this controversy may thereby receive a
fuller scanning) are extremely scandalized at your high and scornful spirit.

You propound what you conceive is the best way to promote Reformation, and
your thoughts are, that the 2.
only way to further Reformation is to begin with this your darling, the
casting out this point of Infant Baptism, a point which you conceive to be a
mother corruption, which carries in her womb most of those abuses in
discipline and manners, and some of the errors in doctrine which defile the
reformed Churches, without which all after Cathechizing, Censures, separaton,
Church Covenant, etc. are altogether insufficient to supply the want of it.
Secondly, that Baptism therefore has not that influence into the comfort and
obligations of Consciences as it had of old. And thirdly, that the Assemblies
not beginning with this point is one great cause why Gods blessing does no more
accompany them, whilst they waste much time about things inconsiderable in
comparison of this, and either hastily pass over, or exclude from examination,
this which deserves most to be examined.

Ah Sir, How dear and lovely are our own children in our eyes! did ever any
before you conceive so many and great evils to follow upon the baptizing the
children of Answ.
believers? that such Monsters should be bred in the womb of it, or conceive
that the removing of this would be the healing of all? I verily think, should
another have spoke such things of far greater points, you would have called
them dictates, Chimaraes, bold, assertions, and what not? Whether your Examen
of my Sermon, and your twelve Arguments in your exercitation will prove it to
be a corruption of Christ's institution; whether the reasons for Paedo-Baptisme
be far fetched; whether there be a clear institution of Christ against it. (as
here you affirm) we shall have leisure (God willing) to examine in their due
place: but for the present, suppose me to grant your postul^tum, that it is an
applying of an institution to a wrong subject, yet I would feign learn of you,
how all these odious consequences will be made good, how these abuses in
doctrine, discipline and manners (which you mention) would be taken away if
Paedo-Baptisme were removed; nay would not the self same things still be
found as grounds or occasions of the same differences, while some profess they
would baptize any, whether Turks or Heathens, who only would make a
profession of their faith in Jesus Christ, and then admit them to all other
Ordinances, and not have them Excommunicated e sacris, (but only a private
consortio) though their lives should prove scandalous; (and I am misinformed by
good friends who know and love you very well if your self incline not this
way) others would take the same course before Baptism, which now they do
before admitting men to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and would proceed to
excommunication a Sacris as well as privately withdraw from such as prove
scandalous and obstinate; yea and take themselves bound to separate from mixed
communions with them, as much as they do now, notwithstanding their admission
by Baptism in your way. And in this various manner of admitting men to
Baptism, and dealing with men in other censures, every Church or Eldership
proceeding according to the largeness or strictness of their own principles,
I can see nothing but that the same abuses in discipline and manners which are
now found among Christian people, the same controversies about such as should
be admitted to the Lords Supper, the same divisions and separations would be
sound in the Church, which now (alas!) take too much place amongst us. This I
say, supposing your Postulatum were a truth; But on the contrary supposing it
not to be a truth, what a Deformation instead of a Reformation should we bring
in, in casting the children of Believers out of the visible Church, reputing
them no better then Turks and Indians, and especially doing it upon such
grounds, as are pleaded by you and others; which even alter the state of the
Covenant of grace? As for your second, I know not what influence of comfort or
obligation upon conscience Baptism had of old, which is not now to be found
among them who are truly baptized, who enjoy not only the putting away the
filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ.

And lastly, for what you speak of the Assembly, I impute it to your
prejudice, and extreme doting upon your own opinion, that you think this
Point most worthy of their examination, and to your misinformation (to speak
no worse) that they waste much time about things inconsiderable in comparison,
or that they exclude this from Examination, or seek to stop it from any
Trial, or that they hastily pass it over; This is a very bold charge which
you give upon the Assembly in the face of the world: What evidence have you for
this? unless your Compassionate Samaritan be Authentic with you? The Apostle
commands Timothy not to receive an accusation against an Elder unless it be
under two or three witnesses. But for one man to cast thus much filth in the
face of an Assembly of Ministers is very high, and savours little of that
modesty or meekness to which you did sometimes pretend. How far the blessing
of God (who has not hitherto altogether left us, notwithstanding our
unworthines) does and will accompany the endeavors of the Assembly; it is fit
to leave to himself, who gives increase to Paul's planting and Apollo's
watering according to his good pleasure. But as for their shutting out the due
examination of this Point, you are wholly mistaken (though they have returned
no answer to your paper.) It is true (as I told you in the beginning) that we
are shut up by Ordinance of Parliament from answering any private men's Papers
or Books without leave from the Houses; but I dare speak it in the name of
the whole Assembly, that they would be glad you were admitted to dispute all
your grounds among them.

In your next Paragraph which contains a comparison Sect. 8.
betweeve the evidences held out in the New Testament for the Religious
observation of the Lords day, and this of Infant Baptism, you first make your
self merry with my expressions, that all who reject the baptizing of Infants,
because there is not an express Institution or Command in the New Testament,
do and must upon the same grounds reject the observation of the Lord's Day. But
I am no whit ashamed of those words. They do, and they must upon the same
Principles (if they be true to their Principles) reject the one as well as the
other. And though I want the skill which some others have to plead for the
Lord-day; yet I suppose you shall find I have skill enough to make this good,
That there is no more express Institution or Command in the New Testament for
the Lords day then there is for Infant Baptism. And whereas you allege that
some of the reformed Churches reject the Lords day, and yet entertain
Infant Baptism, and thence infer that these two must not necessari'y stand
and fall, be received and rejected together. I answer, Those Churches which
do so conceive that there is an institution for the Baptizing of Infants, but
none for the observation of the ^ords day, although herein I humbly conceive
they are mistaken, I doubt not but it does and will appear to impartial and
unprejudiced Readers, that there is sufficient evidence of an Institution for
both of them, though not in such express Texts of Scripture in the
New Testament as the Anabaptists require, and I shall now examine whether you
bring any better evidence for the one, then is to be found for the other.

First, you say, they mean it of positive worship, consisting in outward
rites, and not of worship which is natural or moral.

Answ. But this but a blind, moral and natural are not to be confounded;
whatever worship is natural may be indeed acknowledged to be moral, but not
whatever is moral is to be esteemed natural: I know you cannot be ignorant
of the received distinction of Morale Natural, and Morale positivum, and I
beseech you, though a Sabbath be grant^d to be Natural, yea if I should add,
that one day in the revolution of seven should be so; yet that this or that
seventh day in the revolution of a week should be observed, all grant this
depends upon an Institution, and has no more morality in it then what can be
made out from an Institution, and consequently, that the first day of the week
should be the Christian Sabbath, or that this one day of seven which God has
separated to himself and had once expressly fixed upon the seventh or last day
of the week, should be translated from the last day to the first day of the
week, must depend wholly upon an Institution, and consequently they who reject
that which depends upon positive Institution, unless its Institution can be
expressly found in the New Testament are as much at a loss for the Lords day,
as for the baptizing of Infants.

Nay give me leave to add, that in this point in question, the advantage lies
more on this hand, (I mean for Infant Baptism) because there is more
necessity of clearing the Institution for the Lords day, then for baptizing of
Infants, because in the one the ordinance it self, and its institution is
questioned, but in this of Infant Baptism, the question is not of the
Institution of the Ordinance it self, but only of the subject to whom the
Ordinance is to be applied. If the question be betwixt Baptism and the Lords
day, all grant that we have clearer Institution for the Sacrament of Baptism,
then for the Lords day: Baptism is clearly instituted in the New Testament to
be the Sacrament of our admission into the Covenant of grace, and to succeed
in the room of Circumcision, (as your self grant.) Now the only question is,
whether (taking this for granted) that baptism succeeds in the room of
Circumcicision, and to be applied unto all persons by the will of God who are
in Covenant with him, whether the same persons may partake of this Sacrament,
as might partake of the other, unless those persons be expressly set down in
the New-Tement; I hope in the judgment of all indifferent men, a question
about the persons to whom an ordinance is to be applied, is a question of a
far inferior nature to that question, whether such a thing pretended to be
an Ordinance have any Institution at all or not. It Is one thing to invent a new
Ordinance of worship, another (and that of inferior rank) to mistake in some
of the persons to whom an Ordinance is to be applied. In some of the ancient
times the Lords Supper was given to Infants, and carried to sick persons when
absent, to testify their communion with the Church: I take them both for
errors, but yet not for errors of the like nature with inventing a new
Sacrament; I say again, there is a great difference between bringing in a new
Ordinance, and applying it to these or these persons, especially, when the
question is not of the persons in general, who are the subject matter, (as
whether men or Angels, men or beasts) but whether men of such an age or of such
a Sex. Sir, to my best understanding, these two questions are not parallel, a
just parallel question to this of Infant Baptism would be such a one as was
once disputed betwixt Mr. Bifield and Mr. Brerewood, viz. Taking it for
granted, that by a clear Institution, the Lords day succeeds in the room of
the old Sabbath, whether yet the same persons are tied to keep the Lords day,
who of old were tied to keep the Sabbath, unless those parties were mentioned
in the New Testament, as whether servants as well as their masters, the same
holds here.

All this I speak not as any whit doubting that there is as clear evidence
for Baptizing of Infants, as there is for the religious observation of the
Christian Sabbath, notwithstanding the latter seems to require fuller evidence
then this does.

Your second explication gives you as little advantage, you say that
Apostolical example which has not a me^re temporary reason, is enough to
prove an Institution from God, to which that practice does relate, especially
when such examples come to be backed with the constant practice of all
Churches in all ages. And then you bring in Paul's preaching at Troa^, the
collections upon the first day of the weeks in the first of the Corinthians and
the sixteenth, the mentioning of the Lords day, Revel. 1.

Sir, I except against none of all this to be a part of that good evidence
which we have for the religious observation of the Lords day, but I dare
confidently speak it, that out of these you can never evince more (laying all
things together) to prove the Institution of the Lords day, then I have done
for the lawfulness of baptizing of Infants; and I appeal to all learned
Readers, whether the many books written of late against the Institution of the
Lords day, give not as specious and plausible answers to these places alleged
by you concerning the Christian Sabbath, as yours are against Infant Baptism
(although they have received sufficient clear and solid answers) yea and tread
under their feet all arguments taken from these examples, with as much
confidence and scorn, as your self do that which I and others have named for
Paedo-Baptisme. And as for the supplement which you bring out of the constant
practice of the Churches for the religious observation of the Lords day in
stead of the old Sabbath: I earnestly desire you in your next to produce as
many of the ancients to bear witness to that truth, as I have done in this
point for Paedo-Baptisme, and I promise you, you shall receive my hearty thanks
among the rest of your Readers; in the mean time the Reader shall judge
whether I have not brought a moity of that for the Baptizing of Infants, which
you have done for the Lords day.

Further, whether you have not abused your reader in so confident averring that
there are no footsteps in Antiquity for Paedo-Baptisme, till the erroneous
conceit of giving Gods grace by it, and the necessity of it, to save an Infant
from perishing some hundreds of years after Christ's Incarnation, is easily to
be seen by what I have at large produced in the former part of this treatise.

Lastly, your tedious discourse of that dangerous principle of framing
additions to Gods worship by Analogies of our own^ making without warrant from
Gods Word; I desire you to apply it to them who do so, I no further make use of
it, then I find Gods Word to go along with me: Whether believers Infants are
confederates with their parents in the Covenant of Grace, comes afterward to
be examined; the rest of this Section being carping at a phrase or expression
which your self grant being taken cum grano salis, may pass with a candid
Reader, I pass over as worthy of no further answer, only I add this one
word, that though it be not safe to reason barely from events of things, yet
it well becomes us thankfully to take notice of Gods blessing upon his own
Ordinance, and the more earnestly to contend for that which God is pleased so
mercifully to accompany with his grace.

In your ninth Section you concur with me in condemning To Sect. 9.
it as a wicked practice to separate from ministry and communion in Ordinances,
by reason of this difference in opinion, and that the making of Sects upon
these grounds is contrary unto Christian Charity: and I as willingly concur
with you in what you say in the latter part of this Section, that godly
Ministers and other Christians should not by harsh usage of their brethren in
stirring up hatred in Magistrates and people against them, cast strumbling
blocks in their way, thereby to alienate dissenting brethren from them: but for
what you say in the middle of this Section, that this is not the evil of
Anti-paedo-baptisme; I answer, I conceive it flows from the principles which
most of the Anti-paedo-baptists do conceive (though possibly all (and your
self for one have not wholly embraced them) for if you please to take and to
compare these three principles of theirs together. First, members are added to
the Church by Baptism, and not otherwise. Secondly, that such as are not
baptized according to Christ's Institution, their Baptism is a nullitie.
Thirdly, that because the Baptism of Infants is not clearly held out in the
New Testament, it is therefore not warranted by Christ's Institution, but
contrary to it, and then tell me what follows less then this, that none so
baptized are Churchmembers, and consequently can perform no acts of
Churchmembers, and that therefore our Churches are no true Churches, our
Ministry can be no true Ministry, and therefore a necessity of separation
from us. What you add in the end of this Section, that a passage in one of my
Sermons about the hedge which God has set about the second Commandment has
been one cause of your startling at this point of Paedo-Baptisme. I answer,
only this, had you not bin startled before, there is nothing in that speech
could have moved you; and when once you have manifested that Baptizing of
Infants does break down the hedge which God has made about the second
Commandment, I shall be startled with you, and not till then.

In your tenth and last Section, wherein you undertake to answer that passage
in my Sermon, that the opinion To Sect. 10.
of the Anabaptists puts all the Infants of believers into the selfsame
condition with Turks and Infidells, you answer several things: wherein I
plainly perceive you cannot deny what I affirm, and yet you are loath to
grant it: you say, first, Cyprian with his 66. Bishops does the same, which I
have forinerly showed will not follow out of the words of of that Epistle:
secondly, you say, Mr. Rathband pleading that such Children whose Ancestors in
any generation were faithful may lawfully be accounted within Gods Covenant,
grants the same also. But this no ways follows without extreme wracking
those words in any Generation. I suppose your self does not think those
words, Exodus 20. 5. were intended to intimate that all the children in the
world, who came from Adam or Noah were included in the Covenant of grace, nor
do I conceive you believed Mr. Rathband to think so. For your own opinion
you declare it thus; 1. You know no warrant to think election to reach
believers children more then unbeleevers children. 2. You know no more promise
for them then for the children of unbeleevers. 3. All the likelihood there is,
that they belong to Gods election rather then Turks and Infidels, to be,
because they have their parents and the Churches prayers, some general and
conditional promises, and enjoy the benefit of good instruction and example,
which puts them into a nearer possibility to be believers and saved, and
experience shows God frequently continues his Church in their posterity. But
this you dare not ground upon any promise made unto believers as such, for
store you should incur blasphemy by challenging a promise which God does not
keep: in that many of the posterity of godly parents prove very wicked.

To all which I answer, first, in general, that to my understanding you here
clearly yield the Infants of believers to be in the same condition in
reference to the Covenant of grace, which the Infants of Turks and Indians are
in, no more promise for the one then for the other: which so often as you
consider, me thinks your fatherly bowels to your own children should be
moved within you. Secondly, I answer, first, to that of election, your own
speech that experience showing that God frequently continues his Church among
believers posterity, should be one argument to make you think Gods election
lies more among them then among others, though we can be certain of no one
of them in particular. Secondly, what promises are made to believers children
more then to Turks, and whether Abraham's promise reach them, shall God willing
be scand in its proper place. Thirdly, as to that which you say, that the
children of believers are in a more hopeful way, because of their parents
prayers, instructions, examples, etc. and some general and conditional
promises which puts them in a more possibility; I answer, this is nothing to
the children which die in their Infancy, nor secondly, any more then children
of Pagans enjoy, whose lot may fall to be educated by Christians, but no more
promise by your doctrine for the one then the other. Thirdly, whereas you
affirm that General, Indefinite, and Conditional promises do prove that
there is a more comfortable likelihood that the children of believers are
elected by God rather then the children of Turks. I reply, 1. You do not
express what those promises are. 2. I wonder that you should infer election
from conditional promises. Did God ever say that if you will perform these
and these conditions, then I will regenerate you, give you a new heart, and put
my spirit within you? 3. If the promise of regeneration be not conditional
then you must say that there is some comfortable likelihood that such Infants
may be elected though they are not regenerated, for if there be any thing
less then regeneration promised, sure there can be no comfortable likelihood
of the election of a child gathered from a promise of any thing which leaves a
child in an unregenerate estate. But I much admire that speech of yours, where
you fear you should incur blasphemy by challenging a promise which God does
not keep, because many of the children of believers prove wicked; I beseech
you tell me, was it not so among Abraham's posterity? and yet you grant Abraham
had a peculiar promise which we have not; might not they without blasphemy
plead that promise, notwithstanding that promise, I will he the God of thee and
thy seed, was not made good to every one of them? for it is most clear by the
Apostles discourse in the ninth and eleventh Chapters to the Romans, that God
was not the God of thousands of Abraham's seed, either in respect of saving
grace, or outward privileges, for he cast off the Jews from being his people,
and suffered them not to enjoy so much as outward privileges, but made choice
of the Gentiles in their stead; and yet I hope you will not say that God broke
his Covenant with those that had the seal of the Covenant in their flesh; and
yet were rejected not only from saving grace, but from outward privileges.

Next let us see how you avoid being goared by the three horns of my
Syllogism. I said, all being left in the same condition, 1. All must be saved.
Or 2. all must be damned. Or 3. God saves some of the Infants of the Turks,
and some of the Infants of believers pro beneplacito. After some discourse of
the two first of these, you deny the consequence: It follows not (say you) God
may save some, and those some may be the Infants of believers, and none of the
Infants of Turks and Indians. It Is true, a man that will may venture to say so;
and if another will, he may venture to say, That those some, are the Infants of
Pagans, and not of Christians: and he that should say so, has as good warrant
for this, as you have for the other, according to your principle. But what is
this to the question before us? I said, This opinion leaves them all in the
like condition; One having no more reference to a promise then another. Now if
you will avoid being goared by any of these three horns, you should have
showed, that according to your opinion, there is some promise for some of the
Infants of believers, though there be none for the Infants of Pagans. But in
stead of showing how your doctrine and opinion leaves them: you tell me what
God may possibly do in his secret Counsel, which is altogether unknown to
us. But I perceive your self suspected this answer would not endure the
trial: and therefore you quarrel at that expression of mine, That if any of
the Infants, of such as live and die Pagans be saved by Christ; then salvation
by Christ is earryed out of the Church, whereof God has made no promise.
Against this you except; 1. That salvation is not carried out of the invisible
Church; though some Infants of Pagans should be saved by Christ. I answer,
it is true; and I add, That if any man shall say, the Devils should be saved by
Christ: even that Opinion would not carry salvation out of the invisible
Church. But Sir, we are enquiring after the salvation of them to whom a promise
of salvation is made. Now when you can prove that God has made a promise, that
he will gather a number, or has a number whose names are written in the Lambs
book, although their Parents never knew Jesus Christ, nor themselves ever live
to be instructed, you may then persuade your Reader to believe, that even some
of the Infants of Pagans dying in their Infancy belong to the invisible Church:
and till then, you must give him leave to believe that this answer is brought
in as a shift, only to serve your present need.

Secondly, you answer, That men may be saved out of the communion of the
visible Church; and you instance Abraham called out of Chaldea; Job in the Land
of Vz; Rahab in Jericho: and you say, He that called these, may save some
amongst Turks and Indians out of the visible Church. I answer, I hope in your
next, you will a little better explain your meaning: The Reader will certainly
take this to be your meaning: that as Abraham, Job, and Rahab, were saved out
of the communion of the visible Church in their days: so some among the Turks
and Indians may be saved out of the communion of the visible Church in our
days. But surely this is not your meaning, you do not believe, that Abraham,
Job, and Rahab were out of the communion of the visible Church, though possibly
the manner of their calling might be extraordinary, as afterward St. Paul's
was. Nor do you believe that the Eunuch when he was returned into Ethiopia was
out of the Communion of the visible Church; though his habitation (at least for
a^ while) was not among Christians but Infidels. I am persuaded that you think
all visible believers to be within the Communion of the visible Church, though
possibly they may be hindered from being actual Members of any particular
Church. I will not so much as imagine that you mentioned these three examples,
as a Blind to deceive your uncautelous Reader: and therefore I only desire you
in your next, to let us know your meaning plainly: and discover to us this
mystery, how men may be called to fellowship with Jesus Christ, and yet have
no communion with the visible Church of Christ.

The rest of this Section, wherein you enquire what those promises are which
are are made to the seed of believers, I shall (God willing) give you an
account of them in the next part of the Sermon, whither now you call me; only
I cannot but take notice of your confident brag in the close of this Section,
how manfully you have entered my outworkes, and thereby encourage your self to
scale my walls: You indeed entered, and set up your flag, but I hope it appears
to the indifferent Reader that you are in no great probability of getting any
great spoil, unless my walls prove weaker then the outworke, which as yet are
far from being taken by you.

PART III.
NOw we come to that wherein I rightly placed the strength of my cause, the
evidence which the Scripture gives Defense of the third part of Sermon. Reply
to Sect 1. Of the connection between the Covenant, and Seal.
for Infant Baptism: which before I proceed in the examination of, I briefly
propound to the Readers consideration, that you have this advantage to make
your work have a specious probability, in that the question is concerning
Infants, concerning whom there is much silence in the Scripture, and should any
man argue against the justification of Infants, by the Theological doctrine
that is to be found clear in the Scripture, how specious a plea might he
make, especially if his disputation should be carried as yours is altogether
in the way of making exceptions against arguments, but not positively affirming
any thing? But notwithstanding, by the help of God, I hope clearly to
vindicate my arguments from your exceptions.

My first Argument was, the Infants of believing parents are faederati,
therefore they must be signati, they are within the Covenant of Grace,
therefore are to partake of the Seal of the Covenant.

This Argument, because I knew the terms of the propositions and the reasons
of the consequents would not be clear at the first propounding, I therefore
made no further prosecution of until first I had cleared five conclusions The
consequence of the argument made good.
from which it receives not only its light, but strength, and from which it
ought not to be separated, because in them I both prove a Covenant and sign
initiall, this, first you assault singly, and denying both the propositions you
try your strength in this Section against the consequence, and affirm that
they who deny the consequence do it justly, because (say you) if they who are
faederati must be signati, it must be so either by reason of some necessary
connection between the terms, or by reason of Gods will declared concerning
the Covenant of Grace: but for neither of these causes; first, there is no
necessary consequence that God gives a promise, ergo he must give a seal, or a
special sign, Joshuah had none for his promise of bringing Israel into
Canaan; Phinehas none for his, for the Priesthood to continue in his family;
nor secondly, by any declaration of Gods will, Adam, and all the rest to
Abraham had none, yea, and in Abraham's time Melchisedeck, Lot, Job; and for
Abraham's family there was no such universal order or declaration of Gods will,
for children under eight days old, and all the females had no such command,
and therefore to have sealed them, would have been will worship, and so you
conclude here and in many other places of your book, that it is not being
foederati in Covenant which gives title to the seal, but only the declaration
of Gods will to have it so.

To which I answer clearly, and first in general. That concerning the truth
of this consequence, the difference between Reply. The consequence proved by
Mr. Tombs own principle.
you and me is not so much as you would make the world believe, we differ
indeed in the interpretation of the word faederati, about what is meant by
being in Covenant. I assert, that many are to be reputed to belong to the
Covenant of grace, and in some sense to be Covenanters though they be not
partakers inwardly of the saving graces of the Covenant, for the Covenant of
grace contains not only saving grace, but the administration of it also in
outward Ordinances, and Church privileges, and that according to Gods own
word many are Covenanters with him, or in some sense under the Covenant of
grace, who are partakers only of the outward administrations and Church
privileges; you allow none to be under the Covenant of grace in any true
Gospel sense, but only such as are inwardly believers, justified, sanctified,
and partakers of the saving graces of the Covenant. Whether of us are in the
right, shall (God willing) be tried out in this dispute; but as to the truth of
the consequence, That all who are in the Covenant of grace, ought therefore to
be partakers of the seal: you acknowledge more then once, or twice, or ten
times; for though you every where dispute that God has made no declaration of
his will concerning baptizing of Infants, yet rotundis verbis, you profess
that if you knew an Infant to be regenerate, you would baptize it. And when I
said, Such as have the inward grace, ought not to be denied the outward sign:
You answer, There is none of the Antipaedobaptists but will grant that
proposition to be true, page 142. And the present state of a person is that
which gives right to baptism, page 158. It Is granted that (such Infants) such
as are inwardly sanctified are disciples, and may not be debarred from
baptism; mark, Infants disciples; and is not this in plain English, That such
as are Covenanters, ought not to be denied the initiall seal of the covenant;
Now then, if I can prove that not only such as are inwardly regenerate, but
others also, whether Infants or grown men are to be reputed to belong to the
Covenant, and that an external visible right (in facie visibilis Ecclesiae)
may be made out for any person or persons, to be by us owned and received as
Covenanters with God, you your self grant that the seal may be applied to
them; and whether this be so, or not, shall (God willing) afterward fully
appear.

Secondly, I answer more particularly; 1. I grant with you that there is no
necessary dependence between a promise and a seal, the addition of a seal to
a promise is of free grace, as well as the promise it self; and if God had
never given any Sacrament or seal of his Covenant, we should have had no cause
to complain of him, he well deserves to be believed upon his bare word. Nor 2.
did I ever think that by Gods revealed will this Proposition was true in all
ages of the Church; All Covenanters must be sealed, I carried it no higher
then Abraham's time, when God first added this new mercy to his Church,
vouchsafing a seal to the Covenant: And 3. from Abraham's time and so forward, I
say it was Gods will, that such as are in Covenant should be sealed with the
initiall seal of the Covenant, supposing them only capable of the seal, and
no special bar put in against them by God himself, which is apparent in the
very first institution of an initiall seal, Genesis 17. 7, 9, 10, 14. Where the
very ground why God would have them sealed is because of the Covenant, I will
establish my Covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee in their
generations for an everlasting Covenant to be a God to thee and thy seed after
thee: thou shall keep my Covenant therefore; and this is my Covenant which ye
shall keep, every man child among you shall be circumcised; and afterward in
the 14. the seal is, by a Metonymia called the Covenant, for that it is
apparent not only that God commanded them who were in Covenant to be
circumcised, but that they should therefore be circumcised because of the
Covenant, or in token of the Covenant between God and them; and he that
rejected or neglected the seal, is said not only to break Gods commandment,
but his covenant: so that because the initiall Seal was added to the Covenant,
and such as received it, received it as an evidence of the Covenant, or because
they were in Covenant: I therefore concluded, that by Gods own will, such as
enter into Covenant ought to receive the seal, supposing still that they were
capable of it. So that to lay Circumcifion upon Gods command, and the Covenant
of grace too, are well consistent together; for the command is the cause of the
existence of the duty; but the Covenant of grace is the motive to it. 4.
Whereas you allege concerning Melchisedeck, Lot, Job; we find no such thing
that they either received this seal of circumcision, Answ. to Melchisedeck,
Job. and ^et.
or were tied to it. I reply, it is very hard for you to prove that Melchisedeck
was then alive; and had he been alive, he was of an higher Order, and above
that Paedagogie. Or in what age of the world Job lived, though he be thought
to be of the posterity of Esau, and so might have a right to it (even in your
sense) as descending lineally from Abraham; however this is a mere negative
Argument in matter of fact, which your self know to be of no validity;
Negative arguments from Scripture are good in matters of faith. I am not bound
to believe this or that, unless it be found in the Scriptures; but they are
not good in matter of fact; this or that fact is not recorded in the Scripture,
therefore I am bound to believe it was not done, is no good consequence; A non
scripto ad non factum non valet consequentia. No Scripture says they were
circumcised, (though very good Authors think that Lot and Job were
circumcised,) nor does any Scripture say they were not circumcised.

As to that you say of Infants under eight days old, and of all the females in
Abraham's family. I answer to that of Infants, And to Infants under eight days
old.
there was a peculiar exemption of them by God himself, whether for any
typical reason, or in regard they were not fit in nature to undergo so sharp
a pain as was to be endured in Circumcision, before the seventh and critical
day was past, or whether for any other cause, I dispute not; it is sufficient,
God forbad them to have the seal till they were eight days old. For the
women, they were not Women not capable of Circumcision.
subjectum capax circumcisionis, there was in them a natural impediment
against it, therefore could not be enjoined them: and suppose some men among
them, or some who turned proselytes to them had not had a praeputium (as some
sort of Eunuchs) this Ordinance had not reached them; whether the wisdom of
God purposely chose a sign that Women might not be capable of receiving it,
for some typical use, as some conjecture: I cannot tell, it is sufficient that
they were not capable of it, and were exempted from it by God himself: so that
if you please to state the general Proposition, as you needs must, That all
who since Abraham's time are foederati, or covenanters with God, must by Gods
own appointment receive the seal of admission into covenant, unless they be
either incapable of it, or are exempted by a particular dispensation: This
proposition will endure all the shock of your arguments, and remain unmovable.

Next you reply to my answer concerning Women among Women circumcised in the
men, vindicated.
the Jews, I said they were circumcised in the males: this you cast away with
scorn, affirming it to be an easy answer, because it is easy to be answered.
Indeed Sir, you answer it as easily as he who undertook to answer Bellarmine
in one word, and said, Bellarmine thou lie: so you, it is an insufficient
answer to take away the exception against the proposition, and that you might
have a little matter to work upon, you go to another part of my Sermon, and
thence you fetch the word virtually, with which you make your self merry
putting my proposition into several shapes and forms; and in one form (you
say) it concludes not the thing in question; in another, it has 4 terms; in
another, the major is false. Whereas my plain meaning was, and is, that the
women being incapable of it in their own person, because of their sex, wherein
was a natural impediment, as to this Sacrament, God imposed it only upon the
Males, and yet the women were not esteemed as uncircumcised, being (as Divines
use to express in this point) viris annexae and in iis censerentur qui
familiarum capita debebant esse; and whether this will not be justified, we
shall presently inquire. But first give me leave to observe by the way how you
pinch me with a point of law, That no man can be said virtually to have that by
his Proxy or Attorney, which he might not actually receive himself in his own
person. I question whether this be good law, but I am confident it is bad
Divinity; sure we sinned virtually in Adam, yet we could not actually, though
that sin of Adam be ours by imputation. The sun is virtually hot, yet
Philosophers say it is not actually. And the Jews of old offered to God such
things by the hands of the Priests who were their Proxies in that work which
they might not offer in their own persons: yea, and received such things by the
hand of the high Priest (who bare their names in the most holy place) which
they might not receive in their own persons immediately: and the Saints now in
this world do virtually, and quoad effectum juris, receive some such
privileges in Christ their Advocate, who in their right, is at Gods right
hand, which here they are not capable of receiving immediately in their own
persons. I also obiter desire you to remember this expression of yours, That it
had been a sin for a child to have been circumcised after the eighth day was
past. And try how you will reconcile this with an opinion of yours delivered
elsewhere; viz. That circumcision might be administered oftener then once;
surely those other times must be after the first eighth day.

The other fault you note in my argument, is, That I conclude of a sign of the
Covenant indefinitely, and not of Baptism only; whereas the Lords Supper is
also a sign of the Covenant; which yet you think I will say is not to be
delivered to them, because not appointed for them: I answer, I clearly in my
Sermon showed this Proposition only to be meant of the initiall sign, and not
of the other; and I am confident your self, who durst baptize an Infant known
to you to be regenerate, durst not yet give the other Sacrament to it* because
more is required to make one capable of that Sacrament, then is required to
make them capable of Baptism: a regenerate Infant you think is capable of
this: but besides regeneration, I am sure you will grant, That an examination
of a man's self, and an ability to discern^ the Lords body, is required to make
one capable of that.

Now let us see how you avoid my proofs, That the Women were circumcised in
the men. My first was, That the whole house of Israel are in the Scripture said
to be circumcised. You answer, That by the whole house of Israel must not be
meant all, but the major part, or the most confiderable part. But Sir, do you
imagine that any of your judicious Readers can Circumcised not put for the
major or nobler part.
be satisfied with this answer, when (you know well enough) that the
Circumcision is put for the Church and people of God, in opposition to the
uncircumcised that is, all the rest of the world who are not the people of God.
When Peter was to go to the Circumcision, and Paul to the Gentiles to preach
the Gospel; does not circumcision include the Women Jews, as much as the men,
in opposition to the Gentiles; as well as the word Gentiles includes the women
Gentiles as well as the men, to whom Gal. 2. 8.
Paul was sent? Gal. 2. 8. 9. Surely it must needs be granted, that not only
the major, or nobler part, but the whole Nation of the Jews, both men and
women are there meant by Circumcision, which could not have been, if in some
sense they were not to be accounted Circumcised.

Secondly, I argued thus, No uncircumcised person might eat the Passover:
Ergo, Their women might not have eaten it, if in some sense they had not been
circumcised. Your answer is, This is to be limited pro subjecta materia, none
that ought to be circumcised might eat the Passover, unless they were
circumcised. But this answer is altogether insufficient. For, 1. Where is this
distinction of yours found, or founded in the Word of God? other distinctions
about eating the Reply.
Passover, are clearly found, the clean might eat it, the unclean might not
eat it, the circumcised might, the uncircumcised might not: but of your
limitation there is altum silentium.

2. I demand further, where is there any command or institution for women to
eat the Passover, (more then No warrant for women to eat the Passover,
unless they were to be esteemed circumcised.
for Women now to eat the Lords Supper,) unless it be founded upon
Circumcision? yet in practice we know they did eat it; and if they eat it not
as ci^cumcised persons, tell me by what right they did it. If you say they were
included in the household, Exodus 12. 3, 4. Every household was to eat the
Paschall Lamb, and there was no exception of women. I reply, first, grant but
the same consequence, that when we read so frequently in the new Testament,
that whole households were baptized, and no exception of children, that
therefore all the children in those households were baptized, and this
controversy is quickly ended But I add further, it is not said that the whole
household shall eat it, for all uncircumcised persons were forbidden to eat it,
and none but circumcised persons had any warrant to eat it. Yea further,
suppose some words in the institution should reach the Jewish women, yet how
does it reach the women Gentiles, who should prove Proselytes to them? for
Exodus 12. 48, 49. there is order taken for the male stranger, Let all his males
be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it; but there is not any
word that takes order for the strangers females. I hope by this time it appears
that your exceptions against the consequence of my Argument have no weight,
they are foederati; therefore they are to be signati.

Next come we to examine the truth of the Antecedent which I manifested in
those five Conclusions opened in my Reply to Sect. 2.
Sermon: The first whereof is this, That the Covenant of Grace, for substance,
has always been one and the same, both to The Covenant of grace always one
and the same.
the Jews and Gentiles. This first conclusion you grant; and therefore there
were no need to have stayed the Reader any further about it; were it not that
some of your exceptions do almost recall your grant: If it be in substance
the same, though you should reckon up a thousand accidental and local
differences, it were nothing to the purpose: but the first does almost recall
it; wherein you charge me to carry the narration of the Covenant made with
Abraham, Genesis 17. as if it did only contain the Covenant of Grace in Christ;
whereas it is apparent (say you) out of the Text, that the Covenant was a mixed
Covenant, consisting of temporal benefits, the multiplying of Abraham's seed,
possession of Canaan, the birth of Isaac, besides the spiritual blessings. To
which I reply, I meant so indeed, and so I plainly expressed my self, that all
the difference betwixt the Covenant then made with Abraham, and the Covenant
made with us, lies only in the manner of the administration of the Covenant,
and not in the The Covenant with Abraham no more mixed for substance then the
Covenant with us.
Covenant it self. The Covenant it self in the substance of it holds out the
same mercies, both spiritual and temporal, to them, and to us: Godliness
having all the promises both of this life, and that which is to come; and that
they, and we have our right to all these promises upon the self same
condition: earthly things indeed were to them promised more distinctly and
fully, heavenly things more generally and springly then they are now to us; and
on the contrary, spiritual things are more fully and clearly promised to us
then to them; and earthly promises more generally and sparingly: And that these
temporal benefits which you mention, viz. multiplying of Abraham's seed, the
birth of Isaac, and possession of Canaan were all of them administrations of
the Covenant of grace, they were figures, signs, and types of spiritual
things to be enjoyed both by them and us. These things I not only asserted,
but proved in my Sermon. If you think otherwise of these earthly blessings, I
desire you to explain your meaning in your next. If you mean no more then this
that all these temporal blessings were promised and given as flowing from the
promise of Christ, and were subservient to it, or were but types and shadows
of it, you mean no more then what we all grant, who yet deny any more mixture
in the Covenant made with Abraham for the substance of it then there is in that
made with us: and that the difference lies only in the manner of
administration. But I confess I suspect you have a further meaning, not only
because you here mention the temporal blessings before the spiritual, and
call the land of Canaan the Covenant made with Abraham, but especially that
expression which you own from Cameron, that Circumcision did primarily seal
the temporal promise, and signified sanctification but secondarily; what your
meaning is in this expression, I cannot tell, it has an untoward look, as if
the meaning were, that God did primarily and chiefly, in a Covenant of Grace
founded in Christ (wherein himself promises to be their portion) intend in
the seal of it to ratify temporal blessings which only concerns vitam
animalem; now that the Seal (I say) of this Covenant should primarily, and
chiefly give evidence to such a porton which a people may enjoy, with whom God
Circumcision sea^ed the spiritual part of the Covenant.
never made a Covenant to be their God, is so gross a thing to imagine of God,
and so expressly contrary to the word, that until you own it, I will not
impute it to you, although I know the Anabaptists in Germany shame not to say,
that the Covenant made with Abraham was a mere carnal thing, and had nothing
to do with eternal life. As for that expression of the learned Cameron that
Circumcision did primarily seal the earthly promise, etc. if by primarily he
meant immediately, though not chiefly, that it sealed these things first in
order, as they were types of spiritual things, it may then pass ^um gran^
salis, but if by primarily be intended principally, that Circumcision did
chiefly seal earthly blessings, the opinion is too unsavory to be received:
and whereas he, (and you with him) say that Circumcision did thus primarily
seal the earthly part of the Covenant, I desire to know of you what Scripture
ever made Circumcision a Seal of Canaan; we have express Scripture that it
sealed the righteousness of faith, whereby he was justified, but I no where
read that i^ sealed the Land of Canaan. Whereas you say, though the promises
were types of spiritual and heavenly things, yet the things promised were but
carnal and earthly, as the sacrifices were but carnal things, though shadows
of spiritual: I reply, all this is true, but this belongs to the
administration of the Covenant (as was said before) but makes it never a whit
the more a mixed Covenant for the substance of it; the Covenant then was more
administered by carnal things then it is now, and yet the administration of the
Covenant even now also has some carnal promises, and privileges as well as
then, as the external ordinances of the Gospel, Baptism and the Lords
Supper; and we as well as they have in the Covenant of grace, the promise of
this life, and of that which is to come: and so you may, if you will, call ours
also a mixed Covenant, consisting both of temporal and spiritual blessings;
and as among them some who were in Covenant did partake only of the temporal
part, and never were partakers of the spiritual, others of them were partakers
of the spiritual part also; even so now, some partake of the external and
carnal part only, whilst others partake of both: this you must grant to be
true, unless you will maintain that none are now members of the visible
Church, but only Elect and true believers.

Secondly, you except against me that when I said the manner of administration
of this Covenant was first by types, shadows, and sacrifices, etc. it had
been convenient to have named Circumcision, that it might not be conceived to
belong to the substance of the Covenant: I reply, first, this is a very small
quarrel, I added, etc. which supplies both Circumcision and other things.
Secondly, you know the Covenant of grace was administered by sacrifices and
other types before Circumcision was instituted.

Thirdly, whereas I said there were some Proselytes in the Jewish Church who
were but selfe-justiciaries, carnal and formal professors, who are yet in the
Scripture called Abraham's seed, you answer I call them so without the warrant
of Scripture, as you conceive: to which I reply, my words were that there was
another Proselytes were Abraham's seed.
sort of Abraham's seed who were only circumcised in the flesh, and not in the
heart, who though they were borne of Abraham's seed, or professed Abraham's
faith, and so were Jews facti, though not nati, yet they never made Abraham's
God their portion, but rested in somewhat which was not Christ, etc. and so
were to perish with the uncircumcised. This you do not here deny to be true,
only you would have me show where the Proselytes were called Abraham's seed; I
reply, had I mentioned no proselytes at all, but only said there were some in
the Church of the Jews, who were visible members, and partakers of outward
Church Priviledges, and yet were not inwardly godly, nor partakers of the
spiritual part, and that these were called Abraham's seed as well as others, it
had been enough for my purpose. I named not Proselytes to add any strength to
the argument; and because they are called Gods people, I feared not to call
them Abraham's children by profession, and never expected to have met with a
quarrel for calling them who joined to the Church of Israel by that common
name whereby the Church members were called, viz. the seed of Abraham or the
children of Israel: and could no place of Scripture be produced where
proselytes are expressly called by this name, the matter were not tanti. But if
it were a thing of any moment, it would be no hard matter to produce evidence
sufficient to prove that proselytes were called Israelites and the seed of
Abraham, as Acts 2. 10. and 22. compared, Act. 13. 26. compared with Verse 43.
but I forbear. You go on and accuse me, that herein I join with Arminius, who
says, there is a seed of Abraham mentioned, Romans 4. 9. 10. Gal. 3. Gal. 4. who
seek justification and salvation This is not to join with Arminius.
by the works of the Law, and that he makes this the ground of wresting that
Scripture, and that Mr. Bayne upon Ephesians. 1. says that the seed of Abraham
without any adjoined is never so taken: I reply, you give an high charge, but a
weak proof; I said there was a sort of proselytes who were the seed of
Abraham by profession only, or outward cleaving to the Covenant, who though
they professed Abraham's faith, yet did not place their happiness in Christ, or
make choice of Abraham's God for their all-sufficient portion. Sir, is this to
join with Arminius in his interpretation of the ninth to the Romans? 1. How
do you prove that Arminius means the words which you cite, of Jewish
Proselytes? Nulli filii carnis censentur in semine, says Arminius; does he
mean that no proselytes were the seed of Abraham according to the flesh? if
so, I believe acute Mr. Bayne would Mr. Bayne of of my judgment, That civil
justiciaties were called Abraham's seed.
have been more wary then to have opposed him in that point. Nay Mr. Bayne in
the very self same page which you quote, having set down Arminius his two
conclusions. (1. The children of the promise are reckoned for the seed. 2. The
children of the flesh are not reckoned for the seed;) passes his judgment upon
them in these words, Page 140. The Conclusions are true, but not pertinent to
this sense, for the children of the flesh here, are those only who in course
of nature came from Abraham. But you very wisely mention neither of these
Conclusions of Arminius, you thought it more for your advantage to fasten upon
some other proposition laid down by Arminius, and as you set it down it runs
thus: There is a seed of Abraham, qui per opera legis justitiam and salutem
consequuntur; I was much amused at the words. I know Arminius says, Deus ex
promise ac debito dat vitam aeternam operanti, but he means it not of the
works of the Law; and therefore I wondered to see opera legis in your
proposition; but the word which puzzled me most, was consequuntur. Sir, let me
entreat you to correct your book, there is no such word as consequuntur in
Arminius his exposition, and it does not agree with your own exposition, for
consequuntur justitiam, is by you translated; Follow after righteousness. I
have perused Arminius, (with whom you say I join) and Mr. Bayne, from whom you
say I say I differ, and I shall give an account of both to the reader.

First for Arminius, his words are these, Filii carnis Apostolo hoc loco sunt,
qui per opera legis justitiam and salutem consectantur, not consequuntur: so
that the question between Arminius and Mr. Bayne, is, whether in that place,
namely, in the 9 to the Romans, the Apostle by children of the flesh, do mean
such as seek righteousness by the Law? Hoc in loco, says Arminitor, the
phrase is to be so interpreted in this place; No, says Mr. Bayne, it is not
to be taken so in this place, though it may be taken so in other places: I
shall set down Mr. Baynes his own words, that the Reader may see how grossly
you have abused me; For though (says Mr. Bayne) children of the flesh in some
other Scripture, does note Bayne in Ephesians. p. 138. cap. 1. 5.
out justiciaries, seeking salvation in the Law, yet here the literal meaning
is to be taken, a child of the flesh, being such a one as descends from
Abraham according to the flesh. Good Reader observe, 1. That I was not
expounding the 9 to the Romans; and therefore did not at all meddle with the
question between Arminius and Mr. Bayne.

2. I am cleared by Mr. Bayne himself, whom Mr. Tombs produced against me. 3.
The words which clear me, are within six lines of those words which Mr. Tombs
cites against me: whether Mr. Tombs be guilty of negligence or falsehood, I
leave to your judgment. 4. The errors of Arminius are many in the place
cited, and I join not with him in any one of them. First, I do not conceive
that by [Word] Romans 9. 6. the Jews meant the legal Covenant, but the word of
promise, or else the Apostle had not answered directly, v. the 9. Secondly, by
the word [Seed] was meant the children of the promise, the elect, Romans 9. 8. as
Mr. Bayne, nay Arminius confesses; only Arminius says that they were elected
upon Gods forefight of their faith; an Opinion which I detest, as being injurious
to the free and effectual grace of God. I need not instance in any other
errors, only draw this Corollary, if God did fulfill this promise made to the
seed of Abraham, though God did reject so many of his seed (that had the token
of the Covenant in their flesh) not only from salvation, but from the
partaking of outward privileges, from the dignity of being accounted his
people any longer: then God may reject many of the seed of beleeve^s now under
the Gospel, though baptized, not only from salvation, but from all
Church Priviledges besides baptism, and yet make good his promise sealed in
baptism, in which he engages himself to be the God of believing Christians
and their seed.

Fourthly, Mr. Tombs speaks of Abraham's seed by celling, and says that
promise, [I will be the God of thy seed] was made good to Abraham in the
calling of the Gentiles, page 43. Now Mr. Tombs will not say that all the
Gentiles were made partakers of an inward calling, the Gentiles then which had
but an outward calling, are the seed of Abraham only by profession say I,
because they are of the same profession with the spiritual seed of Abraham,
who are inwardly called. If Mr. Tombs say that it is better to term them seed
by calling, then seed by profession; if it be but an outward call, where lies
the difference?

Fifthly, Mr. Bayne and Arminius are agreed, that by the seed of Abraham, Romans
9. 8. is meant the elect only, Omnes filii promissionis censentur in semine,
nulli filii carnis censentur in sentine, says Arminius.

Sixthly, the principal difference between Mr. Bayne and Arminius, is, that
this elect seed was elected upon Gods foresight of their faith, as Arminius
would have it; but I join with Mr. Bayne in detesting this opinion, as
injurious to the free and effectual grace of God: and Mr. Bayne joins with
me, in confessing that in some places of Scripture they who seek to be
justified by the Law, are termed children of the flesh. To conclude this of
Arminius, I Mr. Tombs joins with Servetus.
wonder you should seek to cast an odi^^ upon my expression (as you do here and
several other times) by saying it is a joining with Arminius, when you know
well enough that you join not only in an expression or two, but in this your
very doctrine of opposing Paedo-baptisme, with that monster Servenus, and other
like him.

Lastly, you are much more stumbled and offended that Mr. Blake should say,
There yet remains in the Church a distinction Mr. Blake vindicated.
of Abraham's seed, some borne after the flesh, some after the spirit; and that
both these have a Church interest, or a (...) bright to Church privileges; and
that ^ee for this alleged Gal. 4. 29. even so it is now, etc. I reply, for my
part I as much wonder at your calling these passages very gross, for though it
be granted, 1. That the Apostle shows Ishmael to be intended as a type of
civil justiciaries who sought righteousness by the law. Yea, and 2. that
these persecuted the true Church, who sought justification by Christ. And 3.
That they are cast out from being heirs, never to partake of the spiritual
privileges of the Covenant; yet because it is apparent that even these (who
Paul said were typified by the son of Hagar) had a visible standing in the
Jewish Church, and were partakers of outward Church privileges, and were the
same of whom Paul speaks, Romans 10. 3. Who being ignorant of Gods
righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not
submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God. And that in the same place
Paul himself says, even so it is now, (even in the Church of Gallatia it was
so) and Paul by this Doctrine labored to make them better.) I see not why Mr.
Blake might not use this as an argument, that some have a visible Church
membership, and ought to partake of outward Church privileges, notwithstanding
they will not have the inheritance of children, unless they repent. The thing
which I conceive offends you in his expression is, that he thinks there is a
fleshly seed of Abraham: but I know no reason of stumbling at that phrase,
since by flesh is there intended any thing which is our own, whatever we put
confidence in, and lean upon, as that which may commend us to God; whether our
birth, or parts, our understanding, or moral virtue, yea, or our Religious
duties, and performanc^s, all are but flesh; and this St. Paul plainly
signifies, Phil. 3. 3 etc. We are Phil. 3. interpreted.
the Circumcision which worship God in the spirit, and put no confidence in the
flesh, and in the verse following he tells you what he meant by flesh, viz. his
birthright, his circumcision, What meant by seed of the flesh.
his unblameable conversation, etc. And might not Mr. Blake safely say, there
is still a seed of these who are visible members?

My second conclusion was to this effect, Ever since God Reply to Sect. 3.
gathered a distinct number out of the world, to be his Kingdom, Infants taken
into Covenant with their parents.
City, Household, in opposition to the rest of the world, which is the
Kingdom, City and Household of Satan; He would have Infants of all who are
taken into Covenant with him, to be accounted his, to belong to him, to his
Church and family, and not to the Devils.

So much weight lies upon this Conclusion, and it so nearly concerns you to
make at least a show of overthrowing it, that in 40 Pages and upward you try
all your wits, and artifices to shake the strength of it, by scornful
speeches, by clouding and darkning what was expressed plainly, by framing
senses, and confuting what was never asserted nor intended, by Bringing in at
the by, opinions of other men, and disputing against them, by alleging the
Testimonies of some eminently learned men, when they are nothing to the purpose
in hand, and by seeking to elude the strength of my arguments: In all these I
shall attend you, and endeavor to clear what you would seem to have obscure,
briefly to pass over what is impertinent, and chiefly buckle with you in that
which concerns the cause in hand.

First, you tell me this conclusion is a b^^kin, that may be put on either
leg, right or left, expressed so ambiguously that you know not in what sense to
take it.

Truly Sir, you take a course to make it seem so: I knew Reply.
a man in Cambridge that went for a great Scholar, whose remarkable faculty
was, so to expound a Text, as to make a clear Text dark by his
interpretation; even thus have you dealt with a plain Conclusion, you bring
first, three sorts of senses, then you subdivide them, and under each of them
bring several Imaginable senses, four or five under one head, five or six
under another head, and then blame me that I have not distinctly set down^ in
which of these senses, Infants of Believers belong to the Covenant, whether in
respect of Election, or of a promise of grace in Christ, whether potentially,
or actually, whether they are so to be accounted by an act of science, or
faith, or opinion, and that grounded on a rule of haritie, or prudence, or
probable hopes for the future; thus you express your skill in multiplication
of senses: But I reply, that he that runs may read my sense, and with the
tenth part of the pains you have taken to fasten a sense upon it, which I
never thought upon, might confidently have concluded that I meant of a visible
privilege in facie visibilis Ecelesiae, or have their share in the faedus
externum, which my words plainly enough held forth when I spoke of Gods
separating a number out of the world to be his Kingdom, City, Household in
apposition to the rest of the world which is the Devils Kingdom: and
afterward in the same Conclusion, God having left all the rest of the world to
be visibly the Devils Kingdom (although among them many belong to his
invisible kingdom as being of the number of his elect) he will not permit the
Devil to come and lay visible claim to the offspring of those who are
begotten of the children of the most High, is not this plain enough? that as
all they who by external vocation, and profession join to the Church of God,
(though few of those many so called are elected) have a visible right to be
esteemed members of the Church and Kingdom of God, (which is a visible
Corporation, distinct, and opposite to the rest of the world, which is visibly
the corporation and kingdom over which the Devil does reign;) So God would
have their children, even while they are children, to enjoy the same privilege
with them: what Delian Diver is there any need of, to fetch up the meaning of
this? But that you may no longer complaint of not understanding my sense, I say
plainly, The Covenant The sense of this second proposition cleared.
of grace is sometime taken strictly, sometime largely; as it is considered
strictly, it is a Covenant in which the spiritual benefits of justification,
regeneration, perseverance, and glorification are freely promised in Christ.
Secondly, as the Covenant of grace is taken largely, it comp^^hendss all
Evangelicall administrations which do wholly depend Men may be under the
Covenant several ways, some spiritually, and some under the administration
only.
upon the free and gracious appointment of God, and this administration is
fulfilled according to the counsel of Gods will; sometimes it was administered
by his appointment in type^ shadows, and other legal Ordinances; this
Covenant of administration, God said, Z^^^ary 11. 10. h^^ did (...) with the
people of the Jews, and at the death of Christ he did wholly evacuate and
abolish, and in stead thereof brought in the administration which we live
under, where also he rejected the Jews or book them off from being his people
in Covenant, and called the Gentiles, and graffed them in ram^rum defractorum
locum, into the place of the branches broken off, as your self page 65. do
with Beza rightly express it. Now according to this different acceptance of
the Covenant are men differently said to be in covenant with God, or to be
members of his Church and family; some are mystical members by inward grace,
the inward grace of the Covenant being bestowed upon them, being made new
creatures, etc. others are members in regard of the external and visible
aeconomy; accordingly among the Jews some were said to be Abraham's seed
according to the promise, and not only after the flesh, who had the
Circumcision of the heart as well as that which was outward, others were Jews
in propatulo, Jews only in foro visibilis ecolesia: and in like manner is it
under the Evangelicall administration in the Christian Church, some are in
Christ by mystical (...), so as to be regenerate, etc. 1 Cor. 6. 17. 2 Cor.
5. 17. others are said to be in Christ by visible and external profession, as
branches which bear no fruit, John 15. 2. and these also are called branches
of the Vine, though such branches, as for unfruitfulnesse shall at last be cut
off and cast away; and often times tells us many are called, but few are
chosen: Unto both these do belong great privileges, though the priviledg^^ of
the one be saving, and the other not, as shall by and by appear.

Furthermore, according to this different notion of the Covenant grounded upon
the different manner of men's being in Christ, there are also different S^ales
belonging unto the Covenant; some peculiar and proper only unto those who are
in Covenant spiritually, a quo^d substantiam et grati^^ fae^^ris, as the
testimony and Seal of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 1. 2^. Ephesians. 1. 13. 14. 30. Romans 8.
16. others common and belonging unto all, who are in the visible body and
branches of Christ the Vine in any relation, and so in Covenant quoad (...),
till by scandalous (...) which are (...) with that very outward dignity and
profession they cut themselves off from that relation, and such are the visible
and external Seals annexed to the external profession among Christians, as
the Jewish Seals were to those who were Jews externally.

When therefore I say, they are visibly to be reckoned to belong to the
Covenant with their parents, I mean look what right a visible pr^fessor has
to be received and reputed to belong to the visible Church, qu^ visible
professo^, that right has his child so to be esteemed: now all know the
spiritual part and privileges of the Covenant of grace belongs not to visible
professors as visible, but only to such among them who are inwardly such as
their external profession holds out, but yet there are outward
Church Priviledges which belong to them as they are visible professors, as to
be reputed the sons of God, Genesis 6. 1. the sons of God saw Great
priviviledges belong to them who are under the external Covenant. Genesis 6. 1.
Deuteronomy. 14. 1. Gal. 3. 26.
the daughters of men, Deuteronomy. 14. 1. ye are the children of the Lord your God;
and Paul, writing to a visible Church, Gal. 3. 26. says, yea are all the
children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, (yet I suppose you do not think
that all the Galatians were inwardly so) so likewise to be reputed children of
the kingdom, Matthew. 8. 12. the children of the kingdom shall be cast out,
the children of the Covenant, Act. 3. 25. ye are the children of the Covenant
which God made unto our fathers, and many other of their privileges which
belong to them, who are Israelite^ in this sense, viz. being by such a
separation and vocation the professed people of God (though they were not all
heirs of the spiritual part of the Covenant) Saint Paul reckons up in
several places, as Romans 9. 4. to them pertains Romans 9 4.
the adoption, even to the body of that people (not a spiritual adoption, but
the honor of being separated and reputed to be the children of God, Deuteronomy. 14.
1.) and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the
service of God, and the promises; yet of these Paul says, they were not all
children of Abraham, when he speaks of the spiritual seed. So likewise Romans 3.
1. afte^ Paul had showed Romans ^. Romans 3. 1.
that nothing but faith and inward holiness gave right to the spiritual part
of the Covenant, and that all the external privileges of the Jews, who were
only Jews in propatulo, Jews outwardly, were nothing to justification before
God, he then propounds this question, Cap. 3. 1. What advantage then both the
Jew, or what profit is there of Circumcision? what privilege or gain is it to
be a visible professor, a visible member of the Jewish Church? he answers,
the advantage is great many ways, and instances in this one particular, that
the Oracles of God were deposited to them, the custody and dispensation of his
Ordinances, which they might use as their own treasure, and thereby learn to
know and fear him, (therefore it is called their Law, John 8. 17. It is also
written in your Law) when the rest of the nations all that while were without
God in the world, and received John 8. 17. Deuteronomy. 33. 4.
the rule of their life from the Oracles of the Devil, according to that of
the Psalmist, Psalm. 147. 10, 20 He showed his word to Jacob, his statutes and
his judgments to Israel, he has not dealt so with any nation, and as for his
judgments they have not known them: So Deuteronomy. 33. 4. The Law is called the
inheritance Psalm. 147. 20.
of the Congregation of Jacob. And although it be true that these visible and
external privileges will end with the greater condemnation of them who live
and die in the abuse of them while they rest in Cortice, in the outward thing
it self, and labor not after the spiritual part, yet the privileges
themselves are very great. It is no small mercy to have a membership or visible
standing in that society where salvation is ordinary, this our blessed Savior
told the woman of Samaria, John 4. 22. Salvation is of the Jews, this was the
privilege which the Church of the Jews had John 4. 22.
above the Samaritans, that salvation was to be found in their way, and God in
his wisdom has so ordained it to have his visible Church made up of such, I
mean so, as to have some of them inwardly holy, and others of them by
external profession only, for this reason among many others, that there might
be some who should from time to time be converted by the Ordinances dispensed
in his Church, as well as others, who should be built up, that the Pastors
which he sets up to feed his flock, should not only be nursing fathers to
build up, but also fathers to beget sons and daughters to him: and though all
are bound de jure to be inwardly holy, who join to the Church, yet would he
have his Church admit those who profess their willingness to be his, that
he by his discipline might make them inwardly such as they externally profess
themselves and as yet are not in truth, as into a School are admitted not
only such as are actually learned, but such as are dedicated to be learned,
not only quia docti, sed ut sint docti: and who ever will deny this, that
there are some rightly admitted by the Church to visible membership, who only
partake of the visible privileges, must deny, that any are visible members who
are not inwardly converted, which I think you will do, but lest you or any
other should, I shall at the present back it only with that speech of the
Apostle, Romans 11. where Paul speaks of some branches grassed into the Olive,
and An external right to the Covenant proved. Romans 11.
afterward broken off, not only the Jews whom he calls the natural
branches were broken off, but the Gentiles also; the Gentile Churches who were
graffed in in their room, and were made partakers of the root and fatness of
the Olive, even they also may be broken off if they believe not, and God will
no more spare these branches then he did the other; now this cannot be meant
of any breaking off from the invisible Church, from partaking of the spiritual
root and fatness of the Olive, from this neither Jew This proved from Mr.
Tombs own principles.
nor Gentile are ever broken off, it were Arminianisme to the purpose to
affirm the contrary, it must therefore be meant only of a visible standing
and external participation of Church Priviledges; and if you think
otherwise, that none of old were, nor now are visible members of the Church,
or had right to external Church privileges, unless they were inwardly
sanctified; I beseech you in your next, to clear this, and open our eyes with
your evidence that we may see it with you, and in stead of leading your Reader
into a ma^e by framing multitudes of senses and the like, produce some solid
arguments to show, and prove that no other but true believers, may in fore
visibi^^^ Eccl^siae, be reckoned to belong to the Church and people of God.
But I suppose in this particular, you will hardly deny a lawfulness of
admitting men into a visible communion upon a visible profession, and that
rightly, even by a judgment of faith, though their inward holiness be unknown
to us; for so much you grant, page 159. and if by a judgment of faith a
Minister as Gods Steward may dispense the seal of the Covenant of grace, and
not stay from applying the seal to him, who makes an outward profession,
because we have not a Spirit of discerning, to know them to be real
believers; then it undeniably follows, That some may rightly be accounted to
belong to the Church of God, and Covenant of grace, beside real believers,
which is as much as I need, to make my sense and meaning in this Proposition to
pass for current. And truly Sir, whoever will grant that a Minister in
applying the seal, must do it de fide, in faith, being assured he applies it
according to rule; must either grant such a right as I plead for, that many
have right to be visible members, and be partakers of the external
administration of Ordinances, though they be not inwardly sanctified; or else
he must by revelation be able to see and know the inward conversion of every
one he applies the seal unto; for certainly he has no written Word to build
his faith upon, for the state of this or that man. And for my own part, when
once you have disproved this, that there is such a visible membership and right
to external administrations as I have here infisted upon, I shall not only
forbear baptizing Infants, but the administration of the external seal to
any, what profession soever they make, until I may be de fide assured, that
they are inwardly regenerate.

This then was and is my meaning, when I say, That Infants of believers are
confederates with their Parents; that they have the same visible right to be
reputed Church Members, as their Parents have by being visible Professors; and
are therefore to be admitted to all such external Church Priviledges as their
Infant age is capable of; and that the visible Church is made up of such
visible Professors and their Children, that the invisible takes in neither all
of the one, nor the other, but some of both. Whereas therefore you say you are
at a stand to find out what my meaning is, and know not what to deny, or what
to grant: and again, page 45. You are at a stand whether I mean they are to
be taken in with their Parents into Covenant, in respect of saving grates; or
the outward privilege of Church-ordinances. I beseech you stand no longer
doubtful of my meaning, I mean of them, as I mean of other visible
Professors, they are taken into Covenant both ways respectively, according as
they are elect, or not elect, all of them are in Covenant in respect of outward
privileges the elect over and above the outward privileges, are in Covenant
with respect to saving graces; and the same is to be said of visible members,
both Parents and Infants, under the New Testament, in this point of being in
Covenant, as was to be said of visible members, in the former administration,
whether Jews and their children, or Proselytes and their children. I endeavor
in all this to speak as clearly as I can possibly, not only because you say
you are often at a stand to pick out my meaning; but because this mistake runs
through your whole book, that none are to be reputed to have a visible right to
the Covenant of grace, but only such as partake of the saving graces of it.
Now I proceed with you.

When I say, That God would have believers children reputed to belong to his
Church and family, and not to the devils. You answer, That you fear I use
that expression (of not belonging to the Devils Kingdom) to please the
people. But Sir, why do you judge my heart to intend amiss, in using an
expression which your self cannot mislike? I have more cause to think you use
all these words (it cannot be denied but God would have the Infants of
believers in some sort to be accounted his, to belong to him, his Church and
family, and not to the Devils. And again, it is true in facie visibilis
Ecclesiae, the Infants of believers are to be accounted Gods, etc.) only ad
faciendum populum, to please the people, because this is not Mr. Tombs leaves
all Infants of believers to be under the visible kingdom of the Devil actually.
your judgment; for when you speak your full meaning and sense of this point,
you profess you know no more promise for them in reference to the Covenant,
then to the children of Turks: And even here you only grant them a nearer
possibility to belong to the Covenant of grace then the children of Infidels
have: therefore in your judgment they are not now actually belonging to it,
but only in a possibility: so that though they may be accounted to belong to
the Kingdom of God potentially, yet (by your doctrine) they belong to the
Kingdom of the Devil actually* and all this charitable opinion which here you
express toward them, dontaines no more then is to be allowed to the child of a
Turk, if born among Christians; especially, if a Christian will take it, and
bring it up in Christian Religion; and by what may we ground any probable hopes
they will actually receive the profession of Christ, since by your rule there
is no promise, no external Covenant? why may I not have as good hopes of
Heathens children, if Gods promise help not here? But say you, To make them
actually members of the visible Church, is to overthrow the difinitions of the
visible Church, that Protestant Writers use to give; because they must be all
Christians by profession. I reply, it overthrows it not at all, for they all
include the Infants of such Professors* as the visible Church among the Jews
did include their Infants, male (and female too, lest you say that Circumcision
made them members:) I add also, Baptism now (as well as Circumcision of old)
is a real, though imp^i^^^ Profession of the Christian Faith. But (say you)
Infants are only passive, and do nothing whereby they may be denominated
visible Christians. I answer, even as much as the Infants of Jews could do of
old, who yet in their days were visible members. Yea (say you) further it will
follow, That there may be a visible Church which consists only of Infants of
believers. I answer, no more now then in the time of the Jewish Church; it is
possible, but very improbable, that all the men and Women should dye and leave
only (...) behind^ them, and it is far more probable that a Church (...)
Anabaptists why may consist only of Hypocrit^^* Again, you affirm, We are
not to account Infants to belong to God, either in respect of election or
promise of grace, or presen^^ (...) of in being in Christ, (...) ^state by any
act of (...) with in a particul^^ revelation, because there (...) declaration
of God, that the Infants of pris^^^ (...) all or some, either are elected to
life, or in the Covenant of grace in Christ, either in respect of present
in-being, or future estate. To which I answer briefly, though all this be
granted, if meant of the spiritual part of the Covenant only, yet this makes
nothing against that visible membership which I plead for. Yea, I re^ort the
argument upon your self, and dare boldly affirm, that by this argument, no
visible Church, or all the visible Professors of any Church are to be accounted
to belong to God either in respect of election from eternity, or promise of
grace, or present state of in-being in Christ, etc. without a particular
revelation, because there is no declaration of God that the present visible
Professors are indefinitely all, or some, either elected to life, or are in the
Covenant of grace in Christ, either in respect of present in-being, or future
estate: look by what distinction you will answer this, for visible Professors
who are grown men, the same will serve for the Infants of believers.

In the next place, you make a digression against an expression of Mr. Cottons,
which you think necessary to do, because Mr. Cotton vi^dicated.
you f^^de many are apt to swallow the dictates of such men as Mr. Cotton is,
without examination; he affirmed, the Covenant of grace is given to Christ, and
in Christ to every godly man, Genesis 17. 7. and in every godly man to his seed;
God will have some of the seed of every godly man to stand before him for ever:
against this you except many things, and according to your usual course, you
frame many senses, of the Covenants being given to every godly man and his
seed; some whereof are so absurd, as no charitable man can imagine ever came in
Mr. Cottons thoughts, That every godly man should be to his seed, as Christ to
every godly man; which in truth (as you say) would be little less then
blasphemy. But I shall give you this short Reply, that I take Mr. Cottons
meaning to be, that look as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and other godly Jews
were to their seed, in respect of the Covenant; that is every godly man to his
seed now; except only in such things wherein those Patriarchs were types of
Christ, in all other things wher^in God promised to be the God of them and
their seed, godly parents may plead it as much for their seed (...), as they
could then; and whatever inconvenience or absurdity you seem to fasten upon Mr.
Cotton, will equally reach to them also: as for example, suppose an Israelite
should plead this promise for his seed, you will demand if ^ee plead it to his
seed universally, that is false, and so of the rest of your inferences, look
what satisfying answer an Israelite would give you, the same would Mr. Cotton
give, and at satisfyingly. As for what you say concerning Abraham, that by the
seed of Abraham are meant only elect and believers; I have sufficiently
answered to it before, and shall have occasion to meet with it again in its due
place; therefore I now say no more of it; but the chief thing you grate upon
against M. Cotton, is that expression in the close, That God will have some of
every godly man's seed stand before him for ever. You aggravate this to the
utmost, as a bold dictate, imposing on Gods counsel and Covenant, the absurdity
and falsity whereof, you endeavor to manifest at large: to which I answer in
two or three words, that supposing his meaning to be as you set it down, That
it is in reference to election and everlasting life, that every godly man shall
have some of his seed infallibly saved. I confess the expression is not to be
justified; nor do I think that that sense ever came into the mind of so
learned and judicious a man as Mr. Cotton is: for my part, I think he only
alluded to that promise made to Jonad^^s children, Jer. 35. tha^ God would
always bear a merciful respect unto the posterity of his servants, according
to that promise, Exodus 20. 5. I will show mercy to thousands of them that love
me and keep my commandments. And that being his scope, (as I think it was)
you need not have kept such a stir about it.

After your digression to meet with Mr. Cotton, in stead of returning to my
Sermon, you wander further out of your way; for after a short discourse of
judging children to be Mr. Tombs ^^deavours to (...) a sense upon this
Proposition, never intended by (...) not owned by me.
within the Covenant (by opinion) according to a rule of prudence or charity
(senses which I meddle not with: and therefore need not stay the Reader in
descanting upon them. My rule of judging their condition, being limited to the
Rule of Gods revealed will in his word) you then proceed in an endeavor,
wherein you do but lose time, and waste paper for many pages together,
endeavoring to confute what was never asserted by me; viz. That the Covenant
of saving grace is made to believers and their natural seed; that the Infants
of believers are so within the Covenant of grace, as to be elected, and to have
all the spiritual privileges of the Covenant belonging to them; this you
would needs have to be my meaning: and I almost suspect you would fasten this
sense upon me, against your own light; for page 142. you do as good as
clear me of it; where you say, You suppose that I do not hold, that the
Infants of believers indifferently have actually the thing signified by
baptism, union with Christ, adoption, pardon of sin, regeneration, etc. So
that in all this discourse, you do but luctari cum larvis, according to your
own expression, page 45. my plain meaning was as is before expressed; nor do
any of the expressions used by me, and here brought by you as Arguments to
prove this to be my meaning, hold forth any such thing; as, they are within the
Covenant of grace, belonging to Christ's body, kingdom, household; therefore are
to partake of the seal. True, as visible professors are, qua visible. Again,
they are to be accounted to belong to him as well as their parents. True, as
well as their parents do by a visible profession. Again, they are made free
according to Abraham's copy. True, according to the promise made to Abraham, I
will be a God to thee and thy seed; that look as Abraham and his seed, the
Proselytes and their seed, upon their visible owning of God and his Covenant,
had this visible privilege for their posterity, that they should be accounted
to belong to Gods kingdom and household with their parents; so it is here.

One Argument more you bring (beside laying of my words together) to prove that
this must needs be my sense, because you doubt not but my meaning is agreeable
to the Directory, which holds forth, That the promises are made to believers
and their seed: and directs Ministers to pray, That God would make Baptism to
the Infant a seal of adoption, regeneration, and eternal life. And you
conclude, that if there be not a promise of these saving graces What the
Sacrament seals absolutely, and what conditionally.
to Infants, in vain are they baptized, and the seal is put to a blank; To
which I reply, my meaning is indeed according to the sense of the Directory,
and according to that direction, I do pray that God would make baptism to be
a seal to the Infant of adoption, and the rest of the saving graces of the
Covenant; yet I utterly deny you consequence, that unless there be absolute
promises of saving grace to Infants, the Seal is set to a blank, for give me
leave but to put the same case; first, for the Infants of the Jews, was the
seal put to a blanke with them, or had they all promises of saving graces?
Secondly, let me put the same case in grown men, who make an external
visible profession, and thereupon are admitted to baptism, can any man say,
that all the saving graces of the Covenant, or the spiritual part of it, is
promised to all visible professors? is it not abundantly known that in all
ages, even in the best times, even in the Apostles times, multitudes were
baptized, to whom God yet never gave saving graces, and therefore never
promised them? for had he made a promise, he would have performed it. But I
shall desire you a little to consider the nature of a Sacrament, in what sense
it is a seal, and then you need stumble at this no longer; these three things
are necessarily to be distinguished, first, the truth of the thing signified in
a Sacrament; and secondly, my interest in that thing; And thirdly, my
obligation, to do what is required in or by that Sacrament: I say therefore,
that in every Sacrament, the truth of the Covenant in it self, and all the
promises of it are sealed to be Yea, and Amen; Jesus Christ became a Minister
of the circumcision, to confirm the promises made unto the Fathers, and so to
every one who is admitted to partake of Baptism, according to the rule which
God has given to his Church, to administer that Sacrament, there is sealed the
truth of all the promises of the Gospel, that they are all true in Christ, and
that whoever partakes of Christ, shall partake of all these saving promises;
this is sealed absolutely in Baptism, but as to the second, which is interesse
meum, or the receivers interest in that spiritual part of the Covenant, that
is sealed to no receiver absolutely, but conditionally; in this particular, all
Sacraments are but signa conditionalia, conditional seals, sealing the
spiritual part of the Covenant to the receiver, upon condition that he
perform the spiritual condition of the Covenant: thus our Divines use to
answer the Papists, thus Doctor Ames answers to Bellarmine, when Bellarmine
disputing against our doctrines that Sacraments are seals, alleges then they
are falsely applied ostentimes; he answers to Bellarmine, Sacraments are
conditional Seals, and therefore not seals to us but upon condition. Now for
the third thing, the obligation which is put upon the receiver, a bond or the
for him to perform, who is admitted to receive the Sacrament, this third I say
is also absolute, all Circumcised and Baptized persons did or do stand
absolutely engaged to perform the conditions required on their part, and
therefore all circumcised persons were by the circumcision obliged to keep
the Law, that is, that legal and typical administration of the Covenant which
was then in force, and Infants among the rest were bound to this, though they
had no understanding of the Covenant, or that administration of the Covenant,
when this Seal was administered to them. Now then, since in Baptism there is
first an absolute Seal of the truth of the Covenant of grace in it self, a
conditional seal of the receivers interest in the Covenant, and an absolute
obligation upon the receiver to make good the Covenant on his part, is there
any reason that you should say, that the seal is put to a blank, where the
spiritual part or saving grace is not partaked of? What you further say here,
that by Abraham who is the father of the faithful is meant Abraham's person,
and not every believer, that it was a personal privilege to Abraham, and not
a common privilege to believers as believers, which thing you repeat very
often, it shall be considered in a more proper place. So that, you having thus
wholly mistaken my sense, and undertaken to dispute against a sense which I
never owned, I may therefore pass over your six arguments which you bring to
confute this sense which you have set down: I join with you that it is an
error to say that all Infants of believers indefinitely are under the saving
graces of the Covenant, for although I find abundance of promises in the
Scripture, of Gods giving saving graces unto the posterity of his people, and
that experience ^eacheth us that God uses to continue his Church in their
posterity, and that Gods election lies more among their seed then among
others, yet neither to Jew nor Gentile was the Covenant so made at any time,
that the spiritual part and grace of the Covenant should be conferred upon
them all; it is sufficient to me that they may have a visible standing in the
Church, partake of the outward privileges of the Church, and be trained up
under that discipline, or administration of the Covenant which God uses to make
effectual to salvation, in the mean time all of them to be visible members
as well as their parents, and some of them invisible as well as some of their
parents. And therefore although in some of your fix reasons there are diverse
expressions which I cannot swallow, yet I shall not here stay upon them, but
examine them when you bring them elsewhere to dispute against me, as here you
do not; only give me leave to touch upon the last of your fix arguments,
because in some sense it militates How Christianity may be called a birthright.
against my Thesis, Is this were true, say you, that the Covenant of grace is a
birthright privilege, then the children of believers are the children of grace
by nature, then Christians are borne Christians, not made Christians; if the
child of a Christian be borne a Christian, as the child of a Turk is borne a
Turk; and if so, how are they borne the children of wrath as well as others? I
answer, According to the sense which I own I maintain this assertion to be
true, that the child of a Christian is borne a Christian, it is his birthright
to be so esteemed; I mean to be reputed within the Covenant of grace, or a
member of the visible Church, our* I am sure it was so, the child of a Jew was
borne a Jew, and it was his birthright to be an Israelite, a visible member of
the Church of Israel, and the Apostle Paul stuck not to use the word Jews by
nature, Gal. 2. 15. We who are Jews by nature, and not (...) of the ^^^tiles,
^ee there opposes the natural privilege of the members of the Church to the
condition of the heathens, and Romans 11. he calls the whole nation of the Jews
the natural branches of the Olive tree, because they were the visible Church
of God: Will you say of them also, how were they then the children of wrath by
nature? I answer, do but consider the Apostles distinction, Romans 2. last.
betwixt a Jew in propatulo in facievisibilis ecclesiae, a Jew without, and a
Jew Romans 2. (...).
in abscondito, a Jew within, and your objection is answered; in the first
sense, every child of a believer is brone a Christian, that is, he is a member
of the visible Church; in the second sense, none can claim it as a birthright,
men must be made Christians in that sense, and not borne Christians; thus this,
which is a weak objection of the Lutherans against the Calvinists, is easily
answered, to be children of wrath by nature* and yet to be holy in an
external Covenant, being borne of believing parents, do no whit oppose one
another; thus it was not only among the Jews who had a visible standing under
the Covenant of grace, and yet multitudes of them were the children of wrath;
but even thus it is unto this day among grown men, who are admitted to be
Christians in your way, some of them are sancti, called and holy in the face of
the visible Church, and yet not so coram facie dei, whilst others are so both
in the spirit and in the letter. Your great error and mistake is, that you
speak not distinctly of the Covenant of grace, for whereas the Covenant is to
be largely understood for the whole dispensation of it in outward Ordinances
as well as saving graces, you usually take it strictly for saving graces which
belong only to the elect; You cannot be ignorant how our Divines own the
outward administration of the Covenant, under the notion of faedus externum,
and the spiritual grace of it under the notion of faedus inte^^um; you still
restrain the Covenant to the spiritual part only, and would persuade your
Reader, that they who speak of the Covenant of grace must mean it thus
strictly, and yet you bring not arguments to disprove a true visible
membership, upon a visible profession, whether the inward saving grace be known
or not.

Now I return with you to my Sermon, where your To Sect. 5. Comparison
between Christ's kingdom and other kingdoms, vindicated.
examen proceeds, I used for illustration sake ^^ comparison from other
Kingdoms, Corporations and Families; the children follow the condition of
their parents, free m^n^ children are borne free, the children of slaves are
borne slaves, etc. and thus has God ordained (said I) that it shall be in his
Kingdom and Family, children follow the Covenant condition of their parents;
this passage you slight, first in general, as that which contains nothing but
dictates; but par^ius-ista-vitis, you may give your adversary two in the seven
at dictating, you who call my only using a comparison or allusion to be a
dictating can dictate in this very place, Christianity say you is no man's
birthright, this was but even just now the question betwixt you and Mr. Blake,
and you here without any proof ^et down this peremptory conclusion (which was
the very question betwixt you) Christianitis is no man's birthright, but the
thing is true, call it what you please, and will not be blown away with a
scornful puff: but say you, I do^very carnally imagine the Church of God to
be like civil Corporations, as if persons were to be admitted into it by
birth, whereas in this all is done by free election of grace, and according to
Gods appointment. I reply, you carnally and sinfully judge of Gods ways in
this particular, for is it not evident that the Jewish Church was in this like
civil corporations? were not children then admitted in by birthright, and yet
was not grace then as free as it is now? had the Jews by birth no seal of
grace, and that by Covenant, because God was the God of them and their seed, or
was there no grace accompanying the Jewish Sacraments? I suppose you are not so
Popish as to deny it. And further I pray you tell me, was not all done among
them as much by the free election of grace, as among us? are you of Arminius
his mind, that Jacob and Esa^ (both circumcised persons) are not proposed to
us, Romans 9. as such who hold forth to us the soveraigntie of God in election
and reprobation? Secondly, what mean you when you say, all is done in the
Church according to the f^^^ election of grace? It Is true, if you mean it of
the Church invisible, all is there done by the free election of grace, but we
are speaking of the visible Church: and I hope you will not say, all is there
done by free election of grace, you will not say that none have any interest in
the visible privileges, but only they who are elected. You add, yea to
conceive that it is in Gods Church, as in other kingdoms, is a seminary of
dangerous superstitions and errors; Dr. Reynolds in his conference with Heart
has showed that hence arose the frame of government by Patriarchs,
Metropolitans, etc. and this is (say you) the reason of invocation of Saints,
etc. I reply, true, for men to say thus it must be, or thus it may b^e in God^
kingdom, because it is so in other kingdoms, is the very Seminary which Dr.
Reynolds speaks of; but to mention some things alike in Gods Kingdom and other
kingdoms, when God himself has made them so, it is obedience and not
presumption. Yea, it is a great sin to call that a carnal imagination which
is Gods own doing. Next when I say, if he take a father into Covenant, he
takes the children in with him, if he reject the parents, the children are
east out with them. You answer, if I mean this in respect of election and
reprobation, it is not true, or in respect of the Covenant of grace which is
congruous to election or reprobation. I answer, you judge right, I meant it not
of election or reprobation; nor that the saving graces of the Covenant are
always made good, either to Infants or grown men, who are taken into
Covenant* I meant it as before I expressed it, of taking in, into a visible
Church-standing. But (say you) neither is that true, it is not true in respect
of outward Ordinances, the father may be baptized and not the child, and e
contra, the father may, be deprived, and the child may enjoy them, I answer,
but this is the (...), the thing that is in question betwixt us, the contrary
whereunto I undertake to justify; Indeed de sacto, the one may enjoy them, and
the other he deprived of them, a father may be baptized, and his child die
before it be baptized* but our question is de jure, whether a Parent, being a
believer, his child has not right to Baptism, and other Church Priviledges,
as it grows copable of them, at the ^ew^s children had to Circumcision, etc.
De sacto, it fell out sometimes so among the Jews, David, the ^ather
circumcised, and not the child borne to him by Bathsheba, which dyed the
seventh day, and was not Circumcised, and many multitudes more in the same
condition, but is this any thing against the right of Infants to be^
Circumcised?

Next (say you) In this point there i^ (...) certainty or agreement in the
paedobaptists determination, because Mr. Rutherford says, the children of
Papists, and excommunicate Protestants which are barn with in our visible
Church, are baptized if their forefathers have been found in the faith, but
others will deny it, and you cite Mr. Cotton in the Margin, wh^ says that if
has Mr. Rutherford and Mr. Cotton reconciled.
the nearest parents be excommunicated, the child is not to be baptized,
because the parents are to us as heathen^, and th^^, say you, Paedobaptists as
well as Anabaptists, like wates of the Sea, beat one against another: To which
I answer, This peculiar controversy betwixt some Paedobaptists, by (...) right
the children are to be baptized, whether by right of their nearest parents
only, or by the right of their remoter forefathers, who have been sound in the
faith, is very little helpefull to your cause, nor is it any very great
controversy betwixt those parties whom you mention, for Mr. Cotton in the very
words cited, does almost, (if not altogether) reconcile it, while he says,
when the nearest parents are excommunicate, it may be considered whether the
child may not be baptized either if the Grandfather or Grandmother make
profession, or in the right of the Household Governor, who promises to educate
the child in the faith, (...) by proportion of the Law may be gathered from
Genesis 17. 12, 13. Here is little or no beating of one wave against another, but
both of them beating Anabaptists; and I wish, that your answer did no more
beace against the very reason of the holy Ghost, Genesis 17. 7. who makes this his
Argument why he would have the male children circumcised, and thereby reckoned
to be in Covenant with him, because their parents are in Covenant with him;
this in me you call a carnal imagination, take heed you dash not against the
Lord Jehovah himself. Lastly, whereas I add thus i^ w^^ in the time of the
Jews, both Jews and Proselytes, they and their children came thi^ Covenant
together, and when God rejected the parents out of the Covenant, the children
were cast out with them. To this you answer, indeed when par^nts were taken
into Covenant, their children were circumcised with them, but whether this make
any thing for baptizing of Infants you shall con^ider in du^ place, and there
(God willing) I shall meet with you. But for the second thing, that when the
parents were cast out of Covenant the Children were cast out with them; this
(say you) is not true, parents might be Idolaters, Apostates, etc. yet their
children were to be circumcised; I answer, first, Is it not evident in the
Jews at this day, that they and their children are cast out together? and (I
add) if you would show the falsitie of it, you should have given some
instance, not of parents, who remain Gods people in external profession, not
having received a Bill of divorcement, though their lives might possibly be
very wicked, but of some who were cast off from being visible professors, and
yet their Infants remain in the visible society of the Church, or of some who
were visibly thus taken in, and their Infants left out, but instead of this,
you still go on in your wonted equivocation of the word Covenant of grace,
taking it only of the Covenant of saving grace, not including the external
way of administration with it.

Now (God willing) I shall try what strength there is in Io Sect. 6.
Vindicating Act. 2. 38. 39. as a proof of Infants of believers to belong to
the the Covenant of grace.
your exceptions against those Texts I brought to prove that Infants of
Believers do belong to the Covenant now as well as the Infants of Jews did
under the former administration. The first whereof was taken out of Acts 2. 38.
39. where Peter exhorting his hearers to believe and be baptized, used this as
an Argument taken from the benefit which should come to their posterity, The
promise is made to you and to your children, etc.

The first branch of your answer is according to your usual method, to throw
dirt in the face of an Argument Mr. Tombs his method of answering.
which pinches you, sleighting and scorning that which you know not how to
answer; and then to frame several senses, and raise a dust about it* You
complain how irksome it is to Readers and Answerers, to find them who
allege ^ Text to paraphrase upon it, but show not how they conclude from it.
It is harder for you to find your enemy then to vanquish him; and you wish,
that I would first distinctly expound, and then frame my arguments out of the
Text.

I answer I hardly can tell whether it were best to smile at or pity this
grievous trouble you are put to, that your patience should be thus compelled
deverare taedium; it seems you expected I should make syllogismes in mood and
figure, in a Sermon ad populum, if you did not, I wonder why you should be
thus troubled, since as plainly as I could I expressed the meaning of the
Text: I first showed where the strength of the Argument lay viz. That not only
themselves upon their faith and Baptism should receive such an Invaluable
benefit, but their children should also (as under the former administration
they were) be taken into a better administration, the Covenant being now
exhibited in the best and fullest manner, and all they whether near or far
off, who would own this should themselves and their children with them, be
under this best Covenant, as formerly they were when the Covenant was more
dark. And in the progress of my discourse I both proved this to be the
meaning, and answered the exceptions to the contrary.

Next follows your several senses: You doubt whether I Mr. Tombs his art in
multiplying senses.
fetch children in under the first part, I will be thy God; or whether under
the second, I will be the God of thy seed. Or whether I mean is of saving
graces, or Church Priviledges. One while you doubt whether my sense be, that
God will be the God of their children if they obey his call: then you rather
guess it, That if the Parents obey his call, be will be the God of them, and
their children, though the children do not obey his call. Yea further (because
here are not yet senses enough) you proceed and say, If by the promise to them
and their children, be meant of outward Church Priviledges; then the sense must
be, If you will believe, repent and be baptized, then you and your children
shall be baptized. Yet another sense you make out of that which I spoke (at the
by) of Zacheus, Luke 19. that salvation came to his house upon his believing;
that thence may be gathered, That the meaning is, a man's whole household may be
saved barely by his believing: and not content with all these senses, you step
out of your way to bring in Mr. Goodwins interpretation of Zacheus, that he
meant it of the whole household; and that thence he collected that an household
was Ecclesia prima, which you confute, and then you set down your own sense of
salvation coming to Zacheus his house; that by Zacheus his house is mean^
only Zacheus himself.

What multiplicity of imaginary senses, and consequences of senses are here
poured out on an heap? could the ^arest Chymick have extracted any more? The
Reader would hardly swadlow down the tediousness of my discourse, if I should
take them all singly, and show what I own or reject of each of them: It is
better to set down the plain sense together, and make it goods; and then he
will discern how you have endeavored to cloud an argument, and wrangle against
it, when you cannot answer it. I plainly expressed the Apostles argument to be
fetched from The p^ame sense and scope of this argument opened and vindicated.
the benefit, which would not only come to themselves, but to their children
by their believing in Christ; and after added, that the clear strength of the
Argument lay thus; God has now remembered his Covenant to Abraham, in sending
that blessed seed in whom he promised to be the God of him and of his seed;
do not you by your unbelief deprive your selves and your posterity of so
excellent a gift: In which passage you acknowledge I have hit the mark, and
given that very interpretation which you own. And whereas you add as a
further illustration, that the promise is now fulfilled to them and their
children, according to Acts 3. 25. Ye are the children of the Prophets, and of
the Covenant, which God made with our fathers, etc. I confess that is true,
but not all that is meant; and yet even that strengthens my Argument, the
Covenant which God made with their Fathers, That he would be the God of them,
and of their seed, and they were the children or heirs of that Covenant* that
look as God was the God of Abraham and his seed, so he would be the God of them
and of their seed, if they did believe and were baptized; and therefore he
would not have them by their unbelief deprive themselves and their children of
that privilege: this I then made my argument, and this you saw well enough,
and therefore say, that this expression, do not by your unbelief deprive your
posterity of so excellent a gift, has a little relish of my interpretation of
the promise concerning the natural seed of believers. But Sir, why do you
call it a little relish? it is the very scope of my Argument, that look as God
did when he made the promise of grace in Christ to Abraham upon his believing,
and took also his posterity, those that were borne of him, into Covenant with
him, in the sense which I before alleged; and not only the natural Jews, but
even among all Nations, whoever became followers of Abraham's faith, did inherit
Abraham's promise, That he would be the God of them and their seed, and by
virtue of that promise, their children were taken into visible communion: so
this blessed seed [in whom this promise was founded] being now come, would
according as heretofore, make it good to al, whether Jews or Gentiles, that
should believe in him.

This clause of the Covenant of grace, and the interpretation of it, viz. That
it belongs to all believers, and that by virtue of it their children are to be
received into visible communion, you often dispute against, and sometimes say
that it was a promise peculiar to Abraham at other times, it was at the utmost
to be extended no further then to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to have their
posterity (as born of them) to belong to the visible Church, though in this
place where it was most proper, you say little or nothing about it, only make
wrangling exceptions against my interpretation; but because it most pertinent
to the business in hand, I shall here take it into consideration, and manifest
that it was not a personal privilege to Abraham; no nor to Abraham, Isaac The
promise given, I will be thy God and the God of thy seed, not peculiar to
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, proved by three Arguments.
and Jacob, to have their poste^^ty taken into Covenant by virtue of that
promise, I will be the God of thee and thy seed

For first, though Abraham was the father of the faithful, and so in some
sense [the root, as you elsewhere call him:] yet the Covenant was made with him
for his faiths sake, and believers are his children and heirs, and partake of
those privileges and promises which were made to him: and therefore look as
Abraham's faith justified him before God, and gave him interest in the
spiritual graces of the Covenant, and none but himself; yet it was so
beneficial and advantageous to his children, that for his sake they should be
accounted to belong to Gods Kingdom and household, and partake of the external
privileges of it; and thereby be trained up under the discipline of it, and so
be fitted for spiritual privileges and graces which God does ordinarily
confer upon them who are thus trained up; so shall it be with them who become
followers of Abraham's faith.

Secondly, had it been a peculiar privilege to Abraham's natural seed,
Proselytes of other Nations could never by virtue of their becoming followers
of Abraham's faith, have brought their children into Covenant with them, so as
to have a visible Church Membership, as we know they did.

Thirdly, and we know also that this promise of being the God of believers and
their seed, was frequently renewed many hundred years after Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob were dead and rotten, as Deuteronomy. 30. 6. The Lord will circumcise thy Deuteronomy.
30. 6. Esa. 44. 2, 3.
heart, and the heart of thy seed, etc. so Esa. 44. 2, 3. Fear not O Jacob my
servant, and thou Jesh^run whom I have chosen, I will pour my spirit upon thy
seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring, and they shall spring up as among
the grass, etc. So likewise Esaias 59. 21 As for me this is my Covenant Esa. 59.
21.
with them, says the Lord, my Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I
have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth
of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from
henceforth and for ever, and this last promise your self acknowledge, page 54.
to be intended chiefly of the nation of the Jews at their last calling in:
and whereas you use to elude these Texts by saying these things belong only to
the elect, when they These places vindicated.
come to believe, and reach not to any privilege which is external; I reply,
by the same answer you might cut off the seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, for
to believers then as well as to believers now were these promises made; and I
shall desire you, to think how by this Answer you will avoid that which page
42. you call absurdity and trifling in Mr. Cotton. For Instance; God made this
promise (say you) to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to be the God of them and of
their seed, in all generations: see how you will answer your own objection; if
it be understood universally to all his seed, that is manifestly false, all
his seed had not God to be their God; or if it be meant conditionally, if they
believe, then the meaning must be, that God would be the God of Abraham and
his seed if they did believe; and then it signifies no more then thus, that God
will be the God of every believer, and then it is but trifling to add, to be
the God of him and of his seed, because nothing is more expressed in the last
words th^n what is said in the former; therefore this promise made to Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, must be restrained to elect and believers only, not to the
natural seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but to believers, as they and their
seed by calling: thus by your own Argument you cut off all the Jews but such
as were elect and inwardly holy, as much as you do the Gentiles, from having
any visible communion in external privileges. Consider what you will answer
to these things, I nothing fear but by what distinction you will fetch off the
Jews, we shall fetch off the children of believers, whether Jews or
Gentiles. This I add to make it more clear, that that promise, Genesis 17. I
will be the God of thee and of thy seed, (to which the Apostle here relates)
is a Gospel promise, which from age to age holds forth some benefits even to
the natural seed of believers. So that when the Apostle presses them to
believe in Christ, and by being baptized to come under this new and best
administration of the Covenant, by an Argument reaching to their posterity;
the sense is no more then thus, you have indeed crucified the Lord of life, and
deserve that his blood should be required of you and of your children, and
that that Vineyard (the heir whereof you have killed) should be taken away
from you, but if yet you will receive him offered to you in his Gospel, it
shall not prove so, but you shall receive the holy Ghost, you shall be
justified, accepted, you shall still be a chosen generation, the Church and
people of God, ye^ and your posterity shall be under this best administration,
they shall be accounted by virtue of this promise still to be his, and be
trained up for him, in his School, in his house, as heretofore they have
been, yea and with greater advantage, because a greater abundance of the
spirit is now poured and to be poured out. Try what absurdities you can make
to follow from this Argument.

After I had opened the scope of the Argument, I proceeded to examine what
exceptions are made against it. First, Mr. Tombs his exceptions against this
argument answered.
some say the promise here mentioned is meant of extraordinary gifts of the
holy Ghost, this I confuted, in this you concur with me, only (that you
might debase as much as is possible what ever I go about to prove) you add,
my reasons are not sufficient to confute it, for though all who then 1
Exception.
believed and were baptized did not receive those extraordinary gifts, yet
Peter might assure them that it should be so for the future; This deserves no
reply; is it imaginary that Peter might promise what never was to be
performed? was it to be true Answer.
at any time, that all who believe should receive the extraordinary gifts of
the holy Ghost? Your self say elsewhere, you should incur blasphemy to
challenge a promise which God should not make good. And whereas you add
further, that it does not follow that this promise must be true in all ages,
that whoever believes and is baptized, shall receive remission of sins, and
the gift of the holy Ghost; because there is nothing in the Text to prove that
this promise should be in force in all ages. But Sir is there not in the Text,
all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call; and does
not that reach to all ages?

The other shif^ which I said was insufficient to avoid the force of this
Argument, is their interpretation 2 Exception.
who say, To you and your children, must be thus limited, viz. as many of them
as the Lord shall call, that is, when any of your children come to be called,
this promise shall be made good unto them; now I said this was but a shift,
because the Apostles Argument is taken from the benefit which should come to
their children, which would be no Argument at all; because with this
limitation, it holds forth no more to the children of believers then to Pagans,
the promise is made to as many as God shall call, that is, to you, to your
children, and to Pagans, and their children as much as to you and your
children; what argument can this afford from a benefit which their children
should receive if they believed?

But this say you is the genuine and necessary explication of the Text, for let
the promise be what it can be, whether of saving graces, of outward
privileges, of extraordinary gifts, it is no ways true without that
limitation, as many as the Lord shall call.

But this is but a deceiving of your Reader with an equivocation in the word
call, for if you mean of inward effectnall Answ.
calling, of true faith wrought in the heart, and then say, what ever is meant
by the promise, whether inward graoes or outward privileges, none partake of
any of these things, without this inward call: I must tell you, this is one of
the things you use to call dictates, bold assertions without proof, the
falsehood whereof is abundantly manifested already: Do you not know and grant
that outward privileges are common to elect and reprobate? But if you mean it
of outward calling, then I not only assert, but have already proved their
Infants enjoy this calling with them. But because you cannot deny that the
Apostle here meant to fetch 3. Exception.
an Argument taken from the benefit which should come to their children, you
have found out another shift, and say, the maine matter was concerning
themselves to erect them, because they had said, His blood be upon us and upon
our children, and this was a comfortable Argument, because they might hereby
understand, that notwithstanding this imprecation or execration, they and their
children might yet be saved by this Jesus whom they had crucified, in case
they should believe in him.

But I reply, first, there is nothing in the Text to evince it, Answ.
that all these men either uttered that curse, or were privy to it: for though
Peter said they had crucified him, he meant the Scribes and Pharisees had done
it, and elsewhere he says, the Jews which dwelt. at Jerusalem had done it:
it is most probable that many of these stranger Jews knew nothing of it.
Secondly, let it be granted that they both knew it and were parties in it, and
so consequently that the application of the promise was the more seasonable to
them, yet because it was the promise of the Covenant, which belonged to every
Covenanter, that God in Christ would be a God to them and to their seed, and
that he pressed it to them as to those who were children of the Covenant,
Acts, Chap. 3. Verse 25. this Argument taken from the Covenant had been of use,
though that speech had never been uttered.

As for that which you call the witless descant I put upon my adversaries,
while I say the Argument must run thus, that if the Apostle must be
interpreted, (as these men would have him) to you and your children, so many of
them as the Lord shall call, viz. you and your children have hitherto been an
holy seed. But now if you believe in Christ your selves, your children shall
be in no better condition then the rest of the Pagan world, but if afterward
any of them or any of the heathen shall believe and be baptized, their
particular persons shall be taken into Covenant, but their Children still left
out, this (said I) would not have been a very comfortable Argument to persuade
them to come in, in relation to the good of their children. To this your answer
is, that this witless descant follows not on the applying the restriction in
the end of the verse, to them, their children, and all that are afar off; and
that which I burden my adversaries Tenet with, of putting believers Infants out
of the Covenant into the condition of Pagans children is a Co^cysme answered
before. But Sir, be it witless or witty, they must own it whose it is, and I
perceive you can more easily put it off with a scoff then give it a solid
answer, and it is a thorn which will not so easily be plucked out of your
side* the strength of it is, Peter could not have used this as an Argument to
persuade them to come under this administration of the Covenant, whereof
Baptism was a seal, from the benefit which should come to their children if
your interpretation be true, because by this their children should be in a
worse condition, in relation to the Covenant, then they were before: all grant
in the former they were included; you say in this latter, you know no more
promise for them then for the children of (...): How then could this argument
be fit to be used? tell me I pray you, suppose a man held some Farm or Office
under some great man, and that in his Grant or Patent, there were some apparent
privileges or benefits included concerning his posterity; If now the Lord of
whom he held it, should offer him a new Grant in which his children should be
expressly left out, and no more privileges for them then for mere strangers,
could an Argument be taken from the benefit that should come to his Children,
to persuade him to give up his former, and accept this latter Grant? I think
not. And whereas you call that expression of putting of the children of
believers into the same state with the children of Turks, a Coccysme which you
have answered before. I pardon your scornful expression, you do but kick at
that which bites you, it is a truth which you have no cause to delight to hear
of; you have answered it indeed, by granting the truth of it, as the Reader may
plainly see in my Answer to your 10 Section of the second Part; and to Sect. 3.
of this part.

Whereas I further said in my Sermon, except in relation to the Covenant, there
was no occasion to name their children, it bad been sufficient to have said a
promise is made to as many as the Lord shall call. You answer, Their children
indeed are named in relation to the Covenant: But there was another reason then
that which I allege; not only their imprecation, Matthew. 27. 25. but
especially because Christ was first sent to the Jews and their children, Acts
3. 26. I Reply, but this reason which you allege affords no Argument for them
now, to believe and repent from any benefit should come to their posterity by
virtue of that promise, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed.

To close this Section, you say, The Antipadobaptists have hence a good
Argument against baptizing of Infants, because Poter required of such as were
in Covenant repentance before baptisms. I answer, just as good an one, as
because Abraham was in Covenant, and an actual believer, and justified by the
faith he had in uncircumcision, and received it as a seal of the righteousness
of faith; therefore all these must go before Circumcision; and because all who
turned Proselytes to the Jews, must first make profession of their faith;
therefore none may be circumcised but such as they are. But more of this when
we consider this Argument in your Exercitation.

Next, let us try whether your success be any better against the next Text of
Scripture which I brought to prove To Sect. 7.
this Conclusion; viz. Romans 11. 16. etc. where I said, The Apostles scope was
to show that we Gentiles have now the same Romans 11. 6. etc. vindicated.
graffing into the true Olive which the Jews formerly had; and our present
graffing in is answerable to their present casting out; and their taking in at
the latter end of the World, shall be the same graffing in [though more
gloriously] as ours is now; and it is apparent that at their first graffing in,
they and their chi^dren were taken in; at their casting out they and their
children were broken off; and when they shall be taken in again at the end of
the world, they and their children shall be taken in together; and all this by
virtue of the Covenant, Ero Deus tuus, etc. Which is the same to us and to
them, we and they making up the Church of God.

In your Examen of this Argument you still proceed in your old method; first to
cast scorn upon it, as such an obscure Argument, That none but a Diver of
Delos can fetch up the meaning of it: and indeed, should you not pretend
difficulties, you could have no color to bring in so many imaginary senses;
thereby to darken an Argument, which is the second branch of your Artifice: As
whether this ingraffing be meant of the visible, or invisible Church, by faith,
or profession of says certain, by reason of election, or Covenant of grace
made to them, or probable and likely, because for the most part it happens so,
etc. Alas Sir, why do you thus strip your self to dive under the water, when
the sense swims upon the top: Look how the Jews were Gods people, so are the
Churches of the Gentiles; look how the Jews children were graffed in, so are
our children, we are taken in, in stead of them who were cast out, and become
one visible kingdom of Christ with the rest of, them who kept their station;
this is the plain sense of my Argument. Now if you please but to apply all
your imaginary senses to the Jews and their children, and say, if they and
their children were graffed in together, was it into the visible, or invisible
Church? was it by faith, or the profession of faith? was it certain or
probable? Do you not think your Reader would smile at the vanity of these
questions?

When you have set down your senses, next you thus proceed, the thing that is
to be proved is, That all the infants of every believer are in the Covenant of
Free grace in Christ, and by virtue thereof to be baptized into the Communi-
of the visible Church. No Sir, the thing to be proved from this Text, is, That
our infants have the same right which the infants of the Jews had, and your
Arguments fight against the Infants of the Jews, as much as against the Infants
of the Gentiles; for [to apply your own words spoken of believers now, to the
Jews then,] Though it may be granted that the infants of the Jews were for
the most part under the election and Covenant of grace, and so in the visible
Church; yet it will not follow that every infant of a Jew, in as much as he is
the child of a Jew, or a believer, is under the Covenant of grace, because we
have Gods express declaration to the contrary, Romans 9. 6, 7, 8. and all
experience proves the contrary; is not this as much against the one as the
other?

To what I said, the Jews Infants were graffed in by Circumcision; therefore
ours are to be ingraffed in by Baptism. You answer, by demanding whether in
good sadness I do think the Apostle here means by graffing in, baptizing or
Circumcision, or incision by outward Ordinances; for if that were the meaning,
then breaking off must be meant of uncircumcising or unbaptizing. To which I
reply, that in good sober sadness I do think that graffing in is admission
into visible membership, or visible communion with the Church of Christ; and
that the external seal of their visible graffing in was Circumcision, and of
ours Baptism; and yet it follows not, that breaking off is only
uncircumcising, or unbaptizing* but breaking off^^^ a casting out from that
visible membership whereof this Sacrament is a Symbol. But to you it seems
that ingraffing here, is meant of the invisible Church by election and faith: I
Reply, if it be meant of the invisible Church only; and that all who are
graffed in, in the Apostles sense, whether Jews or Gentiles, are only
electones, I will solemnly promise you never to plead this Scripture more, for
any Infants, either of Jews or Gentiles; no nor for visible Professors of
either of them; provided only if you cannot make that good, you will [as
indeed you must] yield that some are to be reputed visible Church Members,
though not elect, whether Jews or Gentiles, and that our graffing in, is as
theirs was; they and their children, we and our children; and if you please,
let us a little try it out. The Text is plain, some of the branches were
broken off, such branches whose natural growing in the Olive yielded them that
privilege which they now partake of who are graffed in in their stead; were
these broken off from the invisible Church? you dare not say so: if then the
Olive from which they were broken off, be the visible Church, I have enough:
and I wonder that any but an Arminian, should make any question that the
Apostle speaks only of rejecting the Nation of the Jews from being the
visible Church, and taking the body of the Gentiles in their stead, to be Gods
visible Kingdom; in that it is meant of such an ingraffing as may be broken
off, which cannot be from the invisible Church. But let us see how you seek to
evade this, and how you prove that it must be meant of the invisible Church:
Abraham (say you) bad a a double capacity, one of a natural Father, and
another the father of the faithful; in respect of the former capacity, some
are called branches according to nature; others wild Olives by nature, yet
graffed in by faith: and when it is said that some of the natural branches
were brokin off, the meaning is not that some of the branches of the invisible
Church may be broken off; but only such as were so in appearance, according as
our Savior expresses it Joh. 15. 2. But I Reply, I profess I understand not
how this distinction gives you the least help, for tell me I pray you, were
not these whom you call natural branches is truly in the Olive as they who
being wild by nature were yet graffed in, in the stead of them who were broke
off? If they were, how does this distinction help you? You say indeed, That the
Infants of believing Jews were not in the Covenant of grace, because they were
their children: if by this you mean they were not members of the invisible
Church, you say the truth, but nothing to the purpose. But if your meaning be,
that they had not a visible membership, such an ingraffing as gave them a right
to outward Ordinances; you not only contradict the Scripture, but your self,
who plead this, That it was a peculiar privilege to Abraham, that his children
should have such a visible standing as ours have not: plainly, the Jews were
the natural branches, some of them were elect, some not, the body of them were
the branches spoke of in this place; many of these were broke off, others of
them kept their station; yet Gods election fails not; even so is it now, the
Gentiles were graffed in, that is, their visible faith gave them a visible
ingraffing, their invisible faith gave them (who have it) an invisible
membership: yea, to me your self seem to say as much, when page 63. you
affirm, incision may be either into the visible or invisible Church; graffing
in, may be either by faith, or profession of faith. And page 65. It is true
that our present graffing in, is answerable to [or rather for their] casting
out; that is, God would supply in his Olive tree the Church, the casting away
of the Jews by the calling of the Gentiles, so much the Apostle says, ver. 17.
thou being a wild Olive, were graffed in, in ramorum defractorum locum, into
the place of the branches broken off; if you mean it in this sense (say you) I
grant it. And truly Sir, in these words, to my understanding, you grant not
only my interpretation of this place, but even the question controverted
betwixt us. First, you grant my interpretation, that it is not meant of the
invisible, but the visible Church: for I know you will not say that any of the
elect Jews were broken off, and the Gentiles elected and put into their place.
It must therefore be meant of the visible, and of the visible Church of the New
Testament; and that those Jews who kept their station, and we who are in the
room of those that were broke off, do make that Olive which the Jews made
before. Yea secondly, you by necessary confequence grant, that our children are
taken in as theirs were, we are graffed in, in ramorum defractorum loeum; we
supply in the Olive tree the Church, the casting away of the Jews. Now if we
thus supply, our children supply the place of their children which were broken
off; and beside, we are one with the rest of the Jews who remained in this
Olive; and their remaining in the Olive, did not (I hope) deprive them of that
privilege which before-times they had for their children, and therefore we
must have the same with them, and a greater then they had for their children,
none of us ever pleaded, though ours be clearer, and a greater measure of grace
accompanying it.

You go on, and say, when some of the natural branches were cut off, it is
not meant any otherwise then our Savior Christ means, Joh. 15. 2. Every
branch in me not bearing fruit he Joh. 15. 2. proves the interpretation to be
true.
takes away; that is, not that any branch truly in him could be fruitless, or
taken away, but only those branches which were so in appearance. I reply, that
this is my very meaning, that this standing as branches of the Olive, is not to
be limited to the invisible, but takes in the visible also, not restrained to
such as have a spiritual union with Christ by faith, but takes in also the
external profession of faith, which often times is not in truth, that which it
appears to be.

Whereas you say, the Apostles scope in the whole chapter is to answer that
question; Has God cast away his people, etc. and not to show that we have now
the same graffing into the true Olive which the Jews formerly had. I answer, I
undertook not to Analize the whole Chapter, but to open the scope of that
matter or argument which begins at the 16 ver. and that you cannot gainsay, but
that there the Apostle makes an Argument from our graffing in in their stead.
And you mind me also of my own distinction of the substance of the Covenant,
and the administration of it. Sir, I thank you for remembering me of it, it is
of very good use in this place, though not of that use which you bring it for,
we have the same Covenant with them for the substance; which Covenant consists
of the same blessings, and is applyable upon the same conditions, belongs to
the same sorts of persons, but the administration of it, is clean differing
from theirs. You grant, That by faith we partake of the substance of the
Covenant, in respect of which, all believing Gentiles are Abraham's seed. Yea,
and you may add, visible believers are his visible seed: But if you mean it
(say you) of the outward administration of this ingraffing by Circumcision,
Baptism, etc. nothing is more false, the outward administration is utterly
taken away; and to affirm that it is not, were to ^vacuate the blood of Christ
in this particular. But Sir, this is at the best but cunning dealing, and in
part, a confident false assertion; it is cunning to say by Circumcision,
Baptism, etc. as if both these belonged to one administration. Indeed to
affirm that ingraffing into the visible Church, should now be by
Circumcision, were to evacuate the death of Christ in that particular; but to
say [as you ought, if you would speak plainly] that to have our initiation now
by Baptism into the visible Church, as formerly by Circumcision; or to say
that all outward administrations of the Covenant are now utterly taken away,
[though the old one is vanished] is not only a confident, but a false
assertion, and if you say not this, you apply my distinction to no purpose.

You go on, whereas I said their taking in in the end of the world will be as
ours, they and their children; you grant this is true. If it be true, that
their children by being the children of believers shall be accounted to belong
to the Church, you grant my Argument, if you mean not so, but think that at
their last and best restoration, their children shall not enjoy that privilege
which they had when they were Gods people before, why do you not say so, that
all the world may see that you think in their best condition they shall be
deprived of that glorious privilege which they enjoyed in their nonage? and
yet you grant, That they and their children shall be taken in, yea and a more
full taking in of the children of the Jews, then is now of the Gentiles,
according to that, Romans 11. 26. And so all Israel shall be saved. But (say you)
all this proves not, that God would have either all Infants of believers,
counted his as elect persons, or in the Covenant of grace in Christ, or in the
face of the visible Church admitted to Baptism. I answer, the thing to be
proved was, our Infants have the same privilege with theirs* and that it
proves abundantly; as for election, we are not to esteem all visible members,
whether Infants or grown men, to be elected, God having declared the contrary,
this being true in all ages of the Church, Many are called, and but few chosen.
Notwithstanding, when we speak of particulars, we have the same ground of
charitable hope for one as for another. As for your other expression, That this
proves not that they are to be looked upon as visible members of the Church,
and to be admitted to outward Ordinances; this is only to deny the Conclusion,
whether this being proved, that our Infants have the same right to be reckoned
to the Church of God, as well as the Infants of the Jews, be not a just ground,
and as good a foundation to prove, that therefore they must be admitted to
that Ordinance which is the initiall seal, shall in due time appear, when I
have made good the next conclusion, That Baptism succeeds in the room of
circumcision to that use; in the mean time let the Reader judge.

I further said of the Jews, they shall by virtue of Gods Covenant be taken in
again in the end of the world, because the root is holy, because Gods covenant
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob extends yet to them, and shall again blossom,
and will take place, when the Nations unbeleefe shall be taken away, and their
present national condition I shadowed out in the comparison of Nebuchadnezzars
dream, Dan. 4. 14. of a tree that was cut down, and the root bound with an
iron chain, and yet afterward did grow again. The thing it self you deny not,
nor go about to answer my argument drawn from the Jews, viz. we, as they, were
taken in; they, and their children shall be at the last taken in again, as
they were at the first: and therefore we and they making up the same body, are
taken in upon the same ground, our children with us, as well as theirs with
them; this Argument (I say) you go not about to answer, but in stead of
answering, you pick quarrels against my comparison taken from Nebuehadnezzars
dream. Why Sir, I never thought a Scholar would have expected a comparison
should run upon four feet; nor have wrested it beyond what was intended by
it, I never intended to make Nebuchadnezzars dream an argument to prove, but
only to illustrate, that as that tree for a while was cut down, and the root
bound with an Iron chain, was kept from growing, yet in the end the chain was
removed, and the tree grew again; so the nation of the Jews was for a while
cast off, from being the people of God, during the time of their blindness and
unbeleefe, but in the end the veil should be removed, and their nation taken
into their former Church-standing, yea and more gloriously, and that by reason
of the Covenant; But from this you seek to draw many absurdities, and to show
wherein my comparison holds not; as this tree is not cut down as that was,
only some branches broken off, and that to make Abraham the root; to be bound
with a chain is unhandsome; and that in this allufion, I sometimes make
Abraham the root, sometimes the Covenant the root, etc. all which are worthy
of no answer; nothing being held out in the allusion but what I now said;
nevertheless, were it pertinent to our controversy it might easily enough be
showed, how in a sound sense the Covenant is the root upon which Abraham and
all the rest of the branches grow, and also how by virtue of the Covenant,
Abraham is also a root from which his seed grow, yea, and several believers
are roots from which their posterity springs, and how in one sound sense
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all visible believers make up this one tree this
Olive, and yet in another sense they are all but branches of this Olive.

Whereas I said in all this discourse, the holiness of the branches there
spoke of, is not meant of a personal inherent holiness, but an holiness
derived to them from their Ancestors, a faederall holiness. Against this you
except many things. First, Mr. Goodwin expounds it otherwise: if Mr. Goodwin
mean that there is no other holiness which may make men esteemed so in facie
dei according to Romans 2. ult. I concur with him, but if he say there is no
other holiness, or that the profession of holiness may not make him pass as
holy in facie visibilis Ecclesiae, when I hear him say so (as yet I never did)
I shall dissent from him though he be my loving friend. Secondly, say you,
bear are diverse things to be marked indeed, but with an obeliske: indeed Sir
that brand is always ready at your hand, let us see whether you have set it
justly or no in this place, and whether your impartial Reader will not take
Derivative and inherent holiness not opsed.
it off and set it upon your self. I oppose (say you) personal inherent
holiness, to derivative holiness as inconsistent: but Reader look into my
Sermon, and see whether I did so or no; I confidently deny this charge, I only
showed the meaning of the word in this place to be of derivative holiness
common to the whole nation, not excluding personal inherent holiness in true
believers among them; and I say again, the whole nation was called holy, not
personally inherent, but federally; and you acknowledge here a derivative
holiness from Abraham as a spiritual father, yet I suppose you will not
undertake to justify that true inherent holiness is derived from any, but
from our Lord Jesus Christ, and his holy spirit. Next say you, this holiness
is derived not from any Ancesters, but only from Abraham. But I beseech you in
your next not only to dictate this, as in this book you do very often; but
clear and prove it by some good arguments, why it does not descend from other
immediate parents, who are believers, as well as originally from Abraham: for
parents who are branches from Abraham their father, are yet roots to their
children who spring from them; Do we not read of the root of Iesse, Esaias 11?
though he was but a branch from Abraham, might not every parent among the
Jews, at least every believing parent apply that promise made to Abraham, I
will be the God of thee, and thy seed? if you think he may not, disprove the
Arguments which I have brought for it, in answer to your sixth Section. I demand
further, was not such a holiness derived from Abraham to his natural seed, or
posterity, where all Abraham's posterity, who are called the holy seed, true
believers, and inwardly holy? No (say you) other parents are not Believing
parents are roots to their children.
roots, Abraham only is an holy root, or at the most, Abraham, Is^ac, and
Jacob, in whose names the Covenant runs. To which I reply, first, this is to
say and unsay; Abraham only is an holy root, yet Isaac and Jacob are holy
roots too. Secondly, the Apostle names none of them at all, but speaks of the
fathers, which includes all their Ancestors, at least more then Abraham only.
Thirdly, how often did God (as I showed before) renew that promise, I will be
the God of thee and of thy seed, after Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were all dead?
Fourthly, your self say, the body of believers is compared to the Olive tree,
and each believer to a branch, and then, sure Abraham, Isaac and Jacob only,
are not the root or tree which bare the branches, but the body of believers is
the tree, and so (by your own grant) it follows, believers in one sense are
the tree, in another the branches. Fifthly, I add, that the body of believers,
who make this Olive tree and branches, must necessarily be understood of
visible professors, and not restrained or limited to true believers only,
otherwise the branches could not have been broken off, as is aforesaid.

Next you step out of your way, to reproach Mr. Thomas Mr. Goodwin Vindicated.
Goodwin, who (say you) indeavored to inserre a kind of promise of deriving
holiness from believers to their posterity out of the similitude of an Olive,
and its branches, compared with Psalm. 128. 3. etc. And then you vilify him, as
a man who by spinning out similitudes and conjectures, deludes his Auditory
with such things, rather then satisfy them with arguments: what his discourse
was, you set not down, nor in what sense he alleged holiness to be derived
from believing parents to their posterity, but why like Ishmael your sword
should be thus against every man, I cannot tell? as for Mr. Goodwin
(notwithstanding his difference from me in some points of Church Government) I
can do no less then testify that I know him to be a Learned godly Divine,
and an eminent Preacher of the Gospel of Christ, and his worth not to be
blasted by your scornful speech; and for the things you allege against him,
he assures me, You have set down his notions in your Book otherwise then he
preached them; and that in due time he intends to publish his Sermons, and
then the world shall see whether you have done him right or not.

Lastly, to that which I asserted, That the Infants both of Children follow the
Covenant condition of their parents.
Jews and Gentiles, for these outward dispensations are comprehended in their
Parents; the Infants of godly Parents, according to the tenor of his mercy; the
Infants of the wicked, according to the tenor of his justice: you upon this
demand whether I do not in this symbolize with Arminius, who makes this the
cause why the posterity of some people have not the gospel, because their
forefathers refused it; and you bring in the learned Doctor Twisse, and Moulin
disputing against him in that point. How feign would you Mr Tombs symbolizing
with Arminius his expounding Romans 11.
say somewhat which might reproach this Argument? But may not both these things
be true, that God shows mercy to whom he pleases, and hardens whom he pleases,
and yet shows mercies to thousands of generations that fear him, and visit the
sins of parents upon their children? may we not say truly when God cast out
the nation of the Jews from being his people, that for their sins he gave the
Bill of Divorce to them and to their children, that they should no longer be
his people in Covenant, as they were in time past, and yet his grace remain
free? I spoke expressly of outward administration of the Covenant, That when
Parents are taken into Covenant, their children also with them have a visible
right, and when God gives a bill of divorce from a visible Church standing,
(for to true believers he never gives any) their children are cast out with
them, as appears in the Jews at this day; is this to symbolise with Arminius;
or does Doctor Twisse or Moulin, or any other of our Orthodox writers gainesay
this? I appeal to every learned Reader to judge; But e regione, I desire you
to show how you will avoid symholizing with the Arminians, who endeavor to
prove falling away from true grace and holiness, from this 11. of the Romans,
because the branches were broken off, when you with them say, the graffing into
the Olive here is meant of true believers graffed into the invisible Church,
yet of the branches growing in, or graffed into this Olive, it is expressly said
some were broken off, and others will fare no better if they believe not. Bert
us in his relation of the conference at the Hague, urges this very place, to
prove that it is poss^ble for the Saints to fall away from grace, because we
are advised to take warning by the Jews Example, who were broken off for their
unbeleefe; I know that you think not that true believers may fall away, but
how you will avoid the Argument, interpreting this place as you do, I profess
I cannot tell.

And now I leave it to every judicious Reader, whether you or I have darkened
this Scripture, whether you in saying this Text, is meant of the invisible
Church only, and the graffing in is by election and faith, or I who say the
rejecting is of the Jews from being of the visible Church, and ingraffing is
meant of the taking in of the Churches of the Gentiles to be the visible
Church, kingdom, and people of God in their rooms; whether (in a word) I who
interpret it of such a growing in the Olive, or ingraffing into it, as may
endure a breaking off, and yet none fall from saving grace who once had it, or
you who make such a graffing in, as that if any branches be broken off, it
must necessarily follow, that branches may be rent off from the invisible
Church, and fall away from inward holiness, have interpreted this Text, most
agreeable to the Analogy of faith, and the Apostles scope: and to conclude, let
the Reader also judge, whether this Text (notwithstanding all your endeavors)
remain not still in my hands, as one of my strong holds, to defend this
conclusion, That the obildron of believers new, have the same right to the
Covenant with their Parents, as the children of the Jews had with their
Parents.

Now (say you) you are come to my principal hold, 1 Cor. 7. 14. I perceive at
first you think there is some To Sect. 8. 1 Cor. 7. vindicated.
strength in it, for you have brought a huge army against it, and drawn a long
line about it, raised abundance of batteries, and in a very long discourse say
something almost to every sentence of mine concerning this Scripture, and after
all your shot is spent, you cry Io triumphus, I have got your chief hold which
you had best manned. Truly Sir you speak like (...), qui diff^avi^ omnes
(...) Gurgu (...). But the best is, all the ground is not yours that you walk
over, nor every man killed that you shoot at. I have no fear that your great
swelling words will give any satisfaction to your judicious Readers; we will
come to what you have done, and try what strength there is in this long
Section, and that I may make my answer to it as brief as is possible, I shall
bring all the matter of your discourse to three heads. First, such things as
wherein you and I do agree, and must necessarily agree. Secondly such things
as wherein whether we agree or disagree it matters not much to the point in
controversy; these two I shall but touch upon. Thirdly, such things wherein
we differ, and which really concern the controversy betwixt us. And these
things (God willing) we will try out hand to hand.

First, we agree, that sanctified may have many senses, and that of those
many, two only are applicable in this place, either the matrimonial
sanctification, which you insist upon, viz. Chastity in the wife and husband,
or lawful matrimony between them, and legitimation of the children. Or else
Isntrumental sanctification, in the husband and wife, and federall holiness
in the children, which I insist upon. We agree also, secondly, that i^ may
signify by as well as in. We further agree thirdly, that the seepe and
meaning of the Text is, that the Corinthians having writ for the Apostles
resolution whether it were lawful for them who were converted, still to
retain their Infidel wives or husbands; the Apostle here resolves that case
upon the affirmative. And I will further agree with you fourthly, that these
words else were your Children unclean, etc. are a medium or argument whereby
the Apostle proves the former sentence, the unbeleeving husband is sanctified
in the wife, etc. I yet further agree, fifthly, that all the places which you
cite out of the learned Chamier often cited to no purpose.
Chamier are Orthodox, and clearly prove that for which he brings them, viz.
That sanctification cannot be understood of the conversion of the unbeleever,
through the diligence of the believer, page 73. And that the Argument is not
fetched from a contingent thing, page 74. And that holiness is not meant of
ceremonial holiness (which sense was ascribed to Augustine) page 76. And that
the holiness of Children here, is not that which they receive from their
education, page 75. And I am sure you must agree with me, sixthly, that in all
these testimonies you have cited out of Chamier, there is not one word against
my Interpretation, or for the Justification of yours; And against his own
judgment.
yea and I know also that you will agree with me seventhly, that the learned
Chamier in a large dispute does confute your interpretation, and vindicate my
interpretation, as the only true and proper meaning of this Text, even in that
very place where you quote him. And therefore I know the Reader will agree with
me (whether you do or no) Cham. Panstrat. Cathol. Tom. 4. lib. 3. ca. 10.
that you do but abuse your Author and Reader, both in making a flourish with
Chamiers name nothing to the purpose, and thereby would make the Reader
conceive Chamier to be of your side when he is point-blanke against you. I
yet further agree with you, eighthly, that some Interpreters both ancient and
modern do interpret this Text as you do, and I am sure you will also agree
that it were easy for me to bring ten for one, who interpret this Text as I
do; though I forbear to bumbast my book with them, no ways desiring that
this cause should be carried by number of suffrages.

Secondly, there are many things in this Section wherein we differ, but the
cause depends nothing at all upon them; Beza cited by Mr. Tombs contrary to
his own judgment.
first, you several times cite the learned Beza as if he were of your mind in
the interpretation of this Text, to construe it of matrimonial holin^ss^. I
confess the cause depends not upon Beza's judgment, but your reputation
depends much upon making this good: That you should dare to cite an author as
interpreting it for you who exprofesso interprets it against you; Beza indeed
acknowledges this Text warrants a lawful use, but withal sets himself to
prove that that is not all, but says it is such a sanctification as I contend
for, and says, no man may interpret it otherwise then I do of federall
holiness: according to the Covenant, Ero Deus tuu^, etc. And out of that very
Text, does (in his annotations upon that place) assert Infant Baptism.
Secondiy, you think this Text was never interpreted of federall holiness
until the days of Luther: the cause I confess depends not upon this, but it
discovers some defect in your reading, since it is apparent that Athanasius,
one of the most ancient of the Greek Fathers, and Tertullian one of Tertullian
and Athanasius expound this Text for sederall holiness.
the most ancient of the Latin Fathers bring this Text to prove the
prerogative of the Infants of believers, which certainly they could not have
done if they had interpreted as you do, that their children were legitimate,
nor have given them any title to the kingdom of heaven, if to their
understanding it had not related to the Covenant of Grace. Thirdly, whether Mr.
Blakes paralleling this place with Gal. 2. 15. (upon which you spend almost two
whole pages) be good or no, or whether these places do interpret one another,
is not much material to the present controversy about this Text, although it
be plain, that by Jews by nature the Apostle intends the Church-priviledge of
the Jews in opposition to the Gentiles, as I have elsewhere showed. Fourthly,
whether Bellarmine was the first who expounded holy for Iegitimate, in
confuting whereof you spend another page, and allege sundry Authors before him
who so understood it; this is not to our business though you take occasion to
show your reading in it.

Thirdly, this therefore only remains to be tried out between us, whether
this be meant of lawfulness of wedlock between man and wife, and legitimation
of children, as you affirm; or of Isntrumental sanctification, between
husband and wife quoad hoc, and federall holiness of children, as I affirm;
wherein I shall, first, make it plain that your Interpretation cannot hold;
secondly, that mine must stand.

The sense which you undertake to justify is, that it is a Matrimonial
sanctification, when the Apostle says the unbeleeving husband is sanctified by
the wife, etc. the meaning i^, their marriage is lawful, and their children
are not unclean, but holy; the meaning is, they are not bastards, but lawfully
begotten. Against this I dispute. First, in making good Mr. Tombs his
interpretation of this Text overthrown by eight Arguments.
the four Arguments used in my Sermon against this interpretation; the first
whereof was this, uncleanness and holiness when opposed one to another, are
never meant of civilly lawful or unlawful, but are always used in a sacred
sense, alluding to a right of admission into or use in the tabernatle 1
Argument vindicated.
or Temple, which were types of the visible Church, and holiness is always
taken for a separation of Persons or things from common to sacred use. To this
you except many things.

First, you like not the term civil holiness, you rather would call it
matrimonial holiness, because its institution is of God, not from the laws of
Man. I Reply, this is a poor shift; by holy and civil we distinguish things
belonging to the first and second Table. All second Table duties are civil
things, though their institution be of God; civil Magistracy though instituted
of God; obedience of children to their Parents, though instituted of God; and
all the judicial laws given to the Jews about meum and tuum; were they not
therefore civil, because they were Gods institutions? Or is marriage a
business more concerning Religion, then these are? is it a Sacrament? or how
else, is it more holy then these other civil things?

You except secondly, uncleanness may be taken for bastardy, in an allusion
to a Tabernacle use: Bastards being numbered among the unclean. I Reply, this
is spoken without any proof, for although the Lord says, Deuteronom. 23. 2.
Deuteronomy. 23. 2. vindicated.
That a bastard shall not come into the congregation of the Lord, it cannot be
meant that bastards shall be numbered among the unclean, or having nothing to
do about Tabernacle or Temple services; for there was the same law for Eunuchs
who were not excluded as unclean: no unclean person might eat the Passover,
might no Eunuch or Bastard eat the Passover? Beside, when you thus construe,
else were your children unclean, you make there a Bastard and unclean, to be
termini convertibiles, consequently every unclean child must be a bastard. Now
if any man would suppose that bastards might be reckoned amongst unclean, yet
all unclean children must not be reckoned amongst bastards; all the children
of the Gentiles were unclean, but they were not bastards. It is needless to
enter into a further discourse about that place, Deuteronomy. 23. how or in what sense
a bastard might not come into the Congregation; whether by the Congregation be
meant the Sanhedrin, as some; or whether his not entering, be of bearing
Office, as others; or of not marrying a wife an Israelitesse, as others, it
matters not, it is sufficient they were not numbered among the unclean.

Thirdly, you refer me to the 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7. God has not called us to
uncleanness, but unto holiness; and desire me to tell you, whether
uncleanness be not there meant of fornication, and by holiness, chastity. I
answer, I prevented this in my Sermon: and showed that chastity among the
Heathens, is never called sanctification; the holy Spirit only is the Spirit
of sanctification, and the bodies of the Heathens are not the temples of the
holy Ghost: but among believers it may be called so, because it is a part of
the new creation, a part of the inward adorning of the Temples of the holy
Ghost; and though the chastity of believers is only a moral virtue in respect
of the object, yet in respect of the root, principle, end, it is a Christian
virtue, and it is an act of pure Religion, to keep a man's self unspotted from
the flesh, as well as from the world, Iam. 1. 27. Besides, I now add, there is
no reason that that place, 1 Thessalonians. 4. should be restrained to fornication, 1 Thessalonians. 4. vindicated. Beza not interprets this Text as Mr. Tombs would seem to
make him.
because many other sins are named in that place, besides fornication. Mark the
words in the 3 ver. the Apostle tells them, That the will of God is their
sanctification, that every one should abstain from fornication; that no man
go beyond and defraud his brother in any matter. And then he gives this as a
reason common to all the particulars, because God ha^h not called us to
uncleanness, but to holiness. So that by holiness there, is meant not only
chastity but justice also; and what kind of consequence were there in such an
Argument; let no man go beyond his brother in bargaining, because God has not
called us to fornication, but to chastity? Whereas you allege Beza thus
interpreting this Text, verse. 3. This is the will of God, even your
sanctification, i. e. says Beza, that you abstain from fornication; and upon
this id est, you build much; therefore I shall consider it. Sir, id est put in
by Beza, has reference not only to that which does immediately follow,
namely, that you abstain from fornication; but to the 6 verse also, that no
man go^ beyond and defraud his brother: Beza says, id est, ut abstineatis, ut
ne quis opprimat and habeat quaestui, It being ordinary to have instances given
in the second Table, when the duties of the first Table are included, if not
principally intended; that the holy Ghost might meet with Hypocrites, who are
apt to put all their holiness in outward performances. Yea, Beza in the same
place in his Annotations upon the word (...), referres him to Job. 17. 17. and
his note upon Job. 17. 17. is this, Sanctum autem dicitur, quod Deo
peculiariter devotum ac consecratum est; an expression agreeable to the Hebrew
notion, and therefore Beza adds, est autem hoc vocabulum profectum ab
Hebraeis: so that by Beza we are brought back to the notion of consecrating and
devoting things to God. But you yet endeavor further, and turn and wind the
words every way, and run over all words that are of the same Tribe or kindred,
(...), because you cannot find (...) among the heathen; and in the end you have
Hen. Steph. misrecited.
found an instance in Stephanus's Thesaurus, where (...) signifies castim^niam
servo, [I am chaste.] But first, Stephanus speaks but doubtingly, he puts in
videtur, which you leave out. Besides, (...) is usually meant, (...), so
Suidas; and the very instance which you from Stephanus have brought out of
Demosthenes, makes directly against you: for the Priest says, I offer
sacrifice, and I am in case to do it, for I am pure from the company of man,
(...), and all other things which might pollute me. That is, I am holy
according to my order, and therefore fit to do my office. These last words
which give the full sense of the place, you have (not very fairly) left out of
your Quotation. Yet you make another supplement out of Corinth. 7. 1 Cor. 7.
34. mis-interpreted by Mr. Tombs.
34. That she may be holy in body and spirit; and demand whether the meaning be
not that she may be chaste. I answer, the plain meaning is, that she being
free from worldly distractions, is at more liberty to give her self wholly to
godliness, then others can, who have these worldly avocations; and in truth it
is a pretty odd sense which you have invented of this place, the unmarried
cares for the things of God, that she may be chaste; but she that is married
cares for the things of the world how she may please her husband. I wonder
what learned man concurs with you in this: I doubt in this rare interpretation
you are all alone. When I added, That even 1 Timothy 4 5. vindicated.
the meat and drink of believers, sanctified to them, serves for a religious
end and use, to refresh them who are the Temples of the holy Ghost. You answer,
then is seems in eating and drinking they do an act of religion; to which I
need no other reply then your next words, that they are sanctified to them by
the word and prayer, they receiving them after an holy manner, with faith,
supplication, and thankesgiving, etc. And that this place of Timothy does hold
out more then a lawful use, is most apparent; because it is such a use of the
creatures as the heathen had not, who yet had a lawful use of the creatures;
and it is such a use as is appliable only to believers; and such a use as is
procured by the Word and prayer: and although wicked men do not do an act of
Religion in feeding the bodies of the Saints, because all their actions are
unclean; yet believers have an holy use of those creatures which heathens feed
them with having the Word not only to warrant the use of them, but prayer to
procure Gods blessing, to that end for which they eat and drink, which is to
live unto God.

My second Argument was, had this been the meaning, Else were your children
unclean, but now are they holy; else had 2 Arg. vindicated.
your children bin bastards, but now they are legitimate; the Apostles answer
had not been true; because then if one of the parents had not been a believer,
and so by being a believer, had sanctified the unbeleever, their children must
have been bastards, whereas we know children born in lawful wedlock are
legitimate, though both the Parents were unbeleevers. To which you answer, this
privilege comes not from the faith of the believer, but from the relation of
marriage; and your reason is, because the Apostle says not, the unbeleever is
sanctified by the believer; but from the husband or the wife, although one or
two old Copies have the word believer, yet the rest have it not* and the reason
cannot be conceived rightly to be any other, but that although the person meant
were a believer is well as an husband or wife; yet in this passage they were
considered only as husband and wife, and not as believers, to intimate that
the sanctification did not come from the faith of the party, but from conjugall
relation.

I reply, this expressly crosses the Apostles confessed scope, for the
question was not, whether an husband might leave his wife, or a wife her
husband, the Apostle had resolved that case before, ver. 10. but whether a
believing husband might leave or separate from an unbeleever; no (says the
Apostle) if the unbeleever be content to dwell together, (if not, let them go,
a brother or a sister is not in bondage in such a case) Why? for the unbeleever
is sanctified in or by the wife; but now in your sense, the Argument had been
as good, to say, the unbeleever is sanctified in or by the unbeleever; or the
believer is sanctified in or by the unbeleever, which had been nothing to the
question in hand. Again, the Apostle expressly names the unbeleever in
opposition to the wife or husband who is a believer; of which there had been no
use, if he had intended only matrimonial sanctification, he might have said
the husband is sanctified by the wife, and the wife by the husband, let them
be what they will, which cannot be spoken truly, when the Scripture plainly
says, Nothing is pure or holy to the unbeleever, as Beza well observes upon
this place: and though the word believer be not in the Text, [yet it is
necessarily employed, and therefore some Copies have it in the Margin, not only
one old Copy, and a Copy of Clermont, and the Vulgar Latin so read it, but
Augustine also in his book, wherein he expounds the Sermon on the Mount; and
Tertullian in libro secundo ad ux^rem,] for as Beza rightly observes, the
question is concerning a believer, what he is to do with an unbeleever; and
when he says the unbeleeving party is sanctified in or by the other party, it
plainly implies the one party sanctifies the other, viz. the believer
sanctifies the unbeleever, (not retro) which needed not be said of matrimonial
sanctification, as you call it, for in that sense both parties were sanctified
in themselves, not in or by one another, marriage being honorable among all,
and the bed (the coitus) undefiled. Besides, there are words which plainly
denotate it a little before, a brother or sister, which are taken for
believers, ver. 12. if a brother have an unbeleeving or infidel wife, ver. 15.
a brother or a sister is not in bondage in such a case: And if you should say
the believing party sanctifies the unbeleever, not qua believer, but by the
Word and prayer I answer, this would make the Argument stronger; for it is
therefore such a sanctification as heathens are not capable of.

My Third Argument was, the Apostles argument had had no strength in it,
supposing the text were to be interpreted as these Argument 3. vindicated.
men would have it: their doubt (say they) was, their marriage was an unlawful
wedlock; and so consequently their children bastards; and they make the
Apostles answer to be, were you not lawful man and wife, your children were
bastards: which kind of Argument (said I) were but idem per idem. Your answer
to this is such a one as I know not what to make of it; you say I do not
rightly set down my Adversaries explication of the Apostle, the doubt (say
you) was only, whether they might live in conjugall use; but there was no
question of their children, whether they were legitimate or not; they were
assured their children were not bastards, but legitimate, and this the Apostle
uses as his medium, to prove they might lawfully live together. To which I
Reply, take this for granted which you say, and (if I want not common sense)
you plainly and fully answer your self, for if they were out of all doubt,
that their children were not bastards, then it was not possible for them to
doubt whether their own marriage were lawful; take this to be his Argument,
your children are legitimate, this you all grant: Ergo, your marriage is
lawful, of which you doubt: Risum teneatis amici? they received the one as a
supposed principle, that their children were lawfully begotten, which could not
be but in a lawful wedlock, yet had not light enough to know, that their
wedlock was a lawful wedlock; if they doubted not of the latter, how could
they of the former?

My Fourth Argument was according to this interpretation, the Apostles answer
could no way have reached to the qui^ting of Argumen^ 4
their consciences; their doubt was, whether they were not to put away their
wives and children as not belonging to God, as being a seed whom God would not
own among his people, and this answer could never have quieted their
consciences, to tell them their marriage was lawful, and their children
legitimate.

To which you answer, this Argument is grounded on a mistake, the question was
not (say you) about putting away of their Wives and children as not belonging
to God, but something else.

I Reply, but if it be not grounded upon a mistake, and that (as Beza says,)
Paut is not here arguing about civil policy, but arguing a case of conscience.
Whether because of the idolatry of the wife or husband, Religion did not
require they should be put away, because God would not have his holy seed
mingled with them, then by your own confession the Argument stands good; which
whether it will not be made out, shall (God willing) by and by appear.

These four Arguments I used before; and whether the first three be not
already vindicated, let the Reader judge; the fourth comes to be made good
afterward, when I come to confirm the interpretation which I made of it. I
shall briefly add four other Arguments, to show that this Text cannot be
interpreted as you would have it.

First, you say, The unbeleeving husband is sanctified by the wife, and
sanctification you here take for chastity: which is 5 Arg. against Mr. Tombs
interpretation.
a most incongruous speech, to say that the one party makes the other chaste;
if he or she were not unchaste, how are they made chaste by the husband or wife?
and if they be unchaste, how does this make them chaste? marriage is then
honorable or chaste when the bed is undefiled: this Argument is only from the
unseemlinesse of the expression.

Secondly, my second I take from your own words, page 73. Where you say, The
sanctification of the unbeleever here, 6 Argument.
is such a sanctification as is parallel with that, 1 Timothy 4. 5. where the
creatures are sanctified to the pure by the word and prayer; therefore there
must be more meant then the Heathens are capable of; therefore another
sanctification then matrimonial sanctification, for that the heathens had: if
therefore this must be such a sanctification as that place in Timothy means,
it must be a sanctification peculiar only to believers.

Thirdly, yet a third Argument I take from your own words: you have
endeavored (though in vain) to show 7 Argument.
that bastards may be called unclean, and holy may be called chaste; but you
do not, and I believe you cannot produce out of the Scripture the least show
of a proof, that holiness signifies legitimation; you are holy, id est, you
are lawfully begotten; if you can, pray let us have it in the next: sure I am,
that place, Mal. 2. 15. That man might seek a holy seed, or rather, a seed of
God, will give you no help; for though Mal. 2. 15. expounded and vindicated.
a seed of God in that place, might be interpreted (as M. Calvin would have it)
for legitimate, because (as he says) that uses to be called Divine, which is
excellent, a legitimate seed is in comparison of spurious, yet this is nothing
to holiness. The word in the Hebrew there used, is not a holy seed, but a seed
of God, an eminent or an excellent seed, as all eminent or notable things use
to be called; great Armies are called the Armies of God; great and high hills,
are called the hills of God; great and tall trees, are called the trees of God:
so that take a seed of God in that place for a legitimate seed, yet there is
nothing to prove that holiness may signify legitimation; though for my own
part (Pace tanti viri) I humbly conceive the Prophet intended, not a legitimate
seed only, (as Mr. Calvin would have it) but to show what was Gods chief end
in the institution of marriage, viz. The continuance of a seed of God, wherein
the Church is to be propagated to the end of the world; now according to your
interpretation of holiness for chastity, the Apostles Argument must run thus,
If your marriage were not lawful, your children would be bastards, but now
they are chaste; which sense were too ridiculous which to avoid you are
compelled in stead of chaste to say legitimate, without any example of such a
use of the word holy.

Lastly, yet one Argument more I propound, your sense ^ Argument.
makes the Apostles Argument wholly inconsequent, if the unbeleeving party were
not sanctified by the believer, (viz. matrimonially) then were your children
unclean, that is, (in your sense) Bastards, which follows not; for if they were
both unbeleevers, yet their children were not bastards; and if they were both
chaste, (yet being Infidells) their children were unclean, id est, Infidells
and Pagans, so that to close this I retort your own words, page the 75. That
let this be granted (that it is meant of matrimonial sanctification, ^^ of
necessity it must) then the uncleanenesse must be meant of Bastardy, and
holiness of Legitimation; but I say, e centra, let this be granted, (as of
necessity it must) that it is not meant of matrimonial sanctification, or
lawfulness of wedlock, then uncleanness must not be meant of Bastardy, nor
holiness of Legitimation, but of some other holiness, which what it is, is
next to be enquired.

Having thus plainly overthrown your interpretation, it remains that I make
good my interpretation against The true interpretation vindicated from Mr
Tombs exceptions. 1. Exception.
your exceptions, I said, their doubt seems to arise from the Law of God,
which was in force in Ezraes time, where Gods people were ordered to put away
their Infidel wives and children, as a polluted seed, which God would not have
mingled with his own: you answer, first, You see very little agreement,
between this case and that; and that the cases are very far different of two
persons not under the Law marrying in unbeleefe, and of two persons under the
Law, the one a Jew by profession, the other a stranger; secondly, and that none
of the phrases, except the word (holy), are used in the one place which are not
used in the other; thirdly, you rather think their doubt arose from a former
Epistle which he had wrote to them, mentioned 1 Cor. 5. 9. wherein he
commanded them not to keep company with fornicators, or Idolaters, thereupon
they might doubt whether they should continue with their unbeleeving yoke
fellows

I reply, first, that the cases were the very same when their scruple arose,
for though they were both unbeleevers when they were married, and at that time
neither of them both belonged to the Church of God, yet when one of them was
converted, and the other remained an Infidel, one of them was now become a
Churchmember, the other remained an alien, their case was the very same, and
they finding their condition parallel with that in Ezra might very well apply
that case to themselves, and make this their doubt. Secondly, although the
phrases used in Ezra differ from those used here, that makes nothing against
this collection, because phrases are used according to the different
administrations, each speaking according to the received dialect belonging to
the administration they lived under. Thirdly, and as to that, you say that it
might arise from 1 Cor. 5. 9. I answer, should that be granted, yet my sense
remains as strong as before, for if this scruple now rose, that if believers
because of the unbeleefe or Infidel condition of the husband or wife, might
not by the rule of the Gospel continue in marriage society with them, it must
be from some rule of Religion, which must strike upon their conscience, and
from what rule could they gather, that their marriage which before was lawful
was upon their conversion turned into fornication? and if their doubt were (as
your self grant) whether it were lawful for a converted party, or a believer
still to retain their Infidel wife or husband, (not of unbeleevers whether
they be sanctified matrimonially one to another) the doubt must necessarily
arise from something in Religion, some case which was peculiar to believers,
now (as Mr. Beza says truly) the doubt being in their consciences, of an
unlawfulness to continue in their married condition from some thing peculiar
to Gods people, the Apostle should have used a most indirect argument to
pacify their consciences in referring them to the civil Laws of other
nations, by which their marriage is proved lawful; and to what purpose should
he discourse of Bastards or the like, when their consciences were scrupled in
something which begun to concern them upon their conversion, and to tell them
they were sanctified in their unbeleefe, could never have reached the scruple
arising, after they begun to be believers, because their marriage might be
firm and good, while they remained unbeleevers; yet the Infidel might now
become impure in that relation of marriage to the other, which was converted.
And therefore it remains, that it must be resolved from some rule which must
reach believers, as they were the people of God, and not be common to Infidels
with them; now what is that Argument which Paul here uses to satisfy them?
(which must reach them as they were believers) your self grant it is this,
else were your children unclean, which is the medium, because your children
are not unclean but holy, therefore the unbeleever must be granted to be
sanctified to the wife or husband, this Argument must therefore necessarily
infer some kind of holiness which is appliable only to the State of
Religion, therefore it must be federall holiness.

But against this you except many things. First, this could not have resolved
the doubt in the case of those who by Age could 2. Exception.
not be sanctified to this end, or by reason of accidendall inabilitie for
generation, they might still depart each from other notwithstanding this
reason. I answer, it follows not, this is a Answ.
laying down of their right, which they may claim when ever they are capable
of it, this is their privilege, which remains firm though it should never
come into Act, as if a freeman of a City should have right to have all his
children borne freemen, that is to be numbered among his privileges, though
he should never have a child, this reaches to men and women, married, and
unmarried, yea even to children yet unborne: besides, the first part of it
reaches to the bed, even the coitus is not only undefiled, but sanctified.
Secondly, say you, this reason would then run 3. Exception.
thus, you may live together, for you may b^get a holy seed, and so their
consciences should have been resolved of their present lawful living together
from a future event which was uncertain, and here (as I touched before) you
bring in Chamier nothing to the purpose; I answer, it is not from a future
event, but from Answ.
a positive real truth, if Paul's reason be framed thus, the children which
believers beget upon their Infidel yoke-fellowes are a holy seed, therefore
believers have a sanctified use of their Infidel husbands or wives, had this
been a reasoning from a future contingent. As for what you here cite out of
Chamier, I answer only this, I persuade my self you are by this time ashamed
of your impertinent quotation, I assure my self, if you be not, your friends
are. Thirdly, say you, 4. Exception.
sanctification is here not ascribed to God a^ selecting some from others to
such an use, but is common to all unbeleeving husbands in respect of their
wives, and comes from that common relation, not special designation. I answer,
this Argument is a plain setting Answ.
down the question in controversy, as an Argument to prove it self, and I
have already proved the contrary, that it is a privilege not common to all who
are married, but peculiar to believers. Fourthly, say you, according to this
exposition the words following could not be true, else were your children
unclean, but now they are holy, because in this form of reasoning this
proposition is included, their children could not be holy without that
sanctification, which (say you) is false, because children may be in Covenant,
and be regenerated, though their parents had never been thus sanctified the
one to the other, the children of Infidel parents may be sanctified. I reply,
not while they are Infants, they are not by any birth privilege to be
accounted as belonging to the Church of Christ, which is the only thing about
which we are disputing, no man ever went about to prove out of this Text that
none can ever be converted, whose parents are not sanctified the one unto the
other.

Next (after another impertinent bringing in of Chamier) you reason thus, take
it in my sense, and it is no satisfactory 5. Exception.
reason you may live together, for you may beget a holy seed; I answer, this is
the same with your second Argument answered before; and wherein I pray you lies
the weakness of it, you may live together, and have a holy use of Answ.
your unbeleeving yoke-fellowes, for God esteems the seed of such to be an
holy seed as truly as if both were believers, is this a slight or unsatisfying
answer? nay I add further, had the Apostle gone about to prove, that a
believing wife and a believing husband have not only a lawful enjoyment one
of another, (as heathens have) but a sanctified, as they have of other
creatures, because else their children were unclean, but now they are holy,
all your exceptions would lie as strong against this last as against the
former, for you might have said, this reaches only those that are of age^;
secondly, this depends upon a future contingent; thirdly, this depends upon
their common relation; fourthly, and children may be holy, that is, afterward
regenerate though this be denied, let the Reader consider of it; You go on,
and say, that in 6. Ex^^ption.
your sense the reason is plain and satisfactory, let them live together,
though one be a believer, the other an unbeleever; for notwithstanding their
difference in Religion, they are husband and wife, marriage being honorable
among all, and the bed undefiled; I reply, but this had been no satisfaction to
their scruple, Answ.
their doubt was not whether their marriage were lawful while they were
heathens, but whether now their conscience would not be defiled, in remaining
joined to Idolaters, and the Apostles resolution must remove that, which your
sense does not; you granted, they doubted not the legitimation of their
children, and therefore your sense could not have removed the scruple, as is
above showed. And whereas you add the like resolution he gives verse the 17.
7. Exception.
concerning circumcised and uncircumcised servants, they might still continue
with their master, their Christian calling did not dissolve those relations. I
answer in one word, this like, has no Answ.
likeness at all in it, there is no parallel betwixt these two cases, he
speaks not one word about believing servants continuing with unbeleeving
masters, but of servants in general, whether their masters were believers or
unbeleevers, he tells them that they might continue servants though they were
Christ's free men, yet if they can fairly obtain their freedom, let them
choose that rather.

One Argument more you bring against this interpretation, 8. Exception.
if the sanctification were meant of matrimonial sanctification, and the
uncleanness of federall uncleanness, so as to exclude them out of the
Covenant, whether of saving graces or Church Priviledges, then the proposition
was most f^lse, because children of parents not matrimonially sanctified one to
the other, were within the Covenant, as Pharez, Jepha, and others. I answer,
Answ.
first, I desire the reader to take notice that you take the Covenant here in
this place as I do for Church Priviledges. Secondly, indeed if sanctification
be taken for matrimonial sanctification or lawfulness of wedlock, and
uncleanness of federall sanctification, the proposition may be granted to be
false, and let them who so take it, undertake the defense of it if they can,
but let it be meant of that other sanctification which I have justified, the
proposition is most true; I say again, all the children of those parents, the
one whereof is an unbeleever, are unclean, that is, federally unclean,
excluded out of the Covenant in regard of Church privileges, at least if not
of saving graces, (which is a secret left to God) unless the one be
sanctified in the other; this Argument I answered in my Sermon, and framed it
thus, that holiness is here meant, which could not be unless one of the
Parents were sanctified to the other, but federall holiness of Children may
be, where Parents are not sanctified, one in or to the other, as in Bastardy,
David's child by Bathsheba, etc. in which case the children were federally holy,
and yet the barlot not sanctified in, or to the Adulterer or fornicator though
a believer: my answer was, that the Apostles scope in this Argument is, to show
that the children borne of an unbeleever would not be holy, unless the other
Parent could remove that bar, but has no force of an Argument where both the
Parents are believers, which was the case of the Jews, the case of Hagar,
Bathsheba, etc. All the reply you make to it page the 80. is to bestow a few
scoffs upon it, that my answer is to deny the conclusion, that I show no fault
either in the matter or the form of the Argument, that the scope which I
mention is but a mere figment, that I do as good as say, that the objector
can make no Argument out of it, and that therefore I need make no answer; And
that in one place I grant the minor, then the major, and thus you most
gallantly vapor upon me; I reply, were it not that some Readers are prone to
think him to have the truth, who speaks most bravingly, I durst (without
adding a word more) leave all Scholars to judge whether my answer deserves all
this scorn; but lest you go on in your vain hoasting, I shall apply my
answer more particularly to this Argument which you acknowledge to be your
own, and I say plainly that the major proposition is not true if taken
universally, viz. That holiness of children is here meant, which could not be
unless one of the Parents be sanctified in or by the other, what ever those
parents be, though both of them be believers.

This proposition (say I) is not true, because when both the Parents are
believers, there is no such bar to be removed, by the ones being sanctified
in the other quoad hoc, so far as to make them capable to bring forth a holy
seed, they being both in the Covenant, and that sinful defiling of one
another body, does not deprive them of that privilege of the Covenant to have
their children accounted to belong to the Church of God, but when one of the
Parents being an unbeleever or Infidel, must have their children accounted out
of the pale of the Church, unless that bar be removed, to them it is true,
that unless the one be sanctified in the other, (the unbeleever in, or by the
believer) their children would not be holy; if therefore you make not your
major so universal, but limit it as the Apostle does, and make the Argument
thus, That holiness of children is here meant, which could not be unless the
one were sanctified in, or to the other, the one of the parents being an
Infidel, but this was the case of Hagar, Bathsheba, Jeptha, Pharez, etc. Now
your minor is false, this was not their case, neither of their Parents were
unbeleevers, though sinful in that act: and now I pray you, where lies the
absurdity or weakness of my answer; all this I said before, only you would
not see it; and thought to carry it with more advantage to you by scoffing then
by solemn refuting. In the close I added, indeed if a believer should
Adulterously beget a child upon a Pagan, this objection in that case deserves
to be further weighed, but here it comes not within the compass of the
Apostles Argument; upon this also you bestow two or three scoffs, you call it
a wise remedy nothing to the purpose; and you construe it as if I said, I will
not answer the objection which i^ made, but if you will make it thus, and thus,
then I will answer it. Truly Sir, I am persuaded, all learned men, either
laugh at or pity this vanity of your disputing; in sober sadness tell me, was
this the scruple of the Corinthians, or does the Apostle here meddle with this
case of believers, and Infidel harl^ts? does he not confine himself to answer
cases betwixt believers, and their unbeleeving wives and husbands? or do both
these cases require one and the same answer? To speak plainly, I could name
Divines, who are no whi^ inferior to your self, who conceive that a believer,
even when he commits fornication with an Infidel, does so far remove the
bar, in the unbeleeving party, as that the child is (in the believing Parents
right) to be reckoned to belong to the Covenant of grace, and Church of God,
but because I knew that question fell not within the Corinthians case, and was
a question which the Text and controversy in hand did not tie me to give a
resolution to, I purposely baulked it, not once suspecting I should have met
with an adversary so uningenuous, to say no worse, who would have said, the
baulking of this question had been the yielding of the cause* and I say again,
this case of Bastards concerns not the Apostles case, who speaks not of
parents adulterers, but of husbands and wives, the one a believer, the other
not, yet this advantage may be made of those Instances, that if among the
Jews, the true Church of God, the children of one parent a Jew, the other a
Gentile (forbidden to be married) were federally holy, as in the case of
Pharez and Thamar, then may one party a believer interest their children in the
same Covenant, and if Bastards among the Jews were partakers of Church
privileges, much more reasonable may it seem, that the children of both chaste
parents, whereof the one at least is a believer, should be federally holy, it
being Gods rule in this case, parius sequetur m^liorem partem. And now Sir, I
leave the reader to judge, whether you have taken this which you call my chief
hold, you have indeed set up your flag, but I hope your Reader will take it
down again.

Thus I have vindicated the truth of these two Conclusions, and I doubt not but
I have evidenced the truth of them with satisfaction to the unprejudiced
Readers, though not with that ability which some others might have done: Your
self acknowledge, that if these two Conclusions could be proved, the cause is
gained; as well as lost, if these Conclusions be lost.

My third Conclusion was this, God has appointed and ordained Conclusion 3.
Baptism succeeds Circumcision.
a Sacrament or Seal of initiation to be administered unto th^^ who enter into
Covenant with him: Circumcision for the time of that administration which was
before Christ's Incarnation, Baptism since the time of his incarnation: This
(say you) may be granted. But whereas I add, That our Baptism comes in the
room and use of Circumcision: against this you except many things.

First you say, this I deny. I wonder how you could grant my Conclusion to be
true, and yet deny this. Nor would you deny this, if only the baptizing of
grown men were intended to be proved out of it; it is for Infants sake you thus
labor to invalidate this Argument.

Secondly, you make a large parallel between them, wherein they are like,
wherein unlike, and show how far you come up, and where you differ.

I Reply, your self say similitudes are weak proofs, be sure the showing of
dissimilitudes is the weakest way of answering when the agreement holds in that
whereto we apply it. A Lieutenant may be locum ten^ns to a King, though there
be many things unlike between them. Let us make the business as short as may
be: I agree with you in that speech Wherein Baptism and Circumcision are
parallel by God himself.
which you cite out of Mr. Ball, we may stretch the parallel no wider, nor draw
it narrower then the Lord has done it; and in this point to allege nothing
but what God has taught us, and as he has taught us; and whatever parallel
men make between them, if the Spirit of God make not the same, let it be
rejected. And I say again, That the Spirit of God has made parallel in these
particulars.

First, Circumcision is the same with Baptism for the spiritual part;
Circumcision was the seal of the new birth, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. so Baptism, Tit. 3.
5. Col. 2. Circumcision was a seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 11.
11. so Baptism, Acts 8. and many other places. Circumcision was the seal of the
Covenant of Grace, Genesis 17. so Baptism, it being the nature of every Sacrament.

Secondly, Circumcision was the way of entrance and admittance into the Church,
during the time of that administration, so is Baptism during the time of this
administration, Matthew. 28. Acts 2. and throughout the whole Story of the Acts,
Circumcision was the distinguishing badge between them who were Gods people,
and the rest of the world; so is Baptism now, all who are not belonging to the
Church, (the solemn way of entrance whereinto is acknowledged to be by
Baptism) are said to be without, 1 Cor. 5. 12. Ctrcumcision was to be but
once administered, nor Baptism any oftener, as I have largely proved before, in
answer to your 4 Sect. Part 4. None might eat the Passover till they were
circumcised, Exodus 12. nor of any to be admitted to the Lords Supper, till
they be baptized, as appears Acts 2. 41, 42. And throughout the whole Story of
the New Testament, all examples are for it, not one against it, and the reason
is plain, because none might partake of the Lords Supper, but such as were in
visible Communion; and your self know and grant, that Baptism is the door
and entrance of our solemn admittance into visible communion, we are by
Baptism (say you) according to Christ's institution exhibited members of Christ
and his Church, Exercit. p. 30. These parallels you see are made by the Spirit
of God, and Exerc. p. 30.
your exceptions against the comparisons between them, or rather your adding of
more comparisons, similitudes, and dissimilitudes between them, by them to
destroy these, are Mr. Tombs exceptions answered.
such as arise from the diverse administration of the Covenant, and do indeed
manifest that they belong to several administrations, but do not prove that
they had not the same general state, signification and use, as Sacraments,
which seal the same thing in their diverse administrations; Christ to come,
and Christ already come, is the cause of difference of administration, and so
of Ordinances, but hinders not the succession of one ordinance into the place
of another, and therefore all those differences hinder not the inference of the
one from the other. As for your exceptions, That Circumcision did confirm the
promise made to Abraham's natural posterity concerning their multiplying,
bringing out of Egypt, the yoke of the Law of Moses, settling in Canaan, etc. I
answer, if this were granted, it hurts not me, these things concerning the
manner of administration of the Covenant. Secondly, how prove you this which
you say? Thirdly, did circumcision confirm these things to all Abraham's
natural posterity? was the posterity of Ismael and Esau to come out of
Egypt; possess Canaan, ^ee yoaked with the Law? Fourthly, what is the sense of
these words, Circumcision confirmed the yoke of the Law? it was indeed a part
of the yoke, and obliged a person to it, Secondly, to that of women's being not
circumcised, and children under eight days old, I have at large spoke to them
in the first Section of this third part. Thirdly, the catechumini; though they
were members, yet they were not received into visible and Sacramental
communion of the Lords Supper till baptized; the case of the Israelites
traveling in the wilderness was an extraordinary one. Fourthly, for that
which you except against Circumcision being a distinguishing badge, because
others were Gods servants who had not this badge; I answer, that of
Melchisedeck, Lot, etc. was answered before: beside, may not a livery be a
distinguishing mark of such a man's servant, and yet happily every servant not
under the livery? the Sabbath was a sign to Gods people, yet it may be you
hold that all Gods people till Moses did not keep a Sabbath. Fifthly, and for
what you add that you Unbaptized persons may not eat the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper.
make question whether an unbaptized person might not eat the Lords Supper,
though you confess you find no example of it, and that in 1 Cor. 10. 2. 3. 4.
and 1 Cor. 12. 13. Baptizing i^ put before eating and drinking; I reply, this I
must number among your freakes, and out-leaps, and is a spice of your itch
after singular opinions, and inconsistent even with your own grant, that
Baptism is the way and manner of solemn admission into the Church, and that
nothing i^ to be done about the Sacraments, whereof we have not either
institution or example, and yet here for oppositions sake you will allow men to
come to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, though unbaptized, and I think it
never yet was a question in the Church whether an unbaptized person might
receive the Lords Supper; but say you, these and a hundred more cannot make ^^
other then a humane invention, if the holy Ghost do not show that they agree
in this particular of Baptizing as well as Circumcising of Infants. I answer,
but when these Arguments and parallels made by God himself, are added to the
parity of Jews and Christian Infants, in being comprehended with their Parents
in the Covenant which is to be sealed, it is a vertuall warrant, it is not mere
analogy we reason from, for we have a command to Baptize, and we have the
competency of infants to receive baptism sufficiently proved elsewhere, your
self grant right to Baptism arises from the present state of a person, and
therefore we apply this seal, which succeeds that seal, to our Infants which
succeed their Infants, in the privilege of being faederati with their Parents,
there being not the least hint in the word, that they should be left out.

To slurre this Argument from Circumcision to Baptism Compatison of Priests,
and Ministers brought in by Mr. Tombs.
you frame a large and needless comparison between the Priests of old under
the Jewish administration, and the Ministers of the Gospel now, and you demand,
are Ministers therefore Priests? and show how many absurdities and dangerous
consequences will follow if we give way to such kind of comparisons, hence the
Papists have pleaded for an universal Bishop, and the Prelates for
superiority of Ministers. To no purpose.


A short answer will serve all this, you demand whether therefore Ministers be
Priests, and so make simile to be idem against all sense and reason, as if I
had gone about to prove Baptism to be Circumcision. Secondly, we only apply
things set up by God himself, and make the parallel as God has made it, when
any can prove that God has set up an universal Bishop, or appointed
superiority of Ministers one above another, and has made such parallels
between them as you speak of, let them plead those comparisons and spare not,
they had in their ministry many things which were typical of Christ, which we
have nothing to do with, but in other things where the Scripture has made a
comparison, we may do it safely, and may plead from the one to the other, as
that they must have a call to their office, so must we; they that serve the
altar must live upon the Altar, so they who preach the Gospel are to live upon
the Gospel; they must be pure who bar^ the vessels of the sanctuary, and the
Priests lips must preserve knowledge, so our Ministers must be of holy life,
fit to teach, etc. And all this we may plead by good warrant; and whereas I
added in my Sermon that our Why Christ was Circumcised and baptized.
Lord taught us this by his own example (miz. that Circumcision initiated into
that administration, and Baptism into this) who was Circumcised as a professed
member of the Jews Church, and when he set up the Christian Church, he would
be initiated into it by the Sacrament of Baptism; hereupon you run into
diverse things, as why Christ wou^d be Circumcised, why Baptized, and in what
sense Christ when he was to be baptized, said that he would be baptized that
he might fulfill all righteousness, but you think it not probable, that it
was any part of his meaning to be initiated into the Christian Church by
baptism, the Christian Church was not yet set up, with worship and discipline
distinct from the Jewish, and because his Baptism was of a higher nature then
our Baptism; I reply, that the Christian Church was not fully set up, and
completed with all Ordinances of worship, government, officers till
afterward, is readily granted, but that it was not in fieri, in erecting and
framing, and that Baptism was administered in reference to the Christian
Church, and that by Baptism men were initiated into this new administration or
best edition of the Church, I think no sound Divine did ever question. I grant
Christ's Baptism was a transcendent one, and differs from ours in many things,
and so was his Circumcision also a transcendent one, and differed from the
Jews in many things; can you thence frame an Argument that he intended not by
his conformity to our Ordinances, to express the same favor to us as he did
to the Jews in conforming to their Ordinances, but that you should hence fetch
an Argument, that because Christ was not baptized till he was thirty years
old, (which was within less then thirty weeks after Baptism was made a
Sacrament) is I confess a most transcendent strain of wit, yet you boast of
it, as if by it you had broke one of the strings I have to my bow.

And proceed to try, whether you cannot crack the other also, the evidence
which Colos. 2 8. 9. etc. gives to prove Baptism Col. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11.
Vindicated, to prove Baptism to succeed Circumcision.
to succeed in the room of Circumcision: but before you come to the
examination of this place, you make enquiry in what sense Baptism succeeds in
the room of Circumcision, and you first observe that in speaking exactly,
Baptism was a concomitant of Circumcision, if not ancienter, that it was in
use among the Jews for many years together with Circumcision, though not as a
Sacrament; and for this you cite the learned Gentleman Mr. Seldom, and Mr.
Ainsworth on Genesis 17. and Mr. Lightfootes Elias Redivivus: I confess, you are
in the Baptism in use in the Church of the Jews, and applied to Infants as
well as grown men.
right, Baptism was a known rite in the Jewish Church long before it was made
a Sacrament, and therefore when John came baptizing, none of the Jews were
ignorant of the use of Baptism, they never asked him what he meant by
baptizing, they knew well enough that it was a rite used in admitting of
Proselytes or new Converts into the Church, they only wondered, why he did
Baptize if he were not the Messiah. But Sir, this exception of yours is so
far from being any argument against me, that it affords me a good argument
for Infant Baptism, because the same authors, which mention this as an
Ecclesiastical rite, in admission of Proselytes, do testify that the Infants
of Proselytes were baptized as well as circumcised, and wheresoever
Circumcision was applied, Baptism went along with it, so that the use of
Baptism was the same before, viz. to be a rite of admitting grown men and
Infants into the Church, only it begun to be a Sacrament of divine
institution, when John was sent to Baptize into the name of Christ: and it is
in this Sacrament as in the other Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the panis
benedictus, and the cup were used before in the Sacrament of the Passover, as
an Ecclesiastical rite, but our Lord at the last Passover, instituted the
bread and wine to be Sacramental Elements, which before were only an
Ecclesiastical rite; now seeing that Baptism which was in use before, was
only turned into a Sacramental use, to succeed Circumcision, with whom before
it was a concomitant, and always applied to the same persons. Have you not
helped us to a good Argument, that Baptism belongs to Infants as well as grown
men, especially since there is not the least hint given in the Word, that when
it was thus advanced to be a Sacrament, it should not be applied to those
persons to whom before it was, viz. Infants as well as grown men? the truth of
this, that it Proved from Mr. Seldom.
was so, may appear partly by Mr. Seldom who testifies that the Infants of the
Gentiles were made proselytes by this rite among others, both the male children
and the female; so likewise Maimonides [Issurei biah, Cap. 13.) tells us by
three things Israel entered into Covenant, by Circumcision, by Baptism,
Maimonides.
and offering, and that Baptism was in the Wilderness before the giving of
the Law, as it is said, And thou shall sanctify them to day and to morrow, and
let them wash their garments; and in another place, when a Gentile will enter
into the Covenant, (...)
and gather himself under the wings of the Divine majesty, he must be
Circumcised, Baptized, and bring an offering, if it be a female, baptism and
offering; and again, a Proselyte that is circumcised and not baptized, or
baptized and not circumcised, is not a Proselyte, until he be both
circumcised and baptized; and again, a little Proselyte, they baptize by the
appointment of the Consessus. There are also special testimonies in the
Talmud, which declare, that Infants both of Jews and Gentiles, were The Talmud.
thus admitted, the male children by circumcision and baptism, the females by
baptism, etc. Many testimonies of this nature to show that Infants as well as
grown men, were baptized among the Jews are to be seen in Mr. Ainsworth upon
Genesis 17. verse. 12, 13. I was willing to give this little taste, that the Reader
may see, that baptism ever since it was in use, was applyable to children as
well as grown men. You add, even the Sacrament of Baptism was before
circumcision ceased, and you instance with John's Baptism, which was a
concomitant Sacrament with the Sacrament of circumcision; I answer as before,
John's Baptism and Ministry, was a Pr^ludium John's Baptism initiated into the
Christian Church.
to Christ, and was wholly in reference to the Christian Church, which then
begun to be molded; and though there was not a new distinct Church of
Christianity set up, yet all this was preparing the materials of it, and John
did not admit them by Baptism, as members to the Jewish Padagogy, which was
then ready to be taken away, but into that new administration which was then
in preparing, but this is no argument against baptism to succeed circumcision,
as a Lord Major elect succeeds the old, though the old continue after his
election for a time. Yet further, You inquire in what sense Baptism succeeds
in the room and place of Circumcision, and say if by room and place, I mean,
Mr. Tombs Exceptions.
locus communis et proprius, so Baptism being an action, has no room or
place at all properly: and if by room and place I mean the baptized and
baptizers, that is true but in part, seem who were to be baptized were not to
be circumcised, as women. Thirdly, if by room and place I mean the same
society, that is not true, Circumcision admitted into the Jewish, baptism into
the Christian Church. Fourthly, if of the Commandment upon which both are
sealed, that is not true neither, Circumcision was commanded long before
Baptism. Fifthly, if of the same use, that is most untrue, for the use of
Circumcision obliged to keep the Law, to be a partition between Jews and
Gentiles, and to initiate into the Jewish Church, or rather into Abraham's
family. Then lastly you say, if I mean it of confirming and sealing the same
Covenant, neither is that true save only in part, because their Covenant was a
mixed Covenant, and although Circumcision did confirm righteousness by faith,
and signified holiness of heart, so also did the Cloud, Sea, Manna, the Rock,
the Deluge or Arc: and the same are also confirmed by the Lords Supper; and
therefore to say that Baptism succeeds in the room and place of Circumcision,
is a position erroneous and very dangerous.

I am prone to think that time as well as paper and Ink are very cheap with
you, who thus needlessly Answ.
waste them; this poor quibbling about succession and room, place, etc. is
too Pedanticall for a grave Divine, what Reader will not at the first view see
this to be my meaning, of Baptism succeeding in the room and place of
Circumcision, that Baptism succeeds Circumcision as a sign substituted, in
the place and stead of Circumcision, to signify and seal the same Covenant of
grace which Circumcision did, Circumcicision more darkely sealing, Christ being
not yet exhibited, baptism more clearly, the shadow being taken away and the
substance come? and almost all your differences refer only to the several
manners of administration of the Covenant, not to the Covenant it self, or
thing administered, yet I shall touch upon each particular. First, your fancy of
Locus 1 Exception deserves no Answer.
proprius and communis, is too idle to require any answer. Secondly, that of
the Jewish women has been sufficiently spoken to in the first Section of this
third part. Thirdly, 2 Exception answered before.
when you say, circumcision admitted into one Church, baptism into another; (I
am very loath to impute to your sense which you intend not) if you mean only
the several administrations, 3 Exception answered.
the Church of the Jews being Christ's Church under one administration, the
Christian Church the same Church of Christ under another administration; you
speak truth, but not to purpose, my conclusion never said, Circumcision and
Baptism do initiate into the same Administration of the Covenant: but if you
mean, that the Church of the Jews and we are not one and the same Church,
you speak pure Anabaptisme indeed, and contradict the Scripture expressly,
which every where makes the Church of the Jews and the Gentiles, one and the
same Church though under diverse administrations. I count it needless to annex
any proofs, because I think you dare not deny it. Fourthly, you lay the
command of circumcision was long before the command of Baptism, but how 4
Exception answered.
this follows that therefore Baptism does not succeed in the room of
Circumcision I cannot guess, the Lords day succeeds the seventh day in being
Gods Sabbath, but certainly the institution of it was long after the other. And
fifthly, as for the several uses mentioned by you, they all refer 5 Exception
answered.
to the manner of administration peculiar to the Jews; I have often granted
there were some legal uses of Circumcision it obliging to that manner of
administration, and so they were part of the Jewish paedagogy, which is wholly
vanished, and therein Circumcision has no succession, but baptism succeeds it
as a Seal of the same Covenant under a better administration, as a set and
constant initiating Ordidinance: only I wonder that you say, Circumcision did
initiate into the Church of the Jews, or rather into Abraham's family; I pray
you explain this, rather into Abrauams family; if by Abraham's family you mean
the Church of the Jews, why say you rather into Abraham's family? if you mean
any thing else, tell us what it is, and how Circumcumcision initiated
Proselytes into Abraham's family any otherwise ^hen as it was the Church of the
Jews Lastly, you hit upon the right thing intended, They he both seals of 6
Excep. Answ.
the same covenant; but (say you) the covenant was not the same, except in
part, which has abundantly been confuted before, and justified to be one and
the same, and the difference to lie only in the manner of administration.

But say you, the Cloud, Sea, Manna, water of the rock, etc. signified 7 Excep.
Answ.
righteousness by faith, and holiness of heart, as well as baptism does; and
why then should we not say that Baptism succeeds these, as well as it does
Circumcision? I answer, these were extraordinary signs, not standing
Sacraments to be used in all generations; much less were they set and
standing Sacraments of initiation: And yet so far as God has made the
parallel, what hurt is there in saying baptism succeeds them? sure I am, the
Apostle Peter compares baptism 1 P^^ 3. 21.
and the Ark, the like figure whereunto Baptism saves us.

But whereas you add, And why also should not the Lords ^ Excep. Answ.
Supper succeed Circumcision as well as Baptism? I answer, what ever disparity
may be made between Circumcision and Baptism, yet herein certainly they
agree, and you often grant it, That both of them are initiall signs; and
therefore this is most wildly said of you, That the Lords Supper may he as well
said to succeed Circumcision; did ever any think the Lords Supper to be an
initiall sign? And now let the Reader judge of that expression of yours in the
close, which you so boldly use against all Divines and Churches since the
Apostles time, who all concur in the same truth, (except only the
Anabaptists) That to say Baptism succeeds in the room and place of
Circumcision, (...) a propos^tion (...), and very dangerous.

To confirm this of Baptism succeeding Circumcision, much may be gathered out
of many places in the New Testament, which hold out the things wherein they are
paralleled: I used only that clear place, Col. 2. 8 to 13. whence I made it
evident, Not only that we have the same thing signified by Circumcision, while
we are buried with Christ in baptism, but also that the Apostle plainly set^
Baptism in the same state, Mr. Tombs exception against Colos. 2. answered.
and makes it of the same use to us, as Circumcision was to the Jews; Christ
only to them and (...) also, is the author ^f spiritual Circumcision. The
Circumcision of the flesh, was the Sacrament of it to them; and now that is
abolished, we have baptism to seal the same thing.

Let us see what your exceptions are against it, First, you acknowledge with
me, the Apostles scope is to show that we are complete in Christ, and
therefore needed not Circumcision: And you add, his scope was not to teach
them that we have another ordinance in stead of Circumcision. I reply, it is
very true, he teaches them we are complete in Christ, and need not
Circumcision; but it is as true, that he further enlarges this comfort, by
showing them that we have a visible seal of this compleatnesse in Christ, and
so it is more evident we have no need of Circumcision.

Secondly, say you, Aretius in his Commentary says, That Aretius alleged by
Mr Tombs, as if for him, who is expressly against him.
the thing it self is asserted to the Saints, without an outward symbol,
which yet the adversaries incessantly urged; and for which Aretius his help,
you conclude it is utterly against the Apostles whole argument, to say, that
they needed not Circumcision, because they had another ordinance in the room of
it. But Sir, why do you thus frequently abuse your readers with the names of
Learned men, inserting some one sentence of theirs into your book, and thereby
insinuating to your Reader, that they are of your Opinion in the point wherein
you cite them? I assure you, it concerns your Conscience, as well as your
Cause, to be thus often taken tardy. The Learned Aretius in that very place
where you cite him acknowledges indeed, That we are complete in Christ, without
an external symbol^; and that he is a perfect organ of our salvation; you
needed to have cited no man for this, we all concur with you in it; the only
thing controverted is, whether the Apostle intend also in this place to show,
that our baptism succeeds in the room and use of Circumcision; and does not
Aretius concur in this? let himself speak: Observetur ^tiam successio
Baptismi in locum Circumcisionis, quando aperte hunc vocat Circumcisionem
Christi: He plainly tells us, that the Apostle calls Baptism the Circumcision
of Christ. But since you have put me upon Aretius, I shall make bold to inform
the Reader, that the same Aretius in his Problemes, after the History of
Valentine Gentilis, has an entire Discourse to prove that Baptism succeeds
Ancient Authors cited by Aretius to prove that Baptism succeeds Circumcision.
Circumcision, and brings this second of the Col. there also, as a maine
evidence; and cites many notable testimonies out of the Fathers, both Greek and
Latin, for the confirmation of it.

Accepimus non illam secundum carnem circumcisionem, sed spiritualem, quam
Enoch and similes custodierunt, no^ tamen per baptismum Just in Martyr contra
Tryph.
accepimus.

Circumcisio figura erat exuviarum quae per baptismum deponuntur. Athan. in
Luc. ^^nia mihi tradita.


Abraham ubi Deo erediderat circumcisionem accepit pro nota ejus regenerationis
quae per baptismum conficitur.

Illic fuit circumcisio carnalis quae inservit tempori ad magnam Epiphan.
contr. Iip^cureos.
circumcisionem, h. e. Bapt. qui circumcidit nos a peccatis and obsignat nos
D^o.

Duravit circumcisio tempore inserviens donec major circumcisio Idem contra
Ce^^nthu^n.
accessit, h. e. lavacrum regenerationis.

Affi^mat Christum in ecclesia sua dedisse pro circumcisione Aug in Epist. 1^8.
carnis, Baptismum.

Baptismi and circumcisionis ejusdem est natura. In Epist. ad Dardanun.


All these the Reader shall find in Aretius, whom you bring in, as if he
concurred with you; most of these testimonies are before also alleged by me.

Thirdly, but you go on and say, That in truth it would evacuate the Apostles
argument used both here, and Hebr. 9. 11. 9-13. who still proves the abolition
of the ceremonies of the Law, because we are complete in Christ; not in some
new ordinances added in stead of them; for if there be need of other
Ordinances, (besides Christ) in stead of the old, then Christ himself has not
fullness enough, and though our Ordinances may be said to imitate theirs; yet
Christ only succeeds them.

I answer, it is very true, that whoever should plead that we have any of our
compleatness in any outward Ordinances would evacuate the Apostles Argument But
Sir, is there no distinction to be made betwixt our compl^atnesse in Christ,
and Ordinances which by his own appointment help us to apply this
compleatnesse: do the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper, and other
Christian Ordinances hinder, or argue that all our compleatnesse in not in
Christ. I add further, that Christ only succeeds all the Jewish ordinances,
as the body succeeds the shadow: we plead not as the Papists do, that the
Jewish Sacraments were types of ours, they were types only of Christ; but yet
ours succeed them to be like signs of the Covenant of grace, and so the
Apostle does in this place.

Fourthly, say you, I deny not but there is an analogy betwixt Vide Rive^. in
Genesis 17.
baptism and circumcision, as there is also betwixt the Arc and Baptism; but
we are not to conclude thence, that Baptism succeeds in the room and use of
Noah's Arc, etc. for in the administration of an Ordinance, we are not to be
ruled by bare analogy framed by our selves, or delivered by the Spirit of God,
but by the institution of God. I answer, but when those analogies framed by the
Spirit of God, are agreeable to the use and end of Gods institution, we are to
be ruled by them; and the Apostle shows that is our case here.

Fifthly, say you, The Apostle in this place rather resembles burial to
circumcision then baptism: and so makes the analogy between circumcision and
Christ's burial; and you bring in Chrysostom and Theophylact concurring with
you. I answer, this I wonder at, where is Circumcision compared to burial, and
wherein I pray you lies the analogy between them? Besides, whoever will look
into this Text, shall find that this spiritual circumcision contains both
our death to sin, and rising again to newness of life, by the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ, both which are here fully signified in our
baptism, ver. 11. and 12. consepulti sum^^; the analogy lies plain between our
buryall and baptism. And Chrysostom whom you cite, says plainly, we are
spiritually circumcised, but when and where; and answers in Baptism.

Sixthly, say you, Circumcision was not only a privilege to the Jews, but it
was also a buriben to them, and it would be a bu^then, Chrysostom cited by Mr.
Tombs, is against him.
not a privilege, to have an ordinance in the room and use of it. I answer,
Circumcision was a burden, as it was a painful Sacrament, and as it obliged
them to that painful, costly and burdensome manner of the administration of
the Covenant, which was before Christ's incarnation; but it was no burden, But a
great privilege, as it was a seal of the Covenant. And in this last respect
only is baptism substituted into his room and place.

In the close of this Section, I like your farewell, though you tell me, I
speak with more confidence then truth; I said Mr. Tombs his reason, why
baptism is there named, confirms my interpretation.
there had been no reason to have named baptism, but that he meant to show
baptism was now to Christians in the room of circumcision to the Jews: You
say, baptism is named, because it is one of the means by which Christians
come to have communion with Christ, and to be complete in him; which was the
thing the Apostle intended in the 12. verse. And therefore faith is joined with
it, they being the two special means whereby we have our communion with
Christ, to which you add, Gal. 5. 25, 26. Romans 6. 3, and 4. But is not this
the same sense with mine, who have hitherto undertaken to justify that, though
our compleatnesse be in Christ only, who is now exhibited, and no longer to
be sought in the types and shadows of the Jewish administrations, (to which
manner of administrations Circumcision did oblige them;) yet Baptism is now the
seal of our initiation, and a means to apply this Covenant to us, as
Circumcision was to them, though the manner of their administration be wholly
ceased. If I have not taken you right, make a syllogism, and make all Logic
quake before your mighty consequence. Baptism is named, because it is one of
the means of Christians being exempted from the Schoolmaster, and come to be
ingraffed into Christ, and to be complete in him; therefore it does not
succeed in the room and place of Circumcision: nay, rather, it therefore does.
I pray you put together these words, Ye are complete in Christ, in whom ye are
also circumcised, being buried with him in baptism; and see if it speak not
this plainly, that baptism succeeds into the use of Circumcision: surely, it
hence appears Circumcision and Baptism are nearer of kin then you would make
them.

In the close of this Section, according to your wonted manner, you triumph,
and tell me that you have at last waded through this conclusion, and the text,
Col. 2. 12. and 10. the misunderstanding of which has been the ignis faruis,
foolish fire, which has led men out of the way in this matter, into bags.
Truly Sir, were these scorns of being led by foolish fire into bogs, etc cast
upon my self only, it were nothing; but when they are thus cast in the faces
of all Divines, ancient, and modern, all Harmonies and Confessions (except
only a handful of upstart Anabaptists) as if they were all such simple ones,
that an ignis fatuus, a fools fire, might lead them into any bogs, I can
hardly forbear to tell you it is an argument of an arrogant Spirit.

There is also in the end of your book, a short discourse The descant of Mr.
Tomber upon this Text at the end of his book briefly examined.
upon this Text, which I read over to see if there were any thing which might
weaken my Argument, or strengthen your exceptions; but in it I find not any
one sentence that hurts me, or helps you; only some of those things which you
call dictates, bold assertions, some of them contrary to the plain Text of
Scripture, all of them magisterially set down with out proof: as, circumcision
was not a token of the Covenant to the Jews children; which is contrary to the
very Text, Genesis 17. That the promises of the Covenant, were not the reason that
they were circumcised. Yet any Reader may see that the Covenant is there set
down as the reason why they should be circumcised. That the Jews children
were not therefore in covenant, because they were Abraham's natural seed, that
believers children are not in covenant, because believers children; and diverse
other Conclusions of the same nature, which are already answered; and therefore
I shall not stay the Reader any whit about them.

Hitherto I have followed you foot by foot, because the gaining or losing the
cause, depends upon these former conclusions, the samenesse of the Covenant
both to Jews and Centiles, the s^menesse of our Infants right to the Covenant
with theirs; and baptism succeeding circumcision, as to the use of an initiall
seal to them, who are in Covenant. In that which remains, I shall more
contract the matter of your large Discourse^ partly, because many things in it
are upon by-matters; partly, because that which is material, is but the
repetition of that which has been answered already.

My fourth Conclusion was, That by Gods own express order, Infants as well as
grown men, were in the time of the Jews to be initiated and sealed with the
sign of circumcision, whether Jews by nature, or Proselytes of the Gentiles,
one law was for them all, if they receive the covenant, they and their children
were circumcised.

This Conclusion you grant to be true; only, because you will say somewhat to
every thing: you answer, First, That it is 4 Conclus. vindicated.
as certain that this express order of God is now repealed; very true, and you
might have added, That by his order likewise, Baptism succeeds in the room of
it. I added, whereas some allege, Though circumcision was to be applied to
their Infants, yet Why Infants of Jews were circumcised.
it was not as a seal of the spiritual part of the Covenant, but as a
National badge, or seal of some temporal and earthly blessings and
privileges, as of the right to the land of Canaan, etc. and that Ishmael,
though he was circumcised for some temporal respects, was not thereby brought
under the Covenant, etc. You answer, they who thus object, speak the truth:
and here you refer to your Latin Paper. I reply, to my understanding, you
here speak pure Anabaptisme indeed, just like the Anabaptists in Germany, who
say, The Covenant which circumcision sealed, was a carnal covenant: and that
when God commanded the Israelites to circumcise their children, we are not to
understand that he obliged them to have their hearts circumcised, nor aimed at
any thing which touched the inward man; that the condition required by God in
circumcision, cannot be drawn to a spiritual business; that the circumcised
by circumcision, were not bound to look for salvation by Jesus Christ: how
very near are you come to these carnal conceits of the German Anabaptists,
which have been a thousand times confuted by our Orthodox Divines? yet you
bring not one shadow of a proof for what you say, only you allege, Ishmael
had no part in the covenant, the cov^nant was to be establisted with Isaac,
and not with Ishmael, etc. But I have made it abundantly clear, that not only
Ishmael and Esau, but missions of Jacobs seed, did never partake of the
spiritual graces of the Covenant, yet were reckoned by circumcision to belong
to the Covenant, and were obliged to seek after the spiritual part of it, and
whereas you say, when Ishmael was circumcised, Abraham understood the promise
was not intended for Ishmael but for Isaac, that Ishmael only was to have a
share in some temporal blessings; I answer, supposing that were true, you have
given a very good instance to prove that some may receive the outward sign of
the Covenant, and have a visible standing in the Church, though he who
administers the Seal, might by revelation know that the inward grace is
wanting. Secondly, I answer, how do you prove that no part of the spiritual
Covenant made with Abraham did appear to belong to Ishmael when he was
circumcised, or not to Esau when he was circumcised? God indeed did then
declare that Isaac was he in whose family the Covenant should continue, but not
a word that Ishmael should have no part in it: prove (if you can) in your next
that Ishmael and Esau were not by their circumcision bound to have their hearts
circumcised, and to believe in the Messiah that was to come of Abraham's seed.
And whereas you say, again and again, that no benefit of the Covenant was the
proper reason why these or those were circumcised, but only Gods precept: I
have already cleared it out of the Text Genesis 17. that though Gods command
was the cause of the existence of the duty of Circumcision, yet the Covenant
of grace was the motive to it, and these two are well consistent together.

Whereas I answered to that carnal objection of the Anabaptists, that nothing
is plainer then that the Covenant whereof Circumcision was a sign was the
Covenant of grace, you reply, first, it was a mixed Covenant, which is before
taken away, in answer to your exceptions against my first conclusion, Sect. 2.
Part 3. Secondly, you say, all circumcised persons were not partakers of the
spiritual part, it is one thing to be under Mr. Tombs grants what is in
controversy.
the outward administration, another thing to be under the Covenant of Grace;
Sir, I thank you for this answer, you grant as much as I have been proving all
this while, viz. that men may have a visible membership though they be not
elected, and that there ever was and will be some such in the Church to whom
the outward administration and external privileges do app^^taine, though
they are not inwardly sanctified, and I hope you will not deny but that these
are called, in that sense which our Savior means when he says, Many are
called, but few are chosen. I added Abraham received Circumcision a sign of
the righteousness of faith: true, say you, Circumcision was a seal of
righteousness, but not to all or only circumcised persons, but to all
believers, whether Jews or Gentiles though they never are or may be sealed in
their own persons. I reply, first, this is but a piece of odd Divinity, that
Circumcision should seal righteousness to them who never are circumcised, nor
reputed so, nor capable of being circumcised, nor might lawfully be
circumcised, but let that pass. 2ly Indeed none but believers have the
spiritual part of Circumcision, but visible professors had a visible right to
it, and were obliged to seek the spiritual grace of it, and though they who
are externally called, and not elected, never come to attain the spiritual
part, yet are they in foro visibilis Ecclesiae to be reputed Church members,
and they have as Austin says, veritatem sacramenti, though not fructum
Sacramenti, they receive the truth of the Sacrament, though they partake not of
the best part of it; And the Jews (said I) received How the Jewe^ received
circumcision.
it not as a nation, but as a Church, as a people separated from the world, and
taken into Covenant with God; against which you object, if I take (as) with
reduplication, they received it neither as a nation, nor as a Church: for if as
a nation, then every nation must have been circumcised; if as a Church, then
every Church must be circumcised; they received it as appointed them from God,
under that formal notion, and no other. But what poor exceptions are these?
my plain meaning was, the Jews were both a civil society or Commonwealth,
they were also a Church or a people in Covenant with God; Circumcision was
given them in reference to their Church State, not in reference to their civil
state, and was in ordine to the things of Gods kingdom* and though the formal
reason of their being circumcised was the command of God, yet the Covenant of
grace or their Church state was the motive to it, and the thing it related to,
as is most clear out of the 17. of Genesis and many other places where their
Circumcision denotates their religious standing, as has often been showed
before.

But what is all this, say you, to the answering of the objection, which was,
that Circumcision was not the Seal of the spiritual part of the Covenant of
grace, to all circumcised persons, and that Circumcision was appointed to
persons not under the Covenant, etc. I answer, I think it very fully answers
the objection, for if it was commanded and observed, as that which was a
privilege and duty belonging to the Covenant, and they used it as being in
Covenant, the objection is wholly taken off. Your frequent bringing in of the
manner of administration, by types, shadows, etc. has been abundantly
answered in my vindicating my first conclusion, and elsewhere. Next you much
trouble your self, how I will clear that expression of men's conformity to
temporal blessings and punishments, because blessings and punishments are Gods
acts and not men's: I desire you to require an account of it from them who
assert it, I said, Circumcision bound them who received it to conform to that
manner of administration of the Covenant which was carried much by a way of
temporal blessings and punishments, they being types of spiritual things: is
this all one to conform to temporal blessings and punishments? I added, no
man can show, that any were to receive Circumcision in relation to these
outward things only, or to them at all, further then they were administrations
of the Covenant of grace; you answer, they received Circumcision neither in
relation to these outward things only no nor at all, either as they were
temporal blessings or types of spiritual Mr. Tombs by consequence denies
circumcision to be a Seal of any thing.
things, and so administrations of the Covenant of grace, but for this reason
and no other, because God had so commanded; I reply, here had been the fit
place for you to have made good what you have so confidently asserted
heretofore; that Ishmael, Esau, and others were circumcised for some temporal
respects, that Circumcision sealed the temporal or political promises, etc.
but in stead of proving this, you do here as good as deny it, for if they were
not circumcised, in any respect at all to their temporal blessings, how I pray
you did Circumcision seal their temporal blessings? Nay further, you by
consequent deny that Circumcision sealed either temporal or spiritual
blessings, and consequently it was no seal at all, or a seal of nothing at
all; for if they were circumcised with respect to nothing, but only because
God commanded them to be circumcised, how was Circumcision any Seal to them?
If a father give a child a Ring, and command him to wear it, only to show his
obedience to his fathers command, what does the wearing of this Ring seal to
the child? it declares indeed the childs obedience to the father, but seals
nothing to the child from the father. Nor does that which you add any whit
help this, you say, You deny not that circumcised persons were by faith to
look on the covenant of grace, through these administrations, but by what
warrant could their faith look upon the Covenant of grace through circumcision
if the command of circumcision were not in reference to the Covenant of grace?
I profess I cannot understand it, nor do I think it possible for you, to
reconcile this, either with the constant doctrine of the Scripture concerning
the end and use of Circumcision, or with your own grant, that Circumcision was
the initiall Seal of the Jews Covenant with God.

To clear it further that Circumcision was not a seal of the land of Canaan,
or the temporal blessings of it, I showed the Proselytes and their children
could not be circumcised in relation to Canaan, etc. because they were not
capable of any inheritance there; yea, that it tied them to a greater expense
of their temporal blessings by their long, frequent, and chargeable journies
to worship at Jerusalem; you answer only this, all this may be granted, yet
this overthrowes not this proposition, that the Covenant made with Abraham had
promises of temporal blessings, and that some were to be circumcised who had
no part in the covenant of grace: but Sir, the thing I am here proving is that
Circumcision was no Seal of the land of Canaan, not that there were no
temporal blessings belonging to the Covenant; I know the promises of temporal
blessings belong to the Covenant of grace, as well as the promises of
spiritual; godliness having the promise of this life, and of that which is to
come: nor was I proving that all who were to be circumcised had part in the
spiritual graces of the Covenant, my drift being only to prove, that all who
were to be circumcised had a visible membership and right to be reputed as
belonging to the Church, against which in this place you say just nothing.
Lastly, whereas I added that Ishmael and the rest of Abraham's family, Esau and
others were really taken into covenant until afterward by apostasy they
discovenanted themselves, you answer that I plainly deliver ap^stasie from the
covenant of grace, which in others would be called Armianisme, because taking
into the covenant of grace, argues election or some act which executes
election: I reply, I have no doubt but that all indifferent Readers well enough
understand what I meant by being taken into the Covenant of grace, even such a
taking in as when the Gentiles were taken in, in ramorum defractorum locum,
instead of the Jews, who were broken off: your self grant, it is one thing to
be under the spiritual grace of the Covenant, and another thing to be under
the outward administration; in this later sense were Ishmael, Esau, and the
rest taken in, they were visible professors had an external calling, and are
all visible professors elected, and is not external vocation Gods act, though
a common one?

The fifth and last conclusion which I laid down in my 5 Conclusion
vindicated, our privileges nor straightened but enlarged.
Sermon was this, the privileges of believers under this last and best
administration of the covenant of grace are many ways enlarged, made more
honorable and comfortable then ever they were in the time of the Jews
administration; many Scriptures speak of their enlargement, not one for the
dimininishing or extenuating of them; I could hardly have imagined that you
could have spent ten or eleven whole pages in excepting against this, I shall
very briefly examine what you have said; first, you show your skill in the
description of a privilege out of the civil Law, and I concur with you,
that a privilege must be somewhat which is a benefit, and that the same thing
may be a privilege at one time, which is not at another; that that may be a
privilege in comparison of the heathens which is not in comparison of
Christians: but what is all this to the purpose? further say you, the
privileges of the covenant of grace belonging to the substance of it, are not
now more enlarged or more honorable or comfortable then they were in the time
of the Jews; I answer, first, though this were granted it hurts not me, it is
sufficient if the administration be now more comfortable to believers and their
children. Secondly, if there be no more honorablenesse in those privileges
which belong to the substance of the Covenant, how comes it to pass, that in
your answers to those several texts which I and others bring to Our spiritual
privileges how enlarged.
prove the enlargement of privileges under this last administration, you
interpret them of those privileges which belong to the substance of the
Covenant or the spiritual part of it? Thirdly, though I willingly acknowledge
that the spiritual privileges are the same both to the Jews and Gentiles,
the same under both administrations, yet seeing that under this last
administration, these privileges are communicated not only with more
clearenesse, but in greater measure and abundance, floods in stead of drops:
wildernesses made like Lebanon and Sharon, I wonder you should say they are no
more honorable and comfortable now then they were then; is not abundance of
grace more honorable and comfortable then a little grace? But say you, in
respect of the administration it is granted they are many ways enlarged and
made more honorable: this will serve our turn well enough, for this was a
privilege belonging to their administration, that their Infants were under it
as well as themselves; yield that for ours, and the controversy is ended, we
(say I) are freed from that hard and costly yoke of their way of
administration: true say you, it is not only our privilege to be free from
that, but it is our privilege also to have nothing in lieu of that yoke. To
have nothing in lieu of them as they were shadows of the substance, which is
Christ, is very right, but to say it is our privilege to have nothing in lieu
of them, as they were external Ordinances to apply Christ, is to say it is our
privilege to have no Ordinances to apply Christ to us, and thereby to make us
complete in him, which were a most absurd thing to affirm. Whereas I added
that our privileges for our selves and our children, are at least as
honorable, large, and comfortable as theirs, your answer to this is very
remarkable, but whether with an obeliske or asteriske the Reader shall judge;
first say you, circumcision belongs to the administration of the Covenant, not
to the substance of it. I reply; it was indeed a part of their administration,
and obliged them to the rest of that manner of administration, as Baptism now
does to ours, but did it not also belong to the substance? was it not a seal
of the righteousness of faith, of circumcision of heart, etc. does not the
seal belong to the thing sealed? the conveyance and seal annexed to it, are no
part of the purchased inheritance, Mr. Tombs makes it a privilege not to have
Infants baptized.
but do they not belong to it? Secondly, your next is as remarkable, viz. That
it is so far from being a privilege to our children to have them baptized; to
have Baptism succeed in the stead of Circumeision, that it is a benefit to
want it, God not having appointed it. I answer, then belike our privileges of
the Covenant of grace are so far from being enlarged by enjoying the
Sacrament of Baptism, that it had been our privilege to have wanted Baptism
if God had not appointed it; and by as good a reason at least, you might have
said, that Circumcision was so far from being a privilege to the Jews and
their children, that it had been a benefit for them to have wanted it, if God
had not commanded it; sure, that is a strange kind of privilege, of which I
may truly say, that it had been a greater benefit to them who have it, to have
wanted it, if the Donor had not commanded it.

Next, you come more particularly to examine the proofs of my Conclusion; and
(say you) the thing I should prove, is one of these two, either that
circumcision did belong to the substance of the Covenant of grace: or that the
want of circumcision, or some Ordinance in the place and use of it, is a loss
of privilege of the Covenant of grace to us and our children. Sir, the thing I
was to prove was this 5 Conclusion, viz. That our privileges are enlarged, not
extenuated: and as for these two particulars, I have already proved, that
Circumcision, though a part of their administration, did yet belong to the
substance; belong to it I say, not as a part of it, but as a means of applying
it. And I have also proved, that though it be a privilege to have nothing
succeed circumcision, as it bound to that manner of administration; yet it is a
privilege to have somewhat succeed it as a seal of the Covenant, in as much
as a Covenant with a seal, is a greater benefit then a Covenant without a
seal. More particularly, I said our Mr Tombs makes the Covenant, Heb. 8 to
be the Covenant of Works, erroneously.
enlargement of privileges appears, partly, in that we have freedom, in
what was burdensome to them in their manner of administration; partly, because
our Covenant is established upon better promises, Heb. 8. 6. Whereupon you
enter upon a Discourse of that Covenant there mentioned; and you positively
assert, That it was the Covenant of works. Alas Sir, why do you run into
this needless and erroneous digression? I said indeed in my Sermon, that the
moral Law was added four hundred and thirty years after the Covenant was
made with Abraham, not as a part of that Covenant, but as a Schoolmaster to
whip them to Christ; that they finding the impossibility of keeping the Law,
might more earnestly long after Christ, exhibited in those shadows of Rites and
Sacrifices, etc. but to say that this Covenant mentioned in the eight of the
Hebrews, was the Covenant of works, is a most erroneous doctrine; look into the
Text, and you shall find that the Covenant which is there mentioned, (which God
finds fault with, and calls the first Covenant; in opposition to this b^tter
Covenant) had Ordinances of divine Worship, had a Sanctuary, a Tabernacle,
Priests, and High Priests, Sacrifices, and other Rites belonging to the
administration of it. Sir, was this the Covenant of works? I hope you will not
own it in your next. Next you say, That place, 2 Cor. 3. 10. the glory of 2
Cor. 3. 10. mis-interpreted by Mr. Tombs.
theirs, bad no glory in respect of ours: This is not meant of the Covenant of
grace, but of the Covenant in Mount Sinai; therefore impertinently alleged by
me. Sir, I wonder at your confidence in it; the Reader will easily discorne
that the whole scope of that Chapter clearly holds forth the pre-eminence of
the Ministry of the Gospel, above the Ministry of Moses his veiled
Ceremonies: belike then with you, Moses Ceremonies were the Covenant of works.
Next, I showed in my Sermon, that as our privileges are better then theirs, in
being freed from their burdens, so we as well as they, enjoy the honor of
being called a holy Nation, a peculiar people, a chosen generation, etc. Upon
this you discourse at large, especially against Mr. Blake, and you undertake to
prove that all these things are meant of the invisible Church. I answer very
briefly, none of us ever doubted, but that the spiritual part belongs only to
the invisible Church, and did so in the time of the Jews, as well as now; but
yet we as well as the Jews partake of that privilege, and our visible standing
gives us the honor to be so reputed, as well as theirs gave it unto them; and
were all the Jews who had the honor to be called a holy Nation, really such?
were they all inwardly holy, or effectually called? the like answer serves to
your discourse upon Romans 9. the Apostle speaks there of adoption as a
privilege of the body of that Nation, their whole Nation had the Honor to be
called the children of God, according to Deuteronomy. 14. 1. Ye are the children of
the Lord your God, yet they were not all the spiritual children of God; the
Reader may see more of this in the vindication of my second Conclusion, and you
shall do well in your next, solidly to prove that these were not privileges
which the visible Church of the Jews enjoyed (though many among them had the
kernel without the shell) rather then thus to triumph in these feeble
exceptions. I added, We have all these things with advantage, not only in the
clearness of the administration, but in some sense, in greater extent to
persons, with us there is neither male nor female. Why I add this of male or
female, you say you know not, except I mean to insinuate that in the Jewish
Church there was male and female, because Circumcision was only of the males,
etc. I reply, I acknowledge that Gal. 3. 27, 28. opened.
though it be true, that among true believers, among the Jews there was
neither male nor female, all equally did partake of the spiritual part of the
Covenant, as well as now with us, yet for the comfortable manner of
administration of it, even this distinction of male and female, is a privilege
enla^ged under this last and best administration, and the Apostle in that
place, Gal. 3. 28. does plainly intimate the enlargement of this privilege in
this respect, and so I think the words plainly hold out, As many of you as have
been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ; there is neither Jew nor Greek,
bond nor free, made nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus; and if ye
be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise. To me
the Apostle here does plainly hold out, that now under the New Testament,
baptism is the visible pledge of our being Abraham's seed, as circumcision was
the pledge of it under the Old Testament; and that here is the enlargement of
our privilege in the New Testament, that whereas Circumcision of old was
applied to one Nation, and not to others; now out of all Nations, such are
called in, as are made Abraham's seed, whether Jew or Greek. And whereas of old
the seal was applied only to the males, in this respect the differences of
sexes is now taken away. And although it be true that the spiritual part of
all this be made good only to true believers, who likewise alone have the
inward baptism, yet visible professors enjoy the visible privilege.

Next you proceed to reply to an Objection which I propounded in my Sermon, and
answered, (viz.) In some thing's the Jews had greater privileges then we have;
as that Abraham had the privilege to be called the Father of the faithful:
that Christ should be born of his flesh; the Virgin Mary had the privilege to
be the Mother of Christ; the whole Nation of the Jews had this privilege, that
God will call in their seed again, after they had been cast off for unbelief
many hundred years; which privileges none of the Gentiles have, or can have.
And my answer was, That our question is about such privileges as belong to all
who have a standing under the Covenant, which every one who is in covenant with
God might expect by virtue of the covenant, whether he were a Jew or a
Proselyte, not for any peculiar or personal privilege to any one man or
woman, or family, or Tribe. That it no ways derogates from us that some
particular person or Tribe should enjoy some peculiar privileges; but if any
of the common privileges, which they all enjoyed by virtue of their Church
standing should be abridged, then the privileges of the New Testament would
be more restrained then those of the Old; this, said I, is against the word of
God. Your answer is, That this Argument has no weight, but only amongst
Vulgar, and nonsyllogising capacities: and therefore in your Latin Paper you
mention these instances of the Virgin Mary, etc. And thence would show, That
the Jews might have more privileges in some respect, in some things, then we,
and yet our condition better then theirs by reason of some other privileges we
have above them, which recompense the defect of those privileges; and
therefore no good Argument can be drawn, That because God gave such a
privilege to the Jews, therefore we must have such a privilege too; yea, it
would be an Argument of arrogant presumption, to say, the Jews had such a
privilege, therefore we must have it: They had a privilege to circumcise
Iufants, therefore we mast baptize Infants.

I Answer, I think indeed it would take with no sober Christian thus to argue:
The Jews had it, therefore we must have it. But Sir, to argue thus, God gave
such a privilege to the whole Church of the Jews, that their Infants should be
reputed to belong to his Church, and have the initiall seal: Therefore if he
have not granted to Christians, that their Infants shall also be reputed to
belong to his Church, and partake of the initiall seal; then his grace to
believers under the New Testament is straightened as to their posterity. This
Argument appears so clear to me, that I must confess my self one of those
Dull ones, who know not how to deny the consequence. In the mean time I
observe, that though you would make your Reader believe, that these personal
privileges of Abraeham, to have Christ born of his flesh; the Virgin Mary to
be the mother of Christ, etc. do press my Conclusion; yet you spoke not one
word to vindicate them from my answer: And therefore I collect that by this
time you see, that now under this administration, some personal privileges
which a few of the Jews had over and above what belonged to the rest, may be
denied us, and yet they make nothing against this Argument; That if the common
privileges which every one of them had were denied us, our privileges were
Distinction of Proselyres of the Gate, and of the Covenant, helps not Mr.
Tombs.
straightened. Your other exception which you make concerning Melchisedeck, Lot,
and Job, have been often answered before. That which you add concerning one
kind of Proselytes among the Jews, who were called Proselytes of the gate, who
though they were not circumcised, were yet reckoned among the Worshippers of
God, (such at were Cornelius and others) and were also within the Covenant of
grace. I know not what you intend to gather from it; unless you would
intimate, that they were Church Members among the Jews, although they were not
circumcised; but had you said so, that the privileges and Church Membership of
these Proselytes of the Gate, were as honorable as those of the Proselytes of
the Covenant, your learned Readers would have smiled at you; sure there would
have been no need for God to have instructed Peter by a Vision from heaven,
that he should not call them (to whom he was to be sent) unclean; nor had
Peter been ever put to have made his apology for going in to Cornelius and his
company, if these uncircumcised Proselytes of the Gate had been reputed
Church Members among the Jews. Next you grant, The Jews indeed had that
privilege to have their children reckoned in the outward administration, as
branches of the O live by their birth, which the Gentiles have not. But if we
Gentiles have it not, then are not we I pray you, straightened in that
particular? And I demand further, when we are graffed in, and so naturalized
with them, do we not partake of all the fatness or privileges of the Olive
with them? what Scripture ever denied it? I demand yet further, did the many
ten thousands of Jews who were baptized in the Apostles days, by their coming
under this best administration of the Covenant, and thereby kept their former
growing in the Olive with advantage; did they thereby deprive their Children of
that which you say was their natural privilege? if you think so, produce
your evidence to prove it; if they were not, then it seems the Jews who
believed in Christ, and kept their station, had a greater privilege for their
children, then the Gentiles who grow together with them, have for their
children.

I added, Let any man show out of the Scripture, where our privileges under
the Gospel are cut short in any of these things, and in particular for the case
in hand, concerning our Infants right to the Covenant and seal of it; once we
are sure the Infant-children of all Covenanters were within the Covenant, and
the sedle also belonged to them: and by virtue of the Covenant (which is still
the same) (...) pl^ad their interest in it; let any show when and where this
was taken away. You answer, it is unreasonable to require this at your hands,
to show what you do not avouch: you go not about to expunge Infants of
believers out of the Covenant of Grace; and you see no cause to believe me, who
affirm that once they were within the Covenant, etc. I reply, but do not you
avouch, That the Infants of the Jews had this peculiar privil^dge, and
birthright to be under the administration of the Covenant which ours have not;
which you know is the only thing controverted betwixt us: may not I boldly
say, That once the Infants of all Covenanters had this privilege? may I not
also exact of you to show when and where this was taken away? who though you
go not about to expunge them out of the book of life, yet you expressly expunge
them out of visible membership, while you say, the Jews Infants had it, and
ours have it not.

Lastly, I added, who ever will go about to deprive them of it, to cut off
such a great part of the comfort of believing Parents, must produce clear
testimonies before they can persuade believers to part with either of them,
either right to the Covenant, or to the seal of the Covenant; because next to
the glory of God, and the salvation of their own souls; their Infants
interest in the Covenant, is one of the greatest benefits believers have from
the Covenant A great a bridgment of our privileges to have our children left
out of the Covenant.
of grace, even to have their Children belong to Gods family and Kingdom, and
not to the Devils; Children being the greatest treasure of their Parents, and
the salvation of their childrens souls, the greatest treasure in their
children; and therefore to exclude them out of that society or visible standing
where salvation is ordinary, is so great a loss, or eclipsing of their
comfort, a^ whoever would make them yield to it, had need produce very strong
evidence; and much more I said in my Sermon to this purpose. You answer, Here I
am upon my advantage ground, in a vein of Oratory, and on a subject, of all
others, aptest to move affections; to wit, Parents tenderness to their
children. I confess in this point, I stand upon a vantage ground (not in
Oratory, to which I pretend not, but) in point of truth, had I only spoken
words without weight, you could and would have discovered their emptiness, and
scoffed at them sufficiently; you make several small exceptions which I shall
briefly touch: as, First, That I touch something too near upon the Popish
Opinion; as if I might be guessed to symbolize with that Opinion of the
Papists, who judge all unbaptized infants to perish; which is not worth the
answering. Then you demand What comfort do we give Parents, which the
Antipaedobaptists do not give them as well as we; or what discomforts in truth
do they give them, which we do not? I answer, the difference is very great,
you leave them in the state of Infidells, we in the condition the Jews children
were in while they were the people of God; we account them actually belonging
to the visible kingdom of Christ, you actually to belong to the visible kingdom
of the Devil; we leave them under the benefit of that promise, I will be the
God of thee and of thy feed, you acknowledge no more promise for them, then for
the children of Turks: it may be these things are of no account to you, but I
doubt not but they will be with your unprejudiced Reader.

I next proceeded to the maine and only Objection made against this whole
Argument, which is this, There is no command, Sect. 12. Ans. to the maine
Objection.
no express institution, or clear example in all the New Testament, of
baptizing of Infants; and in administration of Sacraments, we are not to be
led by our own reason, or grounds of seeming probabilities, but by the
express order of Christ, and no otherwise. You say, this is indeed the maine
Objection, and without answering it, all that I have said is to little purpose.
But Sir, did not you formerly grant, that upon the proving of my two first
Conclusions the whole cause depended? if therefore those Conclusions remain
firm, there is enough already said to the purpose.

You add, Unless this Objection be removed, the practice of baptizing infants
will never be acquitted from Will Worship, and that the Prelatists will show
vertuall commands from analogy of the Ceremonial Law of the Jews, and
Traditions Ecclesiastical, as ancient as ours for Paedobaptisme, for their
Prelacy, Holy days, Surplice, etc. And therefore if I stand not to i^ here, I
must yield up my weapons. Sure you think you are here like to get some
advantage, you speak so big, but by this time I have had such sufficient
experience of your strength, that I much fear not your great words.

First, for the point of Will Worship, I shall desire you to prove this
Conclusion, That all things belonging to Christian worship, even in the
circumstances of it, even the ages and sexes of the Persons to whom the
Ordinances are to be applied, must be expressly set down in the new Testament;
if you prove not this, you say nothing to the purpose, for this is our very
case. I have already showed the falsenesse of it, in the point of the
Christians Sabbath; for though the Ceremonial Worship, which was a type of
Christ, be wholly abolished, yet not every thing which concerns all Worship
which must have an institution, is abolished. And for the plea which the
Bishops and others may pretend from the analogy of the Ceremonial Law; when
you show how they will raise their Arguments (which possibly you have more
skill and experience to do then I have) as plainly as I do for
Infant Baptism, you may possibly prevail with the Reader in their behalf. And
when you show as much Ecclesiastical Antiquity for Prelacy, Holidays,
Surplice, etc. I shall believe your Reading to be greater, then I can yet be
persuaded of, that you have seen some such Monuments of Antiquity, which the
Prelaticall Party could never yet light upon. But I proceed with you. I first
granted, That there is no express syllabicall command for baptizing of
Infants, no express example where Children were baptized. Sure (say you) this
is a shrewd sign that I am not like to make good my ground, having yielded
thus much. And why so I pray? your very next words leave me ground enough, when
you say, That if it be made good by good consequence, it is sufficient: what
need was there then of this idle scoff? I added, Many other points of high
concernment, are not expressly laid down in the New Testament, a^ forbidden
degrees of marriage, Laws against Polygamy, the Law of a weekly Sabbath, etc.
You answer, In mere positive Worship, it must be so, it must have either
Precept or Apostolical example, equivalent to a precept found in the New
Testament, else it is will worship, and this say you is our case in hand; I
answer as before, there is no absolute necessity that every circumstance of an
Ordinance, or the several Sexes or ages to whom an Ordinance ought to be
applied, must be thus set down in the New Testament, this is sufficiently
cleared Part 2. Sect. 8. and part 3. Sect. 1. As for the forbidden degrees of
marriage, you say, there is one branch mentioned and censured in the New
Testament, viz. the incest^ou^ Corinthians case, and that is, say you, a finne
against a moral commandment; but how would you laugh at such a consequence in
another; a man may not marry his fathers wife, a thing which by the light of
nature was abborred amongst the Heathens, Ergo, all the degrees of forbidden
marriage in Moses Laws stand firm? The like say you against P^lygamy, there
is proof against it, Matthew. 19. 5. 9. But is this an express prohibition of
it? must you not be compelled to go by a consequence to bring it in, which is
all I contend for? For that of the Sabbath you refer your Reader to Sect. 8.
Part 2. whither I also most willingly send him, and leave it to his impartial
judgment whether the advantage lie not clearly on my side. I added, there is
no express command for children of Believers, when they are grown, that they
should be instructed and baptized, no express command or example where women
received the Lords Supper, good consequence I acknowledge there is, but no
syllabicall or express mention of it; but say you, there is express mention
of women's receiving the Sacrament, Let a man examine himself, 1 Cor. 11. 8.
where the Greek word comprehends both sexes, but does that Greek word, where
ever it is used, signify both sexes? you will not offer to say it, I deliver
to you what I received from the Lord, Verse. 23. that, say you, is a command to
the whole Church, which consisted of women as well as men, etc. But Sir, if any
man were disposed to wrangle with you, might he not in your own words do it,
and say, all these expressions must be limited pro subject a materia? I grant
all this is good by consequence, but not in express terms; the same say I for
Infants, you grant all disciples may be baptized, for that you say there is an
express command; your self also grant, that regenerate Infants may be called
disciples, I grant this a good Argument by consequence, that such Infants may
be baptized; and if I have proved or can prove, that Infants of believers by
their birth privilege have a right to be esteemed visible Disciples, then by
your own g^ant, by a good consequence they also may be baptized; and I
undertake to justify that Infants of believers are visible Disciples, as
truly as regenerate Infants are invisible disciples. I add further, they who
are visible Covenanters are to receive the visible sign, Ergo, Infants (who
have been at large proved to be visible Covenanters) are to receive Baptism
which is the visible sign of it: these things are fully cleared already, it is
apparent there is as clear a command for Baptism to be the initiall seal
under this administration, as ever there was for Circumcision under that
administration; and as good evidence that our children are to be reckoned to
the Covenant, as there was for theirs, and no exception in the word put in
against them. Is not here then good consequence, that therefore they are to
have the Seal administered to them? suppose when Paul. said let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat^, that there had been no women there then amongst
them, would not this command by consequence have reached women as well as men?
if this qualification was found in them that they could have examined
themselves, must the command necessarily express all sexes, ages or
conditions, or else not reach them? these things I mention, as consequences
parallel to these which your self infist upon. I added, we by good
consequence have sufficient command and example for Infant^ Baptism: to which
you answer, I should have said jeere, I fetch such a The command of
Circumcision reaches us by analogy.
compass, that you imagine my attempt will prove but a Mouse from the
M^untaines travel; I perceive you know not how you should possess your Reader
with prejudice, if you should not now and then interline a confident scoff,
but let us try the particulars, my first was, Abraham who received the Covenant
had a command to seal his children with the initiall seal, because his
children were in Covenant with him. Now because what concerned the substance of
the Covenant is always the same, and what concerned them then who were in
Covenant as they were Covenanters, the same concerns us equally with them as
we are Covenanters, what concerned them in reference only to their
administration was peculiar to themselves, as that which concerns the manner
of our administration is peculiar to us; it thence follows that the same
command which was laid upon them in their administration in all those things
which properly related to the substance or spiritual thing intended in that
administration, by a just analogy and proportion, binds us as well as them, I
said, this our Divines maintain against the Papists, that Gods commands and
institutions about the Sacraments of the Jews bind us as much as they did them
in all things which belong to the substance of the Covenant, and were not
accidental to them, my meaning being plainly this, that all Gods Commands and
Institutions about the Sacraments of the Jews as touching their general
nature of being Sacraments and seals of the Covenant, and as touching their
use and end, do bind us in our Sacraments, because in these they are the same.
To speak yet more plainly, if I can, there are in the Sacraments these two
things to be distinguished, the general nature, end, and use of a Sacrament
to seal the Covenant of God by some sensible sign; and secondly, the manner
of administration of these signs, as they refer to Christ to be exhibited,
or to Christ already exhibited. The first concerns rem ipsam, the thing it
self, which I called in my Sermon the Substance; the other which concerns the
peculiar way or manner of doing it in reference to Christ not yet come, or to
Christ already come; that in my Sermon I called Accidental; now when I say
that Gods commands about their Sacraments bind us, my meaning never was to
assert, that the rituall part of their Sacraments do remain in the least
particle, or that we are tied to practice any of those things, but only that
there is a general and analogicall nature, wherein the Sacraments of the Old
and New Testament do agree; and that in these things, our Divines do argue
from their Sacraments to our Sacraments; thus Chamier de Sacramentis, Vet.
T^st. cap. 1.
Chamier, Catholici* docent convenire Sacramenta vetera cum novis, omnibus, iis
capitibus quae sunt de Sacramenti natura; Protestants do teach that the
Sacraments of the Old Testament do agree with the Sacraments of the New in all
things which concern the nature of a Sacrament, and yet says he, our very
senses teach us that the external rites of their Sacraments do differ from
ours; So Amesius, quaecunque de Circumcisione dicuntur and spectant Ames.
Bellar. Ene^v^de Sacrament. in genere.
ad Sacramentalem eju^ naturam quam habet in communi cum reliquis Sacramentis,
illarecte applicantur ad omnia Sacramenta, and adds immediately, ratio
signandiest talis in circumcisione: and you know multitudes of our Divines
speak to the same purpose; their Sacraments were Seals of the Covenants, so
are ours, their Sacraments had a Divine institution, so have ours, their
Sacraments were not empty Sacraments no more are ours, the grace accompanying
their Sacraments was not included in their Sacraments, (tanquam contentum in
continente) nor in ours, their Sacraments were to be administered only to them
who were accounted to be in Covenant, so are ours; they had one Sacrament
which most immediately and properly, was a standing Sacrament for admission into
the visible Church, so have we, now in these things do our Divines use to
argue by analogy and proportion from their Sacraments to ours: this was that
which I intended in my Sermon, namely, That look what duty they were tied to
by their Sacraments, in seeking after the spiritual part of it, look what
graces they were bound to believe to be sealed unto them in their Sacraments,
the same are we tied to believe in ours; these things concern us as much as
they did them; but for those things which were the accidental, or (if you like
not that expression) which concern only the rituall part of their Sacraments,
these do no ways oblige us; Rites and Ceremonies, which were peculiar to
them, are ceased, the duties, obligations, comforts and benefits which they
were led to in their administration, do all remain the same to us under our
administration, when the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4. explained.
1 Cor. 10. That all our fathers did eat the same spiritual meat, and drank
the same spiritual drink, our Interpreters generally do agree, that by the
same spiritual meat, and the same spiritual drink is meant the same with
ours; So Calvin, Beza, Chamier, and who not, because say they, Eadem fuit
veterum Sacramentorum and nostrorum substantia, Their Sacraments and ours were
the same in substance, yet no man is so absurd, as to think that either the
Manna or the water of the Rock do remain to us: such an analogicall Ephesians. 6
1, 2. explained.
Argument as this the Apostle Paul himself uses, Ephesians. 6. from the fifth
Commandment which in the Jews time was backed with a particular promise of
living long in the Land which the Lord their God would give them; and believers
now have no promise of living in the land of Canaan, yet Paul there presses a
promise to us from the general scope of that promise, Honor thy father and
mother, which is the first Commandment with promise, that it may be well with
thee, and that thou may live long on the earth: I endeavor the more fully to
express my sense in this particular, because after your usual manner you
endeavor to make my assertion senseless, and absurd, and then come to reason
against a sense of your own making, and cannot be acknowledged to be mine.
Now I proceed to see what you say against this Argument, First, say you, it is
no und^niable argument that this must be good, because all Protestants use it,
nor did I lay the weight of this upon their number or consent, but only
intimated, that it is obvious and usual; if you take away the strength of the
Argument, I shall not leave upon the men. Secondly, you consent not to this,
that there were no other ordinary Sacraments among the Jews, then Circumcision
and the Passover; you rather concur with Mr. Cudworth, that they had almost
as many Sacraments as Ceremonies; I reply, whether this be right or wrong, it
is nothing to the business in hand, Mr. Cudworth denies not the lawfulness of
such an Argument as reasoning from the Jews Sacraments to ours, in that sense
which I have here set down, yea in that very Treatise he acknowledges the
Lords Supper to succeed the Passover in that notion of being a feast upon a
Sacrifice. Thirdly, you take a great deal of pains to put a sense upon my
words which I never thought of, (viz.) That the Jewish Sacraments are still in
force to us, that I make some things in the Jewish Sacraments to be
substantial, some things to be accidental, that the accidentalls I would
have abolished, the substantialls to remain, that I show but little skill in
Logic in opposing the substance of an Act, and the Accidents of it, that I
would make somethings commanded by God in the Sacraments accidental, and not
to be of the same weight or obligation as other things which are substantial;
and finally you bring no less then ten Arguments to prove that all the Jews
Ceremonies* Rites and Sacraments, are all abrogated, substance and
circumstance, whole and part. In all your ten Arguments I fully concur with
you, and in that conclusion which you confute by those Arguments, I never
understood by the substance of their Sacraments, the sensible signs used in
the Sacraments, but rem Sacram^nti, the spiritual part of the Sacrament, or
the res signata; and my Argument was never intended to be any other then that
analogicall Argument which is above set down, and none of your Arguments
meddle with. You proceed to those particular instances I gave, in which you
might have known the meaning of my Argument if you had pleased, and spared
fighting with your own shadow by your ten Arguments. The first, is
Circumcumcision is called a Seal of the Covenant, theno^ our Divines plead,
our Sacraments are Seals of the Covenant. To this you except, first, you know
not where Circumcision is called the Seal of the Covenant, though you
acknowledge it is called the sign of the Covenant in one place, and both the
sign and seal of the righteousness of faith in another place; truly Sir, I
thought that the comparing of these two Scriptures together, had been
sufficient to show that Circumcision was a sealing sign. Secondly, you except,
though Circumcision be called so, yet that is no Argument to call our
Sacraments so, though you are willing they should be called so, and you say
our Sacraments are Seals of the Covenant. I reply, lay aside but this
analogicall Argument, and prove if you can that our Sacraments are Seals; our
Sacraments are neither called signs nor seals in the New Testament, all the
world must grant indeed that they are signs, but when the Papists deny our
Sacraments to be Seals of the Covenant, how will you be able to prove it, if
you lay aside this Argument, Circumcision was a Seal, therefore our Sacraments
are Seals, ours agreeing with their in the general nature of a Sac^ament?
Next I said, Circumcision might be administered but once, it being the Seal of
admission: therefore Baptism being also the Seal of admission may be
administered but once; you answer, denying both antecedent and consequent, you
know nothing, you say, but that hoth Circumcision, and Baptism might be
administered more then once, which I hope I have sufficiently consuted in answer
to Sect. 4. Part. 2. And secondly, say you, had there been a command to
circumcise but once, it would not follow that therefore a person may be
baptized but once; but when this is proved that Baptism succeeds Circumcision
to be the initiall Seal, which your self cannot deny, it must then follow,
that a man may be baptized but once, no more then he may be circumcised but
once, because where there is the same reason of a command or practice, there
must be the same practice. I added, that Circumcision was to be administered
upon the eighth day only, was an accidental thing, and therefore binds not,
meaning that it had some peculiar relation to that manner of administration,
and had nothing common either to the nature of a Sacrament in general, or to
the end and use of that Sacrament as it was the Seal of admission; you answer,
if reason may rule the roast, there is more reason that Circumcising on the
eighth day should rather belong to the substance of the Covenant, then but once
circumcising, both because it was commanded by God, and typified, as some
conceive, Christ's resurrection on the eighth day. I reply, if you please but
once to understand, that by the substance I understand the res signata, the
spiritual part of the Sacrament, you will no longer insist upon making every
thing a substantial part of the Sacrament which God has made a part of the
outward administration only; Indeed if Circumcising upon the eighth day had
had any such spiritual meaning of Christ's resurrection upon the eighth day,
you had spoke something to the purpose; but had I pleaded any such Type in it,
as that Circumcision was to be upon the eighth day, because Jesus Christ was to
rise the first day of the week, you would have laughed at me though Cyprian had
joined with me, and told me as you do here, men's conceits are voin^ without
the light of the word. My next instance was, from the Passover, which being
yearly to be repeated binds us to a repetition of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, which succeeds the Passover, it being the Sacrament of spiritual
nourishment and growth, as the other was for birth and entrance; but that the
Passover was to be eaten in an evening, and upon one set evening in the year,
was accidental and so binds not us. You answer, here are a heap of dictates,
and you as confidently dictate the contrary, you grant that the Passover was
to be yearly repeated, but that this yearly repetition belonged to the
substance of the Covenant, or that this binds us to a frequent use of the
Sacrament of the Lords supper, you utterly deny, but I doubt not, that the
Reader who knows that by belonging to the substance of the Covenant I meant
nothing but the end and use of it, to be a standing memorial of that
deliverance, and a typical representation of Jesus Christ, and our deliverance
by him, will not reject this, because you magisterially deny it, That our Lords
Supper comes in the room and stead of it, there is such a clear demonstration
of it, from the very manner of the first Institution, and the ends and uses of
it; Christ our Passover being then to be sacrificed for us, and we in this
service showing it forth; and in this parallel there is such a harmony of
consent, that I intend not to lead the Reader into a digression about it. As
for the maintaining of Easter and such superstitious customs, my discourse
gives not so much as one hint for it; yea in my Sermon I expressly showed,
That that Circumstance of once a year belonged only to the Jews
administration. And I pleaded for a frequency of it, but because you love to
knit knots, for others to untie, you demand, since we have so clear an
Example, Acts 20. 7. of the disciples coming together the first day of the
week (...) eat the Lords Supper, and that that Action gave denomination to
the whole service, and by the relation of Justin Martyr and others, this was
the received practice in the primitive Churches, whether we are not tied to
have (...) Sacrament every Lords day in the week: I answer, though I conceive
no absolute tie to have it so, yet when it can be with convenience, I know no
reason why it may not be so: but you making this one of your great Arguments,
to prove the Institution of the Lords day, (viz.) An Apostolical example, and
practice of the primitive Churches, whether you be not further engaged in this
point to a Sacrament every Lords day, I leave to your self to consider. You
demand further, since the Apostle does so expressly, and distinctly in his
relation of the Institution mention the time of it, you would know of the
Assembly of Divines, especially such of them, as have been earnest for sitting
at the Sacrament, how we can be loose to receive it at another time; I answer,
certainly the Assembly would answer you, as Cyprian did in the like case, that
the time was an occasional circumstance; and that the clear examples recorded
in the New Testament of the Disciples partaking of the Lords Supper at any of
their Church-meetings, whether by night or by day, does abundantly manifest it:
nor can I conceive why you put this question to the Assembly, unless it be to
show you are not pleased with the dispute about sitting at the Communion, it
seems you still like kneeling better, for the thing it self, you either judge
thus of it, that it was an occasional circumstance, and so you pick quarrels
even against your own light and principles, or if you think it a binding
circumstance, whence comes it that you use it not? You have yet another
quarrel about that expression of mine, in caliing Baptism the seal of our
extrance and new birth, and thence you would insinuate, that I deny Baptism to
be a Sacrament of our nourishment and continuance, and you tell me that is but a
dictate like the rest, and somewhat akin to Bellarmine and the rest of the
Papists, who make the efficacy of Baptism to extend not to the remission of
the sins of our whole life, but of original sin only. I answer, that
Baptism is a Sacrament of our Birth and entrance I have proved, and your self
grant, that it is not of use afterward I never spoke, never thought; but as for
my being akin to Bellarmines assertion, if your assertions were no more akin to
Socinus, Servetus, Marcion, etc. then mine are to the Papists, it were better
for you.

My next Instance was from our Christian Sabbath; the The same Argument which
is good by consequence for our Sabbath, is good for Infant Baptism.
fourth Commandment binds us for the substance, as much as ever it bound the
Jews; there God once for all separated one day of seven to be sacred to
himself; and all the world stood bound by virtue of that Commandment in all
ages, to give unto God that one day of seven, which should be of his own
choosing, though only the seventh day of the week be named in the fourth
Commandment. Now (said I) God having put an end to the Saturday Sabbath, and
surrogated the first day of the week in stead thereof, to be the Lords day, we
need no new Commandment for keeping of the Lords day, being tied by the fourth
Commandment to keep that day of seven which the Lord should choose: And though
no day be mentioned in the fourth Commandment, but only the seventh from the
Creation, yet our Divines think it no absurdity to reason thus, Thou shall
keep the Sabbath, thou shall rest the seventh day, that is, thou shall rest
the seventh day from the Creation, while the Lord continues that day to be his
Sabbath, and thou shall rest the first day of the week, when the Lord chooses
that to be his Sabbath; in like manner I say of the Sacrament of Baptism. To
this you answer, You refer your self to what you have before declared, Part
2. Sect. 8. And thither also I refer the Reader, where I have vindicated this
answer from you. I further add, you neither there nor here deny this Argument
from a consequence, to be sufficient for practice of some things in the Worship
of God, which are not expressly laid down in the New Testament; only you add
here, I forget the mark at which I shoot, the Sabbath or Lords day being not
to be reckoned among the Jews Sacraments. I reply, first, I might as well
reckon the seventh day from the Creation, among the Jews Sacraments, as you may
say the Jews had as many Sacraments as Ceremonies. Secondly, I never numbered
the Sabbath amongst Sacraments, but because the Sabbath belongs to the
instituted Worship of God, as well as the Sacrament, and requires its
institution to be at least as clear as this about Infant Baptism, which
touches but a circumstance of age, this Argument from the one to the other,
will appear to the impartial Reader, to be too strong for you to answer.

Next follows, the blow which will tumble down all, if your self may be
believed: Mark Reader how heavy a one it is. I said when God made the Covenant
with Abraham, and promised for his part to be the God of him and his seed, what
God promised to Abraham, we claim our part in it, as the children of Abraham;
and what God required on Abraham's part for the substance of obedience we stand
charged with as well as Abraham, to believe, to love the Lord with all our
heart, to walk before God in uprightness, to instruct and bring up our
Children for God, not for our selves, nor for the Devil; to teach them to
worship God according to his revealed will, to train them up under Ordinances
and Institutions of Gods own appointment. All these things God commanded
Abraham, and we by virtue of that Covenant (being Covenanters with Abraham)
stand bound to all these duties, though there were no express reviving these
Commandments in any part of the New Testament: and therefore consequently that
command of God to Abraham, which bound his seed of the Jews to train up their
children in that manner of Worship which was then in force, binds believers now
to train up their children in conformity to such Ordinances as are now in
force.

To all this you answer, supposing I mean the spiritual part of the Covenant
to be that which God promised to Abraham, and the persons claiming to be
believers; this passage you grant to be true, because these are mor^ll duties.
Well then, the deadly blow is not yet given; I mean this which you suppose:
and I mean more then this, I mean that what Abraham might claim as an
invisible believer, we may claim as invisible believers; what he might claim
as a visible believer or Professor, we claim the same as visible Professors;
and so what he stood obliged unto as a visible believer or professor, the same
are we obliged to; I mean all this, and you say nothing against it but the
next passage is that which kills all. I said, and the same command which
enjoined Abraham to seal his children with the seal of the Covenant, enjoins us
to seal ours with the seal of the Covenant; and that command of God which
expressly bound Abraham to seal his with the sign of circumcision, which was the
Sacrament then in force pro tempore, for the time, does vertually bind us to
seal ours with the sign of Baptism, which is the Sacrament now in force, and
succeeds into the room of the other by his own appointment. Your answer is,
This Consequence is inferred from The rest of Gods commands to Abraham, teach
us.
a Judaizing principle, without Scripture proving either principle or
Conclusion, whereas you have brought ten Arguments out of the Scripture against
it; and that the meaning of the Concluclusion must be, that we are still bound
to circumcise, that our males must be circumcised at the eighth day, that by no
rule of Divinity, Logic, Grammar, or Rhetorique, any man can construe this
Command, Cut off the foreskin of the males upon the eighth day; that is, let a
Preacher of the Gospel baptize young Infants, male or female, by as good
Consequence I might say, thou art Peter, and upon this rock: Ergo, the Pope is
Monarch of the Church; or, arise Peter kill and eat, Ergo, the Pope may
deprive Princes. So then, the din^ of your mortal blow lies in this, that you
magisterially call it a Judaizing principle; that you have brought ten
Arguments to prove that Moses Ceremonies and Rites do not bind Christian men,
but that they are all abrogated, substance and circumstance, whole and part;
that this vertuall consequence from the command of Circumcision to baptism
cannot be made good either by Divinity or Logic; but sure, if this be all you
can say against it, the Consequent and Conclusion will easily recover of this
wound. When I said but just now, That Gods Command to Abraham and the Jews, to
train up their children in that manner of Worship which was then in force,
binds us now to train up our children in conformity to such Ordinances as are
now in force. You granted this rule was true, if meant of believers. I pray
what difference is there betwixt this consequence and that, especially, it
being clear in the Scripture, that Baptism succeeds Circumcision as the
initiall seal of the Covenant, and our children have the same right with
theirs to be reckoned to the Covenant: if it be a good consequent, That
because Abraham was bound to train up his Children in conformity to those
institutions which were then in force, because their children had right to be
so trained up; therefore we are bound to train up our children in conformity
to the present institutions, because our children have right to be so trained
up; is not this other consequence I say as good, That because God commanded
Abraham to administer to his children, the seal of admission into Covenant,
because his children were to be accounted to belong to that administration, we
are to do the like to our children now, because they belong to this
administration. I say further, because Abraham and the Jews were to train up
their children to celebrate the seventh day of the week to be Gods Sabbath, we
therefore are bound by virtue of that Commandment to train up ours to keep the
first day of the week as Gods Sabbath: which consequence your self grant to be
good, though the thing be a part of instituted Worship, and no express command
or example of it in the new Testament. I appeal to al Divinity and Logic,
whether this consequence from the command of Circumcision to Baptism be not
every way as strong and clear. As for your ten Arguments to prove the abolition
of the Jewish Sacraments and ceremonies, they are al agreed to, and are brought
nothing to he purpose in hand. I have already showed that this argument from
the Analogy between Circumcision and Baptism, and the reason, end, and use
of them both stands still in force, though Circumcision it self be abolished;
and I doubt not but the impartial Reader will acknowledge this argument to be
as good, Circumcise your children, because your children have right to this
initiall seal; Ergo, by analogy let Christians baptize their children, who
have the same right to the initiall seal; as this, ye Jews keep the Sabbath
on the seventh or last day of the week, Ergo, ye Christians keep the Sabbath
on the first of the week. As for your ridiculous consequences which you put
upon me, of, thou art Peter, Ergo, the Pope is Monarch of the Church, etc. I
answer only this, I shall desire you in your next, to deal with your Adversary
by solid Arguments, rather then seek to render him ridiculous by jeeres and
scoffs, lest in the end you meet with some adversary who may dress you in
your own kind, which I have no mind to do; whether I have not made good this
command of Circumcising Infants to prove baptizing of Infants, by good
consequence, I leave the Reader to judge; and proceed to try your strength
against the next.

Another command by good consequence I gathered out of Mat. 28. compared with
Mar. 16. 15. Gal. 3. 89. Romans 1. 16, 17. Sect. 13. Mat. 28. A command for
Infant Baptism by consequence.
where our Savior bids his Disciples go and teach all Na^ions, baptizing
them, etc. Wherein I observed two things. First, what they were to do; viz.
to teach the whole Covenant, the Covenant made with Abraham, whereof this was
one branch, I will be the God of thee, and of thy seed; they were also to
baptize, that is, to administer Baptism as a seal of the Covenant, to all who
received the Covenant. Secondly, we have the persons to whom they were to do
this, all Nations; whereas before the Church was tied to one Nation, one Nation
only were disciples; now their Commission was extended to make all Nations
Disciples, every Nation which should receive the faith, should be to him now,
as the peculiar Nation of the Jews had been in times past; now we know when
that one Nation of the Jews were made Disciples, and circumcised, their
Children were made Disciples (made to belong to Gods school) and circumcised
with them, etc. To this you answer, First, that promise, I will be the God of
thee and thy seed, that it should be thus interpreted, the seed of believers
are taken into Covenant with their Parents, is a new Gospel, no older then
Zwinglius. But I have sufficiently proved that this was good Gospel in the
Apostles days, and in the times of the Fathers of the Primitive Church.
Secondly, concerning the persons who were to be baptized, every Nation, or all
Natitions: to this, because it is like to trouble you, you bring forth your old
artifice of framing many senses, whether by every Nation, be meant believers of
every Nation, then you grant the sense is good: or, whether by Nation be meant
a great or eminent part of the Nation, the Gove^nours, and chief Cities, the
representative body of a Nation. Then you fly out, and talk of baptizing all
within the Precin^^ of a Parish, a conc^it which you fasten upon Cyprian, and
talk of necessity of baptizing by officiating Priests; and bring in the
Independents, nothing to the purpose, and enquire whether (...), or [them]
refer to Nations, or Disciples, in those words of our Savior; then you vent
your Criticismes against the author of Infant Baptism, and undertake to show
that (...), signifies to teach cum effectu, or teach till they be made
Scholars; and after a long Discourse upon these things, your result is, that
(...) [them] may be meant of Disciples, and Nations respectively, Disciples of
Nations, or Nations who be Disciples, but not to baptize any of them till they
were Disciples. But Sir, what need all these things? the meaning is plain; by
Nations, I neither mean the major part of a Nation, nor representative body of
a Nation, nor the King of a Nation; but whereas before, only one Nation of the
Jews were Gods people in Covenant, now other Nations should be taken in
likewise: and whereas before their Commission to preach and baptize was
restrictive, Go not to the Gentiles or Samaritans, now he enlarges their
Commission to all Nations; and wherever their Ministry should be so blessed,
as to have any Nation accept the Gospel, they should be his people now, as the
Jews had been in times past, according to that Evangelicall promise, Esa. 19.
24. In that day shall Israel he a third with Egypt and Assyria, even a blessing
Esaias 19. 24. explained.
in the midst of the Land whom the Lord of Hosts shall bless; saying, Blessed
be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my ^ands, and Israel mine
inheritance. Here is the Nation of Egypt, and the Nation of Assyria taken into
Covenant as well as Israel Gods inheritance; and now Abraham indeed became the
Father of many Nations; so that the emphasis of this Text is in the word
[Nations,] in opposition to the one Nation of the Jews; that whereas the
Apostles thought they were never to go to those vile nations who were esteemed
as Dogs and Swine; our Lord instructed them, That now he would pluck up the
partition wall, and that the rest of the Nations should be brought within the
verge of his Church, and partake of the same Covenant, which the Jews had
before enjoyed as their peculiar treasure (a wonder of mercy, as the Jews
themselves judged, when they came first to understand it, Act. 11. 8.) and
consequently when other Nations should thus by receiving and professing the
Gospel come under his wing, they should enjoy the same benefit of the Covenant
with the Jews, He would henceforth be the God of them and their seed.

Against this you except many things: First, say you, then there may be a rule
assigned to know when a Nation may be called a believing Nation, but there is
none: And to prove this minor, you run out at large, not when a King is
baptized, nor when the representative body, nor when the greatest part are
believers; and further, if the children of wicked parents in a nation may be
baptized, it must be either from their descent, or place of birth, or both; if
by descent, it must be either from their immediate parents, or forefathers
within memory, or beyond memory; if from the place of their birth, then the
children of Turks born in England may be baptized; and if the children of
wicked parents may claim it, it must be from some Charter, Abraham indeed had
a Charter to circum^ise his, how wicked soever they should prove, but other
parents have none. And here again you bring in Romans 11. to be meant of a
personal privilege by faith, which has been before confuted. I answer to all
this in a word or two, there is a known rule, viz. when a whole Nation consists
of visible Professors, that Nation is to be reputed a Christian Nation; and
when the major part of a people may by a figurative expression be called a
Nation, that major part, if they be visible Professors, may by the same
figurative expression be called a Christian Nation, a holy Nation, a separated
people, whether any who having been visible Professors, and afterward prove
apostates, or be excommunicate, may have their children baptized, or whether
children in right of their forefathers, or r^mote ancestor^ (when their
immediate Parents are cut off from the Church) may be baptized, or whether the
Infants of infidels brought up by Christians, and so adopted into their
Families, may be initiated into Christianity by Baptism, whether upon the
ground of federall holiness or other warrant of Scripture, are questions not
belonging to our present business, therefore I pass them over.

I added, when that one Nation of the Jews were made Disciples and circumcised,
their Infants were made Disciples (made to What it is to make disciples.
belong to Gods School) and circumcised with them, when that Nation was made
Disciples in Abraham's Ioynes, and circumcised, their seed was also the same
when they were taken out of Egypt, and actually made Disciples, their chi^dren
were also with them. You answer, First, this supposes that Christ bid them
baptize all Nations after the manner that the Jews did circumcise one Nation.
Secondly, that the Nation of the Jews were discipled when they were
circumcised. And you say to the first Supposition, there is no ground for it,
the Apostle knew Christ's meaning well enough, that they were to preach and then
to baptize; and that there was no allusion from circumcision to Baptism, as
Mr. Blake conceives. But Sir, since it is apparent that here is no commission
for any new Method in their work, but only an enlargement of their commission
to apply their Ministry to new persons, how could they understand our Saviors
meaning to proceed any other ways to the Gentiles, then among the Jews? Now
among the Jews and Proselytes, it is apparent, that children receive the
initiall seal with their parents, yea, and you your self grant that their
infants were baptized when they were circumcised, though baptism was not then
a Sacrament; and when it was taken into the honor of being a Sacrament, there
is not one word in the Scripture of restraining it from being applied to
infants as in times past, the reason of the silence of the new Testament about
baptizing Infants, comes afterward to be considered, when your Objection from
it comes to hand.

To the second Supposition, That the Jews were discipled, and their children
were discipled when they were circumcised. You say, it is such a construction
of the word (...), [make disciples, as you believe no Lexicon, nor any
Expositor to this day, has ever made of that wo^d, which plainly signifies ^o
to teach, as that the persons taught do learn, and accordingly profess the
things taught. Sir, I pretend not to be a Critic, though you do, but I have
learn^, from better Critics then your self, that (...), is a ^abbinick phrase,
and from their use of it, it is best to be understood, and with them it
signifies to admit Scholars (...) is a familiar manner of speech among them for
to admit Scholars, and (...) to get or retain a Master; now this admission of
Scholars was not quia erant docti, sed, ut essent; and there is this difference
with them about this matter, that (...) is to admit Scholars to be taught, and
(...) is to breed Scholars, or to make them learned. And if you please to
consult the Learned Spanbemius, in his Dubia Evangelica, upon this very place,
wherein he vindicates it from the Anabaptists, he will tell you that (...),
signifies not only to teach, but to make disciples; which (says he in this
place) is done by baptizing and teaching; therefore (says he) the sending
forth of disciples in this place, is showed or laid down, First, from the end
of their sending. Secondly, from the several acts they are to do to to
attain this end. The end of their sending is (...), to make Disciples; the
actions whereby they are to attain this end, are baptizing and teaching: and
he gives this good reason for this his Analysis, because if (...), should
simply signify only to teach, there would be found a tautologie in Christ's
words; thus, Go teach all Nations, baptizing them, teaching them. The sense
therefore (says he) of Christ's words, is this, Go ye, make disciples to me
out of all Nations by baptizing and teaching; and this making disciples, suo
modo infantibus etiam aptari poterat; quando enim parents, etc. For when
parents do give their names to Christ for themselves and their families, their
whole house is discipled, their children as well as themselves. By this time I
hope you may be persuaded that baptizing may well be rendered discipling. And
among the Jews, to become a disciple, was not by being first taught, and then
initiated into a Master, but is meant of being initiated into a Master, to be
taught by him; so all Israel was baptized into Moses, 1 Cor. 10. not as already
instructed, but to be instructed and guided by him for the future; so Joseph
of Arimathea, (...) Mat. 27. 57. discipled in himself, entered himself into
Christ's school; so the blind man to the Pharisees, John 9. will ye be his
Disciples, will ye profess him, will ye be initiated into him? the very first
day any one initiated themselves to learn, they were called Disciples.

Further you say, if the Apostles had understood our Saviors command thus,
Disciple all nations baptizing them, that is, admit the Infants of all nations
to baptism, as the Jews did the males of that one nation to Circumcision,
they might have saved themselves a great deal of labor of preaching before
Baptism, and of baptizing females, and would have left us some president of
such a practice. I reply, why the baptizing of Infants of Believing Parents
should spare any Preachers the pains of teaching grown men, who are infidells
before they are converted, does wholly transcend my capacity, because the
Infants of Proselytes were to be Circumcised with their Parents, therefore the
Jews might spare the labor of preaching to grown men before they circumcised
them, this is a most wild consequence; or why the vertuall and analogicall
arguing from circumcision to baptism, should be brought as an Argument against
baptizing of women, has as little reason in it; there being now under the
Gospel, in reference to this Seal of admission, neither male nor female.
Whereas you add, had they done it they would have left some president of such
a practice; whether by good consequence they have not left us some evidence of
it, is the question we are now debating. I added, in every nation the children
make a great part of that nation, and are always included under every
administration to the nation, whether promises or threatenings, privileges or
burdens, mercies or judgments, unless they be excepted, whereof I gave
diverse instances in my Sermon; you answer, the Lord has plainly given a
caution in Scripture for the leaving out Infants in this administration,
according to ordinary rule, in that he directs them to baptize Disciples upon
preaching, he excludes Infants, etc. and when Christ and John baptized only
such, this practice excludes others. I answer, by what rule then durst you
baptize an Infant known to you to be regenerate, since they cannot be
Disciples upon preaching, if you say you cannot do it by ordinary rule, show
us (I pray) your extraordinary; if you answer they are Disciples, therefore
they may be baptized; I answer, the Infants of believers are visible
Disciples, they visibly belong to the kingdom, family, school of Christ, as I
have abundantly proved already; any manifestation of Gods that persons belong
to his Covenant is to your self a sufficient ground of accounting them such,
either a promise, or pouring out the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost,
(though they are no infallible signs of inward sanctification) or confession
of faith or of repentance, are warrant sufficient for us to baptize them, now
the promise of God to believing parents to be the God of them and of their
seed, and his owning them as persons belonging to his Church, is as real a
manifestation of it as the other signs of receiving extraordinary gifts,
external profession, etc. either are or can be. And whereas you add that
Christ's and John's Baptizing such, and no other as made a visible profession, is
exclusive to all others. I answer, first, it is no where said they baptized no
others; secondly, I deny that consequence, this is not an exclusive rule, the
practice and example of Christ, and John is sufficient to make an affirmative
or positive rule, they baptized such, therefore we may baptize such, but it is
not exclusive, that therefore we may baptize no other, and the reason is
plain, they possibly might not meet with all persons and occasioons, and so
their practice is a good rule, not a full rule; I shall give one instance, we
read not before the tenth of the Acts that either Christ's Apostles or John the
Baptist baptized any proselytes of the gate, or that they baptized any (as you
say) until they made actual confession of their faith and repentance, or that
there was any rule given, that the receiving the extraordinary gifts of the
holy Ghost should without any other confession be a sufficient warrant to
Baptize any, yet Peter upon the very pouring out of those gifts, without
requiring any further confession either of faith or repentance, baptized
Cornelius and all his company: in one word, any word or act of God declaring
that such and such belong to his visible Church, is a sufficient warrant
without any danger of will worship, and this we have abundantly for the Infants
of believing parents, we have therefore here nothing to do with a mixture of
wine and water, salt and cream and spittle, they are impertinent to our
business, and you bring them in to no purpose; all your discourse of
will worship which you thus often repeat, reaches not the point in hand in the
least tittle; the Sacrament of Baptism is an ordinance of his own
appointment, and by his appointment may be applied to all such as himself
does manifest to be in the number of those who belong to his visible Church,
what course soever himself pleases to take to manifest it, whiles we keep
within these bounds, we are therein out of the danger of will worship. I added,
it behooved the Lord to give them a caution for the leaving out of Infants in
this new administration, that they might know his mind if he had intended to
leave them out, which that ever he did in word or d^ed, cannot be found in the
Scripture; to this you answer, it behooved the Lord to give a precept to put
them in into this new administration if he intended to have them in, which
that ever he did you cannot find; I reply, but I have abundantly proved that
they always had a right to be accounted as belonging to his Church, to be
reputed visible members, and therefore need no new putting in: if God once
bestow upon a people a Sabbath to be a sign between him and them, they may
lay claim to that Sabbath upon what day of the week soever he please to
appoint it: the like is to be said here, while the Lord will own any to be
visible members of his Church, they have right to the administration, be it
new or old, if they be capable of it, and no bar put in against them by
himself. That which follows in your book, page 133. about Childrens being
taken in with their parents, and included unless excepted, and of being under
the former administration, and so under this, by paritie of reason, has been
abundantly spoke already. I added, our Infants are capable of being Disciples
as well as the Infants of Jews and Proselytes, you grant it to be true, and I
ask no more for ours then they had for theirs, and though they be not capable
of receiving actual instruction from men, yet they are capable of Gods own
teaching even in their Infancy as much as the Jews Children were, which is
sufficient for my purpose* I added, in Christ's dialect to belong to Christ, and
to be a Disciple i^ all one, and cleared it by some Text in the Margent, you
answer only this, that though Mr. Blakepr^^^ph in this n^tion, yet it is a
triumph beford victory, and that the Text cited by me spoke not of little ones
in respect of age, and some of them mention not little ones at all, but what is
this to the purpose, when the intent was only to prove this notion or
expression that to be a Disciple and belong to Christ is all one. Lastly, I
argued from Act. 15. 10. to show that Children may be called Acts 15. 10.
explained and vindicated.
Disciples, because they upon whose necks those false teachers would have put
the yoke of Circumcision, are called Disciples, and to be called Disciples,
and it is apparent that they would have put it upon the Infants of believers as
well as upon the believers themselves, because they would have imposed it after
the manner of Moses Law, and pressed that Law still to be in force; you answer,
you see no necessity from this to call Infants Disciples, and you first deny
the major, that all are to be called Disciples upon whose necks they would
have put that yoke. To which I answer, without any further reply I leave it to
the Reader to judge, only I thank you for the reason you allege why you deny
the major, because it is not said they would put it upon Disciples only: I
hope you will receive the same law you give, and therefore will rest satisfied,
when your self do plead, John's and Christ's Disciples required confession of
says and finnes of those whom they baptized, and when Christ bid his Apostles
and Disciples first to teach, then to baptize, I shall answer, it is no where
said, they baptized only such, or were to baptize only such. Secondly, you
answer that this yoke of Circumcision which necessitated them to keep Moses Law
to salvation was not put upon Infants, but upon brethren who were taught the
necessity of it. I answer, then Paul himself was much mistaken, who said, that
every one that was Circumcised was bound to keep Moses Law; and certainly
Paul meant that which these false teachers alleged, even Circumcision imposed
after the manner of Moses. Lastly, you make your self merry with Mr. Blake, as
if he alluding to Esa. 49. 22. of bringing sons and daughters upon their
shoulders to Christ, etc. had alleged that Text nothing to the purpose; I
confess I am not satisfied, that that Text is clear to the purpose, but I am
fully satisfied, that you often make a noise with Texts less to the purpose,
as in bringing Acts. 19. for rebaptization, 1 Cor. 7. 34. to prove holiness to
be meant of Chastity, and many others.

My next instance was from the forementioned place, Acts. 2. whence I showed
the Children of such as believe and are baptized are taken into Covenant, and
therefore by good consequence Sect. 14. Acts 2. 39. holds forth a command for
Infant Baptism by good consequence.
are to receive the Seal of the Covenant, and that that Text not only shows
that they are within the Covenant, but also that a right to baptism is a
consequence of being within the Covenant; Your answer is to this effect, that
you have already answered this plaoe, and that it is so far from proving this,
for which I allege it, that it proves the contrary; I cheerfully refer the
Reader to my vindication of this place, Sect 6. Part 3. I added, we have
likewise examples enough by good consequence. First, Examples of Infant Baptism
by good consequence.
I showed that the Gospel took place by bringing in whole households as the
former administration also did; you allege to the contrary several examples
page 138, 139. that it was not constantly so, nor did I ever say it was so
always or constantly either among Jews or Christians; you allege the
thousands converted in the Acts, the City of Samaria, and others, yet no
mention of the whole households; yet possibly their whole households did come in
with them, the Scripture speaks nothing to the Contrary, how ever I allege it
not, nor does the cause depend upon it; I alleged many households who were
baptized, Cornelius and his household, the Jailer and his household, the household
of Stephanus, of Crispus, of Aristobulus, of Narcissus and several others; to
all which you answer, this must be interpreted by other places, which when
they express the haptizing of the household, they express also the believing
or receiving of the word by the whole household, and that sometimes the house is
put for the people of growth in the house; but who taught you it must be so
interpreted? he that will may force such an interpretation upon himself, and
it is hard to open the eyes of a prejudiced man, but I fear not, try it when
you will, that you shall never find so good evidence out of the household
eating the Passover, Exodus 12. thereby to prove that women did eat the
Passover, as this proves that the Infants of the house were baptized, because
according to your principles women might not be numbered amongst the
Circumcised; and the Law was plain that no uncircumcised person might eat the
Passover, whereas on this hand for Infants baptism, it is not to be doubted,
but that there were some Infants amongst these households who were baptized, and
no Law made against the baptizing of them. And for your evasion that though is
be sometimes said households were baptized, yet it is said these households
received the word, though this might be pleaded concerning some of them, yet
there is no evidence why you should speak it of all of them. And whereas you
further allege, that a house is sometimes taken for the grown persons in that
house* (though all the Scriptures which you mention are not fit instances) it
may very well be granted, and hurts not me, unless you can prove that it
must be so meant: I have better warrant to affirm concerning the Jaylors
house, of whom it is said Paul preached to all those that were in his house,
that either there were no Infants in that house, or that the preaching of the
word to all in the house is to be limited pro subjecta m^teria to them who
were capable of preaching, and yet the rest received baptism who were capable
of it. And thus I have cleared and vindicated my first and great Argument,
Infants are foedera ^^, therefore they must it (...) they are in Covenant*
therefore the initial (...) of the (...) belongs unto them. I proceed to the
second.

My second Argument was to this effect* the Infants of bele^vers even while
they are Infants are made partakers of the inward gra^^ of Baptism^ as well as
grown (...) who are visible professors; Sect. 15. Argu. 2. Infants are capable
of he grace whereof Baptism is a Seals.
therefore they may and ought to (...) Baptism^, which is the outward sign of
this inward grace. In your answer you grant the major, that all who partake of
the inward grace may partake out of the outward sign, and that ^o
Antipaedobaptist will deny this, but then you enquire what I mean by having
the thing signified, and you suppose I do (...) ^old that all Infants of
believers have actually the inward grace signified by baptism; no indeed Sir,
nor do I think that you conceive that all grown persons who are visible
professors have it. In your answer to the minor proposition that Infants as
well as grown men are partakers of the inward grace, according to your usual
course, you enquire after a great many senses, whether I mean it of potentiall
having it, or actual having it, whether I mean only some have it actually,
others potentially; in one sense the argument has four terms, in another
form, the argument will conclude but for the baptizing of some Infants; then
you enter into a discourse upon the Lutherans, and about a book entitled,
Baptismall regeneration of elect Infants, with which you say Doctor Fe^tley
concurs, and of a book written by S. C. Entitled, A Christians plea for
Infants Baptism, which holds positions somewhat like the Lutherans, all which
you profess you mention to discover what stuff the Pedobaptists do feed the
people withal, you might have added, to work prejudice in your Readers, and
to show your own reading, and to swell up a volume, otherwise quorsum haec? my
meaning is as plain as the high way, that as Infants are to be reputed to
belong to the Covenant as well as grown visible professors (which was the drift
of my first Argument) so the scope of this is to show that they are in the same
capacity to partake of the inward grace of the Covenant, while they are
Infants, as there is of grown visible professors; and that they are not only
capable of it, but many of them are actually partakers of it as well as grown
men* and consequently that we have the same ground to look upon and judge
Infants of believers to be regenerate as upon grown men by a visible
profession, there being to ^s no infallible ground of certainty, but of
charity, for the one no^ for the other, and that their visible right to the
Covenant and the many promises of God made to the seed of the faithful are as
good evidences to ground this judgment upon, as the external signs which
grown men can give; and therefore whereas you say, that all the Infants of
believers* or the Infants of believers in as much they are the Infants of
believers, are actually partakers of the inward grace of Baptism, else the
Argument will not serve for my purpose; I utterly deny, that this is the
Conclusion to be proved, or that my argument is not to the purpose, unless I
undertake to prove this; for I argue in the like case from grown men who are
visible Professors, thus; All who are partakers of the inward grace of Baptism,
may and ought to partake of the outward sign and seal, but visible Professors
are partakers, etc. This minor is liable to the same exceptions that the other
is, for who knows not that many visible Professors have not the invisible
grace, That many are called, when but few are chosen? and yet your self do
hold, that we may de side, out of faith and assurance, that we do it according
to Gods will, apply the outward sign to them, though we have nothing but
charity to make us conceive the inward graces to be in them. Neither can we by
the judgment of charity think that all visible Professors taken together in a
lump have the inward grace; the Scripture (which is the rule of our charity)
having declared the contrary, our charity only warrants us to judge of every
single person, when possibly we may know no more against the one, then against
the other, though we know there are some false hearted amongst them: The same
is to be said for Infants; and this I proved out of the Scripture, Mark 10. To
such belongs the kingdom of God; and in my Sermon I Mark 10. vindicated from
Mr. Tombs exceptions.
vindicated this Text from the glosses which the Anabaptists would put upon it:
your exceptions against it are such as these, it is possible they were not very
little ones; possibly our Savior meant not of them, but of such as they, for
the word is (...) of such, not (...) of these: possibly, horum and similium, of
th^se and the like: possibly, they were not the children of believers:
possibly, it is meant only of elect Infants, that these were elect, and should
in time be called: but yet, say you, grant all, and it will not ^ence follow,
that all Infants of believers have right to invisible grace; yea, it here suits
better for confirmation, then for baptism; yea, that it is rather an evidence
Christ would not have Infants baptized, because he ordered not th^se Infants to
be baptized. But Sir, how many of these things would you have called dictates
in another, assertions without proof and to how little purpose are all these
things brought i^? your self grant enough to serve my turn; you grant that the
kingdom of heaven did belong to these Infants, and I intended from this
instance not to prove that all Infanta of believers are made partakers of
saving grace* but that Infants in their infantile age, are capable of inward
grace, and some of them actually partakers of it; this is enough for me; and
more then this cannot be said of grown men who are visible Professors. I added
in my Sermon, sa one branch of a reason, that there is nothing belonging to the
initiation and being of a Christian, whereof Baptism is a seal, whereof
Infants are not capable, as well as grown men; as receiving the holy Ghost,
union with Christ, pardon of form, regeneration, eternal life. Your answer is
a scoff out of Hora^e, Amphora caepit institui, etc. I should prove, say you,
that all Infants of believers are actually partakers, and in stead of this, I
prove they are capable of it. Sir, this is but one part of my reason; and I
undertook not to prove that all infants, but only that foam are partakers of
it.

I added, and it is further considerable, that in the working that inward
grace, of which baptism is the sign and seal, all who partake of that grace,
are but meer^ Patients; and therefore Infants are as fit subjects to have it
wrought in them, as grown men; and the most grown men are in no more fitness
to receive this grace, when it is given them, in respect either of faith or
repentance, which they yet bave, then a very little child, etc. You answer, by
demanding whether I bring all this as a proof; that all infants have it, or
that they are capable of it; or whether I intend it ^s a further argument, that
baptism is to be given to those, who are capable of the first grace, which
because Infants are as well as grown men* therefore they are to be baptized;
but then you deny the major, for a person is not to be baptized, because he may
have grace, but because he has it. Sir, I brought it to prove that which was
in hand, viz. that Infants are capable of it as well as grown men, and that
some of them are partakers of it as well as grown men; and therefore their
Infant-age cannot be pleaded against them, as if inward grace could not
comp^tere to their present condition. And as for that you add, That baptism
is to be administered, not to them who may have grace, but to them who have it.
Then it seems they are all wrongly baptized who have not inward grace; and so
(according to your own expression) baptism to such is as a seal set to a
blank; yet you know, even the Apostles themselves baptized many who were in no
better condition: and your self afterward grant, That a Minister may defide
administer this Sacrament to such as make a visible profession, though he be
not assured of any inward grace. I have often proved, that a right to be
reckoned to belong to the visible Church, is a sufficient warrant to administer
the seal of admission. Secondly, you much trouble your self, to find out what
I mean by the first grace: whether the free favor of God, or the Covenant of
grace; whether if I mean the first grace in exceution, I pitch upon
justification, or regeneration, or adoption; and then inquire which is the
second grace. But all this is but seeking a knot in a rush. I am persuaded all
other Readers understood me to mean by the first grace, all that grace which
is requifite to the being of a Christian, union with Christ, forgiveness of
sin, the indwelling of the holy Ghost, as a principle of a new life; and your
self say more then once, that baptism is the sacrament of our Initiation, and
that which exhibits us members both of Christ and of his Church; and therefore
thus needlessly to quarrel about things wherein your self concur with me, is
too too vain. Lastly, you have somewhat to say to that of our being merely
passive in our first conversion, and you tell your reader, what the Divines of
great Britain said in the Synods of Dort, of some preparations going before
conversion: and what Mr. Rutherford, Dr. Twisse, and Dr. Preston have delivered
about this point. And after a needless showing that you have read these
Authors, you grant as much as I contend for, That the taking away the be art of
stone, and insusing of a principle of new life, is only Gods work; and that a
new heart, faith, etc. are the effects of converting grace, and that in these
things we are passive: in sum, you are of my judgment in this point, that
Infants are capable of new life, and some of them partakers of it: and I
likewise consent with you, and those above mentioned Reverend Divines, that in
Gods usual way of working upon grown men, there are some preparations for
conversion, before conversion it self, in which preparations men are not
merely passive; but in the receiving of the principle of new life, all men are
merely passive. I know you will own that expression of Augustine, Qnid agit
liberum arbitrium? san^tur. I conclude this argument of baptizing Infants, with
a speech of Bellarmine, there is, says he, no impediment why Infants may not
be baptized; nec ex part prohibitionis alicujus divinae, etc. neither Bella^.
lib. 1. de Baptismo, cap. 8
from any divine prohibition, nor on the part of the Sacrament administered, nor
on the part of the Minister administering, nor on the Infants part to whom it is
to be administered, nor on the Churches part in which it is administered.
Paedo-baptisme therefore is rightly continued in the Christian Church.

PART. IV.
I Proceed now briefly to examine what you have said against that which you are
pleased to make the fourth Sect. 1. Answers ^o Objections against
Infant Baptism.
Part of my Sermon, though I know no reason of this your Analysis: Had I indeed
made this an answer of all the objections which I undertook to answer, you
might have called it so; but you know well enough, that I intended here only
to satisfy these Objections which lie most properly against this second
argument, as before I answered what was most properly objected against the
first argument; however, I shall take it as I find it, and examine what
strength you have added to these Objections.

The first Objection I undertook to answer, was to this purpose, Though
Infants are capable of these things, and that Object. 1. From Mat. 28.
they are wrought by Christ in many Infants, yet we may not baptize them,
because according to Scripture pattern, both of Christ's command, Matthew. 28. in
his institution of baptism, and John the Baptist, Christ's Disciples and
Apostles, they always taught, and made them disciples by teaching, before they
baptized any. And to make this argument the more plausible, you add, It is a
sin of profaning that Sacrament, when the institution is altered by
subtraction or addition, and that it was pleaded by the Non-conformists, that
it is Will Worship to administer the Sacraments by addition of any thing to
them, but circumstances which are alike requisite to civil actions; now the
persons to be baptized cannot be conceived a mere circumstance, but belongs
necessarily to the administration of worship, as well as the person baptizing,
or the persons receiving the Lords Supper.

I answer, I intend not needlessly to multiply words, and therefore do grant
that to apply Sacraments to persons to whom they belong not by the Lords
appointment is a profanation of them. Now that it is so in this case, you go
about to prove out of this 28. Mat. Because the institution appoints only
disciples of all Nations to be baptized, and Infants are not such. This you
have made good (as you say) Sect. 13. Part 3. You add, Christ's order thus
appoints it, which must be kept in this point, as well as in examination before
the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 28. etc. and that by the institution they are to
be baptized into the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, that is, with
invocation of the name of the Lord, which Infants cannot do; with devoting
themselves to the service and adverence of God, which Infants cannot do; that
presently after baptism, the baptized are to be taught to observe whatsoever
Christ command^d them, which Infants are not capable of; that John Baptist and
the Apostles always made profession of repentance and faith, an antecedent to
Baptism, which Infants cannot make. To all this I answer, First, this of Matthew.
28. is not the institution of Baptism, it was instituted long before to be the
seal of the Covenant, it is only an enlargement of their Commission, whereas
before they were only to go to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, now
they were to go into all the World. You reply, If it be not the first
institution of Baptism, yet it is an institution of Baptism to us Gentiles;
and therefore the rule by which Ministers are to baptize, or if not, we must
show another institution, else we cannot acquit it from Will Worship. I answer,
all this is abundantly answered before, Sect. 13. Part 3. And I add this
enlargement of their Commission is very unfitly called by you an institution of
baptism unto us; their Commission at the same time was enlarged to preach to
the Gentiles, will you call that an institution of Preaching? and that the
method of preaching to us Gentiles must be fetched out of this place? I know
you will not. For the rest of your petty reasons above alleged, they resolve
several Answers to oath petty Arguments of Mr. Tombs out of Mat. 28.
of them into one and the same: Christ's order is (say you) teaching should go
before baptizing; is not that the same with this; That men must be made
disciples by preaching, before they be baptized? the answer to the one does
fully satisfy the other. But your third reason is a strange one, They must be
baptized into the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, that is,
(say you) with invocation of the Name of the Lord: then it seems if the party
baptized call upon the name of the Lord by prayer, that is all that is intended
b^ baptizing into the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; that the name of
God should be invocated at the administration of Baptism, and of Circumcision,
and of every Sacrament, is most true; but that baptizing into the name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, should be interpreted to be invocation of Gods
name, and so to make Baptism and Prayer all one, is strange Divinity; it is
true, Paul was exhorted to pray or call upon Gods name when he was to be
baptized, Acts 22. 16. but does it prove that his Baptism and Prayer was all
one? it may be you mean only this, that every person who is baptized, must be
able himself at the time of his baptism to pray; if that be your meaning,
prove it by your next, show why more at Baptism then at Circumcision. As for
your fourth, were not the Infants of the Jews devoted to God by Circumcision,
though they could not actually devote themselves? To your fifth, That they were
to teach them as soon as they bad baptized them; and that therefore none wete
to be baptized, unless they were fit presently after their Baptism, to learn
the rest of their duty. I answer, this also is sufficiently answered in Sect.
13. Part 3. and I further add, that baptized persons ought indeed to be taught
all that Christ commands them, and so likewise were circumcised persons, but
not presently, only as they were capable of it, and able to receive it. And as
for the persons baptized by John, and Christ's disciples; I have before answered
that it cannot appear that they baptized no oother but such as made profession
of faith and repentance; and if it were granted, it follows not, that therefore
no other may be baptized, their practice is a good rule, though not a full
rule, as I showed, Sect. 13. Part 3. And whereas you say, John baptized none
but upon profession of repentance* you would have a hard task to prove it, if
any man should put you to it; to prove (I say) that John did impose or require
confession of sin before baptism, it is said he baptized them (...), to
repentance; not (...), as stated in actual repentance; and his calling for
repentance, and preaching the Baptism of repentance, show that this was the
lesson they were all to learn; not that they must all manifest that they had
it before he baptized them; and though some did make confession of their
finnes, yet you can never prove that all did it, or were tied to it. Sure I am,
I meet with very learned Men who judge thus, That their confession of sins
was not because confession was a necessary medium to all who should receive
Baptism, but because heretofore Baptism had initiated into Judaisme, and so
to Legal performances; and the men who came to be baptized of John, were such
who had been educated in an opinion of Justification by works of the Law: and
therefore John in calling for repentance, did but clear his Baptism from
misconstruction, lest they should think it to be a Baptism obliging to legal
performances, as that was of old, he would teach them that his Baptism was a
Baptism of repentance and faith in Christ, and so does but rectify those
relyers upon their own righteousness, in the right doctrine of Justification,
which the Gospel now began to teach, contrary to their legal conceited
righteousness; and that therefore his calling for repentance and belief in
him that should come after, did more show the nature of the Gospel, to which
his Baptism was the introduction, then the nature of the Sacrament of Baptism
it self, or the method in which it was to be administered; and with these
accords the interpretation Paul made of John's baptism, Acts 19. 4. and
consequently that the confession required had special relation to the
condition of the persons who came to be baptized, and was not necessary for
all, more would be required of a heretic for his admission into the bosom of
the Church, then is requisite to be required of a child. But however, I think
it will be hard for you to confute this, I shall leave it to the Judicious
Readers consideration, and not insist upon it, but shall readily grant that all
Jews and Pagans so bo^ne and bred, were not baptized till they professed their
faith and repentance, because the Jews were all to come under a new
administration, and the Gentiles till then were wholly aliens from the Covenant
of grace, and then their Infants came in in their Parents right. But say you,
This grant that the Jews who already were in Covenant, were to make confession
before they were baptized, is a sufficient proof that the administration of
Circumcision, is not the administration under which we now are: and that
overthrows all virtuall consequences from Circumcision to Baptism. I reply,
who ever said that this administration is the same with theirs? it is the same
Covenant, but a new administration. And as to that you say, This overthrows all
virtuall consequences from Circumcision to Baptism; I have so abundantly
justified this before, that I shall not trouble the Reader with it again,
though you repeat this so often, that I am ready to think you hope your
reader will believe you in one place, if he do not in the other. You add my
saying, That their Infants were to come in only in their parents right, does
overthrow my second Argument, because that is grounded upon a right which
Infants had of their own, viz. participation of the grace of the Sacrament. I
answer, belike then if any had pleaded thus for the Jews Infants, That to
Infants, as well as grown men, God communicated the spiritual part of
Circumcision, therefore they might be circumcised; you would answer, that that
Argument would overthrow their right from their birth-priviledge. I rather
should judge it to be a second good Argument for their Circumcision; the truth
is, they are both grounds of Gods own appointing: and the second is a farther
manifestation of their right to the Sacrament, God not only giving them a
visible standing in his Church, because they are the seed of the faithful, but
among them, who are Infants as well as among grown men does work inward grace
by his holy Spirit according to his good pleasure. Whereas you add, that you
cannot yet discern but that our grounds for Paed baptism are worse then the
Papists and ancients, who build it upon the necessity of baptism to
salvation; I must needs tell you, your respect to the reformed Churches in this
is very small, whil^t you think the Papists ground of damnation of Infants not
baptized is not so ill as the Protestants, who baptize them because they look
upon them as within the Covenant of grace; I will not aggravate this, I hope in
time you will see it and be sorry for it.

But you glory much in the advantage you think you have got, from that which
follows in my Sermon, the Heathen nations who were to be converted to Christ
were yet without the Covenant of grace, and their children could have no right
until themselves were brought in, and therefore no marvel though both John
and Christ's Disciples and Apostles did teach before they baptized, because then
no other were capable of baptism, in this (say you) I grant many things which
do yield the cause: Sir, I shall not recall any one of them, make your best of
your advantage. 1. Hence you collect it follows that baptizing of Infants is
not according to John's, and Christ's Disciples, and the Apostles practice: I
answer, it no ways follows, if you take but that in which immediately
follows, that their Infants came in in their parents right. 2. Hence I grant
(say you) that no other were capable of Baptism, but wherein I beseech you
have I granted the cause in saying their Infants were not capable of it till
their Parents came in, and when they (...) in, their children came in also by
virtue of the Covenant. What need you keep such a coil in asking whether
believers had then no children? or whether the Apostles had no commission? or
whether we have a Commission if they had not? you go on and say, I think to
salve it thus, when once themselves were instructed and baptized, then their
children were capable of it by virtue of the Covenant; I do so, and what have
you to say against it? why then say you they were capable in John's time and the
Apostles time, and this destroys that which I said before, that then none but
taught persons were capable of Baptism; but where did I say so? I said there
was no express mention made of any other, I said also Infants were not capable
till their Parents came in, because their Parents were to come under this new
administration, but I never said, when their Parents were come in in John's time
and Christ's time, that their children then were not capable of it. Yea, I have
showed good grounds by consequence that the practice was otherwise. Further you
say, it seems I could produce no Institution in the new administration, but
the Institution of Circumcision, because I say the children were capable by
virtue of the Covenant, and the validity of arguing from Circumcision has
been considered before: and you further add, that the Covenant being the same
at all times, as my first conclusion holds, the children of bel^evers were as
capable in John's time as after; and thus you say my words do plainly
interfere; I answer, I have abundantly proved, that this ground from the
Covenants being the same, and our Infants right the same with theirs to the
Covenant, and our Baptism succeeding in the room and place of Circumcision,
is a sufficient ground for this practice, though there be no express mention
of them in this new administration; nor did I ever say that Infants of
believers were not capable of it by virtue of the Covenant in John's time, so
that this triumph of yours is not the fruit of my interfering, but of your own
blindness or stumbling. Whereas in the close of this Section I said, if any in
the Jewish Church had received Commission to go and make other Cities
Proselytes to them, their Commission must have run thus, go teach and
circumcise, and yet it would not thence have followed, that none might be
circumcised but (...) as were first taught; you answer the Commission must have
had reference in the execution of it, either to the old institution of
Circumcision, Genesis 17. or to a new Institution, and then it would have been
told plainly what and whom they were to circumcise. I reply, supposing it had
gone according to the institution, Genesis 17. which (as you say) was to
circumcise males at eight days old not taught, I hope you will not say they
might circumcise the males of any at eight days old, although their Parents
were not taught, which is the case that I put, you cannot (I perceive) deny
this case to be parallel, only this arguing from Circumcision to Baptism you
cannot away with; but Sir, this reasoning is justified to be good, rumpuntur ut
ilia.

The second objection I thus expressed, it is expressly said Sect. 2. Object. 1.
Infants are unbeleevers, ergo, not to be baptized.
that he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, faith in Christ is the
condition upon which men may be baptized, and no other unbeleevers may not be
baptized; children are unbeleevers, therefore they may not be baptized; they
say the negative is included under the affirmative, believing is the
affirmative, unbeleeving is the negative, therefore where believers are
commanded to be baptized, unbeleevers are forbidden to be baptized. This
Argument I said the Anabaptists do very much glory in; my answer to it was to
this effect; that if this Argument have any Answ.
strength at all against the baptizing, it has much more strength against the
salvation of Infants, because it is expressly said both affirmatively and
negatively, he that believes shall be saved, but be that believes not shall
be damned; whereas though it be said affirmatively he that believes and is
baptized shall be saved, it is not said he that is not baptized shall not be
saved, look by what distinction they will maintain the salvation of Infants
against this Argument, by the same will I more clearly justify the baptism
of Infants against this argument. I add now further, if they take believers in
a contradistinction to Infidells, then I say Infants of believers are
believers, as well as the children of Infidells are Infidells; if they take
believers in a more restrained sense for positive and actual faith, then I
deny that this is a necessary condition required to be found and manifested in
every one who is to be baptized, as I have at large proved before, and your
self cannot deny. To this Argument your answer is only this, that you own
not the Argument, only thus far you own it, viz. that a profession of faith
is a pre-requisite to Baptism, and so it was accounted in the days of Justin
Martyr, Tertullian, Cyprian, and Augustine, etc.

But I reply, though you dare not: own this Argument, yet it stands upon the
same ground that the rest of your arguments do, and upon the same grounds that
many of your expressions do, such as this, That men are not to be baptized,
because they may have grace, but because they have it. But now you will not
stick to this, That to have true faith, is a pre-requisite to Baptism; you are
contented with an outward confession of it only, and that a visible profession
gives right to a visible membership, and consequently that a visible membership
gives a right to Baptism, which is the thing I have been contending for all
this while. As for what you add, That in the days of Justin Martyr,
Tertullian, Cyprian, and so forward, this confession before baptism was
continued: it is true, it was continued for those that had been Pagans and
Infidels, that they should make such a confession before Baptism; and it is as
true, that in their days Infants of Christians were baptized.

3. I said it was objected, That though Infants are capable o^ Sect. 3. Object.
3. We know not what Infants have grace, ergo we may not baptize any.
the inward grace, and that God does effectually work in some of them, yet
that is no sufficient warrant for us to baptize all of them; if we knew in what
Infants the Lord did so work, we might baptize those Infants, but that we
cannot know by any ordinary way of knowledge, therefore we may not baptize any
of them, but wait to see, when and in whom God will work the thing signified,
and then apply the sign to them. You answer, this is granted, that Answ.
if by revelation it could be known, such as have this inward grace might be
baptized; and that those who are thus entitled are not through want of an
institution to be excluded. To my understanding this over throws all which you
have hitherto contended for; for then if we can prove that Infants are such,
as to whom this Sacrament belongs, by your own grant they are not to be
excluded for want of an institution; now I have proved that Infants of
believers are such as to whom the Sacrament does belong: yea, and your self
grant, that true faith is not a needful pre-requisite to the administration of
Baptism. Besides, I desire before I leav^ this passage to know of you, how you
will reconcile this with that which you spoke, page 162. That there is a plain
Text requiring confession before Baptism, though not before Circumcision. I
hope you do not think a regenerate bab^ can make a confession of its faith;
surely these two things do much differ, Gods inward revealing that he has
sanctified a child, and the child's own profession or confession; God revealed
that Saul was hid behind the stuff, but this was not Saul's own confession;
God revealed to the Prophet Ahijah, that the disguised woman was Jeroboams
wife, but that was not her own confession. My answer to this objection was,
That our knowledge that God has effectually wrought the thing signified, is
not the condition upon which we are to apply the seal, he never required that
we should know that they are certainly converted whom we admit to Baptism, we
are indeed to know that they have in them the condition which must warrant us
to administer the sign, not that which makes them possessed of the thing
signified, fallible conjectures are not to be our rule in admistring Sacraments
either to Infants or grown men, but a known rule of the Word, out of which we
must be able to make up such a judgment, that our administration may be of
faith, as well as out of charity. To all this you assent, and cons^quently that
there is nothing needful according to the Word, but a visible right; and then
what is become of all your pleading, That because we cannot know that all
infants of believers have the inward grace, we may not therefore baptize them?
this hold you have now quitted; and when once you have proved that they have
not a visible right to be reckoned and accounted to belong to the visible
Church, I promise you to quit all mine.

Whereas I added, That I doubted whether in case Peter, or Paul could by the
Spirit of revelation have known that Ananias, or Alexander, would have proved
no better then hypocrites, whither they either would or ought to have refused
them from baptism, whiles they made that public profession, upon which others
were admitted, who in the event proved no better then those were. You think
they would and ought, because the end of such an extraordinary revelation,
would be to warn them not to admit such persons. I answer, the cause depends
not upon it, whether your conjecture or mine be rightest in this particular;
and I confess, should such an extraordinary revelation be made purposely to
warn them not to admit such persons, that would be equivalent to a
prohibition; but might not such a thing be revealed for other ends? Christ knew
that Judas would prove a devil, yet he admitted him not only to baptism, but
Apostleship; and since your self do grant that we have a warrant de fide, out
of faith, and not out of charity only, to admit men into visible communion by
baptism, upon an external confession only; I cannot understand why my
private knowledge upon a particular revelation of a man's inward condition,
should be a sufficient bar against proceeding according to the ordinary rule;
if I were infallibly assured that some glorious professor were no better then
an hypocrite, were that sufficient warrant to deny the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper to him, so long as his life was unblamable before the Church?

Lastly, I added, That in this the rule to direct our knowledge, is as plain
for Infants as for grown men, the rule having been always this, that grown
men who were strangers from the Covenant of God, Pagans, or Heathens should
upon their being instructed, and upon profession of their faith, and promise to
walk according to the rule of the Gospel, be received and added to the
Church, and made partakers of the Sacrament of admission, and their Infants to
come in with them, both sorts upon their admission to be charitably hoped of,
until they give signs to the contrary, charity being bound from thinking
evil of them, not bound to conclud^ certainly of any of them. Your only
exception against this is, wondering that I dare say, the rule to direct our
knowledge, is as plain for Infants as for grown men. I answer, truly Sir, by
as plain, I intended only the truth of the rule, that it may be as truly
known as the other, though possibly not so cl^arely. I deny not but I had
spoken more fitly in saying the rule is plain for Infants as well as for
grown men; and that I have proved abundantly.

My fourth Objection was, That all who enter into Covenant Sect. 4. Object. 4.
Infants cannot Covenant, or promise for themselves.
must stipulate for their parts as well as God does for his; they must indent
with God to perform the believers part of the Covevenant, as well as God does
to perform his part: My answer was, The Infants of Jews were as much tied, as
the Infants of believers under the Gospel, every one who was circumcis^d was
bound to keep the Law, yet they knew not what it meant, nor could have Answ.
the same use of it with their Parents and others of discretion. You own not
this Objection, nor say any thing against my answer; only you except, That
through my whole book, I suppose there is the same reason of the mixed Covenant
made with Abraham, and that it is the same with the pure Covenant of the
Gospel, and of every believer as of Abraham, and of Baptisms as of
Circumcision. I do so, and have justified these thing to be true against your
exceptions. You add also, God commanded the one, but no where commanded the
other; which whether he have or no by good consequence, I leave the Reader to
judge, by what is already spoken.

I added in my Sermon, God seals to them presently, i. e. conditionally, as I
have before showed, and when they come to years of discretion, they stand
obliged to the performance of it in their own persons; in the mean time Jesus
Christ who is the surety of the Covenant; and the surety of all the
Covenanters, is pleased to be their surety: and this I illustrated from things
done amongst men, thus, when several parties stand obliged in the same bond,
they may seal at several times, and yet be in force afterward together, or
even a child sealing in infancy, may agnize, and recognize that sealing, when
they come to years of discretion, if then they will renounce it, as done when
they understood not, they may free themselves, if they please, if they find
the former act a burden to them, so said I is it here, God is pleased to seal
to infants while they are such, and accepts of such as seal on their parts, as
they are able to give in their infant-age, expecting a further ratification on
their part, when they are come to riper years; in the mean^ time affording
them the privilege of being reckoned unto his kingdom and family rather then
the devils, if when they are grown men, they refuse to stand to this Covenant,
there is no hurt done on Gods part, let them serve another God, and take their
lot for the time to come. To this you answer, First, this is only the spinning
out the simile of a seal; which whether it be to the purpose or no, I as
willingly as your self, leave it to the Reader to judge. Secondly, you say, it
is very inconsiderate boldness in me^, to make every baptized person a
Covenanter, for whom Jesus Christ is a surety; when as the Scripture makes
Christ the surety only for his redeemed ones. I answer, it is very true that
Jesus Christ is the surety only of the elect, so far as to perform all the
conditions of the Covenant in them; but he is also the surety of all visible
Professors, aliquo modo, upon their condition of performing the Covenant; look
in what respect your self will acknowledge Christ undertakes for visible
Professors, as they are visible Professors, the same will serve my turn, and I
shall ask no more.

The fifth Objection was, that no benefit comes by such a sealing as this is.
My answer was, The same which came to the infants Sect. 5. Object. 5. No
benefit comes of Infant Baptism.
of the Jews, who received the seal in their infancy. You answer, First, you
allow not that expression, That God seals to every one that is baptized, he
seals only to believers, to whom be undertakes to make good his promise of
writing his law in their heart, etc. And here again you charge me with
symbolizing with the Arminians, who make the Covenant of grace common to elect
and reprobates, and left to every ^ans liberty to free themselves if they
please, and so nullify all. I pass by your scoffs, of my frivolous supposing
of Chimeraes, and other such good language; you have pretty well enured me also
to receive the reproach of Arminianisme. As to the thing it self, I answer,
was not Circumcision Gods sign and seal? which by his own appointment was
applied to all the Jews and Proselytes and their children, did it engage God
absolutely to every one of them to write his law in their heart, etc. And are
not the Sacraments signa conditionalia, conditional signs and seals? and did
any Orthodox Divine before your self charge this to be Arminianism, to say that
the Gospel runs upon conditions? I confess it is Arminianisme to say any thing
is conditional to GOD, this I never asserted, but that the Gospel is both
preached and by the Sacraments sealed to us upon condition of faith, will pass
for orthodox doctrine, when you and I are dead and rotten.

You add that you do not well understand that God required of the Jews
Infants to seal in their Infancy; I reply, but I hope you understand, that the
Jews Infants were sealed in their Infancy, and by this they received not only
a privilege to be accounted as belonging to Gods family, but it also obliged
them to the several duties of the Covenant, as they grew up to be capable of
performing them. I added, secondly, God has other ends and uses of applying
the Seal of the Covenant to them who are in Covenant with him, then their
present gain, it is an homage, worship, and honor to himself, and it
behooves us in that respect to fulfill all righteousness; when Christ was
baptized and circumcised he was as unfit for the ordinance through his
perfection, as children through their imperfection, being as much above them as
Children are below them: your answer is, Baptism is Gods worship,
Paedobaptisme a wilworship; Christ's Baptism was of a transcondens nature,
children are unfit for this ordinance, not because of their imperfection, but
through defect of Gods appointment; had God appointed it, there were no doubt
to be made of their fitness; all this has been considered and weighed again
and again, and I desire not to burden the Reader needlessly. I added thirdly,
the benefit and fruit of it at the present is great, both to the parents and
to the children, to the parents whilst God does thereby honor them to have
their children counted to his Church, and under his wing, whilst all the other
Infants in the world have their visible standing under the Prince, and in the
kingdom of darkness, and consequently while others have no hope of their
childrens spiritual welfare, until they be called out of that condition,
these need not have any doubt of their childrens welfare if they die in their
Infancy, nor if they live until they show signs to the contrary, God having
both reckoned them unto his people, and given them all the means of salvation,
which an Infants age is capable of. You answer. First, all this passage is but
dictates. Secondly, you say if I mean the unbaptized children of believers,
do belong to the kingdom of the devil, it is a harsh and uncharitable
speech. Sir, I am glad to hear you give that censure upon your own judgment,
it is your judgment that all Infants even of Believers as well as Pagans
though they may potentially belong to the kingdom of Christ, yet actually they
belong to the Kingdom of the devil; but for my self, I meant only the
children of Infidells, I do not think that believing Anabaptists do through
their ignorance or error put their children out of this privilege. You demand
further, What comfort do I give more to believing parents that have their
children baptized, then belongs to them, though their children were not
baptized. I answer, if it be not through the parents fault that their children
be unbaptized, but only by the providence of God, they may have the same
comfort, yet I conceive it a greater enlargement of comfort to enjoy the
visible Seal, an ordinance which they are capable of, and which God uses to
bless according to his good pleasure; but I say when parents do therefore not
baptize upon this principle, that their children do not belong to the Church
of Christ, no more then the children of Turks and Pagans, and consequently are
without that pale, where ordinarily salvation is only to be had, it is easy
to say that their comfort cannot be so much as others: your self do grant
that this which I plead for is a comfortable condition if it could be made out,
page 82. Whereas I added they need not make any doubt of their childrens
welfare, if they die in their Infancy, etc. You answer, I speak like one who
holds that Baptism does confer grace ex opere operato: But why so? when I
ground it upon the Covenant, upon their capacity both of the Seal and the
inward grace, and yet leave all to be done by God, who has mercy upon whom
he will have mercy; I said not that they may de fide be assured of their
salvation, but that they need not have any doubt, the same which may be said
of grown visible professors. I added, here is also much privilege and benefit
to children when as (beside what inward secres work God is pleased to work in
them) they being members of the Church of Christ have their share in the
communion of Saints, are remembered at the throne of grace, every day by those
that pray for the welfare of the Church, and particularly in those prayers
which are made for his blessing upon his ordinances; here first you desire to
know what I mean by a secret work which God is pleased to work in them;
whether any thing, ex opere operato, or baptismall regeneration, I answer, I
meant only this, that God is at liberty, and may when her pleases let his
grace accompany his ordinance: as for their being members of the visible
Church, you deny they are so, and I have proved them to be so. Lastly, I
added, it is no small privilege to have that Seal bestowed on them in their
Infancy which they may afterward plead when they are grown, and came to
fulfill the condition; you answer, when, where and how Baptism should be
pleaded, you do not well conceive, it is not Baptism that will yield a plea
of any force either in the Court of earth or the Court of heaven, but the
promise of God and the condition of faith in Christ, and you never knew any
Saint that pleaded his Infant Baptism, in such cases, as the Apostles plea
lies for Romans 8. 31, 32. I answer, as it is a plea for visible professors all
their days, so it is a plea for Infants, when they grow up upon the same
condition, and though the promise and faith in Christ be our best plea, yet
Baptism the Seal is no mean one, and you who say, that of old the influence
of comfort from baptism was very great, I hope did not intend to limit it to
the present time of its receiving, but extended it to all cases, which may fall
within the compass of those things for which Baptism was appointed to be a
Seal, and as long as it remains a Seal, and why you should speak against
the pleading of Infant Baptism, when they come to fulfill the condition and to
have the answer of a good conscience toward God, (in which case the Apostle
said Baptism saves us) I cannot tell, unless you think with the Anabaptists
that Infant Baptism is a nullitie, which if you do, I pray you let us know it
in your next.

The last objection was to this purpose, If Infants being capable Object. 6.
Then also Infants may receive the Lords Supper.
of the spiritual part will entitle them to the outward sig^^, why then do
we not also admit them to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which is the
Seal of the Covenant of grace, as well as the Sacrament of Baptism; and the
rather because the Infants of the Jews did eat the Passover as well as they
were circumcised? My answer was to this effect, Infants in their infantage are
capable of the grace of Baptism, that we are sure of, not sure that they are
capable of the grace signed and sealed in the Lords Supper, we know they may
be initiated into the Church, while they are Babes, not that they receive
nourishment and augmentation. And I further add, there was express order that
Infants should be admitted to the initiall sign, not that they should be
admitted to the other. To this you answer, This Argument is good ad homines
against them who argue that to whom the Covenant belongs, to them the Seal
belongs, and you say, this argument is confirmed by the practice and opinion of
the ancients, who gave the Lords Supper to Infants for 600. years as well as
baptism. I reply, my Argument runs thus; To whom belongs the Covenant, to them
belongs the initiall Seal of the Covenant, not every Seal of the Covenant,
and though the Lords supper be a Seal of the Covenant, and succeed the
Passover as a Seal of that Covenant, yet neither the Passover, nor the Lords
Supper were appointed to be initiall Seals; and though Baptism, which is the
initiall Seal, serves to confirm the rest of the benefits of the Covenant, as
the baptized grow capable of them, or are made partakers of them, yet the prime
and maine use of it is to be a Seal of initiation and reception into
Covenant. As for what you add of the ancients giving the Lords Supper to
Infants for 600. years, I have before answered to it, that it cannot be
proved to be so general a practice as the baptizing of Infants was among
them, nor was it pleaded by any such Arguments, as they pleaded for Infant
Baptism; Indeed in the African Churches about Cyprians and Augustines time,
the Lords Supper was given to Infants, but I can find no such general
practice of it as you would insinuate. Howbeit, I am glad that upon this
occasion you acknowledge, that for the first 600. years Infants were baptized
among the ancients, though I know not how this will agree with that which you
have so fidently asserted before, that it was hardly known in the Church for
the first 300. years. Whereas I added, that though baptism and the Lords
Supper are both of them Seals of the new Covenant, yet it is with some
difference; the first is for birth and entrance, the other is for food and
growth; you answer, this is a paradox to you, because if I make the entrance at
the remission of sins, justification, etc. the Lords Supper which seals
Christ's death, seals the entrance into the Covenant, and Baptism seals as
well the pardon of other sins as of original sin; and therefore this
difference which I put of the one being a Seal for entrance, the other for
growth, is a difference which the Scripture makes not. I reply, if this be a
paradox, your self have very often owned this paradox, in calling both
Circumcision and Baptism the Seals of our admission, and that by Baptism we
are exhibited to be members of Christ and his Church: which you yet never said
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper was appointed to be. And as for what you now
add that the Lords Supper sealing the death of Christ does therefore seal our
entrance; I answer, it follows not, it seals indeed the whole Covenant in its
due place and order, as our food is a witness that we are alive, and is a
means to preserve our life, but yet it must be supposed that we are first
made alive before we are capable of the benefit of our food. And whereas you
jerke at that phrase of the Lords Supper sealing the growth and augmentation of
the Covenant, as an unfit expression; truly, I thought every child would have
understood, that by nourishment and augmentation I meant nothing but the
nourishment and growth of those graces of the Covenant, which the Covenant
promises, and all are tied to seek after. As to that of the Jews Infants
eating the Passover, I answered, there is no such thing mentioned in the books
of God: It is said indeed that the several families were to eat the Lamb,
and if the family were too little to eat a Lamb, several families were to
join together, and that when their children should ask them the meaning of
it, they were to instruct them about it, but not a word of institution
appointing them to eat it, nor any example witnessing that they did eat it:
You answer, All the males were appointed three times a year to appear before
the Lord, one of which was the Passover, and at that time there was no other
food to be eaten, but unleavened bread and the Pascall Supper; and you observe
out of Ainsworth that every child that could hold his father by the hand, and
could go up from Jerusalem gates to the mountain of the Temple, his father
was bound to carry him up, to the end he might catechize him in the
Commandments, and they who went up were bound to keep the feast. I answer,
were the Jews bound to carry all their Babes up with them to Jerusalem, or any
of them, before they had understanding in those rites and mysteries? and was
there no food among them all that time, but the Sacramental food? were the
unclean and uncircumcised in their families to fast all that time? produce any
Scripture that witnesses these; you indeed quote two or three broken
testimonies out of the Rabbis, who lived some hundred years after Christ, but
not one text of Scripture, and yet even your Rabbis say no more then I am
willing to grant, that when they could understand the service, they might
partake of it; nor does the Gospel prohibit such young ones to partake of the
Lords Supper, who are able to discern the Lords body. I observe also that when
a testimony out of a Jewish Rabbi seems to make any thing on your side, you
draw more confident conclusions from it, and fetch consequences further then
you will allow me to do out of the holy Scriptures.

The application of my Sermon you pass over, as Sect. 7. Of the comparison
between Hazaels cruelty to Infants and the principles of Anabaptists.
not being argumentative; only in the first use you again fall upon the
comparison which I made betwixt Hazaels slaying the Infants of Israel, and the
principles of the Anabaptists, in putting the children of believers out of the
Covenant of grace, and this you aggravate to the utmost, calling it a false
accusation, a fruit of passion, not of holy zeal: this also you fell upon in
the very beginning of your treatise, where I answered, I compared not their
intentions with his, but the fruit of their principles, casting all believers
children, as much out of the Covenant of grace as they do the children of
Turks and Pagans; and this I am sure they do, and your self join with them,
who acknowledge no more promise for the children of believers, then for the
children of Turks, and leave them to have their actual standing in the
visible kingdom of the Devil. This I said in a spiritual sense was more
heavy to the bowels of Christian parents, then to see their Infants slain
before their face, while in the mean time they might look upon their Infants
so dying, to be within the pale of the Church, where salvation is ordinarily
to be found; this I leave the Reader to judge of. Whereas you add that this
follows not upon the doctrine of Antipaedobaptisme that Infants are thus
excluded, and that if to be within the Covenant of grace, be rightly
expounded, you exclude them from the Covenant of grace no more then I do; of
the truth of this, without any needless repetition, I leave the Reader to
judge by what has been disputed betwixt you and me; if they find this
assertion of yours to be true, I give them leave to charge me with the same
rashness, false accusations, and passions, which here you power upon me; if
not, I am sure they will lay it all at your door.

I now come to your Epilogue, wherein you intimate, first, that you presume you
have said so much against my Sermon, Sect. 8. Answer to the Epilogue.
that you hope I see cause to consider more exactly of this business then I
had done before, that I am not now so confident as I was, that this is Gods
truth: I answer, as in the presence of the same great God to whom you and I
both must give an account, I have seriously weighed what you have written, or
any other who have come to my hands, with a full resolution not to shut my eyes
against what light he would cause to shine upon me, and upon my most diligent
study, accompanied with my weak, yet sincere and earnest prayers, I am more
confirmed in it, and the more I have studied, the clearer it appears unto me.
Secondly, you say you have endeavored to examine every thing of weight
delivered in my Sermon, and what you could remember of Mr. Thomas Goodwins, and
what Mr. Blake, or any other have written about this thing; and I likewise have
seriously weighed and not past over any thing of weight in this your Examen.
Thirdly, you say you chose out my Sermon, because I am in print styled the
Antefignanus, the Ensigne-bearer; a title which I neither deserve nor desire.
Fourthly, you motion that all we who have appeared in public in this cause
would join our strength together in a reply to this your Examen, that you
might see the whole strength imbattel'd, that you might not be put to the
reading of every Pamphlet. Truly Sir, this smells a little too rankly, thus
confidently to challenge all men, not contented with Goliath to say, Give me a
man, that I might fight with him, but to defy a whole host, argues a little
too much selfe-confidence. But for your satisfaction, here is my book, you may
try your strength against it, and though I find my impaired health and
multitude of employments is like to be an apology for me, from drawing this
saw any longer, nor indeed is it needful, there being no end of writing, all
knowing that there is no controversy of faith, wherein learned and prejudiced
men have not been able to write book after book against the truth, especially
when they choose such a way of disputing as you have chosen; However, I fear
not but it will endure your uttermost opposition, and if my book alone be
looked upon, as too poor a business, you see there are already two or three
other books extant already, against you, and I am informed two pieces at least
come out of New England upon the same subject, your self being therein
concerned (for even thither have some sent your writings, and sufficiently in
them, showed your scorn of Mr. Thomas Goodwin, Mr. Vines, and my self, as our
friends do from thence write unto us) you may take us all together, and then
we may go for a pretty Army, and when you have done all you can, I doubt not
but some will be found who will have leisure as well as ability to cope with
you; I only desire you in your next not to go on in this way of making
wrangling exceptions, and seeking to slurre and blind what is written by your
Antagonist, but by solid and clear arguments, see if you can refute that which
is asserted, and let your Reader also know as well what you would have, as what
you would not have, and open your judgment to the full in this controversy,
and show whether you take Infant Baptism to be valid, or a nullity, and if you
think it not a nullity, show your grounds for it, why all this should be true,
which you have thus far contended for, That Infants are no more to be accounted
belonging to the Church of Christ then Pagans, and yet their baptism should be
valid, whether if any man should baptize a Turk or a Jew when he should be
asleep, or by violence or any ways against his own consent, this baptism were
not a nullity, and I know not what difference you make between the one and the
other.

If on the other side, you do think it a nullity, then manifest how any at
all can now be baptized, unless you will think that they may baptize others
who are unbaptized themselves; for my own part, I seriously profess, that
supposing Infant Baptism a nullity, I cannot understand how any in the world
should this day be lawfully baptized, unless it can be made good that a person
unbaptized himself may be a lawful Minister of baptism to others: for
certainly until the Anabaptists arose in Germany, all the baptized world were
baptized while they were Infants; and consequently the first Anabaptist was
baptized by an unbaptized person, and so in conclusion we must all turn
Seekers, and be content without baptism, till Christ give some extraordinary
Commission from Heaven unto some men to be Apostles in this business.

Fifthly, you express the straights you are like to be brought into by the
loss of your small stipend, as a consequent of this your Opinion. Sir, I am
persuaded this is made up abundantly in that Honorable Society where now you
exercise your Ministry; and I beseech the Lord so to inform you in his truth
in this particular, and to guide your Spirit, that you may no longer be a
stumbling block to others, nor others prove stumbling blocks to you, that those
good parts which God has bestowed upon you, may for the time to come be
employed in the most serviceable way, that both your work and wages may be
with and from the Lord.

Sixthly and lastly, you declare your willingness, either to have conference
with me, to consult about a way of a brotherly debating of this point, or to
receive other answer within the space of a month. What past betwixt your self
and me in Conference, I have given the Reader an account of in the beginning of
my Book; and in truth, I verily thought you would quietly have kept your
Opinion as private to your self, which was the true reason why I meddled with
your Book no sooner; as soon as it was published, I took my self bound in
conscience to take it into Examination, and give this public account of it;
since which time God has been pleased to visit me with sickness and
infirmity of body, so that for a month or six weeks I could very little attend
upon this task, and many other employments have compelled me to go through it,
horis successivis, not being able to attend it many whole days without much
interruption. Such as it is you now have it with you, and I make bold to say
again, I am verily persuaded it is Gods truth which I maintain against you, and
I fear not my account of this Work in the great day; save only I must ever
acknowledge and bewail those frailties and infirmities which cleave to
whatever I put my hand unto.

A Brief EXAMINATION OF Mr. TOMBS his Exercitation about INFANT BAPTISM.
YOur Exercitation might very well have been spared in this place, for any
great advantage it is like to bring to your cause, but I am very glad it is
extant, because all Learned men will by it plainly discern how mean and poor
your Arguments are, when you come positively to assert, they will now find
that true which I said in the beginning, that your faculty is far better in
darkening, slurring, and plundering the Arguments of your Adversary, then in
making good your own. You have here impanelled a whole Jury, and would feign
persuade a verdict of twelve men to stand upon record on your side, as having
found Infant Baptism guilty of the crimes which you have laid to its charge: I
shall very briefly examine what every one of them have said, and only run them
over, partly, because there are lately extant two learned Treatises against it,
written by Doctor Homes, and Master Geree, the first of them was published when
my Book was almost half Printed, the other since; but chiefly because almost
every sentence in this your Exercitation which has any strength is by
yourselfe brought into your other Treatise, which you call the Examen of my
Sermon, and there is already fully answered.

Of your twelve Arguments, the first is not properly to be called an Argument
against Infant Baptism, but is rather an answer to several Arguments
pretended to be brought for Infant Baptism; and upon this you bestow at least
two third parts of your Exercitation, twice as much I nke and Paper upon the
foreman of the Jury, as you do upon the other eleven.

Under the head of this first Argument, you have brought in no less then
fourteen Arguments (as you call them) for the lawfulness of Infant Baptism,
and then you undertake to answer them; your self say truly of many of them,
they make a number without strength; and therefore as you have made a conquest
of them, do with your prisoners what you please, for I count them not worth
the redeeming; only this I say, we have six or seven of your twelve, which I
think all the world, and your self also, will grant to be taken Prisoners by
us, if you please we will exchange them for the other, and then in the exchange
we shall lose nothing, being assured yours are as weak and simple as it is
possible for those to be which you have taken; and for the rest of the
arguments brought for Paedo-Baptisme, you have propounded them for* your own
advantage, so set them down as to make them best capable of the specious
answers you bring unto them; but I like not that an enemy should have the
ordering of the Forces which he means to fight against, you must give us
leave to choose our own weapons, and Marshall our own Forces, and then you may
try your skill and valor against them. Doctor Homes has made his Annotations
upon all the arguments which you have produced according to your own method
Mr. Geree has chosen out only those arguments which carry most evidence, and
not troubled himself to examine every thing; for my part, I humbly conceive
that Infant Baptism is not to be fetched from any one of these grounds singly,
but is built upon the identity of the Covenant, Infants right to the Covenant,
and the initiall seal; and consequently though one Text may be a sufficient
medium or Argument to prove some one or two of them, yet to make the evidence
full, these ground^ must not be separated one from another, but necessary
recourse must be had to them all; and if all your Arguments do overthrow any
one of them, either the Covenants being the same in substance, or infants right
to the Covenant, or the Lords appointing an initiall seal to be administered
to all who are reputed belonging to the Covenant, I shall readily yield the
cause, as I have often told you. All the trouble I shall put the Reader to,
about this your first Argument, Arg. 1. Answ.
or rather your answer to Arguments, shall be to point him to such places in my
book, where you have already pressed the same things, and I have given an answer
to them.

The first Argument from Genesis 17. has been examined, Part 3. Sect. 1, 2. and
elsewhere.

The second argument taken from Baptism succeeding into the room of
Circumcision, and Coloss. 2. 11, 12, etc. is examined Part 3. Sect. 9.

The third argument from the privileges of believers under the New Testament,
is examined, Part 3. Sect. 11. 7.

The fourth argument from Acts 2. ^8. is fully examined, Part 3. Sect. 6.

The fifth argument from 1 Cor. 7. 14. is examined, Part 3. Sect. 8.

The sixth argument from Mark 10. 14. Matthew. 19. etc. which also you put into
several shapes, is examined, Part 3. Sect. 15.

The seventh argument from Acts 16. and several other places which speak of
baptizing of households, is examined Part 3. Sect 14. And in these several
places you have pressed whatever is of any seeming weight in this your
Exercitation, and added many other things which the reader shall find to be
examined in the places which I have pointed to, besides in several other
places of my Book, where you have again and again repeated many of the same
things.

The other seven arguments (as you call them) I look not upon as arguments,
and therefore will not meddle with them* some of the Scriptures mentioned in
them, as, Exodus 20. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 9. etc. so far as they have any use in this
controversy, are also considered of here, and there in my Book, as the Reader
may observe.

Your second Argument against Infant Baptism is fetched from Mat. 28. 19. That
which agrees not with the Lords institution Arg. 2.
of Baptism, that is deservedly doubtful; But the rite of Infant Baptism
agrees not with the Lords institution of Baptism, Ergo. This argument has
received its full examination, Part 3. Sect. 13. and Part 4. Sect. 1. whither I
refer the Answ.
Reader, as not willing to trouble him with needless repetition of the same
things.

Your third Argument is taken from the practice of the Apostles, and John the
Baptist, and runs thus, That tenet and Arg. 3.
practice which being put, Baptism cannot be administered as John Baptist and
the Apostles did administer it, agrees not with the practice of John Baptist
and the Apostles; But the tenet and practice of Infant Baptism being put,
Baptism cannot be administered as Jo. Baptist, and the Apostles administered
i^; Ergo etc. This you go about to prove, because John and the Apostles
baptized none but such as confessed sins, they required shows of faith and
repentance in all whom they baptized.

This Argument relates wholly to matter of fact, wherein you put your self to
prove a negative; and therefore the argument Answ.
can prove nothing, unless you can produce some one place at least out of the
Scripture wherein it is said no Infant was baptized by them, or no other then
such as you have mentioned; but what you have here said about it is fully
considered, Part. 3. Sect. 13. especially Part 4. Sect. 1.

These three Arguments, which alone deserve to be called (if yet the first may
be so called) are fully examined in the places abovementioned; the rest of
your arguments are so wholly inconsequent, that I wonder you should think them
worthy or fit to face an Assembly of Divines, and expect that they should join
their strength together to frame an answer to them; when as I verily think
they may all be routed by the running pen of an ordinary Clerk in a few
hours.

Your fourth is taken from the next age after the Apostles, and stands thus in
your book, Because Infant Baptism Arg. 4.
cannot be proved that it was enforce or use in the next age after the
Apostles; Ergo, the tenet and practice of it is doubtful. The major (you say)
is manifest of it self; for the minor you allege Vives, and Strabo; and (say
you, it is confirmed by examining of places brought to that purpose, and by
continuing questions to the parties baptized in ages following, and other
tokens from Counsels, and Ecclesiastical writers.

I answer, First, to your Major, which you say is manifest of its self, I
judge to be most false, and a most dangerous Answ.
position: is every tenet and practice doubtful, which cannot be proved by
historical evidence to have been received and practiced in that age, whereof
we have so few Records? the procession of the holy Ghost, the propagation of
original sin, and many other Tenets, I believe you will neither find
mentioned in that age nor the next; How would you have laughed at such a
conclusion set down by another? And secondly, for your Minor, I answer 1.
There were no Counsels at all assembled in that age next to the Apostles. And
2. as for Ecclesiastical Writers, I wish you would name them; I believe you
will find very few Writers of credit in that age, whose legitimate works are
transmitted to posterity. Thirdly, how do Vives and Strabo know what was done
in the ages next the Apostles, when the eldest of them lived almost 800 years
after that age? the authority and skill of these two men has been sufficiently
spoken to, Part 1. Sect. 2. Fourthly, I wonder how the questions propounded in
ages following to the baptized, do prove that Infant Baptism was not in use
in the age next after the Apostles.

Your fifth argument runs thus, That which in succeeding Arg. 5.
ages in which it was in use, was in force first as a Tradition not written.
Secondly, out of imitation of Jewish circumcision. Thirdly, without universal
practice. Fourthly, together with the error of giving Infants the Lords Supper,
and with many other humane inventions under the name of Apostolical
Traditions, that is deserv^dly doubtful. But such was Infant Baptism in those
ages, Ergo, etc. I answer, first, by denying your Major, the observation of the
Lords day has been by some accounted a Tradition, others have said it is
Jewish to keep any Sabbath at all, because Sabbath days were a shadow of
things to come, but the body is Christ, what will you thence conclude against
our Christian Sabbath? And for what you say about the practice of it that it
was not universal, I desire you to remember, that argumentum ductum a non
facto ad non jus est absurdissimum; may we plead thus, such and such a thing
was not generally observed, Ergo it was not a duty? the boys in the Schools
would stamp and hiss at such an inference; from the days of Iosoua, to the
days of Nehemiab, the children of Israel had not kept the feast of Tabernacles
Nehem. 8. 17.
in Booths or Tents, which was about a thousand years; was it therefore not
their duty to have done it? Dr. Hoylin in his History of the Sabbath, urges
this very argument against the Lords day, in such and such Fathers days many
did not observe the Lords day, many did tipple and dance upon the Lords day;
ergo the Lords day was not generally observed, and if it were not generally
observed in those days, Ergo we are not bound to observe it. This kind of
arguing is almost as wild as that which the Schools call, a baculo ad angulum,
my staff stands in the corner, Ergo it will rain tomorrow morning.

Your last Exception under this fourth argument is yet more strange, There were
many other things went under the name of Traditions, which were mere humane
inventions, Ergo Infantbaptism, which went under the name of a Tradition is
also a humane invention. Shall I show the natural face of this argument in a
glass; such and such men who went under the name of honest men were knaves;
Ergo all that go under the name of honest men are knaves. It is true, many
things went in those days under the name of Traditions, which were but humane
inventions, and it is as true that many points of faith, and other divine
institutions went in the same ages under the name of Traditions, as I have made
apparent, Part 1. Sect. 2. You see what a poor argument this would prove
although your minor were true, though the things were as you set them down;
but I have abundantly proved the contrary: I have showed the Ancients received
it as a Divine Institution, and upon such arguments as we do, though some of
them pressed some corrupt grounds which we reject: and as for the universality of
the practice of it both in the Greek and Latin Churches I have abundantly
cleared it from all Objections you make against it: and you out of all your
reading have not been able to produce one of the ancients, who either beld it
unlawful, or denied that it was in use from the Apostles days. One or two
indeed you bring who advised the deferring Infant Baptism, as they did also the
baptism of grown men; and some examples you produce of the children of
Christians not baptized (as you think) in their Infancy; to all which I have
spoken at large, Part. 1. sect. 2. And as for what you allege of their giving
the Lords Supper unto Infants, I have denied, and shall do still, till you
bring some evidence for it, that there was any such universal practice, indeed
in the African Churches that error did obtain in the days of Cyprian and
Austin, but I find no such general practice of it; however the Argument
follows not, That it was their error to give Infants the Lords Supper; Ergo it
was their error to baptize Infants.

Your sixth Argument runs thus; that which has occasioned Arg. 6.
many humane inventions, partly by which Infant Baptism it self may be
underpropt, partly the defect in the p^licy of the Church supplied; that is
deservedly douhtfull; But the matter i^ so in the business of Infant Baptism:
and here you bring in witnesses in Baptism, Episcopal confirmation, the
reformed union by examination, confession, before receiving the Lords Supper,
Church Covenant before the admission of Church Members into Church Fellowship,
etc.

I answer briefly, if by occasioned you mean that Infant Baptism Answ.
has exnatura rei given occasion to these things, I deny your minor,
Infant Baptism is no more an occasion of these things in the Christian Church,
then circumcising of Infants was an occasion of the like in the Jewish Church;
Infant Baptism may very well stand, and does very well stand in many reformed
Churches without such witnesses, without confirmation, or any other
examination, confession, etc. before the Lords Supper, or other
Church Discipline, then such as might be in use to men though they were not
baptized in their Infancy: but if by occasioned you mean not (...) da^a, but
(...) temer^ a^^^pta, that the corrupt mind of man has thence took occasion
for other errors and mistakes; if you mean that which has thus ^^casioned
many humane inventions is doubtful, then I deny your major: there is scarce
any common place in the body of Divinity but has occasioned humane inventions,
the Lords Supper has occasioned kneeling at the Sacrament; and that has
occasioned suspension, excommunication, separation; what will you thence
conclude against the Lords Supper? Ergo, the Lords Supper is a humane invention?

Your seventh, eighth, and ninth Arguments are but so many branches or rather
so many repetitions of your sixth Arg. 7, 8, and 9.
Argument, possibly you have thus divided them that you might make up a whole
Jury. And the self same answer serves them as was given to the other; I will
conclude as Answ.
strongly against you, out of your own premises thus; Antipaedobaptisme has
occasioned many errors, many abuses and faults in discipline, divine worship,
and conversation of men, together with many unnecessary disputes, fostering
contention only: Ergo, Antipaedobaptisme is what you please to all
Infant Baptism: I leave out that passage only in the major of your ninth
Argument, viz. which cannot be determined by any certain rule, because
therein you do very heartily beg the question.

Your tenth argument is framed thus; That in the midst of the darkness of
Popery, the same men who opposed invocation Arg. 10.
of Saints, Prayer for the dead, adoration of the cross, and such like,
opposed also the baptizing of Infants, and here you bring in Bernard his 66*
Sermon upon the Canticles, and his 140. Epistla against Henry the Heretic (as
you call him) and Cluniacinsis against Peter de Bruis and Henry; also a passage
out of Ostander, accusing the Albingenses ^s consenting with the Anabaptist^.
To which I answer, first, I deny the consequence, because they opposed
invocation of Saints, prayer Answ.
for the dead, etc. and also opposed Infant Baptism; Ergo, the last is an
error as well as the first: for the same men have opposed Popery and the
Sabbath, the same men have denied Prelacy and the blessed Trinity: Is it not
possible for the same man to oppose a multitude of cursed errors, and yet to
oppose some one blessed truth? Secondly, I also deny your minor; they who thus
opposed invocation of Saints, etc. did not oppose baptism of Infants:
Bermgarius, the Waldenses, Albingenses, Wickluites, Hussites, and others are
indeed slandered by some of their adversaries, as if they denied
Infant Baptism, but are cleared out of their own confessions; as I have made
abundantly manifest, Part 2. Sect. 2. What under the head of this tenth
Argument you mention out of Tertullian, and Gregory Nazianzen has been fully
confidered of, Part 1. Sect. ^.

Your eleventh Argument runs thus; The asserters of Infant Baptism Arg. 11.
little agree among themselves upon what foundation to build Infantbaptisme:
some from universalitie of divine grace, some from necessity of Baptism to
salvation, some from the promise of the sureties, some from the faith of the
Infants, some from the faith of the next parents, Ergo, What? what conclusion
can you make from this: Answ.
The Antipaedobaptists reject the Baptism of Infants upon several grounds:
some because Infants have no sin, some because they have no more to do with
the Covenant of grace, then the Infants of Turks; some because Infants are not
capable of grace, some because they are unbeleevers, some because we cannot
know whether they have grace or no, will you therefore say Antipaedobaptisme is
to be rejected? So for the Lords day, foam plead it upon one ground, others
reject that ground, and plead it upon another, have therefore none of them hit
upon a right ground? the like may be said of many other points both of faith
and practice in Christianity; the utmost that can be collected from men's
different grounds in pleading for such or such a truth is, that God has not
left that truth so clear as possible he has done others wherein there is a
greater consent: but to collect that therefore the opinion is to be rejected,
is a strange consequence. I add farther that almost all, both ancient and
modern, do agree in the argument from Circumcision to Baptism, which
necessarily implies our Covenant to be the same with theirs, our Infants right
to be the same with theirs, and our Sacrament of Baptism to be the same with
theirs of Circumcision as to the use of an initiall Seal.

Your twelfth and last Argument which brings up your reere, which you call a
weighty reason, runs thus: Because Infant Baptism Arg. 12.
seems to take away one, perhaps the primary end of Baptism, viz. that it
should be a sign that the baptized show himself a Disciple, and confess the
faith in which he has been instructed, and this you prove from John the
Baptist and other passages in the New Testament, which put Baptism for
Doctrine, from the form of Christ's institution, and by the use of Baptism in
the initiating of Proselytes, and hence you collect that Baptism does not
only confirm a benefit, but signifies also a profession made. To which I
answer: This Argument how weighty soever it be, is but a branch taken from
your second argument out of Mat. 28. and from your third argument from the
practice of John and Christ's Apostles, and is but a Crambe of what you have
often pressed before, and has received its full answer, Part 3. Sect. 13. and
Part 4. Sect 1. and I add further, that even that which your self here sets
down, gives a full answer to your own Argument, for you say that a Sacrament
is not only a visible sign of an invisible grace, ^r appointed to signify
only a divine benefit, but it likewise serves to signify his duty who
receives the Sacrament: It signifies a profession made, as well as confirms a
benefit; for does it not thence necessarily follow that the Infants of the
Jews made by their Circumcision a profession, as well as received the sign of
a benefit? and that therefore the Baptizing of Infants does not frustrate that
end of initiating them to be Disciples or Professors? And that which you add
of the use of Baptism in the initiating of Proselytes into the profession of
Judaisme, is as full to the purpose as can be to prove what I affirm: for we
know from all the Authors who write about it, that Infants as well as grown
men were initiated into the profession of Judaisme by the rite of Baptism.

In the last place you shut up your Exercitation with a discourse about the
Devils indenting with witches to renounce their Baptism, as if some would
thence argue that Infant Baptism is good, because the Devil would have them
renounce it: but you, who it seems know the Devils mind in it, say the true
reason why he requires witches to renounce their Baptism, is not because the
Baptism is good in respect of the administration of it, but because the faith
mentioned in the form ^f Baptism is good; for my own part, I am so little
acquainted with the Devils practice in it, and see so little strength of
Argument for or against Infant Baptism from the trading betwixt the Devil and
the witch, that I intend not to meddle with this Argument (...) from h^ll, I
rest contented with those which I find in the ^^^ke of God.

FINIS.
A Table of Authors cited or vindicated, and other material things cited in
this Treatise.
A
ABraham, the Covenant with him no more mixed then with us, p. 97. Pros^lytes
were his seed, 100. So were civil Justiciaries reputed, p. 101, 104. Adeodatus
why not baptized in his infancy, p. 48. Alipius why not baptized in his
insan^y, Ainsworth, p. 171. Albigenses ^o An aboptists, p. 64. An abaptists not
like the Non-conformists, p. 72. Their ancient errors newly sprung up again^,
p. 73. Opposed Magistr^cy, p. 75. P^^ no difference between Infants of
Christians and Turks, p. 86, 87. Aretius vindicated, p. 175. Proves Baptism
to succed Circumcision by the An^ionts, p. 176. Athanasius mentions
Infant Baptism, p. 20. Augustin^ vindicated, p. 43. etc. Why (...) baptized in
his infancy, p. 46, 47.
B
Ball vindicated, p. 6. Baltazzar Lydius, p. 64. Baptism called a new (...) by
the Scripture; and the Anci^^^s, p. 1^. Anci^ntty deferred, p. 22. Salvation
may be obtained without it, p. 52, 5^ Whether it may be repeated, p. 67, 68.
Succeeds Circumcision, p. 164. ^^rallelled with it, p. 145. In use among the
Jews, and applied to Infants as well as ^^ men, 170. How it may be pleaded, p.
239. Beza cited against his own judgment, p. 147, 150. Bal^^mon (...), p. 31,
32. Bayne vindicated, p. 101, 102* Berengarius no Anabaptist, p. 65.
C
Catechumeni, p. 50. Chrysostom not baptized in hi^ ^^fancy, p. 27.
vindicated, p 177. Circumcision; women not capable of it, p. 93. Seals the
spiritual part of the Covenant, p. 98. Baptism s^^ceeds if, p. 164. ^ar
a^^^led with baptism, p. 145. Why Christ (...) circumcised and baptized, p.
168. Why Jews infants circumcised, p. 1^^. How the Jews received it, p. 1^^.
Christianity how is may be called ^^ birthright, p. 119. Chamler often ci^ed
to (...) purpose (...). Against hi^ own^ judgment, p. 144. Constantine M. why
not baptized in his infanty, p. 25. Cotton vindicated, p. 114. (...) Mr.
Rutherford reconciled, p. 123. Cyprian vindicated, p. 38. etc. Covenant and
Seal connected together, p. 89. What is meant by being in the Covenant, p. 89.
Covenant of grace always (...) and the same, p. 97. Infants taken into the
Covenant with their Parents, p. 105. Men may be under is several ways, p.
106. Privileges of them who are under the external Covenant, p. 108.
Anexternall right to it proved, p. 140. The promise in it not peculiar to
Abraham p. 127.
D
Disciples, What it is to make Disciples, p. 212, 213, 214, etc.
E
Epiphanitis mentions infant baptism, p. 21, 45.
F
S^e^ of Flesh what, p. 104.
G
Goodwin vindicated, p. 143. Grotius not to be relied on about
infant baptism, p. 29. Misreports the Greek Church, p. 32, 33, 34. Gospel how
conditional, p. 236.
H
Hacket his Story, p. 72. Henricus Stephanus mis-retited, p. 151. Holiness
derivative and inherent not ^pposed, p. 142. Fedrall holiness assented by the
Ancients, p. 148.
I
Infants taken into covenant with their Parents, 105. of believers left by Mr.
Tombs to be under the Devils kingdom, p. 112. Why Jewish Infants circumoised,
p. 180. Whether Infants may be said to be believers, p. 231. Ought to be
baptized though we know not that they have grace, p. 232. How their Baptism is
commanded in Matthew. 28. p. 207. Capable of the grace whereof Baptism is a
sign, p. 219, 224, 226. Infant Baptism, Antiquity of it vindicated, p 7, etc.
p. 44, 45. Episcopacy not so ancient as it, p 8. Why some Ancients speak not
of it, p. 19. Athanasius, p 20. And by Epiphanius, p. 21, 45. Not dispre^ed
because of questions put to the party that was to be baptized, p. 21. etc.
Grotins not to be relied upon in it, p. 29. The Greek Church received it, p.
32. Asserted by Tertullian, p. 35. And Cyprian, p. 38, 39. etc. By Augustine,
p, 43. etc. By Fulgentius, p 50 How it is called a Tradition, p. 44. Why not
mentioned in Councels before that of Carthage, p. 49. Still acknowledg^d in the
Church, p. 63. The rejecting of it not the way to Reformation, p. 76. Examples
of it by consequence, p. 218. Not a Will worship, p. 195, 225. Benefits of
Infant Baptism, 236. No occasion of humane inventions, etc. 253. John Baptist
initiated to the Christian Church, p. 171. Irenaus ^ind indicated, p. 10, 11,
12. Justine Martyr vindicated, 9, 10.
L
Ludovicus Vives examined, p. 37, 38. Lord's Day, p. 80, 81, 82. Proved by
consequence from the Sabbath, p. 205. Comparison between evid^nce for it, and
Paedo-Baptisme, p. 81, 82. Lords Supper not eaten by unbaptized persons, p.
167. not by Infants, p. 240.
N
Nazianzen vindicated, p. ^8. not baptized in his Infant, p. 26. Nation when it
is to be reputed Christian, p. 211. Neocaesarean Council vindicated, p. 30,
31.
O
Origin vindicated, p. 15, 16, 17.
P
Parents believing are roots of their children. p. 142. Passover, our
Sacrament comes in stead of it, p. 203. Privileges ours, not straightened, but
enlarged, p. 185. A great abridgement of them to have our children left out of
the Covenant, p. 193. Photius Patriarch, p. 33.
Q.
Questions put to the baptized disprove not baptism, p. ^1. ^ay they prove it,
p. 52.
R
Rogers vindicated, p. 5.
S
Seldom, p. 170. Strabo examined, p. 37. Sacrament what it seals absolutely,
and conditionally, 117. How they are Seals, p. 201. our rule in administering
them, p. 233. how we may argue from Jews Sacraments to ours, p. 198. 201.
T
Tombs his way of reasoning, p. 3. 105. 125. 134. Unjustly charges the
Assembly, p. 79. thinks some may be saved out of the communion of the visible
Church, p. 88. He joins with (...) Circumcision to be a seal of any thing,
p. 183. makes it a privilege not to have Infants baptized, p. 187. He makes
the Covenant Heb 8. to be the Covenant of works, p. 188. Misinterprets the 2
Cor. 3. 10. p. 188. Leaves all Infants of believers to be under the Devils
(...), p. 112. Symboliz^th (...) Arminius, p. 144. compares Priest* and
Ministers to (...) purpose, p. 108. (...) his own^ opinion ^^ ^nfants
condition, p. 238. Tortullia^ speak^ for Infant Baptism, p. 35. Talmud, p. 171.
V
Vines vindicated, p. 73. Usher de successione Chr. Eccles. p. 64. 65. Vo^^^i
(...) p. 68, 69.
W
Waldenses, p. 64. no Anabaptists, p. 65. History of Waldenses, p. 64. Women
not capable of Circumcision, p. 93. how Circumcised in the men, p. 94. if they
had not been esteemed as circumcised they could not have eaten the Passover,
96.
Errata.
PAge 1. 10. Line 11. read, you will not do, p. 144. l. 34 for where r. were p
145. l. 35. r. thrasi. p. 157. l. 23. dele not, p. 164. l. 22. ^ sequitur, p.
166. l. 5. r. (...). p. 167. l 6. r. Catechumeni, p. 173 l. 3. r. impure to you
a sense, p. 175. l. (...), ^ 176. l. 13. 1. (...), 1. 16. r. tempore, p. 178.
l. 38. r. fa^^^u^, p. 191. l. 33. for That r. But, p 199. l. 1. dol^ comma
after omnibus, p. 213. l. 1. r. (...) p. 213. l. 5. r. (...) p 222. l. 7. ^ as
for ^a. p. 226 l. 19. (...) Baptism and prayer all one, r. baptizing into the
name of the Father, S^nne and holy Ghost, and prayer all one, l. 22. for, his
Baptism and prayer was all one* read, that Ananid^ his baptizing Paul into the
name of Christ, or into the name of the Father, Some and holy Ghost, and Paul's
calling upon the name of the Lord, was all one.


