A SACRED RECORD To be made of GODS MERCIES TO ZION: A Thankesgiving Sermon
Preached to the two Houses of Parliament, the Lord Major, Court of Aldermen,
and Common Council of the City of London, at Christ-Church, June 19. 1645.

Being the Day of their Public Thanksgiving to Almighty God for the Great and
Glorious Victory obtained by the Parliaments Army under the Conduct of Sir
THOMAS FAIRFAX in Naseby-field.

By Stephen Marshall B. D. Minister of Gods Word at Finching-field in ESSEX.

Exodus 17. 14. And the Lord said unto Moses, Write this for a Memorial in a
Book, and rehearse it in the Ears of Joshua.

m Psalm. 44. 1. Our Fathers have told us what Works thou did in their days,
in the times of Old.

Psalm. 78. 4. We will not hide them from their Children, showing to the
Generation to come the praises of the Lord, and his strength, and his
wonderful Works that he has done.

London, Printed by Rich. Cotes for Stephen Bowtell, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Bible in Popes-head-Alley.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
YOur time is so taken up with the important Work of rescuing these bleeding
Kingdoms, and the Church of Christ in and with them, that I am sure you are
not at leisure to read long Epistles; and were I able in a Dedication to write
what might very much kindle your zeal, provoke your whole inward man, and
thereby further your great Work; I conceive it were only to tell the world
what counsel I thought might do you good; and therefore in stead of studying
to present you with an Epistle, which few of you would read, I do only obey
your Order, and at your Command publish to the view, and for the use of all,
and present unto your selves this plain Sermon, Preached unto you upon the day
of your late Thanksgiving unto God for one of the greatest mercies (the
Victory, and what came with it duly considered) that God has bestowed upon our
unworthy Nation these many years. What else I desire to have pressed upon your
hearts, I choose to do it when I am called at any time to Preach unto you, or
rather to beg it for you at the Throne of Grace; where you, and your great Work
are every day (as by many thousand others) humbly remembered by

Your most obliged Servant STEPHEN MARSHALL.

Die Veneris 20. Junii, 1645.
IT is this Day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That Mr. Marshall
one of the Assembly of Divines who Preached yesterday in Christ-Church, London,
before the Members of both Houses of Parliament, and in the presence of the
Lord Major, Aldermen, etc. of the City of London; is hereby thanked for his
great pains that he took in the said Sermon, it being a day of Public
Thanksgiving within the said City, and Lines of Communication, for the late
prosperous success of the Parliaments Forces under the Command of Sir Thomas
Fairefax. And that he is hereby desired to Print and Publish the said Sermon;
which none shall presume to Print or re-print, but by Authority under his own
hand.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

Die Veneris, 20. Junii, 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Sir Peter Wentworth, and
Sir William Masham do return the Thanks of this House to Mr. Vines, and Mr.
Marshall, for the great pains they took, in the Sermons they yesterday
Preached at the entreaty of both Houses, before the said Houses, the Lord
Major, and Aldermen, at Christ-Church in London. And that they be dered to
Print their Sermons: And it is Ordered that none shall presume to Print their
Sermons, but such as shall be authorized under their hands writing.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I do appoint Stephen Bowtell to Print my Sermon.

Stephen Marshall.

A THANKESGIVING SERMON PREACHED To the two Houses of Parliament, June 19. 1645.
PSALM. 102. 18. This shall be written for the Generation to come: and all the
People which shall be created, shall praise the Lord.
Right Honorable and Beloved,
Introduction. Showing the fitness and scope of the Text.
I Have formerly in two Sermons opened the two Verses immediately going before
this Text; The first of them before the Right Honorable the House of Peers;
The latter before the Honorable House of Commons; and there showed at large
that these two Verses did contain two Circumstances which always accompany
the Lords Work of building up of his Church; and they are rendered as two
Arguments, why all the world should stand in admiration of it.

The one is, because, when ever the Lord builds up Zion, He dotb appear in
his Glory; he appears like himself, magnifying all his Attributes.

The other, that he does then return a gracious answer unto the Prayers of his
afflicted People.

These two were handled in the valley of Baca, the valley of Tears, upon days
of Humiliation; that out of them you might receive some strength in your
mourning after the Lord, to help you to wait upon him while you are at his
Work, building the Street and Wall of Dan. 9. 25.
Jerusalem in a troublesome time: But now the Lord having in great measure
given a gracious experience, and fruit of those two, in this late great and
unexpected Victory and Mercy, wherein God has appeared in his Glory, and
answered his Peoples Prayers, in our exceeding low condition; his Providence
having also called me by your choice, to meet you in the valley of Beracah, the
valley of Blessing to praise God for this; I could not think of a fitter Text
then of the very next words to those that helped you in the days of your
Mourning, which contains the use which the Church in all ages shall make of
the Lords building up of Zion. And though my time for preparation has been
very short; yet I am encouraged, because I have been taught of God, that a
Peace Offering to himself is easily found: And I have often found from you,
that my poor endeavors, how weak soever (being the best I have) have never
been rejected: And therefore without further Apology and Preface, let us
consider of the words as they thus lie. This shall be written for the
Generation to come: And the People which shall be created, shall praise the
Lord.

Here are you see, two Sentences: And for the Interpretation of them, some
Expositors do conceive, that the first Sentence contains the use that the
Generation who receive this Mercy shall make of it; They shall Write it for the
good of Posterity.

The second (they think) contains the use that the future Generation shall
make of former Mercies that are thus written; and and transmitted to them, The
People tbat shall be created, shall praise the Lord; the unborn Generation
shall praise God for it.

The meaning of the words.
But others (and I think more rightly) do conceive, that both sentences are
meant of the same individual People; and that the one of them is but an
Exegeticall interpretation of the other: or rather, the first of them is an
expression of one way, how the redeemed of the Lord shall glorify him; by
writing the Mercies they have received, and transmitting them to posterity: and
the other is a comprehension of their whole Work, that they shall not rest in
any one way of manifesting their care to glorify God, but shall make it the
sum of their whole life, they being created to no other end; The People that
shall be created, shall praise the Lord. And I rather incline to this, because
this expression, The People that shall be created; does ordinarily in the
Scripture signify a People brought from an extreme low, despicable condition,
to a state of happiness and blessedness, fit to serve God. These are said, A
people Esa. 43. 1, 2. Jer. 31. 22. Ephesians. 2. 10.
created for Gods praise.

But Beloved, we need not be solicitous about it, choose which of them you
please, the difference will not be material in respect of the practical
Observations arising from them, both of them afford many and the same helps for
a day of Thankesgiving: Some few whereof I shall endeavor (by the Lords
assistance) in one hour, or a little more, to set before you.

The first, and the maine, and that which (indeed) is The first most general
Observation.
the comprehension of the whole Verse, is this;

The great work of Gods redeemed People is to praise him.
That when God appears in his Glory to build his Church, and graciously answers
his Peoples Prayers; their whole work should he to praise him: That is the
general.

They have then nothing else to do, but to make it the work of their life, to
give praise, and glory to him; This paying of the Rent-penny of praise to our
God, this work of Thankesgiving, which is the end God aims at in all his
works; which is the end why Man at first was created; why the Church was
redeemed; why the Saints are called: This, that is the only heavenly work that
can be done upon earth; this, which is the only joyful employment, that
shall last to all Eternity in another life: This work which should ever wait
for God in Zion, Praise waits for thee O God in Zion: This whereof the Church
should be the Magazine, Psalm. 65. 1. Ephesians. 3. ult. Esa^ 46. ult.
the Storehouse and Treasury, Unto him be Glory in the Church by Christ Jesus,
throughout all ages, and the Church is therefore called his Glory, Israel my
Glory: Not only because he glories in it; but because it glorifies him: This
Duty (I say) of Gods redeemed ones To praise him, can never be handled often
enough, never pressed enough on Gods people. But truly, it has been so
frequently, and so fully in all the branches of it, delivered unto your selves,
upon such joyful days as these are, wherein you have had the whole
institution of a thankful people, and all their work; that I know not what to
add to that which heretofore has been delivered; save only, that what is
said of our English laws; That we have abundance of good Laws, and need but
one more, that is, to put all the rest in execution: the same I may say, that
there are abundance of Sermons of Thankesgiving extant, and we need but one
more, and that is, to have our hearts inflamed to practice them; which I shall
endeavor this day, by the Lords help, by handling some more particular
Observations which this Verse affords, very suitable to the condition whereinto
the Lord has brought us at the present. And there are three things in the
Text, from whence (as from so many Well-heads) may flow several instructions,
seasonable and useful for our present business.

More particular Observations.
First, somewhat I shall collect from the Persons who should perform this work;
The People that shall be created: that is their Epithet.

Secondly, from the Work which these Persons shall employ themselves in: that
is, to endeavor, that God may have his Glory from themselves, and succeeding
ages.

Thirdly, and principally, and that which I shall most insist upon, from the
way and means which this created people should take, that God might have his
due glory from themselves and succeeding ages; and that is this great Mercy of
God in building his Church, and hearing his Peoples Prayers, should be
Recorded by them; This shall be written for the Generation to come.

First, from the persons who shall do it.
In the first of these, which I shall only point at; the Persons from whom God
does promise himself the performance of this great Duty, The People that shall
be created. Many excellent Collections might be made.

Thence I observe the condition of God. people when deprived of Gods
Ordinances. And when they enjoy the liberty of them.
One is, that which Mr. Calvin observes upon this Text: viz. We may here
discern what (in the Judgment of Gods People) is the state of the Church when
they are deprived of Gods Worship and Ordinances, and scattered among the
Heathen: and what their estate is, when God is pleased again to set up his
Tabernacle amongst them.

In the first of these conditions they were as if their Creation were
annihilated; as if they were resolved into their first principles. But when God
was pleased from Heaven to look upon them, with a restoration of his Temple
and Worship, and bring them again into a Religious Commonwealth: then they
looked upon themselves as a People that were new created, that had a new being
bestowed upon them. Their outward condition was much alike in both, for the
things of this life. Bondmen they were in Babylon, and Bondmen they were when
they returned into Canaan, the same Emperors and Kings bore sway over them,
and kept them under; and for ought I can learn, they were richer in their
captivity, then in their own Country; but when they were brought back, to have
liberty again to serve God in the way of his Ordinances, then they looked upon
themselves as people that had a new Ezekiel. 37.
being. Thus they constantly judged of themselves; when their Temple was burnt,
and they scattered among the Heathen, then they judged of themselves, as dead
and ary bones, as those whose bones lay scattered, as when one cutteth chips
about the pits mouth; but when they had again got a nail in Gods Sanctuary,
and might enjoy the liberty of his Sabbaths, Feasts, Sacrisices, etc. it was as
the founding of a new Heaven and a new Earth unto them. This I only mention.

2. Observat. A people redeemed from low condition most fit to praise God.
Another is, That when the Lord would engage his Servants to give him his praise
and glory for their deliverance, he chooses to call them by this Name, A people
created: that is, reduced out of nothing, brought to a blessed state, from a
low and mean condition, from a people whom God calls by this Name, he
promises himself his glory and praise; whoever forget him, yet the people who
shall thus be Created will praise him: And that affords this Lesson:

That the People whom God in Mercy brings from a low and mean condition, are
the People from whom God promises to receive praise and glory. Indeed, such is
the selfishnesse of our corrupt Nature, that if we are any thing, or do any
thing, we are prone to forget God, and sacrifice to our own nets, and burn
Incense to our own yarne; insomuch, that when ever God finds a people who shall
either trust in Zeph. 3. 11, 12, 13. Psalm. 22. 24, 25, 26.
him, or praise him, it must be an an afflicted and poor people, or a people
brought from such an estate; Free Grace is ever most valued by such people. And
if you look all the Scripture over, you will find, that all the praises, and
Songs of deliverance that have been made to God, have proceeded from a people
that have thus judged of themselves, as those that were brought to nothing; but
God in mercy had brought the^ back again from the gates of death, and usually
until they had such apprehensions of themselves, they never gave unto God the
glory due to his name. I could give you a cloud of witnesses to evidence the
truth of it; but I intended only to point at this. Only give me leave before
I pass from it, to make a short Application of it to our selves in these two
particulars:

1. I came one great cause why our miseries continue: We are not yet brought
low in our eyes.
First, that hence we may certainly learn one cause why our calamities do
continue thus long; why still we are brought lower and lower; why though we
be lifted up one day, or one month, we are suddenly brought and cast back
again into as forlorn a condition as ever we were in: God would bring us to
such a judgment of our selves, that we might praise him when we are delivered.
I am persuaded God does intend to have a People here in England that shall be
for his praise, and we do not yet look upon our selves as a people out of
mere Mercy brought from nothing; in the time of our calamities we seek him,
and say, he only is our rock and our salvation: But it is too evident that the
pride of our Nation is not yer laid low; still our Arms of flesh are prone to
be exalted. It is with us, just as it was with the Israelites, when God
brought them out of Egypt, he made account that he had done enough to make
them know their dependence upon him, that they were created as out of nothing,
by such a miraculous breaking the yoke of their bondage, and bringing them
through the red Sea into the Wilderness, and in that howling Wilderness
giving them bread from Heaven, and water out of the Rock; but the people had
not yet learned it, they were high and proud, they were too rough pieces to be
so easily hewed; one years leading them in the Wilderness would not teach
them their dependence upon God: and therefore God continued to lead them in the
wilderness, and kept them out of Canaan till they had learned it. What they
would not learn in one year, God made them learn in forty years. And so
Moses told them, Deuteronomy. 8. 23. That the Lord led them forty years in the
Wilderness, and tried them, and suffered them to hunger, that he might humble
them, and make them know that they lived by every word that came out of his
mouth: And till they had learned that lesson, God never made an end with them.
And surely it is so with us; were we but once come to that pass; that we
looked upon our selves as a forlorn Nation, as a people void of wealth, of
Counsel, of Strength, of Ability to carry on our Work, and would lie at Gods
feet, and acknowledge that it is he that must do it, or we are dissolved, and
undone; God would soon make an end with us, then he would trust us to praise
him; a people who thus look upon themselves, will give him the praise and glory
due to his Name.

How great the sin of such people is, when they forget this duty.
Another thing that I as briefly commend to your consideration from it is this,
That because God Almighty does expect that a people brought from nothing, a
people new created will praise him; therefore if such a people, for whom the
Lord has done such things, should fail him; if they should prove ungrateful,
it would aggravate their sin beyond all apprehensions, beyond all expressions.
It is thus among men, we extremely abhor to see a Beggar mounted on
Horseback, and riding proudly: Solomon says, It is one of the Prove. 30. 21, 22
things that the earth cannot bear, to see a Handmaid made heir to her
Mistress; A Hagar laid in her Masters bosom, and then she to prove insolent;
this amongst Men is intolerable: Believe it, it is much more with God, when God
shall take a People, as from a dunghill, from a desperate and forlorn
condition, and (as it were) create them for his glory, and they slight him, and
undervalue him, and deal ungratefully with him: Thus Ezra judged, cap. 9. 13.
When we have received such a deliverance as this, should we again break thy
Commandments and prove ungrateful; would thou not be angry with us till
thou had consumed us? This was the ground of that unappeasable wrath that was
kindled in God against the people of Israel, in the 1. of Esaias, Esaias 1. 2.
Ezekiel. 16. 4, 5, 6, 22.
Hear O Heavens, and give ear O Earth; I have nourished and brought up
Children, and yet they rebel against me. And especially in Ezekiel 16. Where
he told them, I found thee in thy mothers womb, thy navel not cut, no eye
pityed thee, as a bastard cast out in the time of her nativity; and there I
took thee from a dunghill, and bred thee, and trained thee up to be my wife,
and thou playedst the whore against me; and in all thy abominations (says
he) thou never remembredst how I found thee desolate and naked. This made God
judge her after the manner of harlots. And believe it, so will it prove with
us, if the Lord should go on thus mercifully to deal with England, and create
us again, to raise us out of these gulfes and quicksands, and to establish us
to be a people, if we then should go and sacrifice to our own Net, or burn
Incense to our own yarne, prove ungrateful to him, kick with the heel
against him; the wrath of God would be kindled against us so far, that there
would be no remedy. God expects better things from us, he looks, that a
people so created, should be for his praise. But this first branch I intended
only to point at; The Persons that should do this work, The people that
should be created.

2. Part. The work it self;
The second follows, wherein I shall be a little larger, and that is, What
their work should be; This shall be written for the generations to come, and
this created That God might in all ages have the glory of this great work.
people shall praise the Lord: The sum whereof is, That God having done thus
much for them, they should wholly apply themselves, that in all generations,
both the present, and those to come, his glory may be given to him, both by
themselves, and by all posterity; whatsoever was possible for them to do,
should be faithfully endeavored by this thankful redeemed people, That glory
might be given unto God for this great Work throughout all ages, world without
end.

Observat. 1. Ephesians. 3. 21. In all ages God will have a people to praise him.
Whence first observe briefly by the way, that which is sufficiently intimated
in the Text, and noted by several Expositors; That in all ages God will have a
people for his praise; no generation past, or to come, but there shall be a
people for Christ to praise and glorify him: it is not so with other
Monarchies and Empires, one carries it a great while in the world, and then it
is dissolved, and their people remain not to them; Dan. 2 44.
but are either destroyed or delivered over, and left to some other Governor;
but this Kingdom of Christ shall Psalm. 102, 25, 26, 27, 28.
never leave its people to any other Conqueror: It is with other Kingdoms, as
my Text a little after tells you, it is with the Earth, and Heavens, as a
garment, they all wax old, as a Vesture they change, and rot, and come to
nothing; but the Kingdom of Christ like himself, has never any end, and the
Generation of his Servants shall ever continue in his sight. The Church is
sometimes more, and sometimes less visible: The people that praise God are
sometimes more in number, and sometimes fewer; but they always are, in all
ages: God will have them that shall give him his glory, and sing him praises in
the Churches. This I only mention.

Observat. 2. The whole work of Gods redeemed people, is, to provide that God
may have his glory in all ages.
Secondly, another which more concerns us, is, the works they should attend
unto; that the glory of this great deliverance might be always rendered unto
him. Which affords us this lesson, That a People who are truly thankful for
Gods building up of Zion, and hearing the prayers of his afflicted ones, will
endeavor by all means possible, that all ages present and to come, may
glorify God for it. Or more briefly take it thus, The whole work of Gods
redeemed people, is to provide that God may always, and every where have the
glory of it.

Proved by example of the Saints.
Expositors observe upon this Text, that this redeemed Church take no thought
concerning themselves, about their own ease, pleasure, wealth, gain, or any
thing else might accrue unto themselves by this deliverance, to make their own
life easy or sweet; but their thoughts and studies are wholly laid out, how
the present and succeeding Generations should give all glory to God for it. And
he that runs may read it in the practice of many others recorded in
Scripture. The time would fail me to give you a catalogue of the Churches
Kings, Prophets, Priests, and other holy men of God, who have been like minded:
Their care was as Joabs at the 2 Samuel ^2. 27.
taking of Rabbah of the Ammonites, that David might have the glory of it. Thus
did Moses when they were brought out of the Egyptian bondage, Thus Deborah
Exodus 1^. Judge. 5.
and Barak after the discomfiture of Jabin. Thus did Hannah, 1 Samuel 2. and
innumerable others; who in all 1 Samuel 4. 13, 17 18.
the Lords administrations to them, whether inlargements Jos. 7. 6, 7, 10.
or pressures, have been studious of nothing so much, as how in all things God
might have his glory preserved and spread. David the man after Gods own heart
Psalm. 116. 10
exceeded all others in this thing, Quid retribuam? what shall I render unto
the Lord? was his usual study; and he never thought his own parts, his wit,
fancy, thoughts, tongue, pen, etc. sufficient for it; but when he had stirred
up all within him, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and Psalm. 103. 1, 2.
all that is within me bless his holy Name: He would also stir up all
without him, all the Church, Bless the Psalm. 118. 23. Psalm. 100. 1.
Lord ye house of Israel; let Israel say, let all that fear God say, His
mercy endures for ever: All the Nations, make a joyful sound unto God, all ye
Lands: All the Angels, Bless the Lord ye his Angels, all ye his Hosts: Ps.
103. 20, 21.
Yea, all Creatures, bless the Lord all his works, in all places of his
Dominion, whether above or below, animate, or inanimate; The Sun and Moon, the
Stars of Light, the Dragons and deeps, fire and hail, Snow and vapors,
Psalm. 48. per to^um.
Mountains and hills, fruitful trees and Cedars, Beasts and all cattle,
creeping things, and flying Fowls, he lays a tax upon them all, to come in,
and contribute their utmost, that God might have the glory due to his Name, for
exalting the horn of his people, even the Verse. 14.
children of Israel, the people near unto him.

And by reason.
And there are three special Reasons why this should be the great work of the
Lords saved and rescued people: and why indeed they can do no other then study
thus to exalt him.

One is, because they well know that the Lord has reserved nothing to himself
but only his glory; the benefits he gives to them, all the sweetness and
honey that can be found in them, he gives them leave to suck out; but his
glory and his praise is his own, and that which he has wholly reserved, of
that he is jealous, lest it should either be denied, Eclipsed, diminished, or
any the least violation offered to it in any kind: All Gods people know this of
him, and therefore they cannot but endeavor to preserve it for him.

Secondly, besides, they know, as God is jealous in that point, so it is all
the work that he has appointed them to do; he has therefore separated them
to himself out of all the Nations of the world, to be his peculiar ones for
this very end, that they might give him all the glory and praise of his mercy;
I have (said God) created him, formed, and made him for my glory, Esaias 43. 7.
This is the law of his new Creation, Esa. 43. 7.
which is as powerful in them, as the law of Nature, or the first creation is
in the rest of his Works. And therefore with a holy and spiritual naturalnesse
(if I may so call it) the hearts of all the Saints are carried to give God the
glory, as really, as the stones are carried to the Center, or the fire to fly
upwards; this is fixed in their hearts, the work of grace has molded them to
it, that they can do no other but endeavor to exalt God, it being the very
end why their spiritual life, and all their other privileges are conferred
upon them.

Yea, thirdly, they know their own Interests are much concerned in Gods glory,
they never are losers by it: if in any work of God, he want his praise, they
will want their comfort: but if God be a gainer, they shall certainly be no
losers. Whatsoever is powered upon the head of Christ, what ointment soever of
praise or glory, it will in a due proportion fall down to the skirts of his
garments; nor is there any other way to have any sweetness, comfort, praise,
or glory to be derived unto themselves, but by giving all unto him, to whom
alone it belongs, and then, although he will never give away his glory, the
glory of being the fountain, the first, supreme, original giver of all good;
yet they shall have the glory of Instruments, and of fellow workers with him,
which is a glory and praise sufficient.

Application. Exhortation. 1. To the Parliament to do this.
This is a lesson of singular use to all Gods redeemed ones in many particulars.
But the only thing I shall at the present insist upon, is to direct how we may
best improve the mercy of this day; and how we may do something worthy of this
days meeting; the Lord has turned our heaviness into rejoicing, has took
off from us the garment of mourning, and put upon us this day the garment of
salvation.

How they may do it.
And I am persuaded this honorable Assembly has not for a long time had a more
real rejoicing heart then you now feel, for the mercy which this day we meet
to celebrate and commemorate. Now would you know what you should do, what you
should render unto the Lord, what would be the comeliest, and most excellent
sacrifice in this day of your praise and rejoicing before God: Surely there is
nothing comparable to this, That you provide that of all those great things
which the Lord has wrought for us; all possible praise and glory may be set
upon the head of our Lord Jesus, and abide unto succeeding Generations. Some
such work as might preserve his honor in the present and succeeding ages, were
worthy such a great assembly, worthy of the name of a day of their
Thankesgiving.

I am persuaded your hearts are so warmed with the unexpected Victory, that you
would readily swear with David, to take no rest until you were doing that very
Work; if once you knew what it were, I shall tell you, Even in doing that where
in his glory is most concerned in all ages; and that is the setting up of his
Kingdom, the purgation and reformation of Religion, setting up his Ordinances
in purity, providing that his Church may be governed and ruled by his own laws
according to his own Word. This would indeed be a lasting Monument of your
thankfulness. This we should all study, and to this every thankful heart may
contribute something, but none so much as you, Right Honorable Lords and
Commons Assembled in Parliament, by whose appointment, and for whole
furtherance in this work I stand here this day. God has put into your hands
the greatest opportunity, and means of providing for all the glory that he
expects from England while the world stands, that he did put ever into the
hands of any. The measuring line, and plummet of his house is put into your
hands as once it was in the hand of Zerubbabel. From you he seems to expect
what portion himself shall have in England for time to come, what kind of
Subjects he shall have, what Worship shall be offered to him, what kind of
Guests shall sit with him at his Table; by what laws his house and people
shall be governed; he seems now to put into your hands, what unto the end of
the world he may expect from the Kingdom of England, in the way of his
Ordinances; not only the managing of a Kingdom of men, but of the Kingdom of
our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, seems now to be in the hands of the two
honorable Houses of Parliament.

Now, when such opportunities as these are in your hands, to do such great
things for God, how silent should all slesh be, till this work be done? how
hush't and laid aside should all your other businesses be; your own estates
and privileges, and private interests, or any thing that concerns your
selves, names, or families; how should they all be waved and set aside, till
all that be done, from which Jesus Christ shall receive glory in all ages. If
then (Right Honorable and Beloved) any of you should after all the mercy God
has bestowed upon you, make it your work to feather your own nests, build
your own Houses, and let the House of God lie waste, or hinder the setting up
of this Work in purity and perfection; if you should make a slight business of
the Work of Religion; and cause the authority of the Gospel, and Kingdom, and
Ordinances of Christ, to veil bonnet to the lusts and liberties of poor
sinful Men, and decline the setting up of the authority of his Scepter; lest
the corruptions of Men should be brought under the yoke more then they are
willing, you will provide ill for Christ's honor, ill for the Church, worst of
all for your own souls, in betraying the cause of Religion, and spoiling the
most glorious opportunity of advancing the honor of Christ, that ever men were
betrusted with, these thousand years. But if you shall resolve so to go
through with it, that there shall not need a reformation to come the second
time, I mean in stablishing the rule for Faith, Worship, and Government as
near as can be found out by the Word (all carnal considerations set aside)
should you but do this, that it may be set up in the Kingdom, and
transmitted to posterity: God will then acknowledge you really thankful, and
that you have done as much for his honor as he expects from any mortal men,
and posterity shall confess that as you are the most remarkable Parliament for
Gods owning you, protecting and saving you, so God received more glory from
you, then from any former Parliament; Josiahs praise should be verified of you,
^ever the like went before you, or followed after you. I therefore humbly
beseech you, Right Honorable Lords, and noble Gentlemen, whilst now your
hearts are warm with this mercy, and all of you are ready to say with David,
what shall I tender to the Lord? what shall I give the Lord for all his mercies
toward us? take this cup of salvation, resolve to pay your vows, the vow you
made, that you would endeavor the reformation of Religion, according to the
word of God; and to the nearest conformity with the best reformed Churches. Go
on zealously and impartially with it; let the success be what it will, work
belongs to us, success belongs to God; therein shall you in truth give unto
God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, that glory and prase which a Parliament should
give him; other people must come short; though we all are interessed in this
Mercy, and are equally bound to provide for his honor, yet our means are
shorter, we move in a narrower sphere.

Motives thereunto.
Some of our endeavors must be in our own Families, to make them better:
Others in a Pulpit to make our Congregations better; few of us, though raised
to our highest, are able to do any great things for his glory; but if the Lord
enlarge your hearts to do your work aright, the whole Christian world in her
several ages shall be able to give glory unto him, by your improvement of
these mercies which our God has given us.

And a little further to provoke you unto it, consider seriously of these three
things.

First Motives. ^. God chiefly minds this.
First, in all our great conflicts, these huge shakings of the Nations, and
combustions, the Lord has no design in any of them, but only the building up
of his Church, and answering his peoples prayers, his heart is set upon nothing
else: You indeed contend for Liberties and Laws, and justly you may do so; and
the rather, because the liberty of your Religion stands and falls with your
laws; but God can look upon England as well if it were in slavery, as in
freedom, he regards neither of them further then slavery and freedom has 1
Cor. 7. ^^.
relation to his Church, and the welfare of it; if all other his works were
buried (as one day they shall resolve into the Chaos out of which they were
taken) God cares not one whit, sobeit that be done his heart is set upon,
record his work of building of Zion, and let what else so ever be forgotren, it
matters not; ought ye not to be like minded unto our Lord?

2. This only will end our troubles.
Secondly, let me assure you, there is nothing else will ever appease our
troubles, but the vigorous carrying on of this work: A great many are afraid
lest the quick establishing of Religion (through the multitude of men's divided
thoughts, and ungodliness of many men's minds) should make our troubles and
conflicts, more then they have been; but be ye assured, the Lords Kingdom
being provided for in the right way, God will prepare salvation for walls and
bulwarks; he Esa. 26. 1.
will be the safety of that Kingdom, which advances his Kingdom; the
Kingdom of Christ, it is a Kingdom of Peace, (as himself is a Prince of
Peace:) It will never make tumults, it will appease tumults in a Kingdom where
Christ's Scepter prevails: whare he strikes the Earth with the rod of his
mouth, Cockatrices Esa. 11. 3.
will be charmed, and all enemies shall be hush't and quiet. It will I say
make no tumults where it is received: but let me tell you, Christ's heart is so
set upon the advancement of his Kingdom, that where it is not received,
himself will breed tumults enough for them that oppose him: and the stone cut
out of the mountain without hands, will dash asunder all men, and all things,
Dan. 2.
all Kingdoms, and all States that shall not give way to him.

3. This will be the everlasting honor of them who do it.
I add further concerning your selves, that there is nothing will bring so
great and everlasting glory to you, as to have been instruments in your
generation, to further the work wherein Christ's honor is so much concerned;
you have read Books, and know the world; I beseech you tell me out of all the
ages of the world that are past, cull out the choicest among men in their
generations, and say, who among them was really an eminent Man, if it were not
for being an instrument in helping forward the Church of Christ: multitudes
have made stately buildings, Fish Ponds, Gardens, Palaces: Some have erected
Kingdoms, what is become of them all? Jam seges est ubi Troja fuit is the
doom of all of them, they are all turned into vanity, and so are the Makers of
them. Consider the greatest, wisest, richest, learned of all who have lived;
if they were not for Christ and his Church, what glory does now remain to any
of them? how much so ever they magnified themselves, or were flattered by
others, who now will honor them? who now extols Pharaoh for a wise King,
Absalon for a complete Courtier, Achitophel for a politic Statesman? who now
would have the lot of any of them? do they not all lie buried ingloriously?
has not the Lord made the moth and corruption to rot them al? But now look
into Gods Book, and read all Chronicles, and you shall find, that all they who
have set their hearts to this work, all Rulers, Counselors, Parliaments, who
have been for the Lord, and his Church and Kingdom, their memorial is
honorable and blessed in all ages, they are still eminent and glorious, and
shall be so to the worlds end, and in Heaven to all Eternity. Set therefore
your hearts to this great work, show a real defire to glorify him who has
these great things for us.

This, Right Honorable Lords and Patriots, I had to say unto you; and as for
you the rest of this Honored and Reverend Assembly; very many things might be
suggested unto you, as means to exalt the glory of this our God and Savior;
but the only thing I shall at the present commend unto you, is, to be often
with God in the Mount, follow him with your prayers and supplications; give him
no rest till he has carried on this great and Honorable Assembly to do this
work, that they may raise the foundations for many Generations.

This from the second part of the Text; The work that they should do, not to
seek themselves, but how the glory of God may be preserved in the present, and
future Generations.

Part. 3. The means whereby they should seek to perpetuate Gods glory.
The third and last follows, which concerns the way they shall take to
perpetuate Gods glory for building his Church, and answering his peoples
prayers; what way shall they take for it? This shall be written, [in perpetuam
reimemoriam,] for an eternal monument of it. The only Lesson which I shall
hence observe, is this, Observat. One great means to preserve and render unto
God his due glory, is to record his mercies. Proved by Scripture.
That one great way of giving God his deserved glory for his building of his
Church, and answering his peoples prayers, is by causing these wonderful
works of God to be written for the generations to come.

For the truth of it, it is one of Gods Ordinances. You shall find it in the
78 Psalm. verse. 5. where the Prophet had exhorted them to give ear, and learn
what God had done for them, that they might teach it to their children. This
(said he) he ordained for a Law, and a Statute for Israel: what was this
Ordinance? that they should write it, and teach their posterity to come, the
wonderful things which God has done for his people: he commanded not only
themselves to know him, and his works, and to talk of them; but to provide that
the generations to come might know what God had done. So in the 17. of Exodus
14. verse. When God had begun to appear for his people in a War against
Amalck; write it (said he,) in a Book, a Book of the Wars of God for his
Church, and against his enemies, must be written and kept as a record from age
to age. So also Moses commanded them in the 31 of Deuteronomy. 19. verse. Now therefore
write ye this Song for you, and teach it the Children of Israel. A song must be
written and learned to express what God had done for a people who were most
unworthy of the Mercies bestowed upon them: So likewise Ester, Est. 9. 32. The
great work of Gods defeating the conspiracy of Haman, and deliverance of his
Church, was recorded, not only by an anniversary feast, but it must be
written in a Book.

Thus you see, the Lord has often enjoined his people to record and transmit
to posterity the great things which he has done for them. And as he has
commanded it, so his Spirit has ordered and brought to pass, that it has
been so. Moses and Samuel, and the rest of the Prophets have done it; what
should I trouble you with a discourse of particular instances, since the whole
Book of God is nothing but a Chronicle Book of Acts and Monuments of the Lords
wonderful works in gathering, and building protecting, and saving, and doing
good to his Church, and destroying their Enemies? And they did it many ways;
sometime they made Eucharisticall Exodus 15.
Songs, which they taught their children; sometime they wrote them upon their
Childrens names; sometime Judge. 5
by giving names to the places where the mercies Genesis 41 51. Genesis 22. 13: 1 Samuel 7. 12. Hester 9. M. Arrows^nih* Ebenezert.
were received; sometime erecting stones and pillars; sometime by appointing
yearly Feasts of remembrance. Many of which ways were presented unto you the
last solemn meeting you had in this place upon a like blessed occasion.

And by reason*
And the grounds or reasons why this ought to be done, why these things should
be recorded, are necessary,

First, in relation to God. Secondly, in relation to the Generation who receive
these mercies. Thirdly, in relation to the posterity that are to come after.
1. Gods glory is hereby preserved and spread abroad, Psalm. 111. 4.
First, in relation to God and his glory. As the works of God are all worthy to
be registered and remembered, so the work of building the Church, and answering
his peoples prayers, is the most worthy, the most excellent: because these are
his masterpieces; in all these works, God appears in his glory; all his
excellent perfections shine forth in their beauty: and therefore none so worthy
to be written. And as this work is most worthy, so there is no way or means so
excellent and effectual for the perpetuating of the honor and glory due to
him, as the faithful recording of it, and delivering it from hand to hand in
all generations; which else will soon be forgotten and lost, as loose pearls
and precious stones: But when they are recorded, they are like precious and
excellent pearls put upon a golden thread, and thereby easily kept together and
preserved, and his glory thereby made everlasting. His Works are all Eternal,
a part ante, in his decree; this writing and registring of them, will make
them so: a part post, in the eternal commemoration of them. Thus shall be
fulfilled to his glory that which Solomon says, I know whatsoever God does, it
shall be for ever; it shall last for ever to his glory. Eccles. 3. 14.


Thus people who receive them are hereby bettered. And the instruments employed
by God, are had in due remembrance and honor.
Secondly, in relation to them who receive these mercies, the present age that
enjoyes them, may also be great gainers by it, for it makes the favor and
mercy deeplier written in their own hearts in indeleble characters: and the
frequent reading of them would keep the mercy always fresh and green, always
of the same efficacy and virtue unto them who have received it.

And besides, those excellent Instruments whom God has employed to help in
the great work of building the Church, shall thereby enjoy the honor and
praise which God is willing to have conferred upon them: (for he would have
the righteous in everlasting remembrance) when in all ages it shall be known,
not only what the Lord has done for his people; but also who they are whom
God has been pleased to employ in this great Work: we know the old saying,
Multi ante Agamemnona fuere fortes, etc. there were many valiant Commanders and
Soldiers before Achilles, or Ulysses, but none of them are famous to
posterity, because they wanted a Homer, their worthy deeds are not recorded:
but by such a faithful register the Lords worthy instruments are in all ages
made partakers of a glory which is next the glory of Heaven.

But chiefly my Text leads to the third; in relation to posterity. These things
shall be written for the Generations to come, and for their sakes they ought to
be written. 3. The generations to come have their due, these works concern them.


1. Because they are their due, and the present generation cannot without
injustice deprive posterity of a faithful record of Gods mercies, for in all
these things he speaks to all the ages to come, as well as the present. You
have it in Hosea 12. 3. where Jacobs wrestling with God and meeting with him in
Bethel, are mentioned: There (says the Church) he spoke with us; what he
spoke to Jacob, he spoke to Israel, that lived in Hosea's time, above a
thousand years after it; and what Paul spoke, 1 Cor. 10. 11. concerning Gods
Judgment, All these things happened unto them for ensamples, and are written
for our admonition upon whom the ends of the World are come; is as true of all
his works of mercy; they happened unto them for oursakes, as well as for their
own; and the Prophets knew this, unto whom it was revealed, that not unto
themselves, but unto us they did admin^ster the things which are now reported.
Now look as it is with Parents who though themselves know they cannot live
long, and peradventure some of them are but termers in their states and
Honors; yet their Evidences of their Lordships or Manors, which belong to
their children, they dare not but transmit the Copies of them to those who
shall inherit their Lands after them. Since then the records of these things
are their due, we cannot deny them to posterity, unless we would rob them of
that which God will have them receive from us.

And may many ways be gainers by them.
Nay, secondly, it is their gain as well as their due, yea, it may prove an
infinite and invaluable gain to posterity; for by the recording of these great
and excellent Works, posterity may learn to know God, to trust him, to fear
and serve him; they may out of these learn their duty, and read their destiny.
This was the very end why God made that law, Psalm. 78. 5. That the Parents
should transmit unto their children, the wonderful works which he had done,
That they might set their hope in God, and keep his Commandments, and might
not be as their fathers, a generation whose spirit was not steadfast with God.
The like causes of writing these things, you shall find, Romans 15. 4. 1 Cor. 10.
11. Look as it is with them Romans 15. 4. 1 Cor. 10. 11.
that travail at Sea (take for instance Columbus, or Drake, or any of those
famous Seamen, that have discovered unknown tracts in the deep waters) when
they themselves had past them, if they had come home again without making a
Sea-mans Chard, who had been the better for all their voyages? whereas now,
ordinary Sailers by help of their Chard, can compass the world round about;
because they know where the safe channels, and where the rocks and dangers lie.
So in the faithful Stories of the works which God shows to his people in one
generation, the generations to come shall before their eyes be able to read the
right way, by the fall of others they shall know where lies the rocks and
stumbling blocks; by the deliverance of others they shall know where out-gates
are to be found. The reading of a record of Mordecays good service, was a
means to save all the Church of the Jews at one time, Est. 6. 1, 2. The
remembering of Micah his prophecy, saved the life of E^ra 9. 10. ^*
the Prophet Jeremy, at another time, Jer. 26. 19. the remembrance of the
causes why Israel was carried captive out of their own Land, was a means to
bring them to repentance at another time. The records of Gods dealing with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob have succored Gods people in their distresses ten
thousand times; the particular ways how the Church has profited by them, are
not to be numbered; inexpressible is the gain which may be gotten by them:
therefore the Lord would have them written for the generations to come.

Use 1. If posterity, then much more they who receive these deliverances should
praise God for them.
For Application of this: First, if the Lord will have his great Works recorded
to posterity, that they may give him his glory; surely, then the present age
should observe them, and glorify him; if our present mercies shall be the
wonderment of the world in after ages, how ill would it become us who receive
them, to pass them over unregarded, or put them into oblivion? what a
catalogue should every one of us have, how full should all our memories and
records be, who receive them thus by heaps upon heaps? how excellent and
comely a thing were it, if every one we meet with in the streets, and fields,
could be able to tell us the Story of Gods dealing for England these three, or
four, or five years; believe it, it is our shame that we are not able
Exhortation to all to do it.
to do it. What a shame and unworthy thing is it to lay up in our memories
trash and vanities; write down in our Books, our passions, toys, and
fooleries, and have no records of these glorious Works of God? how shall we
lift up our heads before God, when he shall reckon with us for this
ingratitude? O that every one of us could endeavor to have our records of
these mercies, as perfect as Gods are; he observes and keeps account of all,
let us do so likewise, let our books and memories, be treasuries of these
works and ways of God; let our tongues talk of them, let us be all good
Historians, at least of these latter years, since the beginning of this
Parliament, be able to count all our journeys and pitching places, our
deliverances and Victories from Kynton unto this day: yea, and when we think
or speak of them, let it be with admiration, which is the individuus comes,
Especially for mercy.
the inseparable companion of praising God: we never can duly tender his
praises for these mercies, unless our understanding see it self conquered by
that which it contemplates; and be compelled with David, again and again to
cry out, O Lord our God, how excellent is thy Name, how wonderful are thy
works! Do these things daily, but do them this day more carefully: this day
is separated for his praise and glory, but in a more peculiar manner let him
have the glory of this la^e great, and unexpected Victory; and let us consider
The greatness of this Victory.
seriously what kind of mercy it is, which we this day come to bless the Lord
for. I shall not go about by ostentation of words, and hyperbolicall
expressions to elevate it above its height, had I Rhetoric and words to do
it, this Assembly would not be taken with such kind of language; but simply and
plainly be pleased to behold this great work of God, both for the substance
and circumstances of it; for the thing it self, for the substance of it;
Granted it is, to be one of the greatest Victories that ever the Lord bestowed
Both in the substance
upon us since the beginning of our troubles; wherein all the enemies Foot, all
their Carriages, all their Ammunition, so many of their Horse were taken in the
field.

And circumstances which greatly magnify Gods mercy in it.
But there are four Circumstances accompany it, which maks this mercy most
wonderful.

First, the Time when this mercy was bestowed upon us. Secondly, the Place
where it was bestowed upon us. Thirdly, the Persons by whom it was wrought for
us. And, Fourthly, the Manner how God did it for us.
^. The (...) when it was done.
First, the Time when it was done; truly, when we were very low, exceeding low
in our Spirits, low in our Counsels, low in our Treasures, low in our Arms, low
through our mutual Divisions and jealousies; wondrous low (I think) as we have
been almost at any time since the beginning of our troubles: at a time when the
Enemy was extreme high, high in their Spirits, high in their confidence, high
in their scorn, high in their resolutions, so high, as if they had already
swallowed all, boasting that our Armies were crumbled to nothing, and wondering
we were so foolish, as not to resign up all. Yea, done in a time when we had
newly prayed and sought God, when the Honorable Houses had called the City and
the Assembly of Divines to lie in tears and dust before God, to wrestle with
him: this was the time when the Lord remembered us, agreeing with that Psalm.
125. 33.
of the Psalmist, Who remembered us in our low estate, for his mercy endures
for ever.

I may add one more concerning the time, it was in the rising of the year,
almost in the Spring, when yet we have four or five months before there be
any necessity of winter Quarters; in which time, if God give us wisdom to
follow it, and himself please to go on with us, who knows what a blessed
period our troubles may have?

2. The place.
Secondly, and the place where is remarkable. Where was it done? truly, in that
part of the Land where the Enemy had lately wrought outrageous villainies. I
speak not of taking a Town in a hostile way, but of murdering of women, of
ravishing wives and maidens; where the Commanders could boast what liberty they
had given to their Soldiers, though not to murder the women, yet to ravish as
many of them as they could: where the Country groaned under the blasphemies,
and outrages that they wrought; that the Lord should have it so ordered that
where they had plundered and spoiled, themselves should be plundered and spoiled,
that thither they should ^^y with shame, hardly daring to look in where all
these cruelties and insolences had been wrought by them.

8. The persons by whom.
Thirdly, and take in the Persons by whom. Of whom I will say two things, which
you will all grant to be true. They were an Army despised by our Enemies, and
little less then despaired of by our Friends, as men from whom little was to
be looked for; Gods glory is the more conspicuous; this is according to his
own manner of working, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28 29.
Who delights by weak things to confound the mighty, and by things which are
despised, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are, that no
flesh might glory in his presence: This is the Lords doing, let it be
wonderful in our eyes.

4. The manner how.
Fourthly, and the manner how is very remarkable, how God did it; truly so, that
the men should do what men can do, that they might have the praise of
Instruments, giving them valor, courage, wisdom and faithfulness: and yet
withal letting them be so overborn, one wing in a manner broken, and many of
the Foot routed, and all in danger to be lost; that it might appear (as has
been in the rest of our Victories) that the thing was wrought by God: Now can
you look upon all these things together, and not with admiration cry out, This
is the Lords doing, this is wonderful in our eyes: Non nobis Domine, non
nobis, Not unto us Lord, but unto thy Name give the praise and glory? Overmuch
to extol men, God would not have you, they would not have you do it, you
would wrong them and your selves and your God, if you should look upon them
otherwise then as instruments. But O that you could admire this mercy, that God
has given in, that you could see all the mercies that are in the womb of this
mercy! how many have already sprung from it, Leicester taken in again, and
other tidings are come out of other parts of the Kingdom, some mercies about
Taunton, others about Chester, has our God cast them in, that this day might
be as a day of Jubilee to us. Shall not God have glory for all this? shall not
our hearts be lifted up to give him praise? Would God have a Chronicle
written, that the ages to come may stand amazed at it; and shall we that see
these things, and enjoy them thus unexpectedly, confine and pen up our praises
to one day of Thanksgiving, and not have our whole heart, and our whole life
filled with studies and endeavors to exalt him? let this be our first Use, if
we should write them in a Book to provoke others, then surely we should write
them in our hearts to provoke our selves to praise him.

Use 2. Exhortation to record these Mercies for the Generation to come.
The other Use I would make of it is this: That seeing the Lord would have his
wonderful Works written for the Generations to come; Let the Honorable Houses
of Parliament look upon it as a duty they owe unto God, and to the present and
future age, to provide that these glorious and admirable works which God has
done for England and Scotland, since the beginning of our troubles, may
faithfully be transmitted to posterity; you hear God has appointed it for a
law and an Ordinance, that the generations to come should know his wonderful
Works, and it is both due and expected by one age from another; it has been
the received Opinion of wise men, that the World is more beholding to them who
write Histories, then to any men living, except only those that did the
excellent Works which the others writ. Tully tells you, that History is the
witness of time, the light of truth, the life of memory, the school-Mistris of
ourlife, etc. When yet, alas, all their Histories were written with
ignorance, vanity, passion, partiality, and gave very little help to our main
business, to teach us the administrations of God, and the way he has taken
in carrying on his Church, which is the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. But
now by the true and faithful setting forth to the World what the Lord has
done for us; you should honor God and advantage his Church as much as in any
thing that you can possibly do, unless it be the building of the Church it
self. Never could more excellent things tending to advance the goodness,
wisdom, power, and mercy of God be manifested to the world, then this story
of our times would afford. The Jews have a saying, That when God destroyed all
the World, there was a Copy of all kept in the Arc with Noah; and after the
Flood was gone, this Copy was reprinted and spread over all the world. The
meaning was, that the Creatures that were kept there, did fill all the world
with Creatures of the same nature that the World had before. Truly, I have
often thought, that were all the Copies in the world lost, of Gods admirable
dealing with an unworthy people (except only those mentioned in the Scripture,
there might be a re-impression of them out of the admirable things that God
has done for us since these public caelamities came upon us; and all the
world might learn sufficient out of our Story, what a God our God is, and learn
to know, and trust, and fear him forever; give me leave only to name some
Capita rerum, some heads of things, which is fit the World should read and
know: They should read of a Parliament called together by a strange providence;
and when they were called, God dealt with them, as he commanded Ezekiel to
deal with his own hair, Ezekiel 5. one third part of it to be thrown away
into the wind, another to be burnt in the City, and another to be again purged
and refined, and kept in the skirt of his garment. They should read of 4 or 500
Commons, and multitude of Peers, some of them passing through the fire, some
scattered into all the corners of the land, seeking to destroy the Nation that
had entrusted them; and a remnant left behind, fined and refined, and humbled
again and again, and kept to do wonderful things for the Lords glory, and his
peoples good. They should likewise read of Army after Army, and fight after
fight, which we have had with our Enemies; of every one whereof they should be
able to say, what my Noble Lord said immediately after Kynton fight, That there
was never any thing wherein there was less of man, and more of God. They
should acknowledge in all we have done, there was little of man, and much of
God. There they should likewise read, how this famous City, and all the
Countries where the Gospel had prevailed, have faithfully stood to God and his
cause even to their own exhausting, in the midst of infinite discouragements;
and how the rest that were nursed up under Popery and superstition, both Lords
and Commons, and Gentlemen, and whole Counties did endeavor to fight
themselves into slavery, and labor to destroy the Parliament, that is,
themselves, and all that is theirs. There they should read how God broke all
our crutches we leaned upon, our Counsels, our Treasuries, our Armies; and
never prospered us really, till he had deeply humbled, and made us to look to
himself only for help; how he brought the two Nations into a Covenant with
him, and set them upon a work of Reformation of Religion, and carried on that
work in a troublesome time, in a time of War, better then (in likelihood) it
would have been in a time of Peace. There they should read the fruits and
effects of Prayer; how he suffered his Almighty hand to be, as it were,
directed by it. They should see what strange Plots were discovered, prevented,
detected; how God made some of our strong Holds to be easily delivered, and
others of no strength little less then miraculously preserved against all the
Force of the enemy; how usually God made our losses to be our gain, and did
us most good by undoing us; compelling us often to say, Perissemus nisi
perissemus, we had been undone if we had not been undone; and how our enemies,
that rose against us, evermore found their gain to prove their loss; and that
which raised them up highest, instantly laid them lowest. What shall I say?
they shall in a thousand particulars read in this Story our folly and Gods
wisdom, our weakness and Gods strength, our divisions and confusions, and Gods
ordering them all to serve his holy ends. They should read such things as (I am
confident no History in the world) is able to hold out the like. Now I beseech
you, is it not pity that these things should be lost? shall we deprive the
world and posterity of these things; Serimus arbores, we plant Trees which may
bear fruit to after ages, and shall we not do this, which like
Nebuchadnezzars Dan 4.
tree would bear fruit to all the world; or shall we hazard them to be
written by a lying or unskilful hand? written they will be without all
question, Scribimus indocti doctique, Diurnalls, and Weekly Intelligencers
undertake to set them all down; but shall posterity be left to make their
computatio^, and draw their estimate of the Lords dealing by such Books as
these? should not we rob God, our selves, his Cause, and his Church in all ages,
if we should leave it to such Historians as these. God forbid, rather let some
of the choicest men in the Land be set about it: It was said of Claudian, that
he wanted matter to write of suitable Psalm. 10.
to his wit; but what wit is suitable to this matter. Who is sufficient for
these things? who can tell the loving kindness of the Lord? who can show forth
all his goodness? My humble suit therefore to the Right Honorable Houses, is
(a thing which I am assured God expects from you) even that you would provide
that some worthy, faithful heart, and heads, and pens be set on work, who may
undertake this Work, and have leave (as Mr. Fox had in Queen Elizabeth's days)
to search all the Registries; and be enabled to hold forth all the light that
may be, that the Generations to come may see a true picture, a faithful Story
of these three or four last years: And let him do it faithfully, let him not
be discouraged with the Politicians fear, That it is dangerous to write truth
in the present age, not safe to come too near the heels of truth, lest it
kick out his teeth: But as the Penmen of the Scripture, wrote man's folly, and
Gods goodness; so let him be encouraged to let the world know great things
God has done for us, and how little we have done for our selves: no gracious
man shall have the less glory in Heaven, by letting God have his glory by us
on earth, though it be in publishing our weaknesses and follies. I once again
humbly beseech you the thing may be done. And yet further to provoke you,
consider that in all ages the eminentest men have been employed in this kind of
Work. Moses wrote the dealings of God for 2500 years from the Creation to their
entering into Canaan; and afterward it was carried on by other chief
Instruments; above half the Old Testament is a Chronicle of the things done by
the Lord in War and Peace for his people. In the New Testament four Evangelists
wrote the story of Christ; Luke writing the Acts of the Apostles, and how ill
could the world have wanted one of these? How miserable had we been, if we had
been deprived of them? And since that time I appeal to all Scholars, whether
the choicest men in learning have not been employed in this service; and let
all English men speak, whether they think any book written in our Mother
tongue, has brought more glory to God, and stirred up more zeal for Christ,
and encouraged people more to a holy life, and to own Gods Cause courageously,
then Mr. Foxes books of Martyrs, the Acts and Monuments of the Church. In all
this, I plead not for the honor of any man, or men, let them all be laid in
the dust, so God may be glorified, they who do worthily shall have glory
enough with God in Heaven; yet God would have them also had in everlasting
remembrance: but it is for God and his honor that I plead; there are such
things of God, of his Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Compassion, Mercy to be set
forth; that should the Lord move your hearts to resolve upon it this day, it
were a testimony of your thankfulness, next to the going on vigorously in the
Reformation and settling of the Church; and you can pitch upon nothing that
shall bring more eternal glory to the Lord, that has done these great things
for us, thn to cause these things to be written for the Generations to come,
that the people not yet created may praise the Lord.

FINIS.

