WORDS OF PEACE OR, Dr. MANTONS LAST SAYINGS Many of them taken from him on his
Deathbed, or observed on other Remarkable Occasions; Tending very much to the
Edification of Christians.
1. IN his Sickness, lying under great Pains, he was heard to use this
expression. Lord keep me from Dishonouring Thy Name by impatiency; Blessed be
God there is nothing of Hell in all this.

2. Restrain and Bridle your Passions in Religious matters, and never contend
about Punctilio's.

3. The latter days will be hard times, and yet happy times, miserable in the
beginning, but glorious in the Issue, for it is the Course of Divine
Dispersations after the greatest Distractions to bring forth the greatest
harmony.

4. He who Countenances a Fault, is more Guilty than he that Commits it; for
there may be frailty in the one, but you cannot excuse the other from Malice.

5. Be ever more tender of your Conscience then of your Reputation.

6. When the Flesh is too much made of, the Soul loses it vigor; and he that
is addicted to delights, rarely has a Noble Generous and true Christian mind.

7. Bride is nothing but a Pompuous Excrescency of Folly.

8. Provided that people agree in Religious principles, let them never be like
the Bulls of Bashan, Goring and Wounding each other.

9. When a people begin to Innovate, it is an hard matter to keep them within
the bounds of any Moderation.

10. Men of Lucians temper, by jesting against received Rites, insensibly lose
all sense and awe of Religion, and by Scoffing at False Gods, come the less to
Dread the True.

11. They are Guilty of a strange Unfaithfulness, in point of Stewardship
toward God, who do not employ their Superfluities in the Relief of the Poor
and Miserable.

12. A good man may be Innocently revenged of his Enemies, by persisting in
well-doing, and a bad man by reforming his life.

13. Pride is a vice insupportable in the rich, but absolutely abominable in
the poor, it renders one a Fool, the other a Brute.

14. Ill affections do as often divide us as ill Opinions, and distempered
Spirits occasion distracted times, wars come from our Lusts, Jam. 4. 1.

15. Too many men make Idols of their own conceptions, and love an Opinion, not
because it is true, but because it is theirs.

16. A man should as carefully avoid an error in Judgment, as a vice in
Conversation; for God hates filthiness of the Spirit, as well as filthiness of
the Flesh.

17. Easy credulity and stubborn prejudice, are the two great fomenters of
Religious differences.

18. The Adversaries of Christianity, have been always those that have least
inquired into it is nature.

19. Do not appropriate Christ to any one party of Professors; The Apostle
reproves those that said, I am of Christ, as well as those that said, I am of
Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 13. Those that spoke as if Christ were only Theirs, were
accounted a Faction too.

20. We prize a Jewel in a Toads head, how much more should we love grace in
brethren, whose blemish is only some petty dissent.

21. It Is fatal to Religion, when once we cry up Names, and those names beget
Parties, for then men look only to accomodate their own faction, though it be
to the hazard of religion, and public peace.

22. You make the best purchases when you relieve those that are in necessity,
and by the act gain more than those on whom your Bounties are bestowed.

23. Rebukes in private Dealings of Friendship should come from us as
afflicting as if the fault were our own, and wear rather Mourning than Scorn.

24. He only Reproves another with faithfulness, that can suffer himself to be
reproved with Thankfulness.

25. Self-interest twines it self to far into all our actions, that it infects
our very Charity; Men will be bountiful sometimes, because they are ambitious,
and purchase the shadow of one virtue with the real loss of another; If at all
we fling our bread upon the Waters, we choose not Currents that run all one way
from us, but tideing Waters, we do good only to such as many return it.

26. He must be a Fool who sells himself to buy a Garment, how then dare you
expose your soul to gratify your body?

27. Never divulge slanders against any, nor encourage them, but entertain all
lessoning disparagings of others with tingling Ears, slow belief, blushes for
the defamer as well as the defamed, a dejected countenance, an excusing tongue,
or a distastful silence.

28. To smite with the hand is beneath a man, to smite with the Tongue beneath
a Christian, and yet how often are Christians guilty of both biting and
devouring one another, as the Apostle most aptly phrases, Gal. 5. 15.

29. Patient sufferings carry more Majesty with them than carnal replies and
defenses.

30. Of all men it worst becomes the Ambassadors of the Prince of Peace to be
men of Violence.

31. Admonitions are not to be counted accusations.

32. Some men love to live in the fire, and be always handling the red hot
questions of the Age with passion and Acrimony: but alas! this does no good.

33. It Is very unwarrantable to gain Men to a party before they be gained to
God.

34. Arrows of bitter words are no Weapons of our spiritual warfare.

35. The small Rain does most good on the tender Grass, he that speaks to
dissenters, should do it with all meekness and kindness, let your arguments be
as strong as you can, but be sure let your words be soft.

36. There may be diverse colors, but there should be no Rent in the Churches
Coat.

37. It Is good to preserve truth, but small distempers need not violent cures,
he is a mad man that fires his house to destroy the Mice in it.

38. Paul is every where most zealous against erors, yet none more earnest than
he to bring Circumsion and Uncircumsion, to a profession of Brotherhood.

39. Strings that are in Tune must not be stirred, others must be set up to
them; the disobedient must be brought up to the Wisdom of the Just, not that
down to them, for where the Language is pure the Soldier is one, Zep. 3. 9.

40. The great occasion of the decay of Piety amongst Professors, is because
they spend all the heat and first born of their strength and zeal in
contentions about opinions without regard to practice.

41. False Doctrines and bad lives, like Ice and water do mutually beget each
other.

42. Those that kindle Coals, and seek to increase the flames of discontent,
and Animosites amongst the people of God, are Factors for the Devil, who is
pictured with a Cloven foot, only to signify that his work is to cause and
continue divisions in the world.

43. God rules the world by the lusts of his enemies, and the Prayers of his
Saints, disappointing one, and stirring up and answering the other,
accomplishes the designs of providence.

44. Corrupt company is more Infectiou^ than corrupt Air.

45. Conquer Will, and you Conquer Hell; The principal Point in difference
between God and Sinners, is whose Will shall stand, his or theirs.

46. There is nothing in the world mo^ dangerous to the public Welfare either
o^ State or Churches, than private self-seeking.

47. The more low and useless we are our own Eyes, the sitter we are to be
employed by God, who pours the Oil of his Grace into broken Vessels.

48. The Keys of Eternal life are self-denying Graces, Faith and Repentance, by
the o^ we are taught to go out of our selves, by the others to abhor our selves.

49. Restitution as it is a most necessary, it is one of the most hardest parts
of self-d^nyal, when a covetous heart must be forc^ to vomit up all it is sweet
Morsels again; U^ just gain is like a barbed Arrow, it kills if stay within the
body, and it tears and pulls t^ Flesh away with it, if it be drawn out.

50. I never much liked Projectors in any kind, they usually delude others, and
undo themselves: but above all, a Projector in Learning is one of the most
unhappy, and o^ all Learning none more dangerous than Projector in Theology;
the likeliest piece Timber, out of which to shape first a ^tick, and after that
an Heretic, and at Athiest.

London, Printed by A. P. and T. H. for P. Brooksby, at the Golden Ball, in
West-Smith field, near the Hospital-Gate. 1677.

With Allowanc^


