THE ENGLISH MOUNTEBANK: Or, a Physical DISPENSATORY, Wherein is prescribed,
Many strange and excellent Receipts of Mr MARRIOT, the great Eater of Gray's Inn:
With the manner how he makes his Cordial Broaths, Pills, Purgatious, Julips,
and Vomits, to keep his Body in temper, and free from SURFEITS.

With sundry Directions, 1 How to make his Cordial Broth. 2 His Pills to
appease Hunger. 3 His strange Purgation; never before practiced by any Doctor
in England. 4 The manner and reason, why he swallows Bullets and Stones. 5 How
he orders his baked meat, or rare D^sh on Sundays. 6 How to make his new
fashion Fish-broath. 7 How to make his Sallet, for cooling of the Blood. 8 How
to make his new Dish, called a Frigazee: the operation whereof, expells all
sadness and melancholy.


By J. MARRIOT, of Gray's Inn, Gent.

London, Printed for George Horton, 1652.

The English Mountebank: OR, A new Physical Dispensatory: By J. Marriot of
Grayes-Inn, Gent. Wherein is prescribed his rare Conceits, never before
practiced or administered by any Doctor: Also, the manner how he makes his
Cordial Broaths, Pills, Purgations, Julips, and Vomits, to keep his body in
temper, and free from surfeits, etc.
How to make his Cordial Broth.
TAke three sheeps hinges with the wool on their heads: three dozen of sheep
Trotters: two Bullocks Livers, with half a peck of Oatmeal; boil all these in a
Caldron two hours; then strain the broth through a hair sackcloath, and let it
cool: The use of it is to appease grumbling in the Guts, or a wambling stomach,
by drinking one Gallon at a time, and eating the meat after it: This will
preserve you from hunger and wind in the stomach, using it but once in two
hours.

How to make his Pills to appease hunger, ordinarily carried about him.
TAke of Rye-tueal 9 pound, of Chandlers Graves 3 pound, of the skimmings of
Honey one pound, warm water as much as will make it into a Paste: then roll
them up into a dozen balks: then put them into some boiling broth, till they
be through boiled: then set them to cool; but beware that the dogs do not
deceive you of them, as they have done him oftentimes. The chief use of these
Pills are for traveling; for Mr Marriot carried always a dozen to Westminster
in the Term time for fear of fainting: his ordinary place for eating them, was
in the dark place near the Commonpleas Treasury, where one might see him
swallow these Pillt, as easily as an ordinary man would do a guilt pill in the
pap of an Apple.

How he makes a Purgation.
MR Marriot would often fol^ow the Fariars Rule for Drenches, which Receipt best
agreed with his body: for he would take Milk and Oil with Aqu^vitae, Pepper,
and Brimstone, all mingled together: a pottle at one time is nothing with him
to scour his Maw.

Why he swallows Bullets and Stones.
THe heat of his stomach is such, that without such a Remedy he could not
subsist; for when he has gormondized himself at some great Feast, strait way
he swallows bullets of almost 4 Ounces weight, which causes a present
digestion: also round pebble stones he often swallows, which cools his Maw.
These kind of tricks he has, by which he puts down many of our new Juglers now
a days, who will be an hour eating of a Cheese-cake; he vanquisheth all that
dare oppose him in his Art.

How he orders his baked meat, or his rare Dish on Sundays.
MR. Marriot out of niceness, because he would not have women's fingers in his
meat, dresses his meat himself, having an earthen pot which holds half a
bushel; he fills it in this manner as follows. Take a Bullocks head, the
bones being chopped small, and good store of Onions, and other course Herbs
which are easily to be get, with an ounce of pepper, and as many Turnups as
will fill the pot: when he had laid all these in his pot, he put thereto a
Gallon of pump-water, because it should not want moisture: then with his own
paws he carries it to the Bakehouse, staying still by it, fearing least he
should be deprived of some of it in his absence. He never goes to Church on a
Sunday, but gives much attention to the Baker when he says it is his time to
draw; which time being come, he caries his pot home, and to dinner he goes
without laying a cloth; first he cuts slices of stale bread, and sops them in
this R^storativ^: he is a right Englishman, for he eats his broth first;
which being done, he sends the meat to be boiled once more in his hot maw, that
has so quick a digestion, that three Cooks are not able to provide him meat at
all the motions of his stomach: This being an absolute Remedy for the present,
I have here set it down for those stomachs that dare keep him company.

How to make his rare Fish-broath.
LIke a good Doctor he makes his broth, only in May or June, when Mackrel are
16 a groat; and then he has great skill in choosing them, for none but the
broken bellyed ones will serve his turn: but because he would not be cheated in
them, he will go to Billingsgate himself, and will sit on the stairs half a
day, rather then be disappointed: but seeing fish for his turn, presently buys
twelve penny worth, and away he comes home, getting water, and setting them on
in his large Caldron: many herbs he uses, as Fennel, B^yes, Rosemary, and a
few Leeks; but when it is boiling he skims it, because it is to make broth:
having so done, he lets them boil a little, and then takes up his fish and his
herbs: then he puts half a peck of Malt in, and boiles it again; his fish he
sets to cool, yet like a good Cook, he licks his fingers as he is a dressing
them: having now boiled his broth sufficiently, he falls on it, and the fish,
making no more of it then the Welshman did of his three penny Ordinary, who was
ready for another, before he had done that he was about. The use he made of
this broth and fish, was only to get him a stomach; for he would often say,
That fish was of a light digestion: therefore good for those that have but a
slight stomach at present, but desire a greater.

How to make his cooling Sallet, to cool the blood.
I Am of opinion that he has read Gerards Herball, or the History of Plants,
wherein partly he found this Receipt; and being enlarged by himself, I thought
fit to set it down amongst the rest: he being a man of a hot stomach, did use
this Sallet following very often, wherein he found great benefit.

The way to make it is thus: for the space of two hours: then take them up
without much (...), and put them in all (...) Tub, putting thereto a Gallon of
sour Ale, and a quantity of Goose-grease, sufficient to give it a taste, with a
pound of Pepper strewed upon it: This Sallet is excellent good to purge the
blood, and loosen the belly, this quantity being taken three several mornings
in the week.

How to make Mr. Marriots Dish, called a Frigazee.
THis Mr Marriot hearing of a new Dish that was much used at Oxford Cates, and
in other places about the City amongst gallants, thought in his fancy to make
one that should resemble it, because the materials that were used in it, were
too deer for him; but being a man of a rare stomach, quickly guessed at
something that was eatable, though dressed in a strange way: When he had
thought upon all the materials of this Dish, he began to put it in practice,
having gotten all the Ingredients together, to try this rare conclusion.

And thus he made it;

FINIS.

