REBELLION UNMASKED OR A SERMON PREACHED At Poplar in the Parish of Stepney (in
the new Chapel there lately erected by the Honorable Society of the
East-Indie-Company) upon occasion of the late Rebellious insurrection in London.

WHEREIN Is opened the resemblances between Rebellion and the sins of
Witchcraft and Idolatry, as also the pretenses for Rebellion Answered.

By THOMAS MARRIOT, M. A. of Kath. H. in Cambridge, and Chaplain to the
East-Indie-Company.

ROMANS 13.1.2. Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, for there is no
power but of God, the powers that be, are ordained of God.

Whosoever therefore resists the power resists the ordinance of God, and
shall receive to themselves damnation.

LONDON, Printed by I. R. for Thomas Johnson, at the Golden Key in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1661.

Imprimatur.

Ian. 18. 1660. Reverendo in Christ. Patri D. D. Gilberto Episc. Londinensi.
Sacellanus Domesticus Georg. Stradling.

An Advertisement to the READER.
THese are to let thee understand (Christian Reader) that this Sermon was not
in its first framing intended for public view, only composed for the benefit
of a private and plain auditory, and indeed had it not been desired by some,
and had I not had strong convictions on my spirit concerning the present
necessity of the Subject, it had gone no further then those to whom it was
first preached; let the shortness of the time, I had to compose it, plead
something for its plain garb in which it does appear, it being preached on
the 13. Ian. the Lords day next following the Rebellious insurrections in
London, it being likewise a more then ordinary busy week with me upon some
other occasions. I am not unsensible how many uncharitable censures I am like
to bear from some for it, but let such know that by the peace I have in my own
conscience I am provided to bear them all; and like a Christian, consider, if
thou shall judge the Author rashly, it will most redound to thy own hurt, and
be an addition of guilt to thy own conscience. Some few words I have changed in
the printing of it, but nothing of the sense of what was delivered, and some
few lines (though very few) I have added in one or two places for illustration
sake; also one head which (being cast upon the straites of time) was through
have omitted, is here inserted. The rest is entire as it was preached both for
sense and words. Be not e're the more out of love with truth, though thou meet
it in a plain dress, read without Gall or prejudice, study and seek the
Churches peace, so shall thou approve thy self to be a true servant of the God
of peace, if thou see any thing of humane frailty, cover it with the mantle
of love, read, and not only read but practice what is here from Gods word
discovered to be thy duty. The Lord add his blessing.

Thine in the Lord. THO. MARRIOT.

To the Right Worshipful Sr. Andrew Riccard Governor, the Right Worshipful
Sr. Tho. Chamberlain Deputy, and the rest of the Commit of the Honorable
East-Indie-Company, Grace Mercy, and Peace.
IT is not very long (right Honorable) since the condition of England was much
like unto that of the Jews in their captivity; of whom it is said the children
of Israel, Ier. 50.33.
and the children of Judah were oppressed together, and all that took them
captives held them fast, they refused to let them go. At which time when we
seemed to be e'ne at the last gasp it pleased Almighty God in mercy to visit
us, and in the restoration of our gracious Sovereign to give no small hopes
of our restoration to peace both in Church and State, and Oh! how joyful and
pleasant asight is it to all sound-hearted Christians to see the Walls of our
Jerusalem building again? yet has it likewise fared with us as it did also
with the people of God, after their Captivity, that no sooner could they begin
to build, but Satan stirred up those who did endeavor to hinder this Glorious
work, who combined in a Plot and conspiracy against Gods Church, Neh. 4.11
and designed before they should know any thing, or see them, to come into the
midst of them, and slay them, and cause their work to cease, which we have once
more with our eyes beheld to be attempted in our time. It is this malice of the
Devil against the peace of our Zion, which has occasioned me to handle this
Subject, looking upon it as my duty hereupon to open the hainousness of this
sin of Rebellion from the word of God, and to give answer to the Pleas of
discontented persons, that if it be possible, the erroneous might be reduced,
and the like sad unscriptural attempts might be for future prevented; I doubt
not but some may be much displeased, at what is herein contained, especially
those who are touched in the sore place. Even wholesome food is unsavory to the
palate of such as are distempered, but we must please God rather then men. The
Lord knows, the peace of the Nation and Church in which we live, is the maine
end why I have taken the boldness to expose this Homespun Sermon unto public
view. (peace is that Jewel which set in the ring of the Church makes it
sparkling and glorious, though it be the design of Satan to rob it of this its
glory, of this its Jewel) Accept therefore (Right Honorable) of this plain
Sermon with all humility begging your protection, and unto whom indeed could I
more properly Dedicate it then unto your Honors,) by whose encouragement it
is, that both it and the rest of my labors in this place have received their
very life and breath, but unto you; whose bounty in building us a Synagogue,
and care in promoting the Gospel of peace among us in a place where otherwise
in all likelihood, many souls would have starved for want of food, whose
charity, I say, in erecting and induing an Almes-house, wherein to feed and
cloth the bodies of the poor, and in erecting a Spacious Chapel among us (even
in the midst of those times when others made it their work to throw down
Churches) where many hundred souls are continually fedthw the bread of life, a
high expression of your love to the God and Gospel of peace, such renouned acts
as are worthy to be remembered, and may serve as eminent examples to following
Generations. Oh! how many souls in this place are bound continually to bless
you, and to bless God for you? besides indeed the particular favors I have
received of you, have engaged me to present you with these first Fruits, as a
small expression of my thankfulness to you, for those many undeserved favors
conferred upon me; all that I humbly petition of you is your acceptance,
praying that the Lord would abundantly bless you, with spiritual blessings in
your souls, and prosper you in your affairs in this world, and at last advance
you to be of the Company of the Glorious Saints in heaven, which is the
constant Prayer of him who is,

Your Honors obliged servant though unworthiest among the Ministers of Christ.
THO. MARRIOT.

REBELLION AS WITCHCRAFT and IDOLATRY.
1 SAMUEL 15.23. (...) For Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, and stubborness
is as iniquity and Idolatry.

THat which God gave in commission to his Prophet Esaiah. 58.1. is well known
unto you, Cry aloud spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my
people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins. What kind of
people these were, against whom God does commission the Prophet with this tarte
and severe message, you see partly in this verse, more fully in the following
verses; They were a Generation that did make a great profession of Religion;
They seek me daily, says God, they took delight in approaching to God, and in
the following verses you see how they fasted. They were a sort of people that
made a great show of Saintship [they sought God] high pretenses there were to
Religion, but in the mean time they made their Religion but a cloak to their
wickedness, they lived in gross crying sins against God; now God being
exceedingly displeased with, and highly provoked against these hypocritical
wretches, he sends his Prophet to cry aloud, or (as the word notes) to cry in
the throat, and not to spare. What? Cry aloud against such Saints as these, who
were thus Religious, and sought God after this manner? Yes, Cry aloud, says
God, fear them not, spare them not for this, Calvin. in loc.
lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, (which does not only note the loudness of
the voice, but the tartness of the reproves with which he was to scourge these
notorious hypocrites) show my people their iniquities, and the house of Jacob
their sins. Note.
When (such especially who make high pretenses to Religion, and keep a howling
at their prayers, yet commit horrid, crying sins; Gods Prophets and Ministers
are then engaged by commission, and duty to cry aloud and not to spare such for
fear of their pretenses to Piety and Holiness, but to lift up their voice like
a Trumpet against their horrid impieties, and wickednesses. What this last week
has brought to light concerning the horrid transactions of hypocritical
professors, (blasphemously intitling God to their murders, and Rebellions,
impudently fighting the Battles of the devil, though pretendedly under the
banner of Christ, whilst Rebell's against God and their King, and Traitors to
their Country, yet calling Jesus their King) is too well known to all of us.
If ever we that are Ministers are to cry aloud in the Pulpit, it is when
wickedness cries aloud, when the blood of Innocents cries aloud in the streets:
shall such Rebellious designs and practices, and massacres be carried on, and
executed under pretenses of Religion, and Gods Prophets not cry aloud? Shall we
hear the name of God openly blasphemed, see the people of God openly, and
murderously massacred, the name of Christ wickedly and devilishly profaned,
and not cry aloud against such wickedness? Better that our tongues should for
ever cleave to the roof of our mouths, then that we should not at such time
stand up for our Lord and master Jesus Christ, whose Ambassadors we are. What
has been the occasion of all our former disturbances for several years
together? was it not Rebellion, and Rebellion under a mask of Religion? and
shall we see the same Rebellious designs on foot, nay practices yet more
black, horrid and Barbarous, under the same cloak and pretenses of Religion,
and not cry aloud against such wickedness? Sure, if Ministers should not now
cry aloud the very stones in the streets would cry out against us. If we should
not now cry aloud and plead the cause of our Lord and master Jesus Christ, how
shall we ever appear before him with comfort? For Rebellion is as the sin of
Witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and Idolatry.

These words may be considered two ways, either Relative as they stand in
relation to what goes before, denoted by this word [for] in the forefront of
the Text: or else leaving out this word [for] they may be considered Absolute
as a distinct and entire proposition by themselves, Rebellion is as the sin of
Witchcraft, and stubborness as iniquity and Idolatry.

Let us first in a word look upon them in their Relation to what goes before.
God had sent unto Saul by his Prophet Samuel to go against the Amalekites, and
gave it him in his Commission to slay all. When Saul had obtained the victory,
you find he spares and saves Agag alive, and spares also the chief of the
cattle, thus rebelling against that God that had advanced him; where we see by
the way, how dangerous a thing it is for Kings and Princes to save those alive
who are by express command of God to be executed; nor is it to be passed over
without observing, how Saul does endeavor to palliate this his Act of
Rebellion, and to cover it with a Mask of Religion: he tells Samuel, Verse. 21.
he had kept all the commands of God, and in that the people had saved the
cattle alive it was only to Sacrifice with them unto God in Gilgal, v. 21.
upon which Samuel sharply reproves him, V. 22.23.
And Samuel said, has the Lord as great delight in burnt-offerings and
Sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold to obey is better then
Sacrifice: and to hearken then the fat of Rams. For, Rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft, and stubborness is as iniquity and idolatry.

Leaving out this first word [for] we shall consider them as an entire and
distinct proposition by themselves [ Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft,
etc.] where we shall first speak something as to the reading and explication of
the words, and so we shall proceed to the more full and particular handling of
the odiousness of this sin of Rebellion from the words.

Rebellion (...) some read it pugnare, (...)
to fight is as the sin of witchcraft, which if meant of fighting either
against God the King of Heaven, or against our earthly King, is the same in
sense with our Translation, which has more properly rendered it, Rebellio,
Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft: of Rebellion there are several sorts:
Rebellion may be considered as a Genus with several species contained under it.

There is a Rebellion against God, Several sorts of Rebellion.
the God of Heaven, the King and Sovereign of all the world, when God who is
the great King and Sovereign of Heaven and earth does lay his Commands upon the
children of men, and they shall follow their own counsel, prefer their own
humors and wills before the will and command of God their Sovereign,
pertinaciously prosecuting the Dictates of their own wicked hearts in
opposition to the known, just, holy, righteous commands of God. This is
Rebellion against the God of Heaven and King of all the earth. There is
likewise a Rebellion against the earthly God, Psalm. 82.6.7.
for so the lawful Kings and Magistrates of the earth are called Gods. I have
said yea are Gods, but ye shall dye like men, this may be called for
distinction sake a Civil Rebellion, as being against the civil Magistrate and
earthly King, (though otherwise it is uncivil enough) when persons will kick
and spurn against their King whom God has set over them, and will not be
governed by the laws of their Sovereign though never so equitable, and
agreeable to the Laws of God, but will be perverse, restless in their designs
and attempts to throw down Magistracy to destroy their King and Sovereign, to
bring all (as of old) into a rude Chaos, and Hellish confusion; this is civil
Rebellion, and yet this Rebellion against an earthly King if collaterally
considered is also Rebellion against the King of Heaven, whose Vicegerent the
earthly King is, and to whom we stand obliged by the Law of the great God: Of
Rebellion several degrees.
of this Rebellion against our earthly King and governors there are likewise
several Degrees, some of a higher nature, some of a lower, some being
contrivers, projectors, and actors of Rebellion, others abetters and
well-wishers; now for a man or woman any way to abet, encourage, or wish well
in their hearts to such Rebellious designs, to the success of such Rebellious
designs and practices, this is also Rebellion though of somewhat a lower
degree then the other. Now Samuel tells us from the Lord that Rebellion is as
the sin of withcraft: (...) quasi peccatum ariolandi, (...) Vulg. Ar. Mont.
some translate it, as the sin of south-saying: Ar: Mont. peccatum divinationis
the sin, or as the sin of Divination, and so the word (...) does properly
signify Divination, a dealing with the Devil in the black art, Rebellion is as
divination, or as Witchcraft, for this Divination here, is properly such as is
by the help of the Devil, and so Witchcraft.

1. Rebellion is [as] the sin of Witchcraft, some there are that think this to
be a sicut aequalitatis, an [as,] of aequality, as if here Rebellion (by the
spirit of God) should be set forth unto us to be a sin of as heinous a nature
as the sin of Idolatry.

2. Others there are that take it to be a sicut similitudinis, an [as] of
similitude or likeness. Aq. 2.2dae Q. 105. A. 2. 1m.
so Aquinas, Comparatio non aequalitatis sed similitudinis, quia inobedientia
redundat in contemptum Dei, sicut and Idololatria, licet Idololatria magis. A
comparison or [As] not of equality, but of similitude or likeness, because
Rebellion does redound unto the contempt of God, as Idolatry does, though
Idolatry more.

And (...) stubborness as iniquity and Idolatry, (...) Taken verbaliter and
nominaliter. Burdors. Ar. Mont. Vulg. Iun. and Trem.
the word in the Heb. may be taken either verbaliter as a verb in Hiphil, or
nominaliter, as a noun, and is both ways used in Scripture. Wherefore some
translate it verbally, and transgredi, to transgress, as iniquity and
Idolatry: others translate it nolle acquiescere, not to be quiet, is as
iniquity and Idolatry: others translate it nominaliter as a noun, repugnantia;
so Iun. and Trem. the language will bear both, and they all come to the same
sense and meaning, to transgress, not to be quiet, or stubbornness, a persons
persisting in his own wicked way, obstinately and stubbornly to the disturbance
of the peace of Church and State, prosecuting his own fancy and humor in
contradiction to the Law of God and man; this [stubborness] is as iniquity and
Idolatry [is as iniquity,] (...) Ar. Mont Note.
(...) Ar. Mont. translates (...) here mendacium stubbornness is [a lye] and so
the word will bear very well; which does serve to set forth the nature of
Rebellion and stubbornness. Rebellion is a lie, it is a lie as being contrary
to the Command of God, and giving God the lie; and it is a lie in respect of
the contrivers, plotters, and practisers of Rebellion, for whilst such persons
do usually please themselves with great success in this their stubborn humor,
for the most part God does blast them, and so in the effect of it, it is a lie.

If we look into Scripture, Genesis 15.16.
we shall sind all sin and unrighteousness to be called (...) iniquity. So
Genesis 15.16. the [iniquity] of the Amorites is not yet full. So Romans 4.7.
So Romans 4.7. blessed are they whose (iniquities) are forgiven. But in this
sense, how stubbornness may be said to be as Iniquity, is not easy to conceive,
and therefore by (...) iniquity, some understand the aberration of men from the
right rule of Gods worship, (and in that it is here joined with Idolatry this
to me seems to be the most genuine and proper interpretation of it) and
answerable to this translate it Superstitio; and sicut Superstitio repugnantia:
Iun. and Trem.
and stubborness as Superstitition and idolatry: and here, it is very
considerable that whereas our generation of Rebell's started up among us, Note.
make I know not what suppositions, and suspicions concerning the introducing
of superstition and idolatry, as the pretended ground of their Rebellious
designs and practices; they hereby fall into as bad a sin, or at least a sin
bearing great likeness and resemblance to this superstition and Idolatry, they
seem so much to abhor and detest: for Rebellion and stubborness is as
superstition and Idolatry: [ and Idolatry (...) and Teraphim the word i^ in the
Hebrew in Judge 17.5. (...) 17. Judge. 5.
it is there said that Micah had a house of Gods, and made an Ephod and
Teraphim, now these Teraphim were a special sort of images, distinguished by
that name from all other sort of images, 2 Kings. 23.24. 2 Kings 23.24.
Moreover the workers with familiar spirits, and the wizards, and the images
(the word in the Hebrew is the Teraphim) and the idols did Josiah put away. It
seems these images called the Teraphim had the shape of men. 1 Samuel 19.13. And
Michael took an image (or Teraphim) and laid it in the bed. 1. Sam. 19.13.
This had the shape of a man, and it is more then probable they made use of
these Teraphim as oracles, and received from them answers what to do in
doubtfulcases. Ezekiel. 21.21. 21. Ezekiel. 21.
Where it is said that the King of Babylon stood in the parting of the way, and
used divination, and consulted with Images, or Teraphim: so Zach. 10.2. the
Idols or Teraphim have spoken vanity; Zach. 10.2.
so that here, the meaning of the expression in the Text, seems to be this;
stubbornness is as Idolatry or Teraphim, as if a man went to an image where the
Devil does fill the Image, or speak in the Images, it is as the consulting with
the Devil, and worshipping the very Devil himself, thus stubbornness is as
superstition and Idolatry,

The words you see are a famous portion of Scripture wherein the Lord himself
does set forth the odiousness and devilishness of the sin of Rebellion. Which I
shall handle chiefly as relating to our earthly King and show you how it is as
the sin of Witchcraft and Idolatry. I shall not alter the words, they are an
entire proposition, That Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft and stubborness
as iniquity or superstition and Idolatry; now here in the prosecution of the
Text and proposition, I shall first show you the similitude or resemblance
between the sin of Rebellion and the sins of Witchcraft and Idolatry,
Resemblance between Rebellion and Witchcraft and Idolatry.
and then I shall give answer to the pleas and pretenses of those who carry on
Rebellious designs and practices among us: and so we shall come unto the
Application.

First, the Resemblance between the sin of Rebellion and the sins of Witchcraft
and Idolatry. Now these two sins of Witchcraft and Idolatry do in several
things agree, where I shall speak of them jointly and show you how Rebellion is
as the sin of Witchcraft and Idolatry. There are some things wherein these two
sins of Witchcraft and Idolatry differ from each other: and here I shall speak
of them distinctly and show you the resemblance that this sin of Rebellion does
bear to either of them.

First to show the Resemblances between the sin of Rebellion and the sins of
Witchcraft and Idolatry, Jointly.
jointly, take this in 5. particulars.

First, Witchcraft and Idolatry, Rebellion against the light of nature.
are sins against the very light of nature; they are both of them sins that the
very light of nature does detect and abhor, very nature will teach that there
is nothing more contrary to God then the Devil; and that God is to be loved,
obeyed, served, and not the Devil according as Witches do leave God, disown
God, and adhere to the Devil to serve him. And as for these Teraphim or
Idolatry, taken as a worshipping of the Images themselves, Idolatry against the
light of nature. Plut. in vita Numae Pompil.
or the Devil in these Images, or the true God by Images, it is also a sin
against the very light of nature it self: and therefore Numa Pompilius
according to the doctrine of Pythagoras (as is noted by Plutarch in his life)
did abhor the worshipping of Images, and the worshipping of the true God by
Images whither made in the likeness of man as these Teraphim, or in any other
likeness whatsoever; yea many of the heathens themselves have scoffed at this
Idolatry and Image worship. This the learned Varre (as Augustine witnesses)
both bewailed and utterly condemned: Sit Walt. Ralegh. Hist. World. p. 166.167.
how it was derided by Seneca is evident speaking concerning these idolaters,
says he Simulachra Deorum venerantur, illis supplicant, genu posito illa
adorant, they worship Images, they pray unto them, with bended knees they adore
them and fabros qui illa fecere contemnunt, and yet despise and contemn those
that made them. Thus likewise did Sophocles teach how pernicious this was unto
the souls of men; it was likewise condemned for impiety by Lyourgus the
Lacedaemonian law giver; nay it was also of old forbidden by the Brachmans in
India. Witchcraft and Idolatry are sins against the very light of nature; so is
Rebellion as Witchcraft and Idolatry, it being a sin against the very light of
nature. Rebellion against God the King of Heaven, Rebellion against our King
and lawful Magistrates is a sin against the light of nature; Rebels against
their King are so many monsters in nature. Very nature shows that without
government the world could not subsist, nay, and that of all Governments none
like to that of Monarchy or Kingly Government; See how in the body natural all
the members of the body have care of each other, but especially of the
principal, which are for the Government of the rest, The head and the heart.
If the head do but ache, it is noted how the humors of the arms run to the
head, and therefore the arms become small and slender, because deprived of
their proper Nutriture; and so if the heart be sick, or in danger, or in fear,
the outward heat retires inward to comfort the heart, so that the body looks
outwardly pale; yea, if the head or heart the ruling and governing members be
in danger, the other members will hazard limb and lise to save them. See we not
by the dictates of nature in the members of the Body natural, what an
unnatural sin Rebellion is? for the members of the same body politic to sight
against their King and Governors: even nature it self shows what a care all
the members of the body politic should have of their head and Sovereign, and
how unnatural a sin it is to Rebel against their King and supreme Magistrate.
Even the very heathen themselves have been sensible of the vileness of this sin
though they never saw beam of Gospel. light.

It is reported of the old Kings of Peru that they were wont to use a Tassel or
Fringe made of red wool which they wore upon their heads, Levinus Apollon. de
Regno Peruano apud Spencer. Floril.
and when they sent any Governor to rule as Viceroy in any part of their
Country, they delivered unto him one of the threads of their Tassel, and for
one of these threads he was as much obeyed as if he had bin the King himself.
Obedience to the King that God does set over us, is a duty so natural as that
even the Heathens were easily drawn to it, but by one poor Thread. Sure then
Stubbornness and Rebellion in any, so as that they will not be drawn to
Allegiance and Obedience without Ropes and Halters must needs be eminently
against the very light of nature it self, Rebellion contempt of God.
and thus Rebellion is as Witchcraft and Idolatry.

Secondly, Witchcraft and Idolatry are sins which do both of them cast contempt
upon the Majesty of Heaven. What greater contempt can there be from a husband
to his wife, then to leave the bosom of his wife and embrace a whore, or from
a wife to her husband, then to leave her husband and follow strangers? The
like, and worse contempt to the Majesty of Heaven are the sins of Witchcraft
and Idolatry: thy maker is thy husband, says God, by his Prophet, to leave
God, and cleave to the Devil, as all Witches and Idolaters do, is to contemn
the Sacred Majesty of Heaven in the highest degree. Now in this respect is the
sin of Rebellion as the sins of Witchcraft and Idolatry, it being a high
contempt of the great God, the same God that made us, is he that has also made
and appointed Kings and civil Magistrates to rule over us; 13. Romans 1. V. 5.
the same God that made us is he that has commanded allegiance and obedience
to them, and that for Conscience sake: 13. Romans 5. to rebel against the King
is not only contempt to the person of an earthly King, but high contempt to God
the King of the world, Rebellion more peculiarly a Devilish sin.
by whose appointment it is that Kings reign. And thus Rebellion is as the sins
of Witchcraft and Idolatry.

Thirdly, Witchcraft and Idolatry are sins desperately, and more peculiarly
above other sins, Devilish, and Diabolical. They are sins that smell more of
Hell then other sins do. As for Witches it is known by their own confessions
that they are in compact with the Devil, he has them in special bonds above
other sinners of other ranks and degrees. And so for Idolaters they have more
immediate relation to the Devil then others, and the Teraphim were Images in
which the Devil spoke, and by which they consulted with the Devil, as has bin
showed before. Thus is Rebellion as the sin of Witchcraft and Idolatry; it
being nothing else but an instigation of the Devil, who to his power is as much
for murder and confusion as God is for love and for order. Rebellion is a sin
that does more smell of Hell then other sins, as Witches and Idolaters are most
like unto the Devil, so are such as rebel against their King and Magistrates,
and endeavor to throw down civil and Ecclesiastical Government: The first
Rebel against his King was the Devil. Who rebelled against his God and King,
this was the Devils sin, and as Witches and Idolaters drive a peculiar trade
with Hell, so do Rebels the same. Rebellion is a special Trade driven with
Hell, and is a sin eminently transforming persons into the likeness of the
Devil himself. Thus Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft and Idolatry.

Fourthly, Rebellion a plague as well as fin.
Witchcraft and Idolatry are not only sins but extraordinary plagues too.
Witches and Idolaters are the very plagues of a Nation, thus is Rebellion as
Witchcraft and Idolatry: Rebels are the woeful plagues of a Nation. What greater
plague can light upon a Nation then the plague of Sedition and Rebellion, a
plague which strickes immediately at the very life and Vitals of Church and
State. Like as it is in the members of the body natural, a man may loose an
arm, an eye, a leg, etc. and yet the body live, but the head cannot be
struck off without present death. It was not without good advise that the
Israelites preferred the life of David their King above ten thousand of their
own lives, 2 Samuel 18.13.
ten thousand of them might loose their lives, and yet the life of the body
politic continue, if inferior members be cut off, the body may live and do
indifferently well, but if the head be taken off, if the King through Rebellion
be laid aside, if Magistrates and Governors in Church and State laid aside,
actum est de Republica, actum est de Ecclesia. That Church and State cannot
long stand, thus Rebellion is as the sins of Witchcraft and Idolatry.

5. Rebellion a spreading sin.
Witchcraft and Idolatry are sins of an exceeding spreading nature, all sins
are spreading, but above others, these sins are spreading and infectious, one
Witch will make a great many as has been experienced and confessed; and as for
Idolatry, we see through the word of God in many examples of what a spreading
nature it is. How soon were thousands of the Israelites infected with Idolatry
when Moses was in the Mount? How soon did this spread over the ten tribes of
Israel? and how is it at this day spread over great part of the Christian
World? it were easy to enlarge upon it, in this, Rebellion is as the sin of
Witchcraft and Idolatry; Odious and abominable to God, as these sins are. How
suddenly will seeds of sedition and Rebellion spring up? How soon will a few
Rebell's increase, and cover a whole Nation: Number. 6 Particularly.
one Corah with a Rebellious design soon draws in two hundred and fifty into
his Rebellious Conspiracy.

Secondly, I come now to show you more particularly, and distinctly, wherein
this sin of Rebellion is as the sins of Witchcraft and Idolatry.

And first, wherein Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft: Rebellion as
Witchcraft.
now Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft in three particulars, First in the
cause of it, Secondly in the natural effects of it, Thirdly in the prognostic
of it.

First, In the cause or ground of it, In the cause.
the cause or ground of Witchcraft for the most part is extraordinary spleen,
malice, inveterate Envy and irreconcilable hatred conceived against a person.
This upon experience has been found true, and been confessed by several that
have been Witches and Wizards, and have dealt in this vile, unnatural way with
the Devil; when they have been asked how they came to be Witches, they have
confessed that they had upon injury received, etc. conceived implacable malice
and hatred against some person on whom they sought Revenge, but had not power
to accomplish it, on which occasion Satan has appeared unto them, and has
upon conditions and Contract between them, to satisfy their envious and
malicious humor given them his assistance. Now in respect of the cause and
ground of this sin, Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft; the cause and ground
of it being Ambition, and Envy, stirring up inveterate hatred and malice, and
so seeking of revenge on those persons whom they have thus hated, see this in
those notorious Rebell's you read of in the Numb. 16. Number. 16
where you read of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and their adherents, for it seems
they had made a considerable party to carry on their Rebellion. Two things at
present I shall touch concerning this design, first their design and project,
secondly the cause and ground of it.

First, Their design and project was Rebellion against their Superious and
Governors, their Magistrates and Ministers. Verse. 3.
Verse. 3. They gathered themselves together against Moses and Aaron. Moses was
their Magistrate, Gods Vicegerent, he that under God did Rule and Govern the
Civil State; Aaron was their Priest, and chief Minister, now these persons lay
a Rebellions design, they gather together and rise up against Moses and Aaron,
their magistrates and Ministers, as our late Rebell's against the King their
lawful Magistrate, and against the Ministry and Rulers of the Church.

Secondly, And what was the ground of this Rebellion against their Governors
in Church and State? the cause and ground of this was the very same as the
ground of Witchcraft, [Envy] they saw how Moses and Aaron were honored by the
people; because they were above and themselves below, because they moved in the
higher Orb of Government, and themselves, in the lower Orb of Subjection,
hereupon they Envyed them for that state of Superiority wherein God had set
them, and hence their Rebellious design and practices. All their fault was, God
had advanced Moses and Aaron, not that they had opposed God, or hurt Israel, so
that indeed the trouble of the Rebels, was not the badness of their
Governnours, but the goodness of God. this you have clearly expressed Psalm.
106.16. Psalm 106.16.
They Envyed Moses in the Camp, and Aaron the Saint of God. Thus is Rebellion
as the sin of Witchcraft in respect of the cause and ground of it.

Secondly; Effects.
Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft in respect of the proper effects of it:
what is the proper work and business of Witches? are they not altogether bent
upon mischief? Casting away of Ships, making away their neighbors cattle,
murdering their neighbors against whom they have conceived spleen and hatred,
these are the natural and proper effects of the sin of Witchcraft, in which
respect Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft; for what is the work of
Rebell's, their natural and proper work, but to fire, and kill; slay, murder,
massacre, and to do all manner of Hellish wickedness.

Thirdly, Inrespect of its Prognostic.
Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft in regard of the prognostic:
Witchcraft, of any sin next that against the Holy Ghost is the brand of a vild
reprobate Wretch given over to destruction and Damnation. Gods power is
infinite, but scace in an age that you hear of a Witch, converted; so near is
the Conjunction between Witches and the Devil, that it is hardly to be found
where any of them are convinced of their sin, reduced, converted. In this
respect also is Rebellion as the sin of Witchcraft it is a woeful Prognostic
of a Reprobate wretch and firebrand of Hell one destined to Damnation, when
given up to the sin of Rebellion and stubbornness. Mistake me not, I undertake
not positively to determine of the eternal State of every one that has a
finger in Rebellious designs and actions, nor any way dare I undertake to
limit God as if he were not able to make a Traitor, a good Subject, and a Rebel
to become Loyal; he that is Almighty can do all things, yet I know not through
the Scriptures many more dangerous Prognostics of a firebrand of Hell, and one
given up to a Reprobate sense then for one to be a Rebel against God and his
King, against Governors of Church and state. 1 Io. 3.15. Romans 13.2. Thus you
see more particularly how Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft.

I now come to show distinctly how this sin of Rebellion and stubborness is as
the sin of Idolatry, Rebellion as Idolatry. Rebellion looks like Religion.
now this will eminently and evidently appear in this one particular; (for I
shall forbear lanching out farther into these resemblances, least I be
prevented in what I have further to deliver) Superstition and Idolatry of all
sins is a sin that carries the fairest Varnish of Religion upon it, in so much
that many are deceived, and take Superstition and Idolatry for true Religion
and Piety: as I doubt not many may be deluded to take Rebellion for Religion.
Idolatry I say is a sin that carries a brave varnish and high pretenses of
Religion upon its and so does this sin of Rebellion, it is a sin for the most
part Varnished with Religion, it is an old trick of the Devil to varnish over
the vilest actions with Religion; fair glozing words, Saint like words, and
pretenses to carry on his Hellish designs. In nomine Domini incipit omne
malum, but especially this evil of Sedition and Rebellion, you know how it is
with the Papists, those Idolatrous Rebels, who will kill Kings and tell you
they do God good service, murder Magistrates and all under a notion of
Religion. Cambd. Eliz.
It is observed by Cambden concerning Parsons that Arch Traitor and Rebel,
when he was hatching mischief against his King and Country, set forth as if he
had bin wholly made up of devotion an excellent piece of Christian Resolution)
and now, for Zions sake, I will not hold my tongue, says one, so says
another, so a third: Zion at the tipp of the tongue, and Babel at the root of
the heart. Religion without, Rebellion within; so, Number. 16.3.
those Rebels before mentioned, Numb. 16.3. their design was foul; but their
pretense was fair: yea take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation are
holy every one of them, and the Lord is among them. Wherefore lift you up your
selves against the Congregation of the Lord? See here, how Religion is the
cloak, for their Rebellion against Moses and Aaron. Religion was all the Cry,
but Rebellion was all the design. This was the Snake under the grass. Idolatry
is a sin that carries a fair show of Religion upon it; thus Rebellion comes
under the mask of Religion and holiness. Thus you see the first thing promised
sc. How Rebellion is as Witchcraft and Idolatry: by which you may see what a
heinous and odious sin, the sin of Rebellion is.

I now come to the second thing promised, and that is to give answer unto the
several pretenses under which many in the world carry on, their Rebellious
designs and practices, to the ruin of King and Country, Church and State, as
much as in them lies. 1. Pretense for Rebellion wickedness of Governors.
Which I mention, and answer not so much for the [strength] of their Arguments,
as for the [weakness] of many Christians who are deluded and cheated by these
fair pretenses. I shall particularly speak to four.

And first, the first pretense for Rebellion is usually the naughtiness of the
person or persons governing in Church or State. A Generation there are that
take upon them to whisper into the Ears of one another, as if our Like that of
the Donatists vid. apud Aug. cont. petil, l. 2. c. 92. p. 174.175.176. in 8.
whom S. Aug. answers at large. Answer.
King were a wicked King, and as if our Bishops that are now to govern the
Church were wicked men, and therefore they look upon it as their duty, to
remove such Governors as these are. Now, I shall say some thing particularly
to this pretense, and show you the falsehood of it, and the unwarrantableness of
this ground to raise sedition, and to Rebel against our King and Governors
Civil or Ecclesiastical.

I shall chiefly speak to this as Relating to our Sacred Sovereign. If a
private person and neighbor be prejudiced we are bound in our places to
vindicate him, when but his private good name is taken away, much more when
there are such wicked suspicions and whisperings concerning our King, are we
bound to vindicate him, these tending to the prejudice of the whole Church and
State.

And first, for any thus to speak or whisper directly or indirectly concerning
his Majesty, thereby to stir up sedition or Rebellion, is highly uncharitable,
usurping the place of God, who alone is able to search or judge the heart of
any, no man is able to reach the heart, it is uncharitable for to judge upon
light grounds any man to be wicked, much more his King.

2. As to what some would be surmizing and whispering, as to his Majesty's
introducing of Popery, if they were not wilfully blind, his Majesty's standing
fast to the Protestant Religion, when under so great Temptations to the
contrary, is sufficient evidence rationally to clear him of that; nor can it
rationally or honestly be in the least suspected by any that he should be
Popish, whom the greatest and strongest temptations could never shake.

3. Me thinks the extraordinary workings of God for his Majesty, the many
Miraculous deliverances wrought for him, Gods Miraculous Restoration of him,
should be some ground to think that God would scarce have wrought so
Miraculously for one whose heart is not right toward him; God does not usually
such great things, nor is at the expense of such strange deliverances for those
who have not some more then ordinary Relation to himself.

4. If the tree be known by its fruits, methinks his Majesty's Christian care
of Religion since his Restoration, his faithfulness in keeping promise, his
Integrity in governing by Laws and Councels; his incomparable meekness, and
gentleness, to the worst of his Enemies; his unparalleld Charity toward those
that have most provoked him; his readiness to forgive and pardon so many
thousands sometime desperately engaged against him, against whom he had so
strong an advantage: these visible fruits might be sufficient evidences of the
goodness of the Tree that bears them, had we but eyes to see them, and were
not above measure censorious and uncharitable.

5. Suppose indeed, a King were never so wicked, as Rebels will be ready to
pretend, what then? must we therefore Rebel against him, and swim through a Sea
of Blood to dethrone him? must we take Gods work out of his hand? is it not a
work peculiar to God, I say, peculiar to God, and God alone, to set up, or cast
down from the Throne? I am sure the Scripture gives it to God as his special
Prerogative, Know therefore (least any of you should be deluded) that it is
unlawful for any subjects to Rebel against their King under pretense or
surmize that he is a wicked Governor. Should he be wicked? Pray for him as a
Christian subject, Rebel not against him, that is the Devils work. That is a
considerable expression of David: Psalm. 119. v. 161. Ps. 119. v. 161. Note.
Princes have persecuted me without a cause, but my heart stands in awe of
thy word. Mark what he says, Princes have persecuted without cause; Saul, (to
whom this speech of David very likely does relate he did persecute David to the
high, he hunted him up and down as a Patridge upon the mountains, he sought all
ways to ruin him, and this without cause too, David never gave him any just
occasion so to do; what then? does David say Saulis a wicked King, and
therefore I will make a party and rebel against him, and dethrone him? It is
not fit for such a wicked man to reign or be in such a place; do you ever
hear any words of this nature fall from David's mouth? nay, though he was
himself by extraordinary commission from the Lord anointed to be King, yet, not
such a word; no, no, David renders not evil for evil, but overcomes evil with
good; when he had Saul in his power and might have slain him, Nay, and was
thereunto instigated by his servants, yet he would not, he detested, he
abhorred it; when he had but cut off the lapp of his Garment, Oh how did his
conscience smite him? What a Hell then may we imagine would David have had in
his conscience had he cut of his head. No, God forbid that I should touch the
Lords anointed. David's heart stood in awe of Gods word which told him, as he
answered his men, That it was not lawful for him to touch the Lords anointed.

What says Daniel to that wicked Idolatrous King Darius, 6. Dan. 21. Oh King
live for ever; 6. Dan. 21. Note.
though a wicked King, yet, Oh King live for ever; though an Idolatrous King,
yet, O King live for ever; Though one that forced others to Idolatry, yet, O
King live for ever. Though one that had unjustly cast him into the Lions Den,
and offered him personal injury, yet, O King live for ever. He did not
therefore make a party to Rebel against him, because he was thus, nor did he
seek to throw him out of his Throne, what was Casar but a wicked King, an
Idolatrous King? nor yet does King Jesus instigate or stir up any to Rebel
against him. So that you see that pretense of the wickedness of a King or
Supreme Magistrate is not a sufficient ground of Rebellion, which Pretense,
yet, we have great cause to conclude is desperately wicked and false as to our
particular case.

And as to our Ecclestastical Governors. The Bishops, whereas the pretense of
their wickedness must be a cloak for Rebellion, the like might be said to these
as to the former, it is highly uncharitable to judge those of them to be so,
whom we know not nor never so much as saw their faces most of us, and as to
some of them I shall be bold to say, that it is most notoriously false; nor
dare I believe other, but that some of them are of such eminent Piety and
integrity, that the very Devil himself cannot have the impudence to call them
wicked. But, if they were, yet the impersection of the person, destroys not
the sunction, nor is it any just cause wherefore any should raise Sedition and
Rebellion, and such will do well to consider who are over free in words of this
nature (for many will presume to lash their Ecclesiastical Governors, who will
scarce dare to do the same to their Civil Governor) that it is no small sin to
revile a private Christian, but much more to revile Gods Ministers the
Shepherds of our souls.

A second Pretense of some for Rebellion is the business of Ceremonies, 2.
Pretense Introduding of Ceremonies, etc.
Common Prayer, and way of worship which some count and call Popish, and hence
take occasion to inveagle silly people to sedition and Rebellion against their
Governors God has set over them, and the Government they ought to subject
themselves unto, under the notion of throwing down these at least the
Reformation of them, too great pretense is made for Rebellion.

England, or the form of public Prayer are contrary to the Scriptures, that
some of them being used in the Church of Rome, should undeniably prove them
Popish is an Argument so weak that it needs no answer; the rule we are to go by
is to find whither there be any thing in the word of God against them; for else
I know not why we may not eat a meal dressed Italian fashion, supposing there
be no poison in the meat nor sauce, no doubt the Church of Rome may have
something good in her, if we retain what is good and not contrary to the
Scriptures shaking off what is bad, and contrary to the same I see not but that
the charge of Popery is false, irrational, and unchristian.

Secondly, It is a pitiful piece of rashness to cry down that for
superstitious, and Popish which we our selves do not presently understand.

Thirdly, But suppose indeed, something smelling of Superstition be attempted
to be introduced, is this a sufficient ground for Sedition and Rebellion? look
into the Text, does not God say, Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, and
stubborness as superstition and Idolatry?

I but it may be you will say it is fit such things should be prevented, and
what is amiss should be reformed.

To this I shall offer these two things.

First, Suspected evils to be prevented in Gods way.
Whatever we would prevent we are every one to labor to prevent in our own
places, those that are private Christians are to endeavor the prevention of
such things they suspect will be a miss, by their prayers, not by Rebellion.
Prayers and tears were wont formerly to be the Christians Arms, not Pikes and
Muskets, and be sure of this, God needs not our sin, Rebellion, Murder,
Bloodshed, Regicide, to uphold or carry on his cause, it is too grossly
reflecting upon his Glorious Majesty, to think or imagine that God cannot do
the work he has to do in the world without our sin, nor has God ever
appointed Rebellion as a way and means for prevention of evils suspected.

Secondly, As to the business of Reformation; if there be any thing amiss,
there is no good Christian but will heartily desire it may be reformed;
Reformation is indeed a fair word, but, alas, who knows not how cunningly,
and closely Rebellion is sheltered under the wing of pretended Reformation.
Where it is truly intended and endeavored in ways warrantable and
Scriptural, it is worthy to be embraced by all; but when pretended for the
better carrying on men's corrupt interests, and is made use of as a Stalking
horse to men's wicked designs, it is no better then (in one word) Diabolical,
nor is this the first time that Rebellion has been masked under pretense of
Reformation, and has not our own time showed us beyond all Contradiction what
has crept in under this Mask, and what has been introduced under this cloak?
was not Reformation some years since pretended as high as any can pretend to it
now? and what was it? did not experience show us? In stead of one faithful
Religious King, had we not a hundred Tyrants? and was this reformation? instead
of one uniform way of serving and worshipping God, had we not all manner of
errors, Heresies, and Irreligions introduced? was not this the reformation?
Instead of order, had we not confusion? and was this indeed Reformation? while
we over furiously contended about the removal of shadows did we not Tantum non
loose the Substance, and our selves too? was not this the reformation? me
thinks the people of England, having so bit upon the Bridle should abhor all
the like Seditious, and Rebellious practices although coming under never so
specious a pretense of Reformation.

Thirdly, 3. Pretense Liberty of Conscience.
A third pretense for Rebellion is Liberty of Conscience, a fair cloak which
many cover over their Rebellious designs withal, and whereby they delude
poor silly people. Conscience is a tender thing, and Liberty is a specious
pretense.



1. That Government we are under does not (as far as I understand) abridge any
person of the liberty of his conscience, so far forth as his conscience is
Regulated by the Rule of the word, you may be as holy as you will, so you keep
in Gods way, and what ever is not in Gods way is no holiness, nor can
conscience be rightly pretended for it.

2, How easy were it to answer ad hominem? and say that indeed there is no such
thing as Liberty of Conscience intended by those that make the highest
pretenses to it; it is nothing but a juggle and cloak for Rebellion, sure were
these persons indeed conscientiously and seriously for liberty of conscience
they would have given more liberty to others when time was; is this their
principle indeed that every Christian ought to have Liberty of Conscience? then
why did they not give liberty of conscience to others, who were as
conscientious in some things as they themselves can pretend to be in others?

3. I might further also give you to know that there is nothing more repugnant
to the Scriptures, dishonorable to King Jesus, destructive to Religion,
pernicious to all good Civil or Ecclesiastical Government, then unbounded
Liberty of Conscience: universal Toleration, and Liberty is most contrary even
to the light of nature, Came Hist. med. lib. 3 c. 18.
the Romans were always careful to retain their Religion and still punished
those that attempted to bring in new worship and superstition, and to the same
purpose was the advice of old Mecanas to Augustus; to punish those that would
of their own heads attempt to bring in innovations into Religious worship, and
so the Scythians as Barbarous as they were, yet upon foresight of the after
claps, might follow if all men were suffered to bring in, and follow after
their own pleasure new devotions, strictly forbad it and severly punished it.
Nothing more directly destructive to the peace of the Church then unlimited
Liberty in matters of Religion. I will appeal unto all that are enlightened
with the least beam of reason, if it be not the highest piece of nonsense in
the world, for any to affirm that the way to preserve the peace of the Sheep
is to tolerate Wolves among them, this universal unlimited Liberty of
conscience is contrary to the law of God, and to the law of nature and not to
be endured into any, much less a Christian Kingdom.

4. It is evident this day, how the pretenders to liberty of conscience make
use of their liberty to the destruction and murder of their neighbors and
therefore high time to restrain and limit them by good discipline, to the rules
of the word.

Fourth, Fourth pretense King Jesus and the Saints Reign.
pretense for Rebellion this odious and devilish sin is King Jesus and his
personal reign on earth. Which pretense makes my heart to tremble within me,
to hear the name of my Lord and master Jesus Christ thus dishonored and
blasphemed by wicked and ungodly men, who entitle the Lord Jesus to their
Rebellion which you have heard is as the sin of Witchcrast. This must be
carried one under pretense that the Saints must rule the earth, and that Jesus
is their King, and I know not what, such filthy stuff not fit to be named.

Vid. Aug de haeresibus.
is nothing else but an Engine of the Devil and an old Heresy, brought into the
Church by Cerinthus and condemned in several Councels; However seducers have
of late again Broached it for new light.

King Jesus a peaceable King. Esai. 9.6.
2. I find, ad so do you that will be impartial that King Jesus was a
peaceable King; he is the Prince of Peace. Esai. 9.6. never was Jesus Christ a
fomenter or abetter of Rebellion: in his nature and by office, he was a Prince
of Peace often pressing to obedience to Magistrates and Governors Civil and
Ecclesiastical; and therefore to entitle King Jesus to Rebellion, is no other
then horrid Blasphemy. As to such persons who make this pretense, I shall be
bold briefly to tell them these two things.

1. That Rebels are not for King Jesus, but for King Lucifer who was a murderer
from the beginning.

2. Such may further know, that it is too probable when the arm of justice has
reached them here, King Jesus will also execute them hereafter without speedy
and present repentance of so horrid Blasphemy and wickedness. And having
spoken something to the undeceiving of the weak. I shall add a word or two of
application and so conclude. The time being so far spent, I shall only touch
upon two uses.

The first shall be by way of Exhortation to beseech you to have a care how you
have any thing to do in this horrid sin of Rebellion; 1. Use. Exhortation.
which is as Witchcraft and Idolatry. Take heed how you are tardy in the least
degree of it, abetting or well-wishing in the least unto it, to press you a
little to this duty of Allegiance to your King, whom God has set over you, I
shall hint briefly at four or five motives. 1. Mot. From positive command.


First, consider how frequently God does urge this duty upon us. Fear God and
Honor the King: honor the King, honor him in thy heart, harbor not
suspicious surmises and jealousies of him, think not he is not as he should be,
because he is not in every thing as thy self; honor him in thy words; speak of
him as becomes a loyal, Religious subject to speak of a Gracious and Religious
Prince; honor him in thy actions yielding actual obedience in all commands
not contrary to the commands of God. Give unto Caesar, says Christ, the things
that are Casars; it is not, Rebel against him, sow sedition to the disturbance
of his Government, but give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's. 13. Romans
Read over the 13th. to the Romans when you come at home; observe how the
Apostle presses obedience to the higher powers; as the ordinance of God. Upon
pain of Damnation dissuading from Rebellion, V. 2. V. 2.
obey your King and that for conscience sake, in obedience to God the King of
Heaven. It is a saying of Irenaeus, Irenaeus adversus haereses Vulentini and
similium l. 5. p. 601.
Cujus jussu homines nascuntur, ejus jussu Reges constituuntur: by whose
command men were made, by his command Kings were appointed. Know therefore you
cannot be loyal subjects unto King Jesus, unless you are loyal subjects unto
your earthly King. The command of God so often reiterated in holy writ should
prevail something with us that are Christians.

A second Motive might be taken from the examples of all Real Saints, 2. Mot.
From the example of the Saints.
never any man that truly feared God, but honored his King. Nor have we any
Scripture ground to believe that that person does truly fear God, who does not
conscientiously honor his King. The Christians of old did always look upon it
as a woeful disgrace to be but suspected for disloyalty to those whom God had
set in Authority over them. Tertullian does therefore in his Apology he made
for the Christians unto the Emperor, Tartull. Apol.
in his days, speak for them all in general, The Christian is no man's enemy,
much less the Emperors. Nor indeed is he worthy the name of a Christian, that
is a Rebel to God and his King; Consider the examples of all the Saints of
old, let these draw you to Loyalty, and dissuade you from the least degree of
Rebellion.

Consider the sad and woeful judgments of God on those that have bin guilty
of this sin of Rebellion; 3. Mot. From Gods judgments on Rebels. Jude 11.
think not so devilish a sin will be let pass without remarkable punishment,
in the 11. of Jude the Apostle does note that those who in his time followed
Corah in the way of Rebellion, did also follow him in the way of Perdition. Oh
what remarkable judgments did God inflict upon that tribe of Rebels? you see
how the very Elements conspired against them, who conspired against there
Governors Civil and Ecclesiastic. Earth opens it is mouth and swallows up
some of them, fire comes from the Lord and consumes others of them, as you read
Numb. 16. at large, Numb. 16. Prove. 24.21.
you will find it, Enemies to Government are in the end greatest Enemies to
themselves. My Son, says Solomon, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle
not with them that are given to change, for their calamity shall arise
suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both. [There calamity shall arise
suddenly.] i. e. there conspiracies and machinations shall speedily and
unexpectedly be discovered, and God and the King will both set themselves in
their power against them. It may be observed through Sacred and other History
that the calamity of no sort of sinners arises so suddenly, unavoidably, and
remarkably, as that of those who are seditious and Rebellious. Few Rebels have
escaped a violent death. Witness those examples, of Absalom, Sheba, Adonijah,
Zimri, Athaliah; what became of Becket, Mortimer, the Percyes, Tyler, Wyar,
etc. did they not come to miserable ends? to say nothing how the Arm of
Justice has of late reached, those who were Rebellious against their late
King. Government, yea, and Kingly Government is Gods ordinance and God will be
avenged upon those who set to a finger to pluck down his Ordinance, as for
those Rebels that talk so much of seeking God, let them know that God will find
them out, nor shall they easily escape his Hand of Justice.

A fourth Motive might be taken from the King, 4. Mot. From his Majesty.
God has set over us, a pious King; a meek King, a King patient of injuries, a
King sent by the Miraculous Providence of God to rule over us, so that if any
Nation may say, God has set a King over them, we may truly say, we have a
King of Gods sending, and what shall any have a Rebellious thought against such
a King?

I might argue from the Church and Nation wherein we live, 5. Mot. From the
Church.
is not the good of both involved in the welfare of the King, and does not his
welfare depend on his Subjects conscientious allegiance to him? and therefore
let me beseech you as you are men, as you are Christians, if any fear of God,
if any love to Christ, if any respect to the Gospel, if any regard to the
Kingdom and Church in which you live, if any care of your selves and the
Eternal welfare of your precious souls, take heed of this odious sin of
Rebellion; give all due honor and allegiance to the King God has set over you.

I shall only add a word or two by way of direction and conclude: 2. Use.
Direction.
wherein I shall lay down two or three helps against Rebellion.

1. Take heed of the sin of Covetousness it is the ground of Rebellion, it
Remember the King and Bishops Lands.
was the sin of Balaam, who for desire of reward proved a Rebel against God,
desire of gain will carry a man to all wickedness; it neither fears, nor
forbears any sinful course, it is the root of all Evil, and has bin the
cause of our seditions and Rebellions of later years.

2. Take heed of pride and Ambition, this is another cause of Rebellion, which
you see in Core and the other Rebels. They would fain have bin Uppermost
themselves, and therefore rise up against Moses and Aaron whom God had set over
them.

3. Chiefly take heed of Seducers, of being led away into erroneous opinions in
matters of Religion. No Rebels like Schismatics and Heretics, above all,
Heresy is the root whence naturally springs Rebellion, and of all persons those
are most cruel in their Rebellions; in the 11. of Jude, you read of the
seduced, 11. Jude.
and Seducers how they went in the way of Cain, the way of Cain, what way was
that? why, the way of hypocrisy, the way of envy, the way of murder, the way of
blood and cruelty. Here I might tell you of the Donatists what cruel Rebels
they were as is noted by Augustine, these pretended much purity, as if there
were no Church in the world but theirs in chat corner of Africa; as many of our
Rebellious persons are upon the same strain. Aug. Cont. Donat.
Aug. relating their cruelty tells us how that among these Donatists, the
masters stood in fear of their servant that was of this Sect, and though their
great plea was for Toleration and Liberty of Conscience, yet when they got
power in their hands never none so cruel as they filling whole Africa with
blood and desolation. Look among the Papists if heresy be not the spring of
sedition and Rebellion, how desperately bent are they against Kings, if not of
their mind making nothing to depose them as they are able, consider that of the
Anabaptists in Germany, was there ever such a crew of bloody, cruel Rebels in
the world, till this crew of our own sprung up of late and not easily to be
paralleld? Nor is it wonder that those who are left of God to Schism, Error,
Heresy, should rise against God by sedition and Rebellion, have a care of
errors in judgment in matters of Religion, this will lead directly in a little
time to Rebellion; oh, therefore you that are gone aside and separated from the
Church, return, return again to that Church from whence you are fallen, they
that will not return to the Church, there is little hope that they will return
to their Allegiance. And thus much I have thought good in duty to my God, in
duty to my Lord and Master King Jesus, in duty to my King, in duty to my
Country, and in duty to your precious Souls, to acquaint you with concerning
the sin of Rebellion out of Gods Word. From which Devilish sin and from all
Plotters and Actors of it, the Lord of his Mercy deliver us.

FINIS.

