A SERMON PREACHED TO THE TWO HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT, At their solemn Meeting to
Praise God for his infinite Mercy in the restoring of the said Houses of
PARLIAMENT to their Honor and Freedom with so little effusion of Blood: At the
Abbey-Church in Westminster, Aug. 12. 1647. By STEPHEN MARSHALL, B.D. Minister
of Finchingfield in Essex.

And David said to Abigail, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee
this day to meet me. And blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou which have
kept me this day from coming to shed blood, 1 Samuel 25, 32, 33. Scatter thou
the people that delight in War, Psalm. 68. 30. London, Printed by R. Cotes for
Stephen Bowtell, at the Bible in Popeshead-Alley, 1647.

Die Veneris, 13 Augusti, 1647.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That thanks be given to Mr.
Marshall, for the great pains he took in the Sermon he preached yesterday
before the Lords and Commons the day of public Thanksgiving: And that he be
desired to print his Sermon with the usual privilege. Sir William Massam is
appointed to give him the Thanks of this House; and to desire him to print his
Sermon accordingly.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint Stephen Bowtell to Print my Sermon:

Stephen Marshall.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Am not ignorant of the truth and weight of that speech of Pliny, Aliud est
scribere uni, aliud omnibus: the same holds of Preaching, it is one thing to
Preach a Sermon to a Congregation, another thing to Preach it to all the world
in Print; especially upon such an occasion as this, and such a season as this,
when the spirit of jealousy and misunderstanding is let loose, and men's
hearts as tinder ready to catch and kindle at every spark; yet since you are
pleased to conceive that this plain Sermon may be useful to others, and
thereupon to order my publication of it, I humbly obey your Order, desiring the
Lords blessing to accompany it so far as to make men wisely consider the
wonderful works of God, and return to him the glory due unto his name; The
same Lord watch over you, sanctify you and guide all your consultations, that
you may be his blessed instrustruments to make this Land a quiet habitation
for his people, and a place which himself may delight in: This is the daily
prayer

Of your humble servant in the Lords work S. M.

A THANKSGIVING-SERMON PREACHED To the Two Houses of Parliament, August 12.
1647.
JOSHVA 22. part of the 33 Verse. And the Children of Israel blessed God, and
did not intend to go up against them in battle, to destroy the Land wherein
the children of Reuben and Gad dwelt.
WE are this day assembled to bless Introduction.
and praise the name of God for his Showing the suitableness of the Text to
the occasion*
infinite Mercy, in restoring the two Houses of PARLIAMENT to their Honor and
Freedom, with so little effusion of Blood; and for keeping the great CITY and
ARMY from dashing one against another. And I (being called to this Service) did
endeavor to find out a Text suitable to this Mercy, because a word spoken in
season, is like Apples of gold in pictures of silver; A Sermon suited to the
occasion of Time, and Place, and Persons, is not only more acceptable, but
profitable: But I confess, that in all the Book of God I could not find one
instance where his own People were so near imbruing their hands in each others
blood, and God so wonderfully appearing to prevent it, as in this our case;
this that I have read comes the nearest to it of any other; for here were
Brethren of the same Country, and of the same Religion, who had for a long
time been engaged in one common War against Enemies which God had subdued
before them; and there remained nothing, but for them quietly to settle
themselves in the fruition of all the good that God had wrought for them; and
now in the very close of all, they were ready to destroy themselves, and devour
one another upon mistakes and jealousies, when no other Enemy could do it; and
we have here also a most blessed end of it by a Treaty, wherein God did so
remove all stumbling blocks, that The sum of this Chapter from verse ^0* to the
end.
their hearts were firmly united, and they joined together to bless God, and
resolved not to go to War.

Which, that it may be the more profitable to you, I pray take a very brief
view of the Story: When the A discord between the two Tribes and half and the
other Tribes.
Wars were ended in the Land of Canaan, the two Tribes and half, the Tribes
(I mean) of Reuben and Gad, and half the Tribe of Manasseh, whose habitation
and possession lay on the other side of Jordan, were now to return home, and
their brethren had dismissed them with a blessing; but before they got out of
the country there fell out an occasion of a quarrel and discord between
Wherein two things.
them and their brethren, which begins about the tenth verse of this Chapter,
and all the rest of the 1
Chapter is a discourse about that discord and jarre that The original of this
quarrel.
grew between the nine Tribes and half, and the two Tribes and half; wherein
there are these two things, First, the Original of the quarrel, or the causa
procreans, what the difference was betwixt them; Secondly, causa corrumpens,
the composure of it, the making an end of it: The original of the quarrel,
briefly was this, the two Tribes and half when they came upon the banks of
the River Jordan, did there build an Altar every way like to the Altar of God,
which by Gods appointment was to stand before the Arc, and the Tabernacle,
upon which only the Israelites were to offer their Sacrifices; This news was
presently carried to the rest of the Tribes, and they looked upon it, as if
their brethren had built an Altar to offer Sacrifice to God, which had been
Crimen apostasiae, an Apostasy from then true Religion, and they resolved
presently in this quarrel to 2
engage their lives, and appoint a general Rendezvous The making up of this
breach or quarrel.
at Shiloh where the Arc of the Covenant was, here they all met as one man
togoe up to war against them; here was their Quarrel; the rest of the Chapter
is the taking up of this quarrel, and that was done by a Treaty, the sum
whereof in a few words, is this, the Tribes did send ten men, one for every
Tribe, and with them they sent Phinehas the son of Eleazar the Priest, they
go as Commissioners to their Brethren, and when they come to them they first
expostulate the greatness of the sin, which they thought they were
committing, they show them the mischief that would come of it, not only
destruction upon themselves, but upon all the whole Congregation, unles they in
the name of God should revenge it: this they prove by the example of the
iniquity of Peor, from which they were not yet cleansed, and by the instance of
Achans sacrilege, which brought wrath upon all the Congregation of Israel, but
withal they request them, that if they thought their land was unclean, because
they had not among them those pledges of Gods presence, the Arc and Testimony,
which their brethren had, that they would leave that Country where they should
be exposed to such temptations, and with all their hearts, they would part with
a portion of their own inheritance, that they might live together as brethren.
To this the Tribes and half make answer; First, they do solemnly call God to
witness, that they were far from being guilty of that which was laid to
their charge, it never came into their thoughts to build an Altar to offer
Sacrifice, they pleaded not guilty. Secondly, they tell them the true reason
of that fact of theirs, namely they were afraid lest the Generations to come,
might occasion their posterity to fall off from the true worship of God, when
the rest of the Tribes should tell them that Jordan was the bounds of Gods
peoples inheritance, and so they be cast off as people that were not within
the Communion of Saints: hereupon they resolved to build this Altar, that it
might be a pledge, and that the generations to come might plead it, that this
was set up at the time, when the wars ended, to remain as an evidence that
they and their brethren were all one, both in Nation and Religion. Which as
soon as the Commissioners heard, they rejoiced, they concluded God was amongst
them, and they return home and acquaint their brethren with it, who when they
heard it were all well pleased; The thing pleased the Some general
observations our of this story.
children of Israel, and they blessed God, and resolved they would have no
war with their brethren.

Here is the Sum of the Story, and in this story there are very many
excellent things for our instruction: This Altar built on the banks of Jordan,
is much debated of in the dispute of humane significant ceremonies in the
worship of God or for religious use. Whether such ceremonies may be justified
by this example, is very disputable, but without any dispute, here are many
notable examples of Piety; it was a great example of Piety in the two Tribes
and half, that they were so desirous to provide that their posterity might
not be deprived of the Communion of Gods people in his Ordinances.

And a great example of Piety there is in this, that they were so ready by (not
only Protestations, but) Oaths to clear themselves from any thought of
corrupting the worship of God.

We have also a great example of Piety in the other Tribes, that in such a
cause, as the case of Apostasy from Gods truth, they would not have spared the
lives of their own brethren.

And a great example of Piety was in them, that they were so desirous by all
Arguments, to take them off from any such sinful way, yea to have parted with
their own inheritance to them, rather then they should be exposed to
temptations to Apostasy.

Here are notable examples likewise of justice amongst them; justice in the
Tribes, that before they would believe any informations, or apprehensions of
their brethren, they would send Commissioners to know the bottom of it, to see
whether the things were so; and justice in the Commissioners, that they did so
faithfully relate back to the Tribes the true state of the case, and so to
hinder as much as in them lay the effusion of blood.

Here are likewise some examples of humane frailty, that are not to be
excused; it is not to be excused in the two Tribes and half, that they would
go upon such a dangerous business, which is disputable to this very day,
whether such a thing was lawful to be done, to set up such a way of
instruction or remembrance, that they would go about such a thing which might
prove a stumbling block, and not first acquaint their brethren with their
intentions.

And as great or greater weakness was that in the nine Tribes and half, that
they would almost resolve upon a war, and make preparations for it, upon a
rash and wrong interpretation, before they did so much as know, whether there
were cause or no.

But the greatest document of all the rest in the whole story, is that which
they made the ground of their war, which you will find about the 23. Verse,
That if their brethren had played the Apostates from God in matters of his
worship, the wrath of God would presently fall upon the whole Nation, unless
they had joined together to vindicate the glory of God.

All these and several other Lessons are worth the handling, but I resolve to
make a short Sermon, and therefore wave them all, and confine my self to that,
which is the result, and event of the Treaty, which was a solemn Thanksgiving
to God; They blessed God, and they resolved, not to go to war against their
brethren; the words are clear, and I think need no interpretation; they
blessed God, that their brethren had not committed the sin that they were
afraid they had done; and that therefore the wrath of God was not like to be
kindled against them; and as the close of both these, that God had mercifully
prevented that which they feared, that they should have been compelled to
embrew their hands in one another blood, they blessed God that there was no
cause of fighting. And from this I shall (by the Lords assistance) handle this,
and this only lesson.

That it is a Mercy worthy of abundance of praises to God, Doct. It Is a great
mercy when God seasonably appears to prevent his peoples engaging in war one
against another.
when God does seasonably appear to prevent his peoples engaging in one
another blood, when they are near to do it.

This lesson lies clear in the words, 1 In the 31. Verse. as soon as Phinehas
had heard their Apology he tells them, This day we perceive the Lord is among
us, now you have delivered the Children of Israel out of the hand of the Lord.
And all this Congregation here in my Text bless God and intend not to fight,
they rejoiced because the ground of a war was prevented; and for further
proof of it, look into a few plain Texts of Scripture, you shall find one
in the 1. of Samuel 26. 1 Samuel 26. 32.
about the 32. Verse. It is an example of David, who upon an unworthy usage of a
Gentleman in the Country, a great man, one Nabal, that had extremely provoked
him, and abused him, had sworn that he would cut off his Family, and not
leave a man of them; and in his heat was going to avenge himself, but as he
was in the midst of his march, Abigail Nabals wife meets him, tells him the
story, infinuates into him by her excellent Counsel, endeavors to stop his
hand from his enterprise; now mark how David rejoices in it, though the war
would have been but against one Family, where he was to meet with no
resistance; Blessed be thou of the Lord, and blessed be God that sent thee to
me, and blessed be thy Counsel that has withheld my hand from shedding
blood; he looked upon it as a wonderful mercy, that when he was ready to
engage, God had offered such a fair means to take him off from it. There is
another in the second of Samuel, of a great Soldier 2 Samuel 20.
and General, Joab by name, when he was in the pursuit of one Sheba, that had
played the Rebel and Traitor against his King, Joab had pursued him far, and
now had chased him into a City called Abell, there besieged him and the City
for his sake, with a purpose to batter the Walls down, and to destroy all that
were in the City, as guilty of protecting this villain; very seasonably a
wise woman over the wall calls to Joab, and would know of him, why he would
come to destroy a City of Israel, and so to swallow up a part of the
inheritance of the Lord; now mark Joabs answer, The Lord forbid, says he) God
forbid, it is far from me, that ever I should take any pleasure to devour,
or swallow up; there is no such matter; there is one Sheba a Traitor against
his King, I pursue him only, deliver him up, I am gone, not a man dies amongst
you. You see a Soldier, a man enured to blood, abominates the thoughts of it,
further then necessity compells, to have his hand in the blood of any of Gods
people. This will yet be clearer, if you consider, that the Lord himself
looks upon it, as the saddest judgment, that ever he gives his people up to,
when he suffers them to imbrew their hands in one another blood. Take but one
or two instances, that in the 9. of Isaiah at the 19. verse; Through the wrath
of the Lord (says the Text) Esaias 9. 19, 20. 21.
the Land is darkened, the wrath of God was like a furnace, and the smoke of it
filled all the Land, and the people shall be as fuel to this fire; This was
a terrible judgment which is expressed in such dreadful terms, darkness
and devouring fire are horrid things, nothing more intolerable then these two;
But what was this judgment, or by what means should this fierce wrath of God
be executed? mark the next words, no man shall spare his brother, they shall
snatch on their right hand and be hangry, and snatch on their left hand and
not be satisfied, they shall every man eat the flesh of his own arm,
Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, and both of them
together help to devour Judah; No man ever hated his own flesh, faith the
Apostle, but this people should be so blinded, and so given up to a reprobate
sense, that they should devour and destroy their nearest friends, and eat as
it were the flesh of their own arms. If ever God give up a people to this,
that brethren thus come to engage in one another blood, it is a token that the
wrath of God burns the hottest that it can burn against a Land. Take one
expression more, it is in Jer. 13. 14. I will dash Ier. 13. 14.
them one against another, even the fathers and the sons together, says the
Lord, I will not pity nor spare, nor have mercy, but destroy them; a strange
expression from a God of mercy, whose delight is in mercy, I will not pity,
show no mercy! kill, kill, kill; but how shall this be executed? why, I will
dash them one against another, without any enemy from abroad, there shall be no
need to send for strangers, the father shall destroy the children and children
their fathers, and a man's murderers shall be his neighbors or the men of his
own household; You may by these plainly discern that God accounts it the
terriblest of all judgments to give his people up to destroy each other, and
therefore it must be acknowledged a great mercy to have it prevented.

To this I might add, that in Gods book, those men that are the occasions of
peoples ruining one another are accounted the most ahominable; and they that
endeavor to prevent it, are counted the blessedest men that live; this is one
of the things that Gods soul hates, Even that man that sowes dissension
amongst Prove. 6. 19.
brethren, boutifews and kindle-fires are an abomination to him, and he will
scatter the people who delight in war, he will destroy the Blood-thirsty man:
the Peacemakers that labor to compose and comprize differences, to keep
people from it, are blessed; Blessed are these Peacemakers, they shall truly
he called the Matthew. 5. 9. This Doctrine further cleared by showing three
things.
children of God. But to open this truth more fully, give me leave to clear
these three things.

First, That Bloodshed war is a terrible judgment, wherever it is, fall it
out among whom it will. 1


Secondly, That it is yet a greater judgment, when 2
Brethren come to devour and destroy one another, brethren of one Nation;
Civil wars is a greater judgment then war with Strangers.

Thirdly, and above all. 3


The greatest of all judgments is, when Gods people who are brethren in the
profession of his true Religion, come to imbrew their hands one in another
blood: these things opened it will certainly be concluded, that Gods mercy in
preventing this, is most worthy to be acknowledged. For the first,

That to have a people given up to war, and blood, and 1 War is a sore
judgment.
spoil, is a great plague. You all know in the Scripture it is counted one of
Gods sorest judgments, Ezekiel. 14. 21. When I send my four sore judgments upon
Jerusalem, the Sword, and the Famine, and the noy some Beast, and the
Pestilence to cut off man and beast, the Sword is the first and chief of Gods
sore judgments: It is granted that sometimes war is lawful, and necessary;
and indeed never lawful but when necessary; when as the saying is, Pax populi,
patriaeque salus and gloria regni, when public Safety, Liberty and Religion
have no other way to preserve them under heaven but the Sword, the Sword is
then lawful and then necessary: but however war may sometimes be lawful, it
is always a great judgment, at least to the one part, if not to both; It is
the Idea of all miseries that can befall a Country; nothing thrives where this
Woolfe sets his foot; and he that would have a Land-skip of it, that would
have a representation of war, let him but conceive the burning of houses,
confused noise, garments rolled in blood, ravishing of women and virgins, and
dashing of Infants against the stones, destroy of trade, spoil of wealth,
blood, and wrath, and fury marching every where, a Country like the land of
Eden before the face of man, and nothing but a desolate Wilderness when once
it have walked over it; a Land sown with the seed of man and beast, fruitful
and flourishing, suddenly made an Aceldama, a Golgatha, a Field of blood, or a
place of Sculs, this is war: in a word, if a man would in one short sentence
describe a Country to be most miserable, he need say no more, but hic fuit
hostilitas, War has raged and reigned in this place; our selves, alas, for
these years past, have had so much experience of it, that our women and
children are able now to be Rhetoricians in setting forth the miseries of
war; and is it not a mercy when God will prevent this? But secondly, Look
upon civil wars, and you will judge them a 2 Civil war a greater judgment.
greater judgment, when brethrens Swords come to be drawn against their
brethren; when a man's deadly enemies must prove those that were his old
companions, when Cities are divided among themselves, and Countries among
themselves, and all the miseries of War come to be inflicted by them that
have been acquaintance and dear to us, when safety and shelter may as soon be
expected among enemies as old friends; let all men that have understanding say
whether this does not double, or treble the miseries of war; had it been an
enemy that had done me this displeasure, I could have borne it, but tu Brute,
thou my friend and companion, that these things should come from thy hand! all
men know how deep this sinkes; this tears the heart of man in pieces; Solomon
says, that a brother offended is harder Prove. 18 9.
to be won then a strong City, and they are like the bars of a strong
Castle; it is hard breaking of them, but when once they are divided they are
more hardly joined: as we say of a strong Cord made up of a great many threads,
it is hard to be broken, but when it is broken, you will hard ever sew it again
to make it strong; by how many arguments any did persuade their hearts, that
they should not receive plunder, or spoil, or mischief from such a man, or
family, from so many arguments arises a difficulty, if not impossibility to be
reconciled; and hence arise lasting grounds of animositie, enmity and hatred
scarce ever to be worn out, when upon every meeting this thought is
suggested, This is the man who as an enemy entered my habitation and spoiled my
wealth, it may be murdered my children or parents, ravished my wife or
daughter; add further, that frequently in these civil broils the victory
ends not the occasion or ground of the quarrel, nor takes away but increases
the former misery, the conqueror commonly proving insolent, inhumane, cruel,
and more grievous to the Commonwealth, then the thing or persons were against
whom men have fought, that I may boldly set down for a certain the conclusion
of a wise man, that civil wars are not only a Malady, but a fiery
sickness, even a Frenzy to a State; and how ever God sometimes brings good
out of them, (as sometimes men have better health after a deadly sickness) yet
for the most part, States are never made better, but very often ruined by them;
and when once the seed of it has took deep root in a Land, if God from heaven
do not miraculously appear, that fire burns till all is consumed; And is it
not then a mercy from God seasonably to prevent brethren, when they are falling
into civil wars, thereby to devour and destroy one another? But thirdly,
which is nearest to my Text, and indeed nearest to the occasion of our meeting;

The greatest misery of all miseries in the world is, When Brethren of the same
Religion, when Gods people and 3 War of Gods people one against another the
greatest of all judgments.
servants come to be so far prejudiced against one another, or mistaken,
that they come to imbrew their hands in one another blood; this I say is the
heaviest judgment that ever God powers upon his Church and people. There is
nothing so contrary to Christianity; the Lord Jesus Christ is the Prince of
peace, his holy Spirit Romans 12. 18. Ephesians. 4. 3. Esaias 11. 9.
is a Spirit of peace, his children are all called the children of peace, and
by their Covenant and duty bound to live in peace, if it be possible they must
live in peace with all men, but among one another they must keep the unity of
this Spirit in the bond of peace, there must nothing hurt or destroy in the
Lords holy mountain which is his Church: now when these that are one body have
one spirit, have one Father, one Lord, one hope, one Baptism, one hope of
their calling, one everlasting inheritance prepared for them, that these should
so far deny their Christianity, as to imbrew their hands in one another
blood, and not be content to let one another live and breath on earth, with
whom yet they hope to live eternally and triumphantly in heaven, O qu^a
dementia! Quisialia fando, temperet a lacrymis! who is able to think of it
without horror? what upon earth brings forth so cursed fruits, as war
amongst the people of God? Infinite dishonor to Gods name, when his redeemed,
covenant servants walk so contrary to his rule: Religion becomes a stumbling
block, a thing even therefore abominated by the enemies of it, when the
professors of it shall be looked upon as factious, seditious, turbulent,
bloody, hateful and hating one another, it overthrowes all power of godliness
in their own hearts, when once the grace of Love which nourishes all good in
the hearts of Gods people is overthrown, and the Spirit of God thus quenched
in them, grace decays, and the woeful fruits of Satan and sin prevail over
them, and now they grow corrupt in their minds and conversation, loose from
their God, bitter against their brethren, companions with wicked men, with whom
they join against their brethren, and so leave their Religion, profession and
name, as a curse behind them. Now to have all these prevented, not only war
and civil war prevented, but brethren in Religion, who are the Lords people,
hindered from destroying one another, when God seasonably apppeares to prevent
all this, Is it not a mercy worthy the acknowledgment? To all this I might add
the excellency of the blessing of peace, which is hereby preserved, that
blessing which is the Jewel of the world; yea the unity, peace and love of
the Church and people of God preserved by such a seasonable prevention, which
is such a mercy as no tongne or pen is able to express. Behold how good and
pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in unity; This is Psalm.
133. per torum.
like Aarons garment, this is like the dew upon the mountains of Sion, which
makes every seed and every plant of Gods planting to prosper; where this is,
the Lord commands his blessing, even life for evermore. A large Volume would
not contain what might be said of this precious Jewel, which is hereby
preserved: But all this further cleares it, that it is a mercy worth abundance
of praise, when God seasonably appears to prevent his peoples engaging in
War one against another.

I come now to the Application of it; and there are but three Uses that I shall
make of this Lesson. First, Application.


This Lesson does speak very sadly against several 1 For Reproof of three
sorts.
sorts of People: If it be so great a Mercy, when God will prevent his peoples
destroying one of another; then certain it is a great curse for any to be
guilty of making Gods people destroy one another, that is clear; Therefore al
such are guilty, as are the Moral causes of the destruction 1.
of Gods people in blood and war; I mean, who Of such as live in such sins as
bring down judgments.
live in such sins, as for which God in his righteous judgment, gives the
Sword a commission to come and devour flesh, and to drink blood; such as are
the fins of Idolatry and superstition, Judge. 5. 8. Contempt of the Word, and
Ordinances, and Ministry, Mat. 21. 35. neglecting the day of Grace, Luke 19.
42. unprofitablenesse under the means of grace and Salvation, Esa. 5. 4.
living in sins of blood, Ezekiel. 35. 6. Carnal security, laying nothing to
heart, Jer. 5. 12. abuse of Peace and Plenty, Deuteronomy. 28. 47. trusting in an Arm
of flesh, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. Sabbath breaking, 2 Chronicles. 36. 21. Pride in apparel,
Esaias 3. 16, 25. want of Compassion to them who live and lie under the misery of
war, Amos 6. 67. For these sins, and such as these are, God has threatened to
send a Sword, to avenge himself upon the doers of these things, and upon the
Nations where these live unpunished: and therefore let all such who dare walk
in any of these ways, know, that however they may go for good Patriots
amongst men, when they happen to take the right side in these Public quarrels,
yet before God they will one day be found guilty of the rapine, and blood, and
spoil, and plunder, and all the miseries that War has brought upon us, and if
they repent not of it, let them be assured, it will one day lie at their door,
and they must answer for it. Secondly,

It speaks more terribly against those that are the Physical causes of it,
that directly and properly do endeavor 2.
Of such as are Physical causes, who endevor to engage Gods people in War one
against another.
to widen differences, to divide between King and Parliament, between
Parliament and City, between City and Army, that they may by all means keep
our wounds open; and all this for their own private ends and interests. These
indeed are cursed men; whereas good men would be willing to die for their
Country, a generation of men are found amongst us, that are willing their
Country should perish for them, or perish with them; who are willing to have
the lives and blood of poor Innocents sacrificed to their lusts; as if the
people for whom Jesus Christ thought not his own blood too precious for their
redemption, were no more worth, then to perish like brut Beasts for their
cursed and carnal ends; who, like the Priests of Mars, scatter curses and
firebrands betwixt Army and Army, to provoke and raise their fury; who to their
utmost labor that animofities and divisions, blood and contests be kept on
foot: These Politicians use to take in the differences of Religion which are
found among Gods people, and weave them into their own designs, and pretend to
stand for Religion, and join with this and that party for Religion-sake, and
thereby engage the consciences of such as fear God, when in the mean time
Religion is no part of their care, but only seek to make use of godly men for
their own ends and interests. God will find them out, and reckon with them in
his own time. I Will say no more to them now, but as old Jacob said of his two
sons, Cursed be their rage; the instruments Genesis 49. 56.
of cruelty are in their hands: my glory be not thou associated with them; into
their lot let my soul never come: And let us al pray, that when God comes to
call all men to an account, none of us be ever found among the people that
delight in War. And as these are cursed, so truly there is a third sort are not
to be excused this day: I mean,

Whoever they are, who in stead of rejoicing and enlarging their hearts to
bless God for this his late mercy 3*
Nor are they to be excused who praise not God for the mercy of this day.
showed in preventing the misery and ruin that was coming upon us, have their
hearts even grieved, and cannot look upon the work of this day as that which
deserves praise and thanksgiving to Almighty God: I would not willingly pass
a rash sentence upon any, I know jealousies and misapprehensions have been many
on both sides, and Gods administrations have been so dark, that the Consciences
of many godly men have not been clearly satisfied in the carriage of things;
but however, methinks any man that could look upon the Lords dealing with a
single eye, must needs say, it was an infinite mercy, That God should thus
unexpectedly turn away that torrent of Blood that was coming in upon us: For I
beseech you, for what end should it have been? what good could ever have come
of it? to say nothing of the misery of them that would have had the worst of
it, I am certain who ever had been the Conquerors, must have taken up the
lamentation of the ten Tribes, when they had almost destroyed the Tribe of
Benjamin, in the 21. of Judges: And in Judge. 21. 3.
stead of keeping a day of Thanksgiving must have kept a day of mourning, and
said Alas, alas! O Lord God of Israel, why is it come to pass this day that
there should be one Tribe lacking in Israel? Alas Lord! why is it come to
pass that either the Parliament is destroyed, or alas Lord! why is it come to
pass that the goodly City is destroyed, or alas Lord! why is it come to
pass, that the Army that has done so worthily is destroyed? certainly who
ever had had the best, lamentation and woe would have been written upon every
honest heart; and therefore why all our souls should not be enlarged to
praise God for it, join with those who have their hearts enlarged, I know not:
Nulla salus bello, our fighting could have produced nothing but ruin.

The second and maine use I intended, is, Use 2. To provoke to bless God for
the mercy of this day.


To help you this day to give that glory and praise to God, which the mercy of
this day calls for at all our hands, God has in all our public troubles
watched over us, and appeared in the mount of all our difficulties, and has
hitherto always found out ways, when we could find none, and always come in
with seasonable deliverances, blessed be his name for it, but to my poor
thoughts, never did the Lord give a more seasonable deliverance, and appear
more mercifully to keep us from utter ruin, then in that mercy, which we meet
this day to celebrate, and I think you will judge so, if with me you consider
these four things that meet in it: First, 1.


The sad occasion of our danger. Secondly, 2.


The persons (some of them through misinformation) The greatness of this
deliverance appears by considering four things.
who were engaged in the preparation to this new war. Thirdly,

The propinquitie, the near approach of utterruine by 3
it: And fourthly. 4


The consequents of it. First, 1


The occasion of it: the Original was, that most horred The sad oceasion of it.
and abominable rape and violence offered unto the two Houses of Parliament,
wherein the most loath some filth and dirt was thrown in the faces of our
Nobles, and our Senators, that I think was ever found in any Nation; confident
I am, the like was never done in England; so great a blot and stain cast upon
the Parliament, as I may truly say, is tantum non irreparable, when a rude
multitude shall by violence compel the honorable Houses of Parliament to pass
what they pleased, shall reproach them, revile them, shall thereaten their
lives, shall enter the House, and order what the Speaker must propound to the
question, what the Glerke must write, and after eight hours keeping them
prisoners and using them at their pleasure; when night was coming on the
Members hardly to escape with their lives; such an indignity it was, that I am
persuaded, if rightly understood, many hundred thousands in this Kingdom of
England would not count their dearest blood too great a price to vindicate or
expiate; and as if this were not enough, against the next Friday, Printed Bills
set up, to call all the company together again, and hereby the Speakers, and
many of the Noble Lords and Gentlemen compelled to fly, so that they could not
with safety of their lives attend the public serieve; this you know was the
Original. Secondly,

Consider the persons that were engaged in preparation 2
for a new war. The persons engaged in the preparation of a new war.


First, the Honorable Houses took both conscience and honor engaged to have
this vindicated, and their safety provided for.

The General and Officers of the Army hearing of the 2
violence that was offered to the Parliament, resolved to enable the Parliament
to call it to an account, or they would perish in it; and thereupon the Army
that was scattered almost 200. Miles, within the space of one week, was
brought together to a Randezvouz, which was within a few hours march of the
City of London.

The City of London (not to patronize or protect the 3
insolency offered against the Parliament for multitudes of them profess and
protest an abhorrencie of it; but) apprehending that the Army would come, and
either plunder them, or give Laws to them, are presently upon their
preparation for defense; the Army on the other side looking upon the Cities
preparation, judge that the City was resolved to protect this Insolency, and
Villainy that was committed, thus both make all possible preparations.

Thirdly, take in the propinquitie of it, how near this was to execution, so
near that I am persuaded most 3
men that looked upon it, did (as to the judgment of The nearenesse of our
danger.
man) conclude it unavoydable; we must now dash one upon another; so near,
that the very night before the day, wherein we might have been embrewitg our
hands in one another blood, there appeared no probability of right
understanding between the two differing parties: so near, that I think there
was never any destructive work so near the execution, unless it were the
Gunpouder plot. And lo, now in this nicke of time, the Lord appears in the
Mount, the cloud breaks, the City will trust the Army, they will open their
works, and their gates to them, the Army will trust the City, they will march
in peace quite thorough it, from end to end, no word, or act of hostility
between them both; The Speakers and the Honorable Lords and Gentlemen who were
driven away return back, the Parliament fits in peace and safety, and all
this preparation for war and destruction ends in a calm; all this has God
done, but this will yet appear more wonderful, if you take in the fourth
consideration, and that is,

The Consequents of it. First,

What would have been, and must have been if 4.
God had not appeared. And Secondly, The consequents of it.


The Consequents that are, and I hope shall be upon 1.
this his merciful appearing for us. 2.


The Consequents that would have been, my tongue 1.
cannot express, my heart cannot conceive how sad our condition would have
been if the Lord had suffered this near engagement to have been brought to
execution, if he had permitted this child of blood to have been borne,
certainly either the Parliament, that has so dilligently and constantly
consulted the good of the Kingdom, City, and Army, must have been destroyed,
or the Army that has fought so faithfully, resolutely and successefully, for
Parliament, for Kingdom and City, must have been destroyed, or the City
which in the worst of our times has so cordially with their state and blood
adhered to Parliament and Army, must have been destroyed, and in the
destruction of any one of these, I am able to apprehend nothing, but the ruin
and destruction of them all, we should have seen a sad Catastrophy, an end of
all the expected hopes, even the giving up the ghost of what we have fought
and contended for hitherto; we had seen the Embryo of Reformation strangled,
and made an end of, we had seen all delivered up into the hands of that
party, that was full with the expectation of such a day, and now doubted not
but all must be in their hands, who hoped soon to give Laws both to
Parliament and Army, City, and Ministers, to all godly people, by what names
or titles soever they be called, each should be carved out, what they would
have allotted unto them. In a word, actum esset, there had been an end of
England for any good days that we should have hoped for; but the Lord
appearing has prevented this, and given us hopes of better things, for already
we have that which Phinehas took as a blessed fruit of his Embassage here in my
Text, We perceive this day that God is with us; This day have we a further
pledge that God is not weary of the Parliament of England, not weary of the
City of London, not weary of the Army, but his interposing thus seasonably to
take weapons out of their hands, shows us new evidence of his watchful eye, of
his careful heart, to do good to us all, gives us a further proof that he
has ways of deliverance when we have none; and is not that a blessed
consequence? and this likewise we see already, that the Parliament not only
sits in peace and safety, but has an opportunity put into their hands to send
some timely succors to Ireland, that our Brethren there may have cause to
bless God with us, and for us, and to settle and make a comfortable close of
the long calamities of England, and the King and Parliament, City and Army come
to a better understanding each of other: there may be such consequences and
fruit of it, if God please to bless and guide the Parliament, to improve it,
that the generations to come shall have great cause to praise God for appearing
upon that day, when he kept his people from imbruing in one another blood.
Now, Honorable and Beloved, is not this a mercy worthy of acknowledgments have
we not cause to say this day, Lo, This is our God, and we have waited for him,
and he will save us; this is our God, we will be glad and rejoice in his
salvation: has not the Lord done very mercifully, when as beyond our
expectation he has put this song of Praise into our mouths? whereas this day
we might have all been flying into caves or deserts, or seeing our dearest
friends blood pouring out, and our selves given up for a spoil: O if you
understand these things aright, give glory to God who has vouchsafed this
Mercy to us.

Since the Lord has appeared thus mercifully, given Use 3. 3 Exhort. to
improve this deliverance to right ends.
us such a pledge as he has done, let us all endeavor to improve this mercy:
What shall I render to the Lord, is the constant question of a thankful heart;
so is this also, How shall I use this mercy aright. We must study therefore how
to improve this great deliverance: For our help herein, I humbly commend two
Directions, one in general, which concerns all of us; the other more
particular, which properly concerns you the Honorable Lords and Gentlemen of
the two Houses of Parliament.

For all of us: Besides all those Uses which should be made of every
deliverance, which are, to teach us, 1
To all who fear God, to study peace and reconciliation, since our Father is so
unwilling we should fight
to turn to God, to believe in him, to trust him for time to come, to tell
abroad his wonderful works which he has done: Besides all these, methinks
this mercy does hint to all Gods people, that God is very willing they should
study to be reconciled one to another; for truly (Brethren) if we had gone to
War now, whatever might have been the pretended cause, the real truth had bin,
Gods people had gone to destroy one another; They that have fought together
against their common Enemies, who have prayed together, mourned together, loved
one another, lived as brethren, contributed, borne burdens, done all with one
heart and one spirit, now under the pretense of I know not what, must have
sheathed their swords in one another bowels: And when they were so near it,
and their Father would not permit them, Is it not a voice from heaven; Children
you must be reconciled? Does it not speak to them, as Moses to the two
Israelites, Sirs, you are brethren, do not fall out one with another: Do not
wrong one another? Had God for our sins left us under this judgment, to help
to destroy each other, and then the remainder of us given up into the hands of
other adversaries, they would have taught us to be at peace one with another;
we should have agreed in prisons, or in banishment, or in the shadow of death.
O that the Lord would fix it upon the hearts of all that fear him, to make
this collection from this great Mercy, that the people of God must study to be
reconciled and united together, and to bear one with another, every one to
endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace:

More especially (my Lords and Gentlemen) this dealing of God toward you, seems
to call for some notable 1 More especially it concerns the Parliament to
impr^ve it. 1 To search why God thus abased them. Esaias 35.
duties at your hands: Let me freely speak a few things unto you.

1 That God has oftentimes cast reproach upon you, and humbled you heretofore;
but in this last abasement, the Lord has set such a stigma, such a mark of
scorn, suffering you to be spit in the face, after that manner, suffering the
young to bear themselves insolently against the Ancient, and the base against
the Honorable; that I cannot but say, there was some high displeasure of God,
either to your persons, or to the Kingdom whom you represent, or both: I do
therefore most humbly pray you, that you would search your own hearts, and
enquire whether there be not some cause why our gracious God did thus abase
you; certainly a Father uses not to spit in the face of his Child, if there
be not some special cause for it: And I cannot think that the Lord would ever
have let such an ignominious act, that carries so much abomination in the face
of it, to be offered to a Parliament, if he would not thereby put them to
search for somewhat, for which they ought to lay themselves low in secret
before him: When Shimei did curse and revile David, David presently reflected
upon himself, So-let him curse, since God bids him curse David; he presently
remembered how he had dishonored God in the matter of Uriah, and therefore
looked at this reproach as righteously inflicted by the hand of God, how
culpable-soever Shimei was in it. I commend it to your serious thoughts,
whether as men, or Parliament Men, or whether as Houses of Parliament, the
honor and glory of God have not been slighted by you; and therefore the Lord
has suffered this slight and scorn to be cast upon you; enquire whether there
be not as much cause, why the God of heaven let this reproach be cast upon
you, as you have to appoint a Committee to enquire who they were that have done
it; I blame not your care in that, but I humbly pray that you would be careful
of this. As I would fain have you learn somewhat from the disgrace which God
cast upon you: So,

Principally I desire you to improve the deliverance 2 To attend their great
work now he has thus restored them.
that now God has afforded; he has now vouchsafed in his mercy to bring you
to sit in Parliament in safety, that you may consult the welfare of this
Kingdom, my most humble suit unto your Lordships, and you Noble Gentlemen, is,
consider more seriously then ever heretofore, what a task lies upon you, you
have a very sick Patient of the Kingdom of England to cure, it is almost ready
to give up the ghost at your door, and in your hand; now for the Lords sake,
if ever any of you have before-time thought of any private interest of your
own, lay it a side, and now attend wholly to the public, now God has given
you one opportunity more, try whether possibly you can save the Kingdom, or
no, and in your endeavors I commend only these two Heads to your serious
consideration. First,

Know for certain, you can never save this Land In making Religion their
greatest care.
without God; If the Lord will not work with you, you can work nothing; Except
the Lord build the House, they labor but in vain who build it. But if you
will work for Gods interest, the Lord will work with you, and carry on your own
interests, so far as yours is good: Now the Lords interest in the Kingdom is
Religion, his Worship, his Truth, his Saints, his People; let them have the
deepest part of your care; you will but set up a wall without mortar, Arena
sine calse, Sand without lime, if you do not take God along with you; preserve
Gods Truth in the first place; buy not Peace with the selling of the Truth of
God. 2 Look to Gods Worship, let that be set up and preserved in purity, and
take all rubbish and filth from it. 3 Let the Ministers be encouraged with
countenance, maintenance, provide that every Flock may have a Shepherd; and
that thev may be helped forward, look to Universities, those Schools of the
Prophets, out of which may be sent laborers into the Lords vineyard; you have
begun many good things in this kind, but you have bin hindered by many
intervening accidents, and the work still hangs, the Reformation still sticks
in the birth: now make it your great work, be faithful in building Gods house,
and God will build your house* but if you shall be slight in it, know for
certain, you shall never be able to settle the Kingdom in Civil peace and
Liberty: when Jehu cut God short in matter of Reformation, 2 King. 10. 30.
God cut the Civil State short, in matter of authority, liberty and wealth,
and gave them up to be like the Summers threshing. 4. As you should regard his
truth, worship, Ministry, so you must love, countenance, and encourage his
people, let your eyes be upon the godly in the land, consider their sad
condition at this time, they are not only hated by wicked men, but extremely
divided among themselves, be you pleased to reach forth a healing hand try
whether God will honor you so far as to help to reconcile the divisions that
are between Gods people; that those things that rund and divide their hearts
and affections one from another, may be taken away; make it your care, and God
will administer not only occasions, but will help you to do it; Begin it first
in your houses, set an example to others to follow you; Oh that God would
persuade you to believe that God has showed you the mercy of this day for this
very end, that you are as Joshua the High Priest, Zach. 3. 2. Zach. 3. 2.
so many brands shatcht out of the fire, that you might keep his charge and
build his house, I am sure Gods portion in the land has been your safety
hitherto, and if you be faithful in this work, it will be your security for
time to come; Religion is Gods glory, it will be your glory, and the Lands
glory, yea, the Lands security: The Esaias 4. 5.
Lord will create upon every dwelling place of mount Sion, and upon her
assemblyes a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by
night; for upon all the glory shall be a defense: let this then be your first
and greatest care to look to Gods interest in the Kingdom. 2 For settling the
Kingdom in matters of civil liberty and Peace, that you would remember, it is
unity of hearts, and not power of Arms that must settle England; and had you an
Army ten times as good and great as it is, unless you carry your affairs so,
as to satisfy the hearts of honest men, of men that will be satisfied with
Reason, though you may carry things on, while your force compels men, yet
things so set up, will not long continue, the kingdom will be divided, and you
divided with them, and we shall be in danger to be ruined all together; therefore
I beseech you, let the interest of men who will be satisfied with honesty,
truth, justice etc. be considered in their due place, carry things so, that no
moderate men may wish they had power in their hands to dissolve or cut in
pieces that peace and establishment which you shall make, yea, I could wish
that even such as are liable to just exceptions might be gratified with favors,
so far as there is hope that they may be won, Desperatio fasit audaces, ac
fortes: he was a wise Statesman who said, Saevitia victoris sape facit magnas
seditiones ex parvis, Severity of Conquerors oftentimes makes great seditions
to arise out of small ones. But these things I only mention, you are wise, and
know what is best in things of this nature: This I am sure of, stand you for
God, and he will guide and honor you; study to settle Truth, Peace, and Unity
in the Kingdom, and that God who has now given you such a deliverance beyond
your expectation, does well know how to repair your Honor, to take away your
reproach out of the land in one day, to make you the most honorable and
renowned Parliament that ever was; and can make all these things that have been
your discouragements and abasements, to prove so many scales, or degrees to
raise you higher in the thoughts of God and man. Consider what I say, and the
Lord give you understanding in all things.

FINIS.

