THE SONG OF MOSES THE SERVANT OF GOD, AND THE SONG OF THE LAMB: Opened In a
Sermon preached to the Honorable House of COMMONS, At their late solemn day of
Thanksgiving, June 15. 1643. for the discovery of a dangerous, desperate, and
bloody Design, tending to the utter subversion of the Parliament, and of the
famous City of London.

By STEPHEN MARSHALL, B. D. and Pastor of Finchingfield in Essex.

Published by order of that House.

REVEL. 17. 4. Come hither, and I will show thee the judgment of the great
whore.

LONDON, Printed for SAM: MAN and SAM: GELLIBRAND in Paul's Churchyard. 1643.

TO THE HONORABLE House of COMMONS, now assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Honorable, and Beloved,
THe holy King and Prophet David, required that the praises of God should be
sung upon well tuned Instruments; and some Psalms which himself composed to
that purpose, he styled Michtam, golden Psalms; as being full of precious and
choice treasure. Such could I have wished might the Instrument have been, and
such the Song of Praise and Thanksgiving, to have celebrated the goodness of
God, for this late wonderful preservation of your Honorable Assembly, and the
famous, and worthy City; both whose ruin was plotted and designed by wicked
and unreasonable men. But you were pleased, not only to design to this
service, a weak and untuned Instrument, (though not Cracked, as Malice, and
Slander has bruted it abroad) but also to enjoin the publishing of this song
of Thanksgiving, which is full of weak and imperfect Notes. And to this latter
task, I was (I confess) far more unwilling then to the former; as being
conscious unto my self, how few conceptions could be brought by me to any such
maturity, as might render them meet to become the standing Monument of so great
a Mercy, and so happy a Day, which is worthy to be engraven on Marble, rather
then to be written on Paper, and with letters of gold, rather then with ink:
But in the pursuance of your Commands I have done it, and added some few
things, which time nor strength would permit Some few instances, clearing the
main Doctrine, and some in largement of the first Use.
me to deliver in public; Being resolved to deny my self, and to do nothing
that may hinder me from being what I am, and shall always desire to remain,

Yours wholly in the service of Christ

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE the Honorable House of COMMONS, on the 15. of June
1643. being the day of their public THANKS GIVING.
HOnorable and Beloved, were the strength of my body, and my furniture of
wisdom, learning, and grace, in any degree answerable to the service of this
Day, I could not but exceedingly rejoice, in being called to this work, in this
place, at this time. For having been lately restored from the gates of death,
what greater mercy could I wish, then to praise God in the great Congregation?
and having been reported over the whole Kingdom, to have altered my former
judgment, concerning this just cause of the Parliaments Defensive Arms: yea
that the horror of my guilt, in adhering to this Cause, had distracted me, and
made me mad, can I look upon it otherwise then as a great and public taking
off this reproach, by being called to exercise my poor talent, in that Assembly
which is the whole Kingdom by Representation, and at this time, to be a
furtherer of your joy and thankfulness, for Almighty Gods watchful eye and
powerful hand thus wonderfully manifested against the desperate and bloody
Designs of those that would destroy you? But I fear, lest this which is so
many ways a favor to me, should prove your loss through my weakness, which
would not permit me to study much in private, and I fear will disable me in the
public delivering that little which God has brought to my hand; yet this does
encourage me, I have abundant experience of your Candor, and I know that both
with God and man, where there is first a willing mind, (especially in a day and
service of Thanksgiving) it is accepted according 2 Cor 8. 12.
to what a man has, and not according to that he has not.

Yea, I have one encouragement more, that Gods providence has directed me to
such a Text, which is not only suitable to our meeting, and service, but so
really intended by the Spirit of God, for your time and work, that the very
reading of it, (though an hour together) might exceedingly affect you, if once
you have the true meaning of it; which Text you shall find written in

REVEL. 15. 3, 4. read also ver. 2. Verse 2. And I saw as it were a sea of
glass mingled The Text.
with fire, and them that had gotten the victory over the Beast, and over his
Image, and over his Mark, and over the number of his Name, stand on the sea of
glass, having the harps of God. 3. And they sung the song of Moses, the
servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy
works, Lord God Almighty: just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints. 4.
Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name? for thou only art
holy, for all Nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy judgments
are made manifest.
THis Text, though it be a part of the Apocalypse, the darkest, and most
mystical Book in all the Scriptures, and therefore thought generally hard to
be understood, yet time (one of the best Interpreters of Prophecies) has
produced the events answering the types so full and clear, that we have the
whole Army of Protestant Interpreters agreeing in the general scope and
meaning of it, which in a few words be pleased to take thus:

A great part of this Book, is a setting out the conflicting state of the
Church (under the great Apostasy) with the Antichrist, the heaviest and forest
enemy which ever the Church had; and this Antichristian power and dominion is
set forth (as other Kingdoms elsewhere are) by a systeme of the world, wherein
are earth, water, air, sun, moon, stars, a King, a Metropoliticall City,
Provinces, People, etc. an Antichristian Empire, an Antichristian World; and
this great Monarchy of Antichrist has the time of its rising, its triumphant
reigning, its declining, and ruin, and the state of the Church of Christ under
all these, clearly foretold in this Book. And (to say nothing of his rising,
and reign) his ruin is described in this fifteenth, and sixteenth Chapter,
under the Type of seven Angels, pouring out seven vials full of the wrath of
God: the seven vialls being so many degrees of the Beasts, or Antichrists
ruin: which story of the vialls, the Holy Ghost sets down two ways, first
generally, in the fifteenth Chapter, secondly more particularly, in the
sixteenth Chapter.

In the general description of them in this fifteenth Chapter, we have first
the circumstance of the place, where this Vision was seen, whence these Angels
came, that is, heaven: I saw another sign in heaven, verse 1. that is, the
true Church, whereof Christ is King, opposed to the world, wherein Antichrist
reigns, as beyond all doubt, may be cleared out of the fourth Chapter of this
Book, which is the Stage of all the Apocalypticall visions. Secondly, we have
the things themselves, or the mavelous signs which were seen in this place,
and they are three.

First, The behavior of the true Church of Christ, during 1.
this time of the pouring out of the vialls, ver. 2, 3, 4.

Secondly, The description of the seven Angels, the 2.
instruments who were to pour out these vialls, their apparatus,
qualifications, and furniture, they come out of the temple, clothed in pure and
white linen, and having their breasts girded with golden girdles; Habitu and
cluctu sacerdotali ornati, like the Priests of God, Ezekiel. 44. 17, 18. pure
worshippers.

Thirdly, A description of the Church, in reference 3.
to Christ's presence with it, his owning, and protecting it, though after a
more dark manner, verse. 8. The Temple was filled with smoke, from the glory of
God, and from his power, etc. alluding to Gods taking possession of the
Tabernacle; Exodus 40. 34. and of Solomon's Temple, 1 King. 8. 10, 11. The first
of these I am to deal with at this time, viz. The behavior of the Church
during the time of the pouring out the vialls. Wherein observe two things,
first, their state, verse 2. secondly, their work, verse 3, 4. Their state; I
saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire, and them that had gotten the
victory over the Beast, etc. stand on the sea of glass, having the harps of
God. This sea of glass, or crystal, is described Chap. 4. 6. placed before
the Throne, alluding to the great Laver, or Sea in Solomon's Temple, wherein the
Priests were to wash themselves from their uncleanness, whenever they
approached nigh to the Altar of God to offer sacrifice; only that was made of
brass, this of a more pure and transparent metal: In this Laver the Reformed
Churches had lately been washed from the foulness, and pollutions of
Antichristianity, out of which they had newly escaped, having gotten the
victory over the Beast, and over his Image, and over his Mark, and over the
number of his Name; and being cleansed in this Laver, (though mingled with
fire, whether of contention, or other affliction, I dispute not) they stand up
on the brim of it, with the harps of God in their hands, with instruments of
praise, as the Israelites did upon the banks of the Red Sea, (through which they
Exodus 15.
had lately passed, and in it been baptized unto God) singing a song of praise
for their great deliverance from Pharaoh and his Host, who perished in the
pursuing of them; This was their condition, and their posture, a delivered,
cleansed condition, a praisefull posture. Secondly, their work, during the time
of the pouring out the vialls, they sang an (...), a triumphant song, Canticum
gratulatorium and eucharisticum, a song of praise and thanksgiving: wherein
observe two things; first, the Title of the Song, The Song of Moses, the
servant of God, and the song of the Lamb: Secondly, the subject matter of the
Song, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, etc.

The title: First, the song of Moses the servant of God, i. e. such a Song, and
upon such an occasion as Moses and Miriam and the rest of the Israelites sang
unto God when they had passed through the Red sea: 2ly. and the song of the
Lamb: we have many songs of the Lamb recorded in this Book; cap. 4. 11. Thou
art worthy O Lord to receive glory, and honor, and power, etc. is the constant
song of the whole Church of Christ; cap. 5. 9. the same quire sings a new song
to the Lamb when he had taken the book to unloose the Seals thereof; cap.
11. 17. the same Church sings another song of praise upon the resurrection of
the two witnesses, and the fall of the tenth part of the great City, We give
thee thanks O Lord God Almighty, etc. cap. 12. 10. upon Michaels victory over
the dragon, there is another Song of praise, Now is come salvation, and the
Kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ, etc. cap. 14. 3. there is a
New Song sung before the throne which no man could learn, but the hundred
forty and four thousand which were redeemed from the earth: Now whether this
Song of the Lamb be the Song which those harpers sang, or whether, and how
far it is composed out of the rest of the songs recorded in this Book, is
needless (as some Interpreters do) to enquire, because we have the matter of
the Song laid down in so many words; it is sufficient that it is therefore
called the Song of the Lamb, because it was indicted by the Spirit of the Lamb,
and tends to advance the glory of the Lamb their Savior and Deliverer.

2. The matter of the Song: which divides in self into two parts. 1. The
Churches confession of the nature of those works which Christ does in the
pouring out the seven vialls, ver. 3. viz. Great and mavelous are thy works,
Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways thou King of Saints, i. e. They
are great and wonderful, fit only to be done by him who is the Lord God
Almghty, just and true, well becoming him who is the King of Saints. 2. The
use which the Church makes of these works, which is threefold. 1. They record,
celebrate, and publish them. 2. They engage and bind themselves faster and
closer to him, in his worship and service, Who shall not fear thee O Lord, and
glorify thy Name? for thou only art holy. 3. They prophetically foretell the
use which shall be made of these works by such as yet were strangers, viz. As
Christ proceeds to manifest these wonderful and righteous plagues and
judgments upon the Antichristian world, the people of Italy, Germany, France,
England, Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, Polonia, Hungaria, and the rest of the
elect shall shake off the Yoke of Antichrist, and submit to the Scepter of
Jesus Christ; for all Nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy
judgments are made manifest.

Thus you have a plain view of the Text together with the interpretation, out
of which many excellent and useful truths might be observed. As first, that
all which is done in the pouring out of the seven vialls, is the wrath of God
upon the Antichristian faction; so that however in the pouring out of every
vial there is something which is grievous to the reformed Churches, to humble,
purge, and quicken them, yet there is no wrath upon any where ever it is
poured, but only as there is something of Antichrist among them, which Christ
will search for, find, and destroy, wherever he finds it: Consider the whole
work of the vialls, and you shall find noisome and grievous sores upon them
only that have the mark of the Beast, the drinking of blood, the scorching
with heat, the gnawing of their tongues for pain, the being destroyed with
hailstones, etc. All these light only upon the followers of the Beast, the
worshipers of the Beast, the kingdom of the Beast, and therefore let none
fear any hurt from these judgments which Christ is now inflicting, but such as
either secretly or openly harbor any of Antichrists acursed stuff which must
be destroyed; and let it be I beseech you, your speedy care to cast out of this
Nation and Church all those relics, which are the oil and fuel that feed the
flame which burns amongst us: God calls you now to this work, and will be with
you while you set your hearts and hands to do it; and do it speedily, it may
be it is one Cause, why so many breaches are made upon you, because you have no
more vigorously attempted it in the first place; and fear not that ye should
thereby lose a party, or strengthen a party against you, believe it, that party
that has drunk of the whores cup, and is in love with her abominations, will
never be assistant, nor will Christ suffer them to overthrow the work committed
to your hands; they may and shall destroy themselves, bringing the curses
written in this book upon themselves, and their posterity, as Achan did by
hiding the Babylonish Josh. 7.
garment and wedg of gold in his tent, but the Lord will be with you, therefore
go on and prosper.

2. Observe: That how ever in the pouring out of these vialls, in the
destroying of the Antichristian faction, Christ uses the ministry of Angels,
of instruments coming out of the Temple and fitted for that work, yet the work
is ascribed to Christ alone, Great and mavelous are thy works, just and true
are thy ways, thy judgments are made manifest: Many worthy and excellent
instruments has Christ stirred up and employed in this Service, many famous
and learned Divines, many excellent Nobles, many illustrious Kings, Queens,
and Princes, many grave Senates, and Parliaments, (amongst whom I doubt not
Yourselves will one day be recorded) have put their hands to this work, to
make this harlot desolate, and naked, to eat her flesh and burn her with fire;
for God has put it in their hearts to fulfill his will: but they confer
nothing of their own to the work, they are but his instruments, his bow and his
battle-axe, mere dead tools, who receive all their efficacy and operation from
his hand who uses them; their presence adds no strength to him, their absence
makes the work no more difficult to him. And therefore let not our faith and
comfort ebb and flow with the increase and wane of humane helps. Let us not
therefore think the work will sooner be done, because strong is our hand and
arm of flesh, nor that we are therefore like to lose the cause, because our
helps prove either weak or treacherous; the vial now pouring out is the
Lords work, and he will see it done, doubt ye not.

3. observe. That all the time of Christ's pouring out the vialls of his wrath
upon Antichrist, should be a joyful time to the Church of Christ, al those
days should be days of Purim, days of tha^ksgiving; though they stand upon a
sea mingled with fire, they should have the harpes of God in their hands, and
Hallelujahs in their mouths, because Christ is judging the great whore, and
avenging the blood of his servants at her hand. Although it be so disposed by
Christ, that during the time of the vialls, his Churches have much bitterness,
and the hayle of every storm in some degree lights upon them, yet must they
overlook their own sufferings, and be filled with joy for the judgments
executed upon Christ's, and their enemies; and not defer their praises till
their deliverances be complete, but upon every new deliverance to them, and
upon every new judgment upon the enemies, have their mouths filled with new and
renewed songs of praise and thanksgivings to God, as we do this day.

These and many such like general observations from the words are obvious to
every eye, and very seasonable and suitable to the mercies celebrated this day,
I desire that they may not lightly be passed over in your thoughts, though I
shall say no more of the^, purposing to confine my speech to one only
observation, which indeed is the very (...) of the Text, the burden of the
song, and to apply it for the same ends and uses for which it is here recorded
by the Holy Ghost: viz.

The works of Christ in the pouring out the vialls of his The main Doctrine of
the Text
wrath, in taking vengeance of the Antichrist and his followers, are great and
wonderful, fit to be wrought by him only who is the Lord God Almighty, just
and true, well becoming the King of Saints.

First, they are [great] works, whether of Mercy, Explained.
or Judgment; or are great, when they are the effects either of great wisdom
in their contrivance, or of great power in their production.

Secondly, [marvellous, or wonderful;] and that in a threefold respect: First,
such as are rare and unusual, which seldom happen; these draw men's eyes after
them, and make men wonder at them. Secondly, such as are unexpected, which come
praeter spem, things which no body would think to come to pass. Thirdly and
chiefly, things are wonderful, which are beyond our comprehension, whereof we
cannot see the causes, whose height and depth cannot be measured, such as
nothing but the power of an infinite and Almighty God can bring to pass.

Thirdly, [Iust:] Ways are just, when they are according to a right rule; and
ways of judgment, (of which my Text) are then just, when they are according
to the nature, kind, and degree of the sins against which they are executed.
Thou art righteous, Revel. 16. 5* 6.
O Lord, because thou have judged thus; for they have shed the blood of thy
Saints, and Prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink, for they are
worthy: Even so Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments.

Fourthly, [True:] Ways are then true, when according to Covenant, when done
according to what was foretold; and these ways become a King of Saints: other
Kings often deal unjustly, bearing the sword, to execute wrath upon them that
do well, strengthening the hands of them that do evil, condemning the
righteous, and acquitting the wicked, and often untruly breaking their Oaths,
falsifying their Covenants; but this King of Saints does so manifest his
righteous judgments, that his people shall be able to say, According to their
deeds, and according to his Word, has he repayed fury to his adversaries,
Isaiah 59. 18.
recompense to his enemies; and his enemies (though with gnashing of teeth)
shall acknowledge with Adonibezek, As we have done, so has God done unto us.
Judge. 1. 7.


Now that Christ's judgments, hitherto manifested in the pouring out the vialls
of his wrath, in (...) Doctr. (...) instances.
thus far destroying this great Antichristian enemy, are thus great, and
wonderful, thus just and true, may easily appear to every careful Observer of
the Church-story in these parts of Christendom, this last Century of years,
since this work has been in hand: The particular instances are too many to be
related in a Sermon, I shall mention only some few things, which as so many
continued threads, have run through this whole piece of his workmanship; first,
in the greatness, and wonderfulnesse; secondly, in the truth, and
righteousness of them.

First, these works have been great and wonderful for the kind: When the
Antichristian Empire which at first was contrived with that wisdom, and
underpropped with that strength, ruling even the souls and consciences of men,
and had prevailed so far, that all the Kings and States of the World were so
drunken with the Whores Cup, that they not only kissed her well-favoured face,
but as so many brute beasts lay at her foot-stooll, prostituting all their
power and strength unto the Beast, and under her command, making war even
against the Lamb himself, and helping to drink the blood of his Saints, none
daring to question the truth, or rather divinity of her Commands, so that she
could glorify her self, and say in her heart, I sit as a Queen, and shall see
no sorrow; now that suddenly, it should be put into the hearts of most of the
Europaean States, to hate this Whore, to endeavor to make her desolate and
naked, to eat her flesh, and burn her with fire, how great and mavelous does
this speak the work for the kind of it? Who but the Lord God Almighty could do
this? It is certainly the Lords doing, and must be mavelous in our eyes.

Secondly, if we consider the time, which our Lord Christ was pleased to make
choice of, for the effecting these great works, they will appear yet more
wonderful; even when his Church was at the lowest, when he saw that their
power was gone, and there was Deuteronomy. 32. 36.
none shut up or left, when the enemy was come in like a flood, and no man to
lift up a standard against him, when he saw that there was no helper, even then
put he on righteousness Isa. 59. 16, etc.
as a breast plate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head, and the garments
of vengeance for his clothing. Who can be ignorant of these things? who knows
not the low condition of Germany, when Luther first appeared, though only
against the notorious abuse of the Popes Indulgences, and other luxuriant
branches of his Tyrannical usurpation? insomuch that a Bishop wishing him
well, yet despairing Albertus Crancius.
of success, counseled him (as the Story reports) after this manner; Frater,
frater, abi in Cellam and dic, Miserere mei Deus. To thy beads Friar, thou will
do no good in this work: For the people of Germany were at that time so
bewitched with the sorceries of the Whore, and so enthralled to her power, that
(as that proud Cardinal too confidently boasted) they were Cajetanus
Cardinalis.
ready at the Popes command, for the redemption of their souls, to have eaten
grass and hay, more pecudum, after the manner of brute Beasts. And was not the
Church in other Countries as low? namely, at the first appearing of Zuinglins,
and Oecolampadius, in Helvetia; of Calvin, Viret, and Farell, in France;
Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, (especially) Bilney, and Tyndall, in England;
Hamilton, Wischart, Knox, and others, in Scotland? at that time, when in a
word, the whole Church might have taken up that complaint, Ezekiel. 37. 11. Our
bones are dried, our hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts, then did our
Lord Christ open their graves, and cause them to come up out of their graves,
and made them live, and stand up upon their feet, an exceeding great army; this
also must needs be acknowledged, to be the work of the Lord God Almighty, who
is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working.

And as the kind, and time, so thirdly, the consideration of the means, and
instruments, renders them yet more wonderful; to effect great things by weak
means, is an argument of great power and strength; That the walls of Jericho
should fall at the blast of trumpets of rams horns; that a Cake of barley Judge.
7. 13, 14.
bread, tumbling into the host of Midian, should come unto a tent, and smite
it, and overturn it, that the tent should lie along; that Gideon and three
hundred men, with lamps and empty pitchers, should overthrow the whole host of
Midian, who came as grasshoppers for multitude, they and their Camels being
without number; that a woman should compass a man, a weak woman subdue a
mighty man; these are New things, as the phrase there is: Behold, the Lord has
created a Jer. 31. 22.
new thing in the earth, a woman shall compass a man, etc. And yet this you
shall see, was no new, but Gods usual, and constant course, which he takes in
this work, pouring out these Vialls of his wrath, upon this potent enemy, by
the ministry of most weak, and contemptible instruments, pulling his Church
out of the dungeon of Superstition, by old cast clouts, and rotten rags, as
once Ebedmelech the Ethiopian did Jer. 38. 11.
the Prophet Jeremy. Was not Luther a poor Monk, and other priests, and
shavelins, newly crept out of their superstitious Cells, the first Engineers
that battered the walls of this great Babylon? who were they but the poorer,
and meaner sort of people, that at the first joined with the Ministers, to
raise the building of Reformation? few of the Princes, and Nobles, putting
their Neh 3. 5.
necks to the work of the Lord; or if any did, yet the Divine Providence so
ordered it, that either they were suddenly taken off, as the Duke of Saxony,
and Landgrave of Hessen, by imprisonment; or immaturely taken away, as Edward
the sixth, by death; or more miraculously preserved, as Queen Elizabeth, a
woman, in England, and King James, a child, in the beginning of Reformation in
Scotland; and although in the progress of the work, many Kings and Princes
have stood up as nursing Fathers, yet still we may observe, that the greatest
things have been done by them, from whom least could be expected; as (not to
trouble you with more instances) the almost incredible, and strange proceedings
of the late victorious King of Sweden will abundantly testify, who as a
contemptible Prince, crossing the Baltick-sea, entered Germany, with not above
five, or six thousand men, and a very small sum of Money, and yet in as little
time, had before his death, almost brought to nothing that mighty House of
Austria, thought by many, to be the Sun giving light and influence to the
Antichristian world, upon which the fourth Vial was to be Revel. 16. 8.
poured out. I might, I say, give you many other instances, this may suffice:
God will (you may be confident) in time make all the world know, that this
great Image, this great Antichristian Oppressor, shall be broken in pieces, by
a Stone cut out of the Mountains without hands, without humane help.

Fourthly, and lastly, and above all, the manner of his working proves them
most wonderful: For if we observe but the goings of this King of Saints, if we
trace him in his footsteps, in this great work of execution upon his enemies,
marching before his people, traveling in the greatness of his strength, we
find him leading them in uncouth ways, which they knew not, and ways which
to them seemed unpassable. His way has been in the sea, and his paths in the
great waters, and his footsteps were not known, yet still Psalm. 77 9.
leading his people like a flock; sometimes removing Isai. 64. 1.
mountains our of their way, making them flow down at his presence; sometimes
skipping over them; sometimes Cant. 2 8.
his way has been in the whirl-winde, and in the Nahum 1. 3.
great storm, yet always working in such ways, and in such a manner, as that
first, his own people have thought he could intend nothing but their ruin, as
Jonah did, when cast into the Sea, and swallowed up by the Whale, (an unlikely
way of deliverance;) and in such ways, secondly, as to the enemy have ever
seemed most advantageous to their own purposes, and destructive to the Church;
God suffering them to lay the Plot for their own ruin, to dig a pit for their
own destruction, and making the ways by them intended for the Churches ruin, to
be the greatest means of their deliverance, as fully and clearly, as Hamans
Plot proved the exaltation of the Jews, and Mordecai, and the ruin and
destruction of himself and family; a Volume might be filled with instances of
this kind: The device of Charles the fifth, to disinherit the Duke of Saxony,
and to keep the Landgrave of Hessen in perpetual imprisonment, thereby
intending utter ruin to the Protestant party in Germany, was the very occasion
of the confederacy of Smalcald, which almost drove Charles out of Germany, and
established the Protestant party in the liberty of their religion. The Massacre
in France, in which Sleidan. Veramundus de suroribus Gallicis.
were destroyed within the space of thirty days, (as the Historian reports it)
above seventy thousand Protestant souls, proved (ye know) a means, within a
short space, to double and treble, if not quadruple their numbers in that
Kingdom; and procured them public Edicts, and Cautionary Towns, for the
liberty, and security of their Religion, which before they had not: The cruelty
and tyranny of the Spaniards in the Netherlands, (one of whose Deputies, Duke
D'Alva, boasted that he put to death, six and thirty thousand Hugenots, and
Protestants) has been the greatest means to prevent the swelling of his
intended Monarchy, and increase the freedom and strength of the Protestant
party, not only in the five United Provinces, but in all these parts of
Europe. Who that has read the Scottish Story, is ignorant that the Archbishop
of St. Andrews cruel burning Knox Hist. of Scot. Thuanus.
of Mr. George Wischart, conferred much to the Reformation of that whole
Kingdom? The time would fail me, to tell you of the desperate Conspiracies of
the Priests, and Jesuits in England, all the time of Queen Elizabeth, of the
Powder Treason, and their unwearied Machinations in other States and Churches,
and how constantly the Lord has turned them all to the advantage of his
Church, and to bring ruin and destruction upon the contrivers of them. And if
any of you have not had time, or means, to observe these things in Story, your
eyes cannot but see them all fulfilled in Christ's late, and present dealings
with our selves, and our brethren of Scotland.

For them, what great things has the Lord lately done, and by what very weak
means? hardly the fifth part of the Nobility, (as I have heard) appearing for
them, the greater part openly opposing them, scarce one fourth part of the
Kingdom owning the Cause, how often were they at their wits end, when some
unexpected door was opened to them? And were not all their works wrought for
them, by the rage, cruelty, and cunning of their enemies? Were not the book of
Service, and the book of Canons, sent, and obtruded upon them from England, the
occasion of their late mercies? was not the tyranny of a few of their Prelates,
a means to unburden them of their whole Prelacy? and when they were as much
shut up in straits, as the Israelites at the Red Sea, and knew not overnight,
what would become of them the next morning, then constantly some absurd,
desperate Plot or other, of their enemies, brake out, which gave them an
out-gate to escape: And even so has God dealt with England, his work amongst
us is of the very same warp, and woof. The great mercies which we enjoy, the
great deliverances we have lately received, from what a high hand have they
come? to what a very dead low ebb were we brought? Our liberty almost
swallowed up, and turned into slavery; our Religion into Popery, and
Arminianisme? and even then God remembered us in our low estate: and by what
Psalm. 136. 23.
instruments, becomes me not to speak much in your own presence; Your selves
know how sinful, and all the Kingdom how mean and contemptible in the eyes of
your adversaries; they looking upon you as Sanballat and his company did upon
Nehemiah Nehem. 4. 3.
and his builders, and with like scorn uttering the same reproaches; What do
these feeble Jews, will they fortify themselves, will they make an end in a
day, will they revive the stones out of the heaps of rubbish? even that which
they build, if a fox go up, he shall even break down their stone wall. And well
may you take up the builders complaint; Hear O our God, for we are despised;
and yet by such despised broken vessels has the Lord hitherto delivered us:
And which is still more wonderful, (to the glory of God be it spoken) our
greatest deliverances have been more promoted by the cunning, treachery, and
violence of the enemy, then by the foresight, vigilance, and strength of our
best friends: The Prelates late Canons and Oath, purposely contrived for the
perpetuating of their Hierarchy, and their other treacherous and malicious
endeavors against the State, joining with the Papists, and with them laboring
to turn all into confusion, rather then suffering the least abatement of their
former pride and tyranny, have helped thus far toward the taking them away
both root and branch; The multitudes of calumnies, and reproaches, cast upon
the Parliaments just proceedings, slighting their Authority, slandering their
intentions, misinterpreting their actions, have they not (through the goodness
of Him who preserves them from the strife of tongi) been an occasion of making
their Authority, Privileges, intentions, actions, clear as the Sun at noon
day? And to instance no further, this late bloody, and mischievous Design, in
which this Honorable Senate, this famous City, and with them our lives,
religion, laws, and liberties, had undoubtedly been made a prey to their
merciless rage, and fury, the Lord has not only brought to light, without
any foresight, or watchfulness of yours, but made those that were the
contrivers, to be the discoverers, their own evidence, and confession being the
thread which lets you into the depths, and labyrinths of those counsels, which
they had dug deep to hide, if possible, even from the eyes of God himself,
and thereby giving you a great opportunity (the Lord in mercy teach you to
improve it) to advance the glory of his Name, (for the present, putting a new
song of praise into your mouths) A prop for your faith to stay upon, for time
to come, (the Lord has delivered, and will deliver) A further advantage, to
break the power of the malicious, and ungodlymen; and a warning to you, to
beware of neuters, and secret false friends, who though they take sweet
counsel together with you, and speak you fair, believe them Prove. 26. 25.
not, for there are seven abominations in their hearts. And by all this ye are
(I suppose) fully satisfied that these works of our Lord God Almighty are as
mavelous for their manner, as before you have heard they were for their time,
kind, and instruments, working light out of darkness, causing even the
experience of the Church, in these later ages, clearly to interpret Sampsons
riddle, Out of the eater came forth meat, and Judge. 14. 14.
out of the strong came forth sweetness; and making all the bloody and cruel
entendments of the Antichristian enemy, in the effect no more hurtful and
dangerous to the Church, then his was to Phereus Jason, when he run at him with
his sword, and in stead of killing him, opened an incurable imposthume, and
saved his life.

Secondly, as they are great and wonderful, so as evident is it, that they are
just, and true: the [justice] of them is celebrated, chap. 16. 5. Thou art
righteous, O Lord, because thou have judged thus: and chap. 18. 6. we find the
Angel calling upon the Church, Reward her as she has rewarded you, double unto
her double, according unto her work; in the cup which she has filled, fill to
her double: how much she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so
much torment, and sorrow give her. O in what exact balances has Christ
proportioned, and weighed out, gall and wormwood, reproach and shame, blood and
ruin to these enemies, making them to drink of the same cup which they had
before reached to his servants! They had grievously afflicted the bodies of the
Saints of Christ, and now behold upon them, noisome and grievous sores: Revel.
16. 2.
They had drunk the blood of the Saints and Prophets, and now behold rivers and
fountains of blood given Ver. 5.
them to drink. They had their Edicts, to kill heretics and Lollards, (as they
called them) and now in England, and among the Netherlands, it is made capital
for the Jesuits and other Incendiaries, and Factors for the Whore, to be found
amongst them. They had burnt the worshippers of Christ, and now behold,
themselves scorched with fire and great heat. They had Ver. 9.
before deprived the Saints of the light of the Scriptures, and now behold, the
Beasts Kingdom overspread with darkness, so that they gnaw their tongues for
pain. Thus you see the King of Saints, rendering Ver. 10.
according to that rule of justice; Eye for eye, breach Levit. 24. 10.
for breach, tooth for tooth; full measure, shaken together and running over.
Ecclesiastical history is full of Luke 6. 38.
instances, which speak home to our purpose in this particular of Emperors,
Kings, Nobles, Popes, Bishops, Priests, men, women, of all ranks and degrees,
upon whom these righteous judgments of God have been made manifest; you have a
whole Catalogue of Vol 3. 954. etc Vol. 2. 185. 187.
them digested to your hands, in Mr. Foxes book of Acts and Monuments. I shall
let pass this particular, only with this one observation; That whereas this
great enemy, this Abaddon, this Apollyon, is made up of all the hateful
qualities of all those Kingdoms, which heretofore have oppressed the Church of
God, and is therefore called, Egypt, Sodom, Babylon; so the wrath of these
vialls poured out upon Revel. 17. 5. Chap. 11 8, 9.
him, is the mixture and quintessence of those plagues and judgments, whereby
all those Kingdoms formerly were destroyed: for here you have noisome and
grievous sores, waters turned into blood, palpable Chap. 16. 2. 3. 10. 21.
darkness, thunder and lightning, and great hailestones, the plagues of
Egypt; here you have the drying up of the river Euphrates, the means of the
destruction of Babylon; fire and brimstone, the judgment of Sodom. Even so
Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are all thy judgments. Chap. 16. 12.
Chap. 19. 20.


And they are as clearly celebrated for their truth: Even so Lord God Almighty,
[True] are all thy judgments, Revel. 16. 7.
was the voice of the Angel out of the Altar, at the pouring out the vial upon
the Rivers and Fountains of waters, turning them into blood: and after they
were all poured out, John heard the voice of much people in heaven, saying,
Hallelujah, salvation, Chap. 19. 1, 2.
and glory, and honor, and power, unto the Lord our God, for [True] and
righteous are his judgments, for he has judged the great whore; which to
understand, you must know, that these vialls were put up long ago by Christ,
and laid up in store with him, and sealed up among his treasures, and written
in a book; and not only so, but the Counterpart of this book was sent, and
signified by his Angel, unto his servant John, and Deuteronomy. 32. 34. Revel. 1. 1.
the epoche, or time of their beginning, and the whole series of their
accomplishment, for time, and place, matter, manner, and measure, exactly
represented to him, whereof many things are already come to our knowledge,
being fulfilled just ad amussim apocalypseos, according to the standard of the
Revelation; and although some things concerning the interpretation of these
plagues, and curses, remain yet dark unto us, being not fully accomplished, yet
when all these vialls shall once be poured out, the whole Church shall be able
to say of them, as Ioshuah did, in another case, of the blessings: You know
that not one thing has failed of all the good things which the Lord your God
spoke concerning you, all are come to pass, and not one thing has failed; So
not one drop of all these vialls has fallen to the ground in vain, not a
plague failed, but all have accomplished the things for which they were sent;
write them down, These are the true Revel. 19. 9.
sayings of God.

If you would know some reason, why Christ delights to proceed after this
manner, in the destruction of this enemy, I answer,

First, because this enemy is the masterpiece of all Reason 1.
the Devils workmanship, the Dragons darling, to whom he has delivered over
his power and his State, Revel. 13. 2.
his throne and dignity; whatever Beelzebub, prince of the Devils, and the
whole Conclave of hell could invent, all has been infused into this grand
Adversary; there was never yet State framed in the world by the wit and art of
man, more wisely contrived, and plotted, more powerful, and forcible, to
subdue the whole world unto it self, by claiming a Ius divinum, laying a
foundation for firm obedience in men's consciences, and having in it sufficient
to nourish all men's affections, and to fit every man's humor, that Sands West.
relig. fect. 13.
each fancy may be satisfied, and each appetite find what to feed on; yea
what ever may prevail with any man, is there to be found; wealth for the
covetous, honor for the ambitious, learning for the studious, great employment
for metald spirits, multitudes of ceremonies for the superstitious,
gorgeousness of shows for the vulgar and simple, miracles for the credulous,
prayers for the devout, works of piety for the charitable, voluptuousness for
the dissolute, pardons for the faulty, dispensing with all rules for men of
lawless conditions, with what ever else might allure the Nations to drink of
the Whores intoxicating cup. Neither has the Devils cunning, and power more
appeared in the first contriving of it, then after, in the upholding of it, in
all ages stirring up men of excellent and rare perfections, constantly and
diligently to put in execution all his counsels, and devices, to hold in those
who are already caught in their snares, to allure others, and to weaken and
undermine all opposers, how great and potent soever; It is therefore well
becoming the wisdom and power of this King of Saints, to grapple with this
Beast, after this manner, that in the things whereof he is most proud, He might
show himself to be above him.

Secondly, this enemy has been the sorest and Exodus 18. 11.
heaviest Adversary that ever the Church of Christ had in the world:
Nebuchadnezzar of old, and the rest of the Assyrian Monarchs did break their
bones like a Lion, the Egyptian Pharaoh like a Dragon devoured them, Antiochus
Epiphanes cast down the Dan.
Saints, and stamped upon them, and did wear them out; the Roman Ethnic
Emperors the three first hundred years wasted them in ten several
Persecutions: but these and all these were as nothing in comparison of this
Destroyer, all their loins lay not so heavy upon the Churches back as the
little finger of Antichrist. Whether we respect the cruelty exercised upon the
body, or tyranny over their souls and consciences, or the extent and length of
time in both; I say, in respect of cruelty, first, upon the body, I believe
that upon a due survey, there would be found upon his score more blood of
Saints and Martyrs then was shed from the blood of righteous Abel to the
beginning of his reign: A hundred thousand within the limits of one Kingdom
put to death in a few weeks, thirty or forty thousand boasted to have fallen
by the hands of one of his emissaries in the space of a few years; and if so,
what has been done in the rest of the Nations, where all who once tasting of
the whores cup delight to drink and to be drunken with the blood of Saints? In
her is found the blood of Prophets, and of Saints, Revel. 18. 24.
and of all that were slain upon the earth. Secondly, in respect of tyranny
upon the soul, we read not that Pharaoh, or seldom any of the rest, (though
they all oppressed the people of God in their outward liberties) did much
endeavor to force their consciences, or if they did (as sometimes
Nebuchadnezzar and Antiochus) Dan. 3. 16.
the case was so clear that they needed not take time to answer about it; but
this tyrant causes all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond,
to receive the mark of their spiritual slavery, in their right hand Rev. 13.
16, 17. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. 10.
and in their foreheads, so that none must buy or sell save he that has the
mark or name of the beast, and that with such deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness, with such power and Revel. 13. 14.
signs, and lying wonders, that he deceives those that dwell Revel. 18. 4.
on the earth by means of those miracles which he has power to do: So that
even many of the Lambs own followers have in part been deceived by him, and if
it were possible they would finally deceive the very elect of God. Or if
thirdly, we respect the continuance and length of his Matthew. 24. 24.
bloody reign, in this also he exceeds the rest. In Egypt they were evil
entreated about two hundred years; The Babylonish yoke oppressed them
threescore and ten years; Antiochus sorely wasted them, but it was but for a
very little season; The Heathen Empire of Rome proved more cruel and bloody
then any of the rest, for the space of three or four hundred years* but this
Antichrist makes incessant, desperate, and bloody war upon them, no less then
twelve hundred and threescore years together. And if you put all this together,
you Revel. 11. 2 3.
shall find just cause why the King of Saints should proceed thus severely and
strangely, in ruining this great enemy of Himself and people, making him as
wonderful in his terrible fall, as he had been in his bloody reign.

Thus you have the truth of the doctrine, fully and clearly demonstrated, it
remains now that I make Application.
some application of it to You, wherein I shall confine my self to those three
uses which we find the Church makes of these works in this place.

First, they wonder at these wonderful works, they observe them, they have
them digested into a 1.
song, and sing this song of Moses and of the Lamb, having For admiration.
as well their hearts filled with admiration of them, as their mouths with
praise. And this (Honorable and beloved) let me commend to your practice in
the first place: Come and see the works of the Lord, even the great and
mavelous works of the Lord God Almighty, how terrible he is in his doings
toward the children of men: All his works are great, his works of Creation,
even of the least atoms, the works of common providence governing even the
ways of the pismire are great and worthy to be sought out of all them that
take pleasure in them; but the works of the Lord toward his Church, the goings
of our Lord and King in his Sanctuary, ruling his Saints in the midst of
their enemies, and after this manner breaking in pieces the Powers which do
oppose them, is now the wonder of Angels, and shall be the wonder of Saints to
eternity; and fit therefore that now it should be ours. Man's disposition is
naturally taken with thoughts and discourses of things great and wonderful,
and is not satisfied but in something that raises the mind to a high pitch of
admiration; here you may behold an object fit, (if any) to beget wonderment,
and indeed our spirits never are right till we stand at gaze here, for this
discovers a plain difference between the spirits of godly and carnal men,
these latter are more taken with vain and empty things. A Poet or a
well-penn'd Romancy how it takes some, wasting upon it days, weeks, and
months, admiring the wit, invention, style or elegancy; others wonder at the
raising of this or that poor man to a great estate of wealth, at another out
of the dust advanced to the height of honor: these things fill their hearts
with thoughts when alone, their mouths with discourse when in company, yet in
the mean time the wonders of Christ are not taken notice of: Christ's person,
offices, administrations are too base things for them to busy their thoughts
about, they can see nothing but trivial matters, and not worth their notice in
them all, yea they wonder at them who can spend their time in the Study of the
Scriptures, and the meditation of these works of Christ. But these men
(whatever they think of themselves) are sottish beasts, carnal and brutish
persons, and I may say of the things they are so taken with, as Christ to the
Disciples who were so affected with the stones and goodly building of the
Temple, Are these the things ye wonder at? I tell you, there shall not be left
here one stone upon another: Mat. 24 2.
So these riches, these buildings, this power and authority, this great man in
his country, these things I say, by too much regarding whereof many lose their
souls, what shall they all be ere long? Heaven and earth shall be on fire, and
what shall these things be then? and I may further say of the men who admire
these things, that they are greater vanities then the things they wonder at;
Who having immortal souls, fit to be partakers of the divine nature,
understandings capable of the knowledge of God, meditations worthy only of God,
should yet thus basely prostitute and abase themselves, to advance a thing of
nothing, whereas on the contrary a holy heart is so taken with Christ and his
ways, that all other things appear to them to be but toys and folly, as men
got up on high near the Heavens, behold the earth but as a little spot.
Augustine observed this difference in himself, that so long as he was a
stranger from the ways of holiness, he thought the study of the Scriptures to
be a dull business, infinitely preferring Tully before the Bible; but after
his conversion he took no pleasure in that Author where he found not the Name
of Jesus. Oh therefore that you would pour out your hearts in the study of
these things, that the wonderful way of Christ's governing in his Church might
take up not the least part of your thoughts. How he has kept this bush
burning, and yet not consumed; how strange it was that a few Fishermen should
by preaching and suffering, like some conquering Alexander, subdue the Nations;
Think of his strange course, permitting an Antichrist to Lord it above a
thousand years, in the world, so as to subdue the world wholly to his yoke,
suffering the Kings to give up their Crowns and Scepters to him, prostituting
their power at his feet; and when Satan thought himself so strong as to
continue the Church in this condition for ever, that then a silly Monk should
set himself against the world, and in a short time rescue a great part of it
from under his yoke. Another time, come nearer into England, and think what he
did by King Edward, a Child, by Queen Elizabeth, a Woman; the great
deliverances, from the Spanish Armado, from the hellish Powder Treason; come
nearer yet, and behold the wonders of these two or three last years, in England
and Scotland; ponder them seriously, they are the Lords doings, and ought to be
wonderful in your eyes: Think yet further, how wonderful he will be, when he
comes to be admired in his Saints at the last day; feed your hearts and raise
them sometimes with some of these thoughts, sometimes with others, until they
burn within you. Oh but we cannot meditate! we love indeed to read these
things, and delight to hear them, but we cannot meditate on them! Say not so
lest you prove your selves persons without grace; Psalm 78. it is made the
note of a wretch, and of one whose days God will consume in sorrow, to forget
the works of God; and of a brutish person, Psalm. 92. not to consider them: and
if you cannot find a heart to wonder at Him, and his ways, as an occasion of
praise, take heed he show not himself wonderful in your confusion. Wherefore
have we our reason and tongues, but to observe, and speak of these things?
think we to live with the Saints, and glorify Christ in Heaven, and not have
dispositions framed to give him all the glory we can, while we live here on
earth? which we cannot do, if we observe not these things. I know that there
is a dullness and auknesse in the spirits of the best, yet godly hearts will
endeavor to overcome it: He that is wise, will ponder these things, will fet
his heart Psalm. 107. 43.
to task in these studies; and that not as to an unpleasing drudgery, but as
to an employment, Divine and Angelical, most pleasing and delightful: My
meditation of Him shall be sweet. And for your better quickening to this duty,
consider; Psalm. 104. ult


First, that this is the only way to make us Heavenly and spiritual, by
feeding on such matters of wonderment; Motives.
The object about which we are conversant, 1.
gives a tincture to our spirit, naturally such as our spirits are, such are
our studies, pueri crepundia gestant, children play with rattles, and morally
our spirits are molded into the studies we are accustomed to.

Secondly, this will make us ever fit for Gods service: This our Lord will be
served with reverence 2.
and fear, and what begets that, but a knowledge of out distance; upon the
consideration of His greatness, from his wonderful works? all base and low
conceits will then vanish: all society and communion among men is maintained by
a knowledge of inequality, when we see more eminency in men for their gifts,
and graces and places, it strikes a reverence, and strengthens the bands of
love and respect, much more strongly does the serious and deep beholding of the
unparalled perfections and excellencies of God, shining in his wonderful
works, captivate the soul and lay it low before him: but of this more in the
second use.

Thirdly, this is the way to make us profit and grow up in grace; when God sees
us humble admirers of 3.
his greatness, and diligent searchers into his goodness, he will reveal
himself yet more and more to us, as Christ said to Nathaniel, Because I said
this unto thee, beleevest thou? thou shall see greater things then John 1. 50.
these: or the Lord to the Prophet, I will show thee great and mighty things
which thou know not. Jer. 33. 3.


Fourthly, as a further motive and help, be thoroughly acquainted with thine
own condition, really 4.
sensible of thine own vileness, wants, and baseness of all kinds; take the
dimensions of thy corruptions, the height, length, and depth of them, consider
that thou art in thy self a vassal of Satan, a vessel of wrath, dead in nature
and disposition to good, dead in Sin, posting to eternal destruction, and then
every thing of Christ thy Savior will be wonderful unto thee.

Fifthly, and lastly, consider thy relations to Christ, 5.
He is thy head, thy King, thy Lord, thy Husband, thy brother, and withal thy
interest in all his works, they are all done for thee, thou have a part in
every deliverance, (they are thy enemies that fall, upon the pouring out of
every vial) a share in every mercy; and our interest in any thing, sets it off
the better to our affections, and makes us with unwearied diligence to search
out, whatsoever is scibile in it; much more should it here, where the more we
shall study, the more we shall wonder, and the more we wonder, the more shall
we honor God, and better our selves; the more we chew these cordialls, the
more sweetness shall we draw from them.

O therefore, that Christ would open our eyes, that we might see his wonders in
their just dimensions, in the wisdom, power, faithfulness, greatness,
justice, and truth, shining in them, that those things might be glorious, and
excellent in our eyes, which are mean and common in the eyes of others, that
we might be able to answer such as see no such thing in them, (with the
Painter, who being much taken with a piece, though seeming plain, yet of
excellent workmanship, to one ignorantly asking him, what worth he saw in that
poor piece) O friend, could thou see with my eyes, thou would be ravished
with it. And that our mouths might be filled with praises all the day long,
especially upon this day, purposely set apart by us, thankfully to record the
great and wonderful works, the true and righteous judgments, of our King of
Saints; In delivering us from the hurtful sword, in being on our side, when
men rose up against us, in causing our soul to escape, as a bird out of the
snare of the fowler, making their mischief to return upon their own head,
causing them to sink down in the pit which they made; in the net which they
hid, is their own foot taken. And so much for the first Use, the Use of
Admiration.

The second use the Church makes here of the works of Christ, is to provoke and
quicken themselves 2. Use of Exhortation.
up to fear him, and glorify him; Who would not fear thee, and glorify thy
Name? for thou only art holy: Lord, who can understand these works of thine,
thus great and mavelous, thus just and true, and not acknowledge thee to be
the only holy One? Let me press it, by way of exhortation, to provoke you to
the same duty: Where first, I must open what is meant by fearing, and
glorifying his Name, and that which is made the ground of this fear, and glory,
because thou only art holy; and first, of his holiness. Holiness, whatever
it is predicated of, is nothing but a separation of the thing from common uses;
and to sanctify, is to respect it according to such separation, or as becomes
its holiness: and holiness in God, is nothing but the incommunicable Eminency
of the Divine Majesty, exalted above all other eminences whatsoever. So that to
be holy alone, or to be the holy one, (in Scripture signification) and to be
God, is all one; Hab. 1. 12. Art not thou from everlasting, my Lord, my God, my
holy One? Isai. 17. 7. At that day, a man shall look to his Maker, and his eye
shall have respect to the holy One of Israel, that is unto God. Psalm. 89. 18.
The holy One of Israel is our King, that is, Jehovah is our King. Amos 4. 2.
The Lord has sworn by his holiness, that is, the Lord has sworn by himself.
So then, for thou only art holy, is as much as to say, Thou only art God;
these works of thine, thus great and mavelous, thus just and true,
sufficiently speak, or prove thee, O King of Saints, to be the Lord God
Almighty. Secondly, [fear:] who would not fear thee? To fear in this sense, and
in this place, is to give that awful respect unto Christ, as becomes his
Excellency; to serve him with a singular, separate, incommunicable service, and
is so commonly in the Scripture taken for the whole duty, which we owe unto
him; thus to fear God, and to take him for our God alone, is all one, Genesis 31.
53. Jacob swear by the fear of his father Isaac, that is, by the God of his
father Isaac. Isai. 8. 12, 13. Neither fear ye their fear, that is, serve not
their gods, sanctify the Lord of Hoasts, and let him be your fear, that is,
let him be your God alone. [And glorify thy Name,] thy Name, that is, thy
self, thy Divine Majesty; and to glorify this holy One, is not meant by making
him glorious, or by adding luster, or excellency to him, which before he had
not, for who ever has given unto him? But to glorify him is, to acknowledge
his excellency, and glory, to do unto him, what may become his glory, to set
up and exalt his glory. To fear him (then) and glorify his Name, as the holy
One, is to acknowledge his Divinity, to own him as their only Lord and King,
and (renouncing all other false Christ's, and Mediators) to devote themselves
to serve him alone, and worship him with a singular, separate, incommunicated
worship, (his jealousy admitting no Corrivall, there is none holy as the Lord,
neither shall any partake with him in his glory) absolutely, eminently, to do
to him themselves, and to provoke others to do, as becomes his Excellency.
This is the duty which the Church here engages her self unto, and is in truth,
the whole of Christianity, the sum of that everlasting Gospel, which the
Angel flying through Revel. 14. 6.
the midst of heaven, was to preach to them that dwell on the earth, and to
every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice,
Fear God, and give glory to him, and worship him that made heaven and earth,
that is, Jesus Christ alone, by whom Col. 1. 16, 17.
all things were created, and by whom all things consist. And this is the duty
(Honored and Beloved) which I desire to press upon your selves, even that you
would be good Christians in your hearts, and in your lives, in your private
places, and in your public standings, to engage your selves with all your
might, with all your authority, to advance the glory of Christ, as the redeemed
of the Lord, as true Subjects to this King of Saints, to offer up as a living
sacrifice what ever you have, or are, to his service, in advancing his Cause,
his Worship, his Church, doing it your selves, and promoting it in others: To
this end, I shall, first, give you a few quickening Motives, to stir you up, to
make you ready and willing to your duty; and secondly, tell you what the Lord
expects at your hands.

First, consider what great and wonderful things Our Lord has already done
for you, and how little you Motives. 1.
have feared, and glorified his Name to this day: Who of you can count the
great and righteous dealings of the Lord toward you, not only as you are men,
great, or rich, learned, or noble; nor only as you are Christians, redeemed,
called, justified, sanctified, by this King of Saints, though all, and every of
these mercies, call loud upon you for this duty; but I mean, as you are a
Parliament, what great things he has done for you, in reference to this
service, wherein he has lately employed you. Has he not carried you in his
bosom? has he not kept you as the apple of his eye? as an Eagle fluttereth
over her young, spreads abroad her wings, takes them, bears them on her
wings, so the Lord alone has preserved you. How constantly (...). 10, 11.
has he discovered, and hitherto frustrated, all the attempts of your enemies,
suffering no weapon of war to prosper, that has been forged against you,
condemning every tongue that has risen up against you in judgment? I need not
name the particulars, I am persuaded, your selves believe, that no former
Parliament can parallel Gods dealing toward you, and all this while (let me
speak freely) how little have you done for his honor, and glory? I know your
distractions have unavoidably hindered much of what might (and I hope else
would) have been done. But say (in this day of your thanksgiving) if you be not
infinitely behind hand with this Lord God Almighty, with this King of Saints;
if you have not ordinarily forgot his mercies, as fast as he has wrought them:
Has he not often filled your hearts with joy, and your purses with money, and
you like unthrifty children, have played away all at a cast? Have you not
checked his providence, not improved his deliverances, and the advantages
which God has put into your hands? or if your hearts, at any time, have been
raised a little, have they not presently been at a dead low ebb again? have you
not gone about to kill his goodness with your unkindnesses, by provoking him
at the sea, even at the red sea? even when, and Psalm. ^^6. 71.
where he has delivered you? Especially, have not many of you dishonored his
Name, and grieved his Spirit by your sinful lives, by breaking out into things
extremely scandalous, doing the devils work, while you profess your selves to
be the Lords servants? Let me tell you, the Lord will not always strive in one
way, in the way of mercy and deliverance: when he has many a time delivered a
people, and they go on to provoke him with their counsels, he Psalm 106.
knows how to say I w(...)ll deliver them no more, he knows how to bring them
low for their iniquity, and to give them up into the hands of their enemy: he
that for a long time has seemed unweariable in watching over an unthankful
people, will prove weary of repenting, and in stead of saying, I have seen
their Esaias 57. 16. Ezekiel. 2 Kings
ways, and will heal them, will in the end swear, I will overturn them,
overturn them, overturn them, as a man wipeth a platter turning it upside down.

Secondly, consider your own place, and standing, the 2.
calling, office, and work, wherewith God and his people have trusted you at
this time, do with a wide and loud voice call upon you to fear the Lord, and
glorify his Name: More then the salvation of your own souls depends upon you;
the glory of Christ; the establishment of this Church and Kingdom; yea the
welfare of all Christendom, in great measure, are all embarked in that
vessel, the steering whereof, is in great part committed unto you. You are in
part, one of the Angels, who are to pour out the vial of the wrath of God,
who should therefore come out of the temple clothed in pure and white linen,
having Revel. 15 ^.
your breasts girded with golden girdles, adorned like the Priests of God, holy
and pure. Be you clean, ye that bear the vessels of the Lord. Honorable and
beloved, Isay
how a bominable a thing were it, to see the Angels of God live like the
instruments of Satan? how uncomfortable a thing would it be to the people of
God, who have chosen you to this work, and bear you in their hearts, and
present you every day at the throne of grace, who are willing to sink and
swim with you, to live and dye with you, that they should hear that such and
such a Parliament man will be drunk? that such an one dare blaspheme, and
swear, and abuse Religion? that Reformers of Religion, should hate religion?
that such as are called to save the Kingdom, should betray the Kingdom? that
in the grief of their spirits, they should be compelled to say, O Lord! can
these men save us? tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of
Askelon. How dishonorable would it be, not only to you, but to the King of
Saints, who uses you, that they who hate the work you are about, should hate
it the more, in regard of your wicked lives, who are entrusted with it? That
they should have occasion to say of you, as Amurath the great Turk said of the
Christians, who brake their league and Covenant with him, (and therefore sped
accordingly) O Jesus! are these thy Christians? if thou be a God, as they
profess thee to be, revenge this impiety upon them: So when Papists and
Atheists, and such as hate religion and reformation, when they shall see the
deformity of your lives, shall say, O Jesus! are these thy Reformers? are these
the Angels that must pour out the vials of thy wrath? Oh beloved! do not with
Elies sons, occasion men to abhor the work of the Lord; far be it from you:
But let the office you are called unto, the place you are set in, the work,
and the dignity of the work, engage you to glorify the name of Christ, that
both his work may prosper in your hands, and your selves be established before
the Lord for ever. But if you will not hearken to me, let me sadly speak it to
you, you are as a City set upon an hill, you and your ways are looked upon by
all men; and if you hinder the work by your lives, which your office calls you
to further, it were better you had never been born into the world. Them that
honor Christ, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
he will honor, and them that despise him, shall be lightly esteemed; yea he
knows how to make use of you, and your gifts, to promote his cause, and to
destroy you for the iniquity of your lives, as many of those who forwarded the
building of the arc, yet perished in the waters.

Thirdly, consider how loud this days deliverance cries in your ears to
engage your selves to fear him, and glorify his name, who has wrought this
great salvation for you. It were a wastefull expense of time to insist upon the
particulars of this late bloody design in this Assembly; (though in others
useful) All the light we have about it, comes from you. The many great and
high hands which were engaged in it, the subtilty of the contrivance, the
neernesse of the execution, the woeful consequences, and the bloody fruits
which must needs have issued from it; The good hand of God in crushing this
cockatrices egg, before it brake out to be a fiery flying serpent, are fit
things to be published and to be spread abroad in other Congregations; But to
you I shall only be a remembrancer of thus much: That you knew not your near
approaching danger, and that had this treacherous and bloody contrivance took
effect, many of you had been at your long home, ere this time, and the rest of
this Honorable Assembly, hitherto the great preservers of our liberty, had
been made as a Parliament of Paris, the greatest instruments of the Kingdoms
slavery and vassallage for time to come. But the Lord was awake when we slept,
and has took the enemies in the pit which they dug, and has filled your
hearts with joy, and given you another day to praise him. Can you upon this day
of thanksgiving do less then enquire, What shall we render unto the Lord? I
will tell you what he calls for, and expects from you, and I beseech you by
these mercies of God that you render it unto him: That you present your bodies
and your souls a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable service, that you fear him and glorify his name, for he only is
holy.

Fourthly, and principally, consider the late sacred Covenant and vow which you
have all entered into; you have not only entered into it your own selves, but
intend to draw the whole Kingdom with you, into the Oath of God; let me mind
you what you have done; you saw we were designed to destruction, and that Gods
mere mercy has hitherto prevented it; You see there are still destructive and
traiterous designs in hand, in several parts of the Kingdom; you acknowledge
your own sins with others, have deserved all these judgments which either lie
upon us, or are threatened against us, and as a means to prevent our utter
ruin, you think it necessary to enter into this Covenant with almighty God,
and you have done it, wherein you acknowledge the desert of your own sins, and
you confess your hearty sorrow for them, and your real intentions to amend
your own lives, and what you will further do to save and preserve Religion;
and all this you have done in Humility and reverence to the Divine Majesty,
calling the God of Heaven, the searcher of all hearts to witness your
integrity, as you will answer it at that Day, when the secrets of all hearts
shall be disclosed. Think now how deeply you are engaged, and brought under the
curse of God, if you perform not this solemn Covenant; Think how horrid a thing
it will prove, for any of you to stand as perjured men before God, in marters
of such Consequence; Shall he break his Oath (said God of a Ezck. 17. 15.
King) and be delivered? Shall he escape that does these things? O Beloved, It
is a fearful thing (in such cases especially) to fall into the hands of the
living God, to whom you have appealed, and whose vengeance, if you wilfully
fail, you have invocated upon your own heads.

Lay therefore your hands upon your heart, and think what your purposes and
Resolutions are in these few things, which I shall mention to you.

First, for what is past; what real sorrow have ye 1.
in your hearts, for those sins which you call God to witness you are thus
sorry for? How grievous is the remembrance of them, how intolerable do you feel
the burden of them? or do you take Gods Name in vain, calling him to witness
of the sorrow for those things which he knows you take pleasure in? Think what
answer you will make to this.

Secondly? What are your Resolutions for time to come. You know what
blasphemies, what prophanenesses, 2.
what uncleanness, you have hitherto lived in; what irreligion and
libertinisme your selves and families, have hitherto been guilty of, else you
would never have acknowledged, your sins to have deserved these judgments; Now
I demand, what you resolve to do for time to come: Do you purpose to go on in
your old ways; He that was unjust, to be unjust still; he that was filthy, to
be filthy still, and had no other purpose, but to lead the Kingdom a dance, to
go before them in the formality of a service, without changing your Leopards
spots, or your Blackmoors skins; or in truth, be you resolved, being changed by
the renewing of your mind, to become new creatures, to serve Christ in
newness of spirit, that Christ alone may reign as Lord and King hereafter,
both in your hearts, and lives, and families, as Ioshuah did, when he bid the
Israelites choose whom they would serve; for himself, he was resolved, though
he went all alone, He and his family would serve the Lord.

Thirdly, as you are Parliament men, what are your purposes concerning your
faithfulness to 3.
Christ, and the Cause of Christ, and his Church committed to your hands? If
you should altogether fail, deliverance will come another way, the Gates of
Hell shall never prevail against the Church of Christ; But are ye really
resolved, to save the Church and Kingdom, though your selves should perish in
the attempt? or do you intend under pretense of being factors for Christ, to
drive a trade for Satan and Antichrist, to betray Religion and Liberty? or to
trade in both the Indies, to have a stock going on both sides, that you may
save your own stake, which side soever win or lose, to save your own skin,
whatever become of the Kingdom? Like a certain Despot of Servia, (of whom I
have read in the Turkish History) who lived among the Christians, and kept
correspondence with the Turk; who was a public worshipper of Christ, but a
secret circumcised Turk, that that Turkish mark might save him, if need were:
Have any of you such cunning devices, to procure external safety with the
certain ruin of your souls? Honored, and Beloved, I hope better things of you
all, though I thus speak, I hope you purpose according to your Covenant, and
what God requires and expects at your hands, to stick close to Christ and his
Cause, to sink and swim with the Church, and Cause of Christ, with singleness
of heart, and unwearied resolutions, to carry on the work of God, to value your
selves only as his Instruments, and let him do by you, and with you, what is
good in his own eyes.

And for your Encouragement, let me speak a little of the third Use, which the
Church here makes of 3. Use of Encouragement.
these great and mavelous, these just, and true ways, and judgments of this
King of Saints, which is a Prophetical Prognostication, and foretelling of
what shall further happen upon the pouring out of every vial; and that is,
more and more people, and nations shall come in, and submit to Jesus Christ;
the Nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy judgments are made
manifest: And this inables me for your comfort, to help you to an answer of the
most difficult question, and most perplexing thought, that I am persuaded is in
the heart of most men living at this day, viz. God has cast our Lot in very
perplexed times, all the banks are broken down, all Gods judgments seem to
invade us at once, and Gods administration to the Kingdom is such, that the
wisest man cannot guess, by Gods dealing to day, what he intends to do with us
to morrow; Sometimes the Lord enables a handful of ours, to chase thousands of
the enemies; Sometimes multitudes of ours flee, as at the shaking of a leaf,
when none pursues them; Sometimes we have rare Instruments unexpectedly raised
up; by and by very useful men are taken off, and hopeful men prove
treacherous; Sometimes the Lord seems to intimate (as in a Cockpit) that one
fight shall end the business, one way or other; otherwhiles, all things are
set as if there would be a lengthening out of these unnatural wars, until the
Cities and Countries are utterly spoiled, and the Land wasted without
inhabitant: Now in these calamitous times, every man's thoughts run, as
Nebuchadnezzars, with desire to know what should come to pass hereafter, and
to demand with that Saint, Dan. 2. 29.
How long it shall be to the end of these troubles, and all Dan. 8. 13. Psalm.
74. 9.
complain, that there is no Prophet to tell us how long; neither can I blame
them as curious, who are modestly solicitous to know what will be the event of
these things, for even the Prophets and holy men of God heretofore, searched
diligently to know what, and what manner of times the Holy Ghost intended, when
he spoke 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11.
of the sufferings of Christ, whether in his Person, or in his members. Now my
Text gives (I say) a satisfactory answer, to this difficult Question, and I
undertake (without fear of being censured, to be wise above what is written) to
tell you what will be the issue and event of all these troubles.

All Protestant Writers do agree, that we are under the pouring out of some one
or more of these seven vialls; Some think the fourth vial is now pouring out
upon the Sun of the Antichristian world; Others the fifth, upon the throne of
the Beast; there are, that think we are come as far as the sixth vial, and
the river Euphrates is drying up; I will not determine which of them it is, it
is sufficient, (which of them soever it be) my Text assures me the event shall
be this, which is the event of every vial, Antichrists part shall be weakened,
and the Church of Christ shall be strengthened; Something in every vial may
afflict the Church, but incurably wounds the Beast. As the seven Trumpets were
so many degrees of the destruction of the Heathen Empire, so the seven vialls
are so many degrees of the destruction and ruin of the Antichristian Empire;
and it is worth your observing, that all the time, the whole twelve hundred and
threescore years of Antichrists reign, Christ always had an army of Saints, to
war against the Beast, a competent number of witnesses, who loved not their
lives unto the death; But all the while of Antichrists rising, and triumphant
reigning, the event of every conflict, or scuffle was, that the Beast grew
higher, and the Church fell lower, the Papacy prevailed over all that rose up
against it, so that the Church in the end was hardly to be found visible upon
the face of the earth; But it is far otherwise in his declining time, the time
when the vials are pouring out, every one of the^ plucks part of his fleece;
one of them strips him of this Kingdom, another of that; one of them weakens
his Temporal, another his Spiritual Jurisdiction; He is under the vials, as
Haman before Mordecai, Ester 6. 13.
having once begun to fall, he can never more prevail against them, until in
the end (the seventh vial being poured out upon the whole power of darkness)
the whole Church triumphantly shouts with a loud voice, It is done, there is an
utter end of this enemy. So that I dare speak it as confidently as I believe
the Revelation to be divine Scripture, and the meaning of it thus far made
known to the Churches, that what vial soever is now pouring out, the issue
will be, That Antichrist shall lose, and Christ shall gain: And there is but
one objection against it, which I confess to be a great one, and that which
troubles many, viz. Whether the two witnesses be yet slain: their story ye
shall read in the eleventh of the Revelation. These two witnesses, are the
small, yet competent number of pure worshippers, who follow the Lamb, and
conflict against the Beast all the time of his reign; now it is there said,
that during this whole space of time, they prophecy in sackcloth and ashes, in
a low and mournful condition, and the Beast makes war against them, and
prevails against them; but quando finituri sunt testimonium, a little before
the end of their mournful prophecy, which is a little before the Beasts
final destruction; the Beast shall not only keep them low, in sackcloth and
ashes, and prevail by degrees against them as heretofore, but shall kill them,
and their dead bodies shall lie unburied in the streets of that great City,
that is, in all the Territories of spiritual Babylon, and the Beast and his
followers shall be more jolly, and glorious, then ever they have been: Now many
learned Divines suspect this killing of the Witnesses is not yet past, and if
it be not, the Church must go lower then ever it has been, and how then is the
Antichristian State weakened by every vial? To all this I answer, that although
I am not able to say, This bitter Cup is yet past, (Father, if it be possible,
let this Cup pass away) yet I can say, this is true I have delivered, that
every vial shall weaken the Beast, and strengthen the Church, and whether they
be killed, or not killed, when ever their killing comes, it lasts but three
prophetical days and a half, that is, but three years and a half, and then
presently come in the glorious times, which Christ has promised, and the
Church long looked for; so that what that Father said of the Arian persecution,
Nubecula est, cito transibit, it is but a short, though terrible storm, and
will quickly have an end, and that end will be comfortable to the witnesses,
who shall after three days and a half, arise from their death, and ascend up
to heaven in a cloud, their enemies beholding it, and the great City
immediately destroyed with a terrible earthquake: And is not this comfortable?
You see, I go not about to determine what the event of these troubles will be
to England, as England is a Civil, or Political State, or Commonwealth;
Christ breaks and moulds Commonwealths at his pleasure; He has not spoke much
in his word, how long they shall last, or what he intends to do with them;
only this, that all Kings and Kingdoms, that make war against the Church,
shall be broken a pieces, and that in the end, all the Dan. 2. 24. Dan. 7. 22.
Revel. 11. 15.
Kingdoms of the World shall be the Kingdoms of our Lord, and his Saints, and
they shall reign over them: But it is the cause of the Church, the blessed
event of these things to the Church of Christ, which I speak of, the welfare
and good success of Religion, in which Cause you are properly engaged and
interessed, and which I hope is dearer to you, then ten thousand Englands.

Therefore Beloved, Be ye steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the
work of the Lord; fear not your enemies, because they are blasphemous and
wicked, because they are set on fire, with the rage, cruelty, and treachery of
Hell, fear them the less for that; Let my enemy be as the wicked, and he that
rises up against me, be as the ungodly: Their wickedness is your advantage,
it is their weakness, and makes you strong; Let not the huge stature of the
Anakims, and Zamzummims terrify you; Our state for the present is low, it may
be we shall be lower, but lower we cannot be then Job was upon the dunghill,
from whence God raised him up; not lower then Jonah, in the Whales belly, from
whence the Lord delivered him; not lower then the Israelites at the Red Sea,
through which the Lord made a way for them: Go on with your work, and fear
nothing, this King of Saints has depths answerable to all our depths; depths
of mercy, answerable to our depths of misery; depths of power, answerable to
our depths of weakness; He can give a comfortable Outgate out of all our
straits, and my Text says, he will do it, and with my Text I conclude, Great
and wonderful are the works of our God: And he delights to work wonders, both
in ruining his adversaries, to uphold, comfort, and deliver his people engaged
in his Cause, and to bring others in subjection to him, who yet are strangers
from him. The Nations shall come and worship before thee, because thy judgments
are made manifest.

FINIS.

