MEAT Out of the EATER, OR, Hopes of Unity in and by divided and distracted
TIMES. Discovered in a Sermon Preached before the Honorable house of Commons
at Margarets Westminster on their Solemn day of Fast, June 30. 1647.

By THO: MANTON Minister of Stoke-Newington.

And there was a strife between the Herdmen of Abraham's Cattle and the Herdmen
of Lots Cattle, and the Canaanite and Perizite were yet in the Land,

Genesis 13. 7. (...);

Naz. orat. 33. adversus Ennomianos. Pacem reliquit iturus, pacem reddet
venturus.

Aug. de Christo tract: 77. in Joh. LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Hanna Allen at
the Crown in Popeshead Alley, 1647.

Die Mercurij 30. Iunij, 1647.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament that Mr. Dove do from this
House give thanks unto Mr. Manton for the great pains he took in the Sermon he
preached on this day at Margarets Westminster before the House of Commons (it
being a day of public Humiliation) and that he desire him to print his
Sermon, wherein he is to have the like privilege in printing of it, as others
in the like kind usually have had.

H. Elsynge. Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint Hanna Allen to Print my Sermon.

THO: MANTON.



An advertisement to the Reader.
GOod Reader, through the frequent recourse of my employment I was not able to
give the Printer so fair a Copy as I did desire, therefore some few mistakes
have happened, I shall note those which are most material, those which are
merely literal and do not mat the sense, thou art entreated to correct and
pardon.

Page 8. l. 14. for serve, r. have. p. 8. l. ult. for dirision, r. derision,
and again in the same line for Christian, r. Chrestian as being the name of
reproach then used p. 20, l. 10, supply yet, which is wanting in most books, p.
22, l. 26. to it would have been better it had been, add disputed down, for
otherwise the expression would make me desire that which indeed is an
abomination to my tho^ghts that Episcopacy should still be, p. 23. l. 3, 4.
there is a sentence of Calvin's, read thus, Lucianici homines qui iocose and
per ludribium garriunt adversus superstitiones papatus interim nullo tanguntur
timore dei. p. 23. l. 16. for love r. leave, p. 24. l. 14. the comma is to be
after many, p. 25. l. 2. for perfection, r. persecution, p. 32. l. 25. for
Scapulus, r. Scapula, p. 30. l. 6. for ingenium, r. ingenitum, p. 38. l. 20.
for porfary, r. Porphyry and Lucian.

To the Honorable House of Commons assembled in Parliament.
THat which was preached by your command is now published, when the great voice
says Come up hither, it is an evil modesty to hide among the stuff. In these
busy times they are happy to whom God has vouchsafed the shelter os an
obscure privacy; yet upon a call we should not consult with our own ease and
quiet. The times are violent and blasting, and this poor endeavor is likely to
undergo several misconstructions. But (I thank God) I am learning to pass
through 2 Cor. 6. 8
good report and evil report, and to disvalue censure, when it seizes upon me
in the way of duty, I have dealt freely and impartially against the
miscarriages of both parties, and happily my liberty may displease some, others
may look upon the things offered here as too low and trivial, and not weighty
enough to reach the end of the design; let them remember, the intent of these
proposalls is only to engage to a further consultation about the matter, the
entire discourse were fitter for a Treatise then a Sermon; and yet something is
offered, which by the blessing of God may be serviceable to reduce men from
their violences and extremities to some better temper and moderation. Some
possibly may dislike the whole design, spirits now are very keen and
exasperated, men think 'twill be a cooling of their zeal if we should a little
take off their edge and sharpness; fire will not be quenched without hissing. To
these I shall only profes, that if I know mine heart, I abhor all such
moderation and compliances as will not stand with christian zeal, and may
disadvantage truth and religion, what ever become of my own party I would be
faithful and true to that interest. I know that as it is hard to be moderate
without danger, so also without sin, men of middle interests do always
displeasemen, and they should be careful they do not displease God, there are
many counterfeits of Christian moderation, a cold or at best a tepid
indifferency; lukewarm Christians may easily middle it; Carnally-wise
neutrality, it is no wonder to see men that observe the times, neither hot nor
cold. James 1. 8
A doubtful uncertainty, (...) are (...) double-minded men are unstable, and
their compliance is promiscuously dispensed: some possibly may have so much of
child and self in them, as to mind Church-peace only as a taking theme, and
speak for it rather from their brain then their heart; Dan. 11. 23.
others may (like him in Daniel) deal deceitfully, and press a league that
they may become strong with a small people, mind moderation for their own
advantage, some out of a desire of their carnal ease and quiet, may be against
stirs. I foresaw these rocks, desired grace to avoid them, therefore I hope
nothing will be found here to occasion any such prejudice and suspicion against
this endeavor: however it speedeth abroad you were pleased to honor it with
acceptance, and to do something upon it, which I hope you will revive again,
when it shall comport with the times. I shall desire God to guide you in that
and other your great affairs; the Wonderful Counselor be with you in all
your streights, Esaias 9. 6.
make you understanding men of the season, careful to apply apt remedies to
the distempers of it. 1 Chronicles. 12. 32.


So prays your meanest servant in the Lords Work, THOMAS MANTON.

MEAT OVT OF THE EATER; OR Hopes of unity in and by dividing and distracted
TIMES. Discovered in a Sermon Preached at Margarets Westminster, before the
Honorable House of COMMONS, on their solemn day of Fast. June the 30th 1647.
ZECHARIAH Chap. 14. ver. 9, latter part. In that day there shall be one Lord,
and his Name one.
THe whole chapter, but chiefly the context immediately preceding is spent in
the description of a wounderfull day, which ver^e the seventh is said to be one
day, that is one entire period and joint of Providence ^or in the manner of
Prophetical speech (...) times put for year^^, or most usually for such whole
entire dispensations and periods of Providence as continue without interruption
and eminent alteration, though perhapps for many years, for a day, being the
natural distinction of time (those of years hours and months are
artificial) most observed and used by the Hebrews in their computes; and that
only space of time which continues without visible alteration, is very
properly used in this case: (...) why day; But then verse 9. it is called the day
of the Lord, it is called so because of the glorious appearances of Christ in his
power and Sovereignty, and because (I suppose) the evening of the day here
spoken of will end with the coming of the Lord and all his Saints with him in
glory to judge the world. This day is described verses 6, 7.

1. By it is beginning and progress. 2. By it is end and close.
1. It Is beginning and progress for a long while is dubiously interchangeable,
The light shall neither be clear nor dark, it shall be neither day nor night,
that is, there shall be a sad conflict between Truth and Error, misery and
happiness, (for they are often expressed by light and darkness in Scripture)
and such a mutual vicissitude and alternate succession of each to other, that
a man cannot tell, which shall have the upper hand, all the comfort is, this
day is known to the Lord, that is, comes by his appointment, and has a
special mark and seal of Providence upon it, and but one day, a Providence
of the shortest size, sad and short, an uncertain day, a day known to the
Lord, and but one day.

2. For the evening and close of it, it is said in the evening it shall be light,
that is peaceably glorious, Truth shall gain upon Error, happiness upon
misery, and all former distractions, and miseries shall be hushed and gone, for
it is light as comfortable, and as much day as you would have it, the comfort and
happiness of this glorious evening is set forth in three things.

1. The propagation of the Gospel. 2. The Reign of Christ. 3. The unity of the
Churches.
1. The Gospel shall be propagated and the knowledge of it diffused far and
near, that is implied in the 8th verse. Living waters shall go out from
Jerusalem toward the former and latter Sea etc. That is Gospel refreshments,
the doctrine and knowledge of Jesus Christ, together with plenty of gifts and
graces, shall be diffused and scattered abroad among all Nations, who are here
hinted in those expressions of the former and latter Sea, which allude to the
watery borders of Palistina, which were the lake of Sodom, and the
Mediterranean, now its usual in the Scriptures, to set out the Evangellicall
Church by terms proper to the Jewish Border.

2. The next privilege of those times is in the beginning of the 9th verse,
And the Lord shall be King over all the earth. Why! you will say the Lord is so
always, Christ was long since inaugurated into the Kingdom, and has for many
ages actually administeredit in the world: But the meaning is he shall show
himself to be King, he shall be known to be King, it is not spoken in regard
of right or actual administration, but in regard of sense and apprehension,
he will show it partly by his Providence, and his own dispensations, partly
by doctrinall discoveries in the Church, men shall more distinctly hold of the
head, Phil. 2. 10, 11.
Col. 2. 18. Partly in the adoration and acknowledgements of men, every knee
shall bow to him, and every tongue and language call him Lord, all shall
ascribe to him Sovereignty, the Lord shall be King, and it is added over all the
earth, not only over a few Churches, but over all Nations. Christ will show
himself in the l^rgenesse of his power, not only as King of Saints, Revel.
15. 3. But as King of Nations, Jer. 10. 7. as head to the Church: but yet so as
over all things, Ephesians. 1. 22. Ruling both with his golden Scepter, and also
his iron Mace; This will be the state and happiness of those times, you will
see Christ upon his Throne, in all his Royalty and glory.

3. The next privilege is the unity of the Churches, in the words of the Text.
The Lord shall be one and his Name one.

By this view we have found the words to be the third privilege of the
glorious evening, observe in them.

1. The time in that day. 2. The blessing which is unity, The Lord shall be
one, and his Name one. Which words do hint. 1. The cause of this unity, there
shall be one Lord a joint subscription and submission to Jesus Christ. 2. The
measure of it, one Name, such an unity and conspiring together in the Worship
of Christ, that all names and badges of distinction shall be taken away.
This resolution of the Text, does somewhat open it to you: But let us go upon
the words more expressly and directly.

In that day, that is the day spoken of ver. 1. described verses 6. 7. what
this day is, is somewhat doubted, most grant it cannot be taken properly, as if
all these things, could be tranfacted in the space of 24 hours, though indeed
some be so fond, as to interpret all these things in the rigor of the Letter:
But what is intended then?

I shall only mention the most probable opinions, some refer it to the first
times of Christianity, and the dawnings of the Gospel in the world: but sure
that is a mistake; for it must be such a day, whose morning is miserably
troublous, whose evening is eminently glorious, which will hardly agree to
those times: others refer it to the day of Judgment: but though the evening
of this day has no end till then; yet I conceive that is not intended, for
these happinesses here mentioned, of the propagation of the Gospel, the
acknowledgedment of Christ's Sovereign^y, and the peace of the Churches etc.
though rare and high privileges yet are somewhat lower then those
dispensations, which Christ will give out at the day of Judgment, others
refer them to the times of the calling of the Jews, and the Churches
recovery from the Apostasy and defection of Antichrist, some more yet more
particularly to the destruction of the last enemies and those secrets about Gog
and Magog, for the present, because I drive at other things, I shall forbear
the through disquisition of this matter, and shall only generally and safely
refer the words to some latter providence, probably the times most nearly
preceding the day of Judgment, for I conceive this text is exactly paralleld
to those promises that are every where in scripture said to be fulfilled in the
latter days, and speak of so much glory and sweetness as then shall be
exhibeted and dispensed to the world, therefore if we will know what this day
is, let us know what is intended in that expression, the latter days, it is
used either

1. More largely for all that effluxe of time and succession of ages between
Christ's ascension and his second coming to judge the world: all that time in
scripture is looked upon as the latter days, for so the times immediately
after Christ are expressly called, Act. 2. 15. and I remember the Apostle Paul
calls his times the ends of the world 1 Cor. 10. 11. the reason of which
expressions is, because, after Christ's ascension there is no change of
dispensations, as there was before: from the Law natural to the Law of Tables,
and from the Law of Tables to the Gospel; but now beyond this time there is
nothing but the everlasting state. There remains no more sacr^fice for sin.
H. b. 10 26
No other way of salvation to be expected beyond the Gospel, this is the
largest sense which not being noted has occasioned some mistakes.

2. More strictly for that space of time, that immediately precedeth the worlds
ruin, and that is to be considered in its morning and evening.

1. In its morning or former part, which is every where in Scripture made to be
of a dismal and doubtful appearance, and therefore do we so often hear of
the evil of the latter times, days full of delusion and desolation, a world of
delusion and error there is then, 1 Timothy 4. 1. The Spirit speaks expressly
that in the latter days men shall depart from the faith, and give heed to
seducing spirits. God has expressly foretold what will be the fate of those
times. So for desolation, 2 Timothy 3. 1. in the latter times there shall come
hard or perilous times (...), times of great difficulty and distress.

2. In its evening or latter part which is bright and glorious, and therefore
do we so much hear of the goodness of the latter days, as Hosea 3. 5. They
shall make have to fear the Lord and his goodness in the Latter days. So of
safety, no provoking briar, no pricking thorn, Eze. 28 24. So also Isa. 2. 1,
The mountain of God, above all mountains, in the latter days, that is above
the reach of opposition and violence, look as there is a morning light that
goes before the Sunshine, so there are some streakes of glory: and times grow
better and better, as they draw nearer and nerer to the great day of the Lord.
I have done with that expression, ( in that day.)

2. The next is there shall be one Lord. Hitherto there have been diverse
Lords. The Heathens had their several Deityes, the Turks their Mahomet, the
Jews their imaginary Messiah, the Papists their Lord the Pope, many nations
do not as yet call Christ Lord, Other Lords have dominion over them, Isaiah
26. 13. But then Jesus Christ shall be the person acknowledged, he shall be
acknowledged alone, he shall be acknowledged as Lord, all this is included in
the expression etc. That Christ alone shall be spoken of invocated and adored
in all the Churches, they shall be subjected to him as the only King, and
guided by him as the only Shepherd, Ezekiel. 20. 24. Hold of him as the only
head, and stand to his appointment as the only Lawgiver, James 4. 12. And
indeed here is the ground of all; for it is unity of Religion that begets
unity of affection, the one Lord causes the one Name, when men have one King,
give themselves up to the will of Christ, and have one Shepherd guided by the
Spirit of Christ, and have one Lawgiver, are willing their opinions should
stand or fall at the appointments of Christ, then will there be a sweet and
happy agreement.

3. The last clause to be examined is that, his Name one, at first I conceived
the meaning to be that men should look only at one power and dignity, whereby
to indeare themselves to the respects of God, and thought the expression
parallel to these Scriptures, Act. 4. 12. That there is no other Name given
under Heaven whereby we must be saved, but only by Jesus Christ, this is the
one name, or that Phil. 2 10. That at the Name of Jesus every knee shall bow.
But considering it more seriously, I saw the necessity of another sense, for
this is but the result and effect of the former phrase, now it seems to be
added for the greater Emphasis, and aggravation of the mercy, that there should
be not only one Lord but one N^me: therefore what is intended? There are diverse
acceptions of the Name of God in Scripture, that which I conceive most proper
is, when 'its taken for Worship, the way of our Religion and profession, as
Micah 4. 5. All people will walk every one in the name of his God, but we will
walk in the Name of the Lord our God, for ever and ever. That is, several
people serve there several distinct ways of Worship and profession, and the
reason why the Scripture uses this word in this matter, is because men are
called and named after the way of their worship and profession, thus the holy
worshippers are called Christians from Christ, and Mahometans from Mahomet,
etc. and among Christians men are called according to their distinct way and
chief opinion, as Papists, Socinians, Arminians etc. well then it is promised
here that there shall be one Name, that is, as one Lord, so one way of worship
and badge of distinction, we see now, and we may bewail it, that among the
holy people, there are distinct names as Lutherans, Calvinists, Presbyterians,
Independants: But then all these shall vanish and be no more heard of, the
whole family shall be named Christians from Christ, And indeed this is no mean
blessing, the Devil gets great advantage by names, and therefore his
instruments are busy this way, inventing such as may either tend to contempt
and dirision Ipsum no^^^ perperam a vobis pronuncia^ur Ch^^stianus Tertull in
Apol cap. 310.
as Christians of old Puritans of late or to tumult and division, as those
names amongst us under which the members of Christ sadly gather into bodies and
parties.

I have done with the explication, I come to the points, they are two


Purity is the ground of this unity, I shall at this time discuss the first
point, That in the latter days there shall be great unity and agreement: The
maine confirmation of the point lies in Promises, for that is the assurance we
have of it, however I shall forbear to heap up Scriptures together, you will
find many in this discussion reduced to their proper place and heads.

The Reasons are these.

1. Because this will suite best with the quiet and happy estate of those
times, God will usher in the glorious and everlasting estate, by some
preparative degrees, the latter times are more blessed times, Rev. 21.
former things are to be done away: That is, the former kind of dispensations
and providence; many promises there are which hint the great peace and rest
that shall then be in the Church, now that could not be if there were divisions
and distinctions, they would produce factions and factious Wars and
contentions, and the contentions desolations, Amos 7. 4. The fire devoured the
great deep, that is, contention brought desolation upon places and countries
that are most populous. Public differences will end in public disturbances,
this is all we can look for in such cases, and therefore if there were not
unity, how could the other promises be fulfilled? such as these, Isa. 33. 10.
Thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a ^abernacle that cannot be
taken down, the stakes thereof shall not be removed, nor the coards broken.
It Is spoken of the Church in the times of the Gospel, whose state hitherto has
been most disturbed and perplexed, like the Arc upon the waves; it may be
there has been some relaxation and short breathing time, as it is said, Rev. 8.
1. There was silence in heaven for the space of halse an hour, a little respit
given to the Church in Constanti^e's beginning, till Licinius (because not
equally prayed for and honored by the Christians, with Constantine) raised a
new persecution then: and so at other times there has been silence for the
space of half an hour, but then the miseries returned again with violence
enough: only in the latter days is Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a fixed Tent,
then there are not such uncertain happinesses, and such interchangeable
removes, so Ezekiel. 28. 24. And there shall be no more any pricking thorn, nor
any provoking bryer of all that are round about her. God has promised to take
away all provocation and molestation, and what ever is grievous; therefore all
the cause of its difference and disagreement, differences in Religion stir up
the greatest violences, and most deadly hatred; that which should restrain and
bridle our passions, is the fuel of them; as long as there is difference in
Religion and worship, there will be disturbances, and there cannot be that
quiet and happy security, which the promises do generally annexe to those
times.

2. Because God will then make some visible provision against the scandal of
dissentions; the glory of Christ has bin mightily darkened by them; no such
stone of stumbling and rock of offense to the world as the contrariety of
opinions, and great differences that have bin among Christians: Observe, and
you will find it always to be the great prejudice against Christianity in the
primitive times. (...).
Zozomen says, many would turn Christians, but they were always discouraged
by that dissonancy of doctrines and opinions that were amongst them. And so
Venit Gentilis quidam et dicit, Vellem fieri christ^anus, sed nescio cui parti
adhaeream: multae euim sunt inter vos pugnae, s^ditiones et tumultus: nescio
quod dogma eligam, quod praeferam. singulienim dicunt, Ego ve^um dico. Hanc ob
causam d^ridiculo factisumus et Gen^ilibus et Iudae is, dum Ecclesiam mill
parts sc^ndi^ur, etc. Chryso. in cap. 1. Epist. ad Galat.
Chrysostom speaks of a certain Ethnicke that came unto him and told him, I
would become Christian, but there is such variety of Sects among you, that I
cannot anchor upon any thing as certain in your Religion. Certainly nothing
begets Atheism so much as this. Men have suspected the Gospel because there
has bin such differences and strife about it, it makes them doubt of all, to
see distinct factions making the word of God ductile and pliable to so many
several purposes. Therefore now an universal unity would much vindicate and
recover the glory of Christ out of the hands of such a scandal, and be an
excellent provision for the credit of Christianity; to this end Christ prays
and urges this very argument to his Father, John 17. 23. Let them all be one;
and again, Let them be made perfect in one, that the world may know that thou
have sent me; as if he had said, Father thou know how easily the world do
take up any prejudice against my doctrine, now if there should be division
among my worshippers, they will think the Gospel a fable, Religion but a
device, oh let them be perfect in one, that the world may know, and own me for
the true Messiah. Should we go to our own experiences, this we find amongst
our selves, that Religion never lost its awe so much as now. God was terrible
in his holy places, in the assemblies of his Saints, and in the lives of his
holy people, the gravity and the strictnes of their conversation had a majesty
with it, and did dart reverence and awe into the hearts of men: but now all
this glory and power is lost, and religion is looked upon but as an empty
pretense and covert to some designs. It Is said Acts 4. 32, 33. The multitude
of believers were of one heart, and one soul, and then the truths of Christ
had power, and great grace fell upon them. Christianity has more luster when
there is such a common consent, and sweet brotherly accord. The truths of God
have their power, and the servants of God their grace with them. Well then, the
scandal being so great, the Prayer of Christ so urgent, God will at one time
or another do somewhat eminently and visibly to right the honor of Jesus
Christ, and to recover the luster of Christianity, and our glorious profession:
for I take this for granted, that at some special times God will roll away
the reproach of every eminent scandal, that has bin cast upon Christ, and
Religion. And because God loves like the good householder to bring forth the
best wine at last, it has not bin done hitherto, but is reserved for the
latter days; for indeed you shall find that all the latter providence are
but so many vindications, and clearings of Christ from the former scandalls of
the world; as for the scandal of meannesse hitherto, Not many noble, not many
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty are called: Christ's company has bin
despicable, and poor; but now in the latter days it is every where promised
that Kings shall bring their glory into the Church, that they shall hold their
mouths at Christ, Isa. 52. ult. That is, with silence and reverence receive
his commands: and the like every where. So for the scandal of persecution, it
is every where declared that in the latter days the enemies shall be the
subjected party, glad to take bold of the skirt of a Jew, Zech. 8. bow to the
soales of their feet, Isa. 60. The magistrates shall call the inhabitants of
Jerusalem their strength; and the like elsewhere. So again, the Church has
been under the abasure of reproaches, but God has promised a vindicatio^ in
the latter days, that he will establish Zion a praise throughout the earth,
set it as a royal diadem, Isa. 62. 3. with the 7. that he will give them
praise in the lands of their shame, Zeph. 3. Proportionably to their abasures
that they shall have glory. So for paucity and fewness, which is another
scandal, there are promises of the Gospel's being propagated, of the flowings
out of living waters, of the flying in of Converts like doves to the windows,
Isa. 60. and the like. So in this present case, because of the variance of the
people of Christ under former dispensations, there are promises of special
unity and sweet accord in the latter days, Of one Lord, and one King, of one
Shepherd, one Head, Hosea 1. 11. of one shoulder, Zeph. 3. 9. And that God
will make Jew and Gentile, and all that fear him, to lie down together in
peace and safety, and to be all called by one name.

3. The misery of these times does seem to enforce the greater unity. I take
this for the manner and course of heaven, to work one contrary out of another,
by the greatest distractions to make way for unity and order. It is said Psalm.
18. 11. He has made darkness his secret place. God's counsels are always
carried under the covert of darkness; usually when he intends the greatest
flourishing, he works the greatest desolation in the earth; and when unity,
he suffers the greatest distraction; (for what grounds I shall tell you by
and by,) hence is it that we do so often hear of the misery of the latter
times, and yet again of the blessedness of the latter times; hard times, and
happy times; miserable in the beginning, happy in the end and issue. Hell is
let loose in the latter times, they shall give heed to seducing spirits; and
heaven is opened in the latter times, there shall be great light and r^re love:
when there is such a conflict and contestation between light and darkness, the
^ight will be the clearer afterward, and the more doubtful the day is, the
more glorious will the evening be; for this (I say) is the law and the course
of divine dispensations, after the greatest distr^ctions to bring forth the
greatest harmony, and the most blessed sweetness and accord; therefore there
being in the latter days such eminent and visible distraction, by the
proportions of heaven, there will be eminent and visible unity: Of this more by
and by.

To application.
of Consolation.
For consolation to all them that wait or care for the consolation of Israel;
many are ready to faint and stagger at the distractions of the times, Judges 5.
15. For the divisions or breaches of Ruben there were great thoughts of heart,
or as the original will bear it, great impressions. These things indeed do
sadly work with a gracious spirit, the enemies warm themselves by these
sparkles, and rejoice over the fire that devoureth the great deep: others,
whose hearts are bathed and steeped in pleasures, or combred with worldly
cares, have not a due sense of the times, and are not enough affected with
them: but now for the people of God, external miseries are not so bad to them,
and do not so nearly reach a Gospel Spirit as differences in Religion: Oh it
is very sad to see the roses of the valleys become pricking thorns, and
Saints in pretense to be devils in practice to one another, the sheep of
Christ's own fold to be like the Bulls of Bashan, goring and wounding each
other; and would our hearts were more affected with it. But here is comfort,
God foresaw how troublous and distracted, the morning of the latter days would
be; and therefore that we might not be dismayed, has given us many a
comfortable promise to support our hearts under such providence. When God
framed the world, there was nothing but confusion; you do not know what God
can extract out of a chaos. Two things I shall urge upon you to set home this
comfort.

1. Consider your hopes. 2. Know the reason of such providence.
1 Consider your hopes, your times are not to be measured and valued by
appearances, it least of all becomes a Christian to observe the clouds; Romans
8. 24. hope that is seen is not hope; that is, those that would hope are not to
judge by the present face of things, but by the promises, teach your faith to
see things that cannot be seen, beauty in distractions, unity and order in
violence and division; faith is excercised not when you get water out of the
Fountain, but out of the Rock, when you make the EATER give you MEAT,
devouring differences yield comfort and hope; it is better to look to a sure
word then to an uncertain providence, see what a promise you have, Isa. 11. 6,
7, 8. The wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with
the kid, and the calfe and the young lion and the fatling together, and a
little child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed, their
young ones shall lie down together, and the lion shall eat straw with the
ox. And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the aspe, and the weaned
child shall put his hand on the cockatrice den etc. I will not undertake to
assign a sense to every particular expression, only in the general note, God
will effect it, though there be no more hopes then to see lion and lamb,
leopard and kid come together, and to persuade natures that are most fierce and
contrary, unto a peaceable and friendly cohabitation.

2. Know the reason of such providence, men are perplexed when they do not
know the reason of things, fear seises upon us in the dark, Judges 6. 13. If
the Lord be with us, why is all this evil befallen us? They did not know the
reason of the matter, and therefore were troubled at it: If there be such
promises of unity, why are there such sad things befallen us? such great
breaches and distractions, the ball of contention bandyed from one to another,
clouds gathering every day thicker and blacker? You will think this is but an
ill time to look for unity, such general consent and agreement: alas, you err
not knowing the reason of your providence, God uses to bring in unity and
order by confusions; there are diverse reasons for it, I shall name 3. which may
encourage hope in the saddest times.

1. God does not love to let the creature look to the end of his designs, and
skill the way of his providence; therefore he will try them by casting a veil
upon his work, and hiding his glory in a cloud, Isa 44. 15. Verily thou art a
God that hidest thy self O God of Israel the Savior: He meant to be a
Savior, but they should know no such thing, a Savior under a veil, an hidden
Savior. Providence are so disposed as if he meant to do quite otherwise: so
Isa. 48. 7. They are created now, not from the beginning, lest thou should
say, I knew them. God speaks concerning the matter of Babylon and the ruin
of that Empire, which should be effected so strangely that none should see
which way providence tended, or say, now I know what God will do. God loves
to hide the particular way and path of his providence, so that your times shall
seem, not to have the least connection or respect to your hopes, it is so in all
his dealings see Joh. 11 6. Jesus loved Lazarus and when he heard he was sick
he abode two days, little love in that, to stand still when there was need of
help, yet that stay was for the advantage of the miracle and commendation of
his love, so John 2. when Christ meant to give them wine he calls for
water-potts; for God will not have you look to the way and end of his
counsels, Deus sum non sequax as Luther seemed to hear God speak to him,
when he complain^^ of some cross providence: the creatures are not to teach
God how to effectuate his promises, there is encouragement enough to wait,
even when the face of things does most lowre upon your expectations.

2. Because God will show you a point of divine skill to make poison become
your preservative, and your ruin your establishment, he will unite you by your
divisions, gather you by your own scatterings; Judas's treason was called
Faelix scelus an happy wickedness, because it occasioned Christ, many times
God makes contentions happy in their issue and result, and though for the
present their influance is very deadly to Religion; yet their effect is
confirmation to the truth, and in the end Gods people are brought more firmly
and sweetly to close with one another and their God The noise of Axe and
Hammers does but square stones for the Temple, that they may lie the more
evenly in the buildings; usually we find that Religious controversies (like
the knocking of flints) yield more light, and by the providence of God occasion
more sincere love, before we had but a negative affection to truth, and might
rather be said not to hate, then to love it, every ulgar and low spirit will
love truth, when it is honored and advantaged with common consent: true
affections are ravished with the beauty of truth, and have some positive ground
for which they can love truths, yea and the more when they are suspected and
questioned; for then they shine with the greater luster, as being able to
endure contradiction, and as being more strongly vindicated and asserted: thus
(you know) trees shaken are the more firmly rooted, and dislocated joints if
well set again prove the stronger, as in the point of assurance, after
doubtings the soul does most sweetly and closely repose it self in the bosom of
Christ, so outwardly the more smoke there is in the Temple, the greater glory
afterward. In times of common consent men keep together as those that are bound
with a chain: But in times of difference and dissenting, Gods people are at
one with God and one another upon higher motives, and love truth for its own
sake, it being as I said more cleared and vindicated; I have often wondered at
that inference of the people of God, Mica. 4. 5. All people will every one of
them walk in the name of his God, and we will walk in the name of the Lord
our God for ever, and ever. That which is a feandall to the world, is to them a
motive and engagement to firmness, in the truth and union with one another,
there are different ways and persuasions in the world, therefore let us the
more cleave together in the right way, the variety that was abroad made them
more at one; So at that of David Psalm. 126. 127, They have made void thy Law,
therefore do I love thy Commandments above gold. When the ways of God are
questioned, nay disanull'd, exploded with contempt and scorn, the more
precious to a gracious heart, therefore do I love them says David, that was
the very motive of his affection. ver. 127.

3. Because God loves to bestow blessings when the creatures most want them,
to give them the greatest unity, after the greatest distractions, that their
blessings may be according to the rate and degree of their miseries and
abasement; God (I say) loves to make consolations abound in the very degree of
sufferings 2 Cor. 1. 5.
, and therefore you may bear up in the greatest breaches; when God meant them
Canaan he would first give them enough of the Wilderness, enough to carry some
proportion with the future happiness, Deuteronomy. 2. 3. Yea have compassed this
mountain long enough, turn you northward: They had been thirty nine years
compassing mount S^ir, it might have been done in so many weeks or days, but
the pillar of the cloud never went before them till now, God may make you fetch
compass enough about this mountain, keep you in the wilderness of
distractions, ere you can see providence before you, leading of you into better
times: you shall see the people of God in the wilderness did plead the equity
of this rule and course of heaven, Psalm. 90. 15. make us glad according to the
days wherein thou have afflicted us, and the years wherein we have seen
evil. It Was the prayer of Moses, in the desert, let Canaan countervaile the
Wilderness. The longer in the distractions, the more abundance of honey and
milk shall we find in that good Land, more flowings of grace, larger
discoveries of the mind of God.

Well then be sensible of the evil of the times, but with comfort in the Lord,
and hope in the promises.

whole Church,especially at such a season, what do you say to our distempers
and distractions?

Catholic and particular Churches, so that what is said of the whole may be
applied to a part, as many times on the contrary, promises made to particular
persons are reputed as catholic, and of a more universal use, and so applied
to the whole. Yet I shall speak a little more expressly to our own case.

Much may be spoken in this matter about the cause and cure of our distempers,
the danger of the times and the hopes: But because this would engage to too
large a digression, and the discourse will rather be managed and carried on by
rational conjectures, then sure and Theological grounds; therefore I shall
wait for a more convenient season, and but a little touch upon matters, that
otherwise would challenge an accurate discussion.

None can be ignorant of the state of the times, That a spirit of division and
delusion is let loose and gone abroad amongst us, so that the pillars of
Religion are shaken, the most concerning truths questioned, nay exploded with
scorn and contempt; great agitations there are every where, and God only
knows whereunto they will grow, it is a thing of great advantage and benefit
to us to consider the ground and rise of our distempers, and what is the
special Genius of that spirit of error that works amongst us, and so
posibly we may come to conceive some hope of the allaying and removeall of it.
Diverse concurring causes there are that help to beget, conceive, bring forth
and midwife, such foul productions into the world, and therefore before. I
touch upon the hopes, I shall a little reflect upon the rise and growth of our
dissentiency and division, and how it came to be thus with us as now it is. We
may let pass the general causes, viz. Gods providence, who usually makes the
morning of a glorious day misty and dark; Satan's malice who, when his own
holds are shaken, loves to ruin all the world together with himself. the
corruptions of embased nature, by which the heart is either weak, and so apt
to prostitute it self to the grossest fancies if left by God, or wicked, and so
naturally opposite to the truths of God, very willing to blot out those
impressions and that sense that we have of them, I say if we let pass these
general causes, we shall find upon an enquiry that thus our evils, grew upon
us, first, they were hatched by the ignorance iniquity and violence of the
former times (when things are very badde, men are apt to fly out into the
contrary extremities) and began to break out upon this great change, which the
former corruptions did even necessitate and enforce, as usually you know great
and violent changes occasion great tumults, ill humors in the body discover
themselves upon a strain; when God changed his own Ordinances, erroneous
spirits were busy, I mean in the first times of the Gospel: when a people
begin to innovate it is an hard matter to keep them within the bounds of any
moderation, and therefore it is the policy of the Church of Rome to change
nothing, ne videatur errasse, Reformations are very perilous especially to
corrupt bodies; here then was the occasion, and indeed a sad occasion to many,
who in the extremity of opposition to Antichristian ways, obtruded themselves
upon as sad, or worse inconveniences, going off not only from vain Rites;
but Religion it self; and instead of leaving corruptions left worship, and
indeed any other thing could not be expected, if we consider* how loose and
slack the reins of Government have been of late, with what violence and tumult
this change was managed, not in the solemn grave way of conviction and
humiliation. Buildings stand whose foundations are laid in those deepes: But
otherwise 'twill be hard to settle things, partly because till the error be
rightly stated the truth is not found out, partly because such changes make men
lose all awe and reverence in the matter of Religion, and so every man
digresseth into his own way, and adoreth the Idol of his own brain, usually
you will find what ever is carried on by scoffs and popular tumults, seldom
succeeds well, I confess God loves to power contempt upon the sons of
Levi that are partial in the Covenant, Man. 2. 9.
and it is his way many times to cause the voice of many waters Rev. 19. 6.
( id est) of the confused multitude to go before the voice of mighty
thunderings (id est) the regular act of the magistrate whose sentences and
decrees are terrible as Thunder, and therefore I do adore the justice of
divine providence in causing the former Ministry to become base and
contemptible before all the people; But however I cannot but sadly bewail the
mischiefs that abound amongst us by the neglect of men; though the corruptions
of Episcopacy made it justly odious, yet it would have been better it had been,
rather then jeasted down: arguments would have done more good then scoffs,
besides the danger of returning to folly: do but consider the present
inconveniences of making so great a change without more public and rational
conviction, when things that before were of reverend esteem are of a sudden
decryed, what is the effect? why! Religion it self is of less esteem, men
suspect all, can as well scoff out truth as error, Calvin in Comment. in
Prophetiam Hab. in cap. 2. et ver. 20.
Calvines Observation is excellent, he says that in times of changes there are
Lu^i-amici homines qui jocose et per Ludibrium gerunt adversas supersistiones,
Papatus, interim nullo tanguntur timore dei etc. many that are of Lucians
temper who by jeasting against received rites, insensibly loose all sense and
awe of religion, and by scoffing at false Gods come the less to dread the
true, consider and see if the former liberty of tongues and pens has not
begotten that present irreverence, and fearelessnesse that is in the spirits of
men against things that undoubtly are of God: but this is not all, do but
consider how many are hardened in their old ways, and prejudiced against the
reformers, as if they were men that did procedere non ad perfectionem sed ad
permutationem, Pre. 24. 21.
were men given to changes, merely to love things out of passion and present
dislike, or, which is worse, out of self aims, and are ready to say of them,
as Austin said of some who appeared against the Pagans non pietate everterunt
idola sed Avariti a only to divide the spoil; And all this because the
grounds, reasons, and necessity of the change have not been publicly enough
discovered, and truly it were very well if the loose principles and indirect
practices of some, did not give occasion to these slanders: all that I shall
farther say is this, that to leap out of one way into another, either out of
base aims, or without due sham and sense of former miscarriages, will but make
our own station the more questionable, for certainly selfe-respects have no
majesty with them, and though we be in the right, yet having a wrong heart, God
recompenceth into our own bosoms the very measure of our dealing with others,
we now have so and the great occasion of the spreading of those evile amongst
us, which were hatched under the iniquity of the former times* and possibly let
alone as the last reserve against endeavors of reformation, and now meeting
with a people capable of such impressions Ier. 14. 10.
who love to wander, they are the more easily diffused and propagated; some are
ensnared by their own pride and foolish singularity, others by discontent,
base aims, unworthy reflections upon their honor, profits etc. most by a
spirit of opposition against the Ministry, God has set us out Ier. 15. 10.
to be men of contention to the whole earth: Those that are censores morum,
whose office is to tax public abuses, will be looked upon as men of strife,
we might justly suspect ourselves if this were not the portion of our cup, Rev.
11, 12.
this spirit certainly acts many, enemies will snarle when the great voice
bideth the witnesses come up bither; Job. 32. 19.
Surely some do behold their late ascension and glory with envy and
indignation, others possibly may be led by a desire of being somebody in the
world, Simon Magus would be (...), Act. 8. 9. there is a natural itch and
desire after mastership in Israel, James cheketh it, James 3. 1 mybrethren be
not many masters, we naturally affect the honor of this chair; some bottles
will burst if they have not vent: Nusqa^ cit^us prcfic tur qua^ in castr^s
rebellium, nunc N^ophy^os collocant, nunc saeculo obstrictos nuc Apostatas
nostros ut gloria cos obligent quos veritate non possent. Tertul. lib. de
prescrip. adversus Haereticos. Cap. 41.
Tertullian observes that this was the reason why diverse went over to the
Gnostickes, and the opposite parties in his time; young men, and men otherwise
unfit, presently Commenced into some esteem and mastership, thus you see
different men acted by different spirits, and all one way or another increasing
the distractions of the times, which being thus occasioned and diffused, are
supported and kept up by factions and parties, men severally prosecuting their
cross designs, without any regard to the truth and advantage of Religion, and
if any party be opposed and discountenanced, their delusion is the more strong
by a supposall of perfection, for by comparing their state with the state of
the people of God, who suffered under the fury of former times, their
prejudices are increased, and think it can be no less then Religion, and
truth of zeal for the glory of God, to expose themselves to so many hazards:
and they do the more confidently believe it, because Gods Witnesses have
mostly Prophesied in sackcloth; and hitherto Christ has appeared for the most
part, against the Worship and customs of Nations John says Christ came into
the world 1 Io. 3. 8. (...) to unravell Satan's webbes, he has been indeed
acting the demolishing, rather then the adstructive part: but therefore they
go away with erroneous mistakes, as if he would never build, establish and set
up, and as if the Kings of the earth should never bring in their glory to the
Church. Non sa^guis sed causa facit Martyrem.
And Martyrs were made so, more by the blood and suffering, then by the cause.

Thus I have touched upon the causes and state of the present distempers, much
more might be said upon this subject, But now I was only willing to point at
the heads of things: But you will say, then what hopes? I Answer, our wound is
grievous but not incurable, many things there are to encourage us to keep
silence, and wait upon God, till he ordain better things for us, let me
speak a word or two in this matter, consider then, Errors usually are not
long-lived; the next age declares the folly of them, 1 Cor. 3. 13. the day
shall declare it; time will show what is stubble and hay, though men have high
thoughts of it for the present; we raise so much dust by the heat of our
contentions that our eyes are blinded, the glory of truth darkened: but things
will clear up again, we wounder at the contests of former ages, and so will
they at ours. When God comes into his holy Temple, all the earth will keep
silence, Hab. 2. 20. The nearer we aproach to Antichrists ruin, God will give
out more light, Revel. 18. Babylon fell when the earth was enlightened with the
Angels glory; Light will increase toward the perfect day, and as light
increases so does love, that great unity, spoken of before, is when there
shall be more knowledge, for that is the reason rendered, Isa. 11. 9. For the
knowledge of the Lord shall cover the world, as the waters cover the Sea. And
then again the Devil usually overacts himself by appearing in some odious
delusion, no longer as an Angel of light, but as a foul fiend, in such direct
opposition to Christ, that all good men loath him: usually when God makes any
great change things come to an extremity and excess of corruption; The Arrians
prevailed for a long time, but being so detestably vicious and insolently
cruel, they ruined their own cause. Or else Satan runs himself out of
breath in some civil Commotions.

The Remonstrants in the low-countryes quite overturned their cause, when they
began to raise tumults and troubles every where, so those under the conduct of
Muncer in Germany, did but run themselves violently like Mat. 8. 32.
the Gadarens swine, upon their own ruin and destruction; usually when Satan
has such great wrath his time is but short, Revel. 12. 12. God delights
mightily to ruin him by the violence of his own endeavors.

for Exhortation.
It serves to Exhort, and press you to hasten and set on these hopes: promises
do not exclude action, but engage to it; Hope keeps up endeavors, what you
do in this kind will not be in vain in the Lord, the promises hold forth
unity, strive after it.

1. By Prayers. 2. By Endeavors.
1 By Prayers when things are otherwise itremediable, here is the last refuge,
Psalm. 122. 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love it:
If you love it that is the least you can do to mourn over the matter to God,
indeed sometimes it is all that we can do Perkinsius Epist. ad Leot. Harm.
Bibl.
Learned Perkins said of his times Non sunt ista litigandi tempora, sed orandi,
Prayers are fitter for these times then disputes, Carnal zeal may put us upon
disputes it is true, zeal that puts us upon prayer when we are so tenderly
affected for Gods glory, as that in that respect, we can go and mourn over the
matter to him.: when Luther thought to redress the evil of his times, one told
him abi in cellam et dic miserere nostri, go and cry Lord have mercy upon us,
truly things seem past help and cure, I but go and urge the matter to God,
that which is marvilous in our eyes, Zech. 8. 6.
is not so in his; a man goes most cheerfully to the throne of grace, when he
has the encouragement of a particular promise, here is a promise not only to
the case, but to the times, in that day there shall be one Lord, and one name,
and that you may not think it a casual promise and comfortable word that
dropped out of the mouth of God unawares, you shall see it is a blessing full in
the eye of the general Covenant, for it is very observeable that when the tenor
of the Covenant is expressed, Unity is made one of the chief blessings of it,
Jer. 32. 39. I will give them one heart and one way for the good of them, and
of their children after them* mark; he says in the former verse that he will
be their God, and they shall be his people, which is the form of the Covenant,
and then he undertaketh to give them one heart and one way, union in opinion
and union in affections, so Ezekiel. 19. 11. I will give them one heart, and I
will put a new spirit within them. It Is a maine branch of the Covenant to give
them one heart, an heart united to God, and so to one another, urge God then
with his own promise and Covenant, be instant and earnest with him, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
16. The Lord of peace give you peace always, by all means: the Lord of peace,
God that loves it, God that works it, and the latter phrases always, and by
all means, note the vehemence and intentnesse of his desires, one way or
another, let God find out a means to ordain peace for you; for your
encouragement consider, you do not only pray, but Christ prays with you,
Christ intercedeth with the Father for the same thing, John 17. 21. That they
may be all one, and that they may be perfect in one, that the world may know
that thou have sent me; that Prayer is but the copy of his continual
intercession, He knows what a scandal it is to his Name etc. and therefore
he says, let them be one, now this is a great comfort when Christ prays for
the same thing for which you pray, he is worthy to be heard though you be not,
God will not refuse him that speaks in Heaven, however he deals with poor
crawling worms in earth.

2. By Endeavors, follow hard after it, I shall speak here to the people in
general, then to the ministry, and then shall be bold to lay two or three
considerations at the feet of this honorable Assembly, to help on this work.

1. To the people, oh that all of us would now mind the things of peace and
holiness in these distracted times, The great house is smitten with clefts,
and the little house with breaches, Amos 6. 11. there are divisions in Cities,
divisions in familyes, divisions in Counsels, divisions in the Kingdom, and
yet few healers of the breaches; we are already at a great distance, and yet
we do in alia omnia ire, seek to go farther off from one another, some make
it a piece of their Religion and zeal to dissent and be otherwise minded;
Christ says love shall wax cold in the latter days, Mat. 24. 12. the Context
shows it is meant of this dispensative love, Ludolfus de vita Christi lib. 2.
cap. 8^.
Ludolsus said the world was at first destroyed with water for the heat of
lusts: but it will be destroyed with fire for the coldness of love, oh that
we could stir you up to endeavor peace and reconciliation; the first work
is the peoples, things are mostly managed according to your love and hatred,
Herod could do nothing to John for fear of the people, and it is said of
others they could not do what they would because of the people, oh therefore
come as the people did to John, and say, what shall we do

Truly much is to be done by you, I shall touch upon a few things, besides
reconciling your selves to God which is the best way to make others be at peace
with you, and is to be heeded in a chief place; for when you are at one with
God he will give you the one heart, and one way with other of his people, all
agreement arises from that oneness with God and Christ: but (I say) besides
this general rule, let me entreat you to mind these things.

1. Let every one of us mortify such ill affections as may any way engage us
to a disturbance and vexatious bitterness, ill affections do as often divide
us as ill opinions. Wars come from our lusts, Jam. 4. 1. distempered spirits
occasion distracted times, it is observed that when there was strife among the
Philippians, the Apostle does not state the controversies, but gives rules
against pride and vain glory, and self seeking, Phil. 2. 3. 4. There are many
evils in the heart of man, I shall instance in these, there is an itch of
novelty, naturally we adore things that are new, they flocked about Paul
because they supposed him a setter forth of new Gods Act. 17.
Seneca observes right, homini ingenium est magis nova quam magna mirari, men
admire a glaring Meteor and Comet, more then they do the glorious Sun; so
pride, that will make a man singular, there is an holy singularity, Pro. 30.
31. the going of the he-goate is comely, that is as he walks before the
flock, thus to be a leading man in Religion is honorable, but pride puts a
man upon an evil singularity, Col. 2. 19. intruding himself into things not
seen, being puffed up with his own fleshly mind: It puts men upon ungrounded
conceits, quintessentiall extractes, foolish nicetyes; So envy, that begets an
evil eye upon each o-others renown and esteem, therefore when God would
reconcile Ephraim and Judah, Isa. 11. 13.
he would take away their envy, And Ephraim shall not envy Judah, nor Judah vex
Ephraim. So revenge and discontent; Porsury and Julian two bitter enemies
receiving injuryes from the Church, became Athiests; the Divill works upon
stomach and disco^tent, thoughts of disrespect: so there is self seeking, men
care not what they do so they may accomodate their own ends, they speak
perverse things to draw disciples after them, Act. 20. 30. Some men love to be
in the head of a train, and therefore if Gods truths will not serve their
ends, they can easily balke them; so self-conceit, men make Idols of their own
conceptions, love an opinion, non quia veram sed quia suam, not because it is
true: but theirs, they are angry because others dissent from them, not from
Christ, as appears plainly because those that know little or nothing of the
mind of Christ make most bitter and loud outcries against errors; men are
passionate in their own cause and would have every one embrace their fancyes,
pray what is the spring of all your disputes? self, or Christ's glory.? I
cannot go over all the corruptions, only you see from small sparkles a great
fire is kindled, that which goes up in thin exhalations descends in great
showers, that which is at first but a lust, a vainedesire, and corrupt working
in your own hearts, is at length a tumult and combustion in a Church or State;
therefore in the general note, That a mortified spirit is the most peaceable.

2. Keep your selves pure from ill opinions, you must as carefully avoid an
error in judgment as a vice in conversation, many dally with errors not
considering the danger of them, oh consider! God hates filthiness of the
spirit, as well as filthiness of the flesh, and a vain mind is as great a
judgment as vile affections; Romans 1. 26. 28.
yea certainly to the Public; errors are more dangerous then vices, for vices
and gross sins are more against natural awe and shame, and so less
spreading, and though we yield to sin in our selves, yet we do not love it in
others, and so among persons openly vicious there is nothing to allure and draw
into a faction or party, therefore be cautious and wary if not for your own
soul, yet for the common peace, as Tertullian said to Scapulus si non vis tibi
parcere, parce Carthagini; so if you will not pity your selves, pity England,
a man would be careful of being accessory to a Kingdoms, or a Churches ruin,
where the influence of an action is so public, you had need proceed with good
deliberation and advice, however that I may not in this point seem to press
too hard upon any one party, let me discover the extremities on both hands,
there are two evils abroad Inter juuenile judicium et senile prejudicium omnis
veritas corrumpitur.
easy cre-credulity and stubborn prejudice, and both of them increase the
differences, whilst some men's judgments are forestalled by a tradition, others
seduced by an invention; therefore it is good to take the mean between both,
which is the course the Apostle prescribes, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Prove all things,
hold fast that which is good, prove all things, that we reject not truth by
over much prejudice, hold fast that which is good, that we close not with
error by over much credulity, you owe so much to every thing that pretends
to God, as to consider it; when Ehud told Eglon, I have a message from God, he
arose out of his seat, Iu^ge. 3. 20.
(I say) you owe so much reverence to every thing that chalengeth descent from
heaven, as to weigh the claim, I do the rather urge this because the
adversaries of Cristianity, have been always those that have least inquired
into it, vide Tertulliannm hoc susius et eleganter persequente^ sub initio
Apologetici adversus G^ntes.
Tertullian observes it of the enemies of the truth in his days, nolentes
audire quod auditum damnare non possent, they would not hear that which they
had a mind to hate: God that gave man reason never intended that he should
take up love or hatred by chance, therefore it is good to try things; sometimes
a man may meet with an Angel unawares, Heb. 13. 2.
only on the other hand remember I persuade you to a serious search, not to an
easy credulity, not to play with opinions as if there were no hurt in them,
but to examine them in the fear of God, to call in the help of the Spirit,
and to use all the outward helps God has left to the Church, the Priests
lips are to preserve knowledge and the Apostle says Ephesians. 4. 12. with 14th
that God has given Pastors and Teachors, that we be no more tossed about with
every wind of Doctrine, that is an help which God has provided against this
evil, and it is presumptuous arrogance to despise it.

3. Do not impropriate Christ to any one party or sort of professors; the
Apostle reproves those that said, I am of Christ as well as those that said I
am of Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 13. Those that spoke as if Christ were only theirs, they
were accounted a faction too, Jude wrote in times of division and delusion, and
he calls the salvation a common salvation, Jude's Epist. ver. 3. mine and
yours and theirs too; men should not speak as if they only were holy, they
only were Saints, and all others but the world at the best, but civil and
convinced men; nothing enrageth more then to confine Christ to an opinion, as
if all Religion did begin and end with it, naturally we are apt to do so, we
envy the commonnesse of Christian privileges: but it should not be so among
the Lords people, there were differences at Corinth, but how does Paul write to
them? 1 Cor. 1. 2. To the Saints at Corinth, and to all that call on the name
of Jesus Christ, THEIRS and OURS; mark that clause, theirs and ours, he
checketh this natural envy, in us, which would impale and enclose the free
Christ, the common salvation, it was an expression Tertull. lib. de praescript.
adversus Hereticos, cap. 41.
Tertullian used of some in his time, illic ipsum esse est promereri, 'twas
Religion enough to be one of them, oh certainly this is not Christian; we must
own that of God that we see in them, though they do not every way come up to
our mind, we prize a jewel in a Toads head, how much more should we love
grace in brethren, whose blemish is only some petty dissent, Mar. 10 21
Christ loved the young man for the moral good that was in him, and I remember
in another place he checketh his disciples for prohibiting one to do miracles
in his name, because he did not follow them it is in Mark. 9. 38. 39. 40. where
he speaks expressly to this very case, it is most Christian to own the work
of the Spirit every where, wheresoever we find it.

4. Never serve a faction or party to the prejudice and detriment of truth and
Religion, men cry up badges of distinction and so divide Christ into different
bodies and parties, 1 Cor. 3. 4. I am of Paul, and I am of Apollos, and I am of
Cephas, and so every one serves the party upon which his interest hangs, and
hence come State broils and divisions, and discontents and quarrelling with
one another, even to the apparent prejudice of Religion: all acts of communion
and brotherhood are forborne, and men merely condemn and oppose things
because asserted or agitated by the opposite faction; blindely admire all that
their own party does, yea and will rather give up religion and all for a prey
to the enemy, then lay aside their mutual animosityes, thus Eusebius Eccles.
hist. lib. 8. sub initio capiti^ primi.
Eusebius witnesses that there was great siding one against another, Pastor
against Pastor, and people against people, some engaged in this faction, some
in that, till THE BRETHREN OF THE CAMP brought in Dioclesians persecution,
which devoured them all. Nay, when it comes to this they are so sworn to
their own faction and party, that they will defend the apparent, and open
enemies of Jesus Christ, and so as they may strengthen themselves in the lesser
differences, they will hazard the maine principles, as Meletius who formerly
suffered for Religion, being discontented with Petrus Alexandrinus (though his
difference with the Church was but small) joined with the Arrians, and his
Meletians with him. Oh it is sad when men to support their own interest and
faction, will call in the open enemies of Christ to their aid, and cover them
under their buckler; we have an eminent instance in Scripture of this matter
in Act. 23. 6. etc. they looked upon Paul as a damnable Blasphemer, but when
once he pretended to the Pharisees, as indeed in the point of the resurrection
he held with them then, We find no fault in this man: but if a spirit or
Angel have spoken to him, etc. many things might be spoken under this head,
for indeed it proves fatal to religion when once we cry up names, and those
names beget parts for then men look only to the accommodating of their own
faction, though it be to the hazard of religion and public welfare.

5. As far as truth and Conscience will give leave, there should be a
profession of brotherhood, a condescension and yiedling to one another in
love, a walking together, or at least a Christian forbearance, Ephess. 4. 2.
with long suffering forbearing one another in love, the strong are to forbear
the weak, and the weak the strong, to suffer them a little to walk up to
their measures of knowledge, so Phil. 3. 15, 16. Let us as many as be perfect,
be thus minded, and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God will reveal
even the same to you; nevertheless, where unto we have obtained let us walk
together by the same rule, mind the same thing. Every one has not the same
measure of grace, nor degree of light, as long as they hold of the head we
cannot forsake their communion, the Apostle speaks those words last quoted in
reference to the controversies of those times; every one could not see so far
into them as others could, as how far the Law was to be left, and the
Mosaicall Rites discontinued, therefore the Apostle's rule is, that they should
walk together, go sweetly together as far as they could, and those that
were grown and had most light, (whom he calls perfect) he wishes to be thus
minded, to act according to their light, but not to discourage others in their
weak beginnings, and for the other sort he wishes them to wait upon God
without murmuring and contention, and they would find their hearts directed
into the same truths and ways: this is the rule* you see, in such cases: but
now the misery amongst us is, we keep a proud and contemptuous distance, and
do not yield, not only as far as Religion, but, as far as our own private
principles would give leave. We do not walk together in the Lord, and
therefore does Christianity suffer such loss every where, for we cannot be
helpful to one another faith.

6. Abstain from reproaches and undue provocations and dispense all civil
respects with meekness, I put two rules together, our differences do not
only unchristian us, but unman us many times, Gal. 5. 15. If ye bite and
devour one another, take heed ye do not consume one another. The Apostle
uses such words as are proper to beasts, for indeed such violence is brutish:
God has armed the Beasts with teeth and claws, but man with reason and
judgment: to smite with the hand, is beneath a man, and to smite with the
tongue, beneath a Christian, and yet how often is it found, that Christians are
guilty of both? The Controversies between them degenerate into carnal strifes
and debates, and are no more religious, but personal, because of those mutual
revilings, base and low reflections upon the name and credit of each other;
every one will excuse himself for not being first in the transgression. But
Qui refer injuriam n^titur, cum ip sum a quo laesus est gestit imitari, ita
qui malu^ imitatur bonus esse nullo pacto potest. Lact^nt. de vero cu^tu lib.
6. ca. 18.
revenge does not differ from injury, but only in the order; one is first, the
other second: 'twas no excuse to Adam, that Eve was first in the transgression;
Christ being reviled reviled not again, 1 Pet. 2. 23. It Is no shame to be
overcome in such an act, patient sufferings carry more Majesty with them, then
carnal replies and defenses; and therefore, though provoked, forbear
reproaches. The other part of the rule is, that all civil respects must be
dispensed with all meekness and sweetness. Strangeness, and distance, and
incivilities do enrage; we are bid to have peace with all men if possible,
Romans 12. 18. To pursue all honest ways and means. If possible, notes, it must
not be by any indirect course, otherwise we may try the utmost: for damnable
heretics, and such as raze the foundation, there are other rules: we cannot
with safety bid them God speed, 2 Epist. Joh. 8. If he do not bring this
Doctrine, do not receive him into your house, nor bid him God speed. John the
Disciple of love persuades to such strangeness in such a case: so the Prophet
tells Jehoram, that were it not for Jehoshaphat, he would not look toward
him, nor see him, 2 King. 3. 14. So when Cerinthus came into the Bath at
Ephesus, John went away, let us go hence; Hic est Cerinthus hostis veritatis,
Here is Cerinthus the enrmy of the truth, he having denied the Godhead of
Christ; so Marcion, who denied Christ, the resurrection, in effect the whole
New Testament; when he came glavering to Polycarpus, with a Non agnoscis nos?
Do thou not know me? 'twas answered by him, Agnosco te primogenitum diaboli,
I know thee to be the Devils firstborn. In these extreme cases, the servants
of God have been thus austere; but in errors besides the foundation, and of a
lesser consequence, the other rule takes place, and you will find, that
meekness and sweetness of converse gains much.

More might be said, but I forbear; oh that, that which is spoken were a
little considered! None have more engagements to love then Christians; none
have been more exemplary in love then Christians: Once 'twas said T^rtul. in
Apol. c. 39.
, Aspice, ut se mutuo diligunt Christiani, see how the Christians love one
another; but alas a little after 'twas Nullae infestae hominibus bestiae ut
sunt sibi ferales pleru^que Christiani. Ammia. Marcelli. lib 2. cap. 2.
said by an Heathen; There are no beasts so mischievous to men, as Christians
are to one another. Oh it is too often too true.

Secondly, Because of the publicknesse of the auditory, I shall be bold to
speak a word or two to my Brethren in the Ministry, and those who are to deal
publicly in these matters, they may do much to the calming of the times: We
are Ambassadors of the Prince of peace, twill ill become us to be men of
violence: Oh that the Lord would dispose of our hearts to think of healing the
breaches; the reproaches cast upon us are an hint from God, to press us to the
more care. I hope I shall not take too much upon me, if I commend something out
of the Scriptures to my self and brethren. Admonitions are not accusations,
and when God gives a call, it is not too much peremptorinesse to admonish: by
the bowels of Christ, let me entreat you to mind a few things.

1. Beware of passion in your own interests, though they may be much shaken and
endammaged in the present Controversies, yet selfe-denying patience will be the
best way to settle them: the injury to us may be great, but the injury to truth
is greater; we must approve our faithfulness in afflictions as well as
doctrine. It Is an excellent place that of the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 6. 3. Giving
no offense, but approving our selves as the Ministers of Christ, in necessities
and distresses. Mark that, we are to show our selves Ministers of Christ, in
furthering the Gospel by our necessities: and sometimes it is a duty to depart
from our just rights. Therefore be not too passionate in and for your own
interests; the hint is not needless, Christ's Disciples being too sensible of
their own contempt, Luke 9. 54, 55.
called for fire from Heaven. A tenderness of our own interests, may soon
raise us into an undue heat, and rage, and in a mistake of our spirits, we may
think that, a coal from the Altar, which indeed is but taken from some common
hearth. The false Church has bin more zealous for interests than truths.
Luther might have been more quiet, if he had not declaimed against the triple
crown, and the Monks bellies. Our conveniences should learn to give place
to the advantage of truth. It Is said of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, Mat.
12. 19. that he shall no^ strive, nor cry, neither shall any man hear his
voice in the streets, ( i. e.) he shall not keep a bustling, and a stir for
worldly glory and great matters in this life; and truly we should learn of
him. Paul would not take maintenance, because the false Teachers pretended they
would preach the Gospel freely, 2 Cor. 11. 12. But what I do, that I will do,
that I may cut off occasion from them which desire occasion, that wherein they
glory they may be found even as we. It seems that some (as now) to get
credit and entrance, would take no relief from the Churches; now says Paul,
though I have a right, I will not make use of it, that I may not, through their
glorying in this matter, disadvantage my endeavors in the Gospel. Our esteem,
credit, authority, must all be sacrificed upon the interest, and advantage of
truth. Nazianzene in his Orations and Verses, does often profess his desires
of laying down his Bishopric, and all his Church-honours for the peace of the
Church. In one place I remember above all, he tells them of Constantinople,
that rather than he would any way be guilty of the least concurrence to their
distractions, he should count it an high mercy to go aside, and spend the rest
of his days in obscure silence; for he had learned to prefer Christ above
all.

(...), Nazian: in Carmine 12 ad Constantinopolitanos.

(...)
(...)
(...)
A good resolution, and worthy to be imitated.

2. Press doctrines of Christ, and the maine things of Religion: some men love
to live in the fire, and to handle the red hot questions of the age with
passion and acrimony: but alas, this does no good. Zuinglius was once asked by
a friend, Cur non contra pontificios? Why he was not more keen against the
Papists, and preached not oftener against them? He answered, He would first
plant the fear of God, and then men would be for the cause of God. To gain
men to a party before they be gained to God, is not so warrantable, and to
press zeal in some particular ways, does but produce blind fury, which
undoeth all. Hoc haereticoru^ negotiu^ est, non ethnicos co^ verte^di, s^d
nostros ^vertend: -- nostra suffod^unt sua aedificent. Tertullia. lib. de
praescript. adversus haereticos, cap. 42.
Tertullian notes it as a miscarriage of the Heretics in his time, that they
were more for gaining men to a party, then Christianity; Suppose you press the
truth, yet Christ tells us that wisdom is Mat. 11 19
justified of her children. God's ow^ people are most zealous for God's truths
Jude 4. They turn the grace of OUR God into wantonness: Sense of interest
begets the purest, freest zeal for God. The intent of our Ministry is not
that we should gain men to the support of our faction and party, but to
Christ and Christianity: Other differences would be allayed were it not that
we do so often revive them by unseasonable agitations; and indeed for the
lesser differences, they were better wholly laid aside then so often stirred.
Dequo postea restitutus nunqua^ co^^endendu^ putavit, minime tamen dissimulans
quid alioquin esset probaturus Beza in vita^ Calvini.
Calvin after his return to Geneva would never contend about the business of
wafercakes, for which he was at first cast out, though he altered not his mind
in it, yet would never publicly contend in that matter, only many times
modestly suggested what he thought was the better way.

3. When you deal with the errors of the time, (for certainly that is
necessary, we must stablish our hearers in the present truths, 2 Pet. 1. 12.)
do it with a great deal of caution, and wariness: though I would not
prescribe, yet give me leave humbly to offer three things, which possibly may
prevent some abuses.

1. Beware of loose stings and general declamations against errors and
heresies; these do but exulcerate minds, prejudice our testimony, and much
hinder it from being received; this is a miscarriage on both sides; men urge
their ways in loose flings, conceited nickes, and implications; general
outcryes of one side against superstitious antichristianisme, and the men of
the world, (words soon spoken) on the other side against errors, new lights,
and new opinions. The word works most when it is most particular and
demonstrative; thunder at a distance, does not so much startle me, as a clap
in my own Zenith; it is good to go by way of particular proof and argument
against opinions; prove them to be errors, and then call them so; otherwise
loose and general invectives, will make but superficial impressions. It is
very observable, that when James had prooved that conceit of Gods being the
author of sin, to be an error, then he said, Jam. 1. 16. Err not, my beloved
Brethren: He first disputes, and then disswadeth. It Is very observable too,
Mat. 23. from the 13. to the 33. verse, that our Savior never denounces a woe
against the Pharisees, but he presently renders a reason for it; Woe to you
Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites; for ye devour widows houses, etc. Woe;
for ye shut the Kingdom of God, etc. Usually ungrounded zeal stays in
generals, and ordinarily it is out of deceit or weakness.

2. Deal herein with all soberness and meekness; we should do what we can
to remove prejudices; men drink in truths when they are sweetly propounded;
God was in the still voice; the small rain falls sweetly upon the tender
grass; men presently engage themselves to a fervor and heat, and that
marreth all; it is but as oil to the flames. I remember a speech of Darius,
when one of the Soldiers of the Camp rayled against Alexander, he tells
him, I kept you to fight against Alexander, not to rail against him: Those
Arrows of bitter words, are not the weapons of our warfare: Passion shows
we are angry more against the person then the error, too often it makes us
forsake the maine controversy, and go on upon a wrongsent; one says, he that
speaks to Kings, must speak (...), with silken words; he that speaks to
dissenters, had need make his speech as smooth and soft as may be; I am sure
it is agreeable to the Apostles advice, In meekness instruct those that oppose
themselves, 2 Timothy 2 25. And in the same place he shows, that the servants of
God must be gentle and patient.

3. Take heed of aggravating and greatening matters, making them of more
importance then indeed they are; former ages were possessed with this spirit,
every lesser dissent and mistake, was made an heresy or error in the faith,
as appears by their catalogues.

Tertullian had but spoken two or three words, in favor of Montanus, and the
Priests of Rome presently cried him up for a Montanist, and accordingly dealt
with him: Quo protinus offensus (says he Pamelius in vita Tertulliani.
that wrote his life) prorsus in Montani parts transivit. I confess it is good
to be watchful to dash Babylons brats, and take the little foxes, Cant. 2. 15.
( i. e.) To oppose the first and modest appearances of error; the party last
amongst us began with words, and would have brought in things. Therefore I say,
it is good to be watchful, however this will not justify rough dealing with
those that vary from us, but in an expression and straining every thing to the
worst sense, and most odious consequences, that it may appear to be
heretical. Christ's own words were mistaken and wrested into a sense which he
would not own; he said, He would destroy the Temple in three days, Joh. 2. 19.
He meant it of his body, they accused him of the same words; and yet they are
called false witnesses, Mat. 26. 61. who accused him of it, because they
wrested it to another sense, applying it to the material Temple. Many have a
faculty of turning Eloi into Elias, Molehils into Mountains, making men
offenders for a word, and by false glosses causing innocent things to seem
odious.

4. Let me entreat you to improve your interests for brotherly and friendly
collations; public Conferences cannot be had without tumult; and there is a
prejudice against public Sermons; and again, private disputes are more for
victory then truth, usually there is more of strife then love in them. Alternis
vicibus co^tentioso fume uterque diem in vespera^ traxera^t, obstrepentibus
etia^ quibusda^ spectantibus singuloru^ nubilo quida^ veritas obumbrabatur.
Tertullian says of his private disputation with a Jew, both drew out their
reasonings, and through the heat of contention, both went away unsatisfied.
But now, if there were meetings instituted for the propounding of things rather
by way of case then Controversy, and matters were carried not so much in a
disputative way, but by way of friendly collation and loving discourse, it
would much conduce to the ending of our differences; certainly, where such
meetings have been set up, and wisely ordered, much good has come by them; if
we could allure Christians, the lot of whose dwellings is disposed among our
Churches into these Conferences, we should find them of much avail. I
conceive much might be said out of Scripture for them; certainly we do not
come together so often as we should, to comfort our selves with the mutual
faith of one another, Romans 1. 11, 12. I believe, that (...), spoken of, Heb.
10. 25. will infer some other mee^ing besides the public assembly; this
benefit you would find by such a course, that your own would be stablished,
others would be less violent, if brought to these friendly consultations,
happily it may be a business that may engage you to much labor and
self-denial, but that should not sway with a Christian Minister, whose work
is not ended with an hours discourse in the Pulpit: We are very often calling
for power to punish heretics; but let us sadly smite upon the thigh, and
consider, if any of us, in private, have improved those loving courses, to
gain them that have been in our power. Luther has a pretty saying; Igne
charitatis comburendi sunt haereticis, you talk of burning heretics, burn
them first in the fire of love, or at least burn them with the fire of the
Spirit. The Apostle speaks of trying the work by fire, 1 Cor. 3. 13.
Rational and friendly conviction will do much, at least it will beget a sweet
and brotherly correspondence, and it is to be hoped, we shall find more
meekness, where things are not carried in the way of a set disputation.

I have done with my address to the Ministry.

Thirdly, Give me leave to speak a word to your selves, not as if I would
prescribe to you, but only humbly offer two or three Considerations to your
thoughts, it may be, I may not show so much discretion in it, yet if I do
affection, I have my aim, which is not so much to direct you, as to draw you
into a consultation about these matters, and therefore I humbly propose the
business to your care; think of the Churches unity, you have covenanted to
endeavor that the Lord be one, and his Name one. Consider, civil peace
depends much upon Church peace; Religion is called so a religando, it being the
greatest bond to linck men together; contrary opinions in Religion, usually
cause much alienation of affection, and great disturbances in the
Commonwealth. Therefore this matter appertains to you in reference to
unity; I humbly desire,

1. That you would seriously do your utmost to draw things to an agreement; you
have appointed a Committee of accommodation already, we do not know what is
done, suppose you did try once again. When See the History of the Council of
Dort in ^he Preface to the Reformed Churches.
the Remonstrants troubled the Churches of the Low Countries, there were often
Collations, and they did select men once and again and again to consider how
to compose the differences: it is true, those endeavors did not succeed,
because those meetings were made up of the most violent sticklers, and the
Arminians by the means of Vtenbogardus had the secret encouragement and
countenance of some of the Magistrates, that nothing should be done to their
disservice and disadvantage, and so both parties strove to make the best of
their opinion and faction; but now if you would be pleased to try once again,
God knows what will be the success, I suppose there can be no danger in
trying. Call some men together, whose eminency for the power of godliness will
make the matter the more venerable, entertained with the more reverence and
awe; when the people smell self and interest in any endeavors, they have the
less majesty with them. Call men, through age and experience versed in such a
work, men of a moderate and sober spirit, who prefer the interest of religion
before that of a party; blessed be God, England does not want such, call them
together to think of ways of reconciliation; though many thirst and pant after
it, yet cannot effect it, being but private men, and so not so much regarded,
and in bodies and assemblies they cannot so well drive it on; men of middle
interests, being always suspected, have a prejudice upon their endeavors; and
indeed good men cannot be imagined to be so without all touch and sense of
their own particular opinion, as not to dispute, stickle, and engage for it in
such bodies and assemblies: but now if such were called together by your
authority, to make it their only work to provide for the advantage of
religion, and to compose the differences; possibly and by the blessing of God,
much good might be done, however, you will manifest that you have not been
wanting to your duty, and therefore weigh it in your thoughts.

2. That you would quicken your Ministers and Elders in their Provincial and
Classical meetings, by some charge and command to think of ways how best to
gain and deal with dissentients. The matter is not below the care of a
Christian Magistrate. See Socrates Eccles. hist. lib. 1. cap. 7. in the Greek,
et alios passim.
Histories tell us how Constantine did beseech his Bishops to an agreement:
oversee their Counsels, travail in the peace of the Churches. Socrates says,
he was affected with the schism of the Church as his own calamity. Well then,
if you would be pleased to quicken them by your command and enable them by your
authority, to find out and to act in such ways as may tend to the ending of
the differences and controversies, much good might be done. I humbly conceive
the true nature and intent of such meetings is not altogether or chiefly to
give laws authoritatively to the particular Churches, as to consider how to
compose differences that do arise in them; and 'twere sad if the Mint and
Commin were preferred above the weighty works, and the chief of their care
were spent either in trivial disputes, or in making rules for their own,
rather then in studying all brotherly ways of gaining those that differ, and
healing the breaches of the Church. This (I say) were sad indeed, the true
intent and nature of these meetings being to give satisfaction, and to carry
things with more clearness of demonstration, and to give out the sense of the
Church in matters of difficulty; for indeed the less of a Court, and the more
of a Council they have in them the better: therefore if you would command and
chiefly commend these things of unity to their care and debates, some hope
might arise that way.

Thirdly, That you would take care that Ministers put out for scandal, may not
be so easily taken in again, against those that are humbly penitent, and
modestly ingenuous, no man would open his mouth, but for the others, I am
persuaded they are and will be a great means of our troubles, partly as they
occasion no small offense to the godly, the dead body of Amasa in the way to
discourage the people of the Lord from going on to union and accord; the sons
of Eli that cause many to abhor the offering of the Lord; partly as those that
are very apt to be the cinifloes, that will blow up the coals of strife
amongst us. The first stirs about religion in the Low Countries, were
occasioned by the Ministers of the old Leaven, whom they were feign to take in
out of necessity in that scarcity of Ministers, and to allow some of them,
because of their parts in emine^t places. Amabi^em Bdlyicarum Ecclesiaru^ pacem
atque harmoniam perturbare conati sunt o^im no^^ulli, qui deserto Papismo, sed
fer me^to ejus no^dum plenae expurgato ad ecclesias nostras tra^sicrant,
carundemque ministerio in prima ula ministroru^ inopia admoti fuera^t, C^sperus
Co^lhasius Leidae, Hermanus Herbertus Goudae and Dordrecti* etc. vid. Historiam
syn: Dord: in praes: ad ecclesias sub initio.
The story names Wiggerus, Collhaasius, and others, who kindled those sparks
of trouble, which afterward were blown up by James Arminius into a great flame.
Many observe that the Jesuits go over to the Lutherans, and foment
differences between them and the reformed, and truly we may fear their
influence, men that have the old malice and a new irritation, will stir in a
way of revenge. The Lord guide you: I am sorry to hear the complaints that are
abroad.

Fourthly, In the liberty that you give, use great caution, some things you may
be forced to bear with for a time, take heed of endangering the truths of God,
you ought to be tender of Christ's little ones; woe to those that offend them,
Mat. 18. 6. But you ought to be more tender of Christ's truths* you owe somewhat
to Christ's Saints and servants: but I say again, more to his truths? It Is
somewhat unheard of, that these two should come in contest and competition;
however, you will find Christ more jealous of his ways then of his servants; of
his truths then of his Saints: it is truth makes Saints, ( Joh. 17. 17.
Sanctify them by thy truth, thy word is truth;) and husbandmen are ever more
careful of their seed-corne, then of the increase; and besides, we may be
deceived in Saints, we do not know hearts, but we cannot so easily in truths,
because there is a sure standard to measure them by. Therefore take heed of
doing any thing against truth; it is a good old caution, In vest varietas sit
scissura, non sit, though there be diverse colors, yet let there be no rent in
the Churches coat. I will not take upon me to state the matter, what liberty
you may give, and how far; perhaps that may be unfeasonable; however 'twill not
(I hope) be too much presumption to present you with the most obvious
miscarriages of Magistrates in this matter. Three sorts of men there are in the
world, and concerning every one of them we may say, Romans 3. 17.
The way of peace they have not known.

1. Some are of a preposterous zeal in lesser differences, and are all for
extremity and violence toward those from whom they differ in the least degree
and circumstance; most of the censures inflicted by the late Bishops were
because of Ceremonies, things not weighty in any regard, no not in their own
esteem: some men breath out nothing but rage and threatenings upon the least
dissent.

I remember I have read of Joab David's General, that when his teacher had
falsely vowelled one word in the Hebrew he slew him; the place was that charge
to destroy Zechan. He read it Zachar the males of Amalec: It is good to
preserve truth, but small distempers will not need so violent a cure; it is as
if a man should fire an house to destroy the mice in it. Union is good, but
rigorous inforcements especially in trifles and things that lie far from the
heart of Religion are not so warrantable. Paul is every where most zealous
against errors, there is never an Epistle of his but has some what against
them: However none more earnest then he to bring circumcision and
uncircumcision to a profession of brotherhood.

Secondly, Some are for medleyes and compounds of religion, as if that would be
peace: Thus Charles the fifth thought to please all by that wicked book called
the Interim, it did a great deal of harm, and did not any way heal the
difference; many of late amongst us and in other reformed Churches endeavored
to blend us and Rome, Babylon, and Zion together, God hates those iniquos
syncretismos profane mixtures, and intermysticall designs; unity consists in
an agreement in the truth, not in a coagulation of errors, strings that are in
tune must not be stirred, others must be set up to them: The disobedient must
be brought up to the wisdom of the just, not that brought down to them,
Luke 1. 17. when the language is pure the Soldier is one, Zeph. 3. 9. little
hopes of agreement till you set up pure doctrine, unmixed disipline, the new
cloth set upon the old will make the rent the greater, the world thinks the
less purity the more unity; but it is otherwise, all the troubles are because
Iron will not mix with Clay, Gods ways with man's inventions.

Thirdly, Some drive at a promiscuous leave, and toleration of all opinions,
and differences though never so contrary to truth, as if this were the best way
to bring things to any peace and quiet: oh consider how great a prejudice this
is to Religion, this is the very way that Julian the Apostate took to destroy
it, Socrates Scholasticus, Ammianus Marcellinus and others that write of him
say that to ruin religion he would equally tolerate and countenance all
parties. I shall but take notice of what Quod a^e^at ideo ^^st^nate ut
dissentie^tem augente li^^^^ia non (...) minantem postea plebem, etc. Petrus Mo
rentinus in praefat. in Iuliani miso-pugenem.
one says that he was thoroughly set upon this as knowing it to be the ready
way to bring all to naught, and indeed 'twas not only the policy of this
subtle adversary, but of all the enemies of truth as the Passim cum omni bus
miscent nihil enim interest illis licet diversa tractantibus dum ad unius
veritatis exp^g^atio^em exspirent. Per lib. de praescrip. adversus Haeret cap.
41. John 3. 20
margin will inform you. And indeed where it does not destroy Religion it
does imbase it, partly because men content themselves in having made a better
choice then others about them; partly because men spend all the heat and
firstborn of their strength and zeal in the contentions and letthe practicks
go, certainly there would be but little security to truth and it is followers,
where there is such a promiscuous toleration, where men are godly they cannot
be so easily amassed into one body and confederacy with persons erroneous, they
being bound up by conscience, and having religion of their sides, are not so
flexible, and then the others cannot so well agree with them; for two different
errors can better agree and cotton among themselves then one error and the
nearest truth; darkness and darkness can better agree then light and
darkness, always you will find it, men hate the nearest truth as being that
light by which their deeds are reproved. The Eunomians and the Arians, though
they held different errors (the one denied the Godhead of the Son, the other
of the Spirit) could better agree with one another then with the Orthodox, the
Pharisees and Herodians, though of different principles (the one being for, the
other against the liberty of the Jews) yet both could conspire together to
entrapp Christ. Iebal and Ammon and Amalec could better accord with one another
then with Zion. In such a case truth would be worst provided for, always under
fears of some Sirilian vespers or a Saint Bartholomewes mattens, some sudden
eruption of violent counsels and dangers hatched against it.

Thus I have been bold to commend a few things unto you, God direct your
hearts to all seasonable counsels for his glory, and the Churches good.

work of time, what is to be done to avoid the danger of the present
distractions?

to God not man, Psalm. 11. 3. If the foundations be destroyed, what can the
righteous do. (i. e.) if religion, laws, authority and all have lost their
awe, what can they do? The answer is in the next verse: God is the holy
temple, ( i. e.) there is a God above, one in Heaven, go to him; I suppose you
are met this day as those at Ahavah to seek aright way, Ezra. 8. 21. when we
are at a loss and past the help of means, the address may be the better
made to God.

Secondly, If you go to God you must go to him in his own way; how is that?
you shall see, Job 34. 31. Surely it is meet to be said to God, I have borne the
chastisement of mine iniquity, I will offend no more; this is meet for you to
be said to God, to come before him with humiliation and reformation.

1. With humiliation, sadly reflect upon your miscarriages, I would not
willingly declaym upon that theme, too many do, it is natural to us to speak
evil of dignities: envy would blast eminency, some are mad upon Idols, they
will blemish you, for you have vexed them, others are burdened with payments,
and they will say the former times were better then these, Eccle. 7. 10. happily
Solomon relates to his own times, they complain of Salomons yoakes, though
occasioned by the Temple work in those days. Some affect the repute of bold
men; it feeds the humor of the times to lay things to your charge, The Lord
make others more sober, and you more humble, It Is your duty to smight upon the
thigh, surely there is a cause, when there were such great distractions that
they groped like a blind man, and could not find the way, they said our
iniquities are with us, as for our transgressions we know them Isa. 59. 10,
11, 12. when those that speak tremblings are little feared, surely there is
some offense, Hosea 13. 1. Commune with your own hearts, guilt works best
when it results from your own consciences, being represented from without, it
irritateth, sweetly arising from within it humbles, what is the matter then?
have you dealt with God so faithfully? with the people so kindly as you should?
have greivances been redressed? justice executed, the glory of God's house
provided for? I remember a story in Plutarchus in vita Demetrij.
Plutarch of Demetrius King of Macedonia, who when his Subjects tendered their
petitions to him of having their grievances redressed, he cast them into a
River, afterward Saleucus the great, came with an Army against him, not a man
would stir, he was taken prisoner and deprived of his Kingdom; people will
bear any thing, rather then neglects of justice, consider these things come
with humiliation.

2. Come with purposes of reformation, I will do so no more, do your first
works, if you would recover your lost glory, you know by what insinuations
Absolon stole away the hearts of the people, by those of justice and kindness,
he kissed them he did perijcere oscula, adorare vulgus, as the Historian says
of Otho; and you know he said, 2 Samuel 15. 4. Oh that I were a Judge in the
Land, then I would do them justice, and 'twould be sad if corruptions be found
in you, when distractions are upon you, it is said of the Assembly of the Gods
that had not done justice to the afflicted, nor defended the poor widow and
fatherless, Psalm. 82. 5. That they know not, neither will they understand,
they walk on in darkness, though the foundations of the Land be out of
course, they continued in perverting justice and right, though God ruined the
Commonwealth and plucked it asunder. Oh let it be never said of you, it shall
be myprayer to God for you.

FINIS.

