THE DEFEAT OF THE BARBARY FLEET; OR A Letter of Advice Relating the late
Glorious Victory, which the Republique of Venice obtaind against the Turk in
the Chanel of Scio in the Archipelago, the 3d. of May 1657.

Under the Command of the Lord Lazaro Mosenigo Captain General of the Sea to
the Republique.

London, Printed for Richard Lowndes at the white Lion, near the little North
door of Paul's, 1657.

Most Illustrious, and most Excellent Lord my most Honored Patron.
YOur Excellency shall receive herewith an account of one of the most memorable
Successes that in so short a compass of time the Divine Providence could give
to poor Mortals, over the Common Enemy.

The Venetian Fleet departed from Sdille to the number of nineteen Galleys, and
six Galeasses, the Ships being left behind to make more speed; And finding that
the Enemies Fleet was gone from Mettelino having newly come out of the
Dardanelli, to the number often Galleys, being informed there by the Slaves
that the said Fleet was at Scio where they expected recreuts from
Constantinople, we bent our course toward that place, where not finding the
said Armata, we were told by the Slaves that it was gone toward Rhodes, for
to caulk some bottoms, we making that way, we met with five Saics which were
part of the Alexandrian Caravan designed for Smirna, whereof one was burnt, and
two stranded; Thence we steerd our course toward Samos, and Scala nuova, and in
the way took a Vessel of Alexandria.

Herupon we dispatch Felucas and Brigantines toward Samos and Scala nuova in
quest of the Enemies Fleet, but before their return we finding our selfs nere
Cao corbo, we spied it betimes in the morning making sail toward the Straight
of Samos; The Turks Armata was 25 miles distant from ours, and we no sooner
discoverd it, but we made all the speed that Sails and Oars could make to
find them out. But with the favor of the wind they got to the Channel of
Samos. And having notice the Fleet from Barbary were expected with a good
quanty of Rialls to meet at Scio, and join with the rest of the Armata, we
applied our self to prevent that conjunction, and to streighten that Island,
which began already to feel want.

That Evening another Saic was taken, and Advice was brought of nine Vessels
which made sail toward Scio with a weak wind, and six more because of the
Night were left behind; All these were Ships of Barbary as we had intelligence,
which were going to reinforce the Turks Armata; And amongst them there was the
Golden Cross a Flemish Ship, who being come from Venice with a Cargason of
Biscuit, and being retired to Tine, was taken by them, a little before, they
counterfeiting a Flemish Banner, which the Captain perceiving, he savd his men
ashore, and left them the Ship.

These were Ships from the Coast of Algier, among the foremost there was the
Admiral, the Captain, and the Padrona in the middle, which was taken last of
all.

They having discoverd our Fleet, they began to streighten their Sails, to
join with those that were furthest off, showing thereby a resolution to fight.

Thereupon we ordered our selfs for battle, on the right side stood Proveditor
Badoaro, on the left Comissary Michael, and in the middle the most Excellent
Lord the Capitan General Mocenigo; Thereupon the Galleys divided themselfs to
three Squadrons, with two Galeasses attending evry Squadron.

In the Vantgard their sayld the Gally of Barbaro Captain of the Gulf,
assisted by, and directed by the Lord Augustine Marcello; This Vessel with
incomparable valor made toward, and assaulted the Enemy.

The Fortress of Scio stounded the Enemy with their great Canon shot. The most
Excellent Lord Captain General Mocenigo having disposd of all things for Fight,
the Canons went off for three hours perpetually on both sides, with such an
ardor and fury, that a greater obstinacy could not be in any Battle.

And it may easily be beleevd, for the Moors or Barbareschi, are of the
fiercest, and most undaunted nature of any among the Turks.

There being scarce a breath of wind left, the Ships began to make use of legs
for wings, and make use of Oars, which they use to do when they are out in
course, but by the high virtue and valor of the Captain General all our
Galeasses were inordred to board the Enemy, and the first who did so was
Lodovico Baffo Director of the Captain Galeassa Morosini, who approaching the
poop of the Enemies Admiral with two Galleys more which were to attend him,
viz. that of Commissary Michael, and the honorable Giacomo Pollani, who did the
work, For the comands of the General were so punctually performd, that the
Aggressors being twice beaten back, yet by pure valor and force they made
themselfs Masters of the said Ship, which did much animat the rest.

At the same time the Captain of the Galeasse Loredano boorded another ship
being attended by the Gallie of the Lord Gerolimo Pesaro, and after a tough
fight, he made the Vessel his own.

In the interim there came out of the Port of Scio a Gally, and 2 Galeots for
the assistance of the Enemy, but the Lord Francisco Viscamo took order with
them, and beat them back again to port.

The most excellent Captain General did incessantly torment the Enemies
Captain with his Gallie, who made more resistance than others, and Captain
Renier attempting to board her, the wind interposing it self by turning
Northwest obliged him to pass with the Gallie of the Lo. Nicolas Zane to the
boording of another Ship. But in his place there came Antonio Priuli with his
Galeasse, who with extraordinary fierceness set upon her, so that the
opposition was very obstinat, At last Mehemet a Renegado Hollander who commanded
in chief being hurt in the Leg, whereof he died the next day, the Ship was
won, and the Banner of the Christian General was planted upon Her to the
glory of the great God who furtherd the Enterprise.

The Lo. Francesco Mosenigo Lieutenant, and Brother to the most excellent
Captain General who assisted all the while at the prore, did stir himself
notably in this exploit, as also Signor Aluise Dona who in quality of an
adventurer and Volontier was upon the said gallie, did show most signal proofs
of resolution and valor in the acquest of the said shipp.

One shipp alone which was lagg behind the rest by the favor of the wind being
joined with six more which were already discoverd, and come near, put
themselfs all to flight.

With the ship on the right wing a most blouddy fight continued by the Squadon
of the Proveditor Badoer, causing two to run a shore which were afterward fyrd
by the enemy himself, wherein some swom to land, others chose rather an
honorable death then to expose themselfs to Slavery.

The Captain of the Golfo Barbaro did board another Shipp being joynd with
Signor Lunardo Moro, who were emulous with one another in point of valor; But
this fight cost us dear, for the Captain of the Golf was hurt in his left
shoulder, Marcello director of the Galley had a sore hurt in his right foot,
and Lunardo Moro had a muskett short in his neck which is feared is Mortal; In
the gallie there remaind hurt Francisco Bollani, Luca Falier with little hope of
life; In this engagement the courage of Sig. Baptista Caotorta upon the gallie
Remera was very remarkable.

The generous actions, and exemplary prowess of Father Augustine Moro a
Dominican Friar is not here to be omitted, for the gallie Moro being
indistresse, he with few more endured the Shocks of the Turks who from the land
pelted the prore, where he receavd five wounds but non mortal we hope.

Two galleys being stranded the Proveditor of the Armata came to the succor of
the most excellent Captain General who drew the gally Capitan de golfo from
danger, and by his ordinance driving away the peeple from the shore which were
come thither in swarms, both the galleys were freed; And so in five hours
battle were preservd all the Vessels of the most Serene Republique, but not
without effusion of blood.

Of nine Vessels four were taken out of the very body of the battle, but so
torn that they came as naked Carcases without masts, so furiously did the
Venetian arms play against them.

Among those Vessels which were taken there is the Captain, and the Admirante;
Among the rest one fledd away fearing the Shock, Three were burnt, and one two
days after because they could not hale her ashoare they put fire in her.

The Slaves which were taken in this battle come to a great number, among whom
Aidin Chaus who was sent with money from Constantinople to Barbary for to hyre
this Fleet for the service of the Gran Signor, There was also taken Mehemet di
Berb^ria Colonel of the Janissaries, Cusain d' Algieri Captain of a Shipp, as
also Captian General of the Fleet the who died a little after of his wounds,
beside a great number of Christian Slaves were freed.

The number of the dead on the Eenmies side was great because few could escape
by swimming, and there was not a Ship but had 150 Soldiers, and evry one had 30
Mariners Slaves of all Nations.

The dead on our side came to 100 and 17. among whom Colonel Pietro de Landa a
Subject of high esteem for experience and valor.

But the wounded came to the number of 346, among whom besides the Noblemen
before nominated there is Signor Andrea Bragadini, an extraordinary Captain of
one of the galeasses, upon which Signor Antonio Loredan^ had occasion to
discover an extraordinary valor who was aboard the said galeasse; Among the
wounded there are also Don vicenzo, Vando and Horatio Bartolini.

Such was the conclusion of this glorious fight, which promises some good
fortune to follow upon the Island of Scio; And certainly it may be esteemd an
incomparable Glory, that so small a Fleet should take and destroy so many ships,
and put to flight 7 more which were in a warlike equipage; But all must be
attributed to the assistance of that great God who protects the just cause of
the Republique, wherein the most serene Prince Bertuca valiero does govern in
chief, and with such singular prudence; Add hereunto that the Heroique virtue,
and valor, the piety, justice, the auspicious fortune, and rare directions of
the most excellent Captain General Mocenigo, did infinitely conduce to this
signal victory, which promises security to all Christendom, with benedictions
and triumph to the Venetian Armies.

This is all I can impart for the present to your Excellency, reserving my self
for a more punctual relation another time, wherein there will be occasion to
speak of the merit, and glory of evry one of those noble Venetians who with so
much magnanimity increase the ancient renown of this invincible Republique.

From Galeazza 30 Maii 1655. Your Excellencies Most humble, and most devoted
Servant N.N.M.
Postscript.
SInce my last, there are fresh News, that a squadron of Turkish Saiques are
taken, and that the Venetian Fleet is advanced through the Castles into the
Hellespont toward Constantinople, where there are fearful confusions, the
Greek Patriarch being lat^ly strangled, and the Janezaries bafled the Gran
Signore in the Seraglio, and committed many other Insolences.




