A DIVINE PROJECT TO SAVE A KINGDOM: Opened In a Sermon to the Right Honorable
the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, of the City of London, at their
Anniversary meeting on Easter Monday, Apr. 22. 1644. at Christ-Church.

By STEPHEN MARSHALL, B. D. Minister of Gods Word at Finchingfield in Essex.

JER. 5. 1. Run you to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now
and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if
there be any that executes judgment, that seeks the truth, and I will
pardon it.

REV. 3. 19. Be zealous therefore, and repent.

Imprimatur, Charles Herle.

London Printed by Richard Cotes, for Stephen Bowtell, and are to be sold at
his shop at the sign of the Bible in Popes-head-Alley, 1644.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, of the famous
City of London.
Lukewarm Laodicea by some has been made Englands Emblem, and sutably
enough, not so much to the cold climate, and this cool evening of the world we
live in, as to the tepid spring of our reformation at first, especially to the
decaying Autumn, which of late years we were come to. But as cold often breeds
an inflammation, so this has inkindled Gods wrath, and it these sad
combustions, which we are already well-nigh consumed with: what remains now
therefore but that fire should take out fire, the kindly warmth of holy zeal,
the woeful heat of this devouring fire, that it may not come to everlasting
burnings? Great is the honor that God in this kind has conferred upon you,
and great the blessings which he has to this whole land conveyed by you: Your
Engines not more admirable to quench fire in your City, then your care, cost,
and blood freely useful to the extinguishing of the general scare-fire of
this whole kingdom: your zeal herein has saved many, provoked more, has
under God been as a wall of fire about us, and will be for ever a more
sparkling Diamond in your Crown, then those stones Ezekiel 24. 14:
of fire in the King of Tyres Diadem. The Ministers Lungs some make the
Prophets Bellows to blow up a dying fire, I desired Jer 6. 29.
that mine in preaching this Sermon might help to blow up yours to a yet
brighter flame; and if this further publishing of it (at your request) may any
whit serve to keep still alive this holy fire on the Altar of your hearts,
whilst Incendiaries set on fire from hell, are every where shooting fiery
bullets to set all into a further combustion, I am but subservient to my great
Master in his present work, who is now purging the blood of our Jerusalem out
of the midst of it, by the spirit of judgment and burning; Fervet opus, and
then I know you will not cool. Isa 4 4.


Its reformation, work, and the examples of Phinehas, Elias, John Baptist,
Luther, Knox, and those other great reformers tell us it requires zeal. Baruch
was a great repairer of Jerusalems walls, but it is said of him, that flagrante
animo instauravit, Nehem 3 20. (...)
he repaired fast, but it was when he was hot upon it.

It is Gods work, and they must be fervent in spirit that would serve the
Lord, who had rather we should let his work alone, Romans 12. 11.
then see us freeze at it, it is his zeal that must now do all for us, and
therefore he expects that our zeal should do what Hab. 97. 37. 32
we can for him.

It is Christ's work and cause, who is willing to redeem us, but that we
might be a people zealous of good works; he Tit. 2. 14.
did not sweat that we should freeze, nor shed his blood out of his own
veins, that it might congeale in ours.

It is finally a great work, and the oppositions against it are greater, but
as they said to Joshua, Only be courageous, so I to Josh. 1. 7.
you, Only be zealous, and then be not discouraged; Hannibal by fire made
his way over the Alps, and you by zeal may make yours over greatest
mountains of opposition, which without running up with full strength and speed
will not be gotten up to; Palms are the Emblem of victory, but they love to
grow in a hot soil; be warm, and promise your selves the Palm; nay God
promises it, and that not only to Smyrna (whose name smells sweet of warm
incense) that if she will be faithful to the death, Revel. 2. 10.
he will give her a Crown of life; but even to our cooler Laodicea, that her,
whom he was ready to spew out of his mouth whilst she was lukewarm, he will
be ready to come into and sup with, Revel. 3. 16. with 19. 20.
when she shall once be zealous and repent: which is the humble and hearty
prayer of your

Servant for Christ,

A DIVINE PROJECT TO SAVE A KINGDOM.
Numb. 25. 10, 11. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Phinehas the Son of
Eleazar the son of Aaron the Priest, has turned my wrath away from the
children of Israel, while he was zealous for my sake among them, that I
consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy.
IF you view this Portion of Scripture Introduction to the Text.
seriously, you will find (Right Honorable and Beloved) that the business
contained in it, does very nigh concern our selves. In a few words, The
condition of the Israelites (at the present time which this Text speaks of)
was this. They had endured a long peregrination in the wilderness, for forty
years together, God had visited former rebellions upon them, and now their
wanderings were well-nigh accomplished, they were come almost to the skirt of
the Land of Canaan; God had begun to deliver the promised inheritance unto
them, by overthrowing, and rooting out Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og the
King of Bashan, and had given their Country into the hand of Israel, and had
told them he would go on, and root out all the rest of the Canaanites before
them, that there should not a man be able to stand Deuteronomy. 3. 21. 22.
in their way, As the Lord your God has done unto these two Kings, so shall
he do unto the other Kingdoms, whither they passed, they need not fear them,
the Lord their God would fight for them: and would very shortly place them in
that land which he had long before promised to their forefathers; And now
when they were just upon entering into the Land, they had like to have made ship
wrack in the very Harbor, and had brought down such a new Plague upon them,
that if there had not been a timely remedy put in, they had perished every
Mothers child of them, without any forain enemy striking a stroke at them.
And thus it was when Balaam could not obtain leave from God to Numb 31. 16.
curse the Israelites, he taught Balak the King of Moab a trick, how he might
make God himself curse them, viz. If he could by any ways draw them to
rebel against God. He had told him plainly, that while they kept close to
God, all the world would be too weak for them, but could he but devise any
way to make them fall out with God, God would take a course with them himself,
he would destroy them to Balak his hand. Balak according to this counsel,
goes and makes all the Courtship that he could to the Israelites, sends
them all kind of provision, sends them the handsomest women, and whatsoever
might allure them unto wantonness, and thereby draws them first to commit
fornication, and uncleanness, and then (as one sin draws on another) they
got them to feast in their Idol Temples, and so to eat the Numb. 25. 2.
sacrifices that were offered to Baal Peor, And the Israelites did eat, and
bowed down unto their Gods; and God knows how many thousands of the Israelites
on a sudden were taken in the strength of this lust: which so extremely
provoked God, that without any more ado, he sends the Plague among them,
such a plague which in the space of four and twenty hours, destroyed twenty
four thousand men, many of the prime of their strength, and it was grown so
hot, that a few twenty four hours more, were like to have made an end of all
this great company: Now they seeing the anger of God so hot, fall down on their
knees, and lament their sins and cast about to see which way they might
procure their peace.

While they were about it, there comes one Zimri, one of the chief Princes
of one of their Tribes, and before the face of all the people, leads a Lady
who was Daughter to one of the chief Noblemen of Moab, leads her into his
Tent, and there goes and commits the same villainy with her that had thus
provoked God to send this plague among them, Phinehas the Son of Eleazar the
High Priest, seeing this high and audacious boldness of this wretched
Nobleman, was so filled by the Spirit of God with holy indignation, That he
takes his Javelin, follows them into their Tent, takes them, probably, in
the very act of their filthiness, strikes the man through the body, and the
woman through the belly, and nailed them both to the ground, and out he went
again: And God took this part of Phinchas so kindly, to see him so inflamed
with the zeal of justice, that he presently commanded the Angel to put up his
Sword, and not to kill a man more, Zimri and Cosbi were the two last that dyed,
at that time not one more perished. And that all the world might know, what had
stopped the Plague so suddenly, he tells Moses in the words that I have read.

Phineas the Son of Eleazar the Priest has pacified my wrath, while he was
zealous for my sake among them.

And so I have now brought you to the Text, which you shall hear (God willing)
to be a divine project, how one, or a few men, may save a whole People, a
whole Nation, when they seem to be sinking under utter ruin.

Wherein observe two things. And Parts of it.


First, What their disease was.

Secondly, What the cure was.

Their disease was this, They were under the guilt of their own sin, and under
the heat of Gods wrath, which broke out in such a plague, that they were all
like to have perished suddenly: that was their disease.

The cure of this disease you have in the words I have read, and upon which I
shall spend the hour (God willing;) only observe a few things from their
disease, both their sin, which was bodily uncleanness, and spiritual
uncleanness, Fornication, and Idolatry; And their punishment the anger of God,
hot kindled against them, and poured out in a devouring Pestilence, and such a
one as was like suddenly to devour them all.

This fearful sin and Plague betyding them immediately after such great
deliverances, mercies, victories, teaches us,

1. That such is the power of corruption, remaining Observe. 1.
even in Gods own people, that no mercies are able to keep them from present
running into most foul rebellions, if but left unto themselves: as appears by
innumerable examples of Gods people in Covenant with him, David, Hezekiah, the
Apostle Peter, etc. whose sudden and fearful falls, even after greatest
mercies, assure us, that no tinder or gunpowder is more prone to take fire, no
unbridled horse more prone to run, no Eagle more ready to fly unto the prey,
then we are to run into the foulest evils, even presently after the greatest,
most precious favors received, if God but take off the bridle of his
restraining grace. Which may teach us, 1. as to be tender to others in their
Application.
falls, 2. so to consider our selves, and to walk with humility and godly
fear, and thirdly, to entreat the Lord daily, not to lead us into temptation,
not to permit us to be solicited by Satan's temptations, or outward objects, or
our own concupiscence; or if it be his good pleasure to permit us to be
tried, that by his own grace he would preserve us, that he would not suffer
us to be foiled or overcome, who else shall infallibly yield to any
temptation, whether on the right hand or the left.

2. That the nearer God takes a people to himself and the Obs. 2.
greater mercies he bestows upon them, the more severe and fierce are his
judgments against them; he had but newly delivered up Sihon King of Heshbon
and Og the King of Bashan, and given their land for an inheritance unto them,
and compelled Balaam to preach that no sorcerie or enchantment, no force or
fraud could prevail against them, and they rebelling against him, he
presently turns upon them in extremity of wrath and fury.

And this is according to his word, that if they who are I evit 26. 4. to 41.
owned by him as his people walk contrary to him, he will walk contrary to
them, and plague them seven times and seven times, and yet seven times, and
seven times, with sicknesses, famine, pestilence, sword, captivity, yea more
severely then to the heathen. Hear yet this word that the Amos 3. 1, 2.
Lord has spoken against you O children of Israel, against the whole family
which I brought up from the land of Egypt, you only have I known of all the
families of the earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities.

And this is also according to his practice; after he had brought them out of
Egypt he bare with their murmurings until he had taken them into a Covenant
with himself Amos 3. 12. Ezekiel. 16. Dan. 9. 12.
at Horeb, and after that every new sin had a new plague: No murmurings
punished like Isreal's murmurings, Idolatries plagued like Iudahs Idolatries,
the like wrath and fury not powered out any where in the world, as was powered
out upon Jerusalem.

And this manner of his dealing is most agreeable to reason and equity,
because these kind of sins are committed against more knowledge, and so
deserve the more and smarter stripes: There is also more ingratitude and
unkindnesse in them; when Jesurun is grown fat with mercies, with the kidneys
of wheat and the pure blood of the grape, then to kick with the heel, to be
unmindfull of his rock, this exceedingly provokes the Lord to anger: Yea, God
is more dishonored by their sins then by any others, as a husband by the
filthy conversation of his Wife, or a Father of his Children. Behold, thou art
called a Jew, instructed in the Law, make thy boast of God, etc. Do thou
commit Zeph. 3. 7.
Sacrilege? Do thou steal? Do thou commit aduitery? What then? The Name
of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles, because of you, as it is written.

This serves first to acquit God in these his severe judgments Use 1.
against us in England; he has called an assembly of violent men against us,
he has given us to drink the cup of astonishment, a cup of deadly Wine, but in
truth when we consider things sadly and seriously, we may wonder we remain a
Nation, that we are not utterly consumed; God has made us the wonder of the
World for mercy, has done mighty things for this Nation, has heaped
deliverance upon deliverance; no Nation like us for mercy, but alas, I must
also say, no Nation like us for unkindnesse, and Rebellion against him; we who
should have made all his Mercies, motives and incentives to further obedience,
service, and thankfulness, have, not only sinned under them and against them,
but with them, fought against him with his own weapons, and been worse and
worse, the more he has done, for us; the more his Sun has shined upon us, the
more like a filthy dunghill, have we putrifyed and stunke in his nostrils. Let
us therefore humbly acquit him, and say with Daniel, The Lord our God is
righteous in all his judgments, for we obeyed not his Deuteronomy 9. 14.
voice: And with Ezra, What shall we say after this, O our God? for we have for
saken thy Commandments.

Secondly, Yea let us tremble and be deeply abased before him for our great
rebellions, lest he proceed and 3.
make us drink the very dregs of his cup of indignations. He was pleased
publicly in calling his people out from spiritual Babylon, to take Germany,
the first of all the Nations, and now in his day of visitation he has first
begun with them, and these six and twenty years he has most heavily afflicted
them, and still his hand is stretched out against them: long time has he
spared us, and seemed to say of us as once he did of Judah, and Jerusalem, I
have cut off other Nations, and destroyed their Cities, I said surely, Romans 2.
17, 18.
England will receive instruction, that their dwelling should not be cut off,
but they rose early and corrupted all their doings: And now the cup is come
over unto us, we are last taken in hand; Oh let us timely meet him, lest he
proceed to make our plagues proportionable to his former mercies, and our
wickedness.

Thirdly, And for time to come let us beware that with 3.
Jesurun we kick not at him, when he has fatted us: the usual course of the
world is this, the more mercies God gives them, the more liberty they take to
sin against him; the more learned, the more honored, the more rich men are, the
more bold they make with Gods Law, to break it and cast it out; and the more
spiritual helps we have, and furtherances many enjoy, the more secure, proud,
and wanton they are before him, but know for certain, he keeps a Register of
all his Mercies, and thy account must be answerable, he remembers how long thou
have lived upon him, how near he has taken thee unto himself, how often he
has spared thee, how accommodated thee with wealth, yokefellow, children,
credit, friends, but above all, how long thou have sat under his heavenly
droppings, what variety of Ministers, etc. He furnishes thee with all* let
thy care be to bethink thy self how thou may lift up thy head, when he will
come to reckon for all thy Talents, and when at any time the flesh begins to
take liberty, because he inlargeth thee, check it thus, and say, Many a mercy
has the Lord given me, for which of them do I thus abuse him? Shall I thus
requite the Lord, O foolish creature and unwise? is not he thy Father, that
brought thee; etc.

Thirdly, that this betided them just when God was giving Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Obser. 3.
them possession of the promised Land, when he was marching in the greatness
of his strength to destroy all their enemies, that not a man might be able to
resist them, yet then he himself with his own hands for their sins turns
upon them, ready to destroy them all: Learn this lesson from it.

That when the Lord is bestowing the greatest mercy, working the greatest
deliverance, destroying the potentest enemies, carrying himself, so that all
the world shall not be able to hinder a people from receiving the greatest and
most desirable mercy, yet their own wickedness breaking out, may deprive them
of all, and utterly undo them when they are nearest the enjoying of their
happiness: Now the 40. years were ended, and Og and Sihon both killed, and God
engaged by Covenant that no enemy should stand before them, had renewed his
Covenant again with them, put them into a way that there needs no more but
merely to enter in the Land; a new rebellion breaks out on their part, which
brings in a Plague that killed more of them then they had lost in all the
wars that ever they had had. This is just like that which the Lord spoke by
the Prophet Jeremie: That at what time Ier. 18. 10.
he speaks concerning a nation, to build it and to plant it, if Ier. 18. 10.
that nation do evil in his sight, he will repent him of all the good that
he promised, and he will root them up and break them down: not that God
changes his mind, but that these wickednesses did change the state and
condition of this people, and put them out of a capacity of receiving what God
else would be willing to confer upon them. Beloved I dare not stay you on
this, neither durst I pass it over without mentioning, and I mention it to
this end, that we may not be too forward to promise our selves too
Application.
much of our present prosperous condition which we seem to be in. I confess
the Lord has not only by a mighty hand upheld us in the midst of all our
trials these two or three last years, but has of late since we have owned
him in a Covenant and sworn for reformation of Religion, and the Counsels of
such as seek our ruin have more apparently owned Idolatry by joining with the
bloody Rebels of Ireland that are setting up popery, and rooting out our
Religion in Ireland, and endeavoring the like against us, since that day I say
the Lord has most admirably gone on and owned us, and been with our Armies,
and hardly (unless it were once) given us any check, but all has gone on very
prosperously and through the goodness of God, to man's eye we are in a better
posture now then ever we were since the beginning of our public troubles.

But for all that do not promise your selves too much out of the present
condition of things, they may be all well to man's eye, but I tell you
brethren, there are such things found in every corner of the Land; that
impenitencie for our old villainies, both of Idolatry and whoredom, and blood,
the blood of Prophets, and the blood of just men, and the unprofitablenesse
under great means, that unthankfulness for late mercies, that breaking out
into new rebellion, such terrible divisions in Church matters, in
State-matters, in Parliament, in City, every where, as if we were divided in
minutula frustula, into the least bits that we could be cut into, so many new
crying sins found in every corner of the Land, that if a man could with a
spiritual eye look upon them, he would with Ezra sit him down astonished,
and with renting his heart as well as his hair cry, Lord, though thou have
wrought all sorts of deliverances for us, we deal so with thee, that we
fear thy wrath will break out so hot that there will be no recovery: for
Gods sake, be not too confident, that you may the better with fear and
reverence attend to the helps that I shall give you afterward. He that would
have said three years ago to England, that before two years at an end, they
shall see England in the miserablest condition that ever had been in these
100. years, hardly a man could have imagined whence the plague should come,
our land in peace, flourishing with wealth, a Parliament called, oppressors
broken, all our neighboring kingdoms either our friends, or else themselves
plunged in war and blood; whence should the enemy come that should be able
to mischief us? yet you see that from above God has sent a fire down, and
kindled it in our own bowels, which has eaten and devoured into every corner
of the Kingdom: and beloved God has new Magazines, new treasuries of
judgments still, that if he please to take us in hand, and deal severely
with us, when we are taking possession of all the mercy that our souls could
desire, our own wickedness may find us out and ruin us: you see had it not
been prevented, it had been the condition of this people at this time.

These things I only name, it is the remedy of this evil which I desire to
spend an hour in, and there are three things in it.

First, who the Physician was that cured them, and that you 2. Part of the Text.
have in these words, Phinehas the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the
Priest, he was the man that did it.

Secondly, what the cure was that he wrought for them, that you have in these
words: Phinehas the son of Eleazar the Priest has pacified my wrath; that
was the cure he wrought, he did pacify Gods wrath.

Thirdly, the means whereby he did it, and that you have in these words:
While he was zealous among them for my sake sake: Phinehas the son of
Eleazar has pacified my wrath while he was zealous for my sake.

I will begin with the first of them, and that I will only name, because there
are but two lessons that chiefly I intend to insist upon.

1. Who it was? It was Phinehas the son of Eleazar the Priest, this man did
it, God tells all the world, he was the only man that did it, here were a
million of people or more who seemed to be condemned to destruction, and some
24. thousand of them executed in one day, and the rest going on as fast as
might be, one man does one excellent act, that saves all the rest of them
from ruin: the lesson that I commend to your thoughts from it is Whence, first
observe. Doct.
this.

That as it is possible for one man to destroy a great deal One man may save a
whole kingdom. Eccles. 9. 18. Joshua 7.
of good; As Solomon says, one sinner destroys much good. One Jonah may
help to sink a whole Ship, one Achan endanger a whole Army; So one man may
save a whole Kingdom, one man, one Phinehas is the only visible means which
God owneth to pacify his wrath, so as to save a whole kingdom from ruin, a
million of people had died without it; and you have a great many of examples of
the like in the Scripture what one man has been able to do in that kind: how
often did Moses save them all, that when the Lord had even seemed to swear
that he would destroy them, Moses has come and tried it out hand to hand,
body to body with God, and turned him back again that he could not destroy
them, as you have it in the 106. Psalm, v. 23. so he said, he would destroy
them had not Moses his chosen stood in the gap, and turned away his wrath,
driven it back again. And one innocent man may deliver a whole Island; a whole
Island as big as England may Job 22. 30.
be delivered by one man: and the Lord himself professes in the fifth of
Jeremiah when he came down with a purpose to destroy them, Run (says he)
through the Ier. 5.
Land and find me one man, there he describes him, and I shall describe him
afterward what kind of man he shall be, but find me out such a man, and I
will spare all the City for him. And in the 22. of Ezekiel toward the latter
end, when the Lord said that he wondered that the people were so set on ruin:
I sought for a man that might have stood in the breach: if he could have found
but one hedg-stake left, the Lords wrath would have kept out still. This I
only name, and I name it to this end, that it might be Application.
an encouragement to every one who has a good heart to the cause of God and to
the safety of England, that he would prepare himself to receive the
instructions that shall be given him, and resolve, (the grace of God assisting
him) that he will follow it: for I am confident, if the Lord help me to open
what I have prepared for you, when the Sermon is done you will be ready to
say, could all England be such as you speak of, or could you find a great
number of such men, then indeed we should certainly be saved, and God would
not destroy us; In the mean time do thou learn for one, for thou can not
tell what one man or woman may do, one Paul saved all the ship, and though
thou should be alone, as Elias thought he was alone, or as one time Moses
was alone, thou can not tell how far the Lord may look upon many hundred
of thousands for thy sake; the Lord himself has given you an evidence of it
here, and told all the world it was one man rescued them; much more when thou
art not alone, but many thousands join with thee, there may be hope: if ten
men might have rescued Sodom and the rest of those abominable Cities of the
plain, why should thou not hope that the land may be spared for your
sakes? however if the worst come, thou shall deliver thy own soul. But this I
dare not handle, I only named it.

Secondly, what was the cure that he wrought? Phinehas the son of Eleazar
has pacified my wrath, has pacified my wrath; Indeed the Plague ceased, there
was not a man died of the Pestilence after Phinehas had done that excellent
act, but God takes no notice of that, but the thing he plainly laid down was
this, that Phinehas had pacified his wrath, he had quenched and cooled his
revenged justice which was kindled against them. That was the cure; And from
this the lesson that I observe is this, v^z.

That the pacifying of Gods wrath is the removing of the Doct. 2. Pacifying
Gods wra^h removes any Plague.
Plague, whatsoever the Plague be, be it the Sword be it the pestilence, be
it famine, be it wild beasts, be it what ever any people had experience of,
pacifying of Gods wrath is the removing of the plague; the Lord himself says
that he had pacified his wrath, and thereby yields the case as granted on
their side, no further evil was to be done against them, now Gods wrath was
pacified. And I desire you that you would first see how plain it is in the
Scripture, and then I hope it will be a profitable lesson for this great
Assembly; That the pacifying of Gods wrath is the removal of every plague. I
need give you no other evidence then this, That the people of God under all
their judgments which at any time they have lain, have never made any other
suite to God but one, that he would turn his wrath away from them: I might
give you 40. several examples of it; when they have sometimes lain in
captivity, sometimes under the Sword of an enemy, pestilence has raged, etc.
their only suite to God was this, that he would but turn away his wrath from
them: Psalm. 80. 3. 7. and 85. 4, 5. Dan. 9. 16, 17. etc. Their only suite was
to this effect, when they lay under most heavy plagues and judgments, Lord
cause thine anger to cease toward us; will thou be angry for ever, will thou
draw out thine anger to all generations? let thine anger and thy fury be
turned away from thy City Jerusalem, cause thy face to shine upon thy
Sanctuary that is desolate, cause thy face to shine upon us and we are safe;
still begging at Gods hands this one only mercy, that he would but merely
pacify his wrath, and there is all the cure they desired.

You shall likewise find that in Scripture all kind of judgments Exodus ^5. ^.
Namb. 16. 46. Joshua 9. 20 2 Chronicles. 24. 18 28 11. 32. 16. Esa. 13. 5. Dan. 8.
12.
are called by the name of Gods wrath, and his indignation, and several
plagues are called the arrones of his indignation, the weapons of his
indignation, and the end of a plague is called the end of the indignation. In
the 8. Dan. v. 19. I will make thee know what shall be in the last end of
indignation, he meant the end of the plague of Antiochus, but he names
nothing but Gods indignation; end the one and you end all: and this you may
clearly understand, if you please but to weigh these two things with me.

First, that the wrath and indignation of God is not only Which is
demon^trated.
the greatest plague of all other to Gods people, as indeed it is, but it is
the only cause of all other plagues; sin 1.
indeed is the meritorious cause, but the wrath of God is the only efficient
cause, the only worker, there is nothing that is imaginable to be a plague
upon Gods people, that can come out of any other spring or storehouse, from any
other hand, but only from the wrath of God.

I say there is nothing that is worthy the name of a plague, or that is a
plague which can come from any other fountain or storehouse, but only from
Gods wrath: from God it must come, that is without all question: Affliction
does not rise out of the dust, nor originally from any creature, all the devils
in hell are not able to inflict one plague without God, not kill a poor hog,
etc. This no man who is not an Atheist doubts of; now if they come from God
they must either come from his favor or from his wrath, there are but these
two Well-heads, they are indeed acts of his power and providence, but are done
according to the counsels of his will, either his good pleasure or his
displeasure; If they come from Gods displeasure, there is wrath; if not from
that, they all come from his love: Now this I propound to your serious
thoughts; that whatsoever betideth any man in the world, those self-same things
that are unsufferable, intolerable hard things, when they come not in Gods
displeasure, they are all good things, things to be rested in, to be
satisfied in, if they come but from the good will of God.

As for example, take m^ a man to be hanged upon a Gallows, he is a cursed
man, Cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree.

Yet take that man that shall die the death of the cross, and let it be out
of Gods love and good will, the cross is the greatest blessing to him. The
Lord never loved his own Son better then when he hanged upon the Cross.
Therefore does my Father love me, because I will hang on the Cross for my
people. And though it were a curse in the eye of the world, it was the greatest
mercy that ever God showed to the Church, to take his Son and hang him on the
Cross.

Take a Lions Den, let but Daniel be put into a Lions Dan. 6.
Den, let there nor wrath go with it, the Lions Dens is a blessing.

Take Paul in all his whippings, his poverty, his banishments, his shipwracks,
his buffetings, and all that ever betided him, let there be no wrath in it, set
him in the stocks, do what you will, let there be no wrath, and there is no
plague in any of them.

All Jobs afflictions, let the fire come down from heaven and burn up his
cattle, let the wind come from heaven and strike the house at the four
corners, and knock out the brains of ten children all at a time, let there be
no wrath in it, and there is no plague in it.

There is no plague where there is no wrath. I could give you a hundred
evidences of this; believe it, the self same thing which to others are
plagues, though they may remain, yet (as one calls them wittily and truly)
they are silken afflictions; plundering, poverty, plague sores, undoing of
outward estates, they are all silken afflictions, as they come from love, and
there is no hurt in them. There is an imagination of some men (but the world
shall never see the truth of it) of a certain stone they call the Philosophers
stone, which will, as these men fancy, turn Iron into Gold: Gods love does it;
That will turn Iron into gold, all crosses into blessings, Iron chains into
gold chains, it will turn death, plagues, poverty, imprisonments,
banishments, it will turn any of these, all of them into invalluable mercies;
let them but only come from Gods love, and well enough; let but God say to the
man whose house he burns, I burn thy house but I love thee, let him say to
him whose child he kocketh in the head, I take thy child away in my love,
there is no plague then. In a word, the thing I would have you believe from
this first branch of my proof is this.

That as things that are seeming mercies, are in truth real plagues when they
come from wrath: So things that are seeming plagues, are real mercies when
they do not come from wrath. I say, seeming mercies are plagues, if they come
from wrath. Let God spread a table in the Wilderness to a people, and feed
them with Quails, and Manna from heaven, let it be in wrath, let the
Israelites come and Psalm. 78. 23. 27. 31.
beg a King, and let him give them the properest man in all the land, and give
him in wrath; he does undo them in giving them a King.

But on the other side, let it seem never such a cross, if there be no wrath
in it, there is no plague in it; therefore whatsoever plague any lie under, do
but pacify Gods wrath, and you end the plague. And that is the first ground
that I gave you of it.

The second is that all plagues, the things themselves that are plagues, all of
them come and go at the commandment 2.
and word of God only. That as they can come from none but him, so with the
infinitest ease that can be imagined, does God, as send, so remove any of
them, how heavy or strange soever it be. Therefore pacify but his Spirit and
you end the plague immediately. As for example;

Suppose a City brought to that pass by famine, and poverty, that they are
feign to eat one another, that there is nothing to keep them one day longer
from starving, and that to all humane imagination, it must be a long time
before ever the City can recover the blow again; God with speaking one word
in an hour or two makes it all up: as you shall have one example of it in
Samaria, when they 2 Kings ^.
were brought to that pass that over night an Asses head, that has but little
meat on it at the best, and poor meat it is, an Asses head shall be a Kings
dish, that he shall give fourscore pieces of silver for it, and a Kab of
Doves dung shall be worth a sufficient quantity of money, to be eaten; if
God speak but the Word, the next day a Bushel of fine flower shall be sold
for a shekell, though no man could imagine how yet, God made it good, you know
the story.

Let a plague come to be so hot that in a matter of two days or little more,
three or fourscore thousand men are 2 Samuel 24.
cut off with it, if God speak but one word, the Angel puts up his Sword, and
there is not a man dies more. I will restore to you, says God, all the years
that the Caterpillars Joel 2. 25.
have taken from you, all the Caterpillars that have been devouring England
thus long, and all that they have plundered and spoiled; (attend to this any of
you that are here, who are daily plundered in many parts of the kingdom, in
your lands, in your wares and in your states;) If God speak but the word, it is
all made up in the twinkling of an eye. If you will therefore pacify God, you
end the plague. Beloved, this is not the maine lesson I would stay upon, yet
give me leave to make some application of it, and it shall be but one only
use.

And that is a direction from Heaven of the readiest way, the shortest cut, to
obtain an establishment for this Application. Therefore our greatest business is
to pacify Gods wrath.
poor distressed Land at this day. I dare say all you who are
Publique-spirited men, are very thoughtfull to think how, and which way it
might be brought about; that, if God see it fit, this Summer at the furthest
might end these bloody wars, these uncomfortable divisions that are amongst
us; And he that could suddainlyest procure it, would be one of the blessed'st
men that ever trod on English ground. Now shall I from Almighty God give you a
little information about it: Know then for certain,

That there is never any sword drawn on earth, till it be first drawn in
heaven. You shall read, Esaias 34. 5. My sword shall be bathed in Heaven, it
shall come down upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse to judgment. A
sword was to come upon Idumea, to drink their blood, to be made fat with their
flesh, but first this sword was bathed in heaven. Never does war come in any
Country, till God bathes his sword in Heaven, draws it out and brandisheth it
in heaven, and then says, Sword, Go into such a Land: And if once God has
given the Sword a Commission, all the world can never quiet it again, till God
speak to it; Oh thou Sword of the Lord, says the Prophet in the 47 Chapter of
the Prophecy of Jeremiah, at the 6 Verse. when will thou be quiet? put up thy
selse again into thy scabbard, rest and be still. But there is an Answer
made. How can it be quiet, when God has given it a charge; against Ashkelon,
and against the Sea shore, there has he appointed it. Can all the world quiet
that, that God gives a charge to? It is God who strengthens one part and
weakneth the other part, and seems to make Esa. 13. 41. 54. ult.
one victorious, and then when he has a mind to bring Ezekiel. 30. 24.
it down again; he will down with that part, and strengthen the other part,
and till the Lord please to say, Sword be thou quiet, all the world cannot
pacify it.

And therefore Brethren, were we never so successful, as through Gods mercy
we seem now to be in a prosperous way; But had we all the Lord Hoptons Army in
the West wholly broken, the Earl of Newcastles in the North, though all the
Cavaliers about Oxford, were they all of them broke all in pieces, had you a
blanke paper for Propositions sent you; A blank paper, that the Parliament and
City, write what they would have, let his Majesty sign all, let him swear to
all, let him and the rest cordially intend to perform all; if the God of
Heaven say, My quarrel with England is not ended, all the world shall not make
peace for you. Consider what the Prophet told them, when they saw the King of
Babylon was risen from the siege of Jerusalem upon Pharaohs coming to help
them, they were jocund: But the Prophet comes, tells them a sad story to this
effect; flatter not your selves Ier. 37. 56. 7. etc.
with it, Had you destroyed all the Armies of the Chaldeans, that there were
none left but a few wounded men, those few wounded men shall return and burn
your City: when God will have the City burnt, it shall be burnt. Therefore till
God be pacified, England shall never be quiet: but tranquillus Deuteronomy tranquillat
omnia, pacify God and you end all: Oh! could this enter into your hearts,
(Right Honorable and beloved) could you all believe this really, and could we
bring it about that the Lord might once be pacified, there were an end of our
troubles, and never till then. There is a case in Isay 22. 5. etc. very like to
ours, Jerusalem saw ae day of trouble, and perplexity, their enemies brake in
upon them, their choycest valleys were full of enemies, full of chariots and
horsemen, which set themselves in array at their very gates, now what course
took they for their safety? why, They locked to the armor of the House of the
Forest, they repaired the breaches of the City of David, gathered the waters
of the lower poole, they made a ditch between the two walls, they pulled down
some houses to fortify the wall, made all warlike preparation, and this God
chid them for, what was their error I pray you? why, they begun at the wrong
end, their maine work lay with God against whom they had sinned, and he
expected weeping and mourning before him to regaine his favor, and that they
neglected, and for that he was more incensed against them; and truly thus
deal many of us, our work lies with God, and we look to men, we look to
Armies and associations, and in the mean time let the wrath of God kindled by
our sins grow more hot against us; but Oh that we could now set upon this
which is our most needful and safest work, to pacify his indignation and
prevail with him to cause his face to shine upon us, and we should soon be
safe: But you will say, How shall we do that? The third lesson I chiefly
reserve for that, to show you what Phinehas Ways how it may be done.
did: But in the mean time let me mention but three things to you, and so I
will pass on to the next.

The one is this, there is a great deal of evidence in the 1.
Scripture, That when God once finds his people mournfully lying down under
his hand, accepting the punishments of their sins, taking shame to
themselves, and acquiting him, and accounting him righteous in all his
severitie, this has a mavelous influence upon the cooling and quenching of
Gods wrath.

The Lord has promised that if he had scattered them into the several parts
of the world, yet if their uncircumcised hearts be but humbled, and if they
do but accept of the punishment of their sins, If they shall in the land of
their captivity confess their sins, and the iniquity of their fathers,
Levit. 26. 40.
with their trespass which they have committed against me, and that also they
have walked contrary to me, and that I also have walked contrary to them, and
have brought them into their enemies land, if then their uncircumcised heart
be humbled and they then accept of the punishment of their sins, then (says
he) will I turn my favor toward them, he says it expressly; so then,
would you all help to pacify God, I beseech you often study how righteous the
Lord is in all his severitie toward England, that we may stand amazed and say,
Lord in stead of quarrelling with thee, and saying, why is it thus severe? why
is thy indignation thus hot? we confess thou have punished us less then our
iniquities have deserved, it is thy mercy we are not utterly consumed, This is
a mavelous means to pacify God.

Secondly, another is, the Lord loves to have his people 2.
seek him by prayer in the midst of all his wrath and indignation against
them, he loves to hear their mournful Prayers: as he would have their
humble acknowledgements of his justice, so he loves their mournful suites
for his compassion. Thus Solomon engaged God, and this God promised him to
grant, That if they were smitten with pestilence, famine, sword of the enemy,
carried into captivity, in what kind soever his anger were kindled 1 King. 8.
33. 35. 47. ^4 ^6.
against them, when they should mourn and pray unto him, that he would
forgive their sins and give them compassion: Thus Daniel sought God in
captivity, O Lord I beseech thee let thine anger and thy fury be turned away
from thy City Dan 9 16.
Jerusalem, etc. and such prayers have prevailed with him.

There are no such Orators in all the world, next to the blood of Christ, in
heaven or earth, there is not the like of a mournful heart wrestling with God
by prayers and tears.

And go on with it (you beloved in the Lord that use frequently to lie in the
dust before God, and to be humbled before him) go on, and let him fill his
bottle, if he will fill one vessel with our bloods, let him fill a great many
bottles with our tears; let us incessantly strive with him, and entreat him to
be propitious and gracious, his promise is then when you call upon me I will
answer you, when you seek me with your whole heart, you shall find me.

But thirdly, (and that will indeed make way for the next part.) The great
means of all, that which one says truly 3.
has the key of all the bowels of mercy and that can let out all the
floodgates of Gods mercy, to quench the heat of his wrath is unfeigned
repentance.

That I say has the key of all the bowels of God, and nothing but repentance
will do it; All acknowledgements of Gods justice, all our mournful callings
upon him for compassion, if it be accompanied with a stubborn going on in a
wicked way; the Lord may preserve them from one judgment, but he will reserve
them to another, there will never be a pacifying of Gods wrath to the purpose,
unless there be a laying down the arms of Rebellion that are taken up
against him. And therefore brethren let me commend this to you.

Labor every soul of you, first for your own parts, to inquire what the
sins are that you are guilty of, and find out what the sins are that
England is guilty of, I mean especially in relation to this judgment that
lies upon us: what the sword-procuring sins are; what the sins are for
which God does use to send a sword to avenge his quarrel; labor to find them
out, to reform them, labor that repentance may do his work on them, and
then the Lords wrath will cease quickly. But unless we obtain grace to do
this, although all other things were granted to us, the end of all would prove
nothing but ruin and misery: The blood, the Idolatry, the whoredom, the
contemning of the Gospel, the profaning of the Sabbath, the scorning of Gods
Ministers, the hating of Gods children; these are all of them sins that God
uses to visit with the Sword; And until the land be humbled for these sins
and do repent of them, there is no expectation that it can long be free from
one devouring plague or another; strike in with all your might, and not only
to do it your selves, but every one in your places, labor to expiate that in
others, root them out, punish them, weed them out, pluck them up by the
roots, what ever lies in your power: And how that shall be done, and the way
of it will best of all appear in the example, and instance that you have in
the Text; He did it while he was zealous among them for the Lords sake: And
so I pass unto the third and last part of my Text. You have heard who was the
Physician, Phinehas; secondly you have heard what was the cure, he pacisied
Gods wrath; now we are to inquire what was the balm which recovered their
hurt, the medicine which cured their sickness, it was Zeal, he was zealous
among them for the Lords sake, wherein (although time will allow me to handle
but onel lesson) I shall briefly inquire into two things.

First, what the thing was that Phinehas did as a means to pacific Gods wrath.

Secondly, the manner how he did it.

The thing that he did, was the execution of justice and judgment, taking
away some grand delinquents, whom God would not have to live: so the Psalmist
says, whereas God says here, Phinehas the son of Eleazar pacifieth Psalm.
106. 30.
his wrath, the Psalmist says, then stood up Phinehas and executed judgment,
and that stayed the plague, he did an act of justice, in cutting off some
notorious Delinquents.

2. And the manner how he did it, zealously, he did it fervently; And both
these together do afford this lesson, viz.

That zeal for God against sin, is the greatest means to pacific Gods anger
against sinners; I say our zeal for God against sin is the greatest means
to pacific the fire of Gods wrath against sinners; as one fire will draw out
another, so the fire of our zeal may extinguish the fire of Gods wrath. And
for the clearing of it, I shall endeavor The maine doctrine. Zeal against
sin pacifyeth Gods wrath against sinners.
these three things.

First, I will show you plainly out of the Scripture, that so it is, That
zeal against sin will extinguish Gods wrath against sinners.

Secondly, I will endeavor to open what I mean by this; What this zeal
against sin is, and how it will appear.

Thirdly, I will show you whence it comes, or what reason there is, that man's
zeal should have such an influence upon the extinguishing of Gods wrath: And
then make some application of it.

For the first, The Lord says it here in express words; Which is proved by
several examples.
Phinehas the son of Eleazar has pacified my wrath; how? while he was
zealous for my sake among them. Phinehas being zealous in this act of his, God
protests it pacifyed his wrath. I will name you but three or four examples
more at the utmost, Moses for one you shall find.

In the 32. of Exodus you shall there find three fires successively kindled,
three sorts of fire, all of them very hot. There you first have the people
inflamed with their lusts, with the lust of Idolatry, so on fire, that Aaron
says, they were mad upon it, they would have a golden calfe, They gathered
themselves together unto Aaron, and said unto him, Read verse. 1. 2, 3. 6. 2^.
Up, make us Gods which may go before us: and all the people brake off the
golden earrings which were in their ears, and brought them to Aaron, to make
a Calfe; And when it was made, They rose up early on the morning and offered
burnt-offerings and peace offerings, and rose up to play, and they were set
upon this mischief, there the people were on fire inflamed with their lust.

And in the next place you have God all on a flame too, he says to Moses, Let
me alone, I will destroy every man of them; and spoke it very bitterly against
them; They have corrupted themselves, they have made them a golden Calfe, it is
a stiff-necked people, let me alone that my wrath Verse. 7, 8, 9, 10.
may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them; there is the second
fire.

And thirdly, you have Moses on a fire too, and he comes down, and there
he shows his zeal in two things.

First, in being Gods Champion against sin: for when he saw the Golden Calfe,
he stampeth it to powder, made Verse. 20. 27, 28, etc.
the Israelites drink of it, calls the Tribe of Levi to him, bids every
one go and sheath his Sword in the bowels of his nearest kinsman, that had a
hand in this sin, as if he had been distracted: and when he had played Gods
Champion against these their sins, and the ringleaders of the sinners, he
then plays their advocate to God, and prays him to blot his name out of the
book of life, rather then to destroy them.

And this heat cooled both the other heates, this heat brought them to
repentance, and pacified the Lords wrath, that he would not cut them off as
he did otherwise protest he would have done. There you see zeal for God
against sin will pacify God against sinners, though he be never so angry.

The like you find in Eliah, though it did not take so well, because they were
past cure, Eliah he rises in an Apostaticall time, when the people had
desperately forsaken God, and he does all that he could, and was like a man
on fire, when he came to God he says, I have been very zealous for thy
sake; and so he had, for he had slain I know not how many hundreds of Baals
Prophets, and had pulled down Baals house, and had made the people in a manner
enter into Covenant with God: O Lord! says he, I have been very zealous for
thy sake, though I have been left all alone, as if he had said, Lord I have
done what I could to save them, I confess my great Sheat Anchor is come home,
I now despair of it, but my zeal, if it could have had any effect at all,
would have done it; yea the Lord professes it so. Be pleased also to note
these two places I told you of in the beginning, in the And several promises.
fifth of Jeremiah, Run, says the Lord, through the streets of Jerusalem, and
see now, and know, and seek in the broad place thereof, if you can find a man,
etc. What means he by a man? First, he means a good man; that no man
doubts of. But every good man would not serve the turn, find me a man that
executes judgment and justice: In a word he describes a Phinehas; find me
but that man, and I will spare all the City for his sake.

So in the 22. of Ezekiel at the latter end, when the Lord had spoke of all the
villainy that the people had lived in, their blood, their Idolatry,
uncleanness, a conspiracy of the Prophets, Priests, and Princes in all kind
of ungodliness, so that the fire of his wrath was kindled against them, then
says he, I do look for a man, what man? A man that might have stood in the
gap to have made it up, (alluding to Moses) another Moses; If I could have
found but a Moses or a Samuel, I would have spared them all. Thus you see God
professes, when he can but find zealous men, that shall burn against sin,
it shall quench Gods wrath, that it shall no longer burn against the sinners.
But beloved, Which is further explained showing what zeal is.


I must in the second place a little come and discover to you, what this grace
is. It is a thing of mighty consequence, that I have undertook to make good;
That this grace of zeal may save a Kingdom, that it may reach to heaven and
extinguish the fire that is kindled in Gods breast; we had need therefore know
what it is, and have it rightly discovered: To this end consider this
description; Some describe it to be an intense degree of love; some a compound
of love, anger and indignation, others call it imensus gradus purae
affectionis. But a little more largely take it thus.

Zeal it is a spiritual heat kindled by the Spirit of God, whereby all the
affections are drawn out to the utmost for God, this is zeal.

First, I call it a work of the Spirit, the holy Ghost is the author of it, it
is named among the fruits of the Spirit, Ephesians. 5. 18. Be not drunken with
wine, wherein is excess, an excess of heat is wrought by wine, avoid that,
but be ye filled with the Spirit, and such are said to be baptized with the
holy Ghost and with fire, Matthew. 3. 11. Act. 2. 34.

Secondly, I add it is a spiritual heat; The word in the original, is to
burn, or hiss as burning coals when water falls on them; and zealous men are
said, Romans 12. 11. to be fervent in spirit. And zealous Apollos was said to
be fervent in spirit, Act. 18. 25. Moreover the sins opposed to zeal,
luke-warmenesse and key-coldnesse, Revel. 3. Thou art lukewarm, I would thou
were either hot or cold, do sufficiently show that the nature of zeal is a
spiritual heat.

Thirdly, the seat or subject of this grace you have in these words, all the
affections; the affections are the motions of the will, the outgoings of the
soul: a man's soul moves little or nothing in prosecuting of good, or avoiding
of evil, but as the affections stir: now all the affections are the proper
seat and subject of zeal, See all of them in David whom the zeal of Gods
house had eaten up; his love, Oh how I love thy Law! more then honey, more then
thousands of gold and silver; his hatred, Do not I hate them that hate thee?
yea I hate them sore, I count them my enemies, it made him fly in their faces;
his joy, My soul is satisfied as with marrow and fatness; his desire, My
soul is ravished with desire; his grief, Rivers of waters run down my eyes;
his hope, My eyes are dim with waiting; his fear, I tremble at thy judgments,
etc.

Fourthly, I add that which is indeed the formalis ratio, the very soul of
zeal, it draws out all the affections to the uttermost, sets them on work to
the uttermost, and therefore they are said to do it with all their soul, all
their strength, all their might; The twelve Tribes with intention of spirit
served God night and day, Acts 26. 7. What Hezekiah did for God, he did it
with all his might. 2 Chronicles. 31. 21. So did Josiah, 2 King. 23. 25. he did it
with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might. In a word,
look what pitch of affection a worldling bestows upon Mammon, an ambitious
man upon honor, a voluptuous man upon pleasure, that does zeal draw out for
God.

Yea, look what an edge is to a Razor, look what wine is to a man's spirit,
what the soul is to the body, wings to a bird, wind to sails, what mettle is
to a horse, look what vivacity and vigor is to any creature; that is zeal to
a Christian. It is that that acts his soul, the vigor, activity, the fervency
of his affections; that is zeal.

Then I add, that all this must be for God, as they are drawn out to the
utmost, so they are drawn out for God, that is, for some thing or other that
belongs to God, in order, in relation to God, and Gods Glory, Gods Sabbaths,
Gods Sacraments, Gods Worship, Gods Children, or against Gods Enemies, those
that rise up against him, things that God hates, his own word. If you will
carry it all away in a short Sentence: A zealous man is a man of mettle for
God: As we say of a man that is all spirit, he is a man of mettle; so that man
that is a zealous man, is a man of mettle and spirit for God.

But because I have not yet satisfied my self, in making And the properties
and e^fects of it.
it so clear as I would, before I come to any application, or to make you
understand why it should have that influence upon Gods wrath to pacify it,
give me leave to open five remarkable properties and effects that do evermore
accompany this grace of holy zeal.

The first is this, I pray know that zeal is not the substance 1.
of a Christian, it is only the edge; And therefore if you know rightly where
zeal is to be found, you must enquire what the mettle is upon which this edge
is most to be set. As for example, bring me an Instrument that has never so
delicate an edge, that will cut an hair off the back of a man's hand, if the
mettle be Lead or Iron, if it be not Steel, the edge is not worth any thing;
enquire we therefore what the mettle is upon which the edge is set; Know then
that the mettle of the heart, that is, for God, is sincerity; sincerity and
uprightness is the substance and groundwork of a servant of God, and zeal
is but the edge of his sincerity; Now then here I lay down my first
conclusion, That no man can ever be zealous for God, that is not sincere unto
God; This sincerity is the applying of a man's heart to God for Gods end: zeal
is the doing of this fervently, with strength of affection: and take but away
sincerity, that the heart be not upright to God, what zeal soever you find in
any of them, it will either prove blind zeal, like mettle in a blind horse,
that will never do any good; or you will find it corrupt zeal, counterfeit
zeal, that a man may come and appear mightily as if for God; but this is but
a vizard; and in the mean while his own gain, his own preferment, his own
ease, or some other carnal thing is that which he aims at: Like Demetrius
and his company, Acts 19. 22. who pretended great zeal for Diana, went up and
down crying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, but this was but a vizard, the
true cause of all their heat was nothing but this, Sirs, you know that by this
craft we have our living, and now this craft is like to be set at naught. Such
a zealot was Jehu, who was fierce against Baal, and pretended much for Jehuvah,
Come see my zeal for the Lord, but the bottom of all was the settling the
Crown upon himself. Further then that he took no heed to walk in the ways
of God, 2 King. 10. And such another was Judas, John 12. 56. who pretended
zeal for the poor, Quorsum haec perditio? This ointment might have been sold
for much money, and given to the poor: But it was the satisfaction of his
covetousness he aimed at. Thus Doeg would be detained a whole day before the
Lord, with a mischievous intent against David and the Priests. This zeal which
thus maskes it self, and makes Gods honor but a stale and lure, is so far
from pacifying Gods wrath, that it is the most devilish villainy, and double
iniquity: With Jesabel to proclaim a Fast to get a Vineyard, to strike in
zealously with the right side, that we might crush some enemy of ours, which
appears on the other side, is a zeal which the Lord abhors.

But if it be be true zeal for God, that zeal whereof the Lord says, He was
zealous for my sake, the heart must be upright toward him. There must be
sincerity within, the coal of sincerity must glow within, before ever the
flame of it will shine abroad in zeal. That is the first thing. That true
zeal is always the edge of a gracious spirit of a man who is upright to God, in
the truth and sincerity of whose heart, the Lord and his ways are set us as
their greatest good.

Another thing which you shall always find in true zeal is this, it is
prodigal of doing good, for any cause of God, it is I say, a prodigal grace,
it spares for no cost, to their strength, and above their strength, any thing
shall go, every thing shall go, if God, Christ Jesus, or his cause have need of
it. You never knew a zealous man a good husband in all your life time. Jesabel
in her zeal for Baal will maintain 400. of his Prophets at her Table. I mean
that whatsoever a man's heart is zealous for, he ever does his utmost in the
prosecution of it: never comes to say, I hope here is enough done for my
share, if he can do any more. Let a voluptuous man have his heart set on his
pleasure; let an earthly man have his heart set upon Mammon; Let an ambitious
man have his heart set upon preferment, or honor, he never says I have done
enough for it, if he can do any more. If David have 1300. Cart load of silver
and gold, he can joyfully part with every penny of it toward the building of
Gods house, and blesses God that he had it to give, if Gods Tabernacle be to
be built; The women bring their Jewels, their Lawnes and Looking-glasses, and
all other materials so willingly, that Moses was feign to make a Proclamation
that they should bring no more, Exodus 36. 6. 38. 8. And in the Primitive Church
when the exigents of Gods people required it, they who had houses, lands, or
other possessions, sold them all, and put them in the common Treasury. This is
a second property of zeal, it is liberal, bountiful, for God. You all know
that if a man have the vanity of his heart let out about any thing; Take a
Gentleman, that is otherwise a good husband, and a provident man, (I mean
penurious) if his heart be set on the building of an house, if he resolve upon
two thousand pound, it is ten to one if he grutch the laying out three or four
or five thousand pound to make it fit to his mind; or if a man's heart be set
upon his garden and flowers, it is little question but he will be wastfull
upon it; the like may be said of Hawks and Dogs; and so is the zealous man for
God, whatsoever cost it puts him to he does not stick at.

Thirdly, Zeal, where ever it is true for God, it appears most of all in
greatest dissiculties; It cannot be taken off, with, There is a Lion in the
way, and I shall be killed, if I go out into the streets; go you first, and I
will see how safely you speed, and I shall come in my due time after you;
neither do you hear a zealous man talk so, always Cravens and Cowards hang
back, but the best horse ever leads the way. You shall have a very Samaritan,
if there be no danger in it, if Authority be on their side, he will be a Jew,
and be a kin to him, and come and build with him; but if there be danger in it,
Jew stand on your legs for all the Samaritan; Just so now in the cause of God,
if there be ease and profit by it, if it goes well, and no displeasure
incurred, many well appear as forward, and frolike for a good cause as the
forwardest; but if any danger appear, a base heart presently tackes about, or
draws back, I promise you I have a great charge, I have somewhat to lose, I
shall incur such a great man's displeasure, I know not in what black book I
may be written; but a zealous man disdains difficulties, and answers with
Nehemiah, when they would have him fly into the Temple, Shall such a man as I
fly into the Temple? no not I, I profess, if I might save my life by it; So
when they would have Luther go, Think any thing of Luther, said he, but
running from Gods cause, or recanting, but never imagine, if they were all
devils, as many devils as Tyles on the house, I will refuse to go, when God
bids me go, That is a third, difficulty and danger and opposition takes not
off the spirit of a man that is zealous for God.

Fourthly, another companion of true zeal is this, Zeal for God always
makes a man cool for himself, 4.
a zealous man cannot trade in both Indies to any purpose, he does not trade
for God and himself too, because there can be but one chief, one that is most
highly regarded, in his bed, in his closet, in his family, in all his relation,
in his office, where ever he has any thing to do he has but one, that is
his chief, and that is God, and because the whole of his heart is given to
God, he must by consequence be a man that does not greatly prosecute his own
business: You shall find this old observation to be a very true one, that in
all the world there cannot be found a man that is eager, truly eager in Gods
cause, and in his own cause too; indeed choleric and hot spirited men
whatsoever they do velle, they do valde velle, they are very eager upon it
from the temper of their nature: But if it be a gracious frame, where the grace
of God has the predominancie, it lays out all the strength and mettle so for
God, that there is little left for themfelves: thus Moses that is stark mad
almost in Gods cause, is the mildest man in his own cause: Nehemiah he that
can tear the hair of his head, and professes he will lay hands on any man
that will profane the Sabbath, he can be contented, any man shall jeere and
scorn him if it be his own cause. I would have you remember that Gods fire
does roast, or boil, or bake a sacrifice, but never does he allow it to roast
our meat in our own Kitchen, no that cannot be: find me the man that drives
any self end in any high degree of his own, and I will show you the man that
has no true zeal for God.

It is an observation that one has of Solomon, That Solomon built an house for
God, the stateliest house that ever was thought to be in the world, the
Temple; and he was seven years building of it: and he built a house for
himself, that was not in the tenth degree comparable to the Temple, and was
14. years building of it, and why? he did Gods house with all his heart and
with all his might, and set fourscore thousand men on work, to have Gods
house up, but as for his own house did it at leisure; he had Gods business
to follow, and that he followed to the purpose, and lets his own house go up
by degrees as it would, 14. years about that which is but a Cottage in
comparison of Gods.

So is every man whose heart is truly zealous, who in truth stands out for
God, he resolves for himself or things that concerns himself to be very
moderate, let the Lord dispose of him and his how he will.

5. Last of all, the last property of true zeal (which indeed is conceived by
many to be the very formalis ratio of zeal, to be the very quintessence of it)
is this; That it always carries vindictive spirits against sin and sinful
men, because they are against God; it is a grace that is full of vengeance, and
therefore some define zeal to be affectus ad dei injuriam vindicandam,
affectus ad extermina dos Dei inimi cos, vel zelotypia persequens sponsarum
Christi adulteria, vel eorum signa and occasiones, an affection that will take
vengeance of injuries that are offered to God, a temper of spirit, that would
extirpate or exterminate all Gods enemies: and ordinarily in the Scripture
where any man's zeal is taken notice of, it is in exacting vengeance against
sin and sinners; and some Critics observe that the original word though it
signify heat, yet it is such a heat as shows it self in opposition to its
enemy, as when hot Iron hisseth when you spit upon it, or such a heat as makes
water play and boil in the pot; such a heat zeal shows it self, when it
comes to opposition, and therefore Phinehas zeal made him stab this noble
man, strike him through with his Javelin; Moses when he was zealous Numb. 25.
4. Exodus 32.
hangs them up, cuts off the heads, makes the Levites run their kindred
through: So every where zealous men, so far as their authority reaches, so
far do they fly in the face of their sins without any exception of
persons: Asa, if his own mother be the Queen Regent and have an Idol, he
puts her down from her regencie, she shall have no regencie in his kingdom
if she will have an Idol: Levi in the day of his zeal, if his brother have a
golden Calfe, runs his Sword through him, he is no brother of his, if he have
an Idol; and every where the nearer they are in the flesh, the more abominable
in the heart of a zealous man is their sin against God; He begins first with
them if it be true zeal, and what their authority reaches not to extirpate,
that does a zealous heart mourn for; As Nehemiah when he had done all he
could, tears the hair of theit heads and takes on against them, and Nehem.
13.
when he has done all he can, he prays the Lord to remember them who defiled
the Priesthood; And so David professes he would not leave a wicked man about
his court, or Jerusalem, when he was King, and yet when he had done all he
could he sits him down and weeps, Rivers of tears run down my cheeks,
because men kept not thy Law, he had a heart full of sorrow for what his
authority did not reach to extirpate. Here you have as in a glass set before
you the man that is worth his weight in gold, the man that may save a kingdom,
such a people, a considerable number whereof will rescue a land wherein they
live, such a people are zealous for God, whose hearts are sincere, that do to
the utmost pass all difficulties, without self respects, do all that they
can for the rooting out of that which provokes the Lord to wrath and
indignation, and so I have done with the first thing to show you what this
grace is, and how it may be known.

The second thing considerable is, whence it comes that this grace of zeal
should be able to pacify the wrath of (...)nd why reale able to do
God? whence it is? I answer you in a word, zeal does not pacify or quench
Gods wrath meritoriously, by any virtue that it has, that it may plead with
God to do it, as if it had deserved it, as if it could give him any
propitiation; No, no, It does it only by way of instrument, the Lord blessing
it, and crowning it, it is Gods free grace does it, only you must know that
the Lord is so delighted with his own works, in the hearts of his people,
that he loves to set some crown or other on the head of his grace, as if the
grace did do that, which he himself works alone; Thus he crowns the
grace of faith, that that shall justify the sinner when it only receives the
pardon, thus he crowns Humility, that it shall be a Temple where God will
dwell, whereas alas it is but a poor stie, if God did not beautify it; And
thus God crowns the grace of zeal, accepting of it, gives this public
testimony of his delight in it, that he will put the glory of his own work
on zeal, as if it had done that, which indeed God only does of his own free
grace, zeal shall have the glory among men, that people might learn to be in
love with it.

If you ask but why zeal has this glory put upon it: I answer, zeal does so
much honor God, therefore he honors it, and that it does in three
particulars; First, it is most like to himself, most agreeable to his own
nature, who is a Spirit, a pure act, all life; to a man of spirit a sloathfull
messenger is as Vinegar to the Teeth, hateful and troublesome; much more to
God is a dull, slothful, lukewarm, cold servant, which he has showed by
refusing to have the firstling of an Ass devoted to him, he abhorrs to have
such a dull creature consecrated to his service, he had rather have the neck
of it broken; but on the contrary he delights in active, lively, quick and
zealous instruments, such shall stand about him, his Angels are spirits and his
ministers flames of fire.

2. This grace of zeal is not only suitable to his nature, but it sets him up
in his own place: for what ever we lay out all the strength of our
affections, to that do we (in so doing) ascribe the height of all excellency:
we know God deserves to have not only some revolets, or streams, but the
whole Ocean of our thoughts, affections, endeavors, etc. Now zeal thus
carrying the soul, does evidently declare that he alone (as he ought to be)
is greatest in our hearts; and in truth God can be no more acknowledged in his
own place without zeal, then a man can be without reason, but give him this
and you exalt him.

3. And beside it does the work that Gods vengeance should do, I say, zeal
in its place and for its part does that which Gods vengeance came to do; What
need God come in vengeance to cut off sinners? Zeal is doing it to his hand,
Phinehas is slaying of them, Moses is thrusting them through, zealous men are
endeavoring to exterminate all things that are evil, and when the Lord sees
some pleading his cause, and doing his work, he will gratify them to spare
the rest for their sake; As when David thought all of Nabals family against
him, he would cut them all off, and not a man of them should live, but when
he finds there was an Abigail that was of his side, and pleaded his cause,
this cools David's heat; So is it with the Lord, Jer. 4. 5. Run, says he,
find out a man who executes justice, and judgment, and I will spare it,
find me a man who is doing the work my justice and vengeance comes to do,
and I will forbear doing it my self: and elsewhere, I looked for a man to
have stood in the breach, to have saved me a labor, and when I could find
none, I did it my self, I then poured out my wrath upon them.

Give me leave to make two or three uses of this lesson, and I shall dismiss
you.

First then, if this be so, what wonderful cause have we to mourn and
tremble before God, to think how few are to be found in any place, or any
rank or society of Application. First to lament the want of it.
men, who are to be numbered among them whom God will make saviors unto a
people, who else are like to be destroyed? Verily it is a sad thing to think
how few can any where be found in whose hearts there is this grace of zeal
kindled, of whom the Lord may, Say such and such are zealous for my sake. In
your own thoughts survey almost all public places, or orders of men, and
think among the Nobles, or the Commons, in the City among the Aldermen, among
the Common Council men, among the several Wards, go into the Ministry, the
several degrees of men, and do but think how few there are whose hearts are
truly zealous for the Lord, if this be zeal that I have opened unto you;
truly if I should enter or put my finger into this Ulcer, I might make your
hearts sad and tremble; have we not abundance that live this day in London and
about London, if not in the Parliament, not only those that are at Oxford,
that turn Cavaliers, who pretend to be our friends, who have a zeal against
zeal, who are with all the heat that can be kindled in them set on fire
against zealous men, casting all the opprobrious nicknames on them that can be;
branding zeal for God with madness, with turbulencie, with indiscretion, with
haire-braindnesse; who with Festus, think men beside themselves, Act. 26. 24.
who with Ahab count every zealous Eliah a troubler of Israel, and esteem of
them as they did of the Apostles, Act. 17. 6. to be men who turn the world
upside downward, who brand them to be Puritans, Precisians, factious, any
thing which a vile heart can think and foul mouth utter. Yea how many are sad
to see men lay out their strength and state for a good cause, and with Tobia
and Sanballat are grieved to think, that any go about to build up the walls
of Gods house, or any Moses or Elijah take vengeance on Gods enemies? A sad
thing there should be any such among us, but more sad that any among us should
be like Catiline, who was all fire, perdere rempublicam, to undo the
Commonwealth where he lived, drive designs, make factions, do any thing in
the earth that Religion might not thrive. These are miserable and accursed men,
these men are factors for hell, Satan's Boutefeus, and as the true zealots are
set on fire from heaven, so these men's fire is kindled from hell, whither also
it carries them.

What abundance are there that are wholly lukewarm, if not key-cold, that have
no mettle, no heat in the world for God? Ah dear friends, how many others are
there that are engaged in Gods cause, who make Religion a and the public cause
a mere vizard to serve their own ends, who lay out the heat of their zeal
all their strength to feather their own nests, by getting some employment in
an Army, in a Navy, in a Commitree, in such a place in the City; And the
thing they drive at is to advance themselves or their friends, to provide for
this child, to stop such a gap. etc. And so out of the public pressure of Gods
people, draw out that which may enrich themselves, and further then that, let
become of Gods cause what will; how little such men's zeal is like to help us,
yea how abominable they and their zeal is to God you heard before; And how
many are there among our selves, that protest they own this great cause that
is now in hand, will vow, and take the Covenant, and swear too, (if you will
give it them) an hundred times over, that they will adhere to this cause with
all their might, and yet do no more for it then honest men may do with a good
conscience, who live under the enemies quarters, that is, let their goods be
taken from them* because it is in vain for them to make an head, if an officer
come he must have it, etc. part with what is laid upon them, and there is an
end: But to be willing to say, Let me go, let my child go; here is my money,
my spirit, my life; let all go rather then this cause sink; you had as good
wring water out of a Pumice stone, you may as soon wring water out of a Flint
stone, as bring men to that: as if they were yet to seek where the truth lay,
or which the true cause were that God would own. God knows there are
abundance of such that with the Samaritanes, if the cause thrive well on the
Parliaments side, they are cordial for them; but if it go on the other side,
then they are casting about how they may save themselves, especially if they
could but settle their own estates, whether Religion should be settled, whether
Idolatry shall be extirpated, whether there should be any relics of them
left, whether any of them should be punished, whom if we punish not, God will
punish us for them, and our life shall go for theirs, whether justice should be
executed upon any Achans, or Zimries, or any such should be made examples;
these are things they never trouble their thoughts about, all matters wherein
the glory of God is concerned, are to them as indifferent, as that
Controversy, Acts 18. whether Paul's Doctrine, or the Jews blasphemy
prevailed, whether the Greeks beat Sosthenes, or Sosthenes beat the Greeks,
whether, as the Proverb is, the Dog catch the Hare, or the Hare the Dog, he
was indifferent, Gallio cared for none of these things; and so verily is it
with most men; so their own houses be furnished, it matters not what becomes
of Gods house; So that Reuben may hear his own flocks bleat, and Asher keep
his own Coasts safe, let Deborah and Barack shift for themselves, private
interests, and selfe-respects, care of themselves and family, have the whole of
their souls, and in these things they are in good earnest, but no heart, no
spirit appears in them for any cause of God; they are like David in his old
age, no clothes can warm them, no motives work upon them, they drive, like
Jehu, furiously in their own business, but in Gods, like the Egyptians in the
red Sea, when their Chariot Wheels were broken: Ah beloved, search and enquire
whether there be not such among your selves, such lukewarm Laodiceans, such
cold professors, and if any of you be such, give me leave to tell you, that
your condition is woeful, you not only will be no Saviors to us in our
distresses, but for you, and such as you are, does the Lord thus bitterly
contend against us; and be you assured, that (what ever he mean to do with
this sinful Nation) without speedy awaking and warming your hearts, he will
spue you out of his mouth, Rev. 3. 15.

The other use (and so I will have done) is for exhortation, where I would
provoke this City, this Honorable City of London, the Lord Exhortation to it.
Mayor, Court of Aldermen, Common Council, and the residue, that are here
gathered together, by your zeal for God, to quench Gods wrath against us. I
confess we have great cause to praise God for your zeal, (though I think you
and others have had cause to bemoane the want of it,) for surely your zeal
has provoked many in the Kingdom, and you have in great measure saved the
Kingdom hitherto, and it shall be a glory and a Crown to you while this world
stands; That in all this deplorable and forlorn condition we have been in,
the zeal of the City of London, for the more considerable part of it, has
held up when others hearts have fallen, and have stood for the Lord and his
cause, and we humbly bless the Lord for it; Let God have the glory; It is
Honor enough for you, that God will accept any service from you, or kindle
anything good in your hearts: but I beseech you that you would abound more and
more: you who have done thus much already, I hope are willing to save us if it
lie in your power. Now you hear what may save the Kingdom, what may
extinguish the fire of Gods wrath: Zeal will do it, the laying out and
drawing out the heart and affections to the uttermost for God, will do it. O
then lay out all your hearts and strength and affections for the Lord, go on
with all your might, with all your estates, with all your treasure, with what
ever you have, let God have it all, in his cause if he need it, and be you
sorry that you have no more to part with, do it to the utmost, show your
selves zealous in it, and extend your zeal more against evil, so far as you
can reach. And you (my Lord, and Honorable Court, and Gentlemen of the Common
Council) may reach a great way this day; your prayers, your Counsels, your
Petitions and your purses, may under God have any good thing done that you will
put your hands to, I say any thing that is good. And therefore put to all your
strength, that Achans may be removed, that all Idolatry may be rooted out, that
those delinquents upon whom God would have justice executed, may be proceeded
against, do you it upon such as are under your own jurisdiction. And by your
humble Petitions, if need be, entreat justice may be done wherever God will
have it done. I am a Minister of Gods mercy, and take no pleasure in pressing
to such a work as judgment and severity, were it not that I am assured that
if we should not do justice where God requires it to be done, he will do it
without us, and he will do it upon us: when Saul executed not Gods fierce
wrath upon the Amalekltes, 1 Samuel 15. he brought Gods fierce wrath upon
himself: when the King of Israel let go a man whom God had appointed to dye,
his life went for the others life, 1 King. 20. 42. And certainly the Idolatry,
and blood and other crying abominations that some are guilty of in this Land, I
mean some of the chief Ringleaders in these evils, who have made these woeful
breaches be tween our Sovereign and his people, and thus violently promoted
Idolatry and spoil, the Lord will have them reckoned with: and let your zeal
be laid out that way: Do it cordially, and so as God may see it. And to stir
you in all these things to be zealous for the Lord, take these few Motives.

Be you so against their sins, I pray you, though not against their persons.
First, let me tell you, That it is for a God that has been very zealous for
you: So zealous, that when he had but one only son, he Motives to zeal.
did not spare him, but sent him, purposely to be hanged upon a Cross to save
you: it is for a Savior who zealously redeemed you, how zealously he prayed,
preached, lived, died for you, to purchase you to be a people for himself
zealous of good works? and his zeal has preserved you, and all yours all
this while, and all the good you have, or hope for, the zeal of God has
helped you to it.

Secondly, the cause you contend for is such a cause, that lose this cause, and
you shall never have such another as long as you live, lose your estate lose
your wives, lose your children, lose your lives, God can give you as good and
better, but lose this cause, and never shall you be tried in such a cause
again while this world stands.

Thirdly, let me assure you your enemies want no zeal against you, they have
followed it, what all the Popish party in Christendom could do against you,
has bin done to destroy you, and they want no ill will at this day; and I
believe should the Lord for our sins but deliver London up to their hands,
since England was a Kingdom, never was so sad a day known, as they would make
London to know, such is their zeal against you. See Matthew. 19 29.


Fourthly, Consider (as this doctrine makes it plain) this is the most
certain way to save this famous City, this will preserve London, this will
keep it as a City of God, yea a few zealous men may do it, Oh that you could
all be as Phinehas zealous for the Lord, but if all should not, the zeal of a
few may do it, some Aldermen if all will not, some Common Council men if all
will not, a considerable number will prevail with God, yea who knows, how far
the zeal of one man may prevail, therefore go on in it to the utmost,
without any self-seeking; Let offices go, let wife and children go, let
estate go, be wholly for the Lord and say, What may I do? wherein may I be
employed and laid out? what is there in my head or heart, in my soul or body,
in my treasury, shop or house, which may be of any use for the Lord? most
gladly will I spend and be spent, for such a God, in such a cause; for such an
end; verily such a frame of heart is invaluable, verily such a man to the State
is more worth then his weight in Gold.

Quest. But how shall we get it? what Prometheus may we send to heaven to
fetch down this sacred fire? Means to attain it. 1 King 8. Act. 2.


Answ. 1. It is true, that from heaven, and from heaven alone it must be
fetched, and thence we may fetch it as Eliah did his fire, by prayer. When
Solomon prayed, the Temple was filled with smoke: and the Apostles men of like
infirmities to us, while they were praying were baptized with this fire; so let
us pray for this holy heat, and that God who breathed our souls into our
bodies will breath this grace into our soul, prayer and zeal mutually produce
one another, as water and Ice do: God has promised to give his Spirit (whose
only work this is) to them who ask it, the meditation of the former motives
will provoke to pray, and the earnest and humble prayers of faith will obtain
it.

2. When this fire is come from heaven, we must be careful to preserve it;
the fire of the Tabernacle was first sent from heaven, but was nourished and
maintained by fuel on earth; so must we do, This coal must be fetched
only from Gods Altar, but we must preserve it with fuel, such as are,
reading, hearing, and meditating on Gods Word; Gods Word is both fire and
fuel, let it dwell in our hearts, lay it in our bosoms and it will warm and
inflame us.

3. Sermons also are bellows for this purpose, and are of great power to
stir up these coals; experience shows us that zealous preaching makes
zealous people, Peter and Paul who are compared to men of fire walking among
straw made the people fervent in spirit who lived under their Ministry: Despise
not prophesying, and Quench not the Spirit, are joined together, 1 These. 5. 20.
fly therefore like Doves to the windows 1 These. 5. 16. 20.
of Gods house, wait at Wisdoms gate, and the sparks of grace will be
blown up into a flame.

4. Communion with such as are zealous. Iron sharpens Iron, so does the
conversation of active zealous men, their zeal will provoke others; company
has a strange influence, even a dull Jade will run for company, Prove. 22. 24.
25, etc.
a companion of fools will learn folly, and such as walk with the wise and
godly will ere they be aware quickened up, and their spirits fired and hearts
glow, as the two Disciples when they walked with Christ, though they knew him
not, or as Moses face, which shined when he had been with God, though he were
not aware of it. Luke 24. 32. Exodus 34. 29.


Lastly, beware of such things as extinguish zeal, such as are sulstracting
the fuel which should feed it, neglecting attendance upon public
ordinances, omitting of family and closet duties, or letting Heb. 10. 25.
out our hearts after such things as are mere quench-coles, as the study of
such things as tend not to edification in truth and obedience, or letting out
the affections after worldly things, this outward heat 1 Timothy 6. 4. 14. 7. 2 Timothy 2. 14. Titus. 3. 9. Luke ^. 14.
cooles our inward, choakes zeal for God, so does the nourishing of any secret
lust, pride, malice, uncleanness, etc. these wast, consume, make shipwreck of
zeal, are as a thief in the Candle, or a continual dropping into a little
fire, grieves and quenches the spirit; Thus, zeal and an unmortified lust, a
known sin chosen to be lived in, though never so secret, Ephesians. 4. 29, 30. 1
Cor. 5. 6. 2 Cor. 6. Matthew. 24. 12.
can no more dwell together in a heart, then Christ and Belial, Dagon and the
Arc. And bad company is as dangerous a quench-coale as any thing in the world;
they say he that lives with a Criple will learn to halt, where iniquity
abounds, men's zeal for God is in danger to grow cold; Peter may warm his
hands in the high Priests Hall, but he will cool his heart. The time being
more then spent, I can only point at these things, Consider what I say, and
the Lord give you understanding in all things.

FINIS.

