depiction of a Franciscan friar kneeling at prayer before a female figure and
receiving the holy spirit, above a group of nuns O Holy Father take the
Blessing, which I have brought thee, etc. IHS A DECLARATION OF THE 3. RULE OF
St. FRANCIS AS it is Ordered for Religious Women. The first part.


THE RVLE OF PENANCE OF THE SERAPHICALL FATHER S. FRANCIS. Approved and
confirmed by Leo the X. for Religious Persons of the 3. Order of S. Francis.
Together with a Declaration of each point of the Rule, profitable not only to
the Religious of this Order, but also to all Religious women.

By BR ANGELVS FRANCIS Friar Minour.

THE FIRST PART.

AT DOVAY, By the Widow of MARK VVYON, M.DC.XLIV.

TO THE RIGHT R. FATHER Br. JOHN GENNINGS FIRST PROVINCIAL AND RESTORER Of the
English Province of Friar Minours: and now actual Provincial of the same.
REV. FATHER.
Sithence the common practice of writers has now so prevailed, that each one
almost, either, for patronage of their works, or to manifest their respects,
Duty, and Gratitude, is accustomed, to present them, under the shelter of such
persons, who by their acceptance may equalize their labors and pains; I hope
it will not seem strange to your R. Paternitie, or to any other; that I have
made choice to present my poor industries, to you; who in all respects may
challenge, under God, the utmost of my endeavors; Nay I should offend, if I
should attribute the Patronage of this little work to any, but to you R.
Father, who first desired it, and by whose commands I have undertaken it.

Besides if virtuous actions may allure me: I know not where, within your rank
and quality, to parallel your heroique deeds: for to omit your progeny; which
may add a probabilite of a virtuous mind: as Aristotle says. 3. Pol:
Verisimile est praestantiores ac meliores esse eos, qui ex melioribus. and to
speak nothing of the happiness you enjoy, by being Brother to so Glorious a
Martyr M. Edmond Gennings: as also of your miraculous conversion, of your
continual labors, for many years in Gods vineyard, for the conversion of
souls: your praise and merit, both before God and man, has taken no small
degree, in your erecting or rather restoring again, that sometimes famous
Province of the English Friar Minours; wherein have been in all sciences, some
of the most renowned and learned men of Christendom. Of this Province was
Alexander Hales, who was called Doctor Doctorum and was the first that ever did
write Sum of Divinity. of this Province was Scotus, whose fame is spread
thorough the whole world, both for his sublime subtilitie, and more than vulgar
devotion to our B. Lady: what shall I reckon up, Occham, Bachont, Midleon with
infinite others, who have embelished Gods Church with their Doctrine: and
strenuously defended it against heresies: to which we may add; that of three
schools from whence all others almost, derive their doctrine, to wit, of
Thomists, Scotists, and Nominalists: two of them have had their begiming from
men of this Province. Is it not R. Father a great glory to you, that
notwithstanding the violent impetuositie of these our times; God should use you
as an instrument, to make this renowned Province to reviue again, in our
order? but I am confident, greater is your joy, to see and hear the fruicts of
your labors; for we may well say of this seeming shrubbe, which you have
planted: that it is tanquam lignum, quod plantatum est secus decursus aquarum:
quod fructum suum dabit in tempore suo. It is like unto a Tree planted by the
water side whith brings forth fruict in due season: for this your tree, was
no sooner planted: but it began to sprout forth leaves of rare examples; Its
root was scarce settled in the ground, but its branches loaded with piety,
devotion and learning did extend themselves to the gayning of souls: as soon
as the waters of grace had watered it, the heavens did receive its fruict: I
mean amongst others, those glorious Martyrs who for Gods honor, and for his
Church, have lately given their lives in sacrifice; of whom according to the
brevity of an Epistle: I will speak a word or two.

Father Thomas Bullaker upon his arrival into England being taken and
emprisoned, co^tracted such diseases, through misery and want, which he
suffered in prison; that he never had his health after: yet: the zeal of
souls, which brought him unto his country; forced him with undaunted courage
to come to london, in the greatest rage of Persecution, to help the poor
distressed Catholics: which he did both spiritually and temporally; until
such time, that being taken at Mass, whilst he was saying Gloria in Excelsis:
he was emprisoned again, condemned, hanged, drawn and quartered, when his
soul did ascend to sing eternally a canticle of Joy in heaven.

Father Paul of S. Magdalen alias Henry Heath, twice Guardian of your Convent
at Douay, and once Commissarie Provincial in these parts, and long since
Reader of Divinity: after having well profited in his studies in Cambridge; by
reading of the holy Fathers, and disputing with others; he was the occasion of
the conversion of many, whereof some became Religious: and after God touching
his heart, he did reconcile himself unto the Catholic church and coming
beyond seas to Douay he entered into the order of our holy Father S. Francis:
and therein lived with so great austeritie, that indeed it was more to be
admired than imitated: for to omit his bloody disciplines, wherewith most parts
of the house are marked; his lying on the ground continually; his haire-cloaths
of of several sorts; his chains, girdells, and bracelets of Iron: his life
was in a manner, a continual fast; for long time together, until Obedience
commanded the contrary, he did take nothing but bread and small drink; unless
it were once or twice a week; and then in such manner, that if he could, he
would put ashes or dust into it: but above all; it is to be admired, how
piously he spent his time; for you should never find him, but either at his
study, or else in vocal or mental prayer; and to talk with him of other
matters, was out of his element: and notwithstanding that always he was
employed in exterior offices of the house; Reading both Divinity, and
Philosophy, hearing confesssions; visiting the sick, especially the poor:
sometimes till 10. 11. or 12. a clock at night: yet scarce would he be absent
from the Quire at midnight; or any other office of the Quire at any time: In
fine none can better express his great desire of gaining souls, and obtaining
martyrdom; than he himself who felt the burning fire of his zeal, which he
has manifested in his own writings; which in time convenient shall be put to
the press: briefly, he was singular in his austeritie; rare in his piety,
excessive in his zeal, most humble in his own conceit: yet as learned in the
eyes of all that knew him. I cannot let pass the last passage, which I and
many more did mark in him: that although he was much retired, and seldom
discoursed of any thing, unless he were urged, for that he took no content in
company: yet at the time when he had gotten leave to go into England; he was
so much altered, and changed, as if he had been another man, or as one who was
not able to co^taine his joy, but in actions, voice ad countenance one might
judge what his heart possessed: and so after a most austere, penitential, and
humble life; much admired, esteemed and honored of all: he did offer up a
voluntary sacrifice of his life for Gods cause; that he might reap an
eternal crown in heaven; which as we piously believe, and may gather out of
his own writings; he obtained by the mediation of our B. Lady: to whom he was
singularly devoted, and from whom he had received many favors.

Of Father Francis Bell (who was formerly Confessor to your Religious women of
the third Order, Guardian of your Convent aforesaid, and Provincial of
Scotland: and a little before his death again elected Guardian of your said
Convent of Douay) I need say no more than, what each one that knew him would
say, that he was a true Franciscan, or child of our holy Father S. Francis, and
that consequently he was fitting fuel, to satisfy the burning rage of Gods
enemies: and to make a pleasant holocaust to God, by sacrificing his life for
his sake. Here I may apply the example of that famous Captain Epimanon-das,
who did not so much glory in his great victories, as that his parents, from
whom he had his being, did take pleasure and content therein: as Plutarch
reports. I for my part (and I believe such is the opinion of all your
children whom you have begotten in Christ Jesus) do not so much rejoice for
the great glory that redounds to our Province hereby; as that you the Father
of us all, with pleasure and content have seen the fruict of your labors,

If Duty may challenge it, sure it must be yours by all right: for whatsoever
we do, is yours: you R. Father being our first Father, and under God the sole
beginner and worker of our being in this happy state of Religion: for if
Ulysses was judged to have right to the Armor of Achilles, because he was the
occasion of his coming to the wars of Troy, surely you may challenge
whatsoever act praiseworthy may be performed by any of us: and therefore if any
have deserved praise, in laboring for the conversion of souls, in teaching
and instructing others, in writing, in virtuous examples or any other heroicke
acts, they are yours; and are but so many additions to your Glory.

If gratitude for benefits received may move me: who can better deserve it,
than your R. Paternitie? who by your labor have sustained, maintained, and
conserved us for diverse years: truly if we prove ungrateful, even the very
walls of your two erected Convents will cry shame on us, and give testimony of
our ingratitude. Now although each of us have this general obligation: yet in
a more particular manner, must I acknowledge it; and therefore most willingly
do I xoffer this, and all my labors as yours by all right and duty: wherefore
it rests, only that you vouchsafe R. F. to patronize and accept of this
exposition of the Rule (which Pope Leo the tenth has accomated for Religious
persons of the third Order of our holy Father S. Francis) which I have made and
composed for your Religious daughters of that Order, now residing at Neuport:
whose Religious Simplicity, prompt Obedience, peace full Amity, and regular
Observance, may crown your old age with joy and content; which I pray, may
always continue both in this life and in the world to come Thus he wishes who
always remains.

RIGHT REV. FATHER. Your poor Beadsman and unworthy Child. Br. ANGELVS FRANCIS.

To the Reader.
I Have thought good to advertise thee, that in the beginning, I intended to
have joined both parts of this book in one volumne: but finding the latter
part, to grow greater than I expected; I was forced to divide them into two
books, and because the first part was some what disproportionable to the
other, by advise of some of my Friends, I have differred hitherto the setting
forth of this first part, and added some other things: which although they
concern not the subject I was to handle, I mean the exposition of the Rule;
yet they conduce to the practice thereof, as also may supply the want of the
forms and manner of clothing, Professing, annealing of the Religious, so that
hereby uniformity may be observed, and the Confessors find most things that
are necessary in this kind: I hope all will take it in good part, and excuse
the litteral errors committed in the print, which among strangers can hardly
be avoided.

APPROBATIONES
F. Georgius a S. Gulielmo Provinciae Angliae in ordine FF. Minorum
Prouincialis:
R. P. F. Angelo a S. Francisco meo Commissario in partibus Belgicis, and S.
Th. Lectori.
CVm ad instantiam R. admodum Patris F. Ioannis Gennings Provinciae nostrae
Patris: and Monialium nostrarum Tertij Ordinis S. P. N. Francisci Neoporti
residentium lucubrationes aliquas ad pleniorem Regulae ipsarum Declarationem
mediteris: in merito S. Obedientiae tibi iniungo, and his praesentibus
Licentiam do: quatenus prius observatisijs, quae in Concilio Tridentino circa
impressionem librorum ordinantur: eas quantocius praelo commendas.

Datum Londini Hac 22. Ianuarij Ann. 1642.
LEgi librum, cuius titulus est, The third Rule Off. S. Francis, as it is
accommodated for Religious Persons. Ab admodum Reuerendo patre, Fr. Angelo a S.
Francisco, S. Thologiae Lectore, and Recollectorum Ordinis eiusdem S.
Francisci, Pouinciae Anglicanae Commissario compositum; in quo, nihil inueni,
fidei Catholicae, vel bonis moribus contrarium; sed plurima, cum magna
eruditione tradita, quae illis, pro quibus scriptus est, in bonum cedent.

Duaci. in Collegio S. Gregorij. 15. Decembris 1644. F. BVDES INDVS BARIO S.
Theologiae Doctor, and Professor in Collegio Vedastino Duaceno.

R. Admodum P. F. Angelus a S. Francisco S. T. Lector, and Recellectorum
Provinciae Anglicanae Commissarius, qui iam pridem de Tertia regula S.
Francisci alio volumine been meruit, novas elucubrationes in eandem regulam, vt
justice suorum desiderijs satisfaciat, patrio idiomate praelo offert: quas cum
diligenter evoluissem, iudicavi non modo per omnia sane^ fidei and bonis
moribus consonas, sed insuper visae mihi sunt vbique redolere spiritum S.
Francisci vere pium, multaque insignia, mira perspicuitate, complecti, quae
magno cum fidelium commodo, eorum praesertim qui sub auspicijs Tertiae regulae
deo sunt militaturi, in lucem emitterentur.

Datum Duaci in Collegio Anglorum Decembris 21. Anno Dom. 1644. GVILIELMVS
HYDAVS S. T. Professor and Collegij Anglo Duaceni Vice-praeses

VIsis approbationibus Virorum eximiorum ac doctissimorum Sacrae Theologiae
Professorum, super libello anglice scripto: cui titulus The third etc. Ego
infra scriptus calculum addo, eundemque iudico dignum qui typis vulgetur, in
bonum eorum quorum manibus teretur.

Datum 22. December. 1644. VALENTINVS RANDOVR S. Theol. Doctor and eiusdem regius
ordinariusque Duaci Professor.

THE INDEX OF THE CHAPTERS.
THE Preface. 1 Chap. I. What a Rule is. 15 Chap. II. Whence there are so many
Rules. 19 Chap. III. Of the beginning of Religious Orders. 24 Chap. IV. Of
Religious Orders since the Apostles time. 30 Chap. V. Of Religious Women since
Christ's time. 37 Chap. VI. What the third Order is. 42 Chap. VII. Who was the
Author of this Rule. 45 Chap. VIII. Of the several branches of this Order. 56
Chap. IX. Of the progress of this Order. 57 Chap. X. Whether the third Order
be a Religious state. 65 Chap. XI. What Privileges this Order enjoys. 72
Chap. XII. To whom this Order is subject. 76 Chap. XIII. What were the Popes
motives to give those privileges. 86 Chap. XIV. Of the sanctity of this
Order. 90 Chap. XV. The life of S. Elizabeth of Hungatie. 96 Chap. XVI. The
life of S. Jews king of France. 131 Chap. XVII. The life of S. Iuo Patron of
the Lawyers. 139 Chap. XVIII. The lives of some beatified Saints of this
Order. 144 Chap. XIX. A Catalogue of holy Persons that were of this Order. 151
Chap. XX. How Pope Leo accommodated this Rule. 171 Chap. XXI. How it is a Rule
of Penance. 177 Chap. XXII. A declaration of the state of Innocence. 187 Chap.
XXIII. Of Man's fall from the said state. 193. Chap. XXIV. How we may reduce our
selves to that state. 199 Chap. XXV. Whether this Order be a state of
Perfection. 207 Chap. XXVI. Whether it be active or contemplative. 213 Chap.
XXVIII. Whether it be lawful to divert any one from Religion. 227. Chap. XXIX,
Of Vocations. 242 The form of clothing the Sisters. 259 The form of
Professing them. 272 Instructions for Nouices. 289. Rules against temptations.
295. Certain prayers in the time of their clothing. 311 Prayers after
Profession, 319. Instructions for those who are professed. 325 An extraction of
some Perfections of our holy Father. 334 Inctructions for the conservation of
mutual charity. 343 The manner of giving extreme unction. 353
EINIS.
THE PREFACE.
THe glorious Apostle S. Paul writing to the Ephesians cap. 4. would have them
to be careful seruare vnitatem spiritus in vinculo pacis to keep unity of
spirit, that is, mutual charity which proceeds from the holy Ghost, in the
bond of peace; which, makes us to be one body, and all members of one head
Christ Jesus, by whom we become one spirit, each one living by one and the
self same spirit which gives to each spiritual life and motion, as we are
called in one hope of our vocation to salvation, immortality and celestial
glory. For to all there is vnus Dominus, vnafides, vnum baptisma one lord, one
faith, one baptism: wherein all Catholics do agree, and make up that Church
wherein alone is salvation, and which is one in three respects as Aluarus
Pelagius in his book of the Churches complaint de planctu Eccl. l. 1. c. 63.
well notes. First the Church is one, says he vnitate totalitatis, by unity
of totalitie because it is a whole body compacted of diverse parts which are the
faithful: secondly vnitate conformitatis by unity of conformity, because in
each part there is a kind of similitude and co^formitie, to wit in the gifts of
grace, as in faith, hope, charity, and good works proceeding from the^:
thirdly vnitate attributionis by unity of attribution, for all the faith full
have a reference to the same end, which is salvation and eternal bliss, by a
certain attribution to Christ, who is the head of all those that are to be
saved.

These three unities are aptly represented in the aforesaid words. Vnum corpus
one body shows the integrity of Gods church; vnus spiritus one spirit the
thing wherein all the faithful have an assimilation and conformity; and vnus
Dominus one lord the principal and chief of all, whereto all have attribution
or respect. So that in the Catholic church, and amongst all Catholic
belieuers there is one Faith, because one doctrine, from whence none without
error may swerve; one Hope, because all have the same end; one Charity, which
works in all; and conformably the self same precepts, sacraments, and such
like without any difference or discord.

Now although such be the unity or union of the Catholic Church, yet we may
find in it a three fold pleasing diversity, which the foresaid Aluarus also
noted, The first is diversity of degrees, some superior, some inferior,
which much conduces to its dignity and beauty; for as S. Bernard says,
Discretio virtuti ordinem ponit, ordo modum tribuit, and decorem. and
perpetuitatem. Difference gives order to virtue, order gives measure, beauty
and perpetuity. The second is diversity of offices, according to the diverse
actions and functions of each one in the Church; And this the Apostle
mentions Romans 12. habentes donationes secundum gratiam quae data est nobis
differentes, having different gifts according to the grace that is given us.
The third is diversity of states, as some are more perfect than others, stella
differt a stella in claritate Cor. 15. one star differs from another in
glory; some being incipients or beginners, some proficients, who have made
progress in virtue, and others perfect, some in one thing, some in another,
all which makes for the greater embellishment of Gods Church. So that we may
well say with the Psalmist Psalm. 44. Astitit Regina a dextris tuis in vestitu
deaurato, circundata varietate. The Queen on thy right hand in golden raiment,
compassed with variety; that is, the Catholic Church stands on the right
hand of God who will always by his mighty hand protect it, firm in faith,
purified by tribulations and persecutions, as gold by fire; with variety of
stars, as clergy, laity, and diverse sort of Religious orders.

Who although they be in the union of Gods Church, all of them being true
members thereof, having also conformity with other members of the same in
precepts, sacraments, and such like necessary means of salvation, as faith,
hope, and charity; yet by a spiritual emulation 1. Cor. 12. they pursue the
better gifts, and desire more perfectly to follow our savior Christ Jesus,
according to the Rules which God has ordained for the greater beauty of his
Church, which by diversity of Rules and institutio^s gives food for each
palate, all tending to one and the self same end of making souls more perfect
and pleasing to God. Amongst the rest our holy Father S. Francis by the
inspiration of God has ordained three Rules. The two first have been
explicated, declared, and expounded by very many: the third, as it was ordained
by our holy Father, has not wanted expositors, but as it is appropriated to
religious persons, has been very little touched or handled. Wherefore for the
greater satisfaction of those who do profess, or hereafter may profess this
Rule, I have endeavored to explicate and expound it, as well by showing its
dignity, as also by setting down the spiritual sense, profit, and use that
our Religious may make of their Rule: which task I have divided into two
parts; In the first I set down some particular questions for the better
explication of the title and other things that are to be supposed in the
exposition: In the second I endeavor to lay open the true sense and meaning of
the Rule.

THE FIRST PART Wherein are made several discourses and questions touching the
Rule and professors thereof, occasioned by the Preface which Pope Leo prefixed
before this third Rule of S. Francis.
THE FIRST CHAPTER. What a Rule is.
THis question shall first be declared as well for satisfaction of the curious
Reader, as also for to lay a better foundation of the rest that follows.
Wherefore to begin with the name, omitting the many senses wherein this word
Rule may be used; A Rule is an instrument, whereby one draws a line in due
measure and proportion, and by translation or Metaphore is taken for Breuis
rerum praeceptio a brief precept of things to be done; in general defined
norma viuendi, a form or method of living. So Hugo a sa^cto Victore says that
Regula est quae normam recte viuendi praebet, a Rule is, that shows the
manner of living uprightly: a Rege^do says Ven. Bid, of ruling, or governing,
because it gouernes us by teaching what we ought to shun and avoid, as also
what we ought to do, and practice. But more near to our purpose, a Rule, which
for distinction sake we call a Religious Rule, is Norma seu institutio been
viuendi, and iuxta illius praecepta inseruiendi Deo propter vitam aeternam, a
form or institution of living well, and serving God according to the precepts
thereof, for life eternal; or a form of Religious life taken out of the
Gospel, and containing Evangelical counsels with approbation of the Sea
Apostolic.

Our seraphicall Doctor says, that Rules are as laws from which the
professors thereof according to their several institutions may not swerve,
and therefore anciently they were called Cannons or positive laws, whereby
they were to be governed and directed. The fruit whereof is not small, for by
such Rules devout souls, as little infants do learn to write, not with paper
and ink, but in their hearts by inspiration and instinct of the holy Ghost,
who impresseth those heavenly characters of perfection, drawing a bond of
eternal life, never to be cancelled or altered: by them as apprentises they
learn the art of arts, to enrich their souls with celestial treasures, and
to nauigate or pass securely through the dangerous passage of this worlds
misery; to conclude, it serves them as a looking glass, wherein they may see
and behold how to adorn and deck their souls. For each Religious person
ought to attend nothing more than to embellysh and enrich his soul with
heroical acts, and Evangelical virtues propounded in his Rule. I would to God
each one did as often cast their eye upon the clear glass of their Rule (not
composed of ashes, but of the marrow and principal substance of the Gospel,
with approbation of the Church) as our worldly gallants and ladies behold their
most frequently-deceiuing mirrours.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. Whence comes it that there are so many Rules, since all
be to observe the Evangelical Counsels.
ALthough it be most certain that those would be most perfect that could
observe all and several the Evangelical counsels, yet considering our
human frailty, non omnia possumus omnes, all cannot do all things, nec omnis
fert omnia tellus one country yields one thing, another some other, none
blessed with all: therefore has God chalckt out unto us so many several
ways, whereby we should tend to perfection, sufficient, and possible for this
mortal life. Neither does God require at our hands, that we should observe to
fulfill all things that he has propounded unto us in the Gospel, unless it
be in a ready and prompt mind, to do whatsoever shall be agreeable to his holy
will and pleasure (which no state of perfection can justly exclude) but to some
he gives five talents, to some two, and to some one, dividing his graces as he
pleases, to each one means to traffic withal, and to make the good
merchandise of life and glory celestial: as it may be seen in all ages. For
in the old law he gave different rules or laws to the levites, and to the
other tribes; In the new law he prescribes several forms of life to men and
women, to Bishops and priests, perfect and imperfect, rich and poor, king and
soldier; and yet all tend to the same end. And what wonder the^, if according
to the instinct of the holy Ghost some take one way, some another. The
Evangelical doctrine is a pattern for all, it is a garden full of various
odoriferant flowers where each one may satisfy their desires, a table richly
spread wherein is food for all sorts. And in this appears the immense
goodness of our lord. Thomas walden. does handle this point well and amongst
other things produces the Examples of our Savior, and S. John Baptist, both of
different lives, and both tending to an eminent perfection; and concludes
saying, he that to his own praise and for the beauty of the celestial
kingdom created the angelical spirits in nine distinct orders or quires,
according to their specificall diversity and distance of offices, has adorned
his militant Church with many and distinct offices according to the diverse
professions, and merits of those that live therein. S. Bernard makes another
comparison saying, as in one heaven there are many mansions, so in one Church
there are many orders; and as there be in one house distinctions of glory, so
in the same spirit there are divisions and distinctions of graces. Finally as
in a commonweal you may find all sort of trades, as well for commodity as for
the greater content of this temporal life, so in like manner in the Church
there are to be found diversity of Rules; which brings great spiritual
profit, and gives there to a beautiful adorning by the variety of so many
spiritual exercises, which they practice, some in the active life, some in the
contemplative, some one, some another. Which diversity brings with it self
another benefit, for that by this variety and multitude of Rules, orders, and
institutes each one according to their inclination, disposition, and ability
may find the way of perfection more facile and pleasing; for those that are not
proper for this spiritual exercise of contemplation or action, may be capable
of another, as experience daily teaches.

THE THIRD CHAPTER. Of the original or beginning of Religious orders.
THis follows next in order to be declared. Concerning which, if we may
believe Josephus the Jew l. 2. de bello Iud. c. 7. we find that Enos grandchild
to Adam did begin this state of a religious life, and that he gave certain
rules which his disciples were to follow, thereby instituting a peculiar and
more sublime manner of worshipping God. Whence Genesis 4. it is said, this man
began to invoke the name of our lord; which must needs be understood of some
peculiar manner different from the rest, for without all doubt Adam, Abel, Heth
and the rest did invoke our lord, but not after that special sort as Enos
did, who was to give a beginning to the monastical or religious life: and
therefore Genesis 6. they were called the sons of God. For they lived in mutual
love and charity having all things common, also in great poverty and
austeritie, and they did wear a white habit for distinction sake. Philo the
Jew has the same, saying that they were poor without any inheritance, money,
or commerce with any, they had no care or thought of any thing but of the
service of God, they were chaste all their lives, living in continual
mortification, obedient to those that had care of them without contradiction,
being readier to die than to fail therein. In all which, and much more, which
those two ancient writers have set down we may see a true platform of a
Religious state and monastical life.

But in after ages this institute decaying, God raised another company, which
were called Nazarites, that is separated or consecrated to God, to whom Number. 6.
he gave certain rules to be by them observed: which according to the
expositors of that place represent the true state of Religion. The like may be
said of the Rechabites Ier. 35. who had their beginning from Rechab, from whom
they received a Rule which they most religiously observed, in so much that S.
Hierome calls them fathers of the monks and religious persons.

If we come to the new law Christ himself gave rules to all Religious persons.
Mat. 19. If thou will be perfect go sell all etc. The like is said Mar. 10.
upon which words S. Bernard exclameth saying. These are the words that have
persuaded the contempt of the world through the whole world, and voluntary
poverty to all men, these are they that have filled cloisters with monks, and
deserts with Anchorites. For in that chapter Christ propounds unto us the
three esse^tiall vows of Religion, the vow of chastity in those words sunt
Eunuchi qui seipsos castrauerunt propter regnum caelorum, there are Eunuchs
which have gelded themselves for the kingdom of heaven: the vow of poverty, in
those words go and sell etc. the vow of obedience veni sequere me come follow
me: whereof who desires more may read the expositors of that place. So that
justly we may say, that the first founder of our Religious and monastical life
was Christ h^mselfe, and all those who since that time have begun that course
of life have drawn their Rules from him: for he having gathered together the
twelve Apostles gave them a Rule to observe, admonishing them that if any one
would be his disciple, he ought to resolve to abandon the world, and all that
is in it, and which is more important, their own proper will, saying that in
this that they followed him, they should be known to be his true disciples. He
showed them the perfect form of obedience, taught them humility, and exhorted
them to patience, and willingly to endure tribulations and persecutions, he
earnestly and continually commended unto them poverty of spirit, meekness,
mercy, justice, peace, cleanness of heart, and sufferance for the kingdom of
heaven, and finally left them his holy Gospel to observe, yea and his own
life and practice for a pattern.

From this Rule of rules all the ancient Fathers have drawn the beginning of
their Religious orders, and founded their three essential vows. For this holy
college of the disciples was a little convent, because after they were
received into his company, they went up and down with him, eat, and slept
which him, calling him their lord and master, obeying him in all things, which
manner of living the Apostles have left to succeeding ages, as shall more
clearly appear in the chapter following.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER. The Rules and Religious orders that have sprung up since
the Apostles times.
THat the Apostles did exactly observe this Rule of theirs may be gathered out
of the same place Mat. 19. by the words of S. Peter in the name of the rest
Ecce nos reliquimus omnia, and sequuti sumus te, Behold we have left all
things, and have followed thee. Which S. Hierom. epist. 8. ad Demet. will have
to be a thing proper to the Apostles, and derived from them. S. Gregory
Nazianze^ and S. Chrysostom with others affirm upon good grounds that S. John
Baptist was the first monk. S. Dionise says, that the Apostles were called
Monks, servants of God, and declares their form of monastical profession l.
de cael. Hier. c. 6. which must needs be to some Rule. S. Hierome is of opinion
that S. Mark was the head and founder of monastical life; which also affirmed
Philo the Jew according to Eusebius l. 2. hist. c. 16. who having been at Rome
to consult with S. Peter described the life and manner of the monks in Egypt.
Also Peter Damian and Cassian do say that the monastical order or life has
been from the Apostles times. S. Athanasius in the life of S. Antony makes
mention of monks before him; And S. Dionise Pope, as witnesses Baronius, was
a monk; notwith standing S. Antony is said to be father of the monks of
Aegipt, because he brought the monks that were dispersed unto an uniformity,
giving them a certain form or Rule of life. Pachomius after him gave them a
Rule which an Angel dictated unto him, where with he made such happy progress,
that in short time he assembled together 7000. monks. In the same time lived
the holy Abbot Simphoranus, who built a Monastery without the town of Millan,
whither he retired with many disciples, to whom he gave a Rule. The like also
many others have done, but the holy Church has only admitted of four
principal whereon depend all other Rules, as on the four cardinal virtues all
other inferior virtues do depend. Or we may say that there are but four
Rules, because there be but four principal Patriarchs of Religious persons.

The first is the Rule of S. Basil, who was the first that obliged the monks
to make a vow after the year of probation or trial, to remain in their
Monasteries, and promise entire obedience to their superiors, vowing also
chastity, and poverty, and in this respect it is said to be the first Rule of
all others, because he first brought the Religious to make a solemn
profession; he builded in Armenia a very great Monastery, wherein there
remained more than 3000. Monks. This order does flourish as yet in some parts
of Greece, and Italy; all the regulars of the Eastern parts do live under
this Rule, as also the Carmelites, with others.

The second is that of. S Augustine under which ^ue all the Cannon Regulars,
Dominicans, Augustins, Brigittins, Hieronimites, Scopetines, those of S. John
of Jerusalem, and of the hospitals of S. Antony, and the Crouciers, although
there be some difference in their constitutions and habits.

The third is that of S. Benedict, who having gathered together all the
scattered monks in Italy, and brought them to the mountain called Cassin,
the chief place of this Order, gave them a Rule which they and their
successors were to observe, under which Rule do militate all the black
monks to the great benefit of Gods Church, and conversion of many Countries,
and in particular of our poor Country of England, which with just reason ought
to acknowledge them for its Patrons and Apostles. To this Rule, or rather to
this Order, according to some, we may reduce that holy order of Charter Monks,
who observe a most strict and austere life, according to the prescription of
their statutes. The like may be said of the Jesuits, who living by certain
statutes appropriated for their manner of living, may be put under this holy
Patriarch, unless you will range them under the standerd of S. Augustine
opposite enemy to Heretics, as they are.

The fourth and last is that of S. Francis, who being one day amongst others
in S. Damians Church, kneeling before a Crucifix, heard a voice that said unto
him Francisce repara domum meam, Francis go repair my house, which thou see
ready to fall to ruin, conforming presently his will to the will of God, and
his life to the life of our Savior, put on a course habit, girded himself
with a cord, going barefoot; and together with others that came to him made
profession of poverty, and holy beggary; and having made a Rule by the
inspiration of God, it was confirmed and approved by the Popes, Innocent the
third, and Honorius the third. So that S. Francis may truly be called patriarch
of the Mendicants. He would have his children called Minors, in testimony of
their great humility, the progress of whose order all the whole world
admires. Haueing briefly spoken of the Rules that have been made for
Religious men, the nature of our subject requires that we do as much for
Religious women.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER. How that in all ages ince Christ there have been religious
women, as well as men.
ALthough in the old law we may see a kind of shadow of religion in some
women, especially in that holy woman Judith, of whom it is written that in the
higher part of her house she made her a secret chamber, wherein she abode
shut up with her maids, and having cloth of hair upon her loins she fasted
all the days of her life, excepting some few festival days. Yet this is not
such a profession by solemn vow as now our religious women do make, to the
great embellishment of Gods Church, admitting into their company those of
another family, yea and another nation too, which Judith did not. And as in all
ages and times there have been religious men, so have there been Religious
and holy women: for if you find a Mark to begin the monks in Egypt, there
will not be wanting a Martha to begin the Nuns at Marsiles: and S. Dionise
ca^ as well show the form of consecrating virgins, as declare the profession
of religious men. If S. Pachomius did give a Rule to his monks, his sister
with other devout women must have another, in all things almost like to that
of his monks. S. Basile had no sooner begun to gather his monks to a good
uniformity, but some devout women came to receive the benefit thereof by
undergoing such a course of l^fe as he should prescribe unto the^, as may be
gathered out of his words, and exhortations to them for the conservation of
their virginity. S. Augustine had not satisfied the world, if he had not left
those religious companies of Cannonesses who militate under the name of S.
Monica. As there was a Benedict to inflame the whole world, so there was a
Scholastica who began the Benedictine Dames.

And, not tediously to prosecute all things, as our holy Father S. Francis did
begin the profession of strict poverty, so there were many devout women that
would imitate his example, amongst whom the first was the blessed virgin S.
Clare from whom comes the austere and perfect order of the poor Clares, who as
they acknowledge B. S. Francis for their Father, so they esteem Blessed S.
Clare for their Mother. What shall I say of S. Brigit, S. Teresa, S. Elizabeth,
S. Collet, with many others that have been famous in this kind, no way
inferior, if not exceeding men. Wherefore not without mystery says the holy
Evangelist. Mat. 24. erant ibi mulieres multae a long, quae secutae erant
Iesum a Galilaea ministrantes. There were there many women a far of, which
had followed Jesus from Gallile ministering unto him. Many men and women
followed Christ to his passion, but alas! the men fled a way, only the women
stay: Vide conuersum ordinem, says Euthemius, Discipuli siquidem fugerant,
discipulae vero assistentes permanebant. Behold a contrary order; for the
disciples who ought to give strength to others, and in words are ready to dye
with Christ, do fly, but the women, although weaker by their sex, yet
stronger by their faith, do remain by him in all his afflictions assisting
him; and as they stayed last, so they deserved first before all others to enjoy
the sight of Christ rising, by whom they were sent to the Apostles, being made
as S. Chrysostom says Apostles to the Apostles.

Thus then briefly having declared what a Rule is, and the diversity of Rules
in men and women, it is now time to show what this Rule is. And for that in
the title it is called the Rule of the third order, it is necessary first to
show what the third order is.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER. What the third order, and their Rule is.
THe holy Church sings in the office of S. Francis. Tres ordines hic ordinat,
primumque fratrum nominat Minorum, pauperumque fit dominarum medius, sed
paenitentium tertius sexum capit vtrumque That is to say, This Saint by divine
inspiration ordained three orders, the first he named the order of Friar
Minours, the second or middle is of the poor ladies or poor Clares, but the
third of penitents does comprehend both sexes. For When this holy Father had
made a Rule for his brothers, and obtained a confirmation thereof, he made a
second Rule which he gave to Saint Clare in most things conformable to the
first Rule; but afterward having authority from the Pope to preach penance,
the Friars being then called Preachers of penance, and having a particular
revelation from God, that it was his will he should labor for the conversion
of sinners, he went forth with such fervor to put Gods will in execution, that
whole villages and towns were almost void of inhabitants, all of them desiring
to forsake the world, and do penance for their sins: whereupon he was
forced to give them some satisfaction by prescribing unto them a certain Rule,
form, or manner of life, which Rule is commonly called the third Rule, because
it is the third distinct Rule he made: or the Rule of the third order, because
it is a third distinct order from the other two, called also the order of
Penitentes, because the professors thereof are to do penance for their
sins And this admits all sorts and sexes; for as penance is the common way
for all to go to heaven, so this Rule or order is common to all, admitting
both clergy and laity, virgin and married of both sex: the fruit whereof the
chapters following will show.

From hence comes that general custom almost in all other orders, as in that
of S. Dominicke as S. Antonine teaches, the Augustines, Carmelits, and others,
to institute and ordain Rules of the third order, who commonly are called
brothers and sisters of penance, the declaration whereof I omit as not
concerning my purpose. It suffices that I have briefly set down how it began
in our order, if any one desire to see it more at large, let him read the
Chronicles of the Friar Minors, and S. Bonauenture in the life of S. Francis.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER. who was the Author of this Rule.
ALthough we have said before that S. Francis was the first author and beginner
of this Rule, yet because some seem to make a doubt hereof, attributing it to
Pope Nicholas the fourth, I could not pass on, until I had removed this
scruple. True it is that Pope Nicholas did make it more public, and more
authentical by inserting it in his bull given in the year 1289. some
threescore and eight years after S. Francis had begun it, but that was only
to confirm not to institute the Rule. The testimony of S. Bonauenture may
suffice herein, vho in the 4. chapter of the life of S. Francis says, that
many of both sexes enflamed by the fervor of his preachings did serve God in
conjugal chastity, according to the Rule which the man of God had given them.
The ancient form of profession infinuates as much, I Brother N. do vow etc.
to observe the Commandments of God all the time of my life, and conveniently
to satisfy for the transgressions or faults, which I shall commit against this
Rule and manner of living of the third Order of Penance, instituted by S.
Francis and confirmed by Pope Nicholas etc. This form is taken out of the
book called firmamentu^ trium ordinum, whence Bernardinus de Bustis a famous
preacher had good reason to say, that the Inuentors of this Rule were not Friar
minors, nor any Bishop, nor Doctor nor any Congregation, but the seraphicall
Father S. Francis, the holy ghost teaching him, has ordained it. Which also is
confirmed by the words of the said Pope Nicholas, who writing to the bishop of
Florence in the year 1291. forbids any one to molest, or trouble the Brothers
of the third order of penance, to whom, says he, we have given a form of
living, as it has been given by S. Francis, causing it to be noted by our
Bull, to the end that the Brothers remain not doubtful, and inconstant in the
observance of their life. Leo the 10. has almost the same. Pope Clement the 7.
in his bull Ad vberes fructus in the year 1526. has it more plainly; his
words are these. And although the Rule of penance instituted by S. Francis and
approved by Nicholas our predecessor etc.

Moreover it seems very unlikely, that this order so much celebrated, and
multiplied through the whole world, wherein there have been even in the very
beginning Emperors, and Empresses, kings and queens, Bishops and priests,
Doctors and illustrious persons of all sorts, should not have a Rule, whereby
they might direct their life. To this we may add, what is recorded in the life
of B. Luchesius one of the first of this order, namely that he demanded a Rule
of the holy Father S. Francis, who granted him his request, and gave him the
habit. Also in the life of S. Viridane we read that our holy Father gave her
the habit, and instructing her left her a Rule to live by in her solitude,
wherein she lived many years. And who can doubt, but Blessed S. Elizabeth of
Hungary had some certain Rule whereof she made profession. Wherefore it being
certain, that our holy Father instituted this Rule, it seems necessary to
enquire of the diversity of the Professors thereof; as also how it has made
that progress to perfection as now we see it is come unto.

THE EIGHTH CHAPTER. Of the several branches in this Order.
THe fervent spirit of our holy Father S. Francis by his preaching of pe^nance
took such effect, that it seemed he had set the whole world on fire with the
inflaming love of God, which did not stay only in those parts where he
preached, but also did extend it self over the whole universe. There is no
place, country, city, town or village where this fire has not taken hold,
there is no degree, quality, or sex that has not felt it, but in several
manner according to the subject it lighted upon.

In some it had not that effect to make the^ leave their families, and goods,
but enjoying their te^porall estates they would serve God under this Rule and
Order, amongst which their have been Bishops who have not esteemed it to
derogate from their perfection to wear the habit and cord of Blessed S.
Francis, yea some Popes, cardinals, and ecclesiastical men of all sorts. For
confirmation whereof I will produce the words of the renowned and most eminent
Cardinal Treio in his devout and learned Epistle to the R. Fa. Luke Wadding
(whose fame is diuulged through the whole world by his learned Annals which he
has made of our Order) who has inserted it in his devout commentaries, which
he has made on the works of our Holy Father, wherein the said Cardinal has
many things in the praise of our seraphicall Order, and coming to this third
Order thus expostulateth.

Do you admire and desire to celebrate my praise, for that after the purple of
Cardinal dignity I have put on the habit of the third Order, and professed
the third Rule of our Fa. S. Francis! but how can I, who profess my life and
all I have to be of S. Francis, exhibit any sign of devotion, unless I
consecrate or deuote my self to his Religion. What is the girdle of S. Francis
unbeseeming to girt the regal purple? Lewis king of France, and Elizabeth
princess of Hungary now numbered amongst the Saints were girt with it,
empresses, kings, queens, and other princes whose number this year at the
time of his death by most devoutly receiving the habit Philip the 3. king of
Spain did increase, as also Elizabeth queen of Spain wife to Philip the 4.
and the princess Marie sister of the same Philip the 4. gave their names to
this Religion. Perhaps the cilice does not become the Royal dignity?
certainly it does, and in the time of Elizeus the prophet, the sacred history
does tell that the king of Israel did use it. Wherefore then do you admire,
that a Cardinal should put upon his purple a cinericious habit, and gird
himself with a cord. You say it is a habit too humble for such a dignity. But
I answer, therefore it is to be taken in this time etc. What therefore should I
do, when I am elevated to so supreme a dignity in the Church, but defend my
self with the humility of S. Francis whereby I may more securely bear the
labors and burden of my enjoined charge. But what more? is not the
cinericious or ashy colored habit of S. Francis truly purple, wherewith Royal
and Cardinal dignity may be adorned? it is truly purple, which the blood of
Christ has colored and the faith of his passion signed, and which in Christ's
place S. Francis has made red with his proper blood flowing from his
stigmats. Is the humility of Christ a servitude? that is not servile which
does nobilitate the Royal purple. If any one should contemn, or abhor this
habit, let him consider that it is not gray but purple; for humility under
taken for Christ does carry with it a Royal dignity. What therefore have I
done? I have covered purple with purple, and that of a Cardinal with a kingly
one. It is so far from humbling me, that I may doubt whether I am become
prouder thereby. Thus far the foresaid Cardinal. Whence we may gather that
this Order is suitable to Popes and Cardinals, kings and princes, and other of
what condition soever they be, and this day in Spain nothing more frequent,
almost whole towns being of this Order.

There are other sorts of the third order, both me^ and women who are taken
either in the Conuents of Friar Minors, or Monasteries of S. Clare, or 'of
other Religions that live under the government of the Friar Minors; in other
Orders they are called Donats, because they give themselves to the service of
such a house, and Oblates because offered up to such an end: these make only
simple vows. There are others, whom the fire of divine love has caused to
leave the world, and live in community under solemn vows of obedience,
poverty, and chastity, professing this Rule of the 3. Order, not barely as it
was made by the seraphicall Father S. Francis, but as it is accomodated to
their state by several Popes as we shall show hereafter. Some of these do
addict themselves to the keeping of Hospitals, teaching of children, serving
the sick, and such like.

Finally there be some, that to make a complete religious state, have joined
certain statutes to their Rule, for the better attaining to perfection, and
do add the fourth vow of Enclosure. Of these in this our treatise we mean to
speak, explicating the Rule conformably to their estate. This diversity may
perhaps seem strange to the Reader, and therefore it shall not be amiss to
show how it was brought in, by showing what progress in perfection this holy
Order has made.

THE NINTH CHAPTER. Of the great progress that the professors of this Rule
have made in the way of perfection.
PLutarch in his apothegmes says, that there be more who adore the sun
rising than the sun setting; and that in some occasions with just reason, for
such is the frailty of creatures that all things are subject to decay, and
even man by nature grows worse and worse, being as Aristotle says, the
example of imbecillitie, spoil of time, play of fortune, and image of
inconstancy. Whence it is that almost all orders have decayed, and fallen from
their first fervor and zeal, which can never be repaired, but by casting our
eyes upon the rising sun of that spirit which first began such and such an
Order, setting before us the heroical virtues of our progenitors, endeavoring
with new force and vigor to imitate their examples. Let us not look upon the
sun setting, that is on the tepide and cold state, that the corruption of
nature has brought us to, but as the Prophet Isay says, Attend to ^he rock,
that is, the first founder whence we were hewn out; for in Christ they have
begotten us, and to the cave of the lake, to the Profession of our Rule from
whence we are cut out, that is, hacked and hewed, and made fitting for the
celestial Jerusalem. There is no better way to reduce us to perfection than
by returning to the beginning. Whence in all orders almost there have been
continual reformations, which not withstanding do soon decay;

I pray God that the like do not happen to this third Order, which hitherto
contrary to the ordinary course has daily more and more increased, not only in
number but also in perfection, and from a low shrubbe is become a fair and
beautiful tree, from the lowest state in Gods Church to be equal in a manner
with the highest. I can see nothing here, but what the prophet Ezechiel
denounces c. 37. God made a league of peace to them, and an everlasting
covenant shall be to them; he has founded them, and will multiply them, and
give them his sanctification in the midst of them for ever. The continuance in
the same state is much, considering our frailty, but to increase daily more
and more in perfection is the hand of the almighty, which particularly is to
be seen in this Order; for in the beginning it was but a certain devout
course of life, which our seraphicall Father did prescribe for all sorts, as is
said before, but not long after the institution thereof, it became a set Order
and state of life, for within six or seven years after the Blessed and
glorious Saint S. Elizabeth of hungary (as Iodocus Chlictouaeus reports) made
a formal profession of this Rule, and did take a gray poor patched habit, and
girt her self with a rude cord, going always barefoot, spending the rest of
her days in a most austere manner with some of her ladies clothed in the same
habit, and professed in the same Order. Which, as it seems, was the first
community that militated under this Rule. After this the most pious Angela
countess of Ciuitella, having gathered together many noble virgins at Fulginea
(which is a town some twelve miles distant from Assisium) did build a covent
under the title of S. Anne, wherein entering with her companions, and making the
three vows of chastity, obedience, and poverty, she perseuered ingreat
sanctity to her death, as is to be seen hereafter in her life. After her
example very many virgins gathering their means together caused to be builded
and erected in short time 8. monasteries in diverse parts of Italy, wherein
they did live under the habit and Rule of the third Order of S. Francis.
Gonzaga says that this B. woman was the first who did make these solemn vows
in this third Order. But in this there seems to be a great mistake, for this
Saint lived in the year 1309. whereas in the year 1295. Pope Bonifacius the
8. does affirm that many monasteries were begun in Germany where to he gave
many privileges which belong only to religious orders, as chapples and
oratories, as is to be seen in F. Luke Wadding in the 2. tome of his Annals,
who also in the year 1282. n. 11. telates that B. Duleinae contemning the
world did offer her self to God under the habit and rule of penance, very
many young virgins and grave matrons running in the odor of her sanctity did
do the same. And before this in the year 1252. number. 7. he describes the life
of B. Saint Rose of Viterbia, who by the commandment of our lady took the
habit of the third Order in a Monastery near there about; and this was within
31. years after the beginning of this Order. Nay before this near Florence
there were many communities whereto our holy Father gave a Rule, it is very
likely that some of these did make the solemn vows, but whether they did or
no makes not much to our purpose: at least it shows how this Order has still
augmented in perfection. Let us now see what it has done from S. Angelaes time.

And we shall find it always to be abbettered, for Sixtus. 4. in the year
1480. in his Breue, Ad Christi Vicarij, has these words. Truly long ago we
have understood that some brethen and sisters of the 3. order of S. Francis by
special grant of me and my predecessors living collegially after the year of
probation, do vow and promise in the hands of their superiors canonically
elected by their college, chastity, obedience and poverty. Whereto Pope
Innocent the 8. in the year 1487. added the vow of enclosure, which made Pope
Leo the 10. to accomodate the Rule that was ordained by S. Francis approved and
confirmed by Nicholas the 4. to a Religious state. And Clement the 7. in his
Bull Ad vberes fructus an 1526. and Pius 5. in his Bull ea est officij nostri
an. 1568. have more amply declared it. So that now it is become more perfect
and complete, convenient for a Religious state, whereof because some without
any just reason have made doubt, I will endeavor to make it clear by the
succeeding chapter.

THE TENTH CHAPTER. Whether the third Order be a Religious state.
THis question may seem superfluous, after what has been said in in the
precede^t chapter, nevertheless to stop the mouths of some, whose rash and
temerarious judgments do show their tongues to run before their wits, and
who imprudently, I will not say maliciously seem to derogate from the honor
and esteem of this holy order, I will add a word or two. But first we must
distinguish this order into two classes, to wit of them that live in their
houses out of community, and of them that live conuentually together.

Certain it is that the first are not truly and properly religious because
they do not make profession of the three essential vows, notwithstanding
their in-institution, as Hieronimus Rodericus, and Portell verb. Tertiarij do
well note, may be called an order or a certain form of life approved by the
Church; for order does extend it self further than a Religious state which
requires the three vows, which order does not, but only signifies direction or
ordination which such have by their Rule.

Those that live in community or in collegiall or conuentuall manner, are
truly and properly Religious. For to Religious state there are required four
things, to wit, a permanency in that state, a particular rule, solemn vows,
and the approbation of the Church.

The first is required, because Religion is said to have an immovable
condition of life, and to carry with it a stable perfection, which made S.
Thomas 2. 2. q. 184. ar. 8. to prefer it before all other degrees inferior
to Bishops, giving this reason, because Religion is a permanent and
unchangeable state, whence Religion is called Ciuitas Dei the city of God.
Holocaustum medullatum a fatt holocaust, Mansio solitudinis a mansion of
solitude, Mons and via Syon the Mountain and way of Syon, Petra refugij the
rock of refuge, requies sanctificata sanctified rest, Stadium currentium the
list of the^ that run, vigiliae solemnitatis perpetuae the vigils of
perpetual solemnity etc.

The second is required, not that the essence of Religion cannot stand without
it, but because the Church does not ordinarily approve of any Religious order
without some particular Rule, and from hence it is called Domus sapientiae the
house of wisdom, Exerciti^m disciplinae the exercise of discipline, fluuius
Orationum river of prayers, iter rectum right way, the golden way, the feeld of
corn, with many such like.

The third, to wit, the solemn vows of chastity, poverty, and obedience are
essentially required, for by Religion one does consecrate and dedicate himself
wholly to God, which is perfectly done by those three vows. And from hence
Religion is called another Baptism, the bath of souls, cella aromatum,
argenti and auri, and odoramentorum, and vnguenti optimi. I say 39. storehouse
of aromaticall spices, and of silver, and of sweet odours, and of the best
ointment. Ciuitas in monte posita Mat. 5. a city placed on a mountain, the
warfar of our Lord the furnace of the holy Ghost, flight of the world, sweet
yoke of Christ, school of Christ, la^d of poverty, with many such like.

The last is requisite to make it a secure, certain, and spiritual state.
Neither was ever any Religious Order instituted without the approbation of the
Church, not that the Popes have always done it, for in ancient time it was
sufficient that they were approved by Bishops, but in the Laterane general
Council it was forbidden under pain of excommunication that any new Religion
should begin without express approbation of the Pope, to who^ alone, as by
many other counsels it has been decreed, belongs the approbation,
confirmation, and declaration of Rules or Religious orders, so that now it is
absolutely necessary, that the Pope do give his approbation, otherwise it
would not be esteemed a Religious state.

Now these four are to be found in the professors of this third Order, and
therefore none can doubt but that they are truly and properly Religious; for
first their state is permanent and stable, no way allowing any one to go back
again to the world. Secondly they have a particular Rule, as has been
manifested before. Thirdly they make the solemn vows of obedience, chastity,
and poverty, as may be seen in their form of Profession. And lastly their
Rule, state, and Profession is approved by the Church. For some twenty Popes
have confirmed and approved the Rule, and Sixtus 4. in the year 1480. Ad
Christi Vicarij declares their vows to be solemn, and to have all the effects
that other solemn vows have, as that none can leave the Order, and that
matrimony made by them is of no force, and that they are sufficient to
dissolve matrimony that is not consummated. Innocentius the 8. has confirmed
the same, and so has Leo the 10. Clement the 7. and Pius 5. which two have
made more ample declaration of the Rule. So that no man can doubt but that the
professors of this Rule are truly Religious, and that they enjoy all
privileges that other Religious persons have. Of this in the next chapter.

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER. What Privileges this Third order enjoys.
WE must still use the former distinction, for those that are of this Order
and live in their houses out of community do only enjoy those privileges
that are granted to the Friarminors, and are purely spiritual, as indulgences
absolutions and such like. And so all those that do not make the three vows.

But those that live in community, and are subject to the Ordinaries, making
the three vows, do enjoy all, and singular, the privileges, that have been
given peculiarly to the third Order which indeed are very many; whereas those
that are subject to the Friar minors, are participa^t of all the privileges,
Indults, and graces, that have or shall be given to the Friar Minors or poor
Clares. For to omit other Popes Leo the the^th in Bulla Dudu^ faelicis
co^municates unto the Religions of this third Order, all and whatsoever
privileges that had been granted to the poor Clares: and before, in his
Bull, Ea per quae, he communicated unto them that had been granted to the
Friar minors. Clement the 7. in his bull. Dum vberes fructus, does put all
three Orders together, and communicates to them, all three, all the
privileges, graces, and grants, that have been given to any Religious
me^dicants or not me^dicants, Julius the 3. confirms the same. Paulus the 4.
more amply, as also Pius the 4. The same has been done but with limitation to
the Council of Trent by Greg. 13. Sixtus 5. and Celment 8.

Whence it appears, that as these three Orders came forth from one rock that
is from the holy and seraphicall Father S. Francis, as has been declared
before so the sovereign Pastors of Gods Church have imparted equal graces,
and favors, which shows the great esteem that they had of this Rule, and
profession.

I omit here to set down the particular Privileges that hereby have been
granted to this Order as being very many, and obuious in the authors that have
spoken of the Privileges of our Order as Hieronymus Roderiquez, Portell, and
others: in the mean time there arises a question concerning their subjection
to the Friar minors which requires another chapter.

THE TWELFTH CHAPTER. To whom the religious of this order are subject.
IT being certain that every true Religions man by force and nature of his
state is subject to some higher power, which not only consists in governing and
ruling their subjects, but also in jurisdiction, for no man can be truly
Religious, unless He be lawfully received in the name of the Church, which
requires a spiritual jurisdiction in the receiver, who may admit of them
punish them, and such like. The question therefore is, in whom remains this
superior power to do the fore said things.

Moreover it is certain that setting aside exemptions, all Religious are
subject to the government of the Bishops, in whose territory or diocese
their houses are, for the Bishop is Pastor of the whole flock residing in his
diocese. So that the exemptions, which now all Religious enjoy, be nothing
elfe but a freedom from the power and jurisdiction, whereto formerly by nature
of their state and law of the Church they were subject, which can be done by
none but by the supreme Pastor of the Churh, who alone can limite and
streighten the power and jurisdiction of Bishops For although the power and
authority of Bishops be ordinary and as they say, of the divine law, yet it is
extended to their subjects dependently upon S. Peter and his successors, from
whom jurisdiction over such and such subjects is derived: so that the Pope
without all question can modifie, mitigate, limite, or extend their power, as
he shall judge convenient, and requisite for the good of Gods Church. And from
him alone, Have been granted to religious, their exemptions, partly out of the
great love and devotion, that many Popes have borne to Religion, and partly to
take, away many injurious abuses that by the continual iarres of the clergy
did creep into the Church, but principally for four reasons, to wit for the
greater uniformity of Religion, necessity of their state, alleuiation or
easing of the bishops burden, and the more exact government of Religious
persons.

Nothing is more necessary in Religion than uniformity, which under the
ordinaries could hardly be observed; for each Diocese has its several
customs and laws, and these Religious orders being dispersed through whole
kingdoms in all places of the world, should have thereby a several manner of
living. Wherefore Popes have thought it more reasonable, that they should be
subject to superiors who with as much uniformity as may be might govern them
in all parts of the world, that so there may be no confusion amongst them.

As for the necessity of there state since no Bishop has power out of his
Diocese to send forth any, for to preach, it is necessary that those orders
that have care and charge of preaching and teaching for the conversion of
indfidels and heretics, should have some power to put this in execution, and
to send those that are sitting for such employments without dependence of the
ordinaries, whose authority does not extend it self so far. Perhaps some
will say, that this authority might be given to Bishops, I admit it, but they
do not consider the great inconvenience that would come thereby, for supposing
the bishop of this Diocese send some one or two, the bishop of the next
Diocese one or two more to the same place, and so the like of others; either
these must live as strangers one to another, which is contrary to their
institution, or else they must live in community together, and then who shall
be superior to govern them. Any one that has the least experience in matters
of Religion, may judge what inconvenience may come thereby.

Few perhaps do consider the third reason, until they feel the burden; How
soever all will say, that the ordinaties are hereby freed from many troubles
and difficulties of conscience, for it were a thing morally impossible that the
Bishop could by himself attend to all Religious persons, or visit all
Religious houses, and therefore he must necessarily committ the charge to others
who perhaps carelessly, or not so uprightly would perform that charge, and
some times not understanding the state of such Religious persons they were to
visit or govern, would cause many relaxations.

Wherefore for the better and more secure government, it has been ordained
that each order should be governed by superiors of their own order, who
knowing the true state and manner of living might keep them in a uniform
manner of life, and ordain laws fitting for such a state. For practical
experience more avails for the advancement of any good government, than
speculatiue knowledge drawn from books without practice, and yet this is the
most that ordinarily those that are not of the same order have. For this reason
no doubt, Blessed S. Ignatius founder of the holy Society of Jesus not lauing
begun any order of women, because his institution was principally to preach
and teach, did particularly ordain, that none of his should take charge and
care of Nuns, well knowing that diversity of spirits might cause diversity
of instructions, and consequently as many if not more confusions and so he
would that every one should look to his own charge and the sheep be left to
their own pastors.

For such and many other reasons have Popes exempted most Religious orders from
the government and jurisdiction of Bishops. As in particular they have donde
to our order, for Honorius 3. who approved our Rule did exempt both the
Franciscans and Dominicans from episcopal jurisdiction, Innocentius 4. did it
more amply, with many other. And that this third order is also exempted, is
manifest by what has been said in the precedent chapter; for if it enjoys
all the privileges of the first order, it must necessarily also enjoy this
exemption which is an especial privilege, much tending to the good of their
order. Besides diverse Popes have wholly submitted it, and the order of the
poor clares to the government of the Friar Minors, as may be seen in the
Bulls of Pope Martin the 5. Sixtus. 4. Leo 10. Clement. 7. with many others,
as is to be seen in the Bullarie of Roderiques. Yea Clement the 7. does extend
this grace to their houses, monasteries, Churches Prelates, servants, men, and
women, benefactors, persons, substance, and goods whatsoever granting them to
use and enjoy all and singular the exemptions, privileges, immunities,
prerogatives, indulgences, indults, favors, conseruatories graces, which the
Friar Minors and Preachers and sisters of S. Clare, or any other whatsoever
mendicant orders do enjoy, or shall enjoy in future times, not only like unto
them or by way of Communication, but equally and principally without any
difference, the Popes following as is said before, still giving them the like
exemptions. And Pius 5. expressly commands them to submit themselves to the
order of the Friars, in all things to be governed, directed, visited, and
served by the Friar Minors to who^ also they have committed the care, and
charge over them.

THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER. What were the motives that drew Popes to grant these
privileges and graces to this third order.
I Know not who can better decide this question, than the Popes themselves who
have been so liberal to this sacred order; and therefore I will produce their
own words most making to our purpose, omitting many others that might be set
down and are to be seen in their Bulls more at large. And to begin with
Pope Gregory the. 9. who lived in the very beginning of this order, he in his
Bull cum dilecti filij says of the religious of this order that they had left
the world to please our lord in the tower of contemplation, and therefore he
frees them from receiving and executing public offices in the world.
Alexander the 4. does the same, because they having left the vanities of this
world, being as yet corporally on earth diligently labor in spirit and mind to
dwell in celestialls, and for God to deny secular desires. Caelestinus in his
Bulla Dignum esse credimus gives the same, because that being mind full of
their last end, and forsaking the vanities of this world they desire with a
contrite heart and humble spirit to do penance.

Leo the tenth in his Bull Dudum faelicis communicates unto them all the
Privileges of the poor clares, because they live in the spirit of poverty in
the lilly of Chastity, and other odours of good fame.

Clement the. 7. goes farther, and communicates unto them all the privileges
of all mendicant orders in his Bull ad vberes fructus. giving this reason,
directing the eye of our consideration unto the plentiful fruit, which the
sacred order of Penance (which the truly seraphicall fisher of men B. S.
Francis illuminated by the holy Ghost, has ordained that he might gain all
souls to their creator) has brought hitherto into the storehouse of our
lord, and every day ceases not to bring in with a more fertile hand; and
reuoluing in the secrets of our mind, that this order not only by those that
are married of both sex, but also by the brethren and sisters living in
community and making the three solemn vows, has long ago begun to flourish
and every day does more and more flourish, etc.

I will omit many such like, and conclude that as the religious of this third
order are participant with all other orders in their essential vows,
religious obseruances, fasts, mortifications, austerities, prayers, meditation,
co^templation, and other labors night and day in the quire, with ought else
that belongs to a religious state, they ought in all reason to participate of
the same graces and favors.

But I fear I have been some what tedious in this subject, yet I hope it
will be pleasing to some who are not only desireous to satisfy their curiosity,
but also to know the truth. Wherefore I now proceed to my intended purpose, and
as I have set down the privileges that have been granted to this order by
the Church, so I have thought good briefly to show the great graces and gifts
that God has imparted to this order, to wit sanctity and perfection, both
which the Popes holiness has mentioned in the Prologue.

THE FOVRTEENTH CHAPTER. Of the sanctity of this order.
AS the Church triumphant is peopled with saints, who have made profession of
the three Rules that S. Francis has left to his children, so the Church
militant has been and is adorned and embellished with many saints, and holy
persons whose lives and deaths have been miraculously confirmed by God, and
approved by the said Church. For we find that there has been in S. Francis
order 27. canonized saints, 606. beatified, of whom the divine office is
celebrated either generally in the whole order, or particularly in some
kingdoms, Diocesses, or towns, and 920. martyrs: besides infinite others
which are not known as yet, 1650. Confessors notable for Sanctity of life
and miracles: 6. beatified saints whose canonization is daily expected, 4.
whose beatification is in hand all things being finished thereto required: 14.
who by command of the Pope have their process for the next general
beatificatio^: 133. whose life and miracles are now in the last examine, for to
proceed for their beatification; 19. whose process is before the ordinaries,
the number of which increases daily.

Of all which saints this third order has had no little share. For in it we
may find 5. canonized saints, whereto we may add S. Roch as approved by the
practice of the whole Church; 9. beatified 21. knowue martyrs. So that we may
well say that of Number. cap. 24. O quam pulchra tabernacula tua Jacob, How
beautiful are thy tabernacles o Jacob, and thy tents o Israel: as wooddie
valleys as watered gardens besides the Rivers, as tabernacles which our lord
has pitched, as cedars by the waterside. O how beautiful are the several
congregations militating under the tents or Rules of the seraphicall Father S.
Francis, they are like to woody valleys extending themselves through the whole
world, which like strong bulwarks are to withstand the treacheries and deceits
of the Devil: for as he every day uses new inventions to deceive and devour
souls, so these orders yield new soldiers day ly to vanquish and tread him
under foot; no soouer does one troop begin to fail but another rises up. And
therefore they may well be compared to watered garde^s besides the Rivers,
always flourishing, and in due time giving copious fruicts, amongst whom by a
pious kind of emulation the true worship of God and religious piety daily
increases. And according as they increase so they are more and more
strengthened, being also as tabernacles which our lord has pitched, that is
solid and firm, as being erected and established by God, who has adorned
each member and branche of them with several gists and graces, conformable to
their capacity. This camot choose but be a great ornament and splendor to the
Church, proceeding from the variety of these cedars by the water side who
being watered with the water of grace do bring forth fruit in abundance.

Truly it is a thing worthy to be noted, that in the sole order of S. Francis
there is meat for all palats, none can excuse themselves, of weakness none
can presume of their strength. For amongst the professors of this order or
children of S. Francis some live as strictly and with as much austeritie as in
any order of Gods Church as be those of the first and second order, but in the
third order, as it is now be of all forts, some living in a very strict manner,
no way inferior to the professors of the first and second order, some
observing a mean accomodating themselves according to the disposition and
nature of the country where they live, others living in a devout manner in
their houses. And out of each of them have sprung forth many saints, which is
an argument that this Rule is holy. And least that any one should think I
speak without ground I will compendiously set down here the lives of some of
them, first beginning with the canonized Saints.

THE FISTEENTH CHAPTER. The life of Blessed S. Elizabeth Queen of Hungary
compendiously extracted out of the Annalls of our Order.
I Have made choice to begin with this glorious saint as being the first
canonized saint and (as it seems to me) first that lived a claustral life in
this order, and therefore worthily acknowledged as patroness thereof. Her life
is very amply set forth in latin by the R. F. Sedulius, and now is translated
out of french into English by S. Thomas. H. whose sweet and elegant style, will
soon show a blemish in my harsh and unpolished phrase: who likes not one may
read the other, and pardon my desires to honor so great a Saint, whose
heroical and pious acts require a Seraphs pen. If the reverence I bear to
the holy woman make me ouerbold, the fault is pardonable, or at least to be
mended by others: howsoever I intend not to make a complete work, but a rude
delineation and brief extract of her life, dividing it into five parts, the
first shall be of her life until she was married, the second of what she did
in marriage, the third what she did after her husbands death, the fourth how
she finished her life in a religious course, and lastly of her translation.

What this saint did until such time as she was married.. 1.
OMitting the description of her noble race (for she was daughter to the king
of Hungary) and the prophecy reported to have been made before the world
enjoyed so rare a piece, of her birth, name, wit, miracles, and many, such like
things worthy enough of recording; I will begin at the 7. year of her age,
when she begins to show forth the luster of her future sanctity. For even now
before she well knows what virtue is, she is become the mirror and pattern,
of virtue, especially of patience and charity. For although her infancy
principally in the more tender sex might excuse her grief for her mothers
death, yet she then above her age and sex, took it with a constant patience,
and with a patient charity, not any ways seeking to revenge her dear mother,
but sweetly prayeing for the^ who had iniuriousely taken away her life. And
from thence forward you should find the little child always in the Church,
before some Altar or other, now prostrating her self in a most pious manner,
now kneeling for a long space together, with eyes and hands lifted up to
heaven, and if she could not get into the Church, sweetly kneeling at the
door, kisseing the threshold, doors and walls of that holy place.

As she increased in years so she increased in piety, making a happy
progress in all virtues, and begins now to lay solid grounds of a spiritual
life. For at the 9. year of her age, she begins to have God always before her
eyes, and for his sake to despise, contemn, and cast of superfluity of
apparel, the pleasures of the flesh, and vanity of the world. Now she
prescribes to her self certain prayers which she resolved daily to make, and
if she chanced in the day time to be hindered (as seldom she was, because true
devotion will always find occasion) that her defect would she supply in the
night. Above all other saints next to our Blessed lady she made choice of S.
John Evangelist for her patron, having first made her prayer to God, that she
might choose one who should most advance her pious desires: him she loved, and
reverenced so much, that she would never deny any thing that was demanded for
his sake.

She most religiously observed the solemnities of feasts and holy days, and
whereas according to the vanity of the world others adorn and deck
themselves with gay apparel, she on those days would take away some thing of
her ordinary attire, well knowing that it was more pleasing to God to have the
mind adorned with virtues, than the body with rich apparel, and that a soul
addicted to the study of religious piety is more acceptable to him, than the
corporal substance shining with purple, gold, silver, jewels or precious
stones, which are but as the dross of the earth.

Although she were but yet a child, yet took she no delight in childish toys,
and plays, and if by chance she were compelled to dance, she used such
temperance therein, that she rather did manifest her ciuility in co^plieing to
their desires, than any content she had in the recreation. She carried her
self indifferent in all such things, and so by a quotidian and daily exercise
resisted her natural inclinations, and mortified her appetite always
declining from the liberty of a loose life, she did raise up her self to
greater means of perfection. Entering into the Church she would always lay
aside her crown, until such time as all being done she were admonished to
return, for that she thought it a great impiety that her head should there be
adorned with the proud pomp of a glittering crown, where was represented
unto her the head of our savior crowned with pricking thorns. Who could
expect such devotion, such high virtues in so tender years. It seemed to many
(and not without reason) that she was more fitting to live amongst religious
women, than in the court; you would judge that she had been some Angel in
human nature, especially where as so many occasions of wordly sensuality were
presented unto her, as all know the courts of Princes be subject to.

What she did in the time of her Marriage. 2.
IN the fourteenth year of her age she is forced by the obedience she owed to
her Father to marry, and thereby perhaps must mitigate somewhat of this great
fervor. But nothing less; for her heart was firm and stable in those graces
that God had given her, more and more sheweing forth her fervor of spirit,
daily increasing in the study of virtuous actions, feeding her mind with the
contemplation of celestial things, and excerciseing her body in watchings,
prayers, and fasts, oftentimes cautiously riseing from her husbands side in the
night to pray. And when she could get opportunity, she would lie on the bare
ground, and to prevent all rebellion of the flesh, she chastised her tender
body every friday with disciplines, and in the lent oftener. Under her silks
and sattins she ware continually a haireshirt, yea many times permitted her
maids to discipline and chastise her when she could think that she had done
ought amiss. A rare parterne in so great a princess.

To all this we may add her great charity, wherein she spent the greater part
of her time, now laboring by word and works to draw others to amendment of
life, by reason whereof many ladies forsook the vanity of the world, some by
her counsel making vows of chastity, others entering into religion, others
who had not received the faith by her good counsel and instruction brought to
be baptized, she her self going to be their God-mother at the font. Other
whiles going forth to visit poor sick women, comforting and cherishing them
with all things necessary, which she always brought with her. And indeed she
was alwayes-mercifull to the poor, not disdaining secretly to dress their
fores and botches, yea their scald-heads and scurfes, where of being sometimes
reprehended she joyfully answered, that she had rather please Christ than me^.
And to avoid idleness the mother of all mischief, being vacant from the
aforesaid works of piety she used with her maids to spinne, and therewithal
she clothed the poor. And that her charity might never cease, she caused a
fair hospital to be built, wherein she gave order that all things necessary
should be provided for the poor that were weak and sick, which hospital
(although it were on a high mountain somewhat painful to ascend) she did
ordinarily visit every day, going with great humility to each one that was
there, enquiring whether they wanted any thing, or what they desired, and with
her own hands did feed those that were not able to help themselves, taking
them out of their beds, bearing the^ in her arms, and composeing their beds
for them. Most lovingly would she embrace the poor little children, carrieing
them in her arms, and showing her tender affection to them, as if she had
been their mother: so that ordinarily she was called the Mother of the poor.
She never regarded their deformity, diseases, scabs or filth, but lovingly
received all as if they had been her own. In this hospital she had always
28 persons for whom she provided, although she were forced sometimes for their
sakes to substract necessaries from her self. Besides there were 900. beggars
daily nourished by her alms; but above all she took special care for the
funerals and burials of such poor people as were not able to provide for
themselves.

These acts of so notable charity God almighty showed both to be grateful to
himself, and also not prejudicial to her husbands state; as the following
examples will show. For once being much importuned by some poor people for
alms, and having not any other thing to give, she gave them her mantell which
was very rich, which the Prince misseing asked for it, the Saint confidently
answered that it hung thereby, as experience did verify. At another time the
prince being in great anxietie of mind, for that she had not apparel beseeming
her quality, especially in such a time as there came unto him an Ambassador
from the king her Father, she willed him not to be troubled, for that she did
never care for such vanities; But the time being come, that she must descend to
the Ambassador, lo she appears in very rich apparel, adorned with such
beauty that every one was struck into admiration, especially the prince, to
whom dema^ding the reason she smiling said, our lord does know how to prepare
such things when he pleases. About the year 1225. there fell a great dearth
through the whole country, when her husband being abroad she gathers all the
corn she could get, and most bountifully imparts it to the poor, so that she
emptied all the princes barnes, and storehouses, which notwith standing were
found to be as they were before.

It is too hard to express her great devotion at Mass and other divine
offices, her fervent and pious aspirations, her piety in the time of
communion, wherein she was many times seen to shine with a great light and
brightness. And although she spent her whole time very religiously, yet more
particularly she observed the lent with fastings, alms, and prayers, adding
frequent disciplines; and on maundy thirsday poorly clad she visited the
churches, washing with great devotion the feet of twelve poor women, and
after ward gave them liberal alms. She oftentiues went the processions
barefoot.

The fame of these and such like virtues came to the ears of our seraphicall
S. Francis, who for her comfort by the commandment of the Cardinal protector
sent her his cloak, which she most devoutly received. It seems to me that
this cloak was a mystical sign of what she was to be, to wit, not only one
of his children, but a mother and patroness of this third order, which the
holy Father by this sign does commend unto her.

What she did after her husbands death.. 3.
News coming to her of the princes death she with a constant resolution said
(tears sweetly flowing from her eyes) If my Brother (so she called her
husband) be dead, hence forward the world shall die to me who am dead to the
world. What she said in words, she fullfild in deeds, for at that time the
overseers of her young son (unable as yet to succeed in his Fathers
dominions) cast her out of all, and banished her the court, not permitting her
to come near the Prince her son; this confusion she willingly embraces, and
no way either desireing revenge, or murmuring against it, she rejoiced much,
and with the Apostles gloried in tribulation. Wherein as we may be hold her
glorious humility, patience, and other virtues, so also the fickle estate of
fortune. She who heretofore had been wont to live in princely palaces, is
now glad to creep into some poor cottage; she that had been esteemed,
honored, obeyed, and loved as one of the greatest princesses of the world, is
now despised, contemned, and derided of all, yea of those whom formerly she
had relieved; she that was, wont to be clad in rich attires of gold, silver,
and precious jewels, now walks in poor rags, and clothes embroadered
perhaps with mire: she that accustomed to bestow her alms so liberally on the
poor, is now glad to beg her own bread. Who would not take compassion of
her!

After she had passed the winter in these sufferances, lent coming on she
redoubled her devotions, wherein she found wonderful sweetness, which she was
no way able to express, and therein had many revelations as well of our
Savior, as of our B. lady. I will only set down one or two. Once being in an
ecstasy our lord appeared to her, and said, Do thou desire to be with me, and
I will be with thee. Whereto she answered, Let it be so my lord, as thou do
wouchsafe to be with me, so also I will remain with thee, and be never
separated from thee. Our B. lady appeared unto her very frequently, and did
instruct her how God does impart benefits to his beloved by many tribulations,
and how by his grace which he gives them he makes their souls more capable
of greater grace, whilst they out of a holy hum^litie do as it were become
diffident of receiueing such and so great benefits, which he daily more and
more bestows on them. And thereupon she counseled her to committ her self
to the divine will and goodness, and attribute more to the power of God, than
to her own indignity. The same was also manifested to the saint by a very
rare miracle, for being one day walking with her ghostly Father called Br.
Roderingus, they fell into a serious discourse of the spiritual progress that
a soul might make in perfection; amongst other things the holy woman said,
Reverend Father amongst all my troubles and difficulties of mind, there is
none so nerely touches me, as that I am doubt full of the benevolence and
goodness of my creator toward me, not that I do not know him to be the
sovereign good, and liberal in his love toward us, but that I find my
demerits to be such, that I shall and ought to be rejected, although I burn
with his love. Whereto the Father answered, you have no reason to fear, for so
great is the divine goodness, that without all doubt he loves again much more
than he is loved by any, But she replied; how then does he suffer me to be
drawn away from him by afflictions and sickness at any time or any moment,
whereas I would always and in all places adhere to him. Br Roderingus
answered, Those are rather signs of one that is beloved of God, than of one
forsaken by him: for he does permit them to increase your love to him as also
your merit. And in sign hereof, the more to confirm you herein, in the virtue
of his name, whom you love, I command that tree which is on the other side of
the river, to come to this side where we are: which was presently done.
Whereupon the saint fell at the Fathers feet craueing pardon for her offense.

The while these things were done some of her friends were thinking to help
her, and to allow her some honorable means, and also provide for her some
noble marriage. But she, not against her will as they thought, but volu^tarily
both poor and solitary, ma^fully refused all, saying, I am confident in the
divine protection, that what I have vowed whilst my husband lived, I shall not
loose now that he is dead, what soever authority press me, or friendship
flatter me, I will not suffer that to be taken from me by men which I have
begun for God alone, neither do I fear any violence, for it is always free
to me with my will to dissent from it, and to make my face more deformed, or
even to cut of my nose, O heroical resolution, rather she will loose her life
than leave the promise she had made to God.

How the holy woman took upon her a religious course of life.. 4.
ALthings nevertheless being well composed, and suffinent means given her to
maintain her self, she was nothing altered thereby from her former
resolution, to live after a poor manner, in so much that her nobility
condemned her, esteeming her as a fool or superstitious idiot. She was indeed
to the wicked a derision and mocking-stocke, but to the godly and just she was
in great veneration. Whence Pope Gregory the 9. hearing the fame of her
virtues, writ to her, taking her as his daughter under the protection of the
Apostolical See, and commending her to Conradus (a Friar as some will have it)
a very holy man, that he should instruct her what she was to do, where with
the Saint was much strengthened and confirmed, most willingly submitting her
self to his direction. Conradus then persuaded her to the contempt of the
world, and the following of Christ, which she very willing to do, to the end
she might execute it in some sure and constant course of life, she made choice
of this order of S. Francis, to live accordingly in holy and evangelical
poverty, which not without seeming reluctation her ghostly Father approved,
especially seeing her so earnestly and with tears to beg it. And upon a good
Friday before the altar in the Friar minors Church, by a solemn profession she
renounced parents, children, pompes, and vanities of the world, and her proper
will, to follow our Lord, but being about to give away all her means Conradus
would not permit it.

Not long after for the love of her ghostly Father, that she might better enjoy
his good instructions she went to Marburge, where she began an hospital, which
by commandment of Pope Gregory the 9. she dedicated to S. Francis. The Pope at
that time sent her some of the blood, that flowed from the side of the said
saint when he was marked with the holy stigmats.

In this hospital she aspires to a higher kind of life, and with a spiritual
emulation endeauours to imitate the Friar Minors in a noble contempt of all
things, taking their state of life and habit as much as she could; as says S.
Bonauenture in a sermon of this saint. She made profession of the third order
of S. Francis, as appears in the Bull of her canonization, and renouncing the
world had her hair cut of, and thence forward went barefoot, girding her self
with a cord: the habit that she with two or three more did take, was gray,
humble and poor, whereby she embraced perfect continency, and voluntary
poverty. The R. Father Pelbartus in one of his sermons upon this saint, says
that she contemned the world and entered into the third order of S. Francis to
live in chastity, obedience, and so strict poverty, that she did always we
are gray, and patched garments. Her father hearing she was come to so great
ponertie sent for her by an earl, who when he saw her cried out Is this the
king of Hungaries daughter? We may well say, no: for she is now the beloved
daughter of S. Francis, whose poverty she imitates.

I must here, to avoid prolixity, omit her great charity toward the poor in
this place, her familiarity, and benign comportment toward her inferiors, as
also her miracles. It is admirable to consider her poor life, her piety
toward the sick, as also toward leapers (in whose form Christ appeared once
unto her) which was not unrewarded by almighty God, who by her prayers did
heal very many of all manner of diseases, as well corporal as spiritual. With
such and so great signs of virtue this saint was adorned that it is impossible
to declare all. As she faithfully exercised the office of Martha, so she
omitted not the quiet rest of Marie, when works of piety and domestical
charge did cease, then her spirit was most at work, for then she goes to some
secret place, and lifting up her eyes, hands, and heart to God, powers forth
her prayer with fervent intention, and that with tears of compunction, wherein
she had a singular grace. Neither was she vnexperienc't in contemplation, for
oftentimes she was rapt in ecstasy for many hours together, wherein her face
did appear shining with admirable sweetness and luster, and at such times not
only enjoyed the colloquie of Angels, but also of Christ Jesus himself,
compassed about with an innumerable company of saints, after which time being
sufficiently refreshed with spiritual food, she would taste no corporal food
for many days together.

But now the time drawing on, wherein she must possess him eternally, he
joyfully appeared unto her saying, veni electa mea, and caelesti thalamo, quem
tibi ab aterno destinaui, potire. Come my elected spouse, and enjoy the
celestial bed chamber, which I have prepared for thee from all eternity. Being
much rejoiced at this vision she went to Conradus, and recounted unto him what
had happened, and within four days after ^ell sick. Drawing near to her
death, she would sometimes swanlike sing most melodiously, being assisted
thereto by angels: sometimes again sends forth all those that were about her,
that (as she said) she might remember her judge, and the terrible censure, that
shortly she was to hear: sometimes again she would begin some pious
discourse of the life or miracles of ou^ Savior, and at other times she would
utter such inflaming and penetrating words, that they forced all the hearers
into tears. God permitted the Enemy to appear to her, but she with a
constant mind cried out, Fly o miserable that thou art, fly unhappy one, thou
have nothing to do in me. And being in her last agony she said; This is the
hour of the virginal and immaculate birth of our Savior (for it was about
midnight) admonishing her assistents to speak something of the most beautifill
child Jesus. How he was borne in winters night, and in another house, swadled
in clothes, placed in a manger, found of the sheapheards, declared by the
star, and lastly adored by the Chaldeans. These, said she, are the venerable
mysteries, most rich benefits, and beautiful ornaments of our salvation. In
these our hope takes force, our faith does profit us, and our charity inflame
us. Of these I pray discourse and sweetly confer. In which words she gave up
the ghost.

What miracles God has wrought by her, both past and future ages will
testify, what is said may suffice for our purpose, Those authors who with more
eloquence have described her life, can manifest at more leisure her innumerable
miracles. Only I will note here that she left four Images of our B. Lady with
her daugher Sophia, which be all miraculous, especially that of our lady of
Hall near Brusselles, and that of Vilford near Brusselles also, commonly
called our lady of comfort.

The translation of S. Elizabeth. 5.
AFter her Canonization which was in the year 1235. by Gregory the 9. her
fame was diuulged through all Germany. So that Siffridus archbishop of Ments in
the year following, ordained the first day of May with great joy of the people
to take up the most holy body out of the grave where it was. It is incredible
to believe how great a multitude of all sorts of people were gathered together
at Marburg; the like was hardly ever seen in those parts; some do report they
came to twelve hundred thousand persons. The offerings that were there
presented were not to be valued. The Emperor Frederick the second was
present, (and dedicated a crown of gold to the holy relics) with many other
princes, archbishops, Abbots, and such like. And before them all the tomb was
opened, from whence came forth a most grateful odor, which did make all those
that felt it very joyful, the body taken up was put into a fair shrine, and
carried with great pomp to the great joy and content of all the people. But
which is more to be admired, there came forth out of her body a certain oil,
which cured all manner of diseases, insomuch that, as Alberinus, who has
written the chronicles of Germany, says, there came almost as many to her
shrine, as to S. James of Compostella.

Thus I have briefly run over the life of this glorious saint, that in part
I might show, with what good reason the religious and other professors of this
order have taken her for their Patroness, as one that was a perfect disciple
of S. Francis, and the first canonised saint of this order, yea except S.
Antony of Padua the first child S. Francis had, that was enroled in the number
of saints, and the first that made the three essential vows of religion. From
her this holy order began to take its happy progress to the glory of God, and
honor of this saint. And in sign that she was patroness of this order, the
religious of this order were wont to celebrate her feast with an octaue, as may
be gathered out of the Bull of Pope Leo the io. Cum alias. Wherein he grants
leave to celebrate Mass, and the divine office even in the time of
interdiction through the whole octaue of S. Elizabeth, in the same manner, as
the order did celebrate the feasts, and octaues of S. Clare, which is not
ordinarily granted, unless they were patrons or patronesses.

THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER. Of the life and death of Blessed S. Lewis king of
France.
THis glorious saint was borne of blessed parents, to wit, of Lewis the 8. king
of France, and Blancha queen of Castile, both holy persons, in the year 1215.
being obtained of almighty God by the intercession of our B. lady. For his
devout mother (who also was of this third order) grieuing that she had no
children to succeed in the kingdom, was persuaded by S. Dominicke to implore
the aid and help of the B. virgin, and to that end instructed her the manner
of saying the Rosarie, which had newly begun. Her prayers were not without
fruit, for she obtained her desire, in enjoying so blessed an offspring, who at
twelve years old was crowned king of France, yet remained under the protection
of his mother, who would often incultate these words unto him, My most dear
son, I had rather thou should undergo a temporal death, than by one
mortal sin offend thy creator. Which words took such root in his mind,
that Gods grace so preserving him he never sinned mortally in his life, his
mother still instructing him in the way of virtue, and procureing always some
religious men, especially Franciscans and Dominicans to be with him, that by
their example he might be drawn to virtue and piety.

And being now of age fit for marriage she provided a wife for him, to the
great joy and comfort of all his subjects, but for three nights after his
marriage he still continued in prayer, bridling his conjugal desire with the
fear of God, and ever after lived most chastely with his queen. He was
greatly addicted unto piety and devotion, daily saying the canonical hours,
and much loved humility, poverty, charity, patience, and other virtues,
studyeing the works of penance, and mercy, living in watchings, prayers,
fastings, disciplines, and haircloath, and continually meditateing on the
sacred mysteries of the Incarnation, and Passion of our Savior; the principal
instruments whereof he from all places procured, as that of the crown of
thorns, great part of the Cross, the Iron of the lance that opened our
Saviors side, with many others.

He was very devout in hearing Mass, and did communicate often, and that with
such devotion, that he would allure others to piety, so strong in faith
thereto, that being one time called to behold an apparition of a most
beautiful child, when the priest did eleuate the holy Sacrament, he refused to
go to see it, saying that such signs were for those that did not believe.

Out of his great zeal of Gods honor he went forth to make war with the
Sarazens, wherein at the first he properously proceeded, but in the end, God so
willing, he was taken prisoner, but by composition being set at liberty, in
his return God by his prayer delivered both himself and his company from
shipwreck. And as in this he showed his fervent desire to reduce those
infidels to the light of faith, so he always did defend the Church against its
enemies, he loved and maintained all religious orders, especially those of the
Friar minors and Preachers; but was a severe enemy to all heretics, even to
the hour of his death, for on his death bed it was one of his last and
greatest charges he gave to his son. Fili, says he, fis deuotus and obediens
matri nostrae Romanae Ecclesiae, and summo Pontifici tanquam Patri spirituali,
be devout and obedient to our mother the Roman Church, and to the Sovereign
bishop as to a spiritual Father.

It is reported of him, that going in pilgrimage to Rome, he passed by Perusia
to see Brother Giles one of the companions of our holy Father, a man of great
contemplation, who by revelation understanding of his coming, and meeting the
king in a disguised habit (for he went in a pilgrims weed) he presently most
joyfully received him, and both falling prostrate to each other, and both
rising together after an hours space they went one from another. Brother Giles
being demanded why he did not speak to the king since he knew him, he answered
we saw one another hearts so clearly, that it was not needful to speak any
thing.

Omitting many other most excellent things in his life, I will conclude with
his death, which was thus. In the year 1270. having received all the
Sacraments of the Church with great devotion, and casting himself prostrate on
the ground with a haire-cloath and ashes under him, holding his hands stretched
forth in the form of a Cross, he gave up the Ghost, and afterward shined with
many miracles, especially that of curing the disease commonly called the kings
Evil, and as some will have it, from him all the succeeding kings have that
virtue. For the great virtues and miracles that God wrought by this saint, he
was canonised by Pope Bonifacius the 8. in the year 1298. And that he was of
this third order is manifest by all the ancient monuments of our order, the
whole order having always celebrated his feast with peculiar right. And Paulus
3. in his Bull Cum a nobis petitur. 1547. numbers him amongst the saints of
this third order. See the Martirologe of the Friar Minors on the 25. of August.

THE SEAVENTEENTH CHAPTER. The life of S. Iuo Patron of the lawyers.
BLessed S. Iuo was borne of noble Parents near Trecore in little Britain,
in the year 1258. who at competent age was sent thence to Paris, where having
past his studies with praise, as well in humanity as Philosophy, and
divinity, he departed thence and went to Orleans to study the cannon law,
where fearing the occasion of place and company, he began to exercise himself
in the way of mortification and virtue, which much increased his good fame and
esteem of all men, and made the Archdeane of Rhemes to choose him for to be
his official, which office he performed with great applause. He ever cherished
the poor, helped orphans, and comforted those that were in any affliction, he
was a great peacemaker, never giving sentence or judgment but with tears
accompanying it: as unwilling to displease any one.

In all things he did show his great charity to the poor and singular love to
God, for whose sake he despised all the things of this world. Which that he
might more perfectly effect, he took the habit of this third order, which
humble state made him to leave his office or place, (although now he were
official to the Bishop) and retire himself to a poor little Parish Church,
where with more freedom he might be attentive to divine contemplation. And now
going in his poor habit, under which also he did wear a hairshirt, with most
strict fasts even in bread and water, very frequently did remain in ecstasy,
and sometimes for the space of seven days together. He celebrated Mass with
exceeding great devotion, as also the divine office, which he said always at
midnight, very sparing in sleep, seldom or never composeing himself thereto,
unless by reading, laboring, preaching, or such like he was forced to it, and
then in his habit, on the ground, taking for his pillow the Bible or some stone.

His great hospitality was the cause that his table never wanted guess, and
those principally of the poorer sort, sick, or lame, in so much that if God had
not miraculously provided for him he could not have sustained it; and for such
upon his own charges and expenses he would plead and defend their cause,
whereupon he was called Advocate of the poor.

Notwithstanding all this, besides his continual preachings with great fruit,
he never omitted the quiet peace of mind, but addicted himself to
conte^platio^, wherein he was often visited by Angels, by whom he had many
things revealed unto him, and at last his own death, whereto he prepared
himself with great devotion, and with the general opinion of sanctity
confirmed afterward by miracles. He was canonized in the year 1347. taken by
them of little Brittany as their Patron, who make use of his name in time of
battle or conflicts, as we use the name of S. George.

Finally that he was of the third order, is manifest by the statute made in the
general chapter of our order held at Lions, in the year 1351. where it was
ordained, that his feast should be celebrated on the 27. of october which is
the day of his translation. Bernardinus a bustis, the firmament of the three
orders, and all the ancient writers of our order make mention of him.

I need not here set down the lives of Blessed S. Elzear and S. Elizabeth
Queen of Portugal commonly called peacemaker, because they are both extant
in our English language. Yet for the better content of the Reader, I will
briefly run over the lives of some beatified saints of this order, whose
fame is more diuulged through the whole world.

THE EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER. Containing the lives of some beatified saints of this
order.
BLessed S. Rose from her infancy began to fear God giving her self to
fervent prayer, mortification, austeritie, and penance; and would often
substract from her self to give to the poor, which God blessed so much, that
she wrought miracles. Whilst she was but a child, by the admonishment of our
Blessed lady, she took upon her the habit of this third order, whereby she
suffered great persecution both from her father, friends, and cocitizens, for
she was therefore exiled the city, though after ward by reason of her famous
miracles and spirit of prophecy, she was brought back again with great
honor. Where after many revelations she died in the year 1251. namely at
Viterbia, where she is famous to this day with innumerable miracles. Many Popes
have intended her canonization, and the citizens of Viterbia do keep her
feast with great solemnity on the 4. day of September. And that which most
increases the devotion of the people, is, that her body whole and entire is at
this day to be seen with hair and nails which do continually grow, which
the religious women of the monastery where her body lies do cut of, turning
her body up and down without any derriment; and which is more miraculous in
the year 1357. her tomb and all things that were in the chapel where the
tomb was, yea the habit upon her back were consumed with fire, which was so
vehement that it melted the rings from her finger without doing the least hurt
to the holy body.

Blessed S. Margaret of Cortona was very beautiful and had been given to
wantonness, but converted to God, and lamenting her former life she began to
despise all vanities, and carnal pleasures, and with effusion of tears did
implore the mercy of God, applying her self to good works, especially of
co^passionating the poor, and out of her great desire to lead a penitential
life, she humbly begged the habit of the third order, which was denied her for
three years space, as well in consideration of her former life, as yongnesse of
years, but perseuering in her firm purpose she obtained it at length in the
year 1277. at Cortona, and began a new life, which was to be admired; for
choosing a solitary place she addicted her self wholly to abstinencies,
fastings, disciplines, watchings, and continual prayer, lyeing on the ground,
having a stone for her pillow. She went in a poor and humble habit, being full
of charity and pity to the poor, oftentimes substracting from her self to
give to them. And by the continual meditation of the passion of our Savior
she obtained the gift of compunction, weeping very frequently as well for her
own sins, as also for the sins of others. She was oftentimes troubled by
the Devil appearing to her in diverse forms, but was as often comforted by our
Savior, by our Blessed lady, and by the holy angels, and strengthened by their
celestial visitations; which made her as much to shine in most profound
humility, and high poverty, as in the love of Christ: whereby she was often
rapt in ecstasies, and had many revelations, whilst she applied her mind to the
contemplation of divine things. By the spirit of prophecy she did foretell
things to come, and reveal the secrets of many hearts and consciences, being
very famous both in life and after her death for many miracles, even to this
our time, which made Pope vrbane the 8. that now is, in the year 1623. to put
her in the number of the Beatified, and to give license that the divine office
might be made of her through the whole order of S. Francis.

Of this order also was that great contemplative blessed S. Angela who in this
penitential habit did undertake a wonderful strict way of penance, wherein
she was consolated by celestial visions. Being much given to contemplation,
for twelve years space she took no other food than the Blessed sacrament. Her
body remains at Fulginea whole and entire. She has left behind her many
excellent things, exceeding the ordinary capacity of men which are extant in
lattin, Italian, spanish, and French, and are to be desired in our vulgar
language, if I do it not (as I much desire to do) I pray God to raise some
one that will perform it, as a work very necessary for all religious persons,
those principally who seek the way of contemplation as this saint did.

I omit to speak of many other beatified saints, as of S. Conradus, whose
office is served in the whole order, and of S. Roch who is held as a canonized
saint through the whole Church, with many others. I will now set down briefly
a catalogue of the principal religious women, who have been famous for
sanctity and miracles in this order according to their years, which I have
collected out of the Martirologe of the Friar Minors. If any list to know more
of the^ they may, read the said martirologe and they shall find what Authors
have written of them.

THE NINTEENTH CHAPTER. Containing a brief catalogue of the principal holy
persons that have been in this order, since it came to be a perfect religious
state.
ALthough there have been from the beginning of this holy order many that did
live in a claustrall manner, the order it self every day increasing more and
more, and yielding abu^da^ce of holy persons, who have professed this holy
rule, yet it never came to its full perfection, that is, to complete and
perfect state of religion, until the time of blessed Angeline, (a diminitiue
from Angela for distinction sake, other wise she was also called Angela) who
from being Countess of Ciuitella became religious of this order. For having
gathered together many noble young women of the same mind with her self, she
built a monastery, and dedicated it to S. Anne in the year 1397. and entering
therein with her associats, having first made the three vows of obedience,
poverty, and chastity she did with sanctity persevere to the end of her life
in fasting, prayer, and other exercises of penance. By her example many other
gathering their means together in short time did build eight monasteries in
diverse parts of Italy, and did live under the habit and rule of the third
order, which manner of life was approved and confirmed by the Popes Martin. 5
Eugenius 4. Not long after by their example many men did also build conuents
living under the same habit and rule, with the three vows of religion as they
had done. This holy woman died on the day that Christ was borne, as our Savior
appearing on S. Thomas his day had declared unto her; and lies buried in the
said monastery of S. Anne where she is worshipped with great reverence of the
people.

Amongst the disciples of this holy woman were many religious persons famous
for sanctity, Iacobellus principally notes three: to wit, blessed Onuphria,
sometimes countess of Aprutia, and B. Francis of Burgaria, of the house of the
Earls of Marsican, and blessed Ioane of Fulginea, much renowned for piety,
virtue, regular observance, and perfection of life, who afterward went to
Florence, and there built the monastery of S. Onuphrius, ending their days in
great sanctity.

Blessed Margaret Dominicke was also one of them that took the habit from S.
Angeline, and became a perfect follower of her virtues, for she much excelled
in prayer, humility, and contempt of her self, and did serve every one as if
she had been their subject, and with a sincere heart and candide mind did
reverence all her sisters; her purity was rather angelical than humane, and
her obedience such that without the consent of her superior she would do or
resolve nothing, showing no less respect also to her ghostly Father. She tamed
her flesh with abstinence, fastings, and haircloath, as being most zealous of
her vows; being full of charity, she did help any of her sisters that were
in necessity, and willingly perform their wills. In the end the monastery of
S. Anne being over filled with religions, the citizens of Fulginea did build
another under the title of S. Anne, and this holy woman was made Abbess
thereof, where she instructed her sisters in the best manner, and by her friends
enlarged the monastery, which she most religiously governed, until she was
called to Spoletum, where she began also another monastery, under the title of
S. Catharine. Which done she was brought home to herformer monastery, where
she appeared more fervent, excercising her self in the works of holy prayer,
penance, and mortification, whence after the death of B. S. Angeline she was
called to succeed in her place, and therein began to shine with miracles, and
there died with incredible patience in her infirmity, her body was placed in a
shrine near to the altar in the said monastery of S. Anne, which was long
times after found whole, and entire, yielding a most fragrant odor, and
shining with miracles.

Blessed Lucida was one of the companions of S. Magaret, famous for regular
observance and rare virtues. She was much delighted in the memory of Christ's
Passion, and thereby merited to feel the dolor of the wounds of our Savior
in her hands.

Blessed Sanctia Martinez was endowed with great humility and perfection of
life. For after she had builded at her own charges the monastery of S.
Elizabeth at Arenali in the year 1440. and laid a good foundation for the
revenues thereof became her self religious of this order, being of such
examplar life, that all did strive to imitate her humility, being such that
although she was borne of nobler parents, yet was she not ashamed to carry
water upon her shoulders through the market place. And no less addicted she
her self to austeritie and penance, and so died with great opinion of
sanctity.

Blessed Pyrona of fla^ders did enter into the monastery of the third order in
Ga^t, that there she might serve God more purely, and more freely give her
self to works of penance. She had the gift of compunction so copiously, that
her eyes were as a red cloth. She was very obedient to her superiors,
flourished in true poverty, and did much labor to conserve her chastity and
keep her mind and body free from all spot. After she had lived thus a long
time with great sanctity she got leave of her Abbess to go and live in an
hermitage within the Church yard of S. Nicholas, near to the town, where she
did shine with admirable sanctity, austeritie of life, patience, and miracles,
and knew the secret thoughts of the minds of those that came to her, and
oftentimes made them known. She died in the year 1472.

Blessed Mary Ruiz of Alcarazio despiseing all nuptial rites took the habit
of this order, and by her example did draw many others to her, and together
with them by the authority of Pope Innocent the 8. did live after a religious
manner, changeing her house into a monastery in the year 1486. And living
under the obedience of the Provincial of the Friar Minors, with abundance of
merits and virtues, most religiously died having before foretold the time of
her death.

About the same time lived Blessed Beatrix Hermosilla who together with her Ant
did study to perfection, nothing esteeming the world and pomp thereof,
whatsoever they could get, they did distribute to the poor, and by their
labors with help of the citizens did erect the monastery of S. Elizabeth in
Castile, where with other virgins and women they made profession of this third
order, and with great sanctity of life lived and died therein, in the year
1485. Her bones were taken up 47. years after, being fresh, and yielding a
very sweet sent, and being translated to a more convenient place very many
miracles were wrought before them, which gave occasion to the people to show
great devotion unto them.

B. Aldonza Lopetia of noble race, by the help of the citizens of Arenali in
the year 1490. began the monastery of our lady, after wards through the
sanctity of the holy woeman called the monastery of Aldonza, for that she was
the first Abbess of this house, who had the spirit of prophecy, working
miracles both in her life and after her death.

Blessed Vraca Roderiguez of Vlmes of most noble parentage, and exceeding rich,
entering into a a Church where she heard the words of our Savior, si vis
perfectus esse, vade and vende omnia quae habes, and da pauperibus, took them
as said to her self, and so bestowed much part of her means upon religious
houses, builded an hospital, converting her own house into a monastery, and
giving all the rest to the poor. Afterward she with five of her neeces, and
three other gentlewoemen entered into this order about the year 1491. None was
more chaste than she, none more vigilant. She excelled all the rest in patience,
meekness, mercy, humility, and daily labors, and at last replenished with
merits, and sanctity died, and lies buried in the monastery she had erected.

About the same time lived Blessed Agnes a ferro who sometime did attend on the
Queen of Aragonia, but afterward being weary of the world, and despiseing the
vain honors thereof, became religious of this third order, living in great
poverty, humility, and sanctity.

In the year 1500. Blessed Anne of Areualo was famous for sanctity in the
monastery of S. Elizabeth, of the third order of S. Francis, where she lived
for a hundred years in exceeding great humility, patience, abstinence,
prayer, and charity.

About the same year lived Blessed Clare of Fulginea famous for piety, and
devotion, being very zealous of regular observance, and often deserving to be
comforted in apparitions by the seraphicall Father S. Francis.

About the year 1515. flourished Blessed Catharine Ruiz, whose charity in
assisting the sick sisters was admirable, spending all that ever she could get
for them, yea begging for them, and thereby became famous for sanctity.

Blessed Anna Sanchez was one of her companions, whose devotion and continual
prayer was much to be admired, yet she was of an excellent prudence for
government, and therefore was sent to be mother or Abbess in the Cloister of
S. Clement from whence after she had been there 20. years with great labors
and toiles, leaving the most fragrant odor of her sweet conversation she
returned to her former place, where broken and wearied with pennances,
fastings, and continual prayers, she died with great sanctity, the cell and
bed wherein she died, did for sometime after shine with a great light to the
great admiration of those that beheld it.

About the same time also lived in Placentia Blessed Baptista famous in her
life for many virtues, and after her death for many miracles, especially for
that her body remaining entire does yield a most sweet and pleasing smell.

In the year 1519. lived B. Maria Pennalosa in the monastery of S. Elizabeth
in Segouia, a woman of a very religious spirit, in humility, prayer, and
charity hardly to be equalized, who as it is commonly reported, in her life
time did obtain life for a young man that was dead, for which and other things
she is worshipped there with great devotion.

About the same time B. Elizabeth Pontia together with her two daughters, both
also holy women began the monastery of S. Anne in the province of Carthage,
and by their example did draw many others to Religion. And as in their life
they had the general opinion of sanctity, so after their death their Relics
have delivered many that had been possessed, as also cured many diseases.

Blessed Francisca of S. Anne in the year 1525. was brought from the
monastery where she had made profession of the third order, to the monastery
of the annuntiation at Grinion, in the diocese of Toledo, that she might give
a beginning thereto, and instruct others that were to come in regular
discipline; and as she had been abbess of the former place, so was she
abbess of this with wonderful fruit of souls; for she did excel in
prudence, charity, piety, humility, affability, modesty, abstinence, and
monastical observance.

B. Lucie about the year 1530. did found the monastery of S. Clare under the
rule of the third order, and was very famous for perfection of life and
miracles. Her body is had in great estimation with the faithful in those parts.

About this time lived Blessed S. Ioane of the holy Cross, whose admirable
life is set forth in out vulgar language, and therefore here omitted.

B. Francis lived in the same time of whom Gonzaga thus writes. This most
virtuous and religious sister Francis was a child of the third order of saint
Francis, who declining from the innumerable deceits of the fiend, did get a
glorious victory over satan, and therefore was much feared by him.

B. Aldonza about the year 1566. was famous for sanctity, and after having
been abbess, when the sisters were to remove, she prayed that she might die
in the same place, which she obtained, and six years after her death her body
was found whole and entire, yielding a fragrant odor, wherefore she was held
in great veneration.

Blessed Marie Gonsalue in the year 1577. died with great opinion of
sanctity, after she had founded a monastery of this third order, wherein she
lead a life of great perfection, as well in serving the poor as in
compassionating their miseries and wants, she did always sleep without any bed
under her, exactly observing the fasts of the whole year with rigorous and
bloody disciplines.

Blessed Olalia Grinesia was famous for sanctity about the year 1583. For
entering into this order, and therein desiring the height of penance, she was
not contented with the ordinary austerities of her order, but invented new
fastings all the lents and vigils, in bread and water, and three times in the
week did take bloody disciplines; being much addicted to poverty, and
humility, she would willingly serve all, and continually did meditate on our
lords Passion, and not without tears. Lastly falling into a dropsy, now
fourscore years old she died most blessedly. The sisters by her relics did
cure very many diseases.

About the same time lived B. Clare Martineira whost abstinences, fastings,
watchings, tears, haircloaths, rigorous disciplines, humble exercises, fervent
prayers, mortificatio^s, pious works, most great temptations, devout act^o^s,
celestial visions, divine favors, frequent miracles both in her life and
after her death are set down by Daza.

And least I be over tedious in rehearsing so many holy persons, to omit many
others which may be seen in the martyrologe amounting to two hundred and
upwards, I will conclude this chapter with Blessed Innocentia, who lived in
these our times, and died in the year 1624. This Blessed virgin of noble
parents in Cicilie, from her infancy gave her self to piety, virtue, and
temperance, observing the fasts very strictly, and despiseing the pomp and
vanity of this world, out of her great desire of perfection entered into this
third order, giving very good example of humility, poverty, chastity, and
obedience. And by her continual meditation she was so enflamed with the fire
of divine love, especially when she communicated, that she was often rapt into
ecstasy. Her body remains as yet whole and entire giving a most sweet odor,
which made Pope Vrbane the 8. that now sits in the seat of S. Peter to give
command that inquiry should be made of her life, death, and miracles for a
future Canonization, which we devoutly expect. And in the mean time go
forward to our intended purpose.

THE TWENTIETH CHAPTER. How Pope Leo the 10. accomodated the Rule of this third
order to religious persons.
Having showed before how this order began, and what progress it has made
from time to time, it will be easy to understand what the Pope did intend, when
in the prologue of this Rule, he says, But forasmuch as by course of time
through the inspiration of the holy Ghost not only married persons, and such as
dwell in the world, but also quires of innumerable virgins, taking upon them
the three essential vows, and also some of them that of enclosure, by our
authority building very many monasteries, not without manifold fruit, and
edification of the Church militant, have subdued their necks under the yoke
of the foresaid third order etc. Which words have been occasion that I have
produced some of the most famous woeme^ and virgins that have been in this
order, the fame of their sanctity having been the reason and motive of the
abbreuiating, reforming, and accomodating of this Rule to religious persons.

For the Pope as Father of all Christians, and particularly of religious
persons, by his office is to have a care of the conservation, propagation, and
increase of Gods honor on all occasions, as a Father of the family is to
provide sufficient means to satisfy the necessity of those that be under his
charge, therefore to him as to our judge we are to have recourse in all doubts
and difficulties, from his tribunal seat to receive the final sentence, he
also as superior is to give us laws and precepts which we are to observe, as
one that has power from God to command all, in as much as tends to our souls
good, and from him we receive all rules with their approbation, declaration,
and confirmation.

Pope Leo in the prologue of this Rule, as a Father does write to his sons
and daugthers of this order, putting them in mind, what intention they ought to
have in the observance of this Rule, to wit to reduce themselves in as much as
the state of this life will permit, to the same innocence wherein man was
created, and as a Father of a family prouides for them competent means to
obtain that perfection, and like a Pastor does propound unto the^ true food
of their souls, which strengthens them in their hard course of life, and
lastly as a supreme judge to whom the religious of this order have made their
appeal, he ordaines laws, and precepts, whereby they are to live giving them
a rule accomodated to their state.

For the Pope seeing the great increase of this order, out of his pastoral
care and great affection which he did bear to this order did renew,
authenticate, confirm, and approve this rule, omitting those things that were
not conformable to a religious state, and making it more propre to devout
religious souls, leaving most ample scope to those that are their superiors
or have government of them, to add or join any thing by ordinations,
statutes, or constitutions, that might tend to the better observance of this
rule, and advancement of the professors thereof in the way of perfection.
Which indeed is no small dignity and credit to this order, since the supreme
pastor and head of Gods Church has vouchsafed to condescend so low, as to
examine, consider, compare, declare, confirm, and approve their rule by his
sovereign authority, propound it unto the world, as obseruable just, lawful,
and good. And to this rule superiors even by the Popes authority have added
certain statutes for their better government in the way of perfection.

From whence proceeds that great diversity and variety in this third order.
For although all of them acknowledge. S. Francis for their patron, and
militate under the same rule; yet the variety of statutes and manner of life
proceeding from the diversity of superiors has caused such diversity in
their habit and manner of life that in appearance they seem not to be of the
same order, each monastery being so much the more perfect, by how much more
absolute and perfect is their government by statutes ordained to that end by
those that have care of them.

THE 21. CHAPTER. How this Rule is a Rule of penance.
THe words of Pope Lea in the foresaid prologue have been the ground of this
question. For he says, that Pope Nicholas the 4. had confirmed and approved
the third rule of S. Francis, which he terms of penance, by which the holy
confessor of Christ full of Gods spirit labored to further the salvation of
all faithful Christians. Some foolishly have taken occasion hereat to derogate
from this order, as if it were only for penitents or repentants, that had
committed some great vice, but truly although it were so, it would be so far
from diminishing the esteem thereof, that happy are those who shall be amongst
those true conuertes who are called penitents of S. Magdalen or repentants, who
notwithstanding are not of this order as may be seen in that which follows.

Wherefore the word Penance is taken diversely, sometimes for the Sacrament of
penance, sometimes for satisfaction, as it is the third part of the Sacrament,
sometimes for punishment of sin, sometimes for interior sorrow, which is
threefold, to wit, in habit, in act, and in passion that follows the act.
Here in this place we take it as an act, orhabit of penance, which is a moral
virtue, whereby a sinner detesteth sin and labors to avoid all the occasions
of sin, and those that frequently use such acts are said to lead a
penitential life. Such an one was that penitential king David, who in a few
words does briefly explicate it, saying psalm. 4. Be ye angry, and sin not,
the things that you say in your hearts, and in your chambers, be ye sorry for,
sacrifice ye the sacrifice of Justice. The royal prophet having persuaded all
to leave the vanity of this world, and not to follow lies, shows the way how
they should do it, first they must take a holy anger and indignation against
sin, and against the things of this world; secondly they must make a firm
and resolute purpose thenceforward to a void all sin, evil desires, vicious
inclinations; and wicked suggestions of the Devil, the world, and the flesh;
and lastly labor to do well, by offering to God the just and due sacrifice of
all their actions, the continuance whereof in diverse places of the psalms he
insinuates, as when he says, I have labored in my sighing, I will every night
wash my bed, I will water my couch with my tears; as if he should say, I will
continually afflict my self with penance, and will never cease from this
thought of my sins, but night and day I will shed forth tears of compunction
to wash away mine offenses, I did eat ashes as bread and mingled my drink with
weeping. The prophet Joel c. 2. inuites all to the same, Convert imini ad me in
toto cord, in ieiunio, and in fletu, and in planctu Be converted to me in all
your heart, in fasting, and in weeping, and in mourming; that is, be ye
converted to me your God by penance with your whole heart, with all your
soul, with all your spirit, with all your affection, which ye may best do by
fasting, whereby the sins of the flesh and gluttony are punished, and in
weeping and mourning, whereby with tears ye deplore your ingratitude toward
your good God. This penance was denounced unto us by all the prophets, but in
a more eminent manner declared and practiced by that most holy forerunner of
our Savior B. Saint John Baptist, whose office was to preach penance by word
and example; of whom S. Bernard says, The austeritie and strict course of life
of holy S. John Baptist is a hard messenger of eternal death unto delicious
and wanton persons. And S. Chrysostom; The habit of his body might preach the
virtues of his mind etc. The Apostles tought the same. S. John Climacus has
notable examples in this kind. The holy hermits that lived in the deserts did
shine with penance, always leading a strict penitential life. And to omit
infinite others, let one S. Francis serve for all, who after his conversion did
lead a most austere life of penance. For putting on the armor of the Cross
he did subdue all his sensual appetites with such rigor of discipline, that
he scarce took what was necessary for his sustentation; for (said he) it is
hard to satisfy the necessities of the body, and not yield to sensual
inclination. And therefore being in health he did seldom eat any dressed
meats, and when he did, he put to ashes or water for sauce; and very rarely
too taking water enough to suffice nature. He still invented new ways to
afflict his body, his bed being for the most part the ground or earth, his
pillow a block or stone. With such and many the like mortifications did he
arm him self to convert the whole world, and to draw it to penance whereof
he became a preacher both by word and example. And this is all the knowledge
his sermons tend unto: let other saints and Doctors preach the high points of
speculatiue, mystical, or moral divinity; let others abound in eloquence and
fertile conceits of holy mysteries; let them teach the sublime mystery of the
holy Trinity, and other articles of our faith; let them explicate the sublime
gifts which God imparts to devout souls, or other such curious points; S.
Francis has but one sermon of penance, always repeating and inculcating the
same, after the example of S. John Baptist and of his Master Christ Jesus;
knows not how to speak any other language; his text, exordium, narration,
peroration or conclusion is of penance, which he always preaches, whilst his
very life is a continuated sermon of penuance. The fruict whereof was such,
that the whole world would needs follow his example, which made him for the
satisfaction of all to make certain rules of penance. All the sentences,
counsels, and commandments of the first Rule savor of nothing else but
penance, and the professors thereof, as well notes S. Bonauenture, were
Preachers of Penance. The second rule of no less austeritie and penance he
gave to the poor Clares. But this patriarcke of penance had not thus given
way and means to all, for some had not strength and ability to undertake such
rigorous austerities, who notwith standing forced by his example and words must
needs take some rule and manner of life, that they might do penance for
their sins. And this rule or method of liueing did the holy Father
accomplish, calleing it the rule of penance or order of penitents, so that the
whole order of S. Francis is an order of penance, and all his children are
penitents, and those that are not so, deserve not to be esteemed his disciples.
So that the first order in the beginning were called preachers of penance, but
afterward for the more humility the Saint would have them called Friar Minors,
a name of humility, dependence, and submission, which is the highest condition
of a Friar minor. The vulgar people also styled the now called poor Clares or
poor dames, religious penitents: only the name of penitents remains to the
third order, whose rule is commonly called the rule of penance, and their
order styled the order of penance, as here the Popes Holiness entitles it.

THE 22. CHAPTER. Containing a declaration of the state of Innocence.
MY reader perhaps will admire, why I propound this discourse so far
differing from my subject, but let him please to consider that my intention is
to explicate the things that are contained in the prologue of the rule; which
the Pope thus begins. Among other things committed to our charge and
government, those chieftly do make us sollicitous, by which the
concupiscences of the world and flesh being bridled, the quiet state of
innocence and peace given us from heaven is known to be reduced to its
original state and perfection. Intimating that by a religious state man may be
reduced to the quiet state of innocence, which cannot well be explicated, if
first we set not down what the state of innocence was, and how we have fallen
from it.

As for the first, we cannot better declare it than by its effects, which
principally were seven; the first was wisdom and perfect knowledge of all
things; the second grace, amity or friendship with God: the third original
justice; the fourth immortality and impassibilitie; the fifth the inhabitation
of paradise, where they might eat of the tree of life; the sixth a special
care that God had of them; the seventh and last freedom from all lust and
concupiscence. S. Bernard contemplating this state of Innocence in his 35.
Sermon upon Canticles says, that Adam did dwell in the terrestrial paradise,
a place of more happiness than any mortal creature could desire, his
conversation was exempt from poverty, nothing could discommodate him, he was
recreated with odoriferant flowers, and delightful fruicts, filled with honor
and glory, and established or created prince of all creatures.

This minion or favorite of heaven was an abridegement of all perfection, a
microcosme where God had heaped all the exquisite beauty that could be seen in
heaven or in earth. For he had enriched him with grace, endowed him with
immortality, and above all created him in original justice, whereby he
perfectly possessed all natural sciences which to gether with the knowledge of
supernatural mysteries was infused into him at the time of his creation.

Moreover God had ranged all creatures under his obedience, all living beasts
did acknowledge him for their lord, all other things tending to his benefit,
content, and pleasure: the planets sent forth no evil influences, each heaven,
planet, and element containeing themselves within the limits of their natures
to the use of man. But that which excelles all is that man was made to the
image and likeness of God, that he might always tend toward him and conform
himself entirely to his holy will, nothing being sufficient to content him
save only God. So that beholding himself he had occasion to contemplate the
maker of all things, and consider the dignity of his own soul. To be brief,
Adam had such great prerogatives in the state of innocence, that he was always
united to God, his soul enriched with grace was pleasing to God, his appetite
without contradiction was subject to the laws of reason, his body should have
been always vigorous and strong. etc.

Who is he that beholding this well carved image, is not ravished and
astonished, or can refrain from extolling the honor and praise of the
workman? Who can behold so noble a creature, and not magnify the Creator who
has made man the ornament of the world, the epitomie of the grand universe,
the love of heaven, the terror of the devil, co^panio^ of angels, son of
God, and brother of Christ Jesus! what shall I say more? It is impossible to
conceive, much harder to declare the pre-eminence, dignity, and nobility of man
in the state of Innocence, when as he was clothed with that royal robe of
original justice whereby man was subject to God, all the inferior powers to
reason. But alas this did not long continue, as is to be seen in the following
chapter.

THE 23. CHAPTER. Declaring man's fall from the state of Innocence.
HOmo, cum in honor esset, non intellexit, comparatus est iumentis
insipientibus, and similis factus est illis. Psalm 48. Man, when he was in
honor, did not understand, he was compared to the foolish beasts, and became
like to them. Adam did not know his excellency and dignity, but he became like
an irrational creature without judgment, and transgressed the commands of
God, by eating of forbidden fruit, and so by his disobedience did as it were
make a massacre upon all mankind: which thus piously S. Augustine deplores upon
S. Paul's epistles, O durus, and durior casus etc. o cruel, and more than
cruel fall! alas, what is it that man has lost? what is it that he has
found? he has lost the beatitude, whereunto he was created; he has found
death from whence he was exempted. O unfortunate Adam! thou have chased us out
of our country, thy sin has banished us into this troublesome desert of
cursed earth, and from immortal as we were, we are become mortals. O miserable
servitude, inestimable loss, insupportable pain, and most grievous torment! o
unfortunate Adam, what have thou done? wherefore last thou so soon forgotten
the command of thy creator, transgressed the precept of thy master, and
trodden under foot the law of thy God? what disorder? what passion? what
intemperance has seized on thee, that thou could not be contented with so
great abundance of all good, but must needs eat of forbidden fruit, whereas
thou might at thy pleasure eat of all the rest. S. Chrysostom in his homily
de Adamo in the person of God does the same. Vbi imago meaprimum for mosa etc.
where is my image that I have created so beautiful? where is that most
precious ornament of Paradise? where is the chief work of my hands? where is
the lively heir of my kingdom? where now is my familiar friend? O unfortunate
sin that has deprived mankind of so great good, made him to be cast out of
paradise, and to be condemned to tears, labors, griefs, and death, both in
himself, and all his posterity.

No sooner then had man disobeyed God, but concupiscence began to reign and
domineere over the spirit, and the inferior powers to rebel against reason.
He who even now was the most noble, and most perfect of all sensible creatures,
is now become of all the most miserable, and because he had rebelled against
his God he finds a continual rebellion within and against himself, being as
the Apostle S. Paul says, Rom 7. venundatus sub peccato sold under sin, and
he and his posterity delivered up to the slavery of original sin, and
tyranny of concupiscence. The flesh is become a remora to the spirit in its
course to heaven, whereof each one may justly complain in himself saying, I
see another law in my members repugning, that is rebelling to the law of my
mind, and captiuating me in the law of sin, making me subject to the law of
sin that is my concupiscence. In so much that unwillingly and with
reluctation I am forced to feel its vicious inclinations, and I cannot escape
its snares.

Well has the wise man said Eccl. 40. Great travel is created to all men, and
an heavy yoke upon the children of Adam, from the day of their coming forth
of their mothers womb, until the day of their burying into the mother of all.
In their whole life they are to suffer many infirmities, wants, griefs,
lamentations, mournings, cares, anguishes, labors, contradictions,
persecutious, wearinesses, injuries, rapines, slaughters, temptations, and
other innumerable troubles, and afflictions, in so much that life seems no
other than a long and continual death, a prolonged death or decaying life.

I will conclude, omitting many yea innumerable evils that have proceeded from
this sin of Adam, and only set down the ten effects of original sin,
which Cardinal Bellarmime in his book de amiss. gra. does assign, to wit,
Ignorance in the understanding, malice in the will, concupiscene in the flesh,
calamity, labor and pain in the members, death in the body, anger and wrath
of God, captivity under the devil, strifes, debates, brawlings, seditions,
and wars with our neighbors, enmity and rebellion of irrational creatures,
and innumerable evils coming from the heavens and elements. O grievous yoke
of mankind.

THE 24. CHAPTER. Declaring how we may reduce our selves to the state of
Innocence.
Having thus briefly showed what the state of innocence was, and what we have
lost by Adams sin, it is now time to explicate the Popes words before cited, and
see how we may be reduced to the state of Innocence.

The light and Doctor of the Gentiles Romans 5. says, If in the offense of one,
death reigned by one, much more they who receive abundance of grace, and of
donation, and of Justice, shall reign by one, Jesus Christ. Therefore as by the
offense of one unto all men to condemnation, so also by the justice of one,
unto all men to justification of life. As if he should have said, If by the
fault of Adam all his posterity did incur the guilt and pain of death, know
that Christ has exhibited a far greater benefit; for Christ by his grace
has given us greater gifts, than Adam by his sin has taken from us. For
says he not as the offense, so also the gift. For if by the offense of one
many died, much more the grace of God, and the gift in the grace of one man
Jesus Christ has abounded upon many. As by Adam all were brought to perdition,
so by Christ all were redeemed; by Adam all were subjected to punishment, by
Christ all delivered; by Adam all did loose grace, by Christ all may receive it
after a more excellent manner; by Adam all came to dye temporally, by Christ
all may rise to life eternal: by Adam all were brought to a corrupted state,
by Christ all may be elevated to a more sublime and spiritual state: by Adam
all were made like beasts, by Christ like Angels, yea above Angels: Adam
deprived us of the tree of life, Christ gives us the bread of life: Adam
deprived us of original Justice, Christ gives us plenty of grace equivalent to
that original Justice, yea far surpassing, for although both be
supernatural gifts immediately infused in the soul, yet they differ in this
that original justice did make a perfect peace between the faculties and
powers of the soul, and grace does make man pleasing and acceptable to God in
order to eternal life, and by it man is made a son of God, and heir of the
kingdom of heaven. This grace of its own nature is sufficient to reduce us to
that former state of innocence, and that in all respects, but that God in his
infinite wisdom for diverse reasons has permitted to stand with grace many
tribulations, and afflictions of this world.

S. Augustine will give us the first reason hereof in his book de pec. rem. c.
31. that we should not seek after the Sacraments for temporal respects, but
for the future glory, thereby to exercise our faith, hope, patience and such
like; so that by the ineffable mercy of God the pain of vice does pass into
armor of virtue, and the punishment of the sinner is become the merit of the
just.

Secondly God permits these temporal troubles to remain, to put us in mind of
the greiuousnesse of the fault, for other wise we should scarce think of the
sin that is so long past, when we are so unmindful of our own sins newly
committed.

Thirdly this is a work of the divine providence, to excite us to the
consideration and search of a better life exempt and free from all misery: for
as experience teaches us, there is nothing more moves us to seek after
celestial things, than to consider and ponder the miseries of this world.

Fourthly by the want of this original justice we are put in mind of our
frailty, and how easily we may fall into sin

Fifthly that the members may be like unto their head Christ Jesus, who
notwithstanding that he was replenished with all grace, would take upon him our
infirmities, and for our sakes become subject to the law of death.

For such and the like reasons, has God permitted that man should not enjoy
that peace which in the state of Innocence he possessed. But yet he has fully
supplied this defect, by enriching our souls with many graces and gifts, as
virginity, patience, martyrdom, fasting, abstinences, mortification, poverty,
obedience and such like, which he by word and example has left us, to the end
that we may attain to a state of Innocence equivalent to the former, and much
exceeding it in merit; for by these virtues performed in grace we labor to
produce in our souls that which by original Justice we might have possessed,
and consequently those that profess the practice of the aforesaid virtues, do
as much as lies in their power, endeavor to reduce themselves to the state of
Innocence. Which made the Pope to say that the religious of this order, who by
their rule and manner of life do continually practice these virtues, have
their final end of their profession, to reduce themselves to the state of
innocence. And this, for that by their rule they are to produce effects
directly contrary to the effects of original sin set down in the end of the
precedent chapter; as perfect faith in their understanding, charity in their
will, mortification of their concupiscence, patience in all calamities, labors
and pains, triumph over death, pacification of Gods wrath, liberty of spirit,
peace of mind, charity to the whole world, and fortitude to bear and
undergo all the evils of this world. And to these their rule brings them, and
consequently reduces them to the state of innocence.

THE 25. CHAPTER. Whether the religious of this third order be in the state of
perfection.
Our seraphicall Doctor S. Bonauenture sets down five sorts of perfection, to
be found in Christians. The first is common and necessary to all Christians,
which he calls sufficient perfection, consisting in the performance of the
precepts. Of this our Savior speaks Mat. 5. Estote perfecti, sicut pater
vester caelestis perfectus est. Be ye perfect, as your heavenly father is
perfect. The second is perfection of religion, which consists in the observance
of the counsels, whereof it is said, Mat. 19. si vis perfectus esse, vade and
vende omnia quae habes. etc. If thou will be perfect, go and sell all thou
have. The third is perfection of prelature, which consists in the government
of subjects, according to that of S. Luke c. 6. perfectus omnis erit, si sit
sicut magister eius. every one shall be perfect, if he be as is master; The
fourth is perfection of work, which consists in the ostension of good
examples, from whence Noe was said to be perfect. Genesis 6. Noe vir iustus fuit
atque perfectus in generationibus suis. Noe was a just and perfect man in his
generations. The fifth and last is perfection of tranquillity, which consists
in the consummation of the things that are best and most hard. According to
that of S. John 1. ep. c. 4. Perfecta charitas for as mittit timorem. Perfect
charity casts out fear.

Now it is certain that the religious of this third order, as being Christians
and faithful subjects of Gods Church, do or ought to enjoy the first
perfection. For by their rule and profession they are obliged punctually to
observe the precepts, whereunto also they bind themselves in a more strict
manner, as shall be declared in the second part.

The third perfection is proper to Bishops and prelates, and consequently cannot
be appropriated to any religious state, which is only a state of getting
perfection, and therefore by some judged to be the school wherein prelates
might learn that perfection which they communicate to others.

But the other three may be appropriated to a religious state, which is no
other but a state of men or women tending to christian perfection by the vows
of poverty, chastity, and obedience: or a certain manner of life, bound by
certain laws and customs, wherein perfection is acquired by observance of
the Evangelical counsels, whereby the professors thereof become perfect
examples, and patterns of good life, whilst they themselves attain to the
chief perfection of tranquillity and peace which unites them to God.

Amongst other approved orders in Gods Church this third order, as it is now
accomodated for religious persons tends to such perfection; for as it has
been declared before, and will appear more plainly in the exposition of the
rule, this third order is a state of men or women tending to Christian
perfection by the three essential vows of religion, and other obseruances of
Evangelical counsels, and has yielded many illustrious persons famous for
sanctity and piety, and indeed wholly tends to the perfection of tranquillity
and peace, as may be seen in the chapter following.

This may be confirmed by the Popes who have approved and confirmed this order
to be religious, and in the state of perfection. Martin the 5. Eugenius 4. in
the year 1442. Nicholas 5. in the year 1447. Paulus 2. in the year 1459.
Sixtus 4. in the year 1471. Julius 2. in the year 1508. Leo 10. in the year
1517. 1521. Clemens 7. in the year 1526. Paulus 3. in the year 1547.
Gregorius 13. in the year 1575. Sixtus 5. in the year 1586. Clemens 8. in the
year 1595, 1600. and 1603. Paulus 5. in the year 1610. and 1613. Greg. 15. in
the year 1621. and Vrbanus 8. who now reigns, in the year 1626. who with
others have all acknowledged those of the third order of both sexes that make
the three vows, living in community, to be true and properly religious,
forbidding them to go to any other orders, besides the Carthusians. And as
such they have been received by all Christian princes, who have given them the
same privileges which other religious have. And finally Sixtus Quartus does
excommunicate all those that should contradict or deny them to be religious,
and consequently tend to perfection.

THE 26. CHAPTER. Whether the third order be active or contemplative.
THe angelical Doctor S. Thomas deuides the life of a christian into active
and contemplative, because some men do principally attend to contemplation,
others to exterior actions, alleging the authority of S. Gregory. hom 14.
super Ezech: who says, Duae sunt vitae in quibus nos omnipotens Deus per
sacrum eloquium erudit, actiua videlicet and contemplatiua. There be two lives
says he, wherein allmightly God does instruct us by his word, to wit active
and contemplative.

This last in it self and of its own nature far exceeds the other, which
the foresaid S. Thomas proves by many reasons, as that because the
contemplative life belongs to man according to his best part, to wit according
to his understanding and will, for it principally consists in the operations of
the soul, but the active life is occupied about exterior things. Secondly,
there is more delight in the contemplative than in the active, whence S. Aug:
ser 26. de verbis Domini. Martha turbabatur, Maria Epulabatur, Martha was
troubled, Marie feasted. Thirdly the contemplative is to be loved for it self,
but the active is ordained to some other end. Fourthly the contemplatlue life
is according to divine things, but the active according to human. Whence. our
Savior said to Marie Luc. 10. Optimam parte^ elegit Maria, quae non auferetur
ab ea. Marie has chosen the best part which shall not be taken away from her.
Which S. August ser 27. in the place above cited, thus expounds; Thou Martha
have not chosen an evil part, but she a better, because it shall not be taken
away from her, but from thee sometime shall be taken away the burden of
necessity, the sweetness of truth or contemplation being eternal. And S.
Basil affirms, that by these two women are set before our eyes two sorts of
life, the one of which is of inferior note or esteem, because occupied in the
more gross operations of this life, and yet maruellously profitable: wherefore
if thou will serve with Martha, do in the name of God, for Christ has said,
what you shall do to one of my little ones, that you do to me, whether you
lodge strangers, feed the poor, or be moved to compassion on the afflicted,
our lord will repute all these offices as if they were done to his own person.
But in another place the same Father does highly extol the contemplative life,
saying that it is the school of celestial doctrine, the discipline of divine
sciences, where God is all that is learned, where God is the way by which we
must go, by him alone we must come to the knowledge of the sovereign truth.
So that the contemplative life is a continual adhesion to God in spirit,
whereby man becomes lord of the whole world having his conversation in heaven,
and there fixeing and placing his mind does despise all earthly things, whiles
he esteems nothing good or great but God and divine things, and here is his
continual pradise unless the law of charity otherwise require.

Hence there be found amongst religious orders three states, some that give
themselves to the active life, others that apply their minds wholly to the
contemplative, and lastly others that are partly contemplative and partly
active, more or less according to their several constitutions. Of the first
sort are all those orders of knights, who make profession of several exterior
acts, as to defend the poor, or to fight against the Turks: as also all those
that give themselves to keep hospitalls, redeem captives, and such like* Of
the second sort, be all those ancient hermits, Anachorits, and monks, and
generally all religious women who vow enclosure. For they lead a life truly
angelical, night and day serving God in the quire, and applying their minds to
their God in all their actions. Of the third and last are those religious
orders which are commonly called mendicants, who apply themselves as well to the
contemplative life, as to the active which proceeds from the contemplative, in
preaching, teaching, and converting of Nations.

In this our third order of our holy Father S. Francis be found of all sorts.
For as it has been before declared, there be some of them that lead a pious
kind of life in the world addicting themselves to godly excercises of devotion,
principally of penance whereof they make profession, and some others do live
in conmunities, and give themselves to serve the sick, keep hospitalls, lodge
the poor, and such like, all which no doubt do follow the active way, others
there be that give themselves purely to the contemplative way, and such are
those religious women of this order as make vow of Enclosure, for their whole
life has no other end but to serve and love God, as shall more amply be
declared in the exposition of their rule. Lastly there are some that enjoy a
mixed life (which cannot be proper for women) and such be those Friars of the
third order in Spain and France, who preach and teach in the same manner as
other mendicants do, and not without fruit, no other wise differing from the
Friar minors who are of the first order, than the religious women enclosed do
differ from the poor Clares, to wit that their rule and manner of life is not
so austere and hard, the reason whereof I have declared before, to wit that in
this holy and seraphicall order might be food for all pallats.

THE 27. CHAPTER. Whether it be lawful for any one to divert another from
coming to religion.
HAueing hitherto endeavored to explicate the prologue or preface that goes
before this rule, I cannot let pass this question, as much conducing to the
clearing of those words. For which the pure affections of chaste minds are
sometimes auerted from entering into the said order etc. Which was one of the
chief reasons why the Pope did accomodate this rule to religious persons, many
seeking to deter them from it by alleging that the rule was not fit for a
religious life; as also notwithstanding the Popes labor and industry, some
not understanding or not conceiving the difference of the rule and professions
even at this time have done; which gave also an occasion to these my poor
labors, as well to vindicate the manifest wrong they do to this holy and
religious order, as also to take away all occasions whereby any one may be
auerted from so pious and laudable an institution, wherein I hope all shall
find full satisfaction in the explication of the Rule. It rests only in this
place to inquire, whether any one may lawfully divert another from any
religious order. Which I will do as briefly as I can, referring the more
curious to those that have more amply treated of this subject.

This diuersion may be done either directly, as when one of purpose or of set
malice does hinder any one from entering into religion; or indirectly, as when
they do it upon some pretense or excuse, which to them may seem reasonable or
to some greater good.

It is the common opinion of all divines, that whosoever shall hinder any one
from coming to religion, by force, fraud, deceit, or fear, cannot be excused
from mortal sin, but is bound to declare the said fraud, or deceit, and to
take away that force and fear. Which made S. Hierom in his Epistle to Heliod.
to say, Retrahere aliquem a religione, nihil est aliud, quam Christum in
pectore alicuius ocaidere, Christo se opponere, spargere and dissipare quae
Christus collegit; To withdraw or draw back any one from religion is nothing
elfe but to kill Christ in another breast, to oppose themselves against
Christ, to scatter and dissipate what Christ has gathered together. And in his
tenth epistle ad Furiam, he calls such venenata animalia poisoned beasts.
Whence the holy council of Trent. sess. 25. c. 18. de Regul. declares the^ to
be excomunicated, that force any virgin or woman to take the habit of religion,
as also all those that give counsel, aid, or favor thereto, and in like
manner excommunicates those that without just cause shall hinder the holy will
of virgins, and other women from receiving the veil or making vows of
religion. The third Toletane council has the same in express terms, whence
it behooues pareuts to be careful, and to take heed least they force or any
way hinder their children in matter of religion. S. Augustine Ep. 38. will have
this affection to be killed in the mother neipsa in aternum pereat, least she
perish for ever. And S. Bernard. Ep. 104. says, Matter tua vult contrariatu^
and per hoc and suae ipsius saluti, speaking to one whose mother detained her
from religion, thy mothers desire, says he, is contrary to thy salvation, and
by this also to her own salvation. And ep. 111. he calls such parents, that
will hinder their children from religion Duros, saeuos, crudeles, non parents,
sed peremptores, hard, harsh, cruel, not parents but killers, because they
hinder their children least they should serve God, fly from the fire that is at
their backs, shun he thieves that would wound them, get into a safe haven
out of the tempests of this world, and be made capable of the celestial good
things which are offered unto them.

Others there be who indirectly propou^ding such things as may give occasion
of their hindera^ces, with Judas cry out, vt quid perditio hac! These might
stay in the world and help others, the wise instruct the simple, the rich
assist the poor, the married might generate children to serve the common
weal. Vt quid perditio haec? why should such go to religion whose life is so
necessary to many? But in so sayeing they do not consider what upon those
words follows. Quid molesti estis huic mulieri? answered our lord, why do you
molest this woman, for she has wrought upon me a good work? Why do you
reprehend her? why do you hinder her, has she not done a good pious,
laudable, and Christian act, so much commended by our Savior? If so, as none
can deny, with what conscience can any one withdraw her or any such as she is,
from it. Specially when as there can be no better work, no greater charity
than for a man or woman to give and consecrate himself wholly to God. How then
can any under whatsoever cloak or pretense with draw devout souls from the
true way of sanctity and perfection such as religion is. If they persuade them
to an oblation of their goods or corporal means, that is but a very mean
sacrifice, being compared with the entire consecration of themselves and all
they have to God which is a perfect holocaust. Again whatsoever such pretend,
the thing they desire in substance is nothing elfe, but to have them remain in
the world; for they are not certain of their charity, of their health,
prosperity, wealth, riches, wisdom, in a moment all may be lost: but the way
of religion is certain, secure, and permanent, no way to be lost. The world,
says S. John, 1. epist. c. 2. passes, and the concupiscence thereof, but he
that does the will of God abides for ever. Neither need their friends fear
or be anxious for their loss, for such is the goodness of God, that he will
amply supply that assistence which could be expected from them, especially
being moved thereto by the prayers of those devout persons who for his love have
forsaken their dearest friends and kinsfolk. And who is or can be ignorant of
the manifold miseries, and dangers of this world, which, as the foresaid S.
John. says in the same place, has nothing in it but concupiscentiam carnis,
concupiscentiam oculorum, and superbiam vitae, concupiscence of the flesh, and
concupiscence of the eyes, and pride of life, amongst all which the danger is
eminent and security very doubtful, as continual experience does more than
sufficiently manifest; whereas religion tends to the contrary and brings
securely to the haven of salvation.

Others there be, who of their own accord, or by the persuasion of others
notwithstanding the good desires they have to follow Christ in a religious life
do delay and prolong the time with a Domine permit me primum ire, and
sepelire patrem meum. mat. 8. lord permit me first to go and bury my father:
taking for a pretense of their stay the love reverence and duty which they owe
to their parents. But these will not take heed to what immediately comes after,
Jesus autem ait illi, sequere me, and dimitte mortuos sepelire mortuos, the
spirit of truth, who can teach all perfection, says follow me, and let the
dead bury the dead. Whereby we are given to understand that spiritual works
of mercy are to be preferred before corporal, and that the following of
Christ, is far more excellent than the duty or respect we owe to our parents;
for God has more right to us than our parents have. True it is, we are
commanded to honor our Father and mother: but first and with much more reason,
we must honor God, we must love our Parents, but above all God. Well said that
holy woman 2. Mac. 7. I know not how you appeared in my womb, for neither did
I give you spirit, nor soul, nor life, and the members of every one I my self
framed not; but the creator. O that all parents would have this consideration?
for if the creator did give spirit, life, and soul to their children, can
they think much to give them or to permit them to give themselves to God. And
herein I have marked a strange deceit of the enemy, for I have known and
heard of many, that upon such like pretenses have staid away from entering into
religion, they have been very well contented to travel into far countries,
or to serve in the court, or some such like place, where perhaps they shall
never see their parents, much less have occasion to help them, and most
commonly are to them a great burden, vexation, and trouble, yea sometimes to
their utter undoing, yet all is thought well on both sides if they enter not
into religion. Can there be any greater absurdity, than that upon these aerie
and ungrounded pretenses of helping or comforting their parents and friends,
they should withstand the vocation that God has given them, and yet in short
time withdraw themselves from their parents, sometimes also with their consent,
to range themselves under some warlike standards, where they may enjoy one
another afar of, until a little bullet dissolve all, and conclude perhaps
with a dismal end. And indeed where soever they go, death may suddenly meet
with them, and then the dead parent dead to God may bury his dead son or
daughter, which might have happily dyed to the world, and always have lived to
Christ Jesus.

Some others there be who are doubtful of their ability and strength, saying
with Saul, Non vales resistere Philistao isti, nec pugnare aduersus cum, quia
puer es. Reg. 17. thou art not able to resist this Philistian, nor to fight
against him, because thon art a child. You cannot persevere in such austeritie,
your delicate and tender complexion and constitution cannot undergo such
mortifications, fastings, disciplines, and such like; but these do not ponder,
that if they with David go on in the name of our lord, they need not fear
the victory, and that he who gives the vocation, will also grant
perseverance, both vocation and perseverance being the gift of God. And
certain it is that where there is a good vocation, there seldom or never can
be wanting a happy perseverance, especially where there be so many means to
conserve it. For in religion they are animated by the good examples of others,
defended by many holy prayers which are daily offered for them, and
strengthened by abundance of grace which God does ordinarily communicate to
those that live in a religious community. I do not say but that some may
fall, but howsoever it is rare, and that very great malice, which God does most
commonly punish with severity, and some public punishment for the
abbetterment of others. As for what they pretend of weakness, or of tender
complexion, besides that as God gives the vocation, so also he gives strength
to perform it; let them take any religious community, and they shall find
some that have been as weak and tender if not more than they: yea continual
experience teaches us, that those who have been most tenderly bred up, are
many times such as desire and practice most austeritie. And indeed who more
ready to fast, more prompt on all occasions, than those who are of more noble
birth, and consequently of a more delicate education. It is admirable to see
how humbly, with what submissiue obedience, and with how great austeritie and
mortification kings and queens, princes and nobles of all sorts have comported
themselves in religion to the confusion of those who have been of a lower
rank by birth, though equal in religion, all setting their hands to the same
plough. To this we may add, that none ate in better health, or of longer life
than religious persons, who no way confide on their proper force and strength,
but on the goodness and grace of God, knoweing full well that it is not humane
force which must prevail, but Gods particular help and assistance. And we all
see the strong and well able bodies to fail and die as soon as the weak.

Without all doubt there may be many just reasons to desist from a course of
religion begun, for many times God does permit his servants to be affl^cted
with such infirmity, sickness, or weakness, for their greater benefit, that
they are not able to go forward. And then so far is it from being a
disparagement to them either to leave or not enter into religion (supposeing it
be not out of lightness of mind or inconstancy) that as they have merited much
before God in their pious desires, so they have manifested their love to God
being ready to do more if they could. In which case their desire of being
religious, will not be without the merit and reward of religion, as the desire
of martyrdom wants not in some part the crown thereof. Nothing more frequent
and ordinary than to see very many good souls strongly possessed with a
vehement desire of martyrdom, to have been by the divine providence hindered
of the same; and every day many do attempt with a full resolute mind that
which God in his wisdom otherwise disposes. No man will condemn a soldier
that valourously enters into the field although by accident or want of
provision he be forced to retire. Neither can any one blame such virtuous
souls who leave religion not through inconstancy, or want of devotion, or
desire to persevere, but because it is Gods will to dispose otherwise of them.

Finally to conclude this chapter, omitting many other like means that some
do use to deter others from religion, as generally included in those before
mentioned. Some there be, who out of a great zeal to the good of souls, not
well considering and pondering the state and vocation of each one, do seek to
draw others to some more perfect state or religious course; which thing in
itself is good and pious, as S. Thomas well proves, yet great charity,
prudence, and discretion are to be had therein; charity, that it be not for
human respects or ends, but purely for God; otherwise they shall find by
experience, it will come to naught, and thereby disedifie those who see and
hear it, giving occasion of iarres and quarrels with others which can never
be avoided when they seek any thing but Gods glory and honor; Prudence and
discretion, least they should seem to contradict the spirit that calls them
to some other state more proper and conuement for them. Si sic eum volo manner,
quid ad te? If God will have them to remain so, what is that to any other, in
stead of doing them good, they may easily do them harm; and which is more,
the places whereto they come are seldom the better for having them, they
themselves also many times not being contented therewith, which causes them to
lead a languishing life. God disposes his gifts as he pleases, what is man that
he should resist his work: he knows best to dispose of each spirit, and
conformably to give his holy vocation. And because we have fallen on this
subject, it will not be amiss to speak a word or two concerning these
vocations, which I will briefly do referring the more curious reader to such
authors who have more amply treated of this subject.

THE 28. CHAPTER. Briefly discoursing of vocations, an^ how one may assure
himself of them.
THree things occur to b^ examined, to wit, whethe^ it be expedient to enter
into religion, secondly whether it b^ expedient for this or that particular
person to enter into religion* thirdly how one may kno^ what religion is most
conuenien^ for him.

As for the first, the angelical^ Doctor 2. 2. q. 189. ar. 10. declares it to
be certain and as ^ matter of faith, that the entry into religion is very good
and pious, and those who doubt hereof do in as much as lies in their power,
derogate from Christ's authority who gave this counsel, whose words and
actions tended to nothing more, than to persuade us poverty, chastity,
abnegation of the will, and such like things, which religion requires. Whence
it acknowledges no other founder, no other beginner but Christ, whom his
Apostles imitating have communicated the self same manner of life to succeding
ages. So that it were great presumption or want of faith to make such a doubt,
whereas the holy scripture and whole torrent of the Fathers and Doctors of the
Church do so highly esteem of such a state; calling it the better part of
this mortal life, the greatest and easyest way to be saved, an assembly of
Angels, and royal seat of Gods children.

In this garden planted by God we are freed from the weeds of many evils, and
replenished with all good flowers of virtues, to enjoy a continual peace of
spirit, and a most perfect union of the will to God. Here devout souls receive
the divine influences of celestial delights, a perpetual banquet of
spiritual consolations. Who list to have more of this subject, let him read
Hieronymus Platus of the happiness of a religious state, and there he shall
understand that a Religious life, is, without all exception, in it self, most
happy and perfect. And consequently it were to impugn truth it self to deny
this. I make no doubt if the readers well consider his words and reasons, they
will cry out with the queen of Saba, Blessed are thy men, and blessed are thy
servants which stand before thee always, and hear thy wisdom, blessed are
all those that enjoy so great good.

As for the second point, it is most certain that as there be diverse mansions
in heaven, so there are diverse ways to go to them, and diverse Spirits to
go by those diverse ways. And all are not capable of all ways, whence our
savior says Mat. 19. Qui potest capere capiat, he that can take let him take,
insinuating unto us that it is a hard thing to do it, and not for every one to
do. Wherefore he does not command it but inuit us unto it by word and example,
for he knew that all could not do this, some being hindered by sickness,
others by other occasions, as those that have parents in extreme necessity,
husband, wife, and such like, generally those that by the law of God are
obliged to the contrary. But setting aside these impediments it is most
certain that a religious state is good for all and every one, our Savior
speaking generally to all, Si vis perfectus esse, vade, and vende etc. if thou will be perfect, go sell the things that thou have, and give to the poor, and
thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come follow me. Which made S. Hierome
to say; Will thou be perfect, and stand in the highest top of dignity? do as
the Apostles have done, sell those things thou have, and give to the poor, and
follow our Savior, and with naked virtue follow the naked Cross. What shall I
multiply many words in a thing so clear, when it is manifest that what soever
Christ has preached, is in it self pious, and good, even to thee, if thou
have no impediment, and that God shall call thee.

In the third point great circumspection and care is to be had, as well in
corresponding to Gods holy vocation, as in making choice of what state is most
convenient; yet generally speaking, that is most convenient and agreeable to
any ones condition, which God inspires; for in this, there can be no error or
deceit, the difficulty only remains to know when such a vocation is from God,
which requires a longer treatise than our present subject will permit; wherefore
I briefly touch the principal.

The Angel of the schools S. Thomas teaches us, that vocations are two fold,
one exterior, which is by preaching, good persuasion, good example,
tribulation, or affliction, yet not so, but that it is accompanied with the
interior motions of the holy ghost; for, as S. Paul says, Cor. 3. Neither he
that planteth is any thing, nor he that waters, but he that gives increase,
God. Who alone breaths those inspirations of the supernatural life in their
souls. The other is purely interior by God him self, who does illuminate and
inflame their minds, but severally, for to some he inspires this holy vocation
by a powerful operation of the will, which violently possesses the soul
making them to approach, as. S. Paul Says, Heb. 10. with a pure heart in
fulness of faith, no way doubting of Gods benefit herein, such was the
vocation of. S. Paul, and generally of all the Apostles. To others God gives
the same grace, but after a more obscure manner, the sound is heard but they
know not well from whence it comes; such was that of Samuel, who did hear
Gods call, but did not understand it. So there be many whom God calls
interiourly, but they feeling it cannot tell what to do in it. Lastly there be
some that have vocations from God, but God does use some visible means to
bring them to it, such was the calling of Heliseus the prophet and that of the
Eunuch. In all which there is required a docile heart and obedient mind to
answer to such a calling, not following our own conceits, but to say with S.
Paul, Domine quid me vis facere? Act. 9. Lord what will thou have me to do;
or with Samuel. Loquere Domine, quia audit seruus tuus, Reg. 3. Speak lord,
for thy servant hears; or with the Psalmist, Paratum cor meum Deus, paratum
cor meum, my heart is prepared o God, my heart is prepared. O lord instruct me
the way of thy iustifications, and I shall be excercised in thy marvelous
works. Conduct me o God in the path of thy commands. And these may be
confident that God will direct them: but with all it is very necessary that
they have recourse to some virtuous and spiritual man, that may direct them,
for although God be the author of all good, yet he will have us to walk the
way of humility, and to submit our selves to others. So Saul was sent to
Ananias, Samuel was instructed by Helie, the Eunuch by S. Philip, Eliseus by
Elias, S. Augustine by S. Ambrose; with many such like. So that in this affair
of so great importance it is good to follow counsel.

If they think good, before they ask this counsel, and that of some learned,
religious and virtuous person, they may first retire themselves a little from
company, and from their ordinary employments, thereby the better to consider
what they are to do, and what motion or inspiration that is which they feel
in themselves.

Secondly it shall be very much expedient to go to Confession and Communion,
thereby to obtain strength and force to accomplish Gods holy will and grace,
to discern and judge what is best to be done.

Thirdly it is good with fervor to offer up a holocaust of prayer, with
humility opening their hearts, to obey and perform the will of God in all
things, not seeking their own pleasure or content, but what shall please the
divine majesty, and with this indifferency so to carry themselves that they be
truly resigned.

Having done this they may take counsel, as above said, commending this
affair to their good Angels, who are given them principally for their
direction, and then let them make no doubt of their vocation, for God will
never be wanting to such pious desires, but according to his promise will
hearken to such as come unto him in true humility.

Neither is it convenient that they should expect any revelation or sign from
heaven, whereby they might be made certain of their vocation; for it would be
great temeritie, presumption, and folly to expect such extraordinary effects,
when God himself has manifested his will in so ample manner, that none can
doubt of it, if their own intentions be conformable: he inuites, exhorts, and
draws all unto such a vocation by word and example, he has taught it, if
there be any fault, it is on our side. Wherefore it behooves them to look
first to themselves, and consider with what intention they leave the world,
whether they do it purely for God, and that they have a resolution to observe
whatsoever religion prescribes, and because in these and such like our own
inclinations many times deceive us, it shall be necessary to stand to the
judgment and counsel of some spiritual person who has experience in such
things.

When they have done all this, let the^ constantly adhere to that inclination
which they find in their souls, whether it be unto this order or that order,
this state or that state, deemeing that which God has inspired them with all
to be 'most convenient and agreeable to their disposition. And when once they
have made choice of any state, without all wavering or doubt let them persevere
therein, without any further deliberation, but assure themselves that such is
the state wherein God would be served by them, and let them be confident that
his infinite goodness will give them whatsoever shall be needful for the
performance of such a vocation. Wherein notwithstanding they may chance to find
some difficulties and temptations to withdraw them from so good resolutions,
yet they ought manfully to persist and patiently support all for Gods love,
which will sweeten all and make this seeming yoke to be most easy and pleasing.

Conclusion.
HItherto I have labored to explicate the preface of Pope Leo which he set
before this rule with intention to satisfy what difficulties might occur
therein, and to lay a foundation to what I am to say in the next part, wherein
I will briefly handle each point of the rule, following the chapters and points
thereof, which in this preface I could not so well do. Yet in the beginning of
the second part, I will set down the preface of the Pope, directing the reader
to those places in this first part which do explicate and declare each point
thereof; if not so well as the curious reader may expect, yet sufficiently to
give him a touch of all things that concern it, and as much as I thought good
for this present subject, especially since I have always studied brevity. If
this be well accepted, I shall the more willingly go for ward with the other.

The End of the first part.
MODVS VESTIENDI SOrores Religiosas Tertiae Regulae Ordinis D. Francisci.
PRaelatus Indutus Amictus, Alba, and Stola, cu^ Diacono and Subdiacono vadit
adostium Templi aut Conuentus, vbi sponsam aduenientem and in limine genua
flectentem aspergit aqua lustrali; tradit aque ei Stolae extremitate in manu
sinistra, sit eam deducit ad locum ante altar praeparatum and statim inchoatur
Missa, cantato Euangelio, Sacerdos deposita Casula petit a sponsa quid velit?
Et facta petitione, absolutaque concione eandem interrogat super conditionibus
sequentibus.

1. An sit fidelis and Catholica? 2. An de nullo errore suspecta? 3. An
matrimonio non ligata? 4. An corpore and mentesana? 5. An legitime nata? 6. An
animo prompta? 7. An debitis expedita? 8. An nulla vulgari infamia maculata? 9.
An excommunicationis vinculo non ligata?
Istae interrogationes fiant prid^, velipso vestitionis die, secreto (propter
saeculares ad vestitionem aduenientes) coram Matre, and Discreti^ Conuentus,
and non in templo: vel qu^ die Superiori placuerit.

His peractis and conditionibus isti^ saluis, incipit Praelatus Litanias and
prosequitur, Ministris respondentibus hoc modo.

KYrie eleison. Christ eleison.
Kyrie eleison. Christ audi nos. Christ exaudi nos.
Pater de caelis Deus, Miserere no.
Fili Redemptor mundi Deus, Miserere nobis.
Spiritus Sancte Deus, Miserere.
Sancta Trinitas vnus Deus, Mis.
Sancta Maria, ora pro nobis
Omnes Sancti beatorum Spirituum ordines, Orate pro nobis.
Omnes Sancti Patriarchae and Prophetae, orate pro nobis.
Omnes Sancti Apostoli and Euangelistae, orate.
Omnes Sancti Martyrs, orate.
Omnes Sancti Confessores, orate.
Omnes Sanctae Virgins and viduae, orate.
Omnes Sancti and sanctae Dei, Intercedite pro nobis.
Propitius esto, Parce nobis D^e.
Ab omni immunditia mentis and corporis, Libera nos Domine.
Ab omni peccato, libera.
A damnatione perpetua, libera.
Per Mysterium sanctae Incarnationis, Passionis, Resurrectionis, and
Ascensionistuae, libera.
Peccatores, te rogamusaudi nos.
Vt pacem and cordis tranquillitatem nobis dones, te cog.
Vt hanc famulam tuam vel [has famulas tuas] in vera castitate and paupertate
conseruare digneris, te rogamus audi nos.
Vt ei vel [eis] virtutem verae humilitatis and obedientiae concedere digneris,
te rogamus.
Vt eam vel [eas] in tuo sancto seruitio vsque in finem perseuerate facias, te
rogamus.
Vt ei vel [eis] augmentum Fidei, Spei and Charitatis donare digneris, te
rogamus.
Vt omnibus fidelibus defunctis requiem aeternam donare digueris, te rogamus.
Fili Dei, te rogamus.
Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, Miserere nobis.
Kyrie eleison. Christ eleison. Kyrie eleyson. Pater noster. Et ne nos inducas
in tentationem.
. Sed libera nos a malo.
. Saluam fac Ancillam tuam vel [saluas fac Ancillas tuas.]
. Deus meus sperantem vel (sperantes) in te.
. Mitte ei vel [eis] Domine auxilium de Sancto.
. Et de Syon tuere eam vel [eas.]
. Nihil profitiat inimicus in ea vel [eis.]
. Et filius iniquitatis non apponat nocere ei vel [eis.]
. Esto ei vel [eis] domine turris fortitudinis.
. A facie inimici.
. Domine exaudi oratione meam.
. Et clamor meus ad te veniat.
. Dominus vobiscum etc.
Oremus.

DOmine Jesus Christ qui es via sine qua nemo venit ad Patrem, quaesumus
benignissimam clementiam tuam, vt hanc famulam tuam, vel [has famulas tuas]
periter disciplinae Regularis deducas, qui etiam peccatores vocare dignatus es,
dicens: venite ad me omnes qui laboratis and onerati estis, and ego reficiam
vos; praesta v^ haec vox inuitationis tuae ita in e^ vel [eis] conualescat,
quaten^ peccatorum onera deponens, vel [deponentes] and quam dulcis e^ gustans
vel [gustantes] tua refectione sustentari mereatur vel [mereantur.] Qui etiam
de ouibus tuis attestari dignatus es, dicens Oues meae vocem meam audiunt and
ego cognosco eas and cognoscunt me meae. Agnosce eam ve^ [eas] inter oues tuas,
vt ipsa ve^ [ipsae] te ita agnoscat, vel [agnoscant] vt alienum non sequatur,
vel [sequantur] sed te, neque audiat vel [audiant] vocem alienorum, sed tuam,
qua dicis, qui mihi ministrat me sequatur. Qui viuis and regnas cum Deo Patre.
etc.

Benedictio habitus.
. Adiutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.
. Qui fecit caelum and terram.
. Sit nomen Domini benedictum.
. Ex hoc nunc and vsque in saeculum.
. Dominus vobiscum.
. Et cum spiritu tuo.
Oremus.

DEus aeternorum bonorum fidelissime repromissor and certissime persolutor, qui
tegumen salutis and indumentum iucunditatis fidelibus tuis promisisti: immensam
clementiam tuam suppliciter exoramus, vt hoc indumentum cordis fidelitatem and
mundi contemptum significans, sub quo famula tua est informanda vel [famulae
tuae sunt informandae] in Crucis modum propositum, propitins benedicas, and
beatae castitatis habitum quem inspirante te suscipit, vel [suscipiunt] te
protegente illibate custodiat vel [custodiant.] Et quam vel [quas] vestimento
venerandae Passionis tuae temporaliter induis, beata facias immottalitate
vestiri. Qui viuis and regnas, etc.

Oremus.

DOmine Deusbonarum virtutum dator, and omnium benedictionum infusor, te
suppliciter deprecamur, vt hanc vestem, quam famula tua vel [h^ vestes, quas
famulae tuae] pro indicio cognoscendae Religionis induer vel [induent]
benedicere and sanctificare tua pietate digneris: quatenus inter religiosas
feminas cognoscatur dicata vel [cognoscantur dicatae] amictu. Per Christum, etc.

Benedictio Cinguli.
Oremus.

DEus, qui vt seruum solueres, filium tuum funibus ligari voluisti, benedic
quaesumus cingulum istud vel [cingula ista] and praesta vt haec famula tua vel
[hae famulae tuae] quae eo vel [eis] velut ligamine paenitentiali cingetur, vel
[cingentur] vinculorum eiusdem Filij tui Domini nostri Jesus Christi memor
existat, vel [memores existant] and in ordine quem assumit vel [assumunt]
salubriter perseuerans vel [perseuerantes] tuis cum effectu semper obsequijs se
obligatam esse cognoscat vel [obligatas esse cognoscant.] Per eundem Dominu^.

Hic aspergit Sponsa^ and vestes aqua benedicta, quae interim exuitur vestibus
saecularibus and dicit Sacerdos.

Exuatte Dominus veterem hominem cum actibus suis.. Amen Et dum eam Induit
habitu Religionis dicit. Induat te Dominus nonum hominem qui secundum Deum
creatus est in Iustitia and sanctitate veritatis:. Amen.

Deinde praescinduntur Capilli: quibus amputatis dicitur.

Dominus vobiscum.. Et cum spiritu tuo.

Oremus.

A Desto Domine supplicationibus nostris and hanc famulam vel [has famulas]
benedicere digneris, cui vel (quibus in nomine tuo habitu^ Religion imposuimus,
vtte largiente and deuota vel (deuotae) in ordine persistere, and vitam
percipere mereatur vel (mereantur) aeternam. Per Christum Dominum nostrum..
Amen.

Oremus.

DEus pacis, Deus Clemens, cui bona cuncta placent, sine quo nihil sanctum
inchoatur, nihil bonum perficitur, adsint nostrae humilitatis precibus aures
tuae pietatis, and hanc famulam tuam cui vel (has famulas tuas quibus) in tuo
sancto nomine sacrae Religionis habitum imposuimus a mundi impedimento, and a
secularibus desiderijs defend, ac concede propitius, vt in hoc sancto
proposito deuota persistat vel (deuotae persistant) remissioneque peccatorum
percepta ad Electorum tuorum consortium pe^uenire mereatur. vel (mereantur.)
Per Dominum nostrum, etc.

Redit Sponsa ad locum. His solemniter cantatur.

Veni Creator Spiritus vsque ad finem.

. Emitte Spiritum tuum and creabuntur.
. Et renouabis faciem terrae.
. Dignare me laudare te virgo sacrata.
. Da mihi virtutem, etc.
. Ora pro nobis Beat Pater Francisce.
. Vt digni efficiamur, etc.
Oremus.

DEus qui corda fideliu^ S. Spiritus illustratione docuisti, da nobis in eodem
Spiritu recta sapere, and de eius semper consolatione gaudere.

COncede nos famulos tuos quaesumus Domine Deus perpetua mentis and corporis
sanitate gaudere, and gloriosa beatae Mariae semper virginis intercessione a
praesenti liberari tristitia and aeterna perfrui laetitia.

DEus qui Ecclesiam tuam B. Francisci meritis foetu nouae prolis amplificas:
tribue nobis ex eius imitatione terrena despicere, and caelestium donorum
semper participatione gaudere. Per Christum Dominum nostrum.

Sacerdos resumpta Casula prosequitur Missam, finito Offertorio, ante lotionem
manuum, venit Sponsa and facit oblationem, and subsequuntur eam parents and
amici.

Item communicate Sponsa post sumptionem Sanguinis. Finita Missa Sacerdos
aspergit eam aqua lustrali and traditis ei in manu dextra Cruce, and in
sinistra Cereo accenso, praecedentibus Ministris, ducit eam ad locum, vbi aliae
Sorores stant eam expectantes, quam (dum aduenerit) in osculo Charitatis
recipient, and deinde ad Chorum illam deducunt, Ministris cum Sacerdote,
interim ad Templum reuertentibus, vbi se exuunt. Sorores vere cantabunt Te Deum
laudamus, and dum cantatur omnes amplexetur ducente illam nouitiarum Magistra.

MODVS ADMITtendi Sorores Tertij Ordinis S. Francisci ad Professionem.
IMprimis inchoatur Missa and cantato Euangelio, interrogatur Sponsa ante
Cancellos quid petat? ipsa respondet, and fit breuis Concio, and postea
dicuntur Eitaniae. page 261. post versus dicitur sequens Oration.

Oremus.

DEus qui per coaeternum tibi filium cuncta creasti, quique mundum peccatis
inueteratum per mysterium sanctae Incarnationis renouare dignatus es, te
suppliciter exoramus, vt eiusdem Domini nostri Jesus Christi gratia, super hanc
famulam tuam vel (has famulas tuas) abrenuntiationem saeculi profiteri
cupientem vel (cupientes) clementer respicere digneris, per quam Spiritu mentis
suae tenouata vel (renouatae) veterem hominem cum suis actibus exuat vel
(exuant,) and nonum qui secundum Deum creatus est induere mereatur. vel
(mereantur.) Per eundem Christum, etc.

Benedictio veli.
. Adiutorium nostrum in nomine Domini.
. Qui fecit caelum and terram.
. Sit nomen Domini benedictum.
. Ex hoc nunc and vsque in saeculum.
. Dominus vobiscum.
. Et cum spiritu tuo.
Oremus.

SVppliciter te Domine deprecamur, vt super hanc vestern capiti Ancillae tuae
imponendam benedictio tua copiosa desce^dat, vt sit haec vestis Ancillae tuae
benedicta and sanctificata. Per Christum, etc.

Si sint plures.

SVppliciter te Domine deprecamur, vt super has vestes capitibus Ancillarum
tuarum imponendas benedictio tua copiosa descendat, vt sint hae vestes
Ancillarum tuarum benedictae and sanctificatae. Per Christum, etc.

Oremus.

CAput fidelium omniu^ Deus, and totius corporis Saluator Ecclesiae, hoc
operimentum velaminis quod famula tua vel (famulae tuae) pro tuo tuaeque
castissimae genitricis semper virginis amore suo capiti est impositura vel
(suis capitibus sunt impositurae) dextera tua sanctifica; vt hoc quod per illud
datur intelligi (tua pietate) corpore pariter and animo incontaminata semper
custodiat, vel (incontaminatae semper custodiant) vt quando ad Sanctorum
remunerationem perpetuam cum prudentibus virginibus etiam ipsa praeparata
aduenerit, vel (ipsae praeparatae aduenerint,) te perducente, ad supernae
faelicitatis nuptias introire mereatur. vel (mereantur.) Qui viuis and regnas,
etc.

Benedictio Annuli.
Oremus.

BEnedic Domine Annulum istum famulae tuae, vel (Annulos istos famularum
tuarum) vt filio tuo vnigenito desponsari valeat vel (valiant) in puritate and
charitate, and cum eodem in Spiritu sancto vinculo indissolubili v^iri.

Tunc aspergit velum, Annulum and Sponsam, vel vela, Annulos and Sponsas aqua
benedicta. Deinde Sacerdos imponit ei vel eis velum dicens.

ACcipe virgo Sponsa Christi velum sacrum, quod feras ante tribunal Iudicis,
cui flectitur omne genu caelestium and terrestrium and infernorum, quo
cognoscaris mundum contempsisse, and Christo Jesus Sponso virginum veraciter and
humiliter totoque cordis affectu Sponsam perpetuam te subdidisse, qui te ab
omni aduersitate defendat, benedicat and ad vitam aeternam perducat.. Amen. Si
fuerint plures Sponsae idem repetitur ad singulas. Et cantatur Regnum mundi,
quod a Sponsa inchoatur and a choro prosequitur, ipsa cantante versum and
Gloria Patri nisi ignoret cantum, tunc supplet aliqua in choro eius vices, his
finitis dicit Sacerdos.

Oremus.

DEus Indulgentiae Pater, qui seueritatem tuae districtionis temperans,
indulsisti, ne filius portet iniquitatem Patris, and qui mira dispensatione,
etiam malis been vteus, tuae dignationis gratiam per eos frequenter operaris,
quaesumus clementiam tuam vt huic famulae tuae vel (his famulabus tuis) non
obsistat, quod velum sanctae Religionis and abrenuntiationis vanitatum huius
saeculi per nos tanta and tali reindignos suscipiat, vel (suscipiant) sed
ministerium quod per nos exhibetur exterius, tu interius per donum Sancti
Spiritus exequaris. Per Dominum, etc.

Oremus.

SAncte Spiritus, qui dignatus es te Deum ac Dominu^ reuelare mortalibus,
immensam tuae bonitatis clementiam suppliciter exoramus, vt sicut vbi vis
spiras, sic and huic famulae tuae vel (his famulabus tuis) affectum deuotionis
indulgeas, quae tua sapientia est condita vel (sunt conditae) tua quoque
prouidentia gubernetur, vel (gubernentur) eamque vel (easque) iuxta consuetam
tibi gratiam vnctio tua de omnibus doceat. Et per intercessionem beatissimi
Patris nostri Francisci, quem praecipuum huius sanctae Institutionis
legislatorem dedisti, and omnium Sanctorum quos inuocat vel (inuocant) fac eam
vel (eas) a vanitate saeculi veraciter conuerti, and sicut es omnium peccatorum
remissio, deprimentes impietatis obligationes in ea vel (eis) dissolve and ad
obseruantiam huius sancti propositi fac eam vel (eas) certatim feruere; vt in
tribulationibus and angustijs, tua indeficienti consolatione valeat vel
(valiant) respirare, ac sobrie, just and pieper veram humilitatem at que
Obedientiam in feruida Charitate fundata viuendo, quod te donante inchoauit vel
(inchoauerunt) faelici perseuerantia complete; vel (compleant) quod ipse
praestare digneris, qui cum Deo Patre sanctoque vnigenito viuis and regnas
Deus, etc.

Hic Sponsa clara voce facit Professione^ in manu Praelati vel Abbatissae, qua
emissa, Praelatus vel Abbatissa dicat. Et ego si haec obseruaueris promitto
tibi ex part Dei vitam aeternam. Deinde detur cuiquestatim Annulus dicendo:
Accipe Annulum fidei, dilectionis and castitatis in nomine Sanctissimae
Trinitatis, vt desponsata filio Dei, ipse te vt dilectam Sponsam illaesam
semper custodiat: vt omni saeculi a more contempto nullum praeter ipsum vnquam
amatorem admittas.

Deinde prosequitur versum.

. Confirma hoc Deus quod operatus es in nobis.
. A templo tuo quod est in Jerusalem.
Oremus.

DEus qui famulam tuam vel (famulas tuas) a saeculi vanitate conuersam vel
(conuersas) ad amorem supernae vocationis accendis, pectoriillius vel
(pectoribus illarum) purificando illabere, and gratiam per quam in te
perseueret, ei vel (perseuerent, eis) infunde, vt protectionis tuae munita vel
(munitae) praesidijs, quod te donante promisit, impleat vel (promiserunt,
impleant) and suae Professionis executrix effecta vel (executrices effectae) ad
ea quae perseuerantibus in te promittere dignatus es, pertingat. vel
(pertingant.) Per Christum Dominum nostrum.. Amen.

Oremus.

OMnipotens se^piterne Deus castorum corporum benignus inhabitator, and
incorruptarum inhabitator animarum, qui humanam substantiam in primis
parentibus diabolica fraud vitiatam, ita in verbo, per quod omnia facta sunt,
reparas, vt eam non solum ad primae originis Innocentiam reuoces, sed etiam ad
experientiam quorundam bonorum quae in saeculo nouo habenda sunt perducas, and
obstrictos adhuc conditioni mortalium, iam ad similitudinem prove has
Angeloru^, respice super hanc famulam tuam, vel (has famulas tuas) quae in manu
tua continentiae suae propositum collocans vel (collocantes) tibi deuotionem
offert. vel (offerunt.) Et praesta vt in ea vel (eis) sit per donum Spiritus
sancti prudens modestia, sapiens benignitas, grauis lenitas, and casta
libertas, in charitate ferueat, vel (ferueant) and nihil praeter te diligat,
vel (diligant) laudabiliter viuat, vel (viuant) laudarique non appetat, vel
(appetant) te in sanctitate corporis, te in animae suae puritate glorificet,
vel (animarum fuarum puritate glorificent) amore te timeat, vel (timeant) amore
tibi seruiat, vel (seruiant) tu ei vel (eis) sis gaudium, tu voluntas, tu in
moerore solatium, tu in ambiguitate consilium, in iniuria defensio, in
tribulatione patientia, in paupertate abundantia, in ieiunio cibus, in
infirmitate medicina, in te habeat vel (habeant) omnia quem diligere appetat
vel (appetant) super omnia, per te quod professa est custodiat, vel (professae
sunt custodiant) carnem macerando castiget, vel (castigent) and mundum cum suo
principe vincat, vel (vincant) quatenus virtutum floribus adornata vel
(adornatae) caelestem Sponsum cum oleo praeparationis expectet, ac lampade
accensa vel (expectent, ac lampadibus accensis) cum prudentibus virginibus
Regalem ianuam introeat vel (introeant) and in agni perpetuo comitatu sine fine
permaneat. vel (permaneant) Per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, etc.

Oremus.

DEus qui renuntiantibus saeculo mansiones paras in caelo, dilata huius famulae
tuae cor vel (harum famularum tuarum corda) caelestibus bonis, vt abiectis
mundanis desiderijs and pompis in vitae perfectionem te sequi valeat vel
(valiant) agnum sine macula, vtque vsque in finem feruidae charitatis compagine
teneatur, vnanimis vel (teneantur, vnanimes) continentiae praecepta custodiat,
sobria, simplex, and quieta vel (custodiant, sobriae, simplices, and quietae)
gratis sibi datam suae Professionis gratiam fuisse cognoscat vel (cognoscant)
concordet illius vel (illarum) vita cum nomine, and Professio sentiatur in
opere. Per Christum Dominum nostrum, etc.

His completis conuertat se Sacerdos ad Sponsam (ceu Sponsas) ei (vel eis)
benedicit: dicens:

BEnedicat te vel (vos) conditor caeli and terrae, Deus Pater omnipotens qui te
vel (vos) eligere dignatus estad beatae Matris Jesus Christi Domini nostri
consortium, vt integram and immaculatam virginitatem quam professa es vel
(professae estis) coram Deo and Angelis eius conserues, vel (conseruetis)
propositum teneas, vel (teneatis) castitatem diligas, vel (diligatis)
patientiam custodias, vel (custodiatis) vt sic coronam virginitatis percipere
merearis. vel (mereamini.) Per eundem Christum Dominum nostrum.. Amen. Et
statim intonatur Veni Creator Spiritus. Prosequente choro cum versibus and
collectis vt supra in vestitione page 270. Et continuatur Missa, finita Missa
cantatur Te Deum laudamus eo finito versus.

. Confirma hoc Deus quod operatus es in nobis.
. A templo tuo quod est in Jerusalem.
Oremus.

ACtiones nostras quaesumus Domine aspirando praeueni, and adiuuando
prosequere, vt cuncta nostra oration and operatio a te semper incipiat and per
te cepta finiatur. Per Christum Dominum nostrum.. Amen.

FINIS.
PRaecipimus hanc formam semper obseruari tam in vestitione quam Professione
Sororu^ nostri Conventus tertiariarum Anglicarum Bruxellensium. Datum in nostro
Minoru^ Conventu Bruxellensi 25. Octobris 1622.

F. ANDREAS A SOTO Commissarius Generalis.

Being debtor as well to Novices as to Professed, I have thought good to add
some brief instructions as well for Novices in their course of life, and in
temptations: as also for the professed Sisters, who proportionably may apply
the same things to themselves.

BRIEF INSTRVctions for Novices taken out of S. Dionise the Carthusian.
LEt them first consider, with what fervor and diligence they have forsaken
the world, and all things which they had, their Parents, kindred, acquaintance
and familiar friends; their native Country, richesse, their dear and friendly
company, for to come to this life of Penance, and die to themselves, and to the
world; which could not proceed from any little affection. Let them consider
also how bash fully humbly, and earnestly they have demanded to be received.
Moreover how after they were received, they did begin to co^port themselves
modestly, devoutly and orderly in all obedience; wherefore let them always
remember of this beginning, and be not weary or draw back, nor presume, nor be
elevated, nor wax cold, nor become more bold, or negligent, but increase,
continue and persevere fruitfully, and holyly even to the end, in so happy a
beginning. To this end in a figure it was commanded to the children of Israel,
after they were gone forth out of Egypt Exodus 13. Remember this day in the which
our Lord brought you out of Egypt, from the Iron fourance, and servitude of
clay and brick. So let them not cease to remember how graciously and
powerfully the holy Ghost has delivered them out of the wicked world, from the
bonds of carnalitie, from the yoke of the devil, from the most hard and most
vile servitude of sin, yea from the pains of hell, which they had merited,
and wherein they had fallen, if God by his assistance, had not with, drawn
them. Wherefore one of the Fathers answered to one, who asked him how he should
comport himself: Consider what thou have been the first day when thou did
depart from the world, and when thou wast received into the Cloister, and
remain the same always. Let them consider how filthy a thing it is in a
Cloister, to become tepide and sloathfull, to be deceived and vanquished by the
enemy: whence it is said in the Apocalipse cap. 2. I have against thee,
because thou have left thy first charity. And cap. 3. because thou art luke
warm I will begin to vomit thee, out of my mouth. And the vessel of Election
has said. Heb. 10. If we sin willingly, after the knowledge of the truth
received, now there is not left an host for sins.

2. Let them be always on their guard, least they be besieged by the enemies.
Yea let them endeavor always to be armed, and prepared to the conflict
against all tentatio^s, being always fear full, according to what shall be
said hereafter, which is also the counsel of S. Peter. Be sober and watch,
because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, goes about seeking whom
he may devour.

3. Let them keep themselves from all rash judgments, and contempt of any
one, as also take heed that by the examples of those who comport themselves
negligently, they be not deceived, and so become sloathfull: but let them seek
the discourse and conversation of those, who may more edefie them, and then
endeavor to join themselves to their company: in the mean time let them not
be so bold, as to judge of others, but leave them to their judges.

4. Let them take heed, that they be not deceived by some appearance of good;
for the most malign enemy, seeing that he cannot en trappe the fervent
spirits by any evident evil; does endeavor to deceive them, by things which
appear good, and are not so: wherefore let the^ discover themselves, their
suggestions, and secret tentations of their hearts, to men that are capable to
discern them, as shall be said hereafter.

5. Let them take heed, that their observance be reasonable, and discreet, and
not presently break themselves by watchings, abstinences, and other such like
excercises: that they cannot continue the way of their religious Pilgrimage.

6. Let them consider that the cause which they have in hand with God, is
unspeakably great, and weigh profoundly, that in short time they shall be judged
by him. For it is altogether necessary, that during the time of this short and
uncertain present life, they should acquire meritoriously the eternal
beatitude, or incur infernal damnation; so that if they duly consider and
weigh this, they will patiently and willingly remain in the Cloistre, and in
their cell, although they should be up to the neck in vermin.

Lastly for to maintain, defend and profit themselves as it is convenient;
let them not cease to invocate God, and let them not fail to love, honor, and
supplicate the Blessed Virgin Advocate of Mankind; as also other Saints:
according to their devotion: to this end I have here beneath translated the
prayers, which are used at their clothing; that they may with the more
devotion be attentive unto them in that act, as also use them during the time
of their Novice ship. But first I will give out of the same author, certain
Rules against temptations: because ordinarily the devil, troops of sins,
and passed customs, do assail and make war against Novices, so that in
them the common saying is verified Job 7. the life of man on earth is but a
continual tentation or war. Whence comes, that many Novices overcome in
the combat, do yield and fall for want of instruction of the manner and means
to make resistance. Many profitable things have been written both of general
and particular remedies, against tentations, I will briefly speak of some of
them.

Brief Rules against Temptations.
FIrst let them endeavor to accomplish that of the wiseman, Eccl. 2. Son
coming to the service of God, stand in justice, and in fear, and prepare thy
soul to tentation. And know, that as S. Paul says, 2. Tim. 2. None are
crowned, but those who fight manfully; and that the elect Act 14. By many
tribulations must enter into the kingdom of God. Wherefore the first and common
remedy against temptations is to know their, imperfections, frailty, and
insufficiency, and confidently to have recourse to Gods assistance,
incessantly and ardently invocating his aid, in saying Deus in adiutorium meum
intend. And so they must, continually hope in God, and never presume of their
proper forces or merits.

The second remedy is to humble and misprise themselves profoundly, yea to
esteem themselves as nothing in all things before God; for he cannot be held
by the devil, who is so little, and as nothing in his own estimation: but
presently he slips out of his claws, and is received by God, who exalts and
comforts those who are so humbled.

The third remedy is, always to consider the presence of God almighty,
principally his judgment, and above all to consider prudently, and greatly
fear the eternal sentence.

The 4. is to consider clearly, what the te^tatio^s are, what are the enemies
of the elect, what they seek, whereto they tend, what they incessantly
machinate: truly they are most cruel, most cautelous, most envious, and
finally seek no other thing, than the eternal damnation of men, and that in
the mean time, they may be withdrawn from God, deprived of all grace and
virtue, made subject to them, and sullied with all vices.

They never cease to invent and prosecute such things, after a thousand ways,
and practices, wherefore by how much more they know these more assuredly, by so
much more foolishly they shall do, if they consent to them; and do not resist
them with all their force, and affections. Would any one enter into a wood of
thieves, of whom he knew he should be strangled.

The 5. to think diligently, what damage they incur by giving way to
temptation; for by this, they loose their sovereign God, and only good; they
are despoyled of all charity, grace, and precedent merits. They cease to be
the daughters, servants, friends, soldiers, heirs, and members of their God;
Creator and Savior, and consequently become his enemies and adversaries, etc.

The 6. is to behold continually how victoriously, and excellently, the
servants of God have resisted temptations; and what glory they have gotten by
such triumph; in reading the lives of the holy Fathers, S. Antony, S. Hilarion,
S. Benedict, S. Francis, they may be more fully instructed.

The 7. is to contemplate God almighty, his holy-Angels, and all the heavenly
citizens beholding their conflict against temptations, ready to assist them,
joyful of their resistance, and victory: and on the other side, consider how
much the malignant spirits do rejoice together, and mock at their fall and
transgression, according to that of the Psalmist Psalm. 12. They that troubled
me, will reyoice if I be moved. O do not offend leave and misprise God, who is
your Creator, and Savior. Do not contristate his B. mother, most ready to
help you, and most zealous of your salvation: do not dishonor your Angel
Guardian, who most sincerely loves you, keeps you most carefully, and
admonishes you most faithfully, rather to follow and hearken after the
suggestions of the devil, than to the most wholesome exhortations of the
Angels. Do not make your selves odious and contemptible to the triumphant
Church of the celestial court. Do not yield your selves to be a shame,
mokquerie, and prey to the most envious and most cruel enemies. But rather,
pray with the wise man. Eccl. 23. O Lord, Father and dominatour of my life;
leave me not in their counsel: least I fall in the fight of mine adversaries,
and mine enemies rejoice.

The 8. is presently to resist in the beginning of the tentation, principally
in the tentations of the flesh: from which as from their objects, occasions,
incitations, and subjects, they are incontinently to turn the eyes of the
spirit, and of the body; the imagination, fancy, memory, and convert them to
behold, and consider some holy and compunctiue things, as beholding the
crucifix and the Passion, the last ends, weighing also the brevity and
incertitude of this present life. Moreover they ought to be magnanimous, and
laudably vindicatiue: that so they may afflict the devils their enemies: by so
much more earnestly and incessantly addicting themselves to all works of
virtue, principally of profound humility, Obedience, and Charity, by how much
more they endeavor to withdraw them from their salvation: say with the true
warrier Psalm. 17. I will pursue mine enemies, and overtake them. And I will not
return till they fail. I will break them neither shall they be able to
stand: they shall fall under my feet.

The 9. is, to ponder the baseness, impiety, and turpitude of tentation, and
vice: and so presently with an indignation, turn themselves, as from a
stinking and most detestable carron. Even as a merchant would with indignation
refuse iron, or dung, that the buyer should give him for gold, or balsome; so
when for our Lord God, eternal infinite and most worthy, and for the most
precious gift of his grace and glory, the world, the flesh, the devil,
should propound vain, filthy, and base things, let them answer, with great
contemptand not vouchsafe to behold or hear ken to those, who suggest such
things, nay rather according to that which the standard bearer of Christ Jesus,
Blessed S. Francis has tought us, let them say to the tempter, Open thy mouth
and I will cast dong into it.

The 10. remedy is, to discover as well in confession, as out of it, what
passes, and is hid in they spirit, to discreet, good, and charitable men,
and humbly obey to their counsels, and instructions.

The te^pter does seek means to deceive us, propounding false and perverse
things, under the species of true and good, and does lay snares and guiles:
wherefore he fears to be discovered. For according as Christ has said in the
Gospel. Joan. 3. Every one that does ill, hates the light, and comes not to
the light that his works may not be made manifest. Wherefore a man has then
almost vanquished the devil, and discovered all his deceits, and trecheries;
when he has declared all the secrets of his heart to men of judgment. It is
also and act of humility and discretion, in such sort to discover the
interior, and to desire to be well instructed therein, and therefore let them
overcome thus the pride of the devil.

Many other things may be added, as to have recourse to our B. Lady to the
Saints toward whom they have particular devotion. And principally to have a
serious consideration of the Passion of our Savior. For Christ has given
great power and inestimable virtue to his Passion and death, whereby he has
redeemed humane kind. It contains in it self an infinite merit, because by a
sovereign and most ardent charity, most perfect Obedience, most profound
humility, most firm patience, most strong constancy and most mild spirit he
has submitted himself to it; his divinity added to his humanity did give to
it an immense efficacy of merits; wherefore by how much more a man is joined to
Christ, by more humble ardent, and strict charity, by so much more abundantly
he may participate of his virtues, and merits.

If then they be tempted with any difficulty or rigor of the Order, and of its
observance, as of the hardness and austeritie of Religion, and that it theeme
grievous and painful to carry the Cross and follow Christ: let them consider
diligently, what he has suffered for them, how in his agony, for horror of
death he has shed a bloody sweat, and was sad even to death, and carrying
upon his own shoulders the heavy gibbot of the cross, he was most
ignominiously led to the place of Calvarie.

If they be tempted with the delights of the flesh, or with the desires of
pleasure, dissolution, play, sport, unmeasured laughter, let them consider the
grief that he suffered for us, when his most delicate flesh was torn, even to
the opening of his sides, and most cruelly rent, with the blows of scourges,
when his hands and feet were transpierced with rough and great nails of Iron,
when his head was crowned with thorns, and beaten with a reed.

If they be tempted with ambition, let them consider how for our sakes, he
became reproach of men, and out cast of the people. He was mocked with a white
garment, derided in purple, bespitted on his face, blasphemed, and despiced,
handled, and slain, as the most base and the most wicked amongst men, for
those who did see him did mock at him, saying Mat. 27. If he be the king of
Israel, let him now come down from the Cross. etc.

If the rigor of abstinence, or of fasting be troublesome, and painful to
them, if they be tempted with more delicate meat or drink: let them remember
that they gave him gall for his meat: and in his thirst they gave him vinagre
to drink. Psalm. 68.

If the motion of Pride, the impetuositie of impatience, or anger assault them,
because some have done them injuries or other contrarieties; let them consider,
how most patiently he has endured all things, when he wa^ carried before
Pilate, with a mos^ mild heart, not saying one word when he was most enormously
accused.

If rancour or motion of envy strike them; let them remember how he fastened
to the Cross, and already environed with anguish, and prickings of death and
more interiourly transperced: did pray for those who crucified him.

If sloth assault them, let them call to mind with what arde^t charity he
has procured our salvation.

Briefly in all temptations let them interiourly consider, what and how great
things he has undertaken, excercised and suffered for our salvation; with what
most bitter and most cruel death he was slain; and most violently and most
painfully stretched forth on the Cross, even so far forth that one might
number all his bones, yea even to the rupture of his veins, how he was crowned
with thorns, clothed in mocquerie with a purpell robe; and his face bained in
blood, presented to the people, who cried take him away, crucisie him. Joan. 19.

On the other side, consider what and how great he is, he I say who has
suffered all these things; is not he, according to his divine nature, equal
with the eternal Father, and according to the Humanity which he has
hypostatically taken and united unto the eternal word; more worth than all the
world? Let them consider the delicateness of his complexion, in that he was
conceived in the most sacred womb of the Virgin, of most pure blood: behold
his Innocence, contemplate how charitably strongly, and most promptly he has
suffered all these pains.

Besides this they may consider, that at the time of his Passion, the grief of
compassion which he sustained from the ungrateful and wicked Jews was more
than the corporal affliction of his Passion. Moreover how great pity and
compassion he had of his most dear Mother, seeing her bitterness, pain, and
compassion as also how greatly he did suffer in all those who stood by, his
devout disciples, and other women.

Let them therefore carry these things in their minds, and at certain hours
daily meditate, and remeditate them, as distinctly, ordinatly and
compassionatly, as if he did endute them in their sight and presence. According
to the form that is given them in the distribution of their time, in the hour
glass of the Passion which they may find in my book of the chord of S.
Francis.

Here follow some prayers which they may use either at their clothing, or
afterward during their Noviceshipp as also some other that they may use at
their Profession.

Prayers.
O Lord Jesus Christ who art the way, without whom none comes to the Father, I
beseech thy most benign clemency, that thou would lead me by the path of
regular discipline, thou also, who have vouchsafed do call sinners, saying,
Come ye to me all that labor and are burdened and I will refresh you. Grant
that this voice of thy invitation, may so prevail in me, that laying down the
burden of sin, and tasting how sweet thou art, I may deserve to be sustained
by thy refreshment, thou also who have vouchsafed to witness of thy sheep,
saying, My sheep do hear my voice, and I know them and they know me,
acknowledge me amongst thy sheep, that I may also so know thee and not follow
a stranger, but thee; nor hear the voice of strangers, but thine: whereby thou
do say, he that ministereth unto me, let him follow me. Who live and
raignest God with God the Father, in the unity of the holy Ghost, world
without end. Amen.

O God most faithful promiser of eternal good things, and certain performer,
who have promised the coverture of salvation, and the clothes of incunditie,
to thy faithful: most humbly I beseech thy immense clemency, that this habit
signifiyng fidelity of heart, and contempt of the world, by thy protection may
keep me unspotted: and as thou have temporally clothed me, with the garment
of thy sons Passion, so thou will make me to be clothed with blessed
immortality. Through our Lord Jesus Christ thy son; who lives and reigns
God, with thee, in the unity of the holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.

A prayer for perseverance.
O God of peace, most merciful and clement Lord, to who^ all good things are
pleasing, with out whom no holy thing is begun, no good thing finished; let
the ears of thy piety be present to my humility, and defend me from all
impediments of this world, and from all secular desires, and propitiously
grant, that I may persever in this holy purpose, and having received remission
of my sins, I may deserve to come to the company of thy elect. Through our
Lord Jesus Christ thy Son: who lives and reigns, God with thee, in the
unity of the holy Ghost world without end. Amen.

A prayer for Gods Grace.
O God who by thy coeternall Son, have created all things, and who have
vouchsafed by the mystery of his holy Incarnation, to renew the world become
old in sins: I humbly beseech thee, that by the grace of the same Jesus
Christ our Lord, thou will clemently vouchsafe to behold me thy handmaide,
desirous to profess the rennuntiation of the world, that so renewed in spirit,
I may put off the old man which its actions, and deserve to put on the new
which is created according to God. Through the same Lord Jesus Christ thy
Son: who lives and reigns, God, with thee, in the unity of the holy
Ghost, world without end. Amen.

Another.
O Holy Ghost, who have vouchsafed to reveal thy self our God and Lord to
mortal men, I most humbly beseech the immense clemency of thy goodness; that
as thou do breath where thou will, so grant to me, the affection of
devotion: that as by thy wisdom I am created, and also by thy providence
governed; so according o thy wonted Grace, let thy holy unction in all things
teach me, and that by the intercession of our most blessed Father S. Francis:
who thou have given for the principal law giver of this holy institution: and
of all the Saints, whom I do now invocate; make me to be truly converted from
the vanity of this world: and as thou art the remission of all sins, so
dissolve in me, the obligations of impiety, that depresse me; and make me
fervent in the observation of this holy purpose, that in all tribulations and
adyersities, I may respire by thy never failing consolation, and living
soberly, justly, and piously, by true humility, and obedience: and grounded in
fervent charity, I may with happy perseverance accomplish, that which by thy
grace I have begun, which thou o Lord vouchsafe to grant who with God the
Father, and his only begotten Son live and raignest world without end. Amen.

Another.
O God who do inslame those, who are converted from the vanity of this
world, to the prize of thy supernall vocation, and do prepare mansions in
heaven, for those who renounce the world: dilate my heart with thy celestial
gifts, that I may remain in this holy company, with them in fraternall union
of Charity, unanimous, constant, sober, simple and quiet, observing the
regular institutions of this holy order, and by thy aid may come to that
spirit of perfection, which by thy inspiration I have conceived. Through our
Lord Jesus Christ thy Son: who lives and reigns, God, with thee in the
unity of the holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.

Another for the same.
O Lord God creator of all things visible and invisible, and reparer of the
world, who by thy power have created, and clemently redeemed me, and mercifully
called me to the state of eua^gelicall perfection: I humbly beseech thy immense
clemency, that thou would vouchsafe to illuminate, inflame, and strengthen
me: that aided by thy most benign piety, I may devoutly, and constantly
persevere to the end in this holy Order, which by thy inspiration I have
undertaken: that after the end of this life, adorned with all ornaments of
virtues, and jewels of spiritual gifts, I may deserve to come to thee my most
clement Father Through our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son: who lives and
reigns, God, with thee, in the v-vnitie of the holy Ghost world without end.
Amen.

Prayers after Profession.
O God who do inflame those who are converted from the vanity of this world,
to the prize of thy supernall vocation; come unto me propitiously purifying my
breast, and infuse thy grace, whereby I may persever in thee; and armed with the
help of thy protection, may be able to perform, what I have promised; and
made a fullfiller of this my Profession, I may happily attain to those things,
which thou have vouchsafed to promise those who persever in thee. Through our
Lord Jesus Christ thy Son who lives and reigns God, with thee, in the
unity of the holy Ghost world without end. Amen.

Another.
Almighty and everlasting God, benign inhabitatour of chaste minds, who by thy
word, by which all things were made, have so repared humane nature, vitiated by
diabolical deceit, in our first parents, that thou have not only recalled it
to the Innocence of its first beginning, but also have brought it to the
knowledge of some things, which are to be had in the world to come: and carried
it, as yet bound in the condition of mortality, to the similitude of Angels,
behold me thy handmaid, who placing my confidence in thee, do offer up my
devotion: and grant that by the gift of the holy Ghost, there may be in me
prudent modesty, wise benignity, grave lenity, and chaste liberty; that I
may be fervent in charity, and love nothing besides thee, may live laudably,
and not desire to be praised; that I may glorify thee in sanctity of body,
and purity of mind; may fear thee by love, and by love serve thee, Be thou
my joy, my will, in mourning, be thou my comfort, in doubts; my counsel, in
injury, defense; in tribulation, Patience: in Poverty, abundance; in hunger,
food; in infirmity, medicine; let me have all things in thee, whom I desire to
love above all things: by thee, let me keep what I have professed, chastise my
flesh by mortificatio^; and overcome the world with its pride; that so adorned
with flowers of virtues, and with the oil of preparation: I may expect the
celestial bridegroom; and my la^pe being lighted with the prudent virgins, I
may enter into thy regal court, and remain without end, in the everlasting
company of the lamb Christ Jesus, to whom with the Father and holy Ghost, be
all honor and Glory for ever more. Amen.

A prayer to our holy Father S. Francis.
O Seraphicall and most Blessed Father S. Francis, Imitatour and standard
bearer of sweet Jesus crucified; who has adorned thee, amongst other Saints
with a special privilege of love, and honor, for he has replenished thy
soul, with the light and splendor of love; and has renewed his sacred wounds
in thy body. I beseech thee for the love of the same benign and merciful
Jesus, that thou be always, and at all times unto me a helper, Father, and
keeper; and an advocate for me, unto the same Lord, both in this life, and at
the hour of my death. O beloved of God; I also humbly and earnestly beseech
thee, to obtain for me, of our Lord Jesus Christ; compunction, and remission
of my sins: pray for me to our benign Lord; that through his mercy and
piety, he would grant me the grace to know my self; and to love and desire him
above all things: and that he make me to serve him faithfully, all the time of
my life; O Father, most glorious Confessor of God; obtain for me, that our
Lord by his mercy, and charity, may make me thy true daughter, and disciple,
and that he replenish my soul with those gifts where with he replenished
thine; and that he make me a true observer of my Rule, and Profession: and
lastly that he keep both me, and my Sisters, with all thy children: in good
and regular observance; and in good example; that we may be a light and
pattern to the whole world. O most loving Father: I beseech thee for the love
of the blessed virgin Marie, Mother of God: to whom thou all ways had
great devotion, obtain for me, that I may always reverence her; and have
special devotion to her; I also humbly beg of thee, that by the said
devotio^ of thine toward her: thou be unto me an aider and helper; when my
soul shall depart from my body; and that thou vouchsafe to pray for me, that
our Lord through his mercy, and by the merits of his most bitter Passion; the
love and merits of his most holy Mother; and by the merits of all the Saints
of thy Order, and of all other Saints, he may bring my soul to Paradise; and
grant me to remain with him and thee, together with his holy Saints, and
Angels for ever in his Glory. Amen.

Instructions for those who are professed.
FIrst let them consider, the greatness of this benefit of their vocation: for
God has not done so to all: but to them, he has declared, not only his
judgments; but also his counsels; He has done great things to them, by
taking them not only for his servants, but also has chosen them for his dear
Friends; for he says Joan. 15. Now I call you not servants, but I have called
you friends. He has also adopted them for his children; whence he says 2. Cor
6. I will be a Father to you, and you shall be my daughters. Moreover he has
taken them for his Spouses, for the souls of every one, are Spouses of Jesus
Christ, says S. Bernard. Let your soul be espoused to him, whose beauty is
admired by the sun and moon. Jesus Christ has made them companions of his
table, companions of his nuptial bed, and has espoused them with the ring
of his love, and charity. Hearken therefore ye daughters and see, and consider
the great bounty of God unto you, and forget your people, and the house of
your Fathers forsake all carnal affections, vnaccustome yourselues of all
secular comportment, and forget the hurtful habits of vice.

2. Let them consider the dignity of a Religious state; for the Monastery is
nothing else, but a school or city of virtue; a place of freedom, where
devout souls, who have happily fled from the arc of the enemy; fearing they
should be surprised in his nets: have assembled themselves. It is also a
terrestrial heaven, wherein celestial women, or terrestrial Angels, who in
spirit converse in heaven, do keep their residence; (Night and day, According
to the saying of S. Bernard) to celebrate the praises of God. Blessed S.
Laurence Justinian calls it a Garden enclosed, Paradise of delights, School
of virtue, Tabernacle of Alliance, Parlour of the Spouse, Station of warriers,
House of Sanctity, Mistress of Religion, particular Mirror of holy Obedience.

3. Let them consider the utility of a Religious state, wherein one is tried
and excercised in virtue, reprehended for negligence, drawn by word and
example to more perfect things. Here they are constrained to deplore their
imperfections, here they are awakened by the fervor of others, instructed by
others humility, moved by the obedience of one, and by the patience of
another: Here they are confounded to be more slow than others. The correction
of the one is the admonition of the other. The danger of one serves so a
looking glass to the other; and for to say nothing of the influence of the
more abundant grace, of the greater assurance, and tranquillity at the hour
of death, of the commodity that they have to be vacant to God, etc. it is also
a sign of the divine Predestination. For Jesus Christ has promised that every
one, who has left Father, Mother, Brothers or Sisters, etc. for him; shall
receive an hundred fold, and shall possess life everlasting. Wherefore
remembering these things, and participating of so great good, let them persever
in the observance of the Rule, and religious conversation, and God will give
them a crown of life.

4. Let them consider that how great soever the dignity and utility of a
Religious state is, yet they cannot come to the height of this dignity, but by
labor; if therefore the place of dignity delight them, let them first
exercise themselves in the way of labor: by this path, one comes to
majesty: wherefore let them know that since they have been disposed to enrolle
themselves in Religion, they are ranged into the society of Jesus Christ, into
the number of his Apostles, and so ought to consider his words. He that will
follow me let him renounce himself, and take up his cross, etc. therefore let
them prepare their souls to fight, for sithence they have called the devil
and hell to the duel, he will come with all his forces and malice, as another
Aman, against Mardocheus, for to vanquish and surmount them; in the mean time
let them be assured that the God of all consolation will assist them, and will
not permit that they be tempted above their force, but will give aid in
tentation, to the end that they may sustain it.

5. As they have firmly resolved, to perseruer in Religion; so let them
valiantly follow him, that is their head and Lord; follow him through fire and
water; Learn of him because he is meek and humble of heart. Mat. 11. let them
crucify their flesh, all vice, and concupiscence, mortify, deny, and overcome
themselves; offering their wills to God by perfect obedience: let them serve
God in fear, and reverence; with great care and fervor of heart, and never
cease to adhere and please the almighty, and incomprehensible God, contemning
all base and unworthy comforts and consolations: certes, if their comportment
be such, they shall have here a Paradise on earth, in adhering most sweetly in
tranquillity of spirit, to a sovereign and infinite good: and soon after, the
celestial Paradise, where they shall see in the kingdom of heaven the good
things of our Lord, which the eye has not seen, nor care has heard, neither
has it ascended into the heart of man what God has most largely prepared for
the true Religious, who accomplish his counsels.

6. Let them consider the great good, which those enjoy who formerly in this
life have contemned the world with all its delights, riches, and honors; and
behold what glory, excellency, praise, and inestimable honor, they have
gotten in a little time, by pains: lo now they are counted amongst the
children of God, and their lot is amongst the Saints; they are now eternally
assured of their unspeakable beatitude, and of the most sweet possession of the
most high Deity, and now for ever, are by so much the more happy, by how much
during this short life, they have been found to have served God more sincerely,
diligently and amourously.

7. They may set before their eyes, the example of the Saints; by often
reading and seriously pondering their actions, to the end, that in as much as
they may; they imitate them: above all, let them set before their eyes, the
example of our holy Father S. Francis; that as they have made Profession to be
his children, so they may be true heirs of his virtues: and for the commodity
of those who perhaps cannot have time to read his life, I have thought good to
set down here in a brief manner, the principal things of his life, that in
making use of this brief extraction, they may set it always before their
eics, and so regulate their actions conformably.

A brief extraction of some perfections of S. Francis, which may serve as a
pattern for all his children.
THe first Perfection of S. Francis, was that with all endeavor, and with all
his forces he did labor to deplore his sins; and did willingly confess
them, and that without delay, and afterward in as much as he could, did take
heede-not to fall again.

The 2. was that he did put all creatures above himself, and himself under
all. And this was his reason: because (as he said) he had offended that great
Lord, who had made all creatures, and who has so much honored us, that for
our love, he has taken humane flesh: which assumed did participate of all
creatures. For this he was obedient with a good heart, and good will, to all
not only to greater, or equal or lesser; but also to all creatures in as much
as was lawful for him.

The 3. Perfection was the love of God, whereby he had rooted out of his heart
all worldly and humane creatures: neither did he find any foundation, root, or
rest, but in him who made his heart. For this he was wont to cast his heart
unto Christ, who had made it, and so excercised his heart in him, that without
any labor, when he would, he could fix his mind on him, and from thence was
always attentive to God, in all places, and in all times.

The 4. Perfection was, that he was of such patience, that he did endeavor to
love him more that did do or speak evil unto him: and with all his heart,
and with a good will, would more willingly serve him without all bitterness of
mind, because as God out of his liberality did give all good things to him;
so he did believe that God did permit all evil things to happen unto him; to
manifest thereby his sins unto him; and that so he himself might acknowledge
and take notice of them: and that God did punish them in this present life: and
therefore he did much love him that did do or speak ill of him: because by,
his mediation, as by his messenger, God did give unto him so great good, to
purify him from his sins.

The 5. was that he loved all good men, and did compassionate all evil; and
did honor all, reputing himself the basest yea worst of all men. And this
because, he did not know, whether the good which he did do, did please God, or
whether he should persevere therein: neither did he know the end, whereto another
might come: and for this, he judged none. When he did hear any evil of any
one, either he did excuse him, or in hearing did show himself sad, or did
wholly turn the words of the speaker to some other matter.

The 6. was, that he did much love reprehensions, and them who reprehended him.
And if any ill thing was spoken of him; he granted it: if they did say any
good, he excused himself, and said, that he did no good: knowing in his mind,
that God did do and give all good.

The 7. was, that he did willingly serve all, and would scarce permit any one
to serve him: reputing himself unworthy of all service; for, said he, Christ
did not come to be ministered unto but to minister; If therefore any one did
serve him, in any necessity, in his heart he gave thanks to God: who gave him
that will to serve, and to be able to do it.

The 8. was, that he did endeavor to contemplate all Gods benefits in
himself, in others; yea in all creatures; and did give thanks to God for all
of them; and afterward humbling himself did say, who am I? that I should give
thanks for others, when I am not sufficient to give thanke^ for the least part
of the good, tha^ God has done unto me; especially since I am so poor a
creature*

The 9. was the guard of his tongue, with out which all good is easily lost for
he did abstain^ not only from evil hurtful or uncivil words; but also from
all superfluous and vain talk: which does expel devotion.

10. Above all things he did take care, that in every word of his, there should
be truth, goodness, and humility. Because the words of a man, ought to begin
in truth, proceed in goodness, and end in humility; and be measured in
brevity.

The 11. was his great Poverty; which he esteemed as his Lady, and Spouse,
because that it had been so dignified in our Savior, and his Blessed Mother.
And therefore he left this as an inheritance to all his children.

The 12. was, his prompt obedience, which he esteemed above all other things:
because it did so shine in our Savior, who was obedient to his Father, even to
the death of the cross, and therefore our holy Father said, he would as
willingly obey to a Novice of one days standing, as to the eldest of the
house; if he were made his Superior.

To omit many other rare Perfections, which the devout Reader may gather in his
life: the last and principal was his tender compassion, of our Saviors
Passion: whereby he did merit to receive the stigmats or marks of Christ
Jesus crucified.

After this example, devout souls in reading the lives of Saints, may gather
the principal perfections, or rarest virtues, which have been in the Saints;
that they may lay them up in store, to benefit themselves by their examples.

To conclude I will add the words of S. Hierome in the first chapter of his
Rule. Christ (says he) has instructed women placed in Monasteries; what
manner of life they should principally take; saying, Mat. 19. If thou will
enter into life keep the commandments, and what those are he has tought,
saying, thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and thy neigbour
as thy self: diligently consider; that without the fullfilling of those
commandments, no man enters to live with God: therefore the Apostle does not
glory in the tongues of Angels, and men; nor in the knowledge of the mysteries
of God; nor in the spirit of Prophecy, but in charity. This alone does make
men live to God; This makes Religious, monks and Nuns. Without charity,
Monasteries are but hell, and those who dwell in them, are but devils. But
with charity, Monasteries are Paradises, on earth: and those who abide in
them, are Angels: therefore my most beloved daughters, although long fasts do
make your bodies lean, and abject; and poor garments deforme them; and long
offices be performed, if charity be wanting within, you are not as yet come to
the lowest degree of Religion. It is a good and pleasant thing for Sisters to
dwell in one, that is in one bond of love, and affection of charity: who do
help one another in tentation, and mutually administer to each other, the
offices of charity and piety. Wherefore let there be one heart, one soul, in
you, corporally united; for certrinely there is no life worse, than to live
together in body, and not in mind and they are truly unhappy, in whom there is
not one will, but diverse: therefore let there be always in you, one affection,
one fraternity, one will, one proportion of manners, one joy, one sadness:
let not that, which in our Lord is pleasing to one, be displeasing to another;
neither that which is the joy of one, be the grief of another: and so ye may
have the proposed end, and virtue of Religion, if ye dwell unanimously in the
house of Lord.

Instructions for the conservation of mutual charity.
FIrst you ought to consider your Sister, not as flesh and blood, but as the
image of God: which he most affectionately loves, and to reform it, has
given his only Son, he has created all this world for its corporal service,
and spiritual assistance: he has also ordained those most noble creatures the
Angels, to labor for its profit: the Son of God, Christ Jesus has given his
proper life for it; for he has loved us, and washed us from our sins, by his
blood. Judge whether it be reasonable to hate those, whom he so infinitely
loves; or contemn those, whom Jesus Christ cherishes.

2. Consider your Sister, not as a stranger; but as one, who is very near unto
you, whose prosperity or adversity concerns your self; if any one loves
her carnal Sister: much more ought you to love your spiritual Sister
engendered with you by the same mother, the holy Church and Religion: and of the
same Father Christ Jesus. We come from the womb of our Mother, to miseries,
sin, and death wherein is no true fraternity; but we are engendered in the
bosom of the Church and Religion, to joy, merits, and life everlasting wherein
is perfect affinity.

3. Regard not your Sister, al though she be angry and envious toward you, as
evil or injurious to you, but as one who does cause you great good and honor;
for in speaking ill of you, or contradicting or discoursing of you, etc. she is
the occasion, that you walk more carfully, and live more religiously, and
therefore consider that, by her means you may heap up merits.

4. At all times, when you find in your mind, any ill will, or a version
against your Sister; do not suffer the cockle sowed by the crafty enemy, to
increase in you; but presently apply some remedy: which you may do, by
incessantly praying God for her: If afterward the occasion present it self, or
if you can, seek the occasion to praise that Sister; show her a good
countenance, and and talk with her of things that occur: so you shall become
a child, according to that of our Savior, Matt. 18. Unless you be converted
and become as little children; you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
You shall be a little child, not in sense, but in malice, a child, not in
imbecillitie, but in sincerity.

5. Do not contract over much familiarity, or immoderate friendship with any
one Sister; for this is not charity; but a moth of charity, the ruin of
peace, virtue, and perfection; and is obtained with offense to others: for from
this root, most commonly buddes forth these branches: 1. a continual
remembrance of those whom you love; with an oblivion of God. 2. many idle
discourses, and loss of time, ordained to contrition, prayer, and good works,
and not, to vanity and detractio^s: which ordinarily follow such familiarity.
3. scandale to the other Sisters, who detest such affections which are
contrary to a Religious life 4. a continual anguish and care, least some
corporal evil, sickness, or dishonor should come unto them, 5. a continual
care to defend them, with such like: which many times causes dissension, and
strife with others; wherefore communicate a general love to all; assist all,
speak to all, and show to all the same signs of familiarity. And if you are
bent to love one, more than another; let it be in no other, but in Jesus Christ
your Spouse, whereby you may the more increase in his love.

6. Contemn all te^porall things, and wholly banish the love of them from your
heart. For oftentimes base and abject things defited, do break peace between
Sisters; and hurt Charity. Be you ashamed, that possessing the gifts of God,
with hope to be heirs of God, you should dispute and quarrel for a little
book, for a cell, and such like; preferring those little and vain things,
before the good of charity and love.

7. Overcome your proper will, and submit it to the will of your Sisters. For
Jesus Christ did not come to do his proper will, but to be subject to all. So
you are not entered into Religion to satisfy your proper desires: but the will
of our Lord. If you will know what the proper will is, which for the good of
peace, you ought to forsake, S. Bernard will tell you. Proper will (says he)
is not commonto God and men: but is only ours: when we will any thing, not for
the honor of God, nor for the will of our Sisters; but we do and accomplish
it for our selves, without intention to please God, or profit our Sisters, but
to satisfy the proper motions of our spirit. This is directly opposite to
charity.

8. Renounce your proper judgment, not too much confiding or relying upon your
own opinion: for even as amongst carnal and imperfect persons, disordinate
love of earthly things, does ordinarily raise strifes and debates, so amongst
spiritual persons, the diversity of sense, and judgment, ordinarily
engenders discord. Now you may obtain this abnegation of your judgment, by
true humility of heart, if you esteem others more wise, and stayed; and your
selves more foolish, and less experienced. Hearken to S. Paul praying each
one Phil. 2. If therefore, there be any consolation, in Jesus Christ, if any
solace of charity, if any society of spirit, if any bowels of commiseration:
fulfill my joy, that you be of one meaning, having the same charity, of one
mind, agreeing in one. Nothing by contention, neither by vain glory, but in
humility, each counting other better than themselves.

9. Think seriously, that there is nothing so great, profitable, or precious:
which may be preferred before the good of charity, and union: wherefore order
all your exterior things, all your affairs, in such sort, that the fraternall
charity may not be prejudiced; but co^served; with the loss and interest of
all other things.

10. Be never angry against your Sister, how just an occasion soever you have,
according to your seeming: for anger does blind the understanding, and loses
the good of peace and charity; you may well be angry against your sins, but
bear always a peaceable and quiet heart toward your Sisters; or at the least
strive to appear so exteriourly. Endeavor to suppress anger, not only in
your own heart; but also in the hearts of your Sisters: which you may do by
cutting of the occasions, by humble satisfaction, and by sweet and courteous
words.

11. Do not promise to your self long life, but think that you may presently
die; and accustom your self with tranquillity of spirit, to suffer injuries
and wrongs; from your Sisters; as you would do, if you were at point of death:
when you would not esteem of such things, but rather apply your mind to God.
wherefore even now consider all things which are done and said, as if they did
no way touch you; and so you shall not be any ways troubled; and shall offer
all to God as voluntary Sacrifices.

12. Consider and reverence Jesus Christ in every one; for you ought not so
much to consider the person, as God, who by his essence, presence, and power is
in all things; and principally in rational creatures: and therefore for his
sake you ought to interpret all their words, and works in good part: or if you
cannot, return to your own self, and consider whether there be nothing in
you, that may displease God, who is present: where perhaps you may find greater
faults, and therefore you may the better support the imperfections of others.
Besides such is Gods goodness that oftentimes he covers great and heroical
virtues, under day ly and light imperfections.

ORDO AD VNGENDAM INFIRMAM.
IN primis pulsetur campana Capituli; and Sorores, quae possunt, in Ecclesiam
conveniant, quibus congregatis, and Sacerdote cum Ministris praeparatis:
Sacerdos accipiat olcum sanctum. Deinde ordinate procedant cum psalmo Miserere
mei Deus. Cum autem peruentum fuerit ad locum vbi iacet infirma, Sacerdos
dicat. Pax huic domui.. Et omnibus habitantibus in ea. Stans ante agrotam
dicat.. Adiutorium nostrum etc.. Qui fecit caelum etc.. Dominus vobiscum etc.

Oremus.

INtroeat Domine Jesus Christ domum hanc, sub nostrae humilitatis ingressu,
aeterna foelicitas, diuina prosperitas, serena laetitia, charitas fructuosa,
sanitas sempiterna. Effugiat ex hoc loco accessus daemonum, adsint Angeli
pacis: domumque hanc deserate effugata discordia. Magnifica Domine super nos
nomen sanctum tuum, and benedic nostrae conuersationi, sanctifica nostrae
humilitatis ingressum, qui sanctus and pius es: and permanes cum Patre and
spiritu sancto in saecula saeculorum. Amen.

ORemus and deprecemur Dominum nostiu^ Iesum Christum, vt benedicendo benedicat
hoc tabernaculum, and omnes habitantes in eo: and det eis Angelum bonum
custodem: faciat eas sibi seruire ad considerandum mirabilia de lege sua,
auertat ab eis omnes contrarias potestates: eripiat eas ab omni formidine, and
ab omni perturbatione, ac sanas in hoc tabernaculo custodire dignetur. Qui cum
Patre.

EXaudi nos Domine sancte Pater omnipote^s aeterne Deus and mittere digneris
sanctum Angelum tunm de coelis: qui custodiat, foueat, protegat, visitet atque
defendat omnes habitantes in hoc tabernaculo. Per Dominum nostrum Iesum
Christum filium tuu^. Qui tecu^ viuit and regnat. etc.

Deinde in modum crucis aspergat agrotam aqua benedicta: postea domum dicendo.

Asperges me Domine hyssopo etc. cum versu more solito deinde agrota dicat
Confiteor. Quo dicto omnes Sacerdotes astantes insimul eam absolvant. Postea
Sorores legant 7. psalmos cum Litanijs. Interim Sacerdos, intincto police in
oleo sancto dicat absolute.

IN nomine Patris, and Filij, and Spiritus sancti extinguatur, in te omnis
virtus diaboli per impositionem manuum nostrarum, immo per inuocationem omnium
sanctorum, Angelorum, and Archangelorum, Patriarcharu^, Prophetarum,
Apostolorum, Martyrum, Confessorum, Virginum, atque omnium simul sanctorum.
Amen.

Quo dicto faciat signum crucis de oleo sancto in corpore aegrae in sex locis
infra scriptis, ad vnamquamque crucem, propriam orationem dicendo.

Ad oculos.

PEristam sanctam vnctionem and suam pijssimam misericordiam parcat tibi
Dominus quicquid oculorum vitio deliquisti.. Amen.

Minister vero tergat locum intinctum and inunctum, cum stupa, reponens eam in
vase mundo: and sic faciat post quamlibet vnctionem.

Ad aures.

Per istam sanctam vnctionem and suam pijssimam misericordiam parcat tibi
Dominus quicquid auriu^ vitio deliquisti.. Ame^.

Ad Nares. Peristam sancta^ vnctionem and suam pijssimam misericordiam parcat
tibi Dominus quicquid narium vitio deliquisti.. Amen.

Ad Os. Per istam sanctam vnctionem and suam pijssimam misericordiam parcat
tibi Dominus quicquid linguae vel oris vitio deliquisti.. Amen.

Ad Manus. Per istam sanctam vnctionem and suam pijssimam misericordiam parcat
tibi Dominus quicquid tactus vitio deliquisti.. Amen.

Ad Pedes. Per istam sanctam vnctionem and suam pijssimam misericordiam parcat
tibi Dominus quicquid incessus vitio deliquisti.. Amen.

Psalm. and Lit anijs lectis, Sacerd. dicat.

Kyrie eleyson. Christ eleyson. Kyrie eleyson. Pater noster. etc.. Et ne nos
etc.. sed libera etc.. Saluam fac ancillam tuam.. Deus meus sperantem in te.
Mitte ei Domine aux liu^ de sancto.. Et de Sion tuere eam.. Esto ei Domine
turris fortitudinis.. A facie iuimici.. Nihil proficiat in^micus in ea.. Et
filius iniquitatis non apponat nocere ei.. Domine exaudi. etc. Dominus
vobiscum. etc.

Oremus.

DOmine Deus, quiper Apostolum tuum locutus es, dum infirmatur quis in vobis,
inducat Presbyteros Ecclesiae, and orent super eum, vngentes eum oleo sancto in
nomine Domini: and oration Fidei saluabit infirmum, and alleuiabit eum Dominus,
and si in peccatis sit, dimittentur ei: cura quaesumus domine redempt or noster
gratia Spiritus sancti languores istius infirmae, and sua sana vulnera, eiusque
dimitte peccata, atque dolores cunctos cordis and corporis ab ea expelle,
plenam que ei interius exteriusque sanitatem misericorditer read: vt open
misericordiae tuae restituta ad pristina reparetur officia. Qui cum patre and
eodem Spiritu sancto viuis and regnas.

REspice quaesumus domine famulam tuam N. in infirmitate sui corporis
fatiscentem, and animam refoue, quam creast^: vt pijs castigationibus emendata,
sentiat se tua medicina saluatam. Per Christum Dominum nostrum.. Amen.

DOmine sancte pater omnipotens aeterne Deus, qui benedictionis tuae gratiam
aegris infundendo corporibus facturam tuam multiplici pietate custodis, ad
inuocationem nominis tui benignus assiste vt famulam tuam N. ab aegritudine
liberatam, and sanitati donatam: dextera erigas, and virtute confirms,
potestate tuearis, atque Ecclesiae tuae, sanctisque altaribus tuis cum omni
desiderata prosperitate restituas. Per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

DOminus Jesus Christus, apud te sit, vt te reficiat, circa te sit, vt te
conseruet, ante te sit, vt te deducat, post te sit, vt te custodiat, super te
sit, vt te benedicat. Qui in Trinitate perfecta viuit and regnat in saecula
saeculorum.. Amen.

Post haec stupam proijciet in ignem. His peractis, eo ordine quo venerunt
simulin Ecclesiam reuertantur, excepto quod crux remaneat coram infirma.

FINIS.

