The English and Scottish Protestants happy Triumph over the Rebels in JRELAND.

Declaring the prosperity of the Protestant Party, and the disastrous
Proceedings of the adverse Irish Rebellion.

Jn the besiege of Wicklow. The Earl of Kildare Thomond. Sergeant Major
^romlus. Captain Thosby. Captain Lothon.
The Lord Plunket wounded in the left Leg.

Jn the Siege of Colerane. The Earl of Baremore The Lord Brabeston, And E. of
Eastmeath.
Slew The Lord Freeman Scane being taken prisoner

In the besiege of Kingsaile, The Earl of Fingale The Lord Donbengen. The Lord
Astry.
were overthrown, By the Earl of Ormond. The Lord Pore Earl of Valentia.
Earl of Kildare.


Being sent in a Letter from Robert Mason in Wicklow, to William Francis in
London, and brought over by the last Post on Wednesday last, being the 1. of
June, 1642.

Together with an Order from both Houses of Parliament concerning my Lord
Howard, and Ordered to be Printed.

John Brown, Cler. Parl.



London, Printed for J. Horton, 1642. June 4.

The English and Scottish Triumph over the Rebels in Ireland, being sent in a
Letter from Rob. Mason of Wicklow, to William Francis in London.
Sir,
I confess I have been silent these many Weeks, in not writing unto you the
conditional estate of this Kingdom, but the reason of my silence was this,
that J was once intended to have seen you rather in presence there in England
then to write to you in absence, for the Rebels had besieged us ten days,
which might beget in us a sufficient suspicion of danger, but we defended our
selves very strongly all that time, there being a continual vigiliae
appointed, And we sent in the mean time private intelligence to the Earl of
Kildare, who had pitched his Te^ts near Archloo, and to the Lord o^ Thomond,
near Garm^^ton who immediately prepared their Forces and assisted us; there
was at the first skirmish some efusion of blood on both sides, and the Lord
Pluneket on the Rebels side had his left Leg beaten off, and Captain Thosby,
Captain Lothon and Sergeant Major Bromlus were all slain on their part,
whereupon the Soldiers began to recant but being closely followed they fled,
and being pursued by the Earl of Kildare and the Lord Thomond, there were at
least seven hundred slain, the other escaped by slight.

Thus we were delivered from the ravenous intents of those bloody Cannibals the
next day, there was a public thanksgiving to Almighty God for our deliverance.

There were many other terrible Combats between the English and the Irish, but
of late the Protestants have been very Victorious. J will describe the relation
of two famous Battails between them, that are most memmorable.

Colerane was taken by the Rebels, five Weeks since, and they held it in
possession three Weeks and upwards, most inhumanly killing the Protestants,
striping many naked both men and women, and turned them into the fields,
whipping them cruelly, but the Earl of Barramore and Lord Brab^ston, Earl of
Est-meath. united their Forces and came with Fifteen hundred men against the
Rebels in Colerane, but the first day there was slain above a thousand Rebels,
and the Lord Brabeston perceiving them almost tired, followed them very close,
and at the first meeting slew the Lord Freeman and took the Lord Scane
prisner, then the other fled and left the town, which is now in the possession
of the Protestants.

The last Fight between the Protestants and Rebels was at Kingsaile, the Earl
Fingale. the Lord Dunbowin, and the Lord Astry, came with four thousand
against it and had almost (as I might say) taken Kingsaile, but they did not
possess it long for the Earl of Ormond, the Lord Poor Earl of Valentia, and
the Earl of Kildare, came with three thousand five hundred men, and regained
what the other had taken beating them with great violence from the Town and
slew the Lord Dunbowin, Captain Humphry, and Sir Patricke Cocksquire, besides
eighteen hundred more, that were slain by the Protestant party.

Sr. you see how God fights for his children, and I hope by his divine
providence and all conquering power, we shall overcome them all suddenly, but
they have done, unknown mischief to our Country, and men that formerly lived
in famous reputation, and of great abillity are extremely impoverished by them
the have taken maney Towns, and the Protestants also have taken many towns
from them, but the City of Galway is besieged with nigh 1700. men, and in
danger to be taken, but withal we hear that the Earl of Ormond, and the
Earl of Barramore, are in preparation to come against them.

We have these strong Pillars of the Protestant Army.

The Lord Ormond Earl of East-meath, The Lord Poor, Earl of Barramore, Earl
of Valentia, Earl of Kildare, The Lord Brabeston, The Lord Thomond,

these are those that have strongly and courageously resisted the Rebels,
otherwise Jreland had been subdued long ago, but these have magnanimously
opposed them, the Lord Antrim is slain by the Rebels, who was a Nevvtrall. the
Lord Macqueere is taken prisner, and the lord Scane also by the Protestants,
many other remarkable passages I could relate unto you, but partly time and
convenience do not give me leave, and partly I believe you have heard of them
already, but I hope J shall have greater opportunity to send you shortly very
joyful and delectable News for I see that God does greatly prosper the
proceedings of the Protestants, and confounds the strength of his and our
Enemies, for which we praise and Magnify his holy and omnipotent Name, and
do heartely beseech him in our supplications, that he would grant us Peace in
this World, and eternal happiness in the World to come.

Your Friend in all things to his power, Robert Mason.
From Wicklow, May, 26. 1642.
IT is Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in this present Parliament,
that the Lord Howard of Carr shall attend his Majesty and present some reasons
to him.

John Brown Cler. Parl.

FINIS.

