To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT: The
humble Petition of Francis Newton, Gent. Captain James Wadsworth, Thomas Mayo,
and Robert Delu^ Messengers allowed by these honorable Houses; and Richard
Rawlyns, Henry Newton, Thomas Roult, a^ Richard Pain, Assistants to the said
Messengers.
SHOWS,

THat ever since the beginning of this Parliament, the Petitioners have been
actually employed by Authority thereof, for disc^very and apprehension of
Seminary Priests, Jesuits, and other Malignants, dangerous and destructive to
the State, which p^sons being seditious Incendiaries, and Instigators of the
various distractions of this Kingdom, and the sad casualties and ca^mities of
War.

That the Petitioners in their unmoved zeal and affection to the Cause and
Commonwealth, through their incessant ca^ industry, and vigilant
circumspection (not without the often hazard of their lives, and to their
positive charge and expence^ above 500 l. for intelligence, and otherwise for
accommodating of the Service;) they have discovered and apprehended ^ number of
31 Priests and Jesuits, and imprisoned and brought them to condign legal
Trial, conviction, and condemnation; all which ha^ been since Executed, except
such as were reprieved by the Kings Majesty and others.

That the verity of the Premises appears by Test or Certificates hereunto
affixed, and also by matter of Record upon the proceedings; wh^ persons are
more in number then have been pursued to effect in this kind, since the happy
reformation of Religion here.

That the Petitioners have also discovered and impeached diverse dangerous
malevolent persons now remaining in the said Prison, as well Prie^ who pleaded
themselves to be Ante-nati, as lay persons, besides those executed and
reprieved, legally convicted upon the Statute of Praemunire.

That Queen Eliz. and King James of pious memory, as also his now Majesty, have
usually in like cases allowed and paid according to estab^shed Laws out of the
Exchequer, the sum of 50 l. for every Priest or Jesuit convicted legally,
which by that rate or estimate does amount ^ 1550 l. due to the Petitioners in
Arrear; and justly computed and added to the sum of 500 l. by them really
disbursed and expended as afo^said, amounts in toto to the sum of 2050 l.

That the Petitioners have not hitherto received any satisfaction or
re-imbursment for their said faithful service and expenses, neither for the
great pains and charge in attending the trial of the late Archbishop of
Canterbury from time to time, until the proceedings became final.

The premises considered, the Petitioners humbly beseech this honorable
Assembly to receive them and their said several Expenses a^ services of so
great concernment to Religion and the State into your honorable considerations;
and thereupon to give such speedy ord^ for their present payment, satisfaction,
and recompense of their faithful, respective, several and distinct services
abovementioned, and hereunto annexed; as to the wisdom, honor, and bounty of
this honorable House shall seem meet. And likewise to prescribe and est^blish
an express certain course and order herein for the future, whereby the
Petitioners, their Agents and Intelligence may in some mod^rate convenient
degree be ascertained, enabled and encouraged to proceed and persevere
according to their unfeigned desires in perfo^ming such further service herein,
as shall redound to the safety and utility of the State and Kingdom, according
to the trust in them ^posed in this behalf.

And your Petitioners shall daily pray, etc.
Die Lunoe 15o. Novembris, 1641.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That Father Jones and
Father Andrews, and all other Romish Priests and Jesuits shall forthwith
taken and apprehended by His Majesty's Justices of Peace, and other His
Majesty's Officers, and put into safe Custody, until the pleas^ of this House
be further known: And then their names shall be returned unto the Lords in
Parliament. And that any man that shall discover a Popish Priests or Jesuits,
and procure them to be apprehended, shall be rewarded by the Parliament.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Jovis 17o. Augusti, 1643.
Upon reading of the humble Petition of Francis Newton, Thomas Mayo, and James
Wadsworth Messengers, and a particular thereunto a^nexed; It is Ordered by the
Lords in Parliament, That the said Petition and particular are hereby referred
to Mr. Recorder of London, wh^ hereby desired to certify their Lordships
whether these Services pretended to be done by the said particular, have been
really performed by the ^ Petitioners; That thereby their Lordships may take
such further Resolution touching the Petition as shall be meet.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

To the Right honorable the LORDS in Parliament assembled:
ACcording to your Lordships Order hereunto annexed; These are to certify your
Lordships, That I have examined the particular Services of ^ persons upon whose
Petition the said Order was made; and find that they have faithfully performed
the particulars formerly by them present to and before your Lordships, as
appears to me by several Certificates under the hands of the Clerk of the
Peace for and of the County of Middles^ and the Clerk of Newgate, together with
a Letter from the Committee of the House of Commons for Examinations, directed
to the Right ho^rable the Lord Major of the City of London, as thereby
appears; Which service I conceive merits a due and considerable reward, not
only (...) their past labors, but for the encouragement of them and others
(employed in that service) for the future; All which I humbly certify and re^
to your Lordships.

J. GLYNN Recorder of London.
Dated the 21. of September. 1643. Ioh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

The Names of the Priests that were taken by the said Messengers and
Assistants: As follows, WIlliam Waller, alias Slaughter, alias Walker
Cuthbert Clapton Bartholomew Row Thomas Reignolds Edward Morgan Thomas
Saunderson, alias Holland Henry Heath, alias Paul Magdalen Francis Quasset
Arthur Bell Ralph Corby John Ducket John Hammond, alias Jackson Walter Coleman,
Edmund Cannon John Wyndmore, alias Turnon Augustine Abbot, alias Rivers, alias
Savile Andrew Friar, alias Herne, alias Richmond Peter Wilford Thomas Bullaker
Robert Robinson James Brown Henry Morse Thomas Worsley Charles Cheney Andrew
White Richard Copley Richard Worthington Edmund Cole John Wright Philip Morgan
Thomas Budds, alias Peto


LONDON, Printed by Richard Cot, 1648.


