SIR THOMAS FAIRFAXES TAKING OF Dennis Castle, AND Felford Haven; And twenty
six pieces of Ordnance taken in a Dunkerke ship that came to relieve Pendennis,
all the men taken prisoners, and all their Ammunition and provisions in the
ship, and fifty men put in her for the service of the PARLIAMENT.

With the Generals summons sent into Pendennis Castle, and the Governors
Answer. And the proceedings in blocking up of Michaalls Mount, where Marquis
Hamilton is prisoner. Eighty come in to the Parliament from thence; With the
last passages of Sir Thomas Fairfaxes victorious proceedings in CORNEWELL.

This being a true Copy and examined, is Printed and published according to
Order of PARLIAMENT.

Printed for Matthew Walbanke at Grays-Inne Gate. March. 26. 1646.

SIR Thomas Fairfaxes taking of Dennis Castle and Felford Haven, etc.
Most Honored Sir,
THE French and Walloons who disbanded on the Lords day last were to stay at
the next port Town until Ships might be procured for their transportation,
all the rest of the English, both Commanders and Soldiers had Passes, either
to go out of the Land, or repair unto their own Countries, and places of
dwelling: the rest disbanded day by day, and marched out of this country
Eastward, and the Gentlemen of the Country unto their own houses; This day
the two last Brigades did lay down their arms and march away. There were nine
Brigades of them, and it is verily believed that they were about five thousand
horse and foot. The Fort on the East side of the Harbor of Faymouth, and
right over against Pendennis Castle is yielded up by Bowthan (that was the
Lieutenant thereof) unto the General five days since, who has placed a very
strong Garrison in it, it lies near the mouth of the Harbor, and much lower
then Pendennis Castle, and is more fit seated for the commanding of that
Harbor. Yesterday last being the 18th of this month, Dennis Castle, being a
Fort made by Sir Richard Vivian at the charge of the Country, at the mouth of
Felford Haven, being situated on a Pena Insula, much after the manner of
Pendennis Castle, was yielded up into the hands of the General by those that
had the command thereof. This Castle and Harbor lies a league to the West of
Pendennis, full in sight of the Castle. The Harbor is a very safe and deep
Harbor, the greatest ship in the Kingdom may ride a floate in it at low
water, it will prove to be of very great use to us, for the taking in of
Pendennis, by means that our ships lying there, may prevent (by the help of
St. Mawes) the conjunction of any ships for the relief thereof: I went with
the General and the Committee to receive the possession of this Fort, and in
the way the General went unto Arwinkle, Sir Peter Killegrew's house, where and
in the Village of Pennicomquicke we had quarted two Regiments for the blocking
up of Pendennis Castle on the land side. The day before the General sent
thither those two Regiments, the enemy in the Castle set on fire Sir Peter's
house, and burned a great part there of down to the ground, and would have
done the like with Pennicomequicke, had not our men's unexpected coming
prevented them in the Castle, and the man of War that has 40. pieces of
Ordnance in him, which lies a ground on the North side of the Fort let us
pass very quietly through Pennicomquicke, and to Arwinkle, which lies within
half musket shot of the enemies Out-workes, but is blinded by the houses and
trees, so that they cannot see those that are on the other fide of the house:
but when we came off, and were past Pennicomequicke, and advanced into an open
field in our way back to Perin, the ship that lay on the North side of the
Castle let fly at us, but their shot (by Gods mercy) did us no harm, though
the bullets flew very near us, and one grazed not far from me, which we
found, and was a bullet of some 12 l. weight. As soon as the General came to
Perin he caused a summons to be drawn up, and sent it by his Drum-Major unto
the Governor of the Castle, requiring him to yield it unto him for the use of
the Parliament, using diverse reasons to persuade him thereunto; But Arundell of
Treverse who is the Governor thereof, gave him a peremptory denial, saying,
that he was 70. years old, and could not have many days to live, and
therefore would not in his old years blemish his honor in surrendering thereof,
and would be rather found buried in the ruins thereof, then commit so vilde a
Treason, (or words to that effect.) Questionless the place is very strong, as
well by its natural situation, (it being almost an Island, and seated on a
rising hill) as by Art and great industry; and it is victualled (as they say)
for nine or ten months, and they have in it about one thousand, or twelve
hundred men, all desperate persons, and good soldiers; and they have powder
and shot great store, and at least eighty great Guns mounted, besides forty in
the ship which lies on the North side of the Castle. Therefore the General
resolves to block it up very close both by Land and Sea: which he may the
better do, in regard that we have Denis Castle, and the Haven of Helford on
the west, and St. Maws on the east; and for that, if we draw a Line thwart the
narrow neck of Land, a little on this fide Arwinkle house, which is not above
Musket shot over: Pendenis Castle will remain unto them but as a close and
sure prison, and so in the end the belly will conquer them, without striking of
a stroke. Here are in this Fort many very considerable men, and the most
desparate Persons and the violentest enemies that the Parliament has in this
kingdom; and the Country reports, they have a very great mass of wealth in
this Castle, for this was ever a place the enemy did much confide in; and
therefore without question it cannot choose but be very rich: I verily believe
that if the Works were once perfected for blocking of them up, two thousand
good foot would keep them in, that they should not be able to break forth to
annoy the Country. Penicomquicke, and Peryne will be able to entertain that
number very well, so that the Soldiers be well paid, that so they may be able
to pay for their Billets, The country is extremely impoverished, and I fear
that Bread and all other provisions will grow very scarce, and so consequently
very dear; for there is already no Hay or Oats to be gotten here, and flesh
grows very dear. The enemy has fortified the Mount where the Marquess of
Hamilton is kept. Eighty Soldiers that should have gone into the Mount, came
this day with their Arms, and tendered their service to the General at Truro.
The General intends to send a Regiment to Marketsene to block up the Mount,
and to keep them from Ranging abroad; They say the Mount is a place neither
strong, nor well victualled, and therefore cannot hold out long. This last night
one of the ships which came down with Sir George Askew, fell into the Harbor
of Falmouth, on St. Mawes fide, and notwithstanding both the Block-house, and
the Bulwark at the point of Pendenis shot very furiously at her, yet she came
very safely into the Harbor, and so passed upon the Tide, to a place in the
Harbor called Mawpasse passage, where a Frigot of Dunkerks had run her self
a ground and came in on purpose to assist Pendennis Castle, she had in her 26.
pieces of Ordnance, and though our men entered her, yet she stood very stoutly
to her defense, yet at last we masterd her, and took all the men out of her,
and put in her about fifty men of our own, and so intend to make her a Man of
War to serve the State, and she may prove very useful, for she is an
exceeding good sailer, and will be good against our enemies Navigable ships,
that so we may take them.

Sir, most of the great Malignants of the Country (unless those that are in
Pendennis and the Mount) are come in; If you alone do not take some speedy
course to remove them out of the County, until the County be fully settled, I
fear it will not be long before we shall have new troubles here. Thus with
the tenderness of my best love and service I rest,

Yours in what ever I may serve you T. M.
From Truro the 19th. of March, 1645.
FINIS.

