BELLUM TARTARICUM, OR THE CONQUEST OF The Great and most renowned Empire of
CHINA, By the Invasion of the TARTARS, who in these last seven years, have
wholly subdued that vast Empire.

Together with a Map of the Provinces, and chief Cities of the Countries, for
the better understanding of the Story.

Written Originally in LATIN by Martin Martinius, present in the Country at
most of the passages herein related, and now faithfully Translated into English.

LONDON, Printed for John Crook, and are to be Sold at his Shop at the Sign of
the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1654.

portrait of the Tartar emperor Thienmingus (Tianming) The Lively Effigies of
Theinmingus ye present Emperor of the Western Tartars, who has Lately ouerrun
and Possessed himself almost of the whole Empire of China.


TO THE READER.
WWhereas in the course of this ensuing History there occurs frequent mention
of the chief Provinces and Cities in China; which have either been assaulted
and defended, subdued or destroyed, by the several Armies, as well from North
to South, as from East to West; least the pleasure and delight of this History,
should be any way diminished by the frequent re-encounter of harsh and
barbarous names of Countries, and Towns unknown to the European Reader, whilst
his attention follows the victorious Army. I thought it good to prefix a little
Geographical table of the Countries, and chief Cities, which might serve as a
guide to conduct the eye of the understanding, in the pursuit of the mentioned
victories. I confess it is not so exact as the rigor of Geography exacts, but
yet it is such an one, as was drawn by the hands of their learned Philosophers,
and may well give us a sufficient notion of all the places mentioned.

As for more exquisit, and rare Maps both universal and particular, as well of
the Countries, as of the Cities, and of all the rarities they contain, together
with the exact knowledge of their Longitudes and Latitudes, and of all that
does belong either to Astronomy or Geography relation to them; with what may be
expected from Natural or Humane History, I reserve all these rarities and
curiosities to my Atlas of China which I am composing; taken from their own
ancient records ever since the time of Noah; all which I have with incredible
pains, and industry both gathered up together, and transported with me to
Europe. I will not therefore for the present deflower that worth of its
greatest beauty, by an unseasonable exposition of it to the Readers view; but
expect till it grow to that perfection, as I hope will ravish the unsatiable
appetits of this our curious Age.

map of the Chinese empire SITVS PROVINCIARVM IMPERII SINICI M.DC.LIVE.
Occidens

Septentrio

Oriens

Auster

TANYV TARTARORVM REGNVM NIVLHAN Yupi NIVCHE TARTARIA ORIENTALIS Crocous fluv.
XENSI Sigan Hanchung XANSI Taitung Taiyuen Pucheu Kiangcheu PEKING Peking
XANTVNG T^ncu Cinan LEAOTVNG Xu^^ing Quang^ing Tuocun Legoyang Caiyuen Xanghai
Taoyuan COREA Kingki GIAPON HONAN Caifung SVCHVEN Chingtu Mahu lacus HVQVANG
Kiang fluv Filius Mar Tungting lacus Vnchang NANKING Yangchai Hoigan Nanking
Poyang lacus CHEKIANG Ta^ lacus Sungtiang Hangche^ Cientang flu. KIANGSI
Nanchang Kiucheu Canchou FOKIEN Kin^oa Ve^cheu Kienning Fochen Cheuxan IVNNAN
Iunnan QVEICHEV Queicheu QVANGSI Queilin QVANGTVNG Nankiung Chaoking Quangcheu
Hainun Macao




BELLUM TARTARICUM, OR The History of the Wars of the Tartars in China etc.
THE most ancient Nation of Tartars in Asia, which was the Parent of many
Nations, had been an Enemy of the Empire of China The Tartars were ancient
Enemies to China.
above Four Thousand years: during which time, as they had many sharp Wars
with those of China, in which they were sometimes conquered, so also more often
they remained Conquerers of the Provinces of that Nation.

I call that Nation Tartars, Who are the Tart^^s.
which inhabiting the Northern parts, behind that famous Wall which stretching
out above 300. German Leagues from East to West, has ever served for a Rampart
to hinder their irruptions into the said Empire.

This Country the Chinese having a defect of the letter R. anciently called
Tata: comprehending under this name as well the Oriental Tartars, hitherto
unknown to us in Europe, as the Occidental, containing the Provinces,
Sumahania, Tanyu, Niuche, Niulhan, and the like, from the lesser Tartary, and
Kingdom of Cascor, to the Oriental Sea above Japony, where they are separated
by the Straight of Anian, from Oviora in America; if yet it be a Straight and
not a Continent.

But it is not my intention to write all the Wars which have passed betwixt
them; but only of such as have happned in our memory, and in my presence; All
the rest shall appear at large in my Abridgement of the History of China. And
that we may proceed with more Order, it will be necessary to reflect, how and
from whence those Troubles had their beginning.

It is therefore first to be known, The Tartars conquered China heretofore.
that the ancient Western Tartars (of whom Paulus Venetus, and Ayton make
mention under the names of Cataye and Maningin) waged war against China after
they had subdued almost all Asia to their Power; and this before the times of
great Tamberlain, Tamberlain never took China.
who never reigned in China as some have falsely writ; for he flourished about
the year MCCCCVI; in which time Taichangus, Emperor of China, and the second
of the Taimingian Family (the Tartars being before beaten out of his Kingdom)
governed peaceably all the Provinces included within the compass of that Vaste
Wall which before I mentioned.

But the War which Paulus Venetus touches, betwixt the Chinese and Tartars
began in the year MCCVI. as their History and Chronology testify, which lasting
77. years, at last in the year MCCLXXVIII. having totally conquered all that
potent Empire, they extinguished the Imperial Family of the Sungas, and erected
a new Regal Family, which they called Juena; of which Tartarian Race nine
Emperors by descent, The Tartars Empe^ours of China.
governed in the Kingdom of China for the space of LXX^ years in Peace and
Quietness; and about the end of that War, came Paulus Venetus into China with
the Tartars, as appears by his Writings.

In this tract of time, the Tartars forgetting their ancient Vigor of Mind and
warlike Spirits, which the pleasures and delices of that Country had quailed
and tamed, being also weakened by so long a Peace, became of a sweeter temper,
and received a deep Tincture of the Nature and Disposition of the Natives of
China.

Whereupon a contemptible person (who was servant to one of those deputed to
offer Sacrifice to their Idols) called Hugh, presumed to rebel against them.

This man commiserating the condition of his enslaved Country, and also touched
with the ambition of Reigning, first acted the part of a Thief, or Highway
man; and being of a Generous Nature, bold, and as quick at hand as in wit;
wanted neither Courage, nor Art, nor Companions, nor Fortune, to gather such a
multitude as in short time made up the vast body of an Army; whereupon deposing
the person of a Thief, he became a General, and with a bold attempt presumed to
set upon the Tartars, and having waged many Wars against them, obtained many
singular Victories; so as in the year 1368. he finally drove them out of the
Kingdom of China, receiving for so memorable an action, the whole Empire of
China as a worthy reward of his Heroical Actions.

It was he first erected the Imperial Family of the Taiminges, and being he was
the first Emperor of that Race, styled himself by the name of Hunguus; which
signifies as much as, The famous Warrior.

After such an illustrious Action, it was no wonder if all the Provinces
submitted to him, both as to one that was a Native of their Country, and also
because they looked on him as a man who had redeemed them from Thraldom: for
it is the Nature of the people of China to love and esteem their own, as much
as they hate and vilify Strangers.

Wherefore he first placed his Court at Nanking near to the bank of that great
River of Kiang, which the Chinese, in respect of the huge Mountains of water
which it discharges into the Ocean, call the Son of the Sea: And having
speedily ordered; and established that Empire, fearing no Insurrections from
these new redeemed Creatures, he was not contented to have chased the Tartars
out of China, but he made an irruption into Tartary it self, and so followed
the point of his Victory, as that he routed them several times, wasted all
their Territories, and finally brought the Oriental Tartars to such streights,
as he forced them to lay down their Arms, to pay Tribute, and even beg an
Ignominious Peace. This Storm of War fell chiefly on the Tartars of the
Province of Niuche, whither the Tartars of China being expelled were retired.

And those Tartars every year, either as Subjects or Friends, came into China
by the Province of Leaotung to traffic with the Inhabitants; For, being
brought to poverty and misery, they thought no more of making war against
China. The Merchandise they brought were several, as the root called Ginsem, so
much esteemed amongst the Chinese, and all sorts of precious skins, as those
of Castor, Martais and Zibellens; and also Horse-hair, of which the Chinese
make their Nets, and the men, though madly, use it in tying up their hair, as
the handsomest dress they can appear in. But those Tartars multiplied so fast,
as they grew quickly into seven Governments which they called Hordes, as much
as to say into seven Lordships, and these fighting one against another, at
length about the year of Christ MDL. came to erect a Kingdom, which they called
the Kingdom of Niuche.

Thus stood China in relation to the Eastern Tartars; but to the Western
Tartars they paid Tribute masked under the Title of Presents, that they might
desist from War;

For the Chinese esteem it very unhansom to make war against any, if by any
other means their Country can be conserved in Peace and quietness, being taught
this by their Philosophers.

But in the mean time, being over jealous of the Enemies to their ancient
riches, A great Garrison upon the Wall against the Tartars.
they never left that great Wall, which extends from East to West, without a
Million of Sorelgers to guard it.

Therefore this Kingdom of China being thus established in the Taimingian
Family, A long Peace in China.
enjoyed a constant Peace and quietness for CCL. years, and whilst the seven
Lords or Governors made Civil wars, that renowned Emperor of China, known by
the name of Vanley being the thirteenth Emperor of Taiminges Family, governed
happily the Kingdom of China from the year 1573. to the year 1620. with as much
Prudence as Justice and Equity.

But in this time the Tartars of Niuche had so multiplied and spread themselves,
The Tartars think of invading China.
as that being incorporated into a Kingdom, they became daily more formidable
to China: And therefore the Governors of the bordering Countries, consulted
privately amongst themselves how they might curb and restrain these people
within their limits: For their Governors have so much Power and Authority, that
although they live as Slaves to their Prince, yet when there is question of a
Common and public good, they govern absolutely and uncontroulably; unless by
some higher Powers their Orders be restrained.

First therefore the Prefects or Governors, The first cause of the Tartarian
war.
did abuse the Merchant's Tartars of Niuche when they came into Leaotung, which
is a Province confines next to them.

The second cause.
Then again when the King of Niuche would have married his Daughter to another
King of the Tartars, they hindered this marriage by representing some pretended
reasons of State.

The third cause.
And finally when the King of Niuche suspected nothing from them he conceived
his friends, they took him by deceit, and killed him perfidiously.

Wherefore to revenge these injuries, The first irruption of the Tartars into
China.
the Kings Son gathered a strong Army, and taking his time, found means to get
over the great Wall I mentioned; and the great River being frozen, he presently
set upon the great City Kaiyven, (or as others call it Taxun) which lies upon
the Confines of Tartary, which he took in the year MDCXVI.

From this City he writ a Letter in Tartarian Characters to the Emperor of
China, which though writ in Barbarian Characters, The Tartars Protestation
against China.
yet contained nothing barbarous. By this Letter which he sent by one of their
Indian Priests (whom they call Lama) in a very humble and submissive manner he
declared to him, that he had invaded his Country to revenge the injuries he had
received from the Governors of the neighboring Provinces. But yet that he was
ready to restore the City he had taken, and depose his Arms, if his Complaints
might be heard, and satisfaction given him. The Emperor of China, called
Vanley, having received this Letter, though otherways of an eminent wisdom,
and of as great experience, yet being now broken with Age, in this business
seems to have proceeded with less Prudence than that which accompanied the
former Actions of his life; For, thinking it not to be a business of that
moment as it deserved to be treated before him in his own Court, he remitted
the business to the chief Governors and Commanders. And these men puffed up
with their usual pride, thought it not sit so much as to give an answer to the
Barbarian King, but resented it very highly that any durst be so bold as to
complain to the Emperor of any injury received.

The Tartarian King, seeing they vouchsafed no answer to his just Demands, The
barbarous and superstitious Vow of the Tartarian King
turning his anger into rage, vowed to celebrate his Fathers Funerals with the
lives of two hundred Thousand of the Inhabitants of China. For it is the custom
of the Tartars when any man of quality dies, to cast into that fire which
consumes the dead Corpse, as many Servants, Women, and Horses with Bows and
Arrows, as may fit to atend and serve them in the next life: Though now since
they conquered China, they have left off this barbarous custom, being
reprehended and corrected for it by the Chinese themselves. After this
superstitious Vow, advancing his revenging Arms, he besieged Leaotung The
chief City of Leaoyang besieged and taken.
(which was the chief City of the Province of Leaoyang) with 50000 men. But the
City was defended by exceeding many men, who generally were all armed with
muskets: The Tartars had nothing but their Scymetars, with Bows and Arrows,
which they discharge with strange dexterity and Art. But because they chiefly
feared the musket bullets, they resolved by a Stratagem to make that unknown
Instrument less hurtful to them than their Enemies did imagine. A Stratagem
against muskets.
For the Tartarian King commanded such as made the first onset, to carry a
thick hard board for their Shield, which was as good to them as a wooden Wall;
these men were seconded by other Companies who carried Ladders to climb up the
Walls; and the Horse came up in the Rear. In this manner he set upon the City
in four quarters, and received the discharge of their Muskets against his
Wooden wall; Then in a moment the scaling ladders being applied, before they
could charge again, they were upon the Walls and enterd the City; for such is
the quickness and nimbleness of the Tartars (in which they excel all Nations,
and in which also they place their chief art) that in a trice, they either
prevail in their Designs, or retire: and the little skill the Chinese had in
the use of Muskets, was no small hinderance to the War. For the Tartars
quickness and nimblenes not giving them time to charge again, being astonished
with the sudden inundation of armed men, they presently fled which way soever
they could; but being pursued by the swift Tartarian Horse, most of them
perished in the taking of this great City. This City being taken, the Tartar
like a Torrent overrun many others of less note, Many other Cities taken.
but amongst others, he took that noble City Evamgning, and over-runing most
speedily the whole Country of Leaotung, he entered the Province of Pekin, and
coming within seven Leagues of the very Imperial City, He durst not advance,
fearing the Enemy might compass or surround him, because he heard that a world
of men came in to help their distressed Prince. But the Tartar struck such a
terror into the hearts of all the Countries he had passed, as both Soldier
and Citizen leaving their Houses left the empty walls to the Tartarians
possession, knowing the Tartar to have that custom and practice to destroy and
put all to fire and sword that did resist, and only pillage the Cities that
submitted, How the Tartars used their conquered Towns.
leaving the Citizens alive, and under a milder Government. By which means
having collected a world of Riches he returned to Leaotung victorious. And
because his Southsayers had persuaded him that the standing of the old Walls
were unfortunate, he beat them down, and compassed them about with new,
fortifying them with new Munitions, and there proclaimed himself Emperor of
China: The Tartar calls himself Emperor of China, An. 1618.
For although as yet he had taken nothing of China, but only the skirts of the
Eastern Country of the Province of Leaotung, yet in his hopes and aspiring
thoughts he had devoured the whole Kingdom: wherefore he was called in the
China language Theienmingus in the third year of his Reign, which was in that
of one thousand six hundred and eighteen.

In this year some in authority about the Emperor Vanley, demanded the
banishment of the Priests, who did then preach the Christian Religion to that
Nation; But the Emperor (who in his heart loved Christianity, and those
particularly that first planted that Religion amongst them) gave no ear for a
long while to their Demands; But at length overcome by the importunity of a
chief Commander, who had ever been a sore Enemy to Christian Religion, and was
called Xinchio, it was ordained and proclaimed that all those Fathers that did
propagate Christian Religion should be banished the Kingdom. Upon which some of
them were secretly concealed in several Provinces by some Christian Governors,
God punished China for their persecution of Christians.
others being taken were carried in great Cages to Macao, where being shut up
day and night, suffered extremely, whilst others also be-being whipped out of the
Country, rejoiced to suffer something for his sake whose name they bore; and
that which added more affliction to all these miseries, was the Emperor
Vanley's Prohibition to all his to profess Christian Religion. But upon this
occasion the Christians of China (who from the horrid wilderness of Infidelity,
had been brought to the pleasant Pastures of Christianity) gave illustrious
examples of their Faith and Constancy; but the longer Narration of this
glorious persecution is reserved for another place. I only touch it here, to
admire the Divine Providence of God, who raised so sharp War against China,
when they neglected Christian Peace; and permited at the same time, these
Tartars to take so deep a root in this Empire of China, as afterward grew to
that height, as both to extirpate the Royal Family of the Taiminges, together
with the Kingdom, at the very same time they went about utterly to destroy all
Christianity. But it happened in this, as ordinarily it does; for by this very
persecution, Christian Religion grew to that height and greatness, that the
Church glories to behold, and unless God vouchsafe to lend a potent helping
hand, the vast Kingdom of China is utterly overthrown.

In the mean time the Chinese were very solicitous to expel this Enemy from
the bowels of their Country, and first they selected very chief and eminent
men for Commanders and Governors; then they gathered an Army of six hundred
thousand choice Soldiers. The King of Corea also sent to the Emperor of China,
twelve thousand; with this potent Army therefore they went out in the beginning
of March MDCXIX. to give Battle to the Enemy. The Tartars resolved to meet
them with an undanted courage; and for a good while the event and victory was
very doubtful; but in the end the Army of China was wholly routed, and their
chief Commanders, with fifty thousand men were all slain: The Tartars according
to their custom, prosecute the victory with all quickness and diligence; for
the same day they took and sacked two Cities which they burned. After this,
they overrun that whole Country, and came to the very Walls of Pekin, the
Emperors Court; but durst not venture to besiege it, because they knew
(besides the infinite number of Canons it contained) there was lodged fourscore
thousand Soldiers in it.

But the Chinese confess that there was such a fear and consternation in the
City, that the King thought to have left that City and gone into the Southern
parts of the Kingdom, which he had effectually performed, had not some
Commanders suggested that his flight would give courage to the Victorious, and
breed trouble and confusion in the whole Empire, being that to fly is nothing
elfs but to yield up the Land to the Enemy. Nay more, they say the disorders
were such in the City, that if the Tartar had come on, he infallibly had made
himself Master of it. But the Enemy was more greedy of Prey, and therefore like
a Lightening they overrun all, spoiling and burning all Towns and Cities, and
killing and destroying an immense company of Chinese in a most cruel manner,
The Tartars return with great Riches.
and leaving all these places dismantled and without Garrisons, laden with
infinite Riches, they returned victorious to Leaotung, where they had their
first footing.

After these things had passed, that renouned emperor of China called Vanley
died, The Emperor Vanle^ dies Taichangus succeeds and dies.
and left his Son Taichangus to succeed him; who begun to gather a new Army
against the Tartars; but after four months reign he also died.

To him succeeded Theinkius, Theinkius is chosen.
who as soon as he assumed the Crown sent an Ambassador, with many magnificent
Presents, and worthy of the China Monarchy, to the King of Corea; The end of
this Embassage was to thank him for the Auxiliary forces sent to his
Grandfather, as also to comfort him for the loss he had received in the late
service of China, and finally to solicit and press for further succors; For
it seems those of Corea, Those of Corea more valiant than the Chinese.
as they are nearer to Japony, so they participate more of that warlike Spirit
and Fortitude, than those of China do.

Besides, that he might more effectually divert the imminent danger of his
Kingdoms ruin, New preparations against the Tartars.
he leavied new Forces throughout all the Kingdom, which he sent into the
Country of Leaotung, to hinder the irruption of the Tartars any further into
the Country; And for their better supply with necessary Provision, he
maintained a great Navy in the Haven of Thiencin to carry Corn and other
necessaries for their maintenance. This Port of Thiencin The Port of Thiencin
very commodious.
is a Station to which an incredible number of ships resort, both by Sea and
River, from all parts of China. So as by this means, by a very short and
compendious way, they were easily provided with all necessaries. For all the
whole Country of Leaotung is almost environed with the Sea, and the furthest
part is but two days distant by water from this Port of Thiencin; but by land
far more time is necessary.

Amongst other Commanders which came with succors to their Prince, The valiant
Amazon of China.
there was one Heroic Lady, whom we may well call the Amazon or Penthesilean
of China. She brought along with her three thousand, from the remote Province
of Suchuen carrying all not only Masculine minds, but men's habits also, and
assumed Titles more becoming men than women. This noble and generous Lady, gave
many rare proofs of her courage and valor, not only against these Tartars, but
also against the Rebels which afterward riss against their Lord and Emperor.
But now she came in this War to supply her Sons place, whom she left at home in
his own Kingdom, as being yet a Child, and not able to perform that Homage and
Duty to which he was obliged. For in the mountains of the Country of Suchuen
there is a King, not subject to him of China, but an absolute Prince; yet so as
he receives the Honor and Title of a King from the Emperor of China; after
which Investiture, his Subjects only obey him and pay Tribute; But because they
surpass all others in Valor and Courage, therefore they are used by the Kings
of China in warlick Affairs.

By occasion of this war the two noble Christian Doctors, The first invention
of the Christians to advance Christianity.
Paul and Michael, found means to persuade the Emperor to demand of the
Portugeses of Macao, some greater Pieces, and also some Gunnes and Gunners;
hoping by this means also to restore the banished Fathers of Christianity, as
also the Religion it self. And their Proposition took effect, for both the one
and the other were sent for, and the Fathers publicly admitted aagain, and
many new Soldiers of Portugal came to help the Army.

But God did most abundantly recompense this favor done to Christianity; For
before the Portugese arrived, his Army had cast the Tartars out of the Country
of Leaotung, by means of the Inhabitants of that Country, who being much
exasperated by the Tartarians cruelty, The Tartars are cast out.
opened their City Gates as soon as the King of China's Army appeared, and
rising against their Garrison, gave entrance to the Army. Insomuch as they
recovered the Metropolitan Town of Leaotung; For the King of Tartary being
diverted by other Wars at home could not come soon enough to relieve it: So as
by this means the affairs of China began to recover Life, and Strength, and the
Tartars seemed wholly restrained.

But though Fortune seemed to show a smiling face for China, The Tartars make
war again.
yet, as her custom is, she stood not long constant and stable: For the
Tartarian King having dispatched his affairs in Tartary, sent presently sixty
thousand Horse to besiege Leaoyang again; promising that himself in person
would follow with greater Forces. They beseige Leaoyang, and take it
And this Army took that strong City in the space of forty hours; both parties
fighting with such vigor and fierceness, that thirty thousand of the Garrison
were killed, and the Tartars lost about twenty thousand of theirs. Nay the
Chinese affirm, that they had never won the City, had not the Governor been
corrupted by great promises of reward, to open them one of the Gates of the
Town. But be it as it will, the Tartars won the Town; The Viceroy hanged
himself for grief. But the Kings Visitor, judging it unworthy to bestow the
Title of a King upon the Barbarian, Constancy rewarded by the Enemy.
In admiration and reward of his Constancy and Fidelity, obtained life and
freedom, but he knowing that according to the custom of China, he was guilty of
death, because he had fought unluckily, more cruel to himself than the
barbarous Enemy, hanged himself in his own Garters.

The Tartars having taken the City, proclaimed by Edict, that they should kill
none, if they would cut their hair, and use the Tartarians Habit. The Tartars
Habits and Manners.
For the Tartars (that I may say something of their Manners, as my subject
gives me occasion) do shave both the Head and Beard, reserving only the
Mustachoes, which they extend to a great length, and in the hinder part of
their heads they leave a Tuff, which being curiously woven and plated, they let
hang down carelessly below their shoulders; they have a round and low Cap, which
is always garnished round with some precious skin three fingers broad, of
Castor, or Zibellin, and serves to defend their Temples, Ears, and Foreheads
from colds and other Tempests. That which appears above the skin being covered
over either with curious red silk, or else with black and purple horse-hair,
which they die and dress most curiously; so as their appurtenances being
handsomely joined together, makes the capp both commodious and handsome. Their
Garments are long Robes falling down to the very foot, but their sleeves are
not so wide and large as the Chinese use; but rather such as are used in
Polony, and Hungary, only with this difference, that they fashion the extremity
of the Sleeve, ever like a Horse his Hoof. At their Girdle there hangs on
either side two Handkerchiefes to wipe their face and hands; besides, there
hangs a Knife for all necessary uses, with two Purses, in which they carry
Tobacco, or such like Commodities. On their Left side they hang their
Scymiters, but so as the point goes before, and the handle behind, and
therefore when they fight they draw it out with the right hand behind them
without holding the Scabbard with the other. They seldom were Shoes, and use
no Spurrs to their Boots, which they make either of Silk, or of Horse-skin very
neatly dressed; but they often use fair Pattins, which they make three Fingers
high. In riding they use Stirrups, but their Saddles are both lower and broader
than ours; Their faces are comely, and commonly broad as those of China also
have; their color is white, but their Nose is not so flat, nor their eyes so
little, as the Chinese are; They speak little, and ride pensively. In the rest
of their manners they resemble our Tartars of Europe, though they be nothing so
barbarous. They rejoice to see Strangers; They no way like the grimness and
soureness of the Chines gravity, and therefore in their first aboads they
appear more human.

Having thus briefly described their Manners, we resume our former discourse,
and return to the victorious Tartars in the City they had takens; In which,
finding many rich and wealthy Merchants of other Provinces, they published a
License that they might depart with their Goods, and withal commanded them
speedily to void the City; Who presently obeying the Order, carried away all
their Goods and Riches, The Tartars perfidiousnes.
little suspecting the perfideous treachery of the Tartars; For they had not
gone three miles from the Town, but being set upon by the Tartars, they were
plundered of their Goods, and lost all their lives; which being done, they
returned into the fearful City, laden with Riches, the Citizens trembling,
lest they might happily experience the like perfidiousnes.

But the Tartar considering at how dear a rate he had bought the mastering of
that City, and fearing also to find the like provision and preparation in other
Cities, they durst not make any further attempt; for they knew well that the
Emperor had not only fortified all the ancient places, but erected also new
munititions, in the straights of many hard and rude passages.

And amongst all other strong holds, that of Xanghai, situated in the Island of
Cu, was most eminent, containing a vast number of men in the Garrison, to
resist the further progress of the Tartarian Forces. But that which most of
all repressed the Tartars, was the great valor of the incomparable Commander
Maovenlungus, who having with his great Fleet taken an Island near Corea in the
mouth of the River Yalo, The valiantest Commander of China.
vexed much their Army in the Rear, and was victorious in several Skirmishes
against them; so that the Tartars bent all their care and thoughts against this
their Enemy. This renowned person was born in the Province of Evangtung, where
being near the Portugese of Macao, he had much perfected himself in the art of
war, and he brought with him many great pieces of Artillery, which he had
recovered from the Shipwreck of a Holland Ship, upon the Coasts of that
Territory. And because the Emperor of China had declared the City of
Ninguyven to be the chief in place of Leaoyang (where also he had placed a new
Viceroy, and his Royal Visitor) therefore Maovenlungus placed the best part of
his Artillarie upon the Walls of this City.

The Tartars therefore acted nothing till the year 16^5* and because they
resolved to besiege the new Metropolitan City of Ninguyven, they first resolved
to try Maovenlungus his fidelity; The faithfulness of the Commanders in China.
offering him half of the Empire of China if he would help them to gain it; But
that noble Soul of his, proved as faithful as valiant, by rejecting those
Demands with indignation; and came presently with his Forces to succor the
City Ninguyven which they besieged; by which means, The overthrow of the
Tartars.
the Tartars having lost ten thousand men, were put to the flight; and among
the rest, the King of Tartary's own Son was killed. Wherefore being furious
with anger, they passed the frozen Sea, and invaded the Island Thaoyven, where
they killed ten thousand that kept Garrisons there, together with all the
Inhabitants; and by this one Act, Their Cruelty.
having revenged their former discomfiture, they returned into Tartary, not
with a resolution to sit still, but with an intention to return with greater
Forces; By which restraint, all things remained quiet till the year 1627. in
which the Emperor Thienkius dyed in the flower of his age, and with him the
whole Empire of China seemed to fall to ruin and destruction; The Kings of
China, and Tartary both died.
and in the same year, the King of the Tartars, who had cruelly murdered many
men, himself augmented the number of the dead.

After Thinkius, in the Empire of China, succeeded that unhappy Emperor
Zungchinius, Zungchininius chosen Emperor of China.
brother to the former, of whom more hereafter. And after Thienmingus King of
Tartary, succeeded Thienzungus his Son, Thienzungus more mild than his
Predecessors.
who changed the manner of his Fathers Government, and by good Counsel began to
govern the Chinese in a courteous and sweet manner; but though he lived not
long, yet he served for a good example for his Son to Conquer China more by
Civilitie and Humanity, than by force of Arms.

In this year, great Maovenlungus Soldiers being insolent by want of action,
The Soldiers Insolences exasperat the Country of Corea.
grew very troublesome and offensive by their Rapines and Disorders to the
Coreans, who were friends and Allies; and particularly they much exasperated
the Province of Hienkin, insomuch that some of the Inhabitants of that place,
moved with indignation of several passages, secretly treated with the Tartarian
King to invade the Chinese Army, in the habit and attire of the Inhabitants of
Corea, from whom they could expect no Treason, being leaguerd with them in
friendship and amity: promising moreover their best assistance to effect this
mischief, to him that was a Traitor both to Country, King, and the Emperor of
China. But this Counsel pleased the Tartar, and therefore he sent a Viceroy
with a potent Army, The Tartars are brought into Corea.
to which the Coreans showed the ways, and guided them through all the
passages; who falling upon the Chinese Army (which suspecting nothing, was
divided, and many straggling up and down the Country) made a huge Carnage
amongst them. But when Maovenlungus percieved they were Tartars, he presently
made head, and gathered a Body of an Army together, and vigorously opposed all
those sharp assaults. But yet at length he was forced to yield the Field; and
therefore leaving a Regiment or two to hold the Enemy in action whilst his
Army retreated, he fled to his Ships, and to the Island which he had Fortified.
The Tartars were vexed and grieved, both to see their victory so bloody, and
also that Maovenlungus, whom they chiefly aimed at, had escaped with most of
his Army; and therefore enraged with Anger, they fell upon the Corean Traitors,
and killed every man; which action the King of Tartary much condemned; and then
turning their wrath to the four Northern Provinces, which border upon Tartary,
Corea wasted.
they wasted and destroyed them all in a moment.

In the mean time the King of Corea gathered an Army to resist the Tartars; and
Maovenlungus also, having recruited his Forces, came into Corea to revenge the
received loss. The victorious Tartars were come within seven Leagues of the
principallest City of all Corea. But finding the King to have taken the
Straights and Passages of the Mountains which lead unto it, they desperately
resolved to force their passage. The Battle was hardly begun, but Maovenlungus,
after a long march, falls in upon their rear: and the Tartars finding
themselves encompassed before and behind, nor any means to escape but by dint
of Sword, fought most desperately, sustaining the shock of two Armies; And
such a Battle was fought, as China never saw; for, (it is strange to write, yet
very true) of the three Armies, none was victorious, but all in a manner
destroyed. The Fight and slaughter of 3 Armies.
Of the Tartarian Army fifty thousand were found wanting; The Corean Army
lost seventy thousand; and few or none escaped of the Chinese Army; For their
Quarter being most commodious for the Tartars flight, they there made their
most vigorous Charges, and so forced their way toward their own Country. So
as none of them all gained the field, or could prosecute the course of a
Victory. Yet the King of Corea made a shift to rallie so many together again,
as to take possession of those his Countries which the Tartarians by their
flight had left desolate. But the Tartars after all the losses, ceased not to
make frequent inrodes into the Country of Leaotung, The Eastern part of
Leoatung is under the Tartar.
and took all the Oriental part of it. From thence they made incursions into
the other part, and carried away great Preys and Booties; But they were always
so beaten, and so defeated, as they could never fix a constant habitation. For
by this time were arrived seven excellent Gunners from the Portugese quarters,
The Portugese send succor.
which both by themselves, and by teaching the Chinese, advanced infinitely the
King of China his Affairs; especially where that Christian Viceroy, called Sun
Ignatius, Commander in chief, of whose affairs we shall say something hereafter

In this conjuncture of affairs, the Emperor Zungchinius sent a new Commander
called Yvenus into Leaotung, A crafty Commander of the China Army.
with a new Army and full power to conclude a Peace with the Tartars, if they
would admit it: For the disorders of the times had caused so many needy
persons, Thieves, and Cutthroats, that the Emperor grew more anxious how to
suppress this great domestic Enemy, which seemed to aim at the Kingdoms ruin,
than he was of the Tartarian Forces. This Yvenus was a crafty and subtle wit,
most eloquent both in speaking and writing; who by politic discourses, drawn
from the nature of this war, had wrought so much, not only upon the Emperors
mind, but also upon all the Council, that they esteemed what he concluded as a
Law to be observed: Wherefore the Chinese put all their confidence in him; nor
had they been frustrated of their hopes, had not this wicked man been more
wedded to his own interest, and love of Riches, than to the public good, and
fidelity to his Prince: For first he received of the Tartars a vast Sum of
gold; which wrought so much upon him, as that having invited to a Banquet that
most Valorous and Faithful Champion Maovenlungus, Maovenlungus poisoned.
whom the Tartars only feared, he there poisoned that great Commander.

After this he made a most ignominious and shameful Peace with the Tartars,
condescending to all that those that fed him with Riches, could desire; But
when the Emperor had perused the Treaty, he presently found his
Plenipotentiarian had sold him, and therefore refused to ratify or confirm the
Articles. What should Yvenus act in this exigent? That he might force the
Emperor to admit them, he peswaded the Tartars, in the year 1630. to enter
China by another Country than that which was committed to his charge, promising
them for his part, he would no way hinder their progress by his Army. The
Tartars knew that his avarice had so potent an Ascendent over him, as that they
need to fear no hurt from him; and upon that Confidence admitted of his
Counsel. Wherefore being secure from all assaults from any Enemy behind them,
they entered the Province of Peking, and besieged the Kings Court: The Kings
Court besieged.
Insomuch that his Council persuaded him to leave the Imperial City, and retire
to the Southern Provinces; but he protested he would rather die, than quit the
Northern quarters; and not only so, but he forbid any to depart the Court, or
Town besieged. In the mean time the Tartars make many fierce affaults, and as
often were valiantly beaten back with great loss and Carnage. Yvenus was called
to resist the Tartars, for as yet his Traitorous Complots were not discovered.
And lest he should discover his Treason, he comes with his Army near the very
Walls, which were of so vast an extent, as both the Chinese and Tartars Army
might perfectly be discerned, though betwixt them there was a great Intervall.
But though Yvenus was under the Emperors eye, yet he acted little; for his
only aim was to return home laden with Riches, he never desisted to persuade
the Emperor to admit his conditions of Peace. So that the Emperor finding him
evidently to be a Traitor, disclosing his intention to none of his Council nor
Governors, sends to invite him to a private Council of war, giving also order
that he should be admitted into the City by the Walls, lest if any Gate should
be open, the Tartar being so near might press in upon them; but indeed he
ordered the business in this manner, lest he should bring his Army into the
City with him. Yvenus therefore knowing he had many chief men about the
Emperors person, who were both his favorites and friends, and that none of
them gave him the least sign of any distaste the Emperor might conceive against
him, he boldly and securely presented himself at Court; and as soon as he
appeared, he was presently arrested, and after some few questions, the Emperor
commanded him to be killed. The perfidious General killed.
The Tartars hearing of his death (before the China Army had a new General
assigned) ransack all the Country round about, and after they had made
excursions to the next bordering Province of Xantung, The Tartars forage all
the Country of Peking and depart.
richly laden with all manner of Spoils, they returned to their first
residence in Leaotung.

And from these times till the year 1636. the event of their Wars was very
various; but in general we observe, that the Tartars could never fix a foot in
China, The King of Tartary dies; another succeeds.
but they were presently beaten out again. In this same year Thienzungus, King
of the Tartars died, after whom, succeeded his Son Zungteus, father to him that
now governs China, of whom we now must begin to Treat.

This Prince before his Reign expressed much judgment in several Occurrences,
Zungteus the new King of Tartary, prudent and mild.
surpassing all the Kings of Tartary in Humanity, and obliging courtesy: For
when he was young, he was sent by his Father into China; where he lived
secretly, and learned the China's Manners, Doctrine and Language; and when he
came to be Emperor of China, he changed, and far surpassed all the Examples of
his Predecessors: For having observed, that their too hard and cruel usage of
the Chinese, had been the principal obstacle of their advancement, to the end
he might conquer that Empire he so much thirsted after, as well by love as by
Arms, he courteously entertained and cherished all those of China which came
unto him, Mildeness and Gentleness to be used in Conquering Nations.
using all Prisoners with great sweetness, and invited them either to submit
freely to his Government, or take their course with full freedom. The fame of
his humanity was spread far and near; which induced many Commanders and chief
Officers to fly unto him; by whose means and help, he became Emperor of that
spacious and flourishing Country. For experience shows us, that Love and
Humanity do work more upon men's hearts, in conquering and conserving
Kingdoms, than Arms; and cruelty of the Conquerors has lost that, which
strength of Arms had happily subdued. Wherefore when the Chinese came to
understand that the King of Tartary did not only afford them a Sanctuary, but a
favorable Haven, many great persons flying the Indignation of the King of
China, sheltered themselves under the Tartars protection. For in respect of the
China's Avarice and perfidiousness, it is a necessary but a most inhumane Maxim,
A barbarous Principle of the Chinese.
that those Officers perish, who have managed the Kingdoms Affairs with less
success. For they easily are brought to believe, that such unhappy events, do
not proceed so much from the frown of a scornful Goddess called Fortune, as it
does from the perfidy and negligence of the Commanders. So as if any fought
unhappily, or if he lost the Country committed to his charge, if any Sedition
or Rebellion happened, the Governors hardly ever escaped alive. Seeing
therefore they found so much Humanity in the Tartar, and so much Inhumanity in
the Emperor, they rather chose to fly to the former.

By this occasion give me leave to relate what happened to that incomparable
Commander (renouned both for Fidelity and Fortitude) called Ignatius. Ignatius
the chief Commander of the Christians unjustly killed.
This Heroic mind preferred his fidelity to his Prince, before his life, before
the Tartarian's protection, yea even before the strength of his formidable
Army; and chose rather, with his unparalled Fidelity, to submit his head to a
Block by an unjust sentence, than to abandon his Country, or once accuse the
least default in his Sovereign's judgment, Ignatius his fidelity.
though prevented, by very unjust impressions: He might perchance have swayed
the Sovereign Scepter of China, if he would have hearkened to his Soldiers,
but he rather chose to die gloriously, than to be branded with the name of a
Traitor in posterity.

This man therefore after he had gained several Victories against the Tartars,
and recovered many Cities from their possession, so as he hoped shortly wholly
to extirpate them out of China, His Soldiers being long without pay,
seditiously plundered and pillaged a Town which had ever been faithful to the
K. Ignatius by several petitions and Remonstrances to the Emperor, had
declared his wants of money, and their want of Pay; but because he fed not those
venal souls that managed the business with money and presents, they always
suppressed his humble addresses for relief. Besides, this man being a very
pious Christian, he did nothing in his government, Ignatius his Piety.
but what was conform to Reason and Justice; which was the cause he incurred
the hatred of all the ancient Prefects; who usually receiving Bribes from the
contesting parties, demanded favor of Ignatius for their Clients. But it was
in vain to intercede for any, unless the justness of the cause did also
balance their Petitions. And these men attributing this proceeding, not to
virtue, but to his Pride, thinking themselves undervalued by him, dealt
underhand with the Prefects in the Court, to stop the Armies pay, that so they
might destroy this innocent man. Moreover, he was envied the Comma^ders in the
very Court, because he came to this eminent dignity by his own valor and
industry; which they imagined was only to be given to Doctors, and Ignatius
was but a Bachelor; as if the most learned must needs be also the most
valorous. In this conjuncture of affairs, the Soldiers not contented with the
seditious pillage, seeing the most imminent danger hanging over their most
esteemed and beloved Governor, by reason of their folly, they go about to
persuade him to make himself King of that Country, nay more, to take the whole
Empire to himself, as a thing due to his Prowess and Merits; promising their
whole strength to effect the business; and also to extirpate those men about
the Emperor, that aimed more to compass their malicious ends, than to promote
the general affairs of the Empire: But Ignatius, by pious admonitions, staved
them off from further violence, made them obedient and quiet, commanded all to
stand faithful to the Emperor of China, and punished the chief of that
fedition.

This Supreme act of fidelity deserved a better esteem and acceptance, than
that which was framed by the Emperor and his Court: who slighting this his
allegiance, sent another ViceRoy in his place, and commanded him to appear in
Court: He then perceived they aimed at his life; and the Soldiers suspected
the business; and therefore, mad with anger, they all jointly rose in Arms for
hm, swearing they would live and die with him, and that he should not present
himself at Court. It is our duty (say they) to conserve thy life, which have
been so careful of ours; and we have strength and courage enough to resist all
the force of thy perfidious Enemies.

But Ignatius was deaf to al these allurements, He chooses rather to die, thatn
either to reign, or to serve the Tartars.
and studied by all means to sweeten their exulcerated minds; always
inculcating to them to the true and loyal to their Sovereigns service: choosing
rather to water that ungrateful Soil of his native Country with the streams of
his Blood, than either to spill his Enemies blood by the force and power of his
Soldiers, or retire to the Tartarian king, which offered him so fair
preferments. But many of his Captains fell off to the Tartars; following, in
this, not his example, but that of many others, whom they saw eminently
promoted amongst the Tartars. Some of those that then fled from the Emperor,
are now chief Commanders under the Tartarian King, in their China Empire; some
also have obtained the dignity of Princes, or Riolets in several Countries, for
the reward of their Valor and faithful service against China. So efficacious
is that wedge which is made of the same wood.

But although hitherto these Tartarian Wars had caused great troubles and
tempests in the China Empire, yet all things now seemed calmed and pacified, so
as they seemed secure from any further danger; for the Western part of Leaotung
was strongly fortified, and there was a great Army in the Island of Cu, and the
bordering quarters, which hindered the Tartars of the Eastern part of the
Country, which they posessed, from further passage. But now the chiefest
danger was from the Traitors and Thieves which were in the very Bowels of the
Country, The Thieves in China, a chief occasion of its overthrow.
who finally destroyed it; and gave it up in Prey to the Tartars.

I touched something of their Commotions before, now we must treat a little more
largely of their proceedings, that the Reader may see how the Tartars came to
subdue and conquer China.

The first Combination of these Rovers appeared in the remote Country of
Suchuen, Several Thieves.
who having pillaged diverse Cities, and emboldened by prosperous success,
ventured to besiege the chief City of that Country called Cingtu, which they
had infallibly taken, if that valiant Amazon, whom I mentioned before, had not
come to relieve it with her Army; but by her valor they were beaten off with
great loss, They are defeated, but not v^^quished.
and not being wholly extinguished, they retired into the mou^tains to recruit
their Forces. These were seconded by a like Race of people in the Province of
Queicheu, who took occasion of rising by reason of an unjust Sentence passed in
a Suit betwixt two Grandees of that Country; and one of these great persons
being offended with the Governors. These roving companions, first killed all
the Magistrates which had pronounced that unjust Sentence; and then they
defeated the ViceRoy his Army; yet afterward he routed them again with a new
Army, but could not extinguish them. Besides these, Famine augments the Thieves
the Famine increasing in the Northern quarters in the Countries of Xensi and
Xantung, by reason of a great inundation of Locusts which devoured all, there
rise up by this occasion, many loose fel^owes which lived by Rapin. These men
at first were few in number, and small in strength, and only preying in little
places, they presently fled to the Mountains; but finding they got both Meat
and Riches, with little labor and less cost, they quickly got Companions to
reinforce them; This Sedition being much augmented by the Emperor Zungchinius
his notable avarice, And the Emperor his avarice
who so exhausted the people by Imposts and Taxes, as if it had been a year of
the golden Age. The Prefects of the Provinces, not being able presently to
repress the insolency of those people, they daily increased in courage and
strength; Insomuch as in several Countries they had eight very considerable
Armies. They chose the strongest and valiantest men amongst them for their
Commanders; and these persons being grown rich and potent by preying, deposed
now the person of the Ringleader of Thieves, The Commanders aspire to the
Empire.
and aspired to no less than to the Empire of China. And at first they fought
one against another, every one laying hold one what he could: But at length
things were brought to that pass, that two of the Commanders being only left
alive, these two prevailed with the soldiers of those that were killed, to
follow their Ensigns and Fortune; and they knowing well that if they were
taken by the Emperors Officers, they could not escape a most certain death,
easily resolved to shelter themselves under the Arms of these two victorious
persons. The names of the chief Felons.
The name of one of these chief Brigands was Licungzus, the second was called
Changhienchungus, two notorious bold roguish fellows, who lest they should
destroy one another fortunes by their ambitious emulation, they separated
themselves far from one another, resolving both to pursue their prosperous
fortunes. Licungzus therefore possessed himself of the Northern parts of Xensi
and Honan; and the other tyrannised the Countries of Suchuen and Huquang. But
that we may not interrupt our discourse, by delivering the Acts of both these
together, we will first treat of Licungzus his feats, being it was he was the
cause of the Tartars coming to the Empire (which he himself might have
possessed, if his proceedings had been moderate and human) and of the other we
shall speak hereafter. Therefore in the year 1641. these pilferers having got
immense riches in the Province Xensi, made an irruption, in a vast body, into
that delicious sweet Provincs of Honan, They vex several Provinces.
and went strait to the chief City called Caifung, which they besieged. There
was in that place a very great and strong Garrison, who by the benefit of
artillery mouned upon hand-wheeling Chars, forced them to quit the siege; then
they fell upon all the neighboring Cities, Plundring, spoiling, and burning
all they could master. Having horded up store of provision of Corn, and
augmented their Army by a company of Rascally Vagabonds and loytering fellows,
They besiege the noble City Caifung.
they returned again to besiege the Metropolitan City; but despairing to take
it by Force or assaults, they resolved to ruin it by a long Siege, that they
might enjoy the immense Riches of that noble City; and though this Town be
three great Leagues in circumference, yet they rounded it so by their lines, as
nothing could enter the City; this drove them to some straits, for although the
Purveyer for victuals had brought in good store of provision in the two
months space in which they were absent, yet because that Province which used
to be most plentiful, was lean in Corn, they could not make sufficient
provision for six months siege, for such an infinite multitude of people as
were retired within the Walls; Yet it held out most obstinately for the space
of six months, in which time though they were brought to hard shifts, yet
hoping always for succor from their Emperor, they would never submit to any
conditions. I dare not relate to what an excess this Famine came too, but it
seems it surpassed the Famine of Jerusalem; An unheard of Famine.
a pound of Rice was worth a pound of Silver, and a pound of any old rotten
skin was sold at ten Crowns; dead men's flesh was sold publicly in the Shambles
as Hogs flesh, and it was held an act of Piety to expose the dead in the
Streets for others to feed on, who shortly were to be food for others; but I
will pass over, and conceal yet more horrible things than I have related. This
City lies toward the South side of that vast and precipitate River which the
Chinese call Hoang, because the Streams always appear of a yellowish saffron
color; and because the River is higher than the plain level downs, of a
Leagues distance from the Town, they built upon the River side, a long and
strong Bulwark of great square stones, to prevent all inundations. The
Emperors Army, after long expectation, came to relieve the Town, and advanced
as far as these Bulwarks, and having considered the situation of the Country
and Enemies Camp, it was thought the fittest and easiest way to raise the siege
without giving battle, to let in the water upon the Enemies Army, by some
breaches made in that long Wall or Bulwark. It was in Autumn when they took
this resolution, and the River, by reason of extraordinary rains, was swollen
bigger than ever before; and they making the Sluices, or Inlets, too great, and
the Breackes too wide, gave way to such an Ocean of water as it overrun the
Walls of the Town (which were very stately and high) involving not only many of
the Enemies in its ruin and destruction, The City of Caifung is drowned
but also 300000.. men, and the City it self perished in those floods of water.
So the ancient City, which heretofore had been honored by the Emperor's
Residence, appeared no more a place of pleasure, but a vast Pool or Lake for
Monsters of the waters to inhabit; for the houses of the Town were not overrun
with water, but also beaten down; and also the Church of the Christians,
together with their Priest, who was one of the Society of Jesus; it was well
known he might have saved himself, but being there were many Christians
perished, he willingly chose to die with those he had gained. The destruction
of this City happened the ninth of Oct. 1642. about which time this famous
Conductor of Thieves took the name of King, The General of the Thieves* takes
the Title of a King.
with an addition of Xunvang, which sounds as much as Prosperous, and so was
styled Licungzus the prosperous; and having in a manner taken all the Country
of Honan into his Dominion, he returned into the Province of Xensi, He takes
the Country of Xensi.
and wonn it wholly to his subjection. When he came to Sigan, which is the
Metropolitan of Xensi, he found some resistance from the Garrison, but he took
it in three days, and for a reward and encouragement to his Soldiers, he gave
it to them to pillage also for three days space; and then he gathered up all
the Corn of the whole Province, as well to keep all the Country in their duty
to him, as also to leave no Forage for the Emperors Army. And now thinking
himself secure of the whole Empire, he took the name of Emperor upon him,
Calls himself Emperor.
and styled the Family wherein he thought to establish this Dignity,
Thienxunam, as much as to say, Obedient to Heaven; By which Title he persuaded
the Soldiers and the People, that it was by the disposal of the Heavens that
he should reign, that he might deliver the people from the Emperors Avarice,
and extirpate those wicked Governors that so much vexed the people, and
deliver them from all their perfidious Plots. For he knew well, that this
Glorious Title would be very acceptable to them of China, who believe that
Kingdoms and Empires come only from Heaven, and are not gained by any Art or
Industry of Man; and that his actions might carry a face correspondent to his
illustrious Title, he began to use the People with all humility and sweetness,
The Thieves good Government.
not permitting any Soldier to wrong or iujure them; only he persecuted all
the Officers called Presidents, which he could find, and all those he put to
death; and as for those that had been Presidents, because he found them rich,
he made them pay great Fines, and let them live; remitting all Taxes in the
places he subdued; severely commanding that the Subjects should be treated with
all Civility and Courtesy. So as all men applauding and loving so sweet and
mild a Government, easily submitted to his Power and Dominion; but where the
Governors use Tyranny, there the Subject has little care of Fidelity. There
were in the City two Priests which served the Christians, that were Jesuits,
and suffered much in the saccage of the City; but being afterward known for
Strangers, they were used with all humanity.

In the mean time a third cause of this Empires ruin grew up in the Court; The
Prefects Discord was another cause of the ruin of China.
which was hatched in the Emperor Thienkius his time: For that Emperor
exalted an Eunuch called Gueio, to such a height and power, as he gave the
absolute Power and sovereign Command into his hands, and passed so far as
allway to style him by the name of Father. This extravagant power caused much
Envy, Dissension, and the banding one against another amongst the Governors,
Presidents, Commanders, and Counselors: and the Eunuch also added much to
incense the flame, by his indiscreet usage of the favor he possessed; for if
any man had touched him, either in word or writing, or expressed less respect
unto him in conversation, or behavior, or did not flatter the base fellow, he
would presently give order to put him to death, though he were a very eminent
person; or at least degrade him from all Office or Dignity. By which means he
exasperated many, and amongst the rest he offended the Prince Zunchinius, who
now, by the death of his Brother without issue, was come to be Emperor of
China. This Emperor knew that the Eunuch had moved Heaven and Earth to hinder
his coming to the Crown; but seeing he could not effect that, at least he
maintained a seditious faction against the great ones; which finally proved the
destruction of the Estate; For these men banding in two factions, studied more
how to destroy one another, than to advance the public good; yet both parties
pretended the general good, but both neglected it; Every party endeavoring to
extol and exalt his own Creatures into places of trust and power: All which
when Zunchinius the Emperor went about to redress, he exasperated the minds
of many of the Commanders against him; for as soon as he came to the Crown he
cruelly persecuted all that favored the Eunuch, and in fine killed this very
Eunuch which had been his Predecessors Favorite, together with many more of
his kind; of which Tragedy I will only relate the Catastrophe. The Emperor
Zungchinius resolving to destroy both the Eunuch and all his power, sent him an
order to go visit the Tombs of his Ancestors, to consider if any of those
ancient Monuments wanted reparation: the Eunuch could not refuse so honorable
an employment, which seemed rather an addition to all his honors; but he had
not gone far upon his journey, but there was presented to him (from the
Emperor) a Box of silver gilt, with a Halter of Silk folded up in it; by which
he understood he was to hang himself by the Emperors order: which he could not
refuse, being that kind of death (amongst the Chinese) is counted honorable,
when it is accompanied with such formalities. But by this occasion the Emperor
raised new Factions and more Traitors, which held secret correspondence with
the Thieves Army. Hence it came to pass, that no Army was sent to oppose them,
or if any went they did no manner of action, being always hindered by the
emulation of others; nay it happened often, that when they might have taken
great advantages, yet the occasion was neglected, lest the Commanders should
increase their Power and Credit, by their Victories, with the Emperor. These
Dissentions and Emulations happened so seasonably to the Roving Army of
Thieves, as that to come, to see, and conquer, was to them one and the
self-same thing, as I shall declare unto you.

Whilst these transactions passed in the Court, The Thieves take the Province
of Xensi.
Licungzus Conductor of the Thieves, having settled all things in the Country of
Xensi, passed to the East; and coming to the famous great River of Croceus,
finding on body to defend it, he passed over with as much facility, as it might
have been maintained with ease, if there had been placed but a handful of
Soldiers. For this River runns with a violent rapid course, and with as vast a
Sea of waters from West to East; but being there was no man to defend it, they
passing it easily, presently seizd upon the chief and richest City in all
those quarters, called Kaiangcheu, which is situated near the South bankside of
that River, and being carried on with a strong gale of Fortune, he seized upon
all other Cities, every one desiring either to free themselves from further
vexation, or blindly and fondly submitting themselves to any new change of
Government. For we commonly delight in varieties and novelties, and hoping for
better, we find worse. Only the City of Thaiyven made some resistance, but
being presently subdued, was fined with great vast sums of money for their
temerity. The Emperor Zungchinius hearing the Thieves had passed the River
Croceus, and were advanced to the very Confines of Xensi (which borders upon
the Province where he had placed his Throne and Royal Seat) he sent an Army
under the Lord Marshal of China, to hold them at least in play, if he could not
overthrow them; But this Army did just nothing, nay most of the Soldiers ran
to the Thieving party, in so much as the Lord Marshal himself, called Colaus
Lius, seeing Affairs grew so desperate, Hanged himself for fear of further
shame and dishonor. The Emperor of China is troubled.
The Emperor hearing of the ill success of his Affairs, began to think of
leaving the Northern parts, where his Royal City of Peking is situated, and to
pass to Nankuing which is far more Southward; but he was dissuaded from this
intended course as well by his loyal, as disloyal Subjects: by these, that they
might give him up more speedily into the enemies hands, before their treachery
was discovered; and by the others, lest his flight might trouble the Kingdom
more, and discourage all his Subjects from giving their best assistance; for
they thought the City impregnable, being fortified with so strong a Garrison;
nor did they doubt that the Kings presence would draw the forces of the whole
Kingdom to him. And their Counsel had been good, if the Court had been purged
of Traitors.

The Stratagem of the Thief.
In the mean time the Thieves Conductor, who was no less quick and nimble in
execution, than witty in invention, sowing a Fox his tail to the Lions skin,
caused many of his Soldiers in a disguised habit to creep into that Princely
City, and gave them money to trade in trifling ware, till he assaulted the Walls
with the body of his Army, for then they had order to raise sedition, and
tumult in the City; and considering they were a Company of desperate Fellons,
and of a very low and base fortune, it is stupendous to think how they could
keep so profound secrecy in a matter of so high concernment: But to this mine,
which was prepared in the bowels of the City, he held a secret train of
Intelligence, with the Lieutenant of the City, who seeing the Emperors Affairs
desperate, is said to have dealt with the Conductor of these Brigants about
giving up the City unto their power; But, however it was, these Pilferers came
in a short time to besiege the Royal City of Peking. There was in that City a
vast Garrison, and as great a quantity of Artillery; but on the Quarters upon
which the enemy made there assault, there was none charged with Bullets, but
only with Powder.

Wherefore being secure from any annoy from that side, The Royal City of Peking
is taken.
in the year MDCXLIV. before the rising of the Sun, they entered the
Metropolitan City of all China by one of the Gates which was opened to them;
nor was there any long resistance made, even by those that were faithful to
their Prince; for the Soldiers of the Thief, which lay lurking in the City,
made such a tumult and confusion, as none knew whom to oppose, in which respect
they made a great slaughter, so as Licungzus in this Babylonian confusion,
marched victorious through the City, till he came to the very Emperors
Palace, where though he found some resistance from the faithfullest Eunuchs,
yet notwithstanding he presently entered that famous and renowned Palace; And
that which exceeds all admiration, the enemy had passed the first Wall, and
Precinct, and yet the Emperor being alive, knew nothing of so strange a
passage; for the Traitorous Eunuchs, which were of most Authority, fearing he
might escape by flight, deferd to admonish him of his own danger, or of the
taking of the City, till they saw he could not possibly evade: Who hearing this
doleful news, he first demanded if he could get away by any means; but when he
heard that all passages were be set, he is said to have left a Letter writ with
his own Blood, in which he bitterly expressed to all posterity, The Emperor
having killed his Daughter hanged himself.
the infidelity and perfidiousness of his Commanders, and the innocence of his
poor Subjects; conjuring Licungzus, that seeing the Heavens had cast the
Scepter into his hands, he would, for his sake, take revenge of such perfidious
Creatures. After this reflecting he had a Daughter Marriageable, who falling
into the villains hands might receive some affronts, he called for a Sword, and
beheaded her with his own hands in the place; then going down into an Orchard,
making a Rope of his Garter, he hung himself upon a Prune tree. Thus that
unfortunate Emperor put a period, as well to that Empire, which had flourished
so long with much splendour, riches, and pleasure, as to his Illustrious Family
of Taimingus, by finishing his life upon so contemptible a Tree, and in such an
infamous manner: To all which circumstances, I add one more, that as the
Empire was erected by a Thief, so it was extinguished by another; for although,
others were chosen to succeed him, as we shall relate hereafter, yet because
they held a small parcel of the Empire, they are not numbered amongst the
Emperors. His example was followed by the Queen, and by the Lord Marshall, who
is called in their language Colaus, together with other faithful Eunuchs; So
as those pleasant Trees which served heretofore for their Sports and pleasures,
now became the horrid and surest Instruments of their death. And this cruel
butchering of themselves passed not only in the Court, but also in the City,
where many made themselves away either by hanging, or drowning by leaping into
Lakes; For it is held by this Nation to be the highest point of fidelity to die
with their Prince, rather than to live and be subject to another.

Whilst these things were acting, Licungzus enters the Palace victorious, and
ascending up to the Chair of State, sat himself down in that Imperial Throne;
but it is recorded, that in executing this first Act of Royalty, he sat so
restlesly and unquietly, yea so totteringly, as if even then that Royal Chair
would foretell the short durance of his felicity. The Theefs Tyranny and cruelty.
The next day after, he commanded the body of the dead Emperor to be cut into
small pieces, accusing him of oppression and cruelty against his Subjects; As
if he, being a villainous Traitor, and a Thief, after the saccaging and burning
so many Provinces, and shedding such an Ocean of blood, had been of a better
disposition. So we often condemn others, when we do worse our selves, and
remark, yea, augment, the least faults of others, when we either take no
notice, or diminish our own. This Emperor Zungchinius was Father of three
Sons, of which the eldest could never be found, though all imaginable means was
used for his discovery; some think he found means to fly away; others think he
perished by leaping with others into the Lake; the two others being yet little
Children, were by the Tyrants command beheaded three days after; his barbarous
humor not sparing even innocent blood: Which disposition he made shortly
appear, when casting of that veil of Piety and Humanity, with which he had for
some time charmed the people, he commanded all the Principal Magistrates to be
apprehended, of which he murdered many with cruel torments, others he fined
deeply, and reserved the Imperial Palace for his own abode. He filled that most
noble and rich City with ransacking Soldiers, and gave it up to their prey and
plunder; where they committed such execrable things, as are both too long, and
not fit to be related. But by this his horrid cruelty, and Tyranny, he lost
that Empire which he might have preserved by courtesy and humanity.

Amongst the other imprisoned Magistrates, there was one a venerable person
called Us, whose Son Usangueius governed the whole Army of China, in the
Confines of Leaotung, against the Tartars. The Tyrant Licungzus threatened this
old man with a most cruel death, if by his paternal power over his Son, he did
not reduce him with his whole Army, to subjection and obedience to his power,
promising also great Rewards and Honors to them both, if by his fatherly power
(which they hold sacred) he did prevail for his submission. Wherefore the poor
old man writ to his Son this ensuing Letter.

It is well known that the Heavens, Earth, and Fate can cause these strange
vicissitudes of Fortune which we behold; know my Son, that the Emperor
Zunchinius and the whole family of Taimingus are perished. The Heavens have
cast it upon Licungzus; we must observe the times, and by making a virtue of
necessity, avoid his Tyranny, and experience his liberality; he promises to
thee a Royal dignity if with thy Army thou submit to his Dominion, and
acknowledge him as Emperor: my life depends upon thy answer; consider what
thou owe to him that gave thy life.


To this Letter his Son Usangueius returned this short answer. He that is not
faithful to his Sovereign, will never be faithful to me: and if you forget
your duty and fidelity to our Emperor, no man will blame me if I forget my
duty and obedience to such a father. I will rather dye than serve a Thief.




And presently after the dispatch of this Letter, he sent an Ambassador to the
King of Tartary, The Tartars called into China against the Thieves.
desiring his help and force to subdue this Usurper of the Empire; and knowing
that the Tartars abound in men, but want women, he promised to send him some
store; and presented him with several curious Silks, and sent him great store
of Silver and Gold. The Tartarian King neglected not this good occasion, but
presently marched with fourscore thousand men, which were in Garrison in
Leaotung, to meet General Usangueius, to whom he expressed himself in these
words. To the end to make our Victory undoubted, I counsel you to cause all
your Army to be clad like Tartars, for so the Thief will think us all Tartars,
seeing I cannot call greater Forces out of my Kingdom so soon as is required.

Usangueius, thirsting nothing but revenge, admitted all conditions, little
thinking (as the Chinese say) that he brought in Tigers to drive out Dogs.
Licungzus hearing the march of the Tartars together with Usangueius, The
Thieves fly from the Tartars.
knowing himself not able to resist, quitted the Court and Palace as easily as
he had taken it: but he carried with him all the rich spoils of the Court, and
marched away into the Province of Xensi, where he established his Court in the
noble City of Singan, which heretofore had been the seat of the Emperors. It
is accounted that for eight days space by the four Palace Gates, there was
nothing seen but a continual succession of Coaches, They carry away the
Treasures of the Palace.
Horses, Camels, and Porters carrying away the pretiousest treasures, though
they left also much, because the enemy approached. Thus the immense Riches of
Gold and Silver, which the Emperors of the Tamingean Family had at leisure
hoorded up, in the space of two hundred and fourscore years, were in a moment
dispersed. But although they fled very speedily, yet they could not avoid the
swift Tartarian Horses, for overtaking their Luggage, and the Rear of the Army,
they Pillaged and vexed them for eight days; but yet they either could not, or
would not pass the River Croceus, that so they might speedily return to amuse
the trembling hearts of the Territory of Peking. The Tartars return therefore
victorious and rich into the City Peking, and there being admited by the
Chinese, they gave them the Empire. Where it is to be observed, that although
Zungteus, the Tartarian King, Zungteus King of the Tartars dies.
dying at the first entrance into China, did not obtain that noble Empire he so
much thirsted after; yet he gave those Instructions, of the manner of
conquering it, to his Council, that they never desisted till they obtained it.
This Prince dying, declared his Son of six years old, his Successor; commanding
all his own Brethren to manage the Child's Affairs with all fidelity and
circumspection, making his eldest brother his Tutor; and all those brethren,
being Uncles to the Child, by a stupendous Union, and never to be paralleled
in any ambitious Nation, exalted this Infant to the possession of the Empire.

These things being thus passed, Usangueius, The Tartars refuse to depart China.
seeing the Thief expelled, began to think of creating a new Emperor, one of
the Taiminga's Family, who was a Prince not far distant: But being mindful of
his promises made to the Tartars he offers them their rewards; he highly extols
their Fortitude and Fidelity in the Kingdoms quarrel; and finally, desires
them now to depart the Country quietly, and to entertain a strict alliance and
friendship with them, seeing they had abundantly revenged all former injuries.
To this demand the Tartars returned a long premeditated answer, but far
contrary to what Usangueius expected, which they delivered in these terms.

We do not think it yet a fit time to leave you and this Empire, unless having
heard our Reasons, you should still persist in your demand; for we consider,
that many of the Thieves are still extant, and seem rather dispersed than
extinguished; and we hear that their great Conductor Licungzus, has fixed his
Imperial Seat in Sigan, the Metropolitan of the Province of Xensi; by which
means he still possesses the richest and most populous Provinces, which are
still under his Dominion. If we depart, worse is to be feared will follow; He
feared us Tartars, when he hears we are gone, having now time to recruit his
Forces, he will doubtless make new Invasions, and perchance we shall not be
able to send new Succors: We therefore resolve to prosecute the Victory, and
quite extinguish those Vagabonds, that so you may deliver the Empire to your
designed King, in full peace and tranquillity. Be not solicitous of paying our
promised Rewards, for they are as safe in yours as in our own hands. Their
Craft and Deceit.
That which we now desire to execute, is, that which presses most, and seems
to us to require no delay, that you, with part of your Army and part of ours,
march speedily against Licungzus, and we with the rest, take our march toward
the Province of Xantung, to extirpate those Thieves that have settled there; By
this means the peace of the Kingdom will be firmly established.

Usanguieus either did not understand the Stratagem, or if he did, he
condescended not to irritate an Army in the Bowels of the Kingdom.

Before the Tartars (which were called) entered China, they sent into their own
and other Kingdoms to raise as many men as possibly they could, to the end
they might conquer the Empire after they had acquitted themselves of their
promised assistance against the Thieves. But these Succors, not being arrived
to reinforce them, therefore they thought it best to use no force, but gain
time by fair words and new projects. A great company of Tartars enter China.
But whilst this business was contriving, there came an immense company of
Tartars into the Empire; not only from the Kingdoms of Niuche, and Niulham,
but also from the old Occidental Tartary, and from a Country called Yupi,
which is more Oriental, and lies above the elevation of Japony. This people is
called Yupi by reason they make their Coats of defense, or Breast plates, of
fishes skin, which grow in a manner impregnable. Nay which is more, I saw very
many who were come as far as the River Volga; which people these Tartars call
Alga-Tartars, and I find they have a Notion of Muscovy, and Polony, but they
are far more barbarous than the Oriental Tartars be; with these auxiliary
Forces, came in the infant King of six years old, Son to the late deceased King
of Tartary, and when these were joined with the body of the Army, The Tartars
ceise upon the Empire of China.
then they publicly proclaimed their right to the Empire, and openly declared
their concealed intentions; and proclaimed this child of six years old, Emperor
of China, by the name of Xunchi, Xunchi is crowned the first Emperor of the
Tartars.
and the new erected Imperial Family they styled by the name of Taicing. The
Child of six years old took possession of the ancient Throne of his
Forefathers, with a great gravity and Majesty, from whence he delivered this
judicious Speech to the Commanders and to his Army.

It is your strength and power more than my felicity (my dear and generous
Uncles, and you the rest of my noble Commanders) which supports my weakness,
and makes me so undantedly ascend and possess this Imperial Throne. This my
Constancy, and this Chairs stability, I hope, is as happy a sign of my future
prosperity, as its tottering proved unfortunate to the Thief Licungzus his
Tyranny. You see my first step to the Empire; but I know your valor to be
such, that I look not only upon the Kingdom of China as my own, but conceive
the Empire of the World not only by me possessed, but also established. The
rewards due to such incomparable Vetues, shall be no other than the riches of
the Empire, and Royal dignities; proceed therefore valiantly and stoutly. The
whole Court was astonished to hear a Child of six years old speak so much
sense, and hence they concluded that fate or Heaven had elected him for King;
But yet, the young Prince did assume his eldest Uncle, as his Tutor and Father,
the same day he was admitted to the Empire: and therefore the Tartars in their
language, called him Amahan, as much as to say, the Father King; which very
thing, the China's express by the word Amavang. The fidelity of the Kings Tutor
called Amavangus.
To this man therefore he remitted all the Conduct of his Wars, and to him it
is, the Tartars owe all their greatness and Dominion: for as he excelled in
Counsel and prudence, so also he was as eminent in fortitude and fidelity; and
withal by the strength and force of his reasons and Counsels did ravish the
wisest men amongst the Chinese, and his Justice and humanity did wholly
enthrall and enchant the popularity. To all which I add those fugitive
Magistrates, who, as I related heretofore, had fled too the Tartars to avoid
the Emperors indignation, did not a little promote their cause; for these men,
sometimes by word and example, did seduce the hearts of the Subjects, and
sometimes suggested dangerous, but political Counsels to the Tartars, against
their own Country; but by both these means advanced themselves to high and
eminent dignities amongst the Tartars.

The same day some Bands of Soldiers were dispatched, with order to proclaim
Usangueius a Tributary King to this new enstalled Emperor, which they
performed with great magnificence, adding to his name (as usually they do) the
Surname of Pingsi, which sounds as much as Pacifier of the Western world: in
which quarters they established his Kingdom in the Capital City in the Province
of Xensi. This Prince considering that he could expect no more honorable
Dignity from the lawful Successor to the Empire of China, and that the Tartars
were come into the Empire, in so vast a number, that he could never hope to
Conquer them, found means to dispense with his hitherto uncorrupted fidelity,
admitting the dignity, and submitting to the Emperor; and so he that had
hither to waged War for China against the Thieves, Usangueius forced to serve
the Tartars.
now was forced to march against China to subdue its Provinces to the Tartarian
Empire. And as he was a Great Commander, so also by the help of the Tartars he
quickly drove out the Thieves from his little Kingdom of Xensi, where to this
day he reigns in the Metropolitan City of Sigan. But by these honors the
Tartars removed him from the practice of Arms, who remaining Armed, might have
proved a dangerous enemy.

It was hitherto never known what became of Licunzus, It is not known what
beam of Licungzus.
some think he was killed by Usangueius in the fight, though he never appeared
more, neither dead; nor alive, after this fight, in which all his forces were
dissipated, or cut off. And with the same facility the Tartars subdued the
Provinces of Peking and Xantung, where they immensly augmented their Armies, by
the access of the China's Soldiers and Commanders which submitted to them; for
the Tartarians admitted all, even the Conquered, to their Army if they did cut
their Hair, and wear their habits, after the Tartarian fashion: for in this
Puntillio of Habit and Hair they were so rigorous, as they proclaimed it high
Treason in all that did forbear it. Which Law, did many times endanger them,
and disturb the whole frame of their Affairs: For the Chinese both grieved,
and fought more valiantly for their Hair and Habit, than for their Kingdom and
Emperor; So as many times they chose rather to dye, or lose there heads, than
obey the Tartars in these Ceremonies; of which I could relate many examples,
unless in this relation I had resolved to be brief. But all these little rubs,
did not hinder, but that in less than the space of a year, The Tartars subdue
several Provinces.
(not counting Leaotung) they had conquered Peking, Xansi, Xensi, and Xantung,
which are the four vast Northern Provinces of China. In all which they changed
nothing in their Political manner of Government; nay, they permitted the usual
custom of the Philosophers of China to govern the Towns and Provinces; they
left also the same Examens as were used for the approving of learned men; for
by this prudent Counsel they wrought this effect, that having given the places
of honor and trust to men of their own Creation, They changed no Laws of the
Nation.
they found they surpassed the very Tartars in fidelity to them; yet they kept
the Militia in their own hands, and the ordering thereof, and yet they stick'd
not to admit even to these Offices, such of the Country as were faithful to
them; so as in the Royal City they retained still the same Orders and degrees
of Prefects, together with the six high Tribunals, as they were established in
the former Emperors time: but so, as they were now compounded of Chinese and
Tartars.

In the mean time the news of the Emperors danger came to the Southern parts
of China, and the Prefects of every City gathering together very great forces
marched toward the City of Peking; but in their march they received the sad
news of the Emperors death, and the taking of Peking, they therefore speedily
called back their Forces, and also all their Ships, which yearly used to carry
Provisions to the Emperors Courts; a little after this, they received the news
how the Tartar was invested in the Kingdom and proclaimed Emperor. I was then
my self in the great City Nanquin, Hungquangus Crowned Emperor in Hanquin.
where I beheld a strange consternation in the confusion in all things; till at
length having recollected themselves, the Prefects resolved to choose an
Emperor of the Family of the Taiminges whom they called Hungquangus. This man
came flying from the Thieves of the Province of Honan, and being he was Nephew
to that famous Emperor Vanley, and Cosen Germain to Zungchinius the last
deceased Emperor, they Crowned him with great pomp and ostentation, hoping for
better fortune under his Government. As soon as this Prince was chosen he sent
an Embassage to the Tartars, begging Peace, rather than demanding it; for he
offered them all the Northern Provinces which they had taken, if they would
join in amity with him. But the Tartars well understood the Policy of these
Prefects and Counselors; which was only to amuse them with a Peace, whilst
they could resume their strength and force; The Tartars admit no Peac^.
And therefore the returned answer, that they would not receive as a gift, that
which they had conquered by force of Arms; but seeing they had chosen a new
Emperor, they migh do well to defend him; but as for them, they were resolved
to have all or nothing. Xunchinias his Son appears at Nankuing.
This Legacy coming to nothing, whilst both parties prepare to take the Field,
appears at Nankuing a young man, who gave himself out to be the eldest Son to
the late deceased Emperor Zunchinius; and he gave no small evidences of this
truth and Clame; nay, he was acknowledged by many of the Eunuchs. But the new
elected Emperor Hunquangus, being strongly touched by the ambition of
reigning, would never acknowledge him, nor admit him; but commanded him to be
imprisoned, and killed as an Impostor, though many of the Prefects enraged to
hear of this order, hindered the execution of the sentence. He causes troubles
in China.
But by this accident, things grew into a sedition, and the dispute was so
high, that it gave occasion to the Tartars to take to the Province and City of
Nankuing; some of the Prefects winking at it, if not enticing them underhand to
this exploit. The Tartars, vigilant to lay hold of all advantages, hearing of
these emulations and divisions, presently march out into the Territory of the
City of Hoaigan, and coming to the East side of the River Croceus, they pass
over speedily by the help of their Boats; on the other side of this River stood
the Army of China, which was so numerous, as if they had but cast off their
very shoos; they had erected such a Rampart against the Tartars, as all the
Horse would hardly have surmounted it. But it is the resolution and valor in
War, carries the Trophies, not the number of men: for hardly had the Tartars
set foot in their Boats, but the Chinese ran all away, as Sheep use to do when
they see the Wolf, The flight of the Cheneses.
leaving the whole shore unfenced to their landing. The Tartars having passed
the River, finding no enemy to resist, enter the most noble City of Nankuing,
and in a trice make themselves Master of all the North part of the Country,
which lies upon the great River of Kiang, which is so vast, as it is worthily
called the Son of the Sea; where it deserves particularly to be noted as a rare
thing in the Warfare of the Tartars, that before they enter into any Country,
they choose and name both the Governors, and Companies, with all the Officers
necessary for all the Cities and places which they aim to take; so as in a
moment they run like a lightning, and no sooner they possess it but it is
fortified, armed, and defended. There was one City in these Quarters which made
a generous resistance to all their re-iterated assaults, called Yangcheu, The
City Yangcheu resisting the Tartar is taken and burnt.
where the Tartars lost the Son of a little Royalet. This City was defended by
that faithful Imperial Champion called Zuuis Colaus, but though he had a mighty
Garrison, yet he was at length forced to yield, and the whole City was sacked,
and both Citizen and Soldier put to the Sword; and least the multitude of the
dead Carcases, should corrupt the Air, and engender the Plague, they laid them
all upon the tops of the Horses, and setting fire both to the City and Suburbs
brought all to ashes, and to a total desolation.

By this progress the Forces of the Tartars much entreased, The Tartars take
several places.
for the Governors of many places, and several Regiments came to submit to his
Dominion. To all which he commonly continued the same Commands and Offices they
were established in before, and advanced many of them to higher dignity; and so
by this humanity with which he treated all that came flying to him, and by the
cruelty he used to those that resolved to make resistance to the Force of his
Arms, he gained this, that most men resolved to partake of his sweet treaty,
rather than of his cruelty; so he easily conquered all that which lies on the
North side of that River, which I named before the Son of the Sea. This River
being a German Leage in breadth, and rising from the West of China, holds its
course to the East, and divides the Kingdom into Northern and Southern
Quarters; it also divides the Country of Nankuing in the very middle; though
Nankuing the Metropolitan and Royal City be placed in the Southern part. To
Master this great City, they were to pass this River. They gathered therefore
together many Ships, to Conquer this new Emperial seat, and also the new settled
Emperor. The Fleet of China commanded by the most generous and faithful
Admiral called Hoangchoangus, lay toward the other side of this River. Here
the Admiral fought so gallantly and resolutely that he skowred all China, and
made it appear to the world that the Tartars were not invincible; Till at
length one of his own Commanders called Thienus born in the City of Leaotung,
being corrupted by the Tartars, shot him with an Arrow to death: which Arrow
fixed the unconstant wheel of Chinas fortune, and lost the whole Empire. But
the Traitor, not contented with this perfidious Act, began himself to run away,
and by his example draw all the rest to imitate this Ignominious Action. His
impudence passed yet to a higher strain, for coming to the Imperial City, and
finding the Emperor preparing to retire, he joined himself with him, as a
faithful friend participating of his adversity; till he heard the Tartars (who
passing the River followed the Kings flight with all imaginable diligence) were
come near him, The Emperor Hunquangus is taken and killed.
and then he took the Emperor Prisoner, and delivered him to the Tartarian
army in the year MDCXLIV. This unfortunate Prince being thus betrayed before he
had reigned full one year, was sent to Peuking, and there upon the Town Walls
was hanged publicly in a Bow string, which kind of death the Tartars esteem
most noble. The pretended Son to the Emperor Zunchinius, whether he were true
or false, run the same course of fortune, when they had discovered him still
alive Prison: for they did not only put to death all those which belonged to
the Imperial Family of the Taiminges by Consanguinity, but after a diligent
search extirpated all they could find, which belonged to them even by Affinity;
for it is a custom in Asia, if any one Conquer a Kingdom, to root out all
belong to the Royal Family.

After this they divided their Army into two parts; the one they sent to
Conquer the Mediterranean Provinces of Kiansi, Huquang, and Quangtung, which
are all of a mavelous extent; the other like a swift Torrent overrun all,
The Tartars run to the City Hangcheu.
till they came to the very Walls of the renowned and vast City of Hangcheu,
which is the head City of the Province of Chekiang. Into this City the
principal fugitives of the Army of China were retired; and those not only of
the common Soldier but many great Commanders, and Prefects, where they
resolved to choose a new Emperor called Lovangus, of the ancient Family of
Taimingus. But this Prince would never assume the Title of Emperor, but
contented himself with the Title of King; thinking his fall would be less, and
his death not so bitter, as if he fell from the Throne of an Emperor: but yet
to the end to animate them to fight with more vigor than they had done
heretofore, he promised them to take that title when they had regained one
Emperial City. He had not reigned three days (a shorter space than their
personated Kings use many times to reign in their Tragedies) but the Tartars
arrive; Which the fugitive Soldiers seeing, and thinking by this pinch of
necessity to force their pay from the King and City, refused to fight before
they had received their salary: It was on this occasion that King Lovangus his
heart, not able to bear such a desolation of the City, of his people and
Subjects, as he foresaw, King Loving as love to his Subjects.
gave such an example of his Humanity and Piety, as Europ never saw; for he
mounted upon the City Walls, and calling upon his Knees to the Tartarian
Captains, he begged the life of his Subjects. Spare not me (quoth he) I will
willingly be my Subjects victime, and having denounced this unto them, he
presently went out to the Tartars Army, where he was taken. This Illustrious
testimony of his love to his Subjects had not wanted a reward to Crown so
Heroic an Action, if it met with a generous Soul like that of Alexander or of
Caesar. When they had the King Prisoner they commanded the Citizens to shut
the Gates, and keep the Walls least either their own, or the Kings Soldiers
should enter the City, and presently they fell upon the Kings men, whom they
butchered in a most cruel manne, but yet the water destroyed more then there
Swords or Arrows; for many cast themselves headlong into the great River of
Cianthang, which is a Liege brood and runs near the City, others leaping and
overcharging the Boats in the River were presently sunck, Many of the Kings
Soldiers drowned.
oothers flying away, full of fear and confusion, thrust one another at the
River side into that unmerciful Element, and by all these many thousands
perished. The Tartars wanting boats to pass this River, having thus expelled or
killed the Soldiery, they returned Triumphant to the City, Hangcheu is taken.
where they used neither force, nor violence; by which means this noble City
was conserved, whose beauty, greatness, and riches, I hope to describe
elsewhere, not by hearsay, but by what I saw the three years space I lived in
it, and what I found when lately I came from it, into Europ. This City of
Hangcheu has an Artificial Channel or Dick to pass by water to the Northern
parts of China; This Chanel is only separated by the high part of the way like
a Cause way from the River, which as I said, runs on the South part of the
City. The Tartars therefore drew many Boats out of this Chanel over the
Causeway into the River Cienthang, and with the help of these Boats they pass
the River without resistance, and found the fairest City in all China called
Xaoking prone enough to submit to their victorious Arms. This City in bigness
yields to many others, but in cleaness and comeliness it surpasses all: it is
so environed with sweet waters as a man may contemplate its beauty by rounding
it in a Boat; it has large and fair Streets paved on both sides with white
square stones, and in the middle of them all runs a Navigable Chanel, whose
sides are garnished with the like ornament, and of the same stone there are
also built many fair Bridges and Triumphant Arches, the Houses also, which I
observe no where else in China) are built of the same square stone; so as in a
word I saw nothing neater in all China. They took this Town without any
resistance, and so they might have done all the rest of the Southern Towns of
this Province of Chekiang. But when they commanded all by Proclamation to cut
off their Hair, then both Soldier and Citizen took up Arms, and fought more
desperately for their Hair of their Heads, The Chinese defend their Hair.
than they did for King or Kingdom, and beat the Tartars not only out of their
City, but repulst them to the River Cienthang: nay forced them to pass the
River, killing very many of them. In truth, had they past the River, they might
have recovered the Metropolis with the other Towns: But they pursued their
victory no further, being sufficiently contented that they had preserved their
Hair, resisting them only on the South side of the shore, and there fortifying
themselves. By this means the conquering Arms of the Tartars were repressed for
a whole year. But the Chinois that they might have a Head, chose Lu Regulus of
the Taimingian Family for their Emperor, who would not accept thereof, but
would be only styled the restorer of the Empire. In the mean time the Tartars
had sent for new forces out of Peking: with which they left nere a Stone
unturned, that they might get over the River Cienthang: but all was in vain.
The drooping Affairs, therefore of the Chinois had a breathing: nay having
gathered together more Forces, they promised hemselves greater victories. But a
desire and emulation of ruling frustrated all their hopes. For the Commanders,
and Presidents which fled the Province of Chekian into the Country of Fokien,
carried with them one of Taimingas Family called Thangus, and this man they
chose King in the Country of Fokien, which confines with Chekiang. This Prince
pretended that the K. called Lu. should yield up his right to him, both because
he had but a few Cities under him, and also, because he was further removed
from the Imperial race, then he was. But King Lu pretended he was Proclaimed by
the Army, before him, and wanted not to set forth his victories over the
Tartars. By which two contentions, the Tartars came to the Crown; for these two
Royalets, would never yield to one another, nor so unite their Armies as
jointly to repress the Tartars. Since therefore this petty King Lu had only
eight Cities under his command, whose Contributions were not able to maintain
the necessary pay of his Army, he never durst venture to pass over the River,
but endeavored only to defend himself. But the Tartars sought all means
possibly to get over this River, yet they durst not venture to pass in Boats,
because King Lu had many Ships and good store of Artillery which he had caused
to come from Sea. But the Tartars felicity, and prosperous fortune, overcame
this difficulty: for as it happened that year being dryer then ordinary, this
River toward the South, where it runs betwixt high Mountains, which break the
ebbing and flowing of the Sea, had lost much water and of depth, and here the
Tartars Horse found it passable; and because the rudeness of those Mountains,
The Tartars pass the River, and recover the City Xaoking.
seemed a sufficient Guard to the Country, they found no Soldiers to resist;
but as soon as the Clowns espied twenty of their Horse to have passed the
River, they presently advertised the Army, and they all betook themselves to
flight. King Lu himself left the City Xaoking, and not daring to trust himself
to the Continent, he took Ship and sailed to the Island called Cheuxan, which
lies opposite to the City of Nimpus; where he remains to this day safe, and
keeps still his Regal dignity; which Island being heretofore only a retreit for
Fishermen, and some Clowns, now is become a potent Kingdom; by reason that many
fly from China to this King Lu, as to there sanctuary to conserve the liberty
of their Hair. The Island of Cheuxan becomes a Kingdom.
In this Island they are now found threescore and ten Cities, with a strong and
formidable Army, which hitherto has contemned all the Tartarian Power and
Forces, and watch for some happy occasion to advance again their Kingdom in
China. But by this means, the Tartars took all the Cities and Towns of the
County of Chekiang into their Dominion. One only City of Kinhoa, whose
President was as well a Native of the place, as also the Commander in Chief, and
my very singular friend, sustained the Tartars assaults for some months. But to
the end the resistance of this City should not be a hinderance to the course of
their victories, the Tartars divided their Army into three parts. The first
part marched toward Kiucheu by the Mountains, the second went by the City
Vencheu, and the Sea shore, The City of Kinhoa is taken and destroyed.
into the Province of Fokien; and the third obstinately besieged the City of
Kinhoa. In this Siege the Tartars by reason of great Guns which continually
played upon them, and by the wise Conduct and courage of their noble Commander,
suffered many and great losses; insomuch as he forced them to pitch their Camp
further from the City; But at length they also brought Artillery from the chief
City, by which they made so many breaches in the Walls as being in a manner
dismantled, they found entrance; and burned and sacked it with, all imaginable
Hostility. The Governor blew up himself and all his Family with a Barrel of
Gunpowder in his own Palace, least he, or his, should fall into the Enemies
hands.

The Province of Fokien is environed with the bordering Countries of Quamgtung,
Kiansi, and Chekiang; from all which it is separated by a continual Chain of
Mountains which are even in breadth of three days journey to pass over; and
withal, so full of ragged and ruggy Clifts, and obscure Vallys, as they make
the very Paths horrid, dark and obscure at Noon day. The Tartars take in Fok en
very easily.
Insomuch, as without any exaggeration they may well be paralelled either to
the Grecian Straits of Thermopolis, or to the Asian ruggy and strait passage of
Taurus. These places might have been easily defended if they had but placed a
few Clowns, to repel the Enemy or overthawrted the ways by any encumbrances;
but the very imagination of a Tartar was grown so terrible to them, as they
fled at the very sight of their Horses; leaving therefore these Mountains wholly
ungarnished the Tartars found a passage, but so very painful, and full of
difficulties, as they were forced to leave much of their Bagage behind them;
and lost many of their Horses, in those fearful precipices; but by this means
they took the Province of Fokien with as much ease, as it might have been
defended, for they hardly spent as much time in taking it as a man would do to
walk the extent of it. The King himself whom I named Lunguus (as signifying a
Warlike Dragon) showed himself a fearful Sheep, flying away, with a good Army
of men, if that word of good, can be applied to a numerous multitude that had
no hearts; King Lunguus slain.
but his flight served him for nothing; for the Tartars following him with
their swift and nimb^e Horses, shot all this heard of silly Sheep to death with
Arrows. It is thought the King himself was involved in this Massacre, for he
never appeared, nor was heard of afterward.

Now because the whole Province submitted it self voluntarily unto him without
any resistance, it did not only suffer little from the Tartars, but he may
choose and select Soldiers out of it; and having thus again recruited his
Army, he made another irruption into the Country of Quamgtung; and its worth
remarking, that the other Tartarian Commander who when the Army was divided as
I related before, had order to subdue the Mediterranean Countries; The
Provinces of Quantung is taken.
this man with some felicity and expedition passing victorious through the
Provinces of Huquang and Kiangsi, entered also on one side of this Country of
Quamgtung, whilst the other came in by Fokien, and because the Town of Nankiung
resolved to fight it out, they consumed it all, by fire and sword. So the poor
Country of Quamtung oppressed by a double victorious Army, was quickly overrun
and subdued. After the Glorious Trophies, one of these victorious Armies
enriched with all the rarites of China, was called back to Peking, but yet they
left a Garrison in every City, assigning in the name of the King of Tartars
both Civil and Martial Officers, for the Countries Government.

The happy success in taking the impregnable Province of Fokien, is attributed
by wise men, (to whose judgment I also submit) to a more remote and hidden
cause which I will briefly relate. There was at this time a famous and renowned
Pyrat called Chinchilungus; this man was born in the Province of Fokien, of
which we are treating; he first served the Porteguise in Macao; then he served
the Hollander in the Island called Formosa, A famous Pyrate in China.
where he was known to all strangers by the name of Iquon. After this he became
a Pyrat, but being of quick and nimble wit, he grew from this small and slender
fortune, to such a height and power, as he was held either Superior or equal
to the Emperor of China; for he had the Trade of India in his hand; and he
dealt with the Portugise in Macao; with the Spaniards in the Phillippins, with
the Hollanders in the Island Formosa, and new Holland; with the Japonians, and
with all the Kings and Princes of the Eastern parts in all manner of rich
commodities. He permitted none to transport the Wares of China but himself or
his, to whom he brought back the riches and the Silver of Europ and Indies; for
after he once rather extorted then obtained pardon of the King of China for his
Pyracies, he became so formidable, as that he had no less than three thousand
Ships of which he was Lord and Master. Nor was he contented with this fortune,
but aspired privately to no less than to the Empire; But because he knew he
never should be accepted of the prefects and people, as long as there was any
of the Emperial Family of the Taiminges alive, he hoped by the Tartars means to
extinguish them wholly, and after this was done, then he resolved to display his
Banners and Ensigns in so pious a cause, as the driving out the common Enemy
from the bowels of the Kingdom, and no doubt but under this pretext, they would
all have followed, helped and even adored him, as their Savior. It was
therefore evident that he had secret correspondence with the Tartars; and that
he favored them for his own profit; And that which made the business more
suspicious was, that at that time when the Tartars made their irruption into
Fokien, he was then declared Lord Marshal of the Kingdom, and all the Generals,
Commanders and Soldiers, were either of his affinity, or wholly at his Command
and Obedience. And therefore it is no wonder if he found an easy admittance
into the Country of Fokien; of which they presently made him King Pingnan, (as
much as to say; Pacifier of the South) and they added many other Dignities, and
Offices of trust, that they might more speciously illude him; for either they
knew his aspiring mind, The Tartars deceive the Pyrat, and take him Prisoner by
mere Art.
or else his great power and authority was suspicious and formidable to them;
but yet all the while the General of the Tartars remained in Fokien, they never
expressed the least diffidence in him, but both with favors, courtesies,
presents and honors, they studied how further to engage him, and promised the
Government of many more Provinces. He made himself therefore secure of the
Government of all the Southern Provinces; but all happened quite contrary to
his expectation; for when this General of the Tartars, who was observed as a
little King, was to depart to Peking, the custom was for all the Officers of
the Kingdom to conduct him, for some part of his journey to give him an
honorable farewell; which last duty of Civillity, Iquon could not handsomely
avoid, nor indeed, had he any reason to be diffident of any distrust in him; so
as he left his Navy in the Port of Focheu, and accompanied the Royolet with
great splendour and magnificence. But when he came to take leave, and demand
License to return; the General of the Tartars, invited him a long to Peking,
where he promised him yet greater honors from the Kings own person, to reward
his Merits. He endeavored by all imaginable occasions, to excuse this journey,
but nothing was accepted, he was forced by their kindness to accompany them to
Peking; and so he was taken by Art, who by Arms seemed Insuperable. He yet
lives in Prison in Peking, because his Brothers and Kindred hearing of his
Captivity, presently ceased on the Fleet; with which they have much infested
China, as we shall touch hereafter.

In the mean time the other Army which had passed the Mediterranean Provinces
of Huquang, The Tartars overthrown Quangsi.
Kiansi, and Quamgtung, invaded the Country of Quangsi. But here it was that
the Arms of the Tartars which hitherto were held invincible, were showed to be
weak, and where they least expected opposition, there they found the greatest
destruction. It happened that in this Province of Quangsi the Viceroy, called
Khiu Thomas, was a Christian, and the chief Commander also of all the Militia
of that Country was commanded by Ching Lucas, whose family for five Genetations
has served the Emperors of China, with as much constancy and fidelity, as they
did Christ. These two having gathered many together, which fled from all parts
into Quangsi, after the Tartars had taken many places in the Country, overthrew
the Tartarians in a set Battle; and passing into the confining Province of
Quamgtung, they recovered all the Western part of it. After this that they
might have a head to fight for, and who might command and govern them in all
Occurrences, and withal to draw the minds and hands of the Chinese to the
common defense of the Country, knowing that in the City of Queilin, Jungley
made Emperor of China.
which is the head City of Quangsi, there was one of the Taiminges Family
living, who was Nephew to the Great Vanleius, they elected him Emperor, and
called by the name of Jungley. This Prince fixed his Imperial seat in the noble
City of Chatking in the Province of Quamgtung, and hitherto has fought several
times with the Tartars, with good success. And in this Princes Court, the chief
Eunuch called Pang Achilleus, is the greatest favorite, and a great Servant of
Christ, whom he has long professed to serve both by word and deed; for to
propagate Christianity he has ever mantained a mission of Jesuits about him,
by whose painful endeavors many have embraced the Faith of Christ; And amongst
others the very Mother of this Emperor, his Wife, The Heir to the Empire
becomes Christian.
and his eldest Son, Heir of the Empire, called Constantin, did all embrace
Christianity. May this Man by the prayers of all Christians prove another
Constantine to the Empire of China. The Emperor himself is not averse from
Christiany, but hitherto he has deferred his Baptism, but yet he permitted his
Wife to send a Father of the Society to do homage to the Sea Apostolic, as all
Europe has heard. God of his goodness grant him that felicity, which may
redound to the universal good of China, and Gods greater Glory.

But it was not only in Quangsi that the Chinese began to resume their
courage, Thieves infest the Province of Fokien.
but in the Province of Fokien also; for no sooner was the Tartarian Army
called back to Peking, but a petty Heathen Priest broke out of the Mountains of
Fokien, with a band of seditious fellows, and subduing the Tartarian Garrisons
he took the fair City of Kienning, and many others from their subjection; and
others which lay lurking in the Mountains following his example, recovered also
many other Cities; about which time also the friends and Kindred of the Captive
Iquon did extremely infest the Sea, and making descents upon the Land vexed the
Province extremely about the Quarters of Siuencheu, and Changcheu. At this time
the Governor of the Province of Chekiang was Viceroy of two Provinces, who
hearing of these commotions came presently by night in great have with all the
force he could make, toward the Mountains of Fokien; for he with reason feared
lest they should take possession of the passages of those places, which if they
had done, the whole Province had been regained. But when this Viceroy called
Changus, found the Mountains and passages clear, and no opposition made in such
difficult places, he then proclaimed himself victorious, and his enemies
perfidious Rebels: Changus the Commander of the Tartars besieges Kienning in
vain.
wherefore coming without resistance into the Country, he besieged the City
Kienning, which was defended by Vangus. This Siege held some weeks, but he
never could take the place by force, and therefore having lost many of his men
by assaults, he judged it best rather to block up the place a far of, than to
besiege it so close and near. But yet by this, he hindered other forces from
joining with Vangus, so that he was not strong enough to sally out upon them.

When the noise of these commotions came to Peking, It is at length taken and
ra^^d.
the Emperor presently sent a new supply to appease these tumults; and this
fresh Army coming to join with the other, brought the City to great streights;
but yet they could not win it, till at length they found means by a rare
invention to transport their Canons over the Mountains upon Porters Shoulders,
by which means they dismantled the Town, and put all whatsoever to the Sword,
to the number of thirty thousand persons, as my own friends writ unto me; and
not content with this, they set fire on the Town, and brought it all to ashes,
by which means, the stately Church erected by the Christians for the service of
God, was also consumed by that devouring flame; yet the Priests that served in
that Church got out miraculously as Lot did out of Sodom, which name was
appropriated to this City, by reason of that infamous vice. This City being
taken, it was no hard matter to recover the Country; for some fled to save
themselves in the Mountains, others ran to the Sea, and so when this new Army
had pacified all, they were called back to Peking; where it is not amiss to
observe the policy which the Tartars use in the Government and ordering of
their Army; they are ever calling back some, and sending out others; in which
proceeding they aim at two things; first to keep the Countries in awe and
subjection, by seeing variety of Troops continually passing up and down; and
secondly to provide for the poorer sort of Soldiers; for the wealthy Soldier
is called back to recreate, and ease labors, and the poor Soldier seeing his
Companion grown rich, takes heart and courage to run the course upon hopes of
the like good fortune.

Yet for all these preventions and cautions, their Empire was not so
established, but by frequent rebellions it was often endangered, and
particularly by one Rebellion which now I will relate, which shaked shrewdly
the foundations of the new Empire. The Kingdom of China is of so vast an
extent, How the Tartars dispose their Garrisons.
as it is a business of main importance, to distribute judiciously the Armies,
and Garrisons. Now because the Tartars alone cannot suffice to furnish both,
they are forced to use the help of the Chinese themselves, although they have
a special care never to leave or place either Commander or Soldier who is a
Native of the same Country, where they sojourn; yet this care could not exempt
them from several Treasons, and Rebellions; yet they distribute and order their
Militia, with great circumspection; for the chief Commander or Governor
resides in the Metropolitan City, whom all inferior Officers obey. This man,
maintains always a complete Army, which he commands to march, when he hears of
any risings. Every City has also their own proper Governor, with a competent
number of Soldiers, but those for the most part are Tartars, and these are
Chines. But all this Political, and well-established Government could not
defend them from Traitors amongst themselves. The first man that did revolt
from them was one Kinus Governor of the Province of Kiangsi. Kinus Gonour of a
Province rebelleth.
This man was born in Leaotung, and because it is a Country that borders upon
Tartary, the King commonly most confides in the Natives of that Province. It
happened, I know not how, that this Governor, by reason of some corruptions,
and Avarice of the Visitor of the Country, The hatred betwixt the two Prefects
disturbs the Country of Kiansi.
had some difficulties with him, which grew by little and little to open
hatred; and although they both dissembled their private malice, as usually they
do in China, yet at length the flame broke out to the ruin of the Country; for
being the one was Governor of the Arms, and the other of justice, there was a
necessity of often meetings, and feastings also. It happened once that whilst
they were feasted with a sumptuous Banquet, they were also entertained by a
pleasant Comedy; in which the Actors were attired with the habits of China,
which were more comely and fairer than those which the Tartars use; upon which
occasion Kinus turning himself to the Visitor said, Is not this habit better,
and graver, than ours? This innocent speech was interpreted by his corrival
Judge, as if he had contemned the Edict about changing of Habits, and expressed
too much love to the Chines Garments, before those of the Tartars; and of this
he sent and Express to advertise the Emperor.

But the Governor Kinus, had a corrupted Secretary, which served the Lord
Chief Justice, who gave him intelligence of all that passed in word or deed in
his Masters House. And as soon as he had notice that this Letter was sent to
the Court, he presently dispatched those who intercepted the Packet, which the
Governor having read, went presently armed to the Judges Palace, whom he
suddenly killed. Then presently he with the whole Province revolted from the
Tartars, and with the great applause of all the Chinese, he submitted himself
to Jugley the new elected Emperor. One only City called Cancheu, which was
governed by an incorrupted Tartar, refused to submit, which was the whole, and
only cause, that the Tartars did recover the two Provinces Kiansi and
Quamtung; both which Provinces revolted at the same time with their Commanders,
and both submitted also to the new elected Emperor. Many places revolt from
the Tartar.
Lihusus was Governor of Quamtung at that time, who resolved to join his
Forces with Kinus, and so to cast the Tartars out of the Empire; which it is
believed they might have affected, if the Governor of Cancheu, which is the
Key and entrance into four Provinces, had not cunningly undermined all their
designs and intentions. But this man hearing that Lihuzus had revolted, and
marched to join his Army with Kinus, dispatched to him this deceitful Letter.
The deceit of the Governor of Cancheu.
I have not hitherto submitted to Kinus, because I knew his forces were not
equal, nor able, to resist the Tartars: But seeing thou my most renowned and
valiant Captain, begins also to march against them, my hopes are at an end. I
am thine, and embrace thy cause; whenever thou shall come, or send, I will
render my City to thee or thine. But in the mean time he sent to all the
Governors in Fokien, to send him secretly all the possible succor they could
raise altogether. Lihuzus having received the Letter marched toward him, as
cheerfully, and as confidently; But though he found the Gates of the City
open, yet he was furiously repelled by the Tartarians opposition; which
unexpected accident so astonished his Soldiers, as many of them perished, and
amongst the rest it is thought himself was killed, for he was never heard of
after.

This reverse and cross fortune did much disturb the progress of the Emperor
Jungley's affairs, though Kinus in the mean time had many singular victories
over the Tartars; for when the chief Governor of all the Western parts of
China, who had placed his chief Seat in Nankuing, had gathered great Forces to
repress this aspiring mind, yet he was several times routed and overthrown by
him, and if Kinus had pursued the course of his victories, he might have come
to the very Walls of Nankuing; but he was sollicitous of the City of Cancheu,
which obliged him to a retreit; for neither was it safe for him to leave an
enemy behind him, nor could he receive victuals from the Emperor Jungley, but
by Cancheu, which is the natural descent of the River, and therefore when he
heard of Lihuzu's defeat, he presently besieged that City with his whole Army;
But whilst he was besieging this City, their came, unfortunately, a new Army of
Tartars from the Emperial City of Peking, which had order to recover this
Province of Kiangsi; and therefore Kinus was forced to raise his Siege to
oppose their entrance by the Northern parts of the Country; And at first having
a vast Army, and used to the Tartarian warfare, he fought both valiantly and
happily; but not being able to sustain any longer their redoubled violent
assaults, he was forced to retire for his security to the Nanchang, Kinus
besieged by the Tartars.
the chief City of that Country; which City the Tartars durst not venture to
take by force, but resolved to reduce it by a long Siege; for which end they
gathered together a Company of Country Clowns to make a large and spacious
Trench round about the City to the River, and there they placed Ships, so as no
Provision could possibly enter. This City of Nanchang is great and extremely
full of inhabitants, besides the multitude of Soldiers which defended it at
that time; so as although Kinus had made great Provision for a Siege, yet after
some months he came to great want and penury; and yet he held it out though
many dyed, expecting still some succors from the Emperor Jungley, which could
not be sent; because the Soldiers of Quamgtung could never subdue the City of
Chancheu, by which his succor was to pass; wherefore Kinus being brought to
great extremity, expressed his mind to his Soldiers in these words, There is
no further hope, (my faithful Companions) but in our own valor and strength,
we must force our way through the Tartarian Army by dint of Sword; be
courageous, and follow my example. And having ordered all affairs, Kinus breaks
out of the City.
he suddenly made a Sally out of the Town upon their Trenches, where, though
he found a vigorous opposition, yet with great difficulty he passed and forced
their Trenches, by which means he saved himself and his Army, having killed
many Tartars; for it is constantly reported that Kinus with his Army lives in
the Mountains, expecting there some good occasion to renew the War.

The City of Nanchang is destroyed.
He being thus escaped, the Tartars Pillaged the City, and put all the Citizens
to the sword; for it is the Tartars custom to spare all Cities which submit to
them, and to those which have made resistance before they were taken they are
more troublesome, but they never spare or pardon those Cities which revolt
after they have once been taken. In this Slaughter they killed the two Priests
which assisted the Christians, and their ancient and fair Church was burned in
the City. After this the Tartars easily recovered the whole Country, and having
appeased all, and left new Garrisons in all places, the Army returned
victorious to the Royal City of Peking. In the mean time this Court prepared
new Armies to reduce Quamgtung with the other. Provinces which acknowledged
Jungley for the Emperor of China; for the Tutor to the young King of Tartary
finding the defections and rebellions in the Southern parts to be very
frequent; resolved to give those Quarters over to some Tributary Royolets,
Three Kings created with as many Armies against Jungley the Emperor of China.
the better to contain those Countries in their duties; wherefore in the year
MDCXLIX. he sent three Armies, consisting partly of Tartars, and partly of
Chinese, under three Tributary Princes, to govern these Provinces with
absolute power and Dominion; one of these was King of Fokien, another of
Quamgtung, and the third of the Province of Quangsi; but with this condition,
that first of all they should join their Forces to recover the Country of
Quamgtung and drive away the Emperor Jungley. But we shall say more of this
hereafter; now having seen the Rebellions of the South, let us look a little
back on the Rebellions in the North against the Tartars also.

In these Northern parts the Chinese showed their desire of Liberty as much as
they had done in the South; where the Commanders though overthrown, yet not
taken, retired into the abrupt and precipitious Mountains, where they held
Counsel, how they might shake off the Tartars Dominion; three of these heads
inhabited the thickest and highest places of that mountanous Country; the
chiefest of which was called House; this man being strong in men, invited the
rest to join with him, to deliver his Country from this miserable thraldom;
one of them consented, the other could not come, but sent him two thousand men
to assist him; House rises against the Tartars.
so as House marched out with five and twenty thousand men, which was no
contemptible Army if they had been as courageous, as numerous: He put out a
Proclamation, in which he challenged the Tartars, and threatened them all
extremities, and to the Chinese, he promised all liberty and freedom; and upon
these hopes, many Towns and Cities admitted him very willingly. Sigan, the
Metropolitan of the Country, was the only place able to resist him, having in
its Walls three thousand Tartars, and two thousand selected men of China, who
served the Tartar. The Governor of this Town hearing of House his motion,
gathered all things necessary for a long Siege, till a new supply of Tartarian
Forces could be sent him. But when he heard that all the Towns and Cities in
the Country did voluntarily submit themselves to House, The barbarous resolution
of a Tartarian Governor.
to prevent the like effect in his own City, he resolved to murder all the
Citizens most barbarously; nor would he ever be removed from this unhumane
sentence, till the Viceroy commanding and persuading, and the Citizens
promising all faithful service, at length he changed this Tyrannical Counsel.
But he commanded under pain of death, that whereas hitherto the Chinese, who
loved so much their Hair, that they only cut a little of it away, about their
Temples, should hereafter shave it off wholly and totally, that so he might
distinguish the Citizens from any others if perchance they entered: he ordained
besides, that if any spoke more than two together, they should all be presently
killed; he forbad all men to walk upon the Walls, or to walk in the Streets by
night, or to keep a Fire or Candle in his House by night, and finally disarmed
all; declaring it death to infringe any of these orders.

These things being thus ordered, The chief City called Sigan is besieged.
he sent out some Scouts to discover the enemies strength, who were partly
killed, and partly came flying back to the City; but this Tartarian Governor,
as well to make an oftentation of his strength, as of his security, commanded
the City Gates to be lest open, nor would he permit the Draw Bridge to be
raised or pulled up, to show he feared nothing. But for all this the Commander
House besieges this City a far off, which was three Leagues compass, and out of
the reach of their Artillery; and to the end he might make a show of greater
forces than indeed he had, he joined to his Army a Company of dull headed
Clowns, by which means he made up a Body of thirty thousand men. The Governor
of the City seeing such an Army as appeared, believed them all to be Soldiers,
and lest his Citizens should join with them, he thought again of cutting all
their throats; but his friends ever diverted him from this outrageous cruelty;
and therefore to divert himself from such horrid projects, he used to walk upon
the Walls, and recreate himself in seeing the Chinese under his colors fight
so valiantly against House; for when he saw this, he used to cry out in their
Language, Hoo Manzu, (as much as to say) O good Barbarians; for so the Tartars
call the Chinaes, as conquering Nations use to expose the conquered to scorn
and derision; and he crowned this scoff with these words Mauzuxa Manzu, as much
as to say, let the barbarous kill the barbarous; yet notwithstanding when they
returned victorious, he did not only praise them, but gave them Money, and
other precious rewards, which were exposed to public view upon the Walls to
animate them to high and generous exploits; so as House finding no Body stir in
the City, as he expected, could do nothing; besides their came new succors to
the Tartarian Army, which when House understood by his spys, he presently
retired. But yet this flight did not serve his turn, nor could he wholly escape
the Tartars hands, for the Horsemen pursuing them fell upon the rear, and
killed many, carrying away great store of Riches, which the Commander
distributed in such proportion, as he gave most to such as were wounded; what
became of House after this action, is unknown, and therefore I conclude that
these Northern revolts produced no other effect, but the spoil, Rapin and
Plunder of all those Quarters, as it had produced the like in the Southern
parts. The Tartars having happily overcome all difficulties hitherto, The
Tartars insolences produced great dangers.
fell into another by their own insolency; from the year MDCXLIX. the Emperor
of the Tartars, being now grown up to man's Estate, desired to Marry the
Daughter of the King of Tayngu, who is Prince of the Western Tartars, hoping by
this match, to conserve the friendship of him, whose Forces he feared; for this
end he sent his Uncle to him, who was King of Pauang. This Prince passed by the
impregnable City of Taitung; which as it is the last City toward the North, so
also it is the Key and Bulwork of the Province of Xansi against the irruption
of the Western Tartars; for it commands all the Soldiers which keep the many
Fortifications of those Quarters, where a fair Level down extending it self
beyond that famous Wall, I mentioned heretofore, gives a fit occasion for the
incursion of the Tartars. The Women of this City are held the most beautiful of
all China; and therefore it happened, that some of the Ambassadors followers
did ravish some of them, and also carried away by a Rape, a Person of quality,
as she was carried home to her Spouse, which was a thing never heard of
heretofore amongst the Chinese. The people had recourse for these injuries to
Kiangus, who governed those Quarters for the Tartars; who hearing of this gross
abuse, sent to that petty Prince Pauang, to demand the new Married Lady to be
restored, and to desire him to prevent future disorders in that nature; but he
gave a very slight Ear to such complants, and therefore Kiangus himself went
unto him, who was not only slighted, but even cast out of the Palace. His anger
was quickly turned into rage; Kiangus rises against the Tartars.
which made him resolve to revenge that injury by the Tartars blood; he
therefore Musters his Soldiers, and presently falls on the Tartars, kills all
he could encounter; the Ambassador himself being let down by the Walls of the
Town, hardly escaped by swift Horses. Then Kiangus displayed a Banner, wherein
he declared himself a Subject to the Empire of China, but named no Emperor in
particular, because perchance he had heard nothing of the Emperor Jungley, by
reason of so vast a distance. Kiangus gathers great Forces.
But, however, he invited all the Chinese to the defense of their Country, and
to expel the Tartars; and many Captains as well as Soldiers, came in to him;
yea even the very Western Tartars against whom he had ever Born Arms, being
promised great rewards, sent him the Forces which he demanded. This accident
extremely troubled the Court; for they knew well that the Western Tartars did
both aspire to the Empire of China, and also were envious at their prosperous
course of fortune; they also knew that they were more abundant Men and Horses
than they were; for from hence it is they bought all their best Horses, and
they feared that now they should have no more; and therefore they resolved to
send presently a good strong Army against him, before he should gather a
greater strength. But Kiangus who was as valiant as crafty, and one who by long
experience knew how to deal with the Tartars, first feigned to fly with his
Army; But in the rear he placed very many Carts and Wagons, which were all
covered very carefully as if they had carried the richest Treasures they
possessed, but in real truth they carried nothing but many great, and lesser
pieces of Artillery, with their mouths turned upon the Enemy: all which the
Tartars perceiving presently pursue, they fight without any order, and fall
upon the prey with great Avidity; but those that accompanied the Wagons,
Kiangus overthrows the Tartars by a stratagem.
firing the Artillery, took off the greatest part of the Army, and withal
Kiangus wheeling about came up upon them, and made a strange carnage amongst
them; and after this he showed himself no less admirable in Stratagems than in
fortitude and courage, He beats the Tartars again.
when he fought a set pitched field with a new recruited Army of the Tartars,
in which he obtained so noble, and renowned a victory, that he filled all the
Court at Peking with fear and trembling; for by this means victorious Kiangus
had gathered so vast an Army, as he counted no less then a hundred and forty
thousand Horse, and four hundred thousand foot, all men having recourse to him,
to defend their Country against the Tartarian Army; And therefore Amavangus,
Tutor to the Emperor, thinking it not fit to commit this business to any but
to himself, resolved himself to go against Kiangus, and try the last turn of
fortune for the Tartars; Amavangus himself goes against Kiangus
he therefore drew out all the eight Colors, that is, the whole Forces that
were then in Peking; for under these eight colors are comprehended all the
Forces of the Kingdom of China, whether they be Natives or Tartars; the first
of which is White, called the Imperial Banner; the second is Red, the third is
Black, the fourth is Yellow; and these three last are governed and Commanded by
the Uncle of the Emperor, but the first is immediately subject to the Emperor;
of these four colors by several mixtures, they frame four more, so as every
Soldier knows his own colors, and to what part of the City to repair, where
they have ever their Arms and Horses ready for any expedition; The Tartars
Banners.
so as in one half hour they all are ready; for they blow a Horn just in the
fashion of that, which we appropriate usually to our Tritons, and by the manner
of winding it, they presently know, what Companies and Captains must march, so
as they are ready in a moment to follow their Ensign, which a Horseman carries
tied behind him, though commonly none but the Commander and Ensign knows
whether they go: this profound secrecy in their exercise of War, has often
astonished the Chinese; for many times, when they thought to oppose them in
one part, they presently heard they were in another Quarter; and it is no
wonder they are so quick, for they never carry with them any Baggage, nor do
they take care for Provision; for they fill themselves with what they find, yet
commonly they eat Flesh, though half roasted, or half boiled; if they find none
then they devour their Horses, or Camels; but ever when they have leisure, they
go a hunting all manner of wild Beasts, either by some excellent Dogs and
Vultures, which they bring up for that end, or else by incompassing a whole
Mountain, The Tartars delight in hunting.
or large Field, they beat up all the wild Beasts into a Circle, and drive them
into so narrow a Compass, as that they can take as many as they please, and
dismiss the rest. The earth covered with their Horse-cloath is their Bed; for
they care not for Houses, and Chambers; but if they be forced to dwell in
Houses, their Horses must lodge with them, and they must have many holes beaten
in the Walls; but yet their Tents are most beautiful, which they fix and remove
with such Art and dexterity, as they never retard the speedy march of an Army.
Thus the Tartars train their Soldiers to hardness for War.

Out of all these Ensigns Amavangus chose the choicest men to accompany his
person. And besides, he took part of those which he had deputed to follow the
three Royalets which he dispatched to the South, ordering them to take as many
out of the several Garrisons through which they passed, as might supply this
defect. But yet although Amavangus had so gallant, and such a flourishing Army,
yet he never durst give Battle to Kiangus, lest he might seem to expose the
whole Empire of the Tartars to the fortune of one Battle; Amavangus durst not
fight with Kiangus.
So that although Kiangus did frequently offer him Battle; yet he ever refused
to fight, expecting still to hear what reply the Western Tartars would make to
his Proposition of his Nephews Marriage; for he had sent a Legate to that
Tartarian King with precious gifts, as well to demand his Daughter for the
Emperor of China, as to desire him to afford no succor to the Rebel Kiangus.
The precious gifts of Gold, of Silk, of Silver, and of Women, obtained
whatsoever he demanded; and therefore Kiangus seeing himself deserted of the
Tartars, that he might provide as well as he could for his own affairs, he
returned to the City Taitung, of which he soon repented himself, when it was
too late; for Amavangus calling in an innnumerable number of Pezants, in the
space of three days, with an incredible diligence, cast up a Trench of ten
Leagues co^pass, which he so fortified with Bulworks and Ramparts, that in a
trice he blocked up that City. Then did Kiangus see his error in granting them
leisure to draw their Trench, which he knew would debar him from all manner of
Provision. And therefore being enraged with anger, as he was a man full of
metal, and a great Soldier, turning himself to his Soldiers, he said, If I
must dye, I had rather dye by the Sword, than by Famine; and upon this marched
out presently to the Enemies Trench with his whole Army. Here it was that both
the parties fought most obstinately, the one to seek his passage, the other to
hinder his advance; so as the fortune was various, and the victory doubtful,
until an unlucky Arrow transpeirc'd Kiangus, and in him all the hope of China
perished. Kiangus is killed.
His Soldiers seeing him dead, partly run away, and partly submitted to the
Tartars, who received them with all courtesy and humanity; for they had cause
enough of joy, to see they had escaped the danger of losing the Empire, and
that they had conquered so formidable a Commander. But yet they Plundered the
City ^aitung, and burned the City of Pucheu, where the Church of the Christians
also perished. From hence the Tartars returned to Peking, where I saw them
enter overloaden with Riches and triumphant Laurels; But Amavangus pursued his
journey to the Western Tartars, where he ratified his Nephew Xunchius his
Marriage, Xunchius the Emperor Marrys.
and brought back with him an infinite Company of Horse from the Tartars of the
Kingdom of Tanyu. In the mean time, the three Royalets which went to the
Southern Kingdoms, to pacify those unquiet Provinces, passed their journey by
the descent of the River Guei, and when they passed through that Province,
which the Emperor had given the Tartars to inhabit, and cultivate, after he
had expelled the Chinese for their Rebellion; most of these Pezants, being
wholly ignorant of tilling and manuring the ground, as having never been used to
manage a Spade or a Plough, but their Swords, these men I say, desired
earnestly these Princes, that they might accompany them in these Wars, and in
their expeditions; Two of these Princes rejected their Petitions, but the third
called Kengus without any consent or order from the Emperor, listed them
amongst his own Troops; upon which they joyfully changed their rustical
instruments into weapons for War; when the Emperor heard of this proceeding,
he sent word to Kengus to dismiss them, but he pretended various excuses, and
did neglect the Emperors orders. He therefore commanded the supreme Governor
of all the Southern Quarters, who resides ever at Nanking, to take Kengus
either alive or produce him dead. He presently cast about how to compass the
Emperors command with all secrecy, and received the three Royolets with all
sorts of divertisements, of Comedies, Banquets, and the like pleasures, as if
he had received no distasteful order from the Emperor. And when the day was
come that they resolved to prosecute their journey by the great River of Kiang,
the said Governor contrived his business so, as he met them again in the
River, and under pretense of taking his last farewell, he entertained them
nobly with a Royal feast, and in as Royal a Junck, which in China are so
magnificent, as they resemble rather some gilded Palaces than floating Vessels.
In this Princely Ship he entertained these Princes in all jollity and mirth,
until their Army had advanced a good way before, and then he declared to
Kengus the Emperors order; who presently promised all submission, and to
return to Nanking with him, if he would only permit him to go to his Ship,
which expected him in the River, to order some little affairs of his own; which
being granted, he no sooner got into his Ship, but knowing he could not avoid
death by another man's hand, Kengus hangs himself.
he chose rather to be his own executioner, and hanged himself. Yet for all
this, the supreme Governor in the Emperors name, granted to this Man's Son the
same Dignity and Province which had been conferred upon the Father; and thus
the three Royalets joining again, having passed Nanking and Kiangsi, came at
length into the Province of Quamgtung, to carry on the War against the Emperor
Jungley; and at their first entrance, they took many Cities, which were loath
to oppose the strength of their Armies; only, the City of Quangcheu resolved
to try its fortune and strength.

This City of Quangcheu is a most rich and beautiful place, environed with
large waters, and is the only Southern Port within the Land, to which Boats
may have access; In this Town was the Son of the Captive Iquon whom I mentioned
before; besides, there was a strong Garrison to defend it, and amongst others
many fugitives from Macao, who were content to serve the Emperor Jungly for
great stipends; and by reason the Tartars had neither Ships, nor skill to
govern them, and that the Town had both the one and the other, it is no wonder
if they endured almost a whole years Siege, having the Sea open for their
relief, But they made many assaults, in which they lost many men, and were ever
beaten back, and vigorously repelled. This courage of theirs, made the Tartars
fall upon a resolution of beating down the Town Walls, by their great Canon,
which took such effect, as in fine they took it the 24. of November MDCL. and
because it was remarked that they gave to one of the Prefects of the Town, the
same Office he had before, it was suspected it was delivered by Treason. The
City of Quangcheu is taken and Pillaged.
The next day after, they began to Plunder the City, and the sackage endured
from the 24. of November till the 5. of December, in which they never spared
Man, Woman or Child, but all whosoever were cruelly put to the Sword; nor was
their heard any other Speech, But, Kill, Kill these barbarous Rebels; yet they
spared some artificers to conserve the necessary Arts, as also some strong and
lusty men, such as they saw able to carry away the Pillage of the City; but
finally the 6. day of December came out an Edict, which forbad all further
vexation, after they had killed a hundred thousand men, besides all those that
perished several ways during the Siege. After this bloody Tragedy, all the
Neighboring Provinces sent voluntarily their Legates to submit, demanding only
mercy, which they obtained by the many rich presents which were offered. After
this the Royalet marched with his Army, against the City Chaoking, where the
Emperor Jungley held his Court; but he knowing himself far inferior in
Forces, and unable to resist, fled away with his whole Army and Family, The
Emperor Jungly fly^.
leaving the City to the Tartars mercy. But whither this Emperor fled, is yet
wholly unknown to me, for at this time I took Shipping in Fokien to the
Philippines, and from thence I was commanded to go for Europe, by those to whom
I consecrate my self, and all my labors. But I make no doubt, but the Emperor
retired into the adjoining Province called Quangsi.

Now to give the Reader a little touch how the Tartars stand affected to
Christianity, it deserves to be reflected on, that in the Metropolitan City of
Quangcheu, which as I now related was utterly destroyed, there was a venerable
person, who had the care and superintendency of all the Christians, whose name
was Alvarus Semedo a Jesuit; this Man they took and tied hand and foot, for
many days, and threatened to kill him every hour, unless he would deliver the
Christians Treasures; but the poor Man had no Treasure to produce; so as he
suffered much, till at length the King hearing of his case, took pity of his
venerable gray Heirs and comely person, and gave him not only his life and
liberty, but a Bible, and Breviary, The Tartars offer a Church to Christians.
which is their Prayer Book, together with a good sum of Money for an Alms, and
finally a House to build a Church for Christians; and this is less to be
wondered at from him, who heretofore was a Soldier under that famous Sun
Ignatius, whom I mentioned before, where he knew what belonged to Christianity,
and also had seen the Jesuits in the Camp, from whence he fled to the Tartars.
Nor is it only this Tartar that loves us Christians, but in a manner all the
rest do love, honor, and esteem those Fathers, The Tartars embrace Christians.
and many have embraced our Religion, nor do we doubt but many more would
follow their example, if we could enter Tartary, as now it is projecting, where
doubtless many great things might be performed, for the reducing of that Nation
to the Faith of Christ; and perchance God has opened away to the Tartars to
enter China, to give Christianity a passage into Tartary, which hitherto to us
have been unknown and inaccessible.

About this time also they made War against the Kingdom of Corea; Corea
revolted from the Tartars.
for of late years they became also Tributary to the Tartars, upon condition
that they should still conserve their Hair and habits: but now the Tartars
would needs constrain them to conform themselves to the Tartarian fashion; and
therefore all that Kingdom revolted from the Tartars; but my departure hindered
me from knowing since what has passed.

But all these glorious victories were much Eclipsed, Amavangus dies.
by the sorrowful death of Amavangus, which happened in the beginning of the
year MDCLI. He was a Man to whom the Tartars owe their Empire in China, and
such an one as whom both Tartars and Chinese loved and feared, for his
prudence, Justice, humanity, and skill in Martial affairs. The death of this
Potentate did much trouble the Court; for the Brother to this Man called
Quingtus, would needs pretend to the Government of the Empire, and of the young
Emperor Xunchius, but both the Tartars and the Chinese resisted his clame,
alleging, that, being of sixteen year old, he was able to govern the Kingdom
himself, and in conformity to this opinion, all the Presidents deposed the
Ensigns of their Offices, refusing ever to receive them from any, but from the
young installd Emperor Xunchius. To which Constancy the King Kuintus, Uncle to
the Emperor, prudently yielded, lest he should exasperate the minds of many,
and raise greater troubles in the Empire than would advance his Family.

But I cannot doubt, but the death of Amavangus, must needs trouble the
Tartarian Empire, and bring all their affairs into great disturbance; for they
will hardly find a Man so beloved, feared, and expert in all Military
Discipline and Government as he in effect showed himself to be; but time will
teach us, what will become of all, for since his death we have no certainty of
any relation; now let us turn the thread of our discourse as I promised here
above, and consider the fortune and success of the other Great Brigand called
Changhienchungus, to let the Reader understand how the Tartars did invade not
only the Mediterranean and Oriental parts, but also the Occidental Quarters of
that vast Kingdom.

But before I begin to speak of this monster of nature, Changhienchungus a
cruel Tyrant.
I must ingenuously confess, I am both ashamed, and also touched with a kind of
horror, to declare his villainies, both in respect they seem to exceed all
belief, and therefore I may perchance be held to write Fables, as also it is
not handsome to make reflections on such Subjects; yet I may sincerely protest,
that I have in my hands a long relation of all his Acts, written by two
Religious persons, who were then in the Province of Suchuen to exercise their
Functions, which Country was the Theater of all his Brutalities which I shall
relate; and because I judge these two persons to be of an incorrupted a Faith,
I judge therefore that a mortal Man might arrive to this pitch of wickedness
and inhuman Cruelty. I therefore gathered out of that relation, what I here
relate, which is nothing else but a vast Mass of such abominable Cruelty, as I
doubt not even the most mildest Reader will take the Author to be no Man but
some horrid wild Beast, or rather if no more execrable name occurs, some Devil
transvested in our humane Nature.

This monster like a wild Bear entered into diverse Provinces, filling all with
Rapin, Death, Fire and Sword, with all other imaginable miseries; for he had a
mind to destroy all, that so he might have no enemies, or leave any alive that
might revolt from him, but only content himself with his own Soldiers, and
often times he spared not these. But the Province of Suchuen, where he usurped
the Title of a King was the chief Theater of his barbarous Cruelty; for after
he had afflicted and vexed the Provinces of Huquang and Honan, and part of that
of Nanking and Kiangsi, he entered the Province of Suchuen in the year MDCXLIV,
and having taken the principal City called Chingtu, in the heat of his fury he
killed a King of the Tamingian race, which here had established his Court; as
he has done also to seve^ other Grandees of the same Family. He kills diverse
Princes.
These were the Preludes of the Tragical Acts, whose Scenses I go about briefly
to describe, that so Europe may see, what a horrid and execrable thing an
unbridled and armed cruelty appears to be, when it furiously rages in the
darkness of Infidelity.

This Brigand had certain violent and sudden buttads of furious cruelty, and
maxims drawn from the very bowels of vengeance it self; for if he were never so
little offended by another, or suspected another to be offended with him, he
presently commanded such to be massacred; and having nothing in his mouth but
murder and death, he often for one single Man's fault destroyed all the Family,
respecting neither Children, For one offending he puts to death.
nor Women with Child; nay many times he cut off the whole Street where the
offender dwelled, involving in the Slaughter, as well the innocents as nocents.
It happened once he sent a Man Post into the Country of Xensi, who being glad
he was got out of the Tyrants hands, would not return; to revenge this
imaginary injury, he destroyed all the Quarter of the City in which he dwelt,
and thought he much bridled his fierceness, that he did not wholly extinguish
all the City. To this I add another unhumane Act about his Hangman, whom it
seems he loved above the rest, because he was Crueller than the rest; when this
Man was dead of his Disease, he caused the Physician who had given him Physic
to be killed; and not content with this, he Sacrifised one hundred more of that
Profession to the Ghost of his deceased Officer.

He was affable and sweet toward his Soldiers; he played, banquetted, and
feasted with them, conversing familiarly with them; and when they had performed
any Military Action, with honor and valor, he gave them precious gifts of
Silks and moneys; but yet many times he commanded some of them to be cruelly
put to death before him; especially such as were of the Province of Suchuen
where he reigned, whom he entirely hated them, because he thought they did not
rejoice in his Royal dignity. Insomuch as he hardly ever did any public
Action, His hatred to the people of Suchuen.
which though it begun like a Comedy, yet had not in fine, the sad Catastrophie
of a Tragedy; for if walking out he did but epsy a Soldier ill clad, or whose
manner of Gate or walking was not so vigorous or Masculine as he desired, he
presently commanded him to be killed. He once gave a Soldier a piece of Silk,
who complained to his fellows of the pooreness of the piece, and being
overheard by a spy, (of which he had a great number) who presently acquainted
him with what was said, he presently commanded him, He cuts off a Legion for
one Man's fault.
and this whole Legion which were of two thousand Men, to be all Massacred.

He had in his Royal City some six hundred Prefects, or Judges, He kills many
City Officers.
and men belonging to the Law, and such as managed the principal Offices; and
in three years space there was hardly twenty left, having put all the rest to
several deaths for very slight causes; He caused a Sergeant Major which the
Chinese call Pingpu, to be flead alive, for having granted leave to a China
Philosopher, without special order, to retire a little to his Country House.
And whereas he had five hundred Eunuchs taken from the Princes of the Tamingean
Family, And he killed also the Eunuchs.
after he had put their Lords to death; he commanded all these to be cruelly
put to death; only because one of them had presumed to style him, not by the
Title of a King, but by the bare name of the Thief Changhienchungus, as if he
then were no Thief.

Nor did he spare the Heathenish Priests, who sacrifised to their Idols. These
sort of men, before he came into this Country, having feigned many crimes
against the Priests, which Preached the Faith of Christ, had raised a bitter
persecution against them; which God of his goodness did turn so much to their
good, as they had permission to teach and Preach publicly the Law of Christ.
But after this Tyrant came into the Country, the chief of these Heathenish
Priests was apprehended for some words let fall against him, and in the
presence of the Fathers, who by accident were then at audience with the Tyrant,
he was beheaded; And although they had learned of Christ to do good for evil,
yet knowing the phrenetical anger and fury of this monster, who used to punish
those that interceded, with the punishment of the offender, they durst not make
any motion for the least favor. It is true, this cruel Beast loved these
Fathers, and would often converse with them, whom he experienced wise and
learned, and he would often call them to the Palace to entertain him in
discourse; but they knowing well his precipitous anger, went ever prepared, and
expecting death, and indeed they were thrice deputed to death, and the fourth
time escaped by Gods particular providence, as we shall relate in time and
place. But he was not contented with the death of one of these same Heathenish
Priests, but having got together about twenty thousand of the same profession,
For one Man's fault he kills twenty thousand.
he sent them all to Hell, to visit their Masters whom they had served. And
then he would applaud himself as if he had done a very Heroical Action, saying
to them, These Men would have taken away your lives; but Thiencheu, so they
call God, which signifies the Lord of Heaven, has sent me to revenge your
cause, and inflict due punishment upon these wretches. He would often confer
also with the Fathers of Christian Religion, and that so properly as a man
would take him for a Christian. He praised, and highly extolled the Religion of
Christians, which he well understood, partly by the conferences which he
frequently had with the Fathers, and partly by reading their Books, which for
the Instruction of Christians they had writ in the China Language; and has
often promised to build a Church to the God of Christians, worthy of his
magnificence, when he once came to be Emperor of China; and indeed all the
works he erected were very splendid and magnificent; but he polluted them all
with the blood of the Workmen; for if he found they had but committed the least
error, or the least imperfection, he presently put them to death upon the
place.

He endeavors to take Hanchung.
On the North part of the Country of Suchuen, where it confines with the
Province of Xensi, lies the strong City called Nanchung, which though it be
seated in the County of Xensi, yet in respect, it is both so strong and of so
great an extent, it is held to be the Key of both the two Provinces. The Tyrant
endeavored by all industry to make himself Master of this important place, as
being a convenient passage to the rest; wherefore in the year MDCXLV. he levied
a vast Army, consisting of one hundred and fourscore thousand men, all Natives
of the County of Suchuen, besides those of his own, which had always followed
him. This numerous Army besieged the Town a long time, but found so rigorous
resistance, that they began to be weary, and about forty thousand of those
Soldiers of Suchuen revolted to the Prefects which governed the beleagured
City; by which means the Army was constrained to return to the Tyrant, He kills
140000 men most cruelly.
without any memorable Action: and he being enraged with anger to see them
return, commanded all the rest of the Soldiers of the Province of Suchuen,
which were in number one hundred and forty thousand, to be all massacred by the
rest of the Army. This horrible Butchery lasted four days; in which slaughter
he commanded many of them to have their skins pulled of, which he filling with
straw, and sowing on the head, commanded to be carried publicly and visibly
into the Towns where they were Born, so to strike more terror into the hearts
of the inhabitants; and after all this, yet he had such a malicious hatred
against this Country, that they did not rejoice that he was King, as he never
ceased to vex and torment it, even when it was in a manner left desolate. Many
unexpert persons, without head or guide, did take Arms against him, but he
quickly dispersed them, being wholly unexperienced in Military Discipline;
others that were wiser, leaving the City, retired into the Mountains, which
were in a manner the only Men who escaped his fury.

After this he called all the Students of the Country to be examined for their
degrees, He kills all the Students.
promising to give those honors, to whomsoever should deserve them best; and
the Chinese are so bewitched with the desire of these dignities, that they did
not conceive the perfidious Stratagem of the Tyrant. Their appeared therefore
in the public Hall deputed for that Ceremony about eighteen thousand persons;
all which he commanded his Soldiers to massacre most barbarously, saying,
These were the people who by their cavilling sophisms, solicited the people to
rebellions.

He kills the Children and exposes the Matrons.
I have a horror to relate so many unhumane slaughters, and yet I see my self
overwhelmed with new ones; for what an addition is it to all his related
barbarities, to tell you, that he never spared Children, Boys, nor Girls, no
nor Matrons with Child and ready to lie down? what an excess of all inhumanity
to take the Prefects Wives, when their Husbands were condemned, but yet alive,
and to expose these Women to all kind of villainies, and then to kill them? This
was so sensible to many, as they rather chose to kill themselves, than to
undergo so infamous and public an opprobry by their honesty. I forbear to
relate more of such detestable and execrable examples, lest I offend the ears
and minds of the Reader by such abominations.

Let us therefore suppress these impurities, and pass to what happened in the
year MDCXLVI. when the Tartars entered into the Province of Xensi to give him
Battle, so as he was forced to go out to meet them. And, to the end he might
leave the Country behind him with more security, he resolved to cut off all the
inhabitants, except those which inhabited the North-East Quarters by which he
was to pass, and therefore must needs reserve these Creatures to assist and
furnish his Army with all necessaries; and therefore he deferred their death to
another time. He therefore commanded all the Citizens of what quality or
condition soever they were, that did inhabit his Metropolitan City of Chingtu
to be bound hand and foot, He kills 600000. in the City Chingtu.
which was done by a part of the Army, which he had called in; and then riding
about them, which vast multitude is related to have been above six hundred
thousand Souls, he viewed them all with less compassion than the cruelst Tiger
would have done; whilst in the mean time, these poor victims with lamentable
cries, which penetrated the very vault of Heaven, and might have moved a heart
composed of stone or Rock, holding up their hands, begged of this outrageous
Tyrant to spare the lives of his innocent people. He stood a while Pensive,
like an astonished and amazed Creature, so as it seemed to be an imperfect
Crisis, wherein humane nature struggled a little with those bowels, and that
heart which was composed of all cruelty; but presently returning to his beastly
nature, Kill, Kill, says he, and cut off all these Rebels, upon which words,
they were all massacred in one day out of the City Walls, in the presence of
this bloody monster. Those Religious persons which are there, the Fathers of
Christianity, resolved to make their addresses for the Tyrant to save their
innocent servants lives; and though all men judged it a desperate attempt, yet
they obtained the lives of those they claimed. So as they distributed
themselves at the City Gates, and as their Clients passed bound to the
Shambles, they mercifully unbound their Shakles, and rescued them from death.
By which occasion also they performed another acceptable Sacrifice to God, in
Baptizing an infinite number of Children, Many Children Baptized.
which the Soldiers willingly permitted, so as the horrid and execrable
cruelty of this Tyrant proved as advantageous to these little Angels, as Herod's
slaughter did to the Blessed Innocents.

They write, that in this massacre their was so much blood spilt, as made the
great River of Kiang, which runs by the City, to increase and swell visibly;
and the dead Corpse being cast into the River, and carried downwards to the
other Cities, did denounce unto them, that they were to expect no better Treaty
from this Tyrants hands. And it quickly proved true, for he dispatched his Army
to the rest of the Cities, and killed all that he could lay hands on; and thus
this Tyrant did bring that populous Province of Suchuen into a vast wilderness.
After this, he mustered all his Soldiers into a Field, which in China is ever
deputed for that end, and is called by the Natives Kioochang, in this place, he
delivered himself thus unto them, I hope by your valor to obtain the Empire of
the world, when I have expelled the Tartars; but I desire to see you yet
quicker and nimbler than hitherto you have been; you all know, to free you from
all burdens and heavy luggage, how I sunck threescore Ships full of Silver in
the River of Kiang; which I can easily recover, to reward your pains and
merits, when I shall once have obtained the Empire; he had indeed sunk the
Ships, and killed the Ship-men, to conceal the place; but there remains yet a
greater encumbrance, which retards much our journey, and all our enterprises,
which is your Wives, which are a heavy burden to you all; Therefore put on a
generous resolution, There will not be wanting other exquisit Women, when we
are come to possess the Empire; and although as Emperor I ought to have some
Prerogative, and make a difference betwixt you and my Royal person, yet I am
content in this, to give you all a leading example, which may serve as a
President. He kills all the Soldiers Wives.
After this Speech, of three hundred handsome and beautiful Maids, which he
kept for his voluptuous pleasures, he only reserved twenty to serve his three
Queens, and commanded all the rest to be killed upon the place. The Soldiers
presently followed the example and command of their cruel Tyrant, and cut off
the heads of innumerable innocent Women, as if they had been their mortal
enemies.

Having now no more men in the Province of Suchuen to put to death, He burned
his Palace in the City of Chingtu.
he turned his fury and hatred against Cities, Houses and Palaces: for whereas
he had built himself a very stately and magnificent Palace in the City of
Chingtu, he consumed that, and with it, a great part of that noble City with
fire; besides he cut down all Trees and Woods, that they might profit no man.
And thus (as he said) having purged his Army, he marched on into the Province
of Xensi to meet the Tartars; but as he marched, if he found any man remaining
alive, he commanded him to be killed. And not content with all this, if he
espied any Soldier which marched either too far before, or too far behind,
though the fault were never so little, he killed him presently. He killed all
his sick or weak Soldiers, that they might be delivered (as he said) out of so
miserable and ruined a Country. I suppress many more passages of his cruelty,
because I will hasten to the Catastrophe of this Tragedy.

He was no sooner entered into the Province of Xensi, but one of the Emperors
Uncles meets him with five thousand Tartars, and the Body of the Army marched
after him; five Horsemen run before the Army as usually they do amongst the
Tartars; who if they be well received of the enemy, they retire, and take it as
a sign of Peace and submission; but if they receive any Act of hostility, then
they march up to fight. These Horsemen were espied by the Tyrants Scouts, who
presently brought him tidings of their approach. But he laughed at the news,
and jestingly asked them, If the Tartars had learned to fly. He had at that
time many persons tied before him, which he intended to massacre, and amongst
the rest two of the Jesuits, for asking leave to return into Suchuen, which was
the Country they had undertaken to convert to Christianity. But the sudden
death of this Archbrigand delivered them all, from the imminent danger; for at
the same time came in his chief Commanders, assuring him the Tartar was upon
him; upon which news, he being of a bold and courageous humor, burst out of
his Tent, and without either headpiece or Breast Plate, snatched up a Lance,
went out with a few, to view the enemy. The Tartars presently assaulted the
Tyrant; and the first discharged Arrow, which was as happy to the Tartars, The
Tyrant is slain.
as it was to many others, peirced the heart of that monster of Cruelty,
killing that Man, who had an intention to make an end of all Men; and who from
the base condition of a raskally Thief, presumed to take the Sacred Title of
King and Emperor. The head being down, the Tartars easily seized on the body
of his Army; but many of the Soldiers submitted to them, others were killed,
others run away; and the poor inhabitants of the Province of Suchuen received
the Tartars as their Saviors. The Province of Suchuen is made subject to the
Tartars.
By which means this Province, which is the most Western in China, and borders
upon the Kingdom of Tibet, became subject to the Tartarian Empire.

When they had established Garrisons, and all their other affairs in that
Country, they prepared to return to the Royal City of Peking; leading with them
the two Captive Priests, which they had found in Chains, as a present most
acceptable to the Tartarian Emperor, there I saw then, and left them in great
veneration and honor in the year MDCL.

But this victorious Conqueror returning crowned with Laurels, One of the
Emperors Uncles is ill received.
was ill received and worse recompensed, by his Brother the great Amavangus,
who was the Emperors Tutor; and instead of a deserved triumph, he received an
unworthy death; for being to make a march of many Months, to undergo much
labor, and many troubles, it happened so, as he lost more Men in marching than
in fighting; he was accused of great negligence in governing his Army; and
being of a generous nature, he thought he deserved high praise, but no blame,
and therefore he took his Tartarian Cap, and scornfully trampled it upon the
ground, which is the greatest sign of indignation, which they can express; upon
which fact he was committed to a Prison proper to those of the blood Royal
which he accused of any Crime; But he scorned to be the first of the Tartarian
Family, which should suffer this first opprobry in China; and therefore before
he was carried to this Prison called by the Chinese Coaciang, he hung himself
miserably in his own Palace. He hangs himself.
A Gallant Prince, and worthy of a better fortune. Many think this disgrace to
have grown from Amavangus his eldests Brothers emulation; but I think that
Amavangus was afraid that this Man wanting neither courage, nor wit, would
quickly ruin the Tartarian affairs, by his rash proceedings. And here I will
put a period, rather then an end, to this brief Narration of the Tartars War to
the year MDCLI. in which year I was sent to Europe, by those that may command
me. In which relation if there be nothing else worthy of admiration, yet it
seems admirable to consider, that in seven years space, they conquered more
ground in Longitude and Latitude, then an Army could have walked in that space
of time; for they overrun twelve vast Provinces of China; besides the immense
extents of Leaotung, and the Kingdom of Corea.

What since has past in such vicissitude of fortune, I know not; but as soon
as God shall bless me with a prosperous return into my beloved China; or that
my friends acquaint me with any new Occurrances by Letters; I will procure all
Europe shall understand the Issue of these prodigious revolutions.

FINIS.
An Addition to the former History, taken out of the last Letters from China,
Written in the years 1651. 52. and 53.
AFter the Printing of this our History of the Tartarian Wars, returning to
Brussels from Amsterdam (where I used all possible expedition to bring my Atlas
Sinieus to the Press) I there, received my long desired Letters from China,
sent by my friends from Rome; some of which being dated the 14. of November
1651. were writ by a Sicilian called Father Francis Brancatus, who sojurns in
the City of Xanchai in the Province of Nanking; and reflecting, that happily it
would not be ungrateful to our Europeans, if I made a private relation of
public use; I resolved to draw out this little ensuing Narration from those
Letters written in several years.

The Empire of China is now grown to a more fixed and settled Estate, See fol.
165.
since the death of Amavangus Uncle to the Emperor: who as he was the first
Man that suggested to the Tartars the Emperors invasion, so also, it is to his
care and vigilance they owe the happy success of all, and its conservation.

But yet, the opinion framed of him after his death, was far different from the
authority and power he carried in his life; for no sooner was the power of
reigning by his death devolved into the hands of his Nephew called Xunchi; but
that this Emperor, though a youth in years, began his reign by the approbation
of all estates and orders, with such maturity of judgment, and Council, as he
seemed to surpass the gray and hory heads of his wisest Counselors. He was no
sooner inthroned, then he expressed a strange ripeness of judgment and Justice
joined together in the same Action; Amavangus suspected and punished after his
death.
for having discovered his Uncles wicked Councels and Designs, and traced the
obscure track of his abominable vices, which were hid during his life: he did
so much resent those detestable Acts, as he commanded his body to be dug up,
and his magnificent Sepulcher to be beaten down; The veneration of dead men's
tombs; amongst the Chinese.
which kind of punishment amongst the Chinese it held to be the greatest that
can be inflicted; being taught by their Religion to carry all veneration and
respect to the tombs of dead persons. The Carcass being dragged out, they first
beat it with Clubs, then they scourged it with Rods; and finally cutting off
the head, they made it a spectacle to all Criminal opprobies. Thus the
splendor of his Tomb, was brought to dust; and fortune paid him after his
death, the turn, she owed him in his life. He punished also all the Officers
and Prefects, which were privy to his Councels; putting some to death, and
depriving others of their dignities. Amongst all which I find the fortune of
General Fung to have been very various: who though he be no Christian, yet
being a singular friend, protector of my order, and particularly known to my
self, I cannot but rejoice to hear him restored to his place and dignity, after
his discovered innocence. In the mean time the Emperor Xunchius, The Emperor
of the Tartars Marriage and their customs.
growing up to Man's estate, and sollicitous to propagate his August offspring,
resolved to accomplish his long intended Marriage with the Daughter to the
Emperor of the Occidental Tartars: In which action the Tartars imitate the
European custom; for they take a Lady of some illustrious blood or descent; But
the Emperors of China seem little to value the nobility of blood, but select
the primest beauty; nor will they refuse a person of a mean fortune, if she be
but graced with beauty; In so much, as the Wife to the late Emperor of China,
was Daughter to a Man, that got his living by making straw Shoos. So King
Ahasuerus raised a poor Captive Maid to be Confort with him in his Royal
Throne: which kind of custom happily the Chinese, drew from the Persians, or
else the Persians had it from them. But to return to the subject that caused
this little digression. The Emperors Wedding was performed with a Pomp and
splendour proportionable to such an Empire: nor was there any magnificence
wanting on the Spouses part; for according to the fashion of the Nation, she
came accompanied with whole Armies of Men, and so many Troops of Horse, as they
seemed innumerable; nature seeming to have framed the riches of the Tartars
more for warlike affairs, than for pleasure. Nor is this infinite multitude of
Horse incredible, for I my self have seen eighty thousand Horse, all at one
time, sent as a present from the Occidental Tartars to the King of China.

Which boundless power of the Tartars, The Tartars subdue the rest of China.
as it cannot be contained within any limits, so also it broke out into the
Province of Quamtung, which they wholly subdued; and out of that, like an
impetuous Torrent, they ran into the Province of Quangsi; which they likewise
conquered to their Empire. So as the King of China called Jungley, with his
chief favourit the Eunuch, called Pang Achileus, who professes Christianity,
were feign to fly to the confines of Tunking, being in a manner excluded the
whole Empire. In so much as a friend of mine writes out of the Province of
Fokien, that the King Jungley fearing to fall into the Tartars hands, was feign
to leave the Land, and fly to Sea. But upon what Coast that unmerciful Element
may have cast him, we know not, for we hear no news of our Father Andrew
Xauerius Koffler who ever followed the Court of King Jungley, having had the
happiness to have Baptized his Queen, his Son, and his Mother with many others
of that distracted Court.

In the mean time, whilst one Cang, a Royolet amongst the Tartars, subdued the
Province of Quangsi, the Governor of the Country, whom they call Colaus, fell
into the Enemies hands, and the Tartars hoping by rewards and promises of
dignities, to soften the mind of this so gallant a Man, The great fidelity of
the Governor to his King.
and so eminent a Philsopher, abstained three days from any cruelty, or ill
usage; But he scorned to prefer his life before his allegiance and fidelity to
his King; and therefore lost his head.

But yet, this generous Action was admired and honored by those brutish Souls,
who presently erected a magnificent Tomb, in memory of so honorable an Act;
for although the Tartars solicit the Chinese to revolt from their Prince, yet
they honor and praise such as show themselves constant to him; And this
memorial, I owe unto his memory, well for his singular friendship he was
pleased to contract with me, as also to his eminent virtues, of which, I my
self and the whole Church of Christians in China, were both Spectators and
Admirers, for the space of twenty years. And that his name may not perish, nor
his Country; he was Born in the Province of Nanquin in the City Changcho; being
called Kiu Thomas, a name worthy of eternal memory, in the Temple of virtue.

During the saccage of these Provinces; news arrives from the Country of
Suchuen, that the notorious Brigand called Changhienchungus, famous for his
infamous cruelty and abominable villainies, See fol. 197.
was broke out again, and wasted all that Province with several tempests of
War; for though he seemed to be quite vanquished in the last Battails, yet he
appeared again to trouble and vex the Empire with new Garboyls, and further
Designs of War.

The Province of Fokien also began to groan under the same miserable condition
of War; for the Reverend Father Peter Canevari Native of Genua, writes out of
the City Changcheu which was besieged the 30. of March 1652. that Quesingus
having made a descent from his Ships into that Province had overrun the whole
Country, taken some Cities and Towns, and carried on the War with great terror
to the Inhabitants. Insomuch as the Tartarian Commanders kept themselves, and
their Army in their Forts, and other places of strength, not daring to appear
in the field to oppose them; but yet he said they expected new Forces and
Succors from Peking; by which they doubt not, but quickly to subdue him.

This Quesingus, who now vexes this Province of Fokien, Quesingus the Pyrat.
is Son to the famous Pyrate Iquon or Chinchilungo whom the Tartars imprisoned
by a slight, as I recounted to you in my former History.

And to let you know what I heard from some passengers of China, who in the
month of January 1653. were cast, in a Ship of China, upon the Coasts of an
Island called new Holland; whither I had been brought before by their Barks,
and Soldiers as their Prisoner; These Men related that a great Army of Tartars
was arrived, to subdue Quesingus; whose Commander thought it fit to join art to
his great Force, and therefore he commanded a handful of Men to charge the
Tartarian Army, and presently by feigning flights to retire to more
advantageous and surer places. But in the mean time, he had placed a number of
Horse in a deep valley behind a Mountain, toward which Quarters the fugitive
Troops retired. This flight gave courage to the Tartars, and the desire of
victory, made them venture so far from the River Chang, where their Ships lay
at Anchor, as they found themselves environed by the Tartars Army. This
desperate condition which excluded the Chinese, from returning to their Ships,
caused a very sad, and bloody Battle, in which there perished above 8000 of
the Chinese Army; Quesingus defeated.
whilst Quesingus a spectator of this sad accident from the Mast of his Ships,
and as they relate, was heard to say, that he would once more try his fortune
against the Tartars; but if she proved again adverse unto him, he then would
submit, and shave his Hair, like a Tartar.

Having briefly related the State of the Temporality in this Kingdom, it
remains I should touch a little of the State of Christianity, since these great
revolutions.

In which subject, I can only say, that being at Brusels this last June in the
year 1654. I received Letters from China, in which they gave me notice that the
Father Jesuits, were very favorably treated by the Tartars; yea better than
before, for they permitted free exercise of the Christian Catholic Religion,
through an their Kingdoms, granting them leave not only to enjoy their ancient
Churches, but did also liberally contribute to build new ones; So by the
goodness of God, that which endamaged others, proved gain to them. But I
reserve all particulars to a larger relation in a greater volumn, which shall
continue, Trigautius his History of the missions dispatched into China; and
considering he concludes that History in the year 1610. it shall be my
endeavor to produce the rest of those memorable Actions to these our present
times.

FINIS

