MAN'S WRATH AND GODS PRAISE. OR, A Thanksgiving Sermon, Preached at Taunton,
in the County of Somerset, the 11th. of May, (a Day to be had in everlasting
remembrance) for the gracious deliverance of that poor Town from the strait
siege.

By GEORGE NEWTON, Mr. of Arts, and Minister of the Gospel in that place.

PSALM. 118.24 This is the day which the Lord has made; made solemn above
other days, by extraordinary mercy: and we will make it solemn above other
days, by extraordinary joy: We will rejoice and be glad in it.

LONDON, Printed by W. WILSON, for Francis Eglesfield at the Marigold in Paul's
Churchyard, and are to be sold by George Treagle in TAUNTON, 1646.

To the Worshipful the Major, the Common Council, and the rest of the
Inhabitants of Taunton Magdalen, my duly respected, and dearly affected
friends.
SIRS,
THey that have been acquainted with my resolutions will admire to see any
thing of mine (especially by my consent) made thus public. This Infant as you
know was very weak, and there was neither Will nor Strength to bring it forth
in this way, but it was forced into the world by strong expulsives. Now it is
come abroad my hope is, that either (like Zaccheus) it will be hid among the
crowd of taller and more stout conceptions: or if any chance to spy it, he will
not be so unworthy to wrong such a poor weak thing as this is. If it may live
to be to any of you a remembrancer of the uncomparable mercy of our God, who
showed himself upon the Mount, I have the utmost of my aim in this
publication.

We find sometimes in Scripture, that a heap of stones has served for a
memorial, as well as a more curious Pillar. Though this be but a heap of
things, not orderly digested in a curious Method, but hastily thrown up
together, as the short time for preparation would permit; (this service
following close upon the Sabbath days labor) yet it may serve for a memorial
of that sweet and precious mercy, which if it dye in your thoughts, I desire to
dye with it. The Lord set up a lasting monument of this deliverance in our
hearts, and write it there with a pen of Iron, and the point of a Diamond in
indeleble Characters, that no injuries of time may ever blot it out again; and
give us yet at length, to render to him according to the benefits he has done
us, lest we provoke him to repent, and do us evil after he has done us good.

My heart bleedes when I think what God has done, what he expects, what we
return, and what is likely to become of all in the latter end. I have a horrid
apprehension of it, as the Prophet had; if after God has punished us far
less then our iniquities deserve, and given us such a deliverance as this, we
should again break his Commandments. We should again? Why, we do break
them since there came deliverance, and that more frequently and boldly then we
did before. The Lord break our hearts for it, and help us to make up our
breaches and our controversies with him, in, and by him, who as our peace,
before our houses (that be left) be all desolate; before it come to, Oh that
thou had known; before the wrath of God arise against us, and there be no
remedy.

All that I have to add is this desire, that as the Sermon is a monument (such
as it is) of Gods praise for the deliverance of this happy day: So this
Dedication of it, may be a monument of my thankfulness to you, for all the
great encouragement, and kindness, and respect, with which you have refresht
his bowels, who is, in the Apostles style, 2 Cor. 4.5.

Your Servant for Jesus sake, GEO. NEWTON.

MAN'S WRATH AND GODS PRAISE.
PSALM. 76.10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, the remainder of wrath
shall thou restrain.


WE are assembled in the presence of the Lord this day to make good this text.
Not to preach upon it only, nor to hear it, but to act it. To take occasion
from the wrath of man to praise the Lord. And certainly if ever any people in
the world had cause to say, as the Prophet in my text, Surely the wrath of man
shall praise thee, we the poor people of this place have cause to say it.
Surely the wrath of man, which was so largely manifested, and so mightily
restrained; shall quicken us and stir us up to celebrate the praises of the
God of our salvation.

This Psalm is Eucharisticall, a Psalm of praise, and therefore yields fit
matter for a day of praise. Yea for this day of praise as fit (I think) as any
in the book of God. For the occasion of it was the same (as most Interpreters
resolve) with the occasion of the praises of this solemn day; viz, the raising
of the siege which the Assyrian King had laid against Jerusalem.

His great Commanders were come up against it with a mighty have, as you may see
2 King. 18.17. and threatened utter ruin and destruction to it: and that in
such a height of volence and pride and scorn, as ever any ear heard. So that
the hearts of Hezekiah and his people melted in their bosoms: But God comes in
and cheereth them with a most sweet and comfortable message by the Prophet,
Chap. 19.20. etc. And for the proud Assyrian King, he tells him that his wrath
and rage and tumult were come up into his ears. And that how cruel, and how
bloody and how barbarous soever his intentons were; he should not bring them
into act and execution: For he would put his book into his nostrils, and his
bridle in his lips, and turn him back by the way by which he came, ver. 27.28.
And he would diligently defend the City and save it for his own sake. verse.
34. And so accordingly the following night he sent an Angel that went out, and
smote in the Camp of the Assyrians an hundred four score and sive thousand
men. ver. 35. And the next news you hear, the siege is raised, and the City is
delivered.

With reference to this deliverance, this Psalm. of thankfulness was penned. In
which the Prophet magnifieth God who brake the arrows of the bow, the shield,
the sword, and battle of the enemy: Who spoiled the stouthearted, and made them
sleep their last sleep; for so the Angel came upon them in the night you
know, as it is likely when they were asleep, and never suffered them to wake
more: Who caused judgment to be heard from heaven, for thence he sent that
fatal messenger who made such bloody work among them. And in the end the
Psalmist cheeres and comforts up himself, and all the people of the Lord, with
this assurance, drawn out of experience, and out of that which he had seen the
Lord to do against the Proud Assyrian King when he was in the height and huffe
of all his rage and violence against Jerusalem. Surely the wrath of man shall
praise thee, the remainder of wrath shall thou restrain.

So that the words (you see) contain the Prophets sweet and comfortable
meditation against the wrath and rage of man; which they had lately experience
of; in the attempt of the Assyrian host against Jerusalem. And it is here set
down in a gradation. First here is wrath. And then here is a remainder and an
overplus of wrath. 1 Here is wrath let out to execution, and against that the
comfort is that God will turn it to his Praise and advance his glory by it:
Surely the wrath of man (so much as thou art pleased to give way unto, to
suffer to be wrackt and vented on thy people) that shall praise thee. 2 And
then here is a remainder and an overplus of wrath (for there is no end in it)
and against that the comfort is, that God will limit and restrain it. So much
as he foresees will serve to the end and purpose, he restraines.

The wrath of man is not so full of rage and bitterness, as these words are
full of sweetness. And yet (my brethren) they are not so sweet, but they are
as certain too, and therefore they are bound with an asseveration here, which
takes away all scruple from them. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee,
the remainder of wrath shall thou restrain.

If I should make the utmost of this golden sentence (every link of which is
precious) the observations would be many. But because the time is short, I
shall wrap up the sum of all that might be gathered hence in two conclusions;
which you shall see to lie before you in the surface and the letter of the Text
that the that runs may read them. 1. The wrath and rage of wicked men
against the people of the Lord is very great, so great that there is no end of
it. When they have proceeded furthest in execution of their malice, there is an
overplus and a remainder, there is more behind still. 2. Though it have no
limits in it, yet the Lord sets limits to it, and fetches praise and glory to
himself from it. I shall pursue them in their order, as the time will suffer,
beginning with the first.

Doct. The wrath and rage of wicked men against the people of the Lord is very
great, so great that there is no end of it. When they have proceeded furthest
in execution of their malice, there is an overplus and a remainder, there is
more behind still.

There is (...) always in their wrath, the wrath of man shall praise thee,
(says the Psalmist in my Text) and the remainder of wrath shall thou
restrain. So that let them have executed what they will or what they can,
there is a residue of rage and fury in the hearts of wicked men for God to
curb; which if it were not mightily restrained by the hand of heaven, would
break out even to the utter ruin and destruction of the Church. Their venom
is not all spit, their malice is not all spent, there is no Non ultra in their
cruelty.

For further clearing of the truth of this, it is to be considered what the
Holy Ghost observes of HEROD: that when he had done many barbarous and bloody
acts against the Church, he added yet this above all, that he shut up John in
prison, Luke 3.20. He had done enough before, sufficient, any man would think,
to have drawn his rage dry; but this comes after for a vantage, as you see, it
is added above all. And there was more behind still, which you may readily
observe to be drawn forth on all occasions along the current of his story.
Those enemies of whom the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 124.3. if they had been endued
with power according to their rage, they would have swallowed up Gods people
quick, so desperately they were bent against thous. Like ravenous beasts they
would not have forborne so long to kill them first, and then to chew them and
devour them: no they would greedily and hastily have snapt them up, and
swallowed them alive. The cruelty of Edom is remarkable, nothing will satisfy
him but the utter desolation of the Lords Jerusalem: Down with it, down with it
even to the ground. And Babylon goes further yet, she takes the little ones,
and dashes them against the stones. What soldiers heart almost would not
relent and melt at this, not only in hot blood, to mow down armed enemies
together in the field: but afterward to come deliberately into a conquered
Town, and there to take up little children sprawling by the heels, and to
dash out their brains against the walls? Yet thus dealt Babylon with Gods
people. See how the Saints of God were used by bloody persecutors, and by
cruel men, Hebr. 11.36. and the following verses. That place may serve in
stead of all, where the Apostle sets forth at large the matchless cruelties
that they endured, and makes a Catalogue of diverse exquisite and horrid
tortures they suffered, which seems to be penned in characters and lines of
blood. They had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea moreover of bonds
and imprisonment. They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were
slain with the sword, they wandered about in sheep-skinnes and goat skins, being
destitute, afflicted, tormented. And yet the men who were exposed to all this
favage cruelty were such, and so unparalleld in holiness, that the world was
not worthy of them.

And if we search the stories of the Church (my brethren) we shall find, that
the ages since our Savior, have equaled, yea exceeded those that went before
him, in rage and cruelty against the Lords people. In the ten persecutions of
the Church, and in the Marian days in this Kingdom, the enemies were never at
a stand, they never thought they had proceeded far enough, though they were
come to extremity of rage against the Saints. No my beloved, they waxed still
more mad against them, as the phrase is, Acts 26.11. And as a mad man knows no
measure in his fury, so it was with these men. Mad they were, and madder every
day they grew; so that they sought out new devised tortures, and he was
thought to have deserved well that did evil in the invention. These days of
war and desolation have furnished us with the sad examples of the endless fury
of ungodly men, so that I need to say no more, we have seen it by experience,
that the wrath of wicked men against, etc. Nor need we wonder at it my
beloved, for

1. They are by nature full of all maliciousness, so full that they are like
to burst with it. They are of barbarous, and bloody, and inhumane dispositions.
Mercy (my brethren) is a fruit of Gods spirit, and consequently is indeed in
none but Gods people, Wicked men have no mercy, and so they show no mercy, as
the Apostle James speaks. Or if they have a kind of mercy in them, it is a
mercy merciless, (if I may express it so) their mercies, yea their tender
mercies are cruel, Prove. 12.10. They are men of stupid spirits, of seared
consciences, and hard hearts, they are as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4.19.
(...) past feeling. Their wickedness, in many of them, has quite extinguished
those slender sparks of ingenuity which the decays of nature left in them, so
that for rage and cruelty they are become brute creatures. And hence the
Scripture likens them to bears, and bulls, and asps, and tigers, and
Leviathans, and other ravenous and fierce creatures. Yea as if they went beyond
the cruellest of beasts on dryland, they are compared to Sea monsters. Lam. 4.3.

2. And as they are by Nature full of rage and malice, so their rage and malice
is extremely heightened by the antipathy and enmity they have against the Lords
people: and hence it is, that there is no end in it. For enmity calls out the
rage that is within, and makes it swell beyond all measure. Now there is in the
hearts of wicked men a bitter enmity against the woman's ford, against the
Children of the Church, they hate them with a perfect hatred, and that to the
very death; and therefore they will show them no mercy: Some pity they may show
perhaps to other men, to men of their own Tribe, to persons that are lewd and
wicked and abominable like themselves: but for the Saints they shall not raste
a drop of it. How pitiful was Saul to Agag? His tender heart (forsooth) would
not permit him to destroy him; but he had no such tender heart to Holy David;
if he could once have gotten him into his power, he had surely dyed for it:
And he could kill almost an hundred of the Priests of God in one hour, without
remorse or reluctation. So Ahab seems to melt upon Benhadad, an open enemy of
Gods people, he calla him brother; and he shall know that he will use him like
a brother, and that he will not take away his life from him, though God
himself had appointed him to dye. And yet he butchers all the Prophets of the
Lord that he can get into his hands, without mercy or compassion. This is the
manner of ungodly men; Pity they have for vicious and profane persons, but
they have none for Gods People; no they must taste the utmost of their fury.
Their malice and their rage against them is so great, that nothing will appease
it but their utter extirpation, nothing but their cutting off, that they may
have no more a being, no nor so much as the memorial of a being, that the name
of Israel may be no more remembered, Psalm. 83.4.

What was it that boiled up the rage of our malicious enemies so high against
us, but because we were (as they accounted us) a strict and a precise Town,
though GOD knows we have ever been too large and too loose? Indeed that hatred
which arises from Religion is bitterest of any other. The first that ever was,
was founded there, and you know how far it went, it rested not, till it
arrived at the shedding of a brothers blood. This brings forth, immortale odium
and nunquam sana^^ile bellum. This makes the brother to destroy the brother,
the father to deliver up the son to death, as Christ speaks Luke 21.16. It
respects not country, friendship, alliance, kindred, any thing, it knows no
bounds of moderation. And hence it is (my brethren) that the rage of wicked men
against the people of the Lord is such a bottomless and endless rage, because
they hate them for holiness and for religions sake.

Use 1. And is it so (my brethren) that the rage of wicked men, etc. Then in
the first place, let it be a Caveat to us, not to trust them, nor to leave any
thing (if we can hinder it) to their mercy. It concerns us very deeply to tie
them up as short, to keep them in as straight a compass as we can. Their
rage and fury if it once get loose, has no bounds and limits in it; and
therefore we must limit it if we be able, we must hamper them, and bind
them as a man would do wild Beasts and brute Creatures. The Scripture likens
them to such, as we have showed you; by which the Holy Ghost would have us to
know; what disposition they are of, and how we are to deal with them.

And yet mistake me not, I do not say these brutish creatures should be curbed
by popular and private hands, in a tumultaary way, (no, this is not the way of
God) but by the hands of those who are the Ministers of God for this purpose.
And I am very much afraid, that they who have authority and power in this
respect committed to them ard not so circumspect and cautious as they ought to
be. That there is too much liberty already given (I do not say to such as have
been moderate and of a milder disposition, but even) to such as have declared
themselves to be implacable and desperate enemies of God, and of his people;
and that they are let loose too soon. Perhaps they fawn and flatter, and
submit, they give fair words and promises and protestations: and who would not
do so, if after he have showed himself so far, and had his hands so deep in
so much blood; and as much as in him lies, in the destruction of this glorious
kingdom, he may be entertained and received upon equal terms, with those who
have been most cordial, and have laid out themselves for God and for his
cause; What ever wiser men may think, it is somewhat early, as it seems to me,
to trust them, and to commit our selves to them.

We might learn a point of prudence and Christian policy in holy David, 1 Samuel 24. ult. There was ameere affinity by reason of his marriage between Saul
and him. Saul had acknowledged David's innocence, his kindness, and made him
goodly protestations as a man could do. And yet when all was done, the holy
Ghost observes; that Saul departed home, and David get him up into the hold. As
who should say, he would not trust him, notwithstanding all this. A simple
harmless man would have believed Saul, he would have thought that all had been
in truth that he had said, and so have put himself into his power. He would
have reasoned with himself to this purpose. I see that Saul is altered now,
for he acknowledges his errors, (as there he does in that place) he confesses
his offense, he promises as fairly, and it should seem as cordially as a man
can do. And shall I not give credit to his vows and protestations? It is
impossible now he has so declared himself so publicly, so earnestly, that
he should ever break with me. But David was a little wiser then to commit
himself to Saul, he was too old now to be caught with a few fair words
from him, in whom he had experience of so much falsenesse. No no, he will not
trust him yet, he will not slight his Garrison, he will not yet deliver up the
place of his defense. Saul departed, faith the Text, and David and his men gat
them up into the hold.

Use 2. Is it so my brethren, that the rage of wicked men against the people of
the Lord, is such a bottomless and endless rage? Then let us earnestly
beseech the Lord that we may not be given up into their power what ever
judgment come upon us. True it is, we must confess we have deserved heavy
judgments, bitter trials, sharp corrections; and if the Lord see fit, we
ought with meekness to submit to them, and patiently to bear his indignation
because we have sinned against him. But yet let us be earnest with him, that
if he be resolved to scourge us, he would be pleased to take the pains to
chasten us himself, and not to give us up into the hands of those whose tender
mercies are cruel. Oh let us beg as the Prophet David did in such a case, 2 Samuel 24.14. Let us fall now into the hands of God, for his mercies are great,
and not into the hands of barbarous and bloody men. And let it be our study
and endeavor so to walk, that we do not provoke the Lord to take this
sharp and rigid course with us. And to this end we must be careful to avoid
those sins which cause the Lord to leave a people or a person in the hands of
such wretches. I might be very copious here; but I shall name but two
particulars for haste, and so on.

1. The first that I will mention is, forsaking God, and casting off his
service. When men will be no longer subject to the Lord (at least they will not
be obedient to him fully, but in some certain things only) then he will make
them subject to their cruel enemies. And when they cast away his easy yoke,
the Lord will lay a heavier yoke upon them, the yoke of merciless oppression
by barbarous and bloody men. This is the sin for which he threatens it to his
people, as you may see, Deuteronomy. 28.47. Because thou servedst not the Lord in
gladness and in joyfulnesse of heart in the abundance of all things; therefore
thou shall serve thine enemy in hunger and in thirst and nakedness, and in
the want of all things, and he shall put a yoke of iron on thy neck, until
he have destroyed thee. And this we see accordingly fulfilled on Israel often
in the book of Judges. As long as they were faithful and obedient, they were
free from enemies, they flourisht in a prosperous state: but when they once
forsook the Lord, and grew weary of his service, their adversaries were the
chief, and they that hated them, ruled over them. To this effect, we have a
memorable instance, 2 Chro. 12.5. The Princes and the people had sat loose
from God, and gone a whoring after other gods: and thereupon the Prophet comes
and sounds this terrible allarum in their ears. Thus says the Lord, ye have
forsaken me, and therefore I have also left you in the hands of Shishack. q. d.
I see that you are weary of my service, and therefore you shall serve your
enemies another while, I have left you in their hands. There let them worry you
and spoil you, there let them kill you and destroy you; let them do what they
will for me, you are out of my protection, I have left you, I take no further
charge nor care of you.

2. Another thing provoking God to give a person or a people up into the hands
of cruel men, is non-proficience by his hand upon them. For when he sees they
will not profit by his mild and gentle hand, then he delivers them into the
hands of those that will pay them to the purpose. You shall observe that there
are some afflictions which are in a peculiar name called the hand of God in
Scripture, as the pestilence for instance, for so you find it termed, 2 Samuel
24.14. Let us fall now into the hand of God, says David there. And that you
may not doubt what is intended by the hand of God, it is immediately annexed in
the following words: so the Lord sent a pestilence upon the people. Now then
this hand of God prevails not, when it is slighted and contemned, and brings
forth no amendment in a people, when he perceives that it will never be unless
there be some rougher dealing used, he leaves them in the hands of cruel men.
The Lord himself has an exceeding tender heart toward his people, his very
bowels yearn upon them when he hears them cry, so that he knows not how to
lay so much upon them as their iniquities deserve, nor as is needful for their
reformation. And therefore when he means to have them soundly scourged indeed,
he gives them up unto the power of wicked men, and they he knows will do it
thoroughly. If he chasten them himself, their cries and tears will overcome
him, and make his bowels yearn within him, as he speaks: and therefore he
withdrawes himself, he goes away, and leaves that office to ungodly men, and
they will scourge them till they bleed and roar, for they have no compassion
in them; there is (as you have heard) no end of their fury.

And now (my brethren) I beseech you let us look home. The hand of God, I mean
the plague of pestilence, has been on us the people of this place, a first, a
second, and a third time, within the compass of a very few years. But what
amendment has there followed? May not the Lord complain of us as once he did
of Israel, Amos 4.10. I have sent pestilence among you after the manner of
Egypt, and yet you have not returned to me, says the Lord? I make no question
there were some who were so far affected with this stroke of God, that they
returned to him that smote them, and reformed many things. But they were but a
remnant that returned: they were but as the gleanings after the Vintage, as the
Apostle speaks. Truly (my brethren) I have looked abroad as wide as I am able,
to see if any universal Reformation have followed this affliction in this
place: and I profess unto you in the presence of the God of Heaven and Earth,
that I know not where to find it, nor yet in what particular to say, that we
are better then we were before. Sure I am, that swearing, drunkenness,
uncleanness, profaning of Gods holy day; are not in the abating hand, the face
of things among us looks as ill as ever, men seek the things of Christ as
little, themselves and their own ends as much as ever. Ah my beloved, if this
be all the fruit of the hand of God upon us, the clouds that for so long a time
have lowred black upon us, are not so dispelled yet, but that the Lord can
raise up other enemies among us, or bringin foreign enemies upon us, that
shall make us know the price of slighting and despising his gentle and
indulgent dealing with us.

Use. 3. Is it so my brethren, that the wrath and rage of wicked men against
the people of the Lord is such, and so exceeding great, that there is no end of
it? Oh then what cause have we, the people of this place to magnify the Lord
that has delivered us from this wrath, and from the rage of these men? Alas
how near were we to have it wreakt upon us to the very utmost! If the Lord
had not been on our side, now may we truly say, if the Lord had not been on
our side when men rose up against us; they had swallowed us up quick, so
desperately were they bent against us. We had assuredly been made a prey to
the enkindled and envenomed rage of the most bloody, savage, hardened, and
remorselesse enemies, that ever drew the sword in these wars; whose spite
and rancour was raised to the height against us. Ah my beloved think upon it:
What might you have expected from those savage creatures that were gathered
round about you? Nay, what did you expect, if this poor Town had been taken
by assault? Look back a little I beseech you, and return upon the thoughts
and apprehensions that you had, when men came in with pale, and ghastly
countenances, and with trembling hands and tongues, and cried, Alas, alas, the
eneomie is, broken in at such a place, he is come within the (...); abundance
of our men are slain, and the rest have left the works, the Town is lost,
there is no remedy. When such sad allarums were, bethink your selves, what
did you look for from the enemy? consult with your own hearts, I make no
doubt, the worst that cruelty it self could devise to inflict.

You may a little guess (my BRETHREN) what they would have done, by that which
they have done where they had power. You may read it in the ruins of this
place. Shall I say look about the Town of TAUNTON, and tell her Bulwarks and
her Towers, etc? No my beloved, look about her and tell her heaps of rubbish,
her consumed houses, a multitude of which are raked in their own ashes. Here a
poor forsaken Chimney, and there a little fragment of a Wall, that have
escaped to tell what barbarous and monstrous wretches there have been here.
Cursed be their wrath, for it was fierce, and their rage, for it was cruel.
But blessed be our GOD for ever, that did not give us over as a prey unto their
teeth. Oh blessed be our God for evermore, that kept us from such endless and
unsatiable rage as theirs was; Who when we had no help nor hope left, wrought
out a great salvation for a poor people. Me thinks I could dwell here, but
that the time runs, and there is a second observation, to which I am enforced
to hasten.

Doct. Be the wrath of wicked men as endless and unsatiable as it will; though
it have no limits in it, yet the LORD sets limits to it; and fetches praise and
glory to himself from it.

The observation as you see, consists of two parts or two branches. First, God
sets limits to the wrath of wicked men. And secondly, he fetches glory from it.
I will proceed with them distinctly and in order.

1. Branch. Sometimes the Lord sets limits to the wrath of wicked men: though
he permit a parcel of it to break out, yet the remainder he restraines, as
you have it in my Text. Although their rancour have no bounds within, yet GOD
sets bounds to the external exercise of it. Let them be as outrageous as they
will, and let them bristle while they can; the Lord has them in a chain, and
he will take them short at his pleasure. The Heathen rage, says holy DAVID,
Psalm 2.1. their passions boil within their bosoms, that is, the working of
their sensual pride; and then they plot, and they imagine how to vent, and how
to wreake this rage of theirs, that is the working of their intellectual part.
But do they execute it? No, GOD will not suffer them. Their policy and fury
does melt away, and come to nothing; they imagine a vain thing. The wrath of
the ASSYRIAN was exceeding great, so great that GOD himself takes notice of
it, 2 KINGS 19.27. I know thy abode, says he, thy going out, and thy coming
in, and thy rage against me; He takes it as against himself, because it was
against his People. The enemy was full of rage, and on he would against the
City, and meant to do great matters. But mark what follows: I will put my
hook into thy nostrills, and my bridle in thy lips, and turn thee back by
the way by which thou came. And with respect to this says the holy Prophet
here: Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, the remainder of wrath shall
thou restrain.

I shall enlarge my self no further here, but appeal to your experience. This
day (my Brethren) was this SCRIPTURE and this point of Doctrine fulfilled in
your eyes. How full of rancour those malicious wretches were who came against
this poor Town, your selves who heard their railings and their bitter
threatenings, who saw and felt their cruel deeds, can tell. They came upon you
with an open mouth, and thought to have devoured you suddenly, but GOD would
not suffer them. You saw (my brethren) many of you who are here beheld it; they
came over your Works, and the Line that you had made, and you could not hinder
them. But GOD had made a line within yours, and over that they could not get,
beyond that they could not pass. And certainly if ever GOD did bound and
limit furious men, if ever he did say unto them as the Psalmist personages him,
speaking to the Sea: thus far you shall come, and no farther; He did it here
in this place. You have seen it my beloved, you have found it by experience;
and so you have reason now of any people in the WORLD to say, the wrath of Man
did GOD restrain. Somewhat indeed he suffered them to vent and to bring to
execution, upon our friends, upon our Persons, upon our houses and estates; But
the remainder he did restrain.

Reason. And this he has done, and will ever do, because he sees his people
cannot bear the utmost of the wrath and rage of wicked men. If he should
suffer all the weight thereof to lie upon them; either they would reach forth
their hands to evil, or else their hearts would faint and sink under it.

Beloved, God is very tenderly affected to his poor people, (I speak it after
the manner of men) and therefore though he suffer them sometimes to have a
taste of the rage of wicked men for their correction: yet when they lay it on
without measure, he considers with himself, as once he did concerning
Ephraim, Jeremy 30.20. He is my son, he is my pleasant child still. And
therefore when he sees his pleasant child about to faint, and when the
enemies are ready to devour his people, then his bowels work within him, and
out he cries, hold there, no more, I can suffer it no longer. Sometimes
indeed he goes away, and leaves his children in the hands of wicked and
ungodly men to scourge them. But when he hears them cry and roar, so that
they are about to swound: then he comes running in and says, Comfort ye,
comfort ye my people, they have received double. You merciless and cruel
wretches, you have given my Children double, twice as much as they can bear:
and so he falls a kissing them to fetch life in them again.

And so me thinks I see the Lord come running in among the merciless
besiegers of this place, and crying out as Isa. 3.15. What mean ye that ye
beat my people in pieces? What do you mean to do to them? What do you
purpose to reduce this Town to nothing; to consume it all to ashes? to butcher
all my people here, so that I shall not have so much as one left? Is that your
resolution and intent indeed? I have permitted you to wreake a great deal of
your rage upon the houses and the persons of my poor servants; But what do
you intend to burn all, and kill all? So that there shall not be a house
standing, nor a SAINT alive here? I cannot bear it: no, the remainder of your
rage must I restrain. And thus you see GOD limiteth the wrath of wicked men,
which is the former member of the point.

2 Branch. And as he limits it in part, so that part of it which he does not
limit, he turns it to his own praise, and fetches glory to himself from it.
Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, says the Psalmist here, so much as
is permitted unrestrained, shall bring honor to thy Name; and the remainder,
etc. Although the wrath of man do not accomplish the righteousness of God, it
does accomplish the glory of God. The Lord (as he designed to do) gat honor
out of Pharoah's rage, and out of the Assyrians rage, against his people. And I
am confident he will have honor out of the wrath and rage of his and our
malicious enemies against this place. Thus he has done heretofore, and will
do to the worlds end. But you will interpose and ask me now, Which way does
the LORD fetch praise out of the wrath of wicked men against his people? I
answer, principally, two ways.

First, He fetches praise and glory from the rage of wicked men against his
people, as it commends the greatness of his own power. For it is a great
thing that the LORD should keep his people notwithstanding all their fury.
That though there be enough of the Malignant Church to devour the Militant, to
eat up GODS people as a man would eat bread. And though they be so full of
bitterness and wrath against them as it is possible for men to be, GOD should
preserve them notwithstanding safe and sound in the midst of these men. That
he should keep them (as he does sometimes) unsinged and untoucht in a
fournace of wrath, heat hotter then ordinary; This sets off the glory of
his power.

Secondly, God fetches praise and glory to himself from the rage of wicked men
against his people; as it does accidentally commend the excellency of the
graces which he has bestowed upon them. Is it not very much (my brethren)
that the Saints should stand it out, and be upright; notwithstanding all the
spite and fury of ungodly men against them? That all their malice, all their
rage, and all their threatenings, should not cause them to desert or to deny the
Cause of God, no nor to droop or faint under it? Have not the spirits of the
Saints of God been admirably strengthened and upheld in these latter times of
trial, when there were no outward means appearing to the eye of sense or
reason, and when there were no hopes left? Is not the grace of God by which
they were upheld (then he you) a glorious thing? Has he not much honor by
it? It was an honor to the Lord that Job continued constant and patient,
notwithstanding all the malice of Satan and his Instruments, and the worst that
they could do. It glorified the grace of God in him. And therefore God me
thinks does vaunt and pride himself in this precious Saint of his, in that
speech of his to Satan, Job 2.3. Have thou considered my servant Job, that
there is none like him in the earth, and still he holds fast his integrity?
Though thou have done thy utmost to him, he has not done as thou did
wickedly suggest he would, he has not yet deserted or denied me: No, still
he holds fast his integrity.

And so the Lord does seem to say in these days to the malicious enemies of
his people: Look upon those Saints of mine, though you have plundered them, and
stripped them, and turned them bare and naked to the mercy of the World, though
you have imprisoned them, though you have threatened them with death it self,
they never yielded or complied with you, they never took the cursed oath that
you endeavored to impose upon them; they never yet denied me nor my cause; but
still they have held fast their integrity, though you have showed the utmost of
your rage and spite against them. Were not the rage of wicked men declared
against the Saints of God, the glory of his power, and grace, could not be
magnified and set off, as now it is. But now the wrath of man does praise him.

Use 1. Now to apply it very briefly, Is it so that though the wrath of wicked
wretches have no limits in it, yet the Lord sets limits to it? Why then I say
as David touching the Philistine, let no man's heart fail him by reason of the
rage of these men. Let them fume, and let them storm, and let them swell even
till they burst with inward fury; they shall do but what the hand and counsel
of God determined before to be done. When they have done what he determines,
they shall not move one jot, they shall not stir an inch further. And why
then are you so afraid of the oppressor as the Prophet speaks, and forget the
Lord your maker, who limiteth and boundeth their fury? Oh you of little faith,
wherefore do you doubt?

Why will you say, though God restrain the wrath and rage of wicked wretches
many times, yet at some other times he permits it to break out in a very great
measure: and so we have cause to be afraid of it? Yet here is comfort still
(my brethren) for that which he permits unrestrained, he turns to his
own glory. And shall we not take sweet encouragement in this, that God is
glorified, though our selves suffer? Should we not cheerfully endure a little
of their rage, so the Lord have honor by it? Should we not prefer his glory
far beyond our own quiet? So that you see we want not something to support
us every way, and however matters go. If God restrain the wrath of wicked
wretches, we have ease, if he permit it unrestrained: he has praise. And
this is not an empty notion; raised by fancy, but a certain thing, there is no
doubt, no question to be made of this; and hence the Holy Ghost has set a
surety on it in my Text; Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, and the
remainder of wrath shall thou restrain.

Well then, (my brethren) in the second place, since the Lord will have it so,
since he has said it shall be so, let the wrath of man praise him. There has
been much of the envenomed rage of wicked men let out against this poor Town.
Oh let us praise the Lord that kept us unconsum'd in the heat of their fury;
that when the Town was stormed so desperately (as you know it was) for so many
days together, God kept you, who are here before him, in that storm, and did
not suffer any of that hail to fall upon you. That when others fell by the
Bullet and the Sword, your blood was precious, and your lives were dear to
him. Say now as Hezekiah, Isaiah 38.19. O Lord, the living, the living they
shall praise thee, as we do this day.

Nay, that GOD did not keep your bodies only, but your spirits too, that he
upheld them with unshaken resolution in the midst of such danger. That he
united you so firmly all together, who notwithstanding were not all of one
mind, nor one way. That all the violence and rage that was declared against
you, was so far from causing you to desert the Cause of GOD, and to give up
the Town into the hands of those that fought against it, as that it made you
to renew your resolutions to stick the faster to the Lord, and to his Cause,
to fight it out in the midst of fire and blood. Here certainly, the wrath of
man does praise the Lord; the wrath of man sends us occasion to sing the
praises of our God forever.

And if we ought to praise the Lord with reference to that part of the wrath
of man which he let out, much more with reference to that which he restrained.
Oh here was mercy to be spoken of to all ages, that God sets limits to the rage
of these men. That when they set their heart as the heart of GOD himself, he
made them know they were but men. That when they said of this poor Town, Fall
on, and take it, for there is no relief for it, there is none to deliver it;
that when they were about to enter, GOD put his hook into their Nostrills, and
his bridle in their Lips, and carried them another way. Brethren, you may
reflect upon the time when you stood looking out at the Windows, and crying as
the Mother of Sisera, Judges 5.28. Why is the Chariot so long a coming? Why
do the Wheels of the Chariot linger? Why is Relief so long a coming? Why
does it stay and linger thus? Why does it meet with such procrastinations and
delays? And in the end concluded, that there was no help for you, but you
should surely perish by the hands of these men. And when your hearts were gone,
and hopes were gone, when you were in the Wilderness, where if you met with any
good or any comfort, it must come from Heaven: then GOD came in, and spoke
comfortably to you: Oh think upon the time when you gave your selves for lost,
and on a sudden some came running in and told you, Relief is come. Oh was
not that a sweet and welcome word, Relief is come? Were you not as Israel was
in such a case, like men that dream? Did you not doubt this happy tidings was
only fancied and conceited in a Dream, and that there was nothing of truth
and reality in it? It was so far above your hopes, and beyond your
expectations. And now, my brethren, I believe your hearts are very much
enlarged and ready to break out into the praises of the Lord. Me thinks I
hear you put the question to me, what shall we do to make it to appear
that we are sensible of this mercy? I give you some directions in a word, and
I have done.

1. I acknowledge the restraint of our malicious enemies to be of GOD. That it
was he, and he alone that set limits to their siege. Say not, it was the
valor or the skill of the COMMANDERS, it was the courage of the SOLDIERS
(though many of them did beyond the race of men, and deserved as high applause
and commendation as instruments are capable of) but rather say, their wrath and
rage did GOD restrain. And truly GOD was visibly and admirably seen in this
business. For when our Line was almost empty of Defendants, and when the
bodies of your enemies were not restrained by any thing that you could either
do or see, the LORD restrained their spirits, as the PROPHET speaks in the
Verse that follows next save one upon my TEXT, so that they had no hearts to
come on. And therefore now let all your bones cry out and say, LORD none is
like to thee, that we are yet unbroken. Let all your houses say, LORD none is
like to thee, that we are standing. Let all your Wives and Children say, LORD
none is like to thee, that we are living. They were not Works, they were not
Gunnes and Soldiers that preserved us, and destroyed our enemies, but their
wrath did God restrain, and therefore let the Lord and he alone have all the
glory.

2. Endeavor to be large to him in duty who has been large to you in
mercy. There was a time you know when you were shut up by your enemies, who
kept you in on every side, when you were held within a very narrow compass.
But now the LORD has set you in a large place. Oh let your hearts I pray you
be enlarged to him in praises, and let your hands be enlarged to him in
service. Oh do not go, but run the ways of his Commandments, now he has
set you thus at liberty. Do not think it is enough to walk on in an ordinary
track of duty, but strive to do (...) as Christ speaks, some singular, fine,
excellent, some extraordinary thing, and to abound in the work of the LORD,
who has laid out the riches of his mercy on you.

3. Improve and lay out all that you have left for GOD, and bestow it all upon
him. Beloved, GOD has given you your somes, your wives, your children, your
estates, your lives. If you have any thing, he gave it you the second time, he
renewed your tenure in it this day. If he had but let loose the enemy, and if
he had not mightily restrained him, in all appearance you had lost all. You
may truly say to GOD as David does, thou art the God of our life, and therefore
now live to him: Thou art the God of our strength, and our we with, and our
comfort, and therefore lay out all for him.

4. Let all those Vows and Covenants which you made to God in days of
misery, be remembered and observed in days of mercy. Surely the wrath of man
shall praise thee, the remainder of wrath shall thou nestraine; and then the
next words are, Vow unto the Lord and pay it. Brethren I make no question when
you looked for nothing else but death and ruin, you engaged your selves to God
by many obligations. Oh how obedient and how holy you would be, if he would but
deliver you this once, if he would save you from this death only. You told
the Lord a very fuire tale. But say my Brethren, have you paid those Vows? have
you made good those Obligations? or did you only flatter with him, as we are
wont to flatter men to attain our own ends? May that be said of you which
David notes of Israel, Psalm 78.36. When he slew them, they sought him, etc.
Nevertheless, they did but flatter him, their heart was not right with him,
nor were they steadfast in their Covenant? Well, be assured God will not
flatter, he will not dally with you when he comes about again. Praise, and
Obedience, and Thankfulness was due, before you made these Vows to God; but
you have made it doubly due, by laying on your selves such sacred Bonds as
these are. And have you broken these Bonds? I fear when you examine what your
ways have been, since you had respite, you will acknowledge you have broken
them indeed, and desperately cast away these Cords from you. I will not shake
my Lap at you, as Nehemiah sometimes did, nor say as he, Chapter 5. Verse 13.
So God shake out every man from his house and from his labor, that has not
kept the promise that he made with God at that time; Even thus let him be
shaken out and emptied. No, that be far from me. But I will rather say as
holy Hezekiah in another case, The good Lord pardon every one, that has not
kept his solemn Vows, and remember not his breaches, to avenge the quarrel
of his Covenant on him, when the next day of Visitation comes.

5. Endeavor to perpetuate the memory of this mercy, write it upon the
Lintells of your doors, upon the Palms of your hands, upon the Tables of your
hearts, relate the story of it to your Children, that so the Generations that
are yet to come, may bless the Lord; that you may keep the Praises of your God
alive, even to the worlds end. Oh let not such a sweet and precious mercy dye
with you. Let not that be charged upon you which DAVID charge upon Israel,
That you forget the works of God, and the wonders that he has shown you.
That you forget the time when the Enemy was entering, and God sent Relief from
Heaven, and restrained his fury. Oh let this day be always solemn to you, a
day of gladness, and of Feasting, and a good day, to all generations. I say as
God unto Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 24.2. Write the name of the day, even of this same day,
the eleventh of MAY, the Enemy of our Religion, and of our Liberty, and Peace,
set himself against TAUNTON this same day. The God of Heaven showed himself
for TAUNTON this same day. Hallelujah, Salvation, and Honor, and Glory, and
Power, and Might, and Dominion, and Everlasting Praise be unto Him that sits
upon the Throne, and to the Lamb in all the Churches of the Saints for ever and
ever, AMEN.

FINIS.

