NEWS FROM YORK*
Wherein is expressed, How His Majesty has put seventeene Justices out of
Commission, and sent out Warrants for the Gentry of Yorkshire to bring in many
Horse, or money to provide Horse, for three months. With other remarkable
things.

Written from a Gentleman at York, to his special friend at London. July 1.
1642.
KIND SIR,
I Am sorry to hear of such preparations both here and with you; diverse of our
Justices of Peace of this County, are put out of Commission, viz. At the
Committee late at York, Sir Thomas Fairefax, Sir William Fairefax, M. Marword,
M. Stockdale, and others to the number of seventeene or eighteen, they are
moderate men, you may guess the cause; the Sheriff is to send out Warrants to
call all the Gentry to York on thursday next, to know what Horse every one
will offer to his Majesty for service for three months; or money, if Gentlemen
be not provided of Horse and Arms; That proposition is thus, that for every
Horse Gentlemen are willing to provide, they may, if they will, send in Money
and no Horse, after the rate of 2 s. 6 d. per diem for three months, which if
I be not mistaken in the accounting is 10l. 10s. per Horse, diverse Esquires
send in six, some ten; the County stands now at gaze wondering what may
happen; the King and Parliament (as I may without offense say) speak both one
language, all in words pretend the Kings Prerogative, the Privilege of
Parliament, the true Protestant religion, the Peace, the liberty and propriety
of the subject, the Laws of the Land, etc. What better harmony if actions be
suitable? surely the finger of God is in it for some great judgment due unto
us, which if he will have to be, his will be done, and fit us for such times
before they come. Captain Duncombe is made Knight and Baronet, and on
Wednesday last being Fast Day he feasted the Soldiers, who were so valiant
that they would needs be billetted at M. Alderman Hoyles, and at M. Winters,
who offered great abuse, insomuch that M. Dickinson son in law to Alderman
Hoyle got some Muskets into the House and stood upon his guard, until the
Lord Major and others went to the Court after nine of the clock at night, to
end these tumults. A good understanding seems to be unlikely betwixt the King
and Parliament, all the English eyes are upon the Parliament, and forraigners
too, Oh that it would be considered what danger civil War may breed! and if
there be no receding of the one party, how near it is. Divide the Kingdom into
four parts, the Papist, the Atheist, the Separatist, and the Protestant, three
of these delight in broyls, which makes the heart of the fourth bleed. This day
Colonel Lunsford is come to York, the papists are as joyful as may be; and
so is Sir Francis Wortley, who I see to day alive, and therefore no such matter
for his death. This is all the news, so I rest.

London, Printed for Richard Best. 1642.


