CHARLES, King of England.
THe Infinite Eternal Being, the only True and Living GOD (who formed thee in
thy Mothers womb, and breathed into thee the breath of life) Lo he is near
thee, his piercing Witness is within thee, his All-seeing Eye beholds thee, he
searches thy heart, and tries thy reins, the depths of thy Counsels are
discovered to him; O King! Fear and dread before him. The Lord God Omnipotent,
who rules in the Kingdoms of men, and disposes of them as he pleases, has
exercised thee with various vicissitudes, and suffered thee to be a man of
sorrows; he has led thee through many straits, that in thy prosperity thou
should remember him, and bow unto him: he has cast thee down, and he has
raised thee up, and now wonderfully set thee upon thy Fathers Throne, even to
the amazement of the people; give him the glory of all. Now thou art chief
Ruler of a numerous Nation, a wise and knowing people are thy Subjects, O that
Solomon's request unto his God were thine, that thou might rightly go in and
out before this people. Then should divine Wisdom be thy Diadem, and thou
should be a blessing to the people.

And now that the Lord has dealt thus bountifully with thee, Come let us
Reason together, and expostulate a little what may be for thy good, and what
the God of thy life requires of thee: For know this, O King, that in thy Life
and Government consists thy present, future and eternal happiness. I have seen,
I have seen the place thou stands on to be slippery ground, and the need thou
have of Divine supportment; for what thy own infirmities, and the iniquities of
the people thou leanest to (whose delight is not in the Law of the living God)
thy condition certainly is very sad, and to be lamented by all that love thee.
Was it the mind of the Lord in this last overturning and change of Government
only to advance an Outward Monarchy, or an earthly Kingdom? to re-edifie the
Towers of Babel? to beautify an adulterated Harlot, and renounce his Spouse?
to crown Babylon and her Merchants, and leave Sion and her children in the
dust? Or has the Lord any pleasure in the fleshpots of Egypt? or can he have
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness? or will he lend his ear to
the yelling noise of the wicked? Art thou altogether ignorant of the wonderful
things which the Lord will do? Can he forsake his Sion? can he delight himself
in Babylon? or think thou he has forgotten to be gracious to his people? He
cannot forget his Own, his Seed is sure to be remembered by him, and the Kings
of the earth must bow before him.

There is a people that are near unto thee, and enjoy a liberal share of thy
natural affections; but, O King! their hearts are not right before the Lord,
nor are some of them faithful in their love to thee. By their fruits thou shall
know them, if they creep into places of honor, profit, and preferment to
themselves, if they hunt after the Earth, and mind earthly things, they are of
Esau's generation. Beware of them, for they will sooner enrich themselves in
thy Ruin, then either serve thee or their generation faithfully. There are
others also, who with their tongues extol thee, but the guile of their hearts,
and the burning heat in their breasts dishonor thee; Rancour and malice remain
unmortified, and they take conusel together for the blood of the innocent.
These men know not how to forgive an enemy: O King! be wise, and let not such
have too much influence upon thee. Another sort there is that are of Haman's
nature; could thou give every individual of them to the half of thy Kingdom,
yet while Mordecai sits in the gate, and bows not to that exalted spirit, all
would not avail them; Ammon and Amaleck will join hand in hand to incense the
King against the innocent; and if possible, through their mis-reports and
importunity obtain a Decree from Caesar for the Banishment or Destruction of
that People. These men with their Dulce Venenum will endanger thee; and if thou
give thy power unto them, will unavoidably be thy Ruin; Therefore hear O
King! and despise not good counsel.

Give not the choicest Jewel in thy Crown to such unworthy Counselors, but
stay thy mind upon the Royal Law written in thy Heart * Obsequium amicos,
Veritas odium parit.
with the finger of the living God; let thy delight be to read and meditate on
that golden Book day and night. Make that invaluable Jewel of my God placed in
thy soul, the Line or Rule of thy life, and that will make thy Life happy, and
thy Reign glorious. It Is the spring of Divine Wisdom; Drink thy fill, O King, at
that celestial Fountain; drink, I say, abundantly thereat, thou can never
draw it dry. O that thy heart were refreshed with the streams of eternal life
that flows from it.

And now the remaining part of my message to thee, is that which the righteous
God expects from thee.

Dwell, O King, in that noble Principle which leads to Mercy and Moderation.
Lean no longer upon the Reeds of Egypt, nor ttust no more to the enchantments
of her Magicians; but let them know thou dwel'st in that wisdom which is above
them, and have now learned to forgive an Enemy: O King I counsel thee, be drawn
no further into Blood; but make them Quondams I require thee, that shall
wilfully persist to minister any Woolvish Counsel to thee; Drink no more of
their bitter Waters. Be clothed with the Royal Robe of Clemency, and count it
thy honor to be affectionately kind to the Kingdom, to pass by injuries, and
forgive wrongs; For to show mercy is better than to be dyed in blood, and would
sooner inthrone thee in the affections of the people, than outward force or
violence; and count them not thy friends that counsels thee to the contrary.

And as for Religion, This the righteous God requires of thee: Live in that
which is pure and undefiled, and keep within thy Sphere: Force not any to an
outward Form; for Conscience is Christ's Throne, and if thou seek'st to Lord it
there, or suffer others so to do, thou art an Usurper, and Sions King will
plead his Controversy with thee, and make War against thee, and be to hard sor
thee. Therefore O King, let the Seed of God go free, and be no longer oppressed
by the Egyptian Taskmasters: Take not that Authority upon thee, which Christ
the Son of God never gave unto thee, nor no power; But let every man worship
his God as he is persuaded in his conscience; for what is not of faith is sin,
and faith is the gift of God. Would thou, O King, be forced to any form
against thy Conscience? Surely not. Then do not thou offer to use force against
the People, but let equal liberty herein be given to all people, I require it
of thee in the Name of the Living God, as their proper right and privilege,
and as thou expects his blessing in this world, and in the world to come. And
roll away the stone of reproach from this English Nation, which long has been
a professing People; I say remove and take away all force and compulsion about
Religion, and down with Tithes and all forced maintenance of any Ministry. Ah
how many of the dear children of God are now in Bonds, and have been long in
several Goals of this Nation, and some have there ended their days for
conscience sake, because they cannot satisfy a greedy, devouring Antichristian
Ministry. Shall not, and has not the righteous God visited for these things. O
let the innocent sufferings of the righteous Seed come before thee, let the cry
of the oppressed pierce through thee, and enter into thy bowels, that thy heart
may be filled with compassion toward them, and the Prison-doors by thee may be
opened for them, and for all that suffer for Righteousness sake: This is a work
would make thee glorious, and happy were Englands King, would he thus favor
Gods people. But if thou still wilt stop thy ears to good counsel, and give
away thy power to the Prelates who will persecute; and if thou will strengthen
the hands of the Uncircumcised Philistines; if thou will make covenant with
Death, and let thy little fingers prove heavier than the Ioins of thy
Predecessors, and seek to banish Truth out of thy Coasts, and utterly subvert
the Royal Seed;

Then know this, O King; The righteous God who set thee upon the Throne, will
pluck thee down; He will overthrow on the right hand, and on the left, until
Sions enemies be confounded. He will take the Kingdom from thee; He will
overturn thy Mountain, and lay thine honor in the Dust, and work deliverance
for his people in a way which yet thou see not, and then shall thou know the
words of truth are spoken by me,

* Who am Thy Friend, yet shall be contented if I am counted Thy Enemy, Martin
Mason.

POSTSCRIPT.
NEver had King of England more precious Warnings from the life of God, than
God has given unto Thee: Oh King! what shall I say unto Thee? Will thou still
cast all his councels behind Thee? O that Thou would answer his Love unto
Thee, by thy Life and Government, in Mercy, Truth, and Righteousness; Let not
Truth be despised by Thee, because by the world it is mis-reported to Thee; The
world loves its own. It Is only TRUTH that is truly honorable; and Virtue is
the Virtus est vera Nobilitas.
true Nobility. Truth is invincible; the more men seek to suppress it, the more
it grows; the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against it; nor can all the strength
of Egypt daunt or overcome it. Truth is stronger than All; and that is a
Measure of it which in thy Conscience bears its Testimony against all Iniquity.
All that strive against it (the Truth) shall be broken by it. Therefore O King,
keep friendship with it, and consent Thou not to any unrighteous Decree against
it; Nor say not within thy self, This Cover shall excuse Me, My Peers, My
Prelates, or my Parliament so counseled and persuaded Me; for the guilt will
stick upon Thee; but in time be awakened, and let the Ruins of others who are
gone before Thee, who once in strength were equal with Thee, be a Warning to
thee; for of a truth Our God is no respecter of persons; If thou do well,
shall Thou not be accepted? But if thou will not own Gods light in thy
Conscience, and by it be guided, nor remove Oppression and oppressing Laws, nor
set up Judges as at the beginning, men fearing God, and hating Covetousness,
but wilt make war against the Lamb, and suffer thy self to be ensnared and
seduced by the deceitful Generation; then know assuredly, It Is in vain for Thee
to strive against Thy Maker, God will be justified when he pleads his
Controversy with Thee in the day of thy Calamity, which will assuredly come
upon Thee, if in the Light Thou believe not. Wherefore O King be wise, and
remember Thou art once more warned.

M. M.
Lincoln the second day of the 9th Mon. 1660.
LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Black-spread-Eagle and Windmill, in
Martins Le Grand, 1660.


