THE PROUD PHARISEE Reproved: OR, The lying Orator laid open. IN AN EXAMINATION
OF Some Passages in a Book, Entitled, Precepts for Christian Practice, Or, The
Rule of the New Creature New Modeled. Written by one Edw. Reyner, who calls
himself a Minister of the Gospel in Lincoln; But is found a Liar by a Child of
the Light, who is known to the World by the Name of Martin Mason.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1655.

To my Friends and Acquaintance in the Flesh in Lincoln, who yet love the
Garlic and Onions of Egypt, better than the Milk and Honey of Canaan.
I Am not ignorant what Aspersions will be cast upon me for writing this
ensuing Treatise; But I have learnt to pass through evil Report and good
Report, as a Deceiver, and yet true: 1 Cor. 6.8.
All the Reproaches and persecutions of the World cannot rob me of my Jewel, of
my comfort, of my Crown: And so truth be but exalted, I matter not for all the
poisoned Arrows which Men of Envy shoot against my Person. I can as freely
expose my naked Breast to receive them cheerfully, as they are forward to dart
them spightfully; and when they have done, forgive them freely. All this I can
do through Christ that strengthens me. Phil. 4.13.


But come poor hearts, You who lie stretching your selves upon the Bed of Ease,
and delight in the broad way you are in, because it gives ease and liberty to
the flesh; Tarry there no longer I beseech you; for though the way seem right
unto you, yet let me tell you, the End thereof are the ways of Death. And if
you will not take my word, Lo I bring you no less than a King for my Surety,
even Solomon himself. Prove. 14.12. Rev. 15.3.
And if that will not do, here is a greater than He, Christ himself (the King of
Saints) Math. 7.13. How many years have you been feeding upon the bare Commons,
your Shepherds having no better Pasture for you than their formal Prayers, and
Houre-glasse Sermons, studied and hammered upon the Anvil of their own
Imaginations, painting them over with the pleasant Title of Christ's Ordinances;
but had their Prayers and preaching proceeded from that pure Fountain of living
water, the Trees would have born better fruit: But their connterfeit Coin can
now no longer pass for pure Gold; for the light has discovered them. 1 John
5.1^.
He that is begotten of God keeps himself, and that wicked One touches him
not: He that can witness this condition, that Man has his Divine within him;
The light is his Guide, and he needs not Jer. 27.9. Jude 8. Jer. 23.21. Jer:
27:10:
the dark Lanthorn of an eight and twenty years Dreamer. While you rest (poor
souls) where you do, you dwell in darkness: come therefore out of Babylon, seek
the good of your own souls, and forsake the Priests, grope no longer in the
dark, lo now its day dote no more upon your filthy Dreamers, who run before
they were sent, and prophecy lies unto the people: it is they who draw you into
delusions, and your souls unto destruction, if you draw not back from them; for
while you go from the pure (the light in your Consciences) you run into the
puddle of men's humane inventions, the streams of the Sea of Rome: Own therefore
the pure teachings of that pure principle of God within you, the light which
convinces you of sin and evil, when no eye sees you. Heb: 12:14:
Take council there, and do not fear to be deluded by it; for it will draw you
(if you are willing to be led by it) from impurity unto Holiness, without which
no man can see God. It Is but a Romish mist your Teachers cast before your eyes,
when they render the light a delusion, least it should discover to you their
Mystery of Iniquity; But the Lord has a Controversy with them, and is
throwing their Diana down; do not you therefore set to your shoulders to hold
it up any longer, least you be found fighting against God. 2 Pet: 1:19:
But know, we have a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well, that ye
take heed, as unto a light shining in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the
day Star arise in your hearts. Remember you have warning in your life, prise
it.

Martin Mason.

THE Proud Pharisee Reproved. OR, The Lying Orator laid open.
WHat means the Man to give his Book such a Boasting Title, as, The Rule of the
New Creature new modeld? Were he himself in that happy condition a new Creature
is, he would have manifested more Modesty and Moderation, and have been
clothed with that sweet smelling Garment of Humility, without which Jewel, no
man shall ever wear the never fading Crown of Christianity. 1 Pet. 1.5.
For God resists the Proud, and gives Grace to the Humble. O the difference
betwixt Truth and Deceit, betwixt the Ministers of Christ and Antichrist! Paul
boasted not of things without his measure, but according to the measure of the
Rule which God had dis^ributed to him, Paul said, 2 Cor. 10.13.
Let us walk by the same Rule. Was this Rule the writings of the Prophets or
Evangelists? Gal. 6.16.
Was this Rule any Epistle written by some of the Apostles? Was not Paul a new
Creature when he writ to the Galathians? Acts 13.9.
was not Paul filled with the Holy Ghost? was not the Holy Ghost his Rule? Can
the Holy Ghost be new modeled? Romans 8.9.
Again, Paul says, If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.
Is that Man a new Creature that has not the Spirit of Christ living in him?
Has that Man the Spirit of Christ living in him, or is he a new Creature, that
so undervalues that holy soul-satisfying Spirit, by preferring his own
Inventions before it, by giving that Honor to lifeless leaves, that is due to
the infinite God of life and love? whether the Spirit of Christ be the Rule of
a new Creature, yea, or nay, let that soul judge in whom the Spirit of Christ
lives: and whether that Rule can be new modeled by man or not. But what must
become then of Edward Reyners Rule? Let it return from whence it rose. This is
his first lie. The world has a Proverb, It Is ill stumbling at the Threshold.
He that begins his Book with a lie, is likely to have more of the same stamp,
before he comes to his end. Here I charge him with blasphemy, let him clear
himself as he can.

In his Title Page he styles himself a Minister of the Gospel: but a liar, and
a blasphemer is not to be trusted. I shall therefore with the Lords leave,
examine him a little further. His first Ordination sprang from the Romish Root,
That foundation being built upon the Sand. The Man grew ashamed thereof, and
relinquished it, and now derives his Ministry from those of his fellowship, so
now he presumes he is built upon the Rock: but let him that thinks he stands,
take heed least he fall. 1 Cor. 10.12.
When he proves his Call to be from God, And that those People had power to make
him a Minister of the Gospel, He may then be believed. Paul was an Apostle not
of Men, neither by Man, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father; Gal. 1.1.
but Eaward Reyner is a Minister of Men, and by Man, for he abides not in the
Doctrine of Christ Jesus, not by Jesus Christ and God the Father: Mat. 12.33.
The Tree is known by its fruit. Paul was filled with the Holy Ghost: is this
Man so, that makes lies his refuge? Isa. 28.15.
Paul says, Ye remember Brethren our Labor and Travel, laboring night and
day, because we would not be chargeable to any of you. 1 These. 2.9.
And, even to this present hour we both hunger and thirst, are naked and
buffetted, and have no certain dwelling place, and labor working with our own
hands, being reviled, persecuted, made as the filth of the World, and the
offscouring of all things to this day. 1 Cor. 4.11.12
Can thou Edward Reyner, or any of thy Generation, who preach for Rewards,
witness such a condition? How often have ye labored with your own hands night
and day, that you might not be chargeable to your Hearers? Have you not certain
dwelling places? Instead of suffering hunger and thirst, being naked and
persecuted: do you not live in plenty and pomp, never yet tasting of such
persecution as the Apostles suffered? What contrariety between you and Christ's
Ministers? The Ministers of Christ Jesus have the spirit of Christ: Can thou
and thy fellow Priests witness that holy Spirit living within you? James 2.9.
Nay, for then you would not pamper your selves, and satisfy your lusts with
the lofty and unrighteous wages ye receive, nor live in respect of persons, and
so commit sin, complementing the rich with hat and knee, Sir and Forsooth, but
not doing so to the poor; are not such partial? Had thou the spirit of Christ
living in thee, (and he that has not, is none of his) thou would not have
sent thy Son to the old Popish Plantation in Cambridge, there to be trained
up in the Serpentine subtlety of Romish Sophistry. Romans 8.9.
Would not that expenses thy Son there puts thee to, have been better bestowed
in putting forth some poor fatherless Children to honest Trades? 2 John 9.
Had thou the Spirit of Christ living in thee, thou would abide in his
Doctrine, and not instead thereof teach the Traditions of Men, nor suffer
Drunkards, swearers, liars, proud persons, and such like, to sing David's Psalms
in thy Assembly, as they do, and thou never reprove that sinful practice, which
is not to the praise and glory of God. Did thou speak from that pure Spirit,
thou would not use such long vain glorious Prayers as thou do, nor limit
that holy One to thy Houre-glasse. 2 Timothy 1.1^. I deny not the Relation of
Master and Servant; but that in Men, which would be called Master by those that
^^ve them not, is of the Serpent and accursed.
Nor call sprinkling Infants the Baptism of Christ, or a piece of bread and a
little wine, Sacraments: where is the precept or precedent in all the Bible for
that practice of sprinkling Children? where do thou read that unsavory word
Sacrament in all the Scriptures? Art thou a Minister of Christ, who hold not
fast the form of sound words, who calls men Masters, whom thou servest not,
and art so called by others, contrary to the Commands of Christ: if thou art
one of Christ Disciples, that of Math. 23.10. is a Command to thee. When did
Christ repeal that precept after he commanded it? and when did thou refuse
that word? Now whether thou art a Minister of the Gospel, yea or nay, let all
who love and live in the Gospel, judge.

I cannot pass by another piece of notable Policy of this painted Preacher: he
has played the Thief, and robbed Paul very smoothly, who in Gal. 6.16. says,
As many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be on them, and Mercy, and upon
the Israel of God: This Proof the Man p^ts into the Title Page of his Book, As
who should say, His Book was as perfect a Rule for people to walk by, as Paul's
was: A presumptuous Pharisee verily he is, yet let him take this along with
him, Mat. 5.20.
Except his Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, He shall not enter into the Kingdom of God. Paul's Rule was no Book
or Writing with Pen and Inck, but the Holy Ghost. Till thou ownest the light.
Post thou compare thy Babel Bundle, thy Babylonish Book, to the Spirit of
Christ, which was Paul's Rule. Neither thou, nor any of thy Hearers, while they
give such pre-eminence to thy Papers, and believe thy lies, shall ever wirness,
nor shall ever find, that peace and mercy which Paul pronounced in that
Epistle.

And now I come to thy Epistle Dedicatory, wherein thy Language discovers thee
what Nation thou art of. Is not bending and bowing of the body a worshipping
with the body. Joh. 5.41, 42. Psalm. 4.4. All Authority that is of God I own:
and him that does Justice, my heart loves, ^^^ugh I give him not the Worlds
flattering Language.
A Roman thou art, though an Englishman born; for thou writes thus, To the right
Worshipful, the Mayor and Aldermen, etc. He that runs may read thee a
Babylonian. Is not all Honor, Glory, and Worship due to God alone? what
Worship is then left for thy Mayor and Aldermen? Is not God only to be
worshipped? where is thy warrant in the Scriptures for giving them or any one
such a Title? Did ever any of the Prophets or Apostles, give that Title unto
any person? Did not Christ himself (a true pattern for all the pure in heart)
say I receive not Honor from men: and, How can ye believe that receive Honor
one of another, and seek not the Honor that is of God only? But thy heart is
corrupted with flattery, and therefore can not follow Christ. Commune with
thy own Heart, and see the end of thy giving that Title to that People; Is it
not to flatter and please proud flesh that delights therein? I know it is; and
that thou knows, it would cross proud flesh to want such proud titles, and
thou dares not take up the cross therein; and the Principle of God within thee
is my witness in this particular. Solomon says it is not good to have respect of
persons, for, for a piece of bread that man will transgress. Prove. 28, 21.
James. 2.9. Romans 2.11. I honor him in my heart whose love is to the Lord, be
he rich or poor, in Authority or not, though my hand move not my hat, Job
32.21.22.
And James says It ye have respect to persons ye commit sin: and Paul says,
There is no respect of persons with God. Yet I honor all men in the Lord, and
out of him I honor no man. Does true honor consist in such hollow,
deceitful, unwarrantable titles, inventions of the beast as are given by the
world one to another? Is not your Lordship, your Honor, your Worship, and the
like; a flattering Title Ester 3.2.
How contrary art thou to Elihu who said Let me not accept of any man's person,
neither let me give flattering titles unto man. for I may not give flattering
titles unto man, in so doing my Maker would soon take me away: And Mordecai he
would not bow unto Haman though the Darling of a King. Mind that, you
idolatrous and dissembling complementers who are bowing to and sawning on one
another when in your hearts you are fit to murd^r one another Psalm. 2.
But while thou feeds thy Magistrates with such food as their crazie, carnal,
stomachs gape after; while thou feasts them with such fare, I say thou fattens
the enemy, and pines the pure, but read thy reward and take it with thee. The
Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaks proud
things, Psalm. 123.

Thou tells them: Full 28 years are run out since thou was called to this City
by the general vote of all the godly in it. It seems this was all the call thou
had: the vote of men.

Thy confession makes it manifest thou had no call from God: How have thou
proved thy general vote of all the godly in this City? Must thy bare word be
taken when thou have already been proved a lier? Was there not one whose heart
was toward the Lord? not one Child of God in all the City but those that gave
their vote to thee? The Baptized people will not credit thee in this thing, but
look upon it as an uncharitable censure, a presumptuous Boast, and will rank
it amongst the rest of thy Lies.

Full 28 years are run out, etc. all which time together with my spirits and
strength I have pent amongst you, and upon you, but for about 2 years in the
heat of the late unhappy broils, when the good hand of providence removed me
to a City of Refuge to wit Norwich.

Thou art Master of thy Trade. A smooth tongue, oily words thou want not.
But this will not do, thy varnish must be washed off, under this painted
stufflies Poison. Have thou spent 26 years upon those to whom thy book is
dedicated, with thy Spirits and strength? what is that which speaks so lustily in
the Pulpit, and walks so lively in the streets? Is it not Edward Reyner his own
self? Has the Mayor and diverse more to whom thou dedicates thy book lived 26
years in Lincoln? If they have not (and I am sure it is so) how have thou spent
thy spirits and strength amongst them, and upon them all that time? Besides
have thou had no journeys out of the City in all these 26 years? Have thou
spent none of that time in bowling, music, feasting at home or abroad? If thou
confessest, then that time was not spent upon thy friends, for the good of
their Souls, whilst thou was Pampering thy own body Dives like with dainty fare
and carnal pastimes not becoming a Minister of the Gospel. But if thou denies
this, many in Lincoln can witness against thee. So that, turn which way thou will, the hand of the Lord is against thee, thou art found out a liar in this
particular also.

We to the Idol Shepherd that leaves the Flock etc. 11 Zecha. 17. verse.
Then thou talks of the good hand of providence, etc. Deal honestly with thy
own heart: was it the good hand of Providence, or the left hand of slavish
fear and self ends that made the Hireling leave his Flock when the Wolf came?
What an unkind requital did thou make them for their general vote to
preach amongst them? Was thou so honest or so hardy, to stay and desire their
general vote to leave them? Was there not many a Soul in that City who
thought well of thee, yet knew not of thy flight till the Bird was flowne.

He Is blind, that sees not this to be Blasphemy.
Thou goes on calling an Abridgment of thy Doctrine, heart renewing, life
reforming, soul saving truths. Here Is three lies in a little room: can thou
prove that the Bible much less thy Babell book can renew the heart, reform the
life, and save the soul of any sinner: Is it not the living God alone can do
these things? The leaest Child in the School of Christ that reads this stuff
of thine, sees thy sottish error, but it is just that thy lying spirit should be
laid open. O that ever such a lying man as thou art should take upon him the
name of a Minister of the Gospel! What a Savior is it which thou trustest in?
cannot he renew the heart, reform the life, and save the soul? Then surely
thou art in a sad condition, being so great a sinner, and have so lame a
Savior. But if he can, then see what wrong have thou done him to make a mere
useless Cipher of him, and place salvation in printed leaves, and abominable
lies. But this makes it manifest, thy heart is not renewed, nor thy life
reformed, nor thy soul saved, were it so, thou would not have printed such
dark Popish stuff in such a time as this, when light breaks forth in abundance.

Soon after thou begs leave of them, to leave that little Piece of thine, in
their hands as a light to guide them, etc.

John 8.12. John. 19.
Christ Jesus is the light of the world: does not he inlighten every one that
comes into the world? is he a perfect light or not? will thou say there is
imperfection in Christ Jesus? Luke 1. 79. John. 16.13. 2 Pet. 1.19.
What need is there of thy dark Lantern, when the glorious Sun it self shines
so comfortably? does not Christ give light to them that sit in darkness, and in
the shadow of death, and guide their feet into the way of Peace: And John
says, when the spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth, and
Peter says we have a more sure word of Prophecy whereunto ye do well that ye
take heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawne,
and the day star arise in your hearts. Away thou blind guide! that book which
thou begs leave to leave with them as a light to guide them, will lead all such
as are guided by it, into the ditch: there is a multitude of lies,
contradictions, false doctrine and blasphemies in it, of the Serpents
invention, mixed and interwoven with several places of Scripture, which thou
wrests and pervertest, explicating of them according to that deceitful
principle that is predominant within thee, thereby hoping more plausibly to put
off thy counterfeit ware and false doctrine for current truth, but the light
has discovered thy delusions, and thou art seen and judged.

Is thy book able to preserve from errors in opinion, and looseness in
conversation as thou hintest? does not that which guides into all truth,
preserve from all errors in opinion and looseness in conversation? John 16.13.
and is it not the spirit of Christ that guides into all truth? O the impudency
of this Antichristian Minister, Would be not fain be counted infallible?
that dares thus arrogate and assume that to him and his lying Legend, which is
only due to the infinite God of life and love! does not this clearly
demonstrate that the Papal honor is eagerly pursued by this purblind Priest?
Children of the night may be misled, but the Children of the day do discern
them.
But this doting Dreamer is through the goodness of God, discovered to be a
twig sprung from the root of old Antichrist, and there is none but Bats* and
Owls will believe the lies and blasphemies which he has written in his book.

At last he concludes his Epistle with a lying complement, I am your servant,
(Hypocrisy is spun with a fine thread) and yet thou suffers them to call thee
Master: thou paintest thy self with Paul's language, as if thou had been and
still were desirous to seek them not theirs; and willing to spend, and to be
spent for them: blush and be ashamed of thy deceitful mystery; art thou guided
by that pure principle, that unerring spirit which Paul was? That of God in
thee knows thou lie.
have thou that pure love to thy Auditory which he had to his Corinthians? be
ashamed thou Hypocritical lying blasphemous man, and repent, repent: Hints
that.
Now I am come to Edm: Calamies Epistle, or approbation and commendation of this
man's doctrine, who hints that Edw: Reyner is excellent in picking out choice
subjects to write upon (are lies, contradictions and blasphemies, such choice
subjects to write on?) and to write much in a little; the man indeed has writ
three gross lies in three lines in his Epistle Dedicatory, where he calls an
abridgment of his doctrine, Heart-renewing, life-reforming, soul saving
truths: there is much Antichristian deceit discovered in that little Letter.

He goes on saying, The subjects he (viz: Edward Reyner) treats on, are very
useful, seasonable and spiritual, (but it is in advancing of Antichrist and his
Kingdom): And his manner of handling them very solid, substantial, accurate
and succinct and calls it much plaineness and much satisfaction to the godly
learned. But babes and sucklings in Christianity, discern this Orator to be a
lying wretch; He says, I have read it, considered it, and approved it, (more
shame for thee! but Simeon and Levi will take part one with another) and so he
hopes will every juditious and pious Reader. But the hope of an hypocrite shall
perish. See how one Priest paints another with flattering commendations, he
says Edward Reyner will appear like Bezaliell and Aholiab who were filled
with wisdom of heart to work all manner of work of the cunning workman, etc.
Were they filled with more wisdom of heart, than this Fox is with
deceitfullness? A cunning workman he is seen to be, but the Mystery of his
iniquity is laying open: Read it, says Edmond Calamy, and it will make thee
very holy here, and perfectly happy hereafter. Is not this a Chicken of the
Serpents hatching? can lies, contradictions, and blasphemous Doctrine make very
holy here, and perfectly happy hereafter. And now he concludes with an old
Sacerdotal Complement, Your Servant in the work of the Ministry. Your Teacher,
thou might more truly have said, in the Mystery of Iniquity: His Letter is
short, but I cannot say sweet, yet he has a notable faculty of writing much in
a little, many filthy lies are laid down in his little letter. Babylon he
loves, Babylon he lives in, and in Babylon I leave him. The God of life and
love be merciful unto him.

The next thing I meet with, is, Edward Reyners Preface to the Reader, where he
says: After serious consideration and consultation with flesh and blood: what,
consult with flesh and blood about the things of God? Did Paul so? Gal. 1.16.
Nay, he conferred not with flesh and blood, but it seems thou did, whether
Paul or thee better deserves the Name of a Minister of the Gospel in this
particular, let the wise man judge. Yet thou says thou found thy heart
inclined, thou hopes, by the good hand of God, to take those ten Rules into
second thoughts, upon two grounds especially; That in the review of them, they
appeared to thee too short and defective: The other was that notwithstanding
the tenuity, and imperfection of them, God has as thou was informed (its
likely by such flatterers as Calamy) made them instrumental for the good of
others.

But it is the good hand of God to make it clear; thy hope was the hope of an
Hypocrite, desiring to seem what thou were not, a Minister of the Gospel. Had
thou been a true Minister of the Gospel, thou would not have consulted with
flesh and blood. Thou could not have preached that which was defective, and
imperfect; did ever any of the Apostles deliver such Doctrine as thou have
done? How were thou guided? by what Rule? not by that Rule which Paul was.
Could the Holy Ghost give out that which was defective and imperfect? Will thou
make that pure spirit the Author of that filthy Book? He that is so weak as to
believe thee, or thy Dreams, is not guided by wisdom; so I pity him. Thou
beseeches the Reader, to take thy ten Rules out of thy Book into his bosom. Thy
meaning is, to believe and practice them. What? believe lies, contradictions,
and blasphemies, live and die in ignorance? They have little reason to answer
thy request otherwise, than, Get thee behind me Satan.

John 16.13. 1 John 3.9.
What if a man could repeat all the Bible, that's larger, and better then thy
Book, yet if the Unction within, the spirit of Christ live not in him, all will
avail him nothing. If that seed remain not in him, how can he be guided into
all truth, how can he keep himself, and not sin? Pen and Inck shall never make
a sinner become a Saint: Calling it a Delusion, and they that are guided by it,
thou countest deluded.
The true Rule (but not thy ten Rules) will, (if observed) keep from wandering,
stumbling, falling, and halting: But thou art not yet in the way to Heaven; for
Christ is the way, He is the light, and him thou love not, but to thy power
do persecute him, both in print and Pulpit: He is the Guide into all truth,
and him thou followest not, but flyest from. He is the Rule, and him thou walks
not by, but delightest in the dark Dungeon of self-inventions; Luke 13.24.
The way seems to thee so narrow and strait, thou dares not Amos 1.6.
strive to enter in, but takes pleasure in the broad way, because its easy to
the flesh. But woe be to them that are at ease in the flesh. Thou art not come
to the brideling of the Tongue, witness the many lies in thy Book: James 1.26.
therefore thy Religion is vain.

After Edmond Calamies Approbation, and thy Preface, follows a begged letter of
commendation from one Thomas Manton, witness his own words toward the latter
end of that Epistle, which are these, Having thus signified, and that upon
Request, the pleasure I took in this undertaking, I take my leave, etc.

Is it the property of a Minister of the Gospel to use such left handed courses
for a commendation? Did ever any of the Apostles use such a practice? But if
thou had ten thousand such hands to thy Book, as his, they might dazzle the
eyes of the weak; but not add one grain of true worth to thy Book, when it
comes to be weighed in the balance.

The Flatterer begins in a soothing strain, Good Reader, and tells of
intimations in Scripture, of a libertine spirit, that shall prevail in the
latter days: That Is true. And how this is accomplished by thee, Manton, and
thy Genetation, all honest hearts do see to their sorrow. Who takes more
licentious liberty to live in pride, oppression, and satisfying the lusts of
the flesh, then the Ministers of England and their Favorites that maintain
them? He talks of a Note found in Luthers study after his death, wherein was
written, That within a small space of time, the temper of the world should be
for breaking yoaks, (what does that trouble thee? thou shows what thou art)
insomuch, that they should not only cast off the Canons and Traditions of men,
but the very Laws and Ordinances of God, And that a sort of men should arise,
that would be under no other Law and Rule, but their own lusts and interests.

It seems Manton and Edward Reyner are sorry Luthers words prove so true,
concerning the casting off the Canons and Traditions of men. And no
marvel-great is your Diana, the Tithes of England, or other set maintenance
instead thereof. But it must down; for its not a Plant of my Heavenly Fathers
planting, and therefore shall be rooted up. Heb. 8.10.
Now who is it that casts off the Law of God written in the Heart, that slights
the pure Counsel of the living God, the light in the Conscience; but the
Ministers of the World, and Men of that Generation? pretending to walk by the
Scriptures, calling them their rule: yet walk clear contrary to them, and live
under no other Law, so far as they dare, but their own lusts and interests? I
know they that are Libertines in opinion, are in the road way to turn
Libertines in practice, if there be not something to restrain them; But it is
seen who they are, that be Libertines, both in Opinions and practice, an
untoward Generation of deluding Priests, and their flatterers, countenanced at
present by some great Ones in the world, who throw the Odium upon the
Innocent, But this is no new thing; for Christ himself was counted Beelzebub.
Mat. 12.24.


Order and Rule I own, and all such who walk contrary to the Law of God, or any
just Law made by man, such I utterly disown, be they Priest or People.

Dan. 4.30.31. Rev. 18.2. Isa. 1.20.
Thus having past the Porch, I am entered into the Palace, Babylon or building,
which this Nebuchadnezer has built by the might of his Power, for the honor
of his Majesty, as he vain gloriously has conceited. But this man's Kingdom is
departed from him, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, The mouth of the Lord has
spoken it.

His first Rule is, Be sensible of Original corruption, whereby you are
deprived of the Image of God, and of Communion with him, and wholly defiled,
and depraved in all the powers and parts of soul and body, with a proneness to
all evil, and averseness to all good continually, and made subject to the wrath
of God, to bondage unto sin and Satan, and to all Gods judgments here and
hereafter.

A sad sentence, if it were as thou says: but he that runs in the dark may
stumble. Do thou teach another man not to steal, and will thou play the
Thief? Do thou preach, and persuade others to walk by Rule, and will thou
walk without? where have thou brought one proof out of Scripture, for any one
of thy expressions above mentioned? Is there such a word as Original
Corruption, in all the Bible? How dares thou thus impudently blaspheme the
infinite goodness of the living God, as to set him forth, so severe a God, as
to make man subject to his wrath, to bondage, to sin, and Satan, and to all
Gods judgments here and hereafter, before he actually commit sin. How many
millions of sweet innocent Children would this man's Doctrine damn to all
eternity? O thou bloody minded, blasphemous man, blush and be ashamed of this
detestable Tenet! Ezekiel. 33.11.
Is it not written, As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live. Turn ye,
turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of Israel. Is there
one syllable of original sin mentioned in this place? Will thou make God a lier
like thy self, and forsworn too? Ezekiel. 13.20.
O the height of blasphemy! Is it not elsewhere said, the Son shall not bear the
Iniquity of his Father; And again, the soul that sins it shall die: Romans
4.15:
And where there is no Law, there is no transgression: Do not these places
throw down the Babel of thy soul-destroying, God-blaspheming Doctrine of
original sin? Is not that place fulfilled in thee, Prove. 10.19.
In the multitude of words there wants not sin; who but a foolish man like thy
self, would have brought in that, Ephesians. 2.12.13. for the proof of original
sin. Paul in that Chapter says thus, You has he quickened, who were dead in
trespasses and sins, wherein, in time past ye walked according to the Prince of
the power of the Air, the spirit that now works in the Children of
disobedience. Amongst whom also we had our con^ersation in times past, in the
lusts of our flesh. Does not he all this time speak of actual sin? is there one
word of original corruption? verse 11. Remember says he, That ye being in
times past Gentiles in the flesh, etc. at that time ye were without Christ,
being Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, having no hope, and without God
in the World: But does Paul say, this was because of Original sin? does not the
Chapter make it manifest, it was their sinful lives? Thou says, Paul calls
this corruption of Nature (which thou countest Original sin) the old man, and
body of sin, Romans 6.6. Is the corruption of Nature named in that verse? why
do thou add to the Scriptures? He says indeed thus, Knowing this that our
old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin. This place speaks of a body of sin, but
does it not imply a living in, and a serving sin? Does it once mention Original
sin? for shame man be silent, thou brings in Paul's warfare, A Law in the
Members, etc. Romans 7. A state or condition of sin it does hold forth. A Combat
between flesh and Spirit, betwixt the seed of the Woman, and the Serpent; but
does it mention that, Original sin does deprive of the Image of God, and of
Communion with him? That original sin makes subject to the wrath of God, and to
all his judgments here, and hereafter? Thou brings in ( Psalm. 51.5.) David
saying, Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me.
He makes a deep confession of his sins, Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in
sin did my Mother conceive me: she was a sinner when I was shapen and conceived
in her womb. 1 Cor. 2.14. Genesis 40.8. Isa. 29.11.
But that spirit by which thou art guided, cannot give the interpretation of
Scripture: The same that gave it forth must open it. To thee and thy Generation
it is sealed, but to the Saints it is given to understand: Thou asks, Who could
sleep in the night, that carries a Toad in his breast to bed with him, and sin
is as full of poison as a Toad. O mind thy own condition, see how many Toads
thou bearest-about thee in thy own breast. Page 4.
How full of poison is the Doctrine thou delivers Of Original sin, and such
like stuff! page 5. Thou says, Every beloved sin or Master lust is a
Beelzebub, or Prince of Devils. Ah how many Belzebubs do thou harbor in thy
bosom, as pride, applause, desires of silver and gold, and a great estate. See
if these, and a Nest of such like Serpents be not within thee; if these be not
the Dalilahs thou delightest in. Thou says, God joins pardon of sin, and power
over sin together, etc. Page 18. Page 21.
That sin makes ugly in Gods sight, That it kisseth and stabbeth, puts out
your eyes, cuts your throats, etc.

Art not thou and thy Generation of Pulpit-talkers, the Devils seeds-men, that
sowes his tares among the wheat? his Servants to put off his cheats and false
counterfeit ware of original sin, sprinkling Infants, taking a bit of bread and
a sup of wine, roaring and singing in your Synagogues; Pharisaical Prayers,
Hour-glasse Oratory, and the like. Do you not with such as these kiss, and
stab the people, and with the honey fine names of Christ's Ordinances,
Gospel-duties, coming to Church, the Baptism of Christ, and the supper of the
Lord, which you put upon them, sting the people to death? for which of them can
witness the life of a Christian? Do you not by these, put out the eyes of the
peoples understanding, that they see not the sun of righteousness, the light?
so they live in Egyptian darkness, under the Priests their Taskmasters; Do you
not set them to grind at your Mills (as the Philistines did Sampson) puts them
upon Pharisaical duties at set times, coming to your Steeple Houses, using
hypocritical prayers, promising them liberty, but brings them into snares;
suffering lusts and sins to lie in their bosom unreproved, and cut their
throats? do they not draw the people backward from Christ, the light of the
world in every man's Conscience? and so hales them to Hell, while they think
they are going to Heaven. See the end (O friends) of this praying and preaching
if it be not to preach up the Priests, to make them your Masters, and you their
Servants, that they may live upon other men's labors. Come but to them on their
Market days, do as they do, eat, drink and be merry with them in their Idols
Temple, and pay them Tithes for their Heathenish Oratory, Then they will account
you good Christians; But if you withhold your hand, and draw back, feed them
not with Tithes or other allowance; The Priests will ( Laban-like) cry out Genesis
31.30.
wherefore have you stolen our Gods? and sue you at the Law, till by their
Ordinance for troble damages they have drawn blood: But surely the eyes of
those Gentiles shall over long be opened, The dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and live, and no longer be deluded by those doting Babylonish
Dreamers. Acts 26.19.
But the City of Lincoln has a pair of proud Pharisees, two subtle
Antichristian Foxes, who pretend they minister not for money, yet either of
them can dispense and dispose of one hundred and fifty pounds a year for their
vain babbling. John 5.25.
They seem as if they mattered not Tithes: what need they when they have so
much money a year duly paid them without any cost or care of theirs? Do they not
preach the same Doctrine, and tread in the same steps which the tyrannizing
blood-sucking Tithemongers do? Do they not account them their Brethren in the
Ministry? when do they publicly preach against Tithes, or disown them in
print or Pulpit? Is it enough to mutter out a word or two sneaking in holes and
corners, as if they could not digest their unrighteous Mammon? If they are
convinced of the unjustness of the thing; Why do they not proclaim it on the
house top? In so doing they should offend their ungodly Brethren and bar
themselves for the time to come in case their present pay should be taken from
them.

Page 23.
The man writes thus; Hare sin perfectly, and perpetually, then you will not
spare it but kill it presently, till sin be hated, it cannot be mortified. Do
they so with Tithes and yearly maintenance: hate them perfectly, and thou will
preach against them presently: O thou teacher of others, first cast out the
beam in thy own eye, away with thy Pharisaicall righteousness, begin at Christ's
Cross, and practice that unpleasant Sermon of self-denial: what sin soever
thou love, though it be thy Absolon, either the maintenance of thy Son at the
seminary of Satan, or thy repute of a godly Minister, thy lofty wages of
unrighteousness, thy deluding the ignorant, and proyhesying lies unto the
people, the pampering of thy body with superfluous dainties; what ever it be
that is thy Dalilah, deal not gently with it, but hate it perfectly and
perpetually; for till it be hated, it cannot be mortified.

Page 28.
Now thou art got to thy old trade again, talking of holy duties, or
ordinances, improved as weapons edgewise to cut and kill your lusts.

How these unholy duties, and ordinances of thine have cut and killed lusts in
thee, or the people, your lives make it manifest. Have these as Antidotes (for
so thou hintest) expeld the Poison of sin? The impurity of your lives (your
lusts being still living) speaks the contrary. Page 302.
But self-love as thou says in another place of thy book is a false glass,
which you commonly look your selves in, that makes all seem good, you either
have or do. But thy painted language can deceive non but the silly: Nahu^. 3.4.
The vizard of the welfavoured harlot must be pulled off, that her ugliness may be
seen and abominated.

Thou says, A Scriptum est,Thou begins with that which thou calls the word of
God, viz. the Scriptures. Thou bids, hear it, read it, As it is written will
put sin and Satan to flight.
and hide it in your hearts.

There are words many, but the Word is but one. John 1.1.
The Scriptures I own more truly than thou does, or any tithe taking Priest in
England, yet I deny it to be that which thou call it, but protest not.

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God. Are the Scriptures God? Were they in the beginning? Was not Moses the
first Man that writ Scripture? Is it not Christ that's clothed with a vesture
dipped in blood, is not his name called the Word of God? Are the Scriptures
Christ? Rev. 19 13. 2 Pet. 3.5.
Does not Paul say, the Word of God is quick, and powerful, sharper than any
two edged sword? peircing even to the dividing a sunder of Soul, and Spirit,
and of the joints, and Marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts, and intents
of the heart? Can the dead do all this? Is the letter quick and powerful?
Has it the virtue force and operation written in that verse? Or is it the work
of a God? Is any printed book a discerner of the thoughts, and intents of the
heart? Peter says by the Word of God the Heavens were of Old, and the earth
standing out of the water, and in the water. Were the Heavens and the earth
made by the Scriptures, or by God? Paul says every creature of God is good,
and nothing is to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving, for it is
sanctified by the Word of God. Luke. 1.1.
Can any thing sanctify a creature, but the Omnipotent God, and Creator of all
things? 2 Iet. 1.2^. Whether does he own the Scripture who calls it his rule
and lives contrary to it, or he that calls it not so, yet lives according to
it?
Yet I own the Scriptures as they are, a declaration, a record, the writings of
the holy Men of God, who spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. But I dare
not Deifie, or equal them with God, nor pretend to make them my rule, and walk
contrary to them, as thou and all thy generation do.

Thy second Antidote, thou calls the Sacraments. A word of an old stamp coined
by thy Forefathers at the Romish-Mint, which it seems thou reservest as a holy
Relic for its Antiquity, not for any Sanctity that is in it, I am sure: Art
thou not ashamed to use such rusty dark language at this time of the day? P.
28.29.
Thou says, Sacraments are instituted to be instruments for conveyance of
virtue from Christ's death into your Souls to mortify your sins. (How many
sins can the people truly say are mortified in them, by thy Sacraments? If
thou will not answer for them, say for thy self, speak and lie not) Channels
through which streams of blood flow from the sides, and heart of Christ, into
your hearts to carry away your sins.

Name what sins thou can witness either of thy own, or the peoples that are
carried away by those pretended streams flowing through the Sacraments. Then
thou bids make use of Sacraments against sins as men do of Assizes against
Malefactors, get them condemned and cut off: He that drinks at the pure
Fountain, savours thy muddy language to stream from the corrupted Sea of
Rome. But all this while thou have been talking of Sacraments, thou have lost
thy Scriptum est. What old Authors have thou been ransaking up for this
Sacrament all stuff. Dares thou come into the field thus to fight against the
Lamb, and his Saints, and not bring one weapon out of thy Scripture Magazin to
defend thee? How can thou hope to return a live to thy Camp? Is the name of a
Minister, Armor of Proof to secure thee? Do thou not say, the Word is a
shield to defend you against all the assaults of Sin, and Satan, or Batteries
of Yentations? The heart fenced with it, thou says, is Cannon Proof. I know
thy meaning is the Scriptures. Thou counts it the Word. Ah silly blind Soul,
that art thus groping in the dark, when the Sun of righteousness shines so
gloriously. Art not thou and the people provided of Bibles? How are you
defended against the assaults of Sin, and Satan? it is seen how open you are to
the Batteries of tentation. And for all thy flourishes thy heart is not fenced
with one Scripture for all this folly thy tongue has uttered, concerning thy
second Antidote. Therefore thou art neither sword nor pistoll-proofe, much less
Cannon-proofe by thy own confession.

Prove. 12.22. Pro. 28.9.
Thy third Antidore is, Prayer to God. of the wicked are an abomination to the
Lord. To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me says the
Lord when ye come to appear before me? who has required this at your hand,
the calling of Assemblies I cannot away with: * It is iniquity even the solemn
meeting, when ye spread your hands, I will hide my eyes from you: yea when you
make many Prayers I will not hear: Isaiah 1.
and what is the reason of this? your uncleaneness: Wash ye, make ye clean, put
away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn
to do well, seek judgment: Relieve the oppressed, judge the Fatherless, Plead
for the Widow. Lo here is work for thee and thy Mayor and Aldermen! O that you
would set your hearts to do it! till then, all your Prayers are but vain
babbling, till then there is no reasoning with God. If ye be willing and
obedient ye shall eat the Fat of the Land, but if ye rebel ye shall be
devoured with the sword, for the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

page 30.
Speaking of the spiritual combat, thou says, The life or exercise of grace
puts sin to death, in the duel between Flesh and Spirit, as humility does
Pride, and sincerity does hypocrisy, (Ah poor Soul that it were so with thee)
and where there is no opposition, there is no restraint where there is no
contrary Principle of grace to cross and curb sin, there sin overflows like a
River without Bancks. Grace thou says will drive out sin as one pin does
another, yet for all this, page 28 thou calls Duties and Ordinances, Weapons,
edgewise to cut and kill lusts, Antidotes to expel the Poison of sin,
especially the Word that is, says thou, Scriptures (Sacraments and Prayer) for
do thou not say a Scriptum est, As it is written, will put sin and Satan to
flight?

Here thou lays all the weight and power of killing sin upon duties,
ordinances and the letter, and page 30. thou says, It Is the life of grace puts
sin to death, and grace will drive out sin, but what that grace is thou have
not mentioned. 1 Cer. 12.9.
The Lord says to Paul, my grace is sufficient for thee. And Paul said when
James, Cephas, and John who seemed to be Pillars, perceived the grace that was
given unto me, they gave unto me, and Barnabas, the right hand of fellowship. 2
Gala. 2.9,
And, by the grace of God I am what I am. And his grace which was bestowed upon
me was not in vain, but I labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I
but the grace of God which was with me. 2 Titus 12.
And the same Apostle says, that the grace of God that brings salvation has
appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts we
should live soberly righteously and godly in this present World. a Scriptum
est. 2 Cor. 13.3. You seek a proof of Christ speaking in me. 1 John 9. Know ye
not that Christ is in you? If not, you are Reprobates. Hebr. 13.5. 1 Timothy 6.9.
The seed of singularity is
Is this grace any duties, or ordinances, Scripture, or a Scriptum est, as thou
calls it, or Sacraments? Is not this grace Christ Jesus himself? The light that
inlightens every one that comes into the world? even the Mystery which has
been hid from ages and generations, but now is made manifest to his Saints?
Thou goes on using many good expressions in the Scriptures. I should rejoice to
see thee live the life of those that writ them, then would thy conversation be
without covetousness. Thou would see, he that will be rich falls into
temptation and a snare and into many hurtful and foolish lusts which drown men
in perdition, and that the love of money is the root of all evil. Ah friend
love thy own soul, and set thy heart no longer upon silver and gold, that lofty
Salary thou receivest for thy lying Oratory. Do not (for the love of money)
delude the souls of so many as thou do, any longer. If thou does, it will be
bitterness unto thee at the latter end. Thou art discovered by the light of
God, and condemned by that pure principle of himself within thee. As yet thou
art rich in thy own conceit, thou have built thy nest high in the Airy wisdom
of the world, which is foolishness with God, therefore art thou sent empty
away, Luke 1.53. Read James 4.6. Psalm. 138.6.

Page 34.
As for Verbosity, whether that be not a weed in thy own Garden, an error thy
self art deeply guilty of, the very babes and sucklings in Christ can witness
against thee. In the multitude of words there wants not sin. Thy vain
glorious Prayers and Houre-glasse Oratory do confirm it: but he that refraineth
his lips is wise. Prove. 10.19.


Page 35.
Thou bids, Furnish and fortify your selves with spiritual weapons out of Gods
Armory against your special corruptions every morning. Do thou not here set
up the Scriptures to be Gods Armory and spiritual Weapons? Where are they
called so in the Bible? Thou would seem to be religious, but how short thou
comes of brideling the tongue, thy Verbosity in thy Book, and thy Tautologies
in thy Pulpit exercises, clearly manifest. And therefore is thy Religion vain.
James 1.26.


Let the tender spirits fear with me herein. I must deal with him a little in
his own Weapon.
In the 41. page thou plays the Critic with the Greek word (...) 1 John 3.9.
where John says, He that is born of God (...) does not commit sin, that is,
says Thou, He does not work sin, as a man on his Trade, etc. What Is thy
meaning to carp at the Translators rendering of that word. Scapula's lexicon,
approves the word (...) committere peccatum. He shows it to be a word of a
various signification as (...) Servare legem, and diverse others: But thy end is
seen, and thou art judged herein to be under-propping that which the pure and
powerful God of Heaven and Earth is throwing down. So thou can not prosper.
Read Ephesians. 4.32. The English runs, As God for Christ's sake: but see if it be
not in the Greek, As God in Christ (...). Is The Sophister would not cavil at
this place, it was not for his purpose.
this truly translated: But this blind Guide strains at a gnat and swallows a
Camel, Mat. 23.24.

Page 49. Thou directs them to receive Christ as held forth in an Ordinance, to
wit, in the Ministry of the word, and in the Sacraments. Thou might have
done well to have shown who are the true Ministers, and what the word is. But
I know thy meaning, and do deny thee and thy Generation, (who run before you be
sent, Jer. 23.21.) to be Ministers of Christ. John 2.9.
All his Ministers abide in his Doctrine, but so do not you, and therefore the
Ministers of Antichrist you all are. Where do thou find the word Sacrament
in the Scriptures? Thou hold not fast the form of sound words. 2 Timothy 1.13.
Prove thy Traditions to be the Ordinances of Christ if thou can, and that
they are appointed as means to convey Christ as thou affirmest, Or else thou
art so well known, thou may not be trusted.

Thou have an itching desire to be counted and received as an Apostle, and be
esteemed amongst thy unbelieving Jews, as Peter was amongst the faithful, and
as Paul was amongst the Colossians. For thou abidest not in his Doctrine. 2
John 9.10. witness thy preaching of Original sin, etc.
For thou says, He that receives Christ's Ministers, receives him. But then
they must not receive thee; for thou art no Minister of Christ. Thou would
fain wear the Crown, but cannot carry the Cross, yet thou says, They must
take Christ, as Wives do their Husbands, for better or worse; for richer or
poorer. Does not this expression favor of the Popish Service Book? P. 50.
Does it not argue, thou still have an affection to the Traditions of thy Romish
Forefathers; but secretly, for fear of thy Jews? Mat. 19.27.
Do thou deserve to be received as a Minister of Christ like Peter and Paul
for this? Can thou witness thy willingness to lose for Christ, as well as to
gain; to suffer with him, as well as to reign with him? Peter could say* Lo we
have left all and followed thee, Can thou say so? Thy Norwich journey will
rise up in judgment against thee. Peter was imprisoned with two Chains. Acts
12.6.
Paul's sufferings was foreshewed him, and when some heard those things, they
wept and besought him not to go up to Jerusalem. But Paul answered, what mean
ye to weep, and to break my heart; for I am ready not to be bound only, but
also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus: O valiant Champion for
Christ and his Cause! Had thou been, with Paul, not ready only to be bound,
but to die for the Doctrine thou had delivered, thou would have had more
color to have pleaded for Paul's Reception; but instead of being ready to be
bound, thou runs away; instead of being willing to die for thy Savior, thou
chusedst to live in thy sins, shall such a cowardly Priest, claim the
privilege of a Paul. Thou talks of erecting Christ a Throne, and giving him a
Crown and Scepter in your hearts. Privilege.
Was it Christ or Antichrist that had a Throne erected, and a Crown and Scepter
in thy heart, when thou fled from thy flock? P. 51.
Does not Antichrist reign in the Kingdom of thy heart, while thou pins thy
sheep on thy poor Commons, and poisons them with thy corrupt Doctrine both in
Pulpit and print?

P. 61.
Thou says, You dwell in Christ, and Christ in you, as a man in his house, and
p. 65. Christ touches the soul by his spirit; Is not his spirit of the essence
of the Deity? Do thou not say, p. 72. The substance of the Deity is
incommunicable?

P. 67.
Thou queries what kind of union is this between Christ and a believer, and thou
answers, it is a real or substantial, total, and spiritual union, and that it
is a union of substances, essences, and persons: Can this be true, and yet the
substance of the Deity be incommunicable?

P. 69.
Thou says, Christ is in a believer, and a believer is in Christ, and in-being
is mutual and conformable between them, and Christ and a believer are in one
another really. And yet thou says, the substance of the Deity is
incommunicable.

2 Cor. 13.5. Col. 1.27.
Thou goes on, saying, Christ himself is in a Believer, not his graces only, so
is the spirit it self in a Believer dwells in him, not his fruits or operations
only, yet thou says, the substance of the Deity is incommunicable, is not
this to make the spirit not to be of the substance of the Deity?

Thou runs on, saying, This union of Christ and a Believer is a total Union;
the whole person of a believer is united to the whole person of Christ, both
Soul and Body with his Deity. And that whole Christ both his Godhead and
Manhood is united to the whole Christian, both his soul and body: And yet for
all this, thou shames not to say, The substance of the Deity is incommunicable.
Page 70.


Then thou brings in Romans 8.11. saying, That the spirit of Christ's unities, the
body of a Believer to Christ, as well sa his soul, and inhabites or dwells in
his body as well as in his soul, and that the Saints bodies are the Temples of
the Holy Ghost. And yet thou blushes not to say, the substance of the Deity is
communicable. An infallible sign, thy body was never yet the Temple, wherein
that pure Spirit has lived in. Certainly some of thy Hearers will not credit
thee in this particular, and if they will any longer be led by such a filthy
Liar and Blasphemer, if they will still dote upon thee, and thy Dreams, I shall
pity their sad condition, that they are thus given up to believe such strong
delusions. P. 79.


A fourth obstruction in receiving Christ, thou says, is fear of suffering for
Christ, of bearing his Cross, that Christ may prove costly, or his ways and
cause cumbersome, that you may leave or lose Father, Mother, Wife, Children,
House, Lands, Goods, etc. And Selfeness stands (thou says) in Diametrall
opposition to Christ, and must be receded from, and renounced before Christ can
be approached or received.

Deal honestly with thy own soul, was not fear of suffering for Christ, of
bearing his Cross, the cause that made thee leave Lincoln and go to Norwich?
is not fear of losing House, Lands, Goods, Gratuities, yearly Revenue; reproach
of the world, the loss of the name of a Minister of the Gospel, the cause that
hinders thee from taking up the Cross of Christ? Can thou not say from thy
own experience (as in p. 80.) O the difficulty of self-denial, and man's
natural aversness to it, it is next to ceasing to be himself: especially thou
says, when a man has a great Self to deny, as great parts, power and wealth.

But what is thy meaning to call the Idols Temple a Church, and breed and wine
a Sacrament, as thou do in thy 80. page? How many rest, says thou, in
coming to the Church, and not to Christ? in receiving the Sacrament, but not
Christ? Fond man, how should they find him where he is not? Away with this
Popery, thou painted Priest, thy Tongue is tipped with Romish poison.

Thou tells of Peter's prohibiting Cornelius, p. 82. when he worshipped him: but
when do thou forbid thy flatterers, when they come bending and bowing before
thee, curtesing unto thee? Thou wants that true humility Peter had, thy
counterfeit stuff shall yield no contentment. That self-pleasing Mantle,
called the Custom of the Nation, shall contribute no comfort to thee in the
time of thy Tribulation, when the book of Conscience coms to be opened.

Thou often hintest to the people, they should readily receive Christ's
Ministers, and counts thy self, and the Tithe-taking Priests for Christ's
Ambassadors, I am sure. But that covetous griping Generation, who are always
crying, give, give, who love the flock merely for the fleece, are none of the
Ministers of Christ Jesus. Read Isa. 56.10.11. and see if that place be not a
pretty Representative of the Priests of our time. Isa. 56.10.11. worth reading.


Page 56.
Thou tells of Christ's Proclamation of himself and his Commodities free access
to all comers, and of all plentiful supply to all hungerers and thirsters
after him, and his good things, wine and milk, etc. to come and buy of him
without money, and without price.

Page 80.
Why do not thou and thy fellow false Ministers make Christ your pattern? O
the difficulty of self-denial, and men's natural aversenes to it! Yea even such
men who would be counted the Ministers of Christ Jesus, These are so far from
calling people to take their counterfeit ware without money or price, that they
think they can never get money nor price enough. Are such the Ministers of
Christ?

Priest;
Thou Queries whether it be not the great condemning sin that Men will not
receive Jesus Christ, seeing that is the great command of the Gospel, and
Christ (says thou) will come in flaming fire to take vengeance on them that
obey not the Gospel: This is the great salvation tendered to you in the Gospel,
which if you refuse, how can you escape great damnation?

Joh. 3.19.
This is the condemnation that light is come into the world and men love
darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil. What will become of
thee, and thy generation of teachers, who do not receive the light, but reject
it? Who instead of yiedling up your selves to it, you set your selves to preach
against it. Ye will neither obey it, your selves, nor are willing that others
should. Math. 23.13.
Woe and misery will be the portion of such men who instead of opening shut up
the Kingdom of Heaven against men, and neither go in themselves, nor suffer
them that are entering, to go in: how can such escape the damnation of Hell?
Prove. 28.13. John 8.12.
Not without confessing, and forsaking their sins and receiving the light of
the world Christ Jesus.

P. pa. 89.
In the 89 page thou tells of a fullness of force and efficacy in the death of
Christ to crucify the Old Man, and destroy the whole body of sin: and page 90,
Thou brings in this Scripture, 5 John 18.
He that is begotten of God keeps himself, and that wicked one, that is Satan,
who is the worst of all bad ones, touches him not. This keeping of Satan, and
his temptations out of the Soul (thou says) conforms a Christian unto Christ,
who said the Prince of this world that is Satan comes and has nothing in me:
he cannot tempt me to sin, I have no dry tinder of corruption within me to
kindle with the sparks of his tentations: all this is thy own language, thou
have here said enough to shake thy own Kingdom; and confound all the Priests in
England who preach against perfection.

Prove. 25.13 Jer. 2.13.
Be your selves, O people; darken not your understandings by doting any longer
upon these dreaming Priests, who are Clouds and Winds without rain, Cisterns
that hold no water. Judge, O ye wise in heart, whether he that is begotten of
God that keeps himself and that wicked one the Devil cannot tempt or overcome
him to commit sin, whether that man be not perfect, and free from sin yea or
nay. Was not Christ perfect and without sin?
Whether he that is conformed unto Christ be not perfect yea or nay and without
sin? whether he that has no dry tinder of corruption within him to kindle with
the sparks of Satan's temptations, be not perfect and free from sin yea or nay?
whether such a Soul I say has not attained to that perfection which Christ
commanded and Paul persuaded the Hebrews to press after. Math. 5.48. 6 Hebr. 1.
Hebr. 12.23. 4. Ephesians. 13.
Is not the spirit of that just man made perfect? Is not he then come unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ? Read this without prejudice,
and consider that as the tree falls so it lies. And 1 John 4.17. As he is, so
are we in this world. Was not Christ Jesus perfect? Was not he without sin?

In the 91 page thou bids others not set their affection on things below, nor
to love the world or the things of it.

Learn this lesson thy self, then preach it to others.

page. 93.
Thou talks of patient suffering the evils of the world, to overcome them, as
persecution, famine, Nakedness, Peril, sword, etc.



p. 94. 95.
Thou bids them go to Christ for his spirit to dwell in them to lead them as a
guide in all their ways, and into all truth, To teach you all things, as a
Master, and bring al things as a Monitor into your remembrance.

What need is there then for thy defective, and imperfect rules? Why did thou
beg leave of thy Mayor, Babylons Brats can work no better.

Thou talks of self emptying, and sense of emptiness makes Souls hungry and
thirsty after the spirit.

Why then do thou fill them with so many filthy-lies, and contradictions as
be in thy book?

The bottle that is full of bad liquor thou says must be emptied to the
bottom, before it can be filled with the good.

Is not thy bottell full of the airy windy stuff of Popular applause, Laodicea
do not know she is poor, blind and naked, her vessel is neither empty nor
open but full and stopped or corkt up.

Now thou presses people to the conduit-pipes of the ordinances as thou calls
them. Especially word, Sacraments, and communion of Saints: Thou may blush
and be ashamed to call thy self-invented lifeless performances the ordinances
of Christ Jesus: where do thou read in the Scriptures that the two
Testaments, as thou calls them, are the two breasts of Christian consolation?
Are not the Saints bodies the Temples of the Holy Ghost.
Tell me, does not a man draw and receive his consolation from the in-dwelling
and living of the holy Ghost within his Body? Is not this to rob God of his
honor, to attribute that to the letter which is due to the living God? Thou
says Christ is a well of living Water, did thou live upon that living water,
thou could not delight in these dirty pudles of false doctrine; and
deceitful devices of man's Brain, as thou does.



Both Priest and people have the Scriptures,

And do thou not acknowledge that he that is begotten of God keeps himself
and that wicked one touches him not. 1 John 3.9.
Do thou not go on saying, This keeping out of Satan and his tentations out
of the Soul conforms a Christian unto Christ? Art thou or any of thy hearers
able to witness the new birth, that you commit not sin, that the wicked one
touches you not, that his tentations are kept out of your Soul, and that you
are conformed unto Christ?

Then thou goes to thy Sacraments, and brings a piece of Scripture for thy
sprinckling infants, which plainly confounds the practice of thee and all thy
generation of Priests. He that believes is and is baptized, shall be saved.
Does not beleiving go before baptizing? Can a newborn Child believe? Produce
either precept or president in the Scriptures for thy practice of sprinkling
Infants, or be ashamed: Did the primitive Church when they brake bread, receive
a bit of Bread and a sup of Wine (as the people in fellow-ship with thee, and
all those who live in forms do from the Priests: Is not this a Popish
invention?), they brake bread from house to house eating their meet with
singleness of heart; Was not this a full meal?

Did ever Christ's Apostles use Prayer with preaching as you do? The Jews
indeed had certain houses of Prayer that Church being national, and so there
was a certain place appointed for that purpose, but were they not unconverted?
do not you by imitating them therein, and by your lives, make it manifest, you
are the Jews now who are unconverted? Do you not hold up the letter, In
opposition to the Spirit, calling the letter your Rule.
and persecute Christ in spirit? Have you any other than common or formal
prayers before and after Sermon, (a mere Popish Custom) And when that is done,
then comes a formal benediction or blessing the people, a mere cheat wherewith
you delude the ignorant; but the light has discovered that, and all the rest
or your deceits.

What the people are better for that blessing, their lives make it manifest:
Acts 3.2^.
Did not Christ that High Priest cease this Ceremony when he blessed his
Disciples, and afterward came in spirit to bless his people? were not Christ's
and his Apostles prayers very short, plain, and to the purpose: are not yours
long, vain glorious, without the spirit and understanding? Does that pure
spirit live in you, when you perform such lifeless exercises, and deliver such
deceitful Doctrine? and is not your singing, a confused noise of lying?

Thou tells of Christ's invitation of all poor souls to him, who feel a need of
him: then see from henceforth thou hinder none, keep none back, let all that
will go freely. Does Christ call them, and will thou by the ringing of a Bell
call them to thy self? Art thou Christ? art thou the way, the truth and the
life? Thou says, Christ stood and cried (so does he still) if any man thirst,
let him come unto me and drink: so let him that is a thirst come. But can
thou and thy fellow Priests satisfy the thirsty souls of poor sinners with the
water of eternal life? if thee can not, call them no longer to thee; but send
them to Christ, the light of the world, that pure Fountain; and delude them no
longer by letting them drink of the long standing, corrupted, putrified pool of
men's traditions. Christ says, Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will ease you. Can thee and thy Generation give ease to that soul,
that labors under the heavy load and burden of his sins? Do ye not instead of
taking off the burden lay more weight on? Christ he gives ease, and you sell
what is a Burden. Page 117.
Thou talks of Christ's cheapness of all soul Commodities, as Grace, Peace,
Spirit, joy, you may buy them without money or money worth. Hoe every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money: for coming is
buying, and thirsting is the price. I will give to him that is a thirst of the
Fountain of water of life freely.

Now see the difference between Christ and Antichrist: Christ he gives grace,
Yet he tells you, that your not coming to Christ for what ever you want, is
your condemnation, and he bids you Take it out of Christ's own mouth, Ye will
not come to me, that ye might have life; but the Serpent is so subtle, He would
have you take Him in your way, make him your Guide; but while you do so, ye
shall never see your Savior. Well friends, the Priest has told you plainly,
your not going to Christ is your condemnation.

Luke ^1.21.
Now unless ye be Reprobates, past reproof, you may know that Christ is within
you. The Kingdom of God is within you: therefore turn aside from your worldly
Teachers, and turn to the pure light of God in every one of your Consciences.
Take counsel of that trusly, faithful, and most wise Counselor, yield
obedience unto him. Behold, to obey, is better then sacrifice, and to hearken
better then the fat of Rams: You shall never witness the life of a Saint, never
truly loath all manner of sin, till you be in perfect love with the pure light
of God within you. And that will give you power over your corruptions, abiding
in it, being obedient to it. The least measure thereof, if you be faithful to
it, shall make you experience this for truth: if you say to this, or that
Mountain, or hill of sin, Be removed, it shall be removed and le^ei'd.

Christ's precept is (thou says) when thou prayest enter into thy Closet, and
shut thy door. This thou calls his Rule for private prayer. Show then his Rule
for thy long vain glorious public prayers, before and after Sermon: where do
the Scriptures mention any Rule for private and public prayer, such as thine?
then thou talks of praying with others, etc.

1 Cor. 14.15.
It Is an easy matter to patter out many words, but which of you prays with the
spirit and understanding? Thou confesses before, They that have not the spirit
of Christ are none of his: And they who have that spirit living in them, need
none of thy Rules or direction, how, when, or with whom, to pray. The spirit he
helps our Romans ^.26.
infirmities; for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the
spirit it self makes intercession for us, with groans which cannot be uttered.

P. 124.
Thou plainly shows thy self a Son of the Church of Rome: Houses thou says (as
well as Temples) were and are to be dedicated to God: Thou says the Jews were
commanded to do it: He Is as blind as thy self, who knows not that; but what
of this: After the Destruction of the Temple, was there ever any other
commanded to be set up? Acts 7.47.48. Acts 17.24.25 John 4.23.24.
Prove this if thou can. God dwells not in Temples made with men's hands: And
ye that worship in the Idols Temple, ye worship ye know not what; for God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit, and in truth. 1
Kings 18.27.29.
Should I say to you concerning your worshipping in your Steeple Houses, as
Elijah did, would you not be angry? Cry aloud, for he is a God either he is
talking, or he is pursuing, Or he is in a journey, or peradventure, he
sleeps, and must be awakened. But is there any voice? any to answer? or any
that regards? Anos 6.1. Romans 12.2.
Where is the man or woman amongst you, that turns from the evil of his ways?
that cease to do evil, and learns to do well? that lives not at ease (and woe
be to them that live at ease) that fashions not himself according to the World?
that can truly witness self-denial, that takes up his daily Cross, and
follows Christ?

P. 130. can the Spirit of God be limited to set times?
Does the Scriptures limit the Saints to pray morning and evening. He that
prays without the Spirits help, his prayers are an abomination to the Lord.
The Apostle bids, pray continually. Away thou Legalist, thou painted Pharisee,
blush and be ashamed.

P. 134.
Thou calls the word (meaning the letter I know assuredly) food for the soul,
Manna from Heaven: but where is thy Scriptum est for this? can any thing but
the living God satisfy the soul? Had not the Scribes and Pharisees the
writings of the Prophets, the presence of Christ's person, and his Apostles, and
their preaching too? yet Christ complains, that they would not come to him,
that they might have life. They had the letter, yet wanted life they Page 134.
had the Husk, yet wanted the Kernel. Whether is the Husk, or Shell, or the
Kernel, Meat? Is it not said, He satisfies the hungry with good things, does he
call the Scriptures those good things? where is it said that they satisfy? But
the rich he sends empty away: Is this the doctrine of Christ, to say reading of
Scripture is that to the Soul, which Dinner and Supper is to the body? How many
poor pined starved souls in this City will witness against thee herein, when
the book of Conscience comes to be opened? Thou goes on calling the Scripture
(under the name of Gods Word) the Christians Armory, or Magazine, saying,
Reading of Gods Word is a Means of putting on the whole Armor of God, of
girding the sword of the Spirit upon the Thigh of the soul: And that it is like
an Apothecary shop, wherein are healing Medicines for all sorts of Spiritual
Diseases. Thou pretends one thing and does another: thou seems to make the
Scripture The Rule for men to walk by, but not, it seems, for thee to talk and
prate by, who preaches and prints such stuff as neither thee nor all the
Priests in England can prove by plain Scripture. P. 140.
He that brings any other Doctrine then what was delivered by Christ and his
Apostles, Is he not accursed? Thou calls Conscience a good Monitor, and so it
is, but thou dares not serve so good a Master. Page 143. Thou calls it a
Principle of Joy. O that thou would make it thy joy to obey that pure
Principle, thy joy would be then unspeakable, and full of glory; but thou
treads it under foot, and dares not give it the uppermost Room, nor let it Rule
in the Kingdom of thy Heart. It is my witness, I speak the Truth and lie not.

P. 145.
Thou makes confession against thy self, but forsakest not. Family-Duries
superficially performed cannot kill disorders in thy house. Are the best of
Your performances any better? What means then the reigning of your Headstrong
Lusts, as Pride, Passion, Envy, Covetousness, etc? Art thou not ashamed still
to limit Prayer to Morning and Evening? The 5. Psalm. 3. verse which thou brings
1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
for thy proof, mentions David's exercise in the Morning only. Does thou bring
in His practice against a Gospel-precept, Pray continually or without ceasing.
Thy calling that day of the Week thou Worships on, the Sabbath, shows thy
ignorance of the True Sabbath. Is this the language of A true Minister of the
Gospel?

Thou says all Relations Domestical, Ecclesiastical, and Political are founded
and established in the Law of God, and Gospel of Christ; But should thou
never have penny for thy preaching till thou proves this, in that sense thou
take Ecclesiastical Relations, The Fox would soon say, his Spirits, and
strength were spent, Take the Pulpit who would, the Priest would be gone either
to Norwich or some such other Place, or City of Pecuniary Refuge.

Thou brings in for a Proof of thy Bold assertion, Thou shall not covet thy
Neighbors Wife, nor his Manservant, nor his Maidservant, etc. But what is
this, to Ecclesiastical Relation as thou calls it? Is it not like a Spiders
Webb finely spun? yet so weak that a feather will fell it down? Is not this to
cast an Odium upon the late Parliament, and present Authority for abolishing
Bishops, Dean and Chapters? were not they counted Ecclesiastical Relations? Art
not thou and thy Generation of Priests built upon the same foundation they
were? Is not your life in the letter as theirs was? Their Doctrine, and yours
the same? Do you not plead for the same maintenance of Tithes they did? Did not
thee and thy Presbyterian Generation preach against Prelacy because you would
be the Prelates your selves?
Art not thou, and thy fellow Priest, paid for your preaching, out of that
yearly Revetiue, which was formerly paid to your Elder Brethren the Bishop,
Dean and Chapter of Lincoln, Three hundred pounds a year between you? If these
Relations had been grounded upon the Law of God, and the Gospel of Christ, Was
it well done of them who abolished them? But that Man's blind who sees not thee
to be a Minister of Antichrist, quarrelling so far as thou dares, and showing
thy discontent at what the Lord has done in hastening the Downfall of the
Devils Kingdom.

P. 156.
Thou presses the people with their duty to their Ministers: Due respect and
love to their persons: and thou brings in 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. We beseech you,
Brethren, to know them that labor among you, and are over you in the Lord. Now
prove thy self and the Priests of England if thou can, to be such as Paul
was, to be in the Lord, and filled with the Holy Ghost, Did ever Paul or any of
the Primitive Saints preach such Doctrine as thou and thy Fellow Priests do?
and live in such pride, pomp, idleness, and oppression as you do? Thy next
proof is, 1 Timothy 5, 17, 18. Let the Elders that Rule well be counted worthy of
double Honor. Name me those Elders among you who rule well: Old in folly,
deceit, and filthiness there are many; but young and green to any thing that
is good. Who are they that labor in the Word? Thee and thy Generation are not
true Laborers in the Lords Vineyard, but lazy idle loyterers, Greedy
shepherds: None of you abide in his Doctrine nor hold fast the form of sound
words.

The next is, due Maintenance for their pains, Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught
in the Word Communicate. First prove your selves True Teachers such as Paul,
and the Apostles were. Produce your Commissions from Christ Jesus, Prove your
Call, That you ran not before you were sent: That you abide in his Doctrine.
Till that be done, there is nothing due unto you, but Judgment. And should thy
self, and the Priests of this Nation, who preach for Reward, be forced to make
but bare restitution of all that they have received and robbed the people of,
under the Notion of Christ's Ministers, they would be the most beggarly
contemptible People in the World.

But observe the word, Communicate, a voluntary Contribution, or free Cift. Is
this the best prop you have for compulsive Tithes, or other set maintenance?
Thy next place is, 1 Cor. 9.11. But what spiritual things have ye sown unto
the people? unless spiritual Delusions, Teaching for Christ's doctrine the
Traditions of Men: calling Sprinckling Infants the Baptism of Christ: and
roaring out Lies in the Idols Temple, spiritual melody: and eating a bit of
bread, and drinking a sup of wine, feeding on the Body and Blood of Christ. Is
Original Sin the Doctrine of Christ? Is Denying the Deity to be Communicable,
the Doctrine of Christ or Antichrist? Is not he that denies Jelus to be come in
the flesh an Antichrist? Then Edward Reyner has no wrong done him to be called
Antichrist: for He denies the Substance of the Deity to be communicable. Is not
Christ Jesus of the Substance of the Deity? Is it not said, Christ in you the
Hope of Glory?

Paul tells us he used not this power, but suffered all things lest he should
hinder the Gospel of Christ. If the Ministers of England were such as Paul was,
they would be content with Paul's Reward; and what was that, Verily, says he,
1 Cor. 9.18.
That when I preach the Gospel, I may make the Gospel of Christ without charge.
Paul he kept under his Body, and brought it into subjection, lest that, says
he, when I have preached to others, I my self should be a Castaway. 1 Cor.
9.27.
O that when thou preachest Self-denial to others, thou would make Paul thy
President, and practice it thy self, and not cry out of the difficulty thereof
as thou do, page 80. and so be discouraged and never take up the Cross, but
live in such pomp and pride as thou does, nor call for respect to thy person as
thou does; like a Proud Pharisee as thou art. Do either of the places in
Scripture thou produces, prove that the Apostles called for that respect to
their persons which thou receivest? Or does either of the places mention
respect to their persons? The Pride of thy Heart is seen in thy third proof, I
saiah 52.7. The words are these; How beautiful upon the Mountains are the feet
of Him, that brings good tidings, that publishes peace, that brings good
tidings of good, that publishes salvation, that says unto Sion, Thy God
reigns. Come down thou proud Son of Ambition, that aspiring spirit in three
shall be levelled with the Dust. 1 Pet. 5.5.
For God refuteth the proud, and gives his grace to the Humble.

Page 174.
Thou counsels Masters and Mistreffes to Make their Servants read Scriptures,
and Bring them to the Public Ordinances.

He that dares use such lofty language now, Bonner, if ever power should be put
into his hands? Art thou a Minister of the Gospel and thus seeks to dethrone
him, by taking his Golden Scepter of Lo from him, and would rule thy self
over his Saints with thy rod of iron, thy persecuting spirit? Is not Christ
alone King of the Conscience? Away thou Traitor to the King of Saints! Thy
Treason is discovered against him, and his Tender Lambs; but it shall not
prosper.

Page 217.
Thou talks of Contempt of the World, of all the Wealth, Pomp, and Glory in it,
and says it is Christian Magnanimity to contemn silver and gold.

It Is such Magnanimity, as neither thee, England who preach for Rewards are
endued with. What people lives in more pomp and glory of the World than your
selves, according to your outward estates? who coret silver and gold more then
your selves?

Page. 219.
Paul thou says was singular in Self-denial.

1 Cor. 9.27.
O that Edward Reyner could truly say so of himself; but while he preaches this
to others, he himself becomes a Castaway: for he like a Coward cries out of
the difficulty thereof, and never yet durst deal with it. Page 80. P. 225.
Ah that thou had eyes to see who it is that rests in the Name without the
thing; who it is that Sardis-like has a Name to live, but is dead, and who
they be that are the Synagogue of Satan: But this is hid from thy eyes, for
thou delightest in darkness, and loves not, but loathes the light, an
infallible sign thy Deeds are evil. Revelat. 3. 1 -- 9.


Page 227. Priest.
Thou says, Neither is that Baptism sufficient to Salvation which is outward
only of the flesh.

Ans. Why do thou use it then and sprinckle Infants? being thou have neither
precept nor president for that practice.

Priest.
Baptism is that of the Spirit (thou says) in the Heart.

Ephs. 4.5.
If this only be Christ's Baptism, Whose is the other? Paul owned but one Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism.

Page 244.
Thou talks of that thou never tasted of from God in (thy own not) his
Ordinances (the Letter not) the World; Hebr. 4.12.
(for the Word is quick and powerful) Sacraments, (Away with that Romish Word,
it shows what thou art and Would be) Prayer: Prove. 12.2. Prove. 28.9.
The prayers of the Wicked are an abomination to the Lord: All thy babbling is
but a Pharisaical Vainglorious Boasting, a mere flourishing of a Formalist.

Ephe. 4.12, 13.
Thou says in Heaven is perfection of grace, and obedience; Paul is speaking of
perfecting the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
Body of Christ, till we all come in the Unity of the Faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the Measure of the
Stature of the fullness of Christ, That we henceforth be no more children
tossed to and fro, carried about with every wind of Doctrine by the sleight of
men, etc. Paul writes to such who had not yet attained to such a Measure; But
does Paul say, that perfection of Grace and obedience is in Heaven, as thou
would have it understood? Does he not plainly signify that the coming unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, is to
be while we are on Earth? Else what mean the following words, That we
Henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro, etc. Can the Saints in Heaven
be tossed to and fro? What wind of false Doctrine is there in Heaven? What
cunning craftiness there? Are there any in Heaven who lie in wait to deceive?

Heb. 12.23.
Then thou tells them, That in Heaven the spirits of just men are made perfect.
The Apostle speaking of the Administration of Moses, etc. Tells them, that they
are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable Company of Angels, to the Assembly and Church
of the firstborn which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and
to the spirits of just men made perfect.

If the man were not blind he might see the Apostle says, That they are come,
etc. But he that is in the Dark may stumble. And the language of Babylon is
Confusion.

In thy 46 page thou Queries, why they fetch not joy from Heaven to comfort
their Hearts against all their sorrows on Earth, etc.

What is the joy of the Holy Ghost so weak,

Page 252.
Speaking of the glory of heaven, Thou says it is Great, Yea an exceeding,
excessive, eternal, weight of Glory: and usest them words as Scripture, 2 Cor.
4.17. But, is the Word excessive set down in that place? why do thou add to
the Scripture? Who ever reads the verse, may read thee a liar. Then thou calls
these words, the highest Hyperbole that can be expressed; and when thou have
done, thou contradicts thy self, saying, Nec Christus nec coelnm patitur
Hyperbolen, Neither Christ nor Heaven can be Hyperbolized.

Thou presses People to that which thou have as much need as they to practice,
Obedience, and Patience, which thou calls the shoes of the Gospel. I wish thee
so well that thou were so shod: Thou bids them be content with such things as
they have, though they have but from hand to mouth; with food and raiment,
though they have no more. The poor it seems must be preached unto patience and
contentedness without dainties and Ornaments; but the Priests and the proud
Ones, who live in pomp and plenty, may purchase Lands and possessions 1 Cor.
9.27.
without any check, as the proud Priests of Lincoln do. Do not these men,
preaching that which they themselves practice not, make themselves become
Cast-awayes?

P. 27^.
Thou says, [If I had More of the world] what have thou not enough yet? One
hundred and fifty pounds a year for preaching, besides a pretty Land thou have
purchased [it might make me worse] that needs not, thou art bad enough already,
Is it not pity thou should have more, to make thee worse? And yet would be
counted a Minister of the Gospel, O blush and be ashamed.
More worldly, vain, unsavory in my spirit. Here thou confessest thy self,
worldly, vain, unsavory in thy spirit; * but confession without forsaking will
not obtain remission.

And while thou art worldly, vain, unsavory in thy spirit, thou art no true
Minister of the Gospel.

Thou goes on, saying, If I had as much as others (what still gaping after more
gold and silver? what never satisfied? Thou have yearly coming in as much, as
would maintain several Families, precious Sons and Daughters of the living
God.) Its like I might be as sinful, and sensual, as proud, covetous, and vain
glorious as others.

Answ. Thou art as sinful, as sensual, as proud, as covetous, and vain
glorious as many of the world, who pretend not to that height and growth in
Christianity as thou does.

P. 272.
Thou says a man may have much of the world, much wealth, honor, pleasure, and
much trouble, sorrow, and vexation with it: both Scripture and experience
attest the same.

Answ. Thou might have spoken more plainly, and have said thy own experience
attests it: For much honor, wealth, and pleasure, thou have, and I know
sometimes, the witness for God arises in thee, preaching self-denial to thee.
P. 72.
The light lets thee see thou lives not like a Minister of Christ Jesus, but art
a Minister of Antichrist; for thou denies Christ Jesus to be come in the flesh,
by denying the substance of the Deity to be communicable (unless thou will say
Christ Jesus is not of the substance of the Deity, and that's plain blasphemy)
and thou preachest for gifts and Rewards, living in pomp, pride, and fullness of
the world, that thou abidest not in the Doctrine of Christ: And art one with
the world in its ways, fashions and Customs. And then the earthly man, the
rebellious part, which would live at ease, is tormented, troubled, and
disquieted: That this is true, the witness for God within thee, is my faithful
Record.

Then thou goes on, saying, A man may have a little in, and of the world, yet
enjoy much quiet, and content of mind, and comfort: but thou does not say, thy
own experience can attest this. No, thou goes far to fetch an example; but to
give thee thy due, thou brings a good One with thee, no less than the Apostle
Paul himself, Phil. 4.10, 11, 12, 16.17.
(If seems thou could not find one in all thy own flock) Paul knew how to be
abased, and how to abound, both to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound,
and suffer need. In the 18th verse, Thou says, Paul triumphs, as if all the
world was his own, and this was for one gift he received of Epaphroditus: How
many gifts have thou received without witnessing such a true Triumphing? Nay,
how many considerable gifts art thou able to send for the supply of the Saints
necessities, who suffer for the testimony of a good Conscience?

How many testimonies of thy love can thy Conscience bear thee witness, thou
have sent to such, out of the abundance of thy Treasury?

P. 246.
Thou was asking, why you do not fetch joy from Heaven to comfort your hearts
against all your sorrows on earth: and now page 274. Page 274.
Thou says, if Gods presence make Heaven above for joy, glory and plenty, sure
Gods presence with you on earth is sufficient to make any condition even the
meanest, comfortable to you, what can be wanting while God is with you?

Answ. Then what needed thee to have hasted the people to fetch joy from
Heaven, since thou confessest his presence on earth is sufficient? And how this
expression agrees with that place of thine, where thou says, The joys of
Heaven exceeds, and swallows up the joy of the Holy Ghost, as the Sea does a
handful of earth. Let the wise in heart judge.

P. 278.
Thou says, those will be found the happiest men of all at last, who have had
the most affliction.

Answ. Then thou and thy Generation will be found very miserable.

P. 281.
Speaking of Christ's poverty: Thou says, when he wanted money to pay Tribute. He
was glad to work a miracle for it.

How many hundred pounds have thou received for thy preaching, and never paid
penny of the same toward assesments. O the difference between Christ and
Antichrist!

P. 291.
Thy Counsel to such as walk in darkness, and see no light, is, let them
endeavor to fear God, and obey the voice of his Servants, that is, says thou,
they should apply themselves to their duties, to believe and fear, and obey
God, and to use the means God has appointed for their souls, as to hear the
word preached, that is the voice of his Servants, to wait on God in the Eye of
his Ordinances: If thou can.
Clear this bold assertion of thine, and that thy empty lifeless Ordinances, the
Traditions of men are the eye of God, on which the people are to wait. Do this
and live, without ever being contradicted by my tongue or pen.

In the mean time, it will not be amiss for the Reader to search the place or
foundation whereon the man seems to build his Babel, Isa. 50.10. Who is among
you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his Servant, that walks
in darkness, and has no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay
upon his God.

He that has any understanding in the things of God, will say this seeming
Saint is wresting and twining the Scripture out of joint, to maintain his
tottering Trade of talking in the Pulpit; but Dagon cannot stand before the
Ark. His Diana must down, The mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

302.
Self-ignorance thou says, made Laodicea think her self rich. And self-love is
a false glass, thou says, men commonly look themselves in, which makes all
seem good, that they are, have, or do.

Answ. Art not thou and thy flock, a Laodicean Assembly, that thinks her self
rich, and has need of nothing that sits as a Queen, and says she can never be
moved? Is not self-love, and self-righteousness the fruits of thy Ministry?
Can thou, and thy Hearers witness in the presence of God, a love to, and
delight in him, a fear to offend him, or to grieve his holy spirit? what means
then the looseness of your lives, your conformity to the world in your
conversations? your frowardness, pride, envy, and passion?

Do you not even in your best performances, draw near him with your lips, when
your hearts are far from him? which of you forsakes the evil of your doings,
your deceit, and dissimulation? Every man search and examine his own
Conscience, and let the witness for God give your answer to me.

P. 309.
Assurance thou says, does not fear or fly Trial, whether it be sound or no;
but presumption shuns examination, and cannot endure to be searched. Did not
thee use these words when a Woman came into the Minister, and would
have-testified against thy deceit.
If any Saint of God be moved to come into your Assemblies, to testify against
your deceitful Doctrine: Do you not bid presently take them away. Is not
advantage taken by the outward Law against them? Or do you not rage, revile,
beat and persecute them. Have not some been persecuted in thy Assembly, by some
of thy own fellowship or hearers. If thou have the impudency to deny it, or
can by Plain Scriptures vindicate the Action, do it?

Art thou not ashamed to compare Calvin's care with the Apostle Paul's? Can
thou boast of Calvin's sufferings for the Gospel, and equal them with Paul's?
Did Calvin work with his own hands day and night, as Paul did? Did he live in
such outward want as Paul did? Was he filled with the Holy Ghost, as Paul was?
Did not Calvin live in pomp and state at Geneva, as thou does at Lincoln? But
thou matters not it seems what thou says, so thou may advance the Reputation
of Calvin, because he was of thy own Brotherhood? Thy third sign (shows thy
subtlety) contempt of Gods Ordinances, of Magistracy, Ministry, Scriptures,
Sabbaths.

When Authority is trampled upon, and men slight and hate him that rebukes or
judges justly. If thou knows any that do so, charge them with it. Name that
Magistrate that judges justly in the Gate, and is for so doing hated by that
People against whom thy heart in secret shoots the Arrows of its poison. That
true Magistrate that would judge justly upon the wicked One, is by thee and thy
Generation trampled upon and persecuted.

Then thou tells, when Israel mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his
words, and misused his Prophets, Then the wrath of the Lord arose against them.

Thou and thy Generation have an itching desire to be counted the Messengers of
God. But what is the Message you deliver? Is it not false Doctrine, lies, and
blasphemies, witness thy Book, and your Pulpit exercises, such as the Prophets,
Christ, nor his Apostles never preached, nor practiced, but cried woe against:
Isa. 56.11. Jer. 5.31. Jer. 14.14. Isa. 48.22. Mat. 10.34.
Do you not seek for gain from your Quarter, prophecy lies unto the people?
run before you be sent? speaking peace to them to whom the Sword is due; for
there is no peace to the wicked. And Christ he came not to bring peace to such,
but a Sword: What are the mockings and misusings thou complainest of? who live
at more ease in worldly credit, and take less care and labor for an outward
livelihood, than the Priests who live upon other men's labors? Acts 13.32. Luke
9.3. Acts 20.33.
But the true Messengers of God, who declare of his word in sincerity, preaching
the glad tidings of the Gospel without bagg or scrip, who covet no man's silver
or gold, nor make the Gospel chargeable to the world: These precious Saints,
and Sons of the living God are reproached, and persecuted by this sinful
Generation.

Who are they that contemn the Scriptures, but those who in words seem to make
them their Rule but in their life and practice tramples them under foot? even
thy self, and all those that preach for Rewards, and they that prize them for
Apollo's: Thou, and the world shall find, that the contempt of The Word, (not
the Letter, though we contemn not that, but own it) and His Ministers (but not
the Priests of England) is a provoking sin, and a presaging Symptom of Ruin to
a People.

P. 322.
Thou talks of a Spirit of error and delusion, and contradiction.

Eccles. 2.14.
Thou and thy fellow Priests are seen by every one, whose eye is in his head, to
be possessed with that spirit of error, delusion, and contradiction, which thou
would cast upon the Saints of God. Do you not teach for Christ's Doctrine the
Traditions of men? Mat. 15.3. Mark 7.7.
Are you not Antichrists, denying Christ to be come in the flesh, when you deny
the substance of the Deity to be communicable? Do you not call sprinkling of
Infants, the Baptism of Christ? Are you not called of men Masters, contrary to
Christ's Command? if you be Christ's Disciples, that is a Command to you. Mat.
23.10. Isa. 56.11. Mat. 23.14
Do you not seek for gain from your Quarters? and use long vain glorious
prayers in your Synagogues, fashioning your selves Romans 12.2. 2 Timothy 1.13.
according to the world, not holding fast the form o^ sound words suffering poor
souls to commit sin in the best of their sacrifices, by telling lies when they
sing David's Psalms?

Do they not preach against pride, yet who more proud then the Priests? Matthew.
7.3.
Do they not talk much against covetousness, yet who more covetous than
themselves? Are not these the Pharisees of our age, that can spy a mote in
their Brothers eye, but cannot see to pull out the beam in their own? Jer.
23.21.
These run and never were sent. And for division and Contradiction, let twenty
speak all from one place of Scripture, and you shall have so many men, so many
minds, and meanings, opinions, imaginations, and contradictions: Then, for a
spirit of giddiness, who more giddy, unsolid, and more unstable then
themselves? Twenty or thirty pound a year more, and some other conveniences is
a Call sufficient with most of them from one place to another.

To leave a poor flock for a richer fleece is an ordinary thing. And as for
bitterness and perverseness, let them preach where they will, if their Tithes be
not paid, or their Doctrine be publicly opposed, let them show patience, and
moderation that can, The Priests have not such pleasant flowers growing up in
their Gardens. And as for falsehood and deceit, it is too well known by some,
that they live in that Mystery of Iniquity, and delight therein: but this will
be bitterness in the latter end, when Conscience-Book comes to be opened.

Page 329. Phil. 2.16.
Thou bids, Be willing and ready to suffer for the Churches of Christ, and
Children of God, as Paul was for the Philippians (Not as Edward Rayner was for
the Lincolners.) If I be offered upon the Sacrifice, and service of your faith,
That is, says thou, if I seal my Doctrine with my blood, and confirm your
faith by my death, I count it matter of joy both to you and me.

Page. 330.
But thou never had yet such Christian courage, nor never wilt while thy heart
dwells where it does: Have not those Heathens thou tells of, who suffered, and
dyed for the prosperity of the Public, showed themselves better State-Martyrs,
as thou calls them, then thou have been a Gospel-Minister?

P. 333. Priest.
Thou complains what a poor Account can rich men give of their goods, who have
done little or no good to others with them? Can learned men give of their
gifts? Can Magistrates give of their power, who have born the sword in vain,
who have taken to themselves the honor, but not performed to others the duty
of their place?

Should any of the Saints have spoken this language,

P. 318.
A little before thou was muttering out, and hinting, That Authority was
trampled upon, that men slight and hate him that rebukes or judges justly in
the Gate: and here thou complains of his bearing the sword in vain. But no
better can be expected from thee, than thy bottles be filled with.

P. 335.
Thou says it is a Mark of dishonor, and a Brand of infamy to be a Self-seeker,
to be like a Hogg that does no good till he dies, and scarce then with his
goodwill.

Search,

P. 339.
Thou tells of Dorcas dying full of good Works, and Paul full of Ministerial
Labors, (not full of filthy lies, Blasphemies and contradictions as thou art)
and of good success, or Gospel-fruits full of the Seals of his Ministry.

How many such Dorcasses have thou in this City? Paul's success, and thine.
And indeed it must Needs be so. Paul was filled with the Holy Ghost, and thou
with the spirit of Deceit and Delusion.

Page 350.
Speaking of the Return of Gods presence and his favor, thou usest those words,
In giving you the Liberties of his House.

Acts 7.47, 48. Act. 17.24, 25. 1 Cor. 6.19.
Thy end is seen in the use of that Language. But the Lord dwells not in Temples
made with hands. The Saints Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost.

Then thou talks of tasting the sweetness, (A fine expression if there were
Truth in it) and feel the power and efficacy, (rather the Flatness, deadness,
and dullness,) the Beauty, and Glory, (the uncomeliness, and raggedness) of all
his holy Ordinances, (thy filthy Dreams and Traditions, Rags of the Romish
Whore) and of the Assemblies of his people; (a mixed multitude of
Presbyterians, Independents, and Cavaleers so called) O that I could truly call
you an Assembly of Gods people: O that your hearts were upright before the
Lord: My soul pities all such who are thus led, and nuzzled up in ignorance by
a painted Pharisee, who will neither enter into the Kingdom of God himself,
nor suffer them that would. Matthew. 23.13.
And I hope ere long, their Eyes shall be opened, and they shall see his deceits
discovered, and escape them.

P. 356.
Thou tells, thou have heard some say, God has used to resolve their doubts by
the Ministry of the Word, thy meaning is, by such Priests as thy self. And then
thou Presumptuously and Blasphemously boastest, saying, Thus God fulfills this
promise, Isaiah 20.21. Thine Ears shall hear a voice behind thee, saying, This
is the way, walk in it, when thou turnest to the right hand or to the left hand.

P. 399.
Observing the Soul, the affairs of it, and Gods dealings with it, will make a
man, thou says, A Divine to Himself; and observing a man's course well, and how
God has led him, will make a man, under God, a Guide to himself.

Ah Friends! Be your selves, a Divine to Himself, and a Guide to Himself. Will
you be so foolish to be led any longer by such a false Prophet? Exodus 21.5, 6.
Will you have your Ears bored through with an Awle in token of perpetual
bondage? Do not inslave your souls for ever. Mind that Divine Principle of God
within you; and if you be willing to obey that faithful Counselor, it will be
a True Guide to you, it will be whispering the pure Counsel and Will of God
unto you. Ah yield up your selves to the light of Christ in all your
Consciences; Love it I beseech you. Ezekiel. 21.26, 27.
This is the Right Heir, give him the Kingdom of your Hearts. Keep the
possession thereof no longer from him. Will you not Reverence this Son? O kiss
him lest he be angry! Blessed is the man that hears This Welbeloved Son in
whom Alone the Lord is well pleased: Blessed, Prove. 8.34, 35.
I say, is the man that hears Him (not the false Prophets who preach for
Reward) watching daily at his gates, waiting at the posts of his doors. (not
at the gates of the Idols Temples, or the Posts of their doors.) For who so
finds him finds life, and shall obtain-favour of the Lord; Seek him and you
shall find him; but then seek right, look within, for there He is in every one
of your Consciences, bearing witness against all unrighteousness. He that
sins against it, wrongeth his own soul; All they that hate it, love Death,
Prove. 8.36.

Page 408.
Thou says, Aged persons are fittest to give Counsel: having lived many years
they have gained much experience; and thou brings in Job 32.6, 7. Days should
speak, and multitude of years should Teach Wisdom.

Its true, They should do so. But is it so with thee? Thou have lived many
years: Thou should teach Wisdom, but O the abundance of folly and
filthiness abounding in thy book, the gross darkness, and doting dreams
thou delivers instead of sound Doctrine. My soul pities thee, and all that are
deluded by thee.

Were thou not blind, thou would not have brought this proof for thy
Assertion: for this makes against thee.

Job in his former Chapter spoke much of his Integrity: Elihu not well pleased
at Jobs Justification of himself, rather than God. And against his three
friends was his wrath kindled because they had found no Answer, yet condemned
Job: Now Elihu had waited till Job had spoken, because they were elder then he,
when Elihu saw there was no Answer in the Mouth of these Three Men, Then his
Wrath was kindled, and said, I am young and ye are very old, wherefore I was
afraid and durst not show my opinion. I said, Days should speak and multitude
of years should teach wisdom. But there is a spirit in man, and the
inspiration of the Almighty gives them understanding. Great men are not
always wise, neither do the Aged understand judgment. Therefore I said,
Hearken unto me.

Titus 2.2, 3.
See thee here! Elihu green in years was made to reprove gray hairs. And Titus
must teach the aged Men and Women. I know thy end is, to make people believe
Wisdom is locked up in the lips of old men; Long standing Teachers in the
Pulpit] but such, Are Ancient in Deceit.] Multitude of years should teach
Wisdom; but the multitude of thy Eight and Twenty years Ministry has brought
forth a multitude of filthy lies bound up in thy Babylonish Book of Doting
Dreams instead of the Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles.

Priest. page 409.
Once more thou tells the people, That experience of God, and his Dealings, will
make men become Prophets to themselves, and able to be Teachers of others.

This is true, but thou dare not abide here;

Come out of Egypt, dear Hearts, do not delight to live and dye in the wild
Wilderness you at present are in: The generation of Priests are the
Hard-hearted, proud, oppressing Pharaohs, that will not let the Children of
Israel go free; but fear them not, only be valiant and Turn to the Light: And
it love with all your hearts, and your souls shall see Deliverance shortly,
and Pharaoh and his Host shall be drowned in the Red Sea. Exodus 13.27, 28.


Priest. Page 249.
In that part of thy Book, called the Government of the thoughts, Thou says,
Thoughts of the Vanities of the world with delight in them, as fashions,
sports, (thou might have named Bowling and Music) Complements,
entertainments, news, jests, the very froth and scum of wit and discourse,
these thou says are not worth thinking of.

Answ. Are they then worth thy living in them? Thou do conform thy self to
the fashions of the world, Thou usest Bowling and Music, and live in
Complements, and respect of persons, Art thou not also one that give
entertainments, listens after news, and loves jests, the very froth and scum of
wit and discourse?

The living Principle of God within thee is my true witness, and faithful
Record in these particulars, and shall rise up in judgment against thee for
these things, if thou repentest not. The light will be thy condemnation, if
thou love it not.

P. 255.
Thou says, While you are thinking what gain you have got by such a Commodity
you have fold; of bargain of Land, or Wares you have bought, or at such a Fair
or Market, Think withal, how little spiritual profit you have gotten for your
souls, at the many soul-fairs, or Markets you have had, as the Sabbaths,
Ordinances, and Sacraments.

Let me answer for them herein: Thou and thy Generation of Priests have gotten
more temporal gains, more Lands, money and goods by the bad Commodities, and
Wares, and false Doctrine which you deliver at such Priest-Faires or Markets,
as thou calls Sabbaths, and paintest over with the name of Christ Ordinances,
than ever their poor souls found comfort by them that bought them of you, and
traded with you.

Isa. 55.2.
Woe and misery will be the Portion of such Priests, if they repent not, who
take money for that which is not bread, and delude the ignorant with your
insinuating Tongues, calling light darkness, and darkness light. You are worse
then Simon Magus; for he would have bought the Spirit, and ye sell the Letter,
adding thereto many lies of your own:

P. 375.
Thou tells of the undaunted and insuperable courage of Paul, whom neither bonds
nor afflictions, nor death, could move or appale: but the very thoughts of
bonds imprisonment and afflictions made thee fly from thy flock in Lincoln to
Norwich. See what difference there is, friends, between Paul and your Priest.

Then thou brings in that of Nehemiah, chap. 6. verse. 11. shall such a man as
I, flee? Had thou been as true a Minister of Christ, as Paul was, thou
would not have wantted Paul's insuperable courage; but, when the slavish fear
was arising in thee, Thou would have said as Nehemiah did, shall such a man
as I flee? But the Tree was known by its fruit: shame cover thee, thou cowardly
Priest. Mat. 12.33.


Heb. 11.
What do thou talking of those Worthies in that little Book of Martyrs (as
thou calls it) of whom the world was not worthy, who subdued Kingdoms, stopped
the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the
sword?

Thou would fain be ranked amongst those conquering Christians: but it must
be then in some unknown Land; for here thy Cowardice is so well discovered,
thou can not be counted such a Champion as those were.

P. 384.
Thou bids the people, As they have frequented Ordinances, etc. so do it still:
and hold on even till death, and if these and the like things make you vile, he
would have you be more vile still.

P. 339.
Is it not this man's design to keep you in darkness? does he not deal
deceitfully with you? one while telling you, That observing the soul, and the
affairs of it, and Gods dealings with it, will make a man a Divine to himself;
P. 409.
and observing a man's course well, and how God has led him, will make a man
under God, a guide to himself. But he dares not center here, This Doctrine he
sees would unroost him and all his Romish Generation; Root and Branch: And
though they may keep aloft for a little season, yet they are not of the Lords
planting, and therefore shall be rooted up: and so shall all other Formalists,
who stumble at the light: Every knee shall bow unto my Jesus.
Here the man speaks plain English. That unless you wilfully hood-wink your
understandings, you may easily discover, The man is convinced, That if you will
but be so wise, and wary, as to watch over your own souls, minding that
principle of God within you, which checks and convinces you of sin, when no eye
sees you, nor ear hears you, this will be a Divine, a Teacher, a true Prophet
to every one of you. This will speak truth when the false Prophet flatters you.
The light of Christ in your Consciences is the pure Divine, The true Prophet,
the never erring Guide unto all goodness, if you will yield obedience thereunto.

It Is the desire of my soul, you may no longer make this Dreamer, nor any of
this stamp your Darling: Draw back from him; for he is but a painted Sepulcher,
what good soever he promises you; shall never be performed: so long as his life
is in the Letter, he feeds on death: Delight in that which draws out of sin
unto holiness, without which no man shall ever see God.

Feed no longer upon the Husks, like Swine. The Pearl of great price is set
before you. Christ Jesus the light of the world, He is the way, the truth and
the life: He is that bread from Heaven, which who so feeds on, shall never
hunger: He is that pure water of life, which who so drinks of, shall never
thirst.

The light in your Consciences, if you love it, will preserve you pure and
spotless, and stablish you in that pure Religion, which is undefiled. But if
you love Babylon, and loath the light, my Soul shall weep for you in secret.
Yet remember you have warning in your lifetime, prize it.

Much more of his filthy Rubbish might be gathered up; but here is enough
presented to the ignorant; for whose sake this work was undertaken, which may
sufficiently render this Romish Orator an Antichristian Minister.

M. M.

An end.

