The First Epistle. A CRYING VOICE of the holy Spirit of Love, wherewith all
People are out of mere Grace, called and bidden by H. N. to the true Repentance
for their Sins, to the Entrance into the upright Christian Life, and to the
House of the Love of Jesu Christ.

Luke 15.7. There shall be more joy in Heaven over one Sinner that repents,
then over ninety and nine just persons that need no Repentance.

O how lovely are the Feet of the Messengers that publish the Peace, preach the
Good, and witness or declare the Salvation!

Isa. 52.7. Romans 10.15. Behold, I will send mine Angel or Messenger, which
shall prepare the way, or path, the Street before me,

Mal. 3.1. Matthew. 11.10. Mark. 1.2. Luke 7.27. To day if ye hear his voice,
then harden not your Hearts, that ye bide not without the Rest of the People of
God,

Psalm. 95.7, 8. Heb. 3.15. and 4.7. Printed in the year, 1648.

The First Epistle.
The First Chapter.
THis is the Crying, or Voice, which comes to pass, and is heard now in this
present day, through the holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ, and wherewith
all People, are by H. N. called and bidden to the Repentance for their sins,
and to the house of the Love of Jesu Christ; the Isai. 32. Heb. 3. Heb. 4.
Rest of all the Saints, or Children of God; (And not alone with this Calling,
but also with all the Scriptures heavenly testimonies, and spiritual Voices of
the eternal Truth, which are gone forth from the holy Spirit of Love, and
brought to light by H. N.) like as the Holy Ghost has spoken thereof, and
warned all people, that they in that present day when they hear his voice,
should in no wise harden Psalm. 95. Heb. 3.
their hearts [namely, that they should not refuse 2 Cor. 6. Heb. 12.
nor resist the same proffered Grace, but humbly endeavor them thereunto] to
the end, they might enter into the godly Rest, which, till unto this same day
of Love, is reserved for the People of God for to rest them therein.

2. The most highest has also, after such a long time that He had promised the
Psalm. 95. Heb. 3.
Rest to the people of God, yet once more appointed a day, on the Acts 17.
which the universal Earth should be judged with Righteousness.

3. Therefore, as the holy Ghost says, Psalm. 95. Heb. 3.
To day if ye shall hear his voice, (that is, when the time now is fulfilled,
that the day of Love, which the most highest has appointed to be a Rest for
the People of God, declares it self, then shall ye hear, that ye, Isa. 42.
Cap. 51.
O all ye People, are called and bidden to the same Grace and Mercy,) then
harden not your hearts.

4. Let every one 2 Cor. 6. Heb. 12.
take heed to this same gracious time, that he may live, and rest him in this
same day from his Works, Travel, and Apoc. 14.
Labor.

5. Seeing then there is yet a Rest Isa. 32. Hebr. 4.
at hand for the people of God, which is made manifest, and inherited in the
family of Love, and that without the same or without his Service, there is
nothing but all Deuteronomy. 12.
good thinking, Isa. 59.
tedious travel, labor, and misery, therefore does not the holy spirit of
Love cease this day, by his minister H. N. to call and bid all people to the
same family of Love, Psalm 16. Psalm. 84. Ecclus 24. Apoc. 21.
full of all lovely being, and to his safe-making service to the preservation
of them all in the godliness. and to warn them every one Isa. 13. cap. 30. cap.
47. Dan. 12. Matthew. 24.
of the Woe and misery, and of the plagues of good-thinking that shall come upon
them that remain without the same, or that will not suffer themselves to be led
into the same through the service of the said family of love, to the end, that
they might all now in the service of love, and in the obeying of his requiring,
do upright Mat. 3. Luke 3 Act. 2. and 3.
repentance for their Sins, and enter into the Rest of the Lord.

The Second Chapter.
Bear sorrow for your sins, Ezekiel. 18. Matthew. 3.
and show upright fruits of Repentance, the great Isai. 14. Joel 2. Obad. 1.
day of the Lord is come hard by, and will now as a righteous Ier. 46. Soph. 1
2.
judgment of God, appear over the whole Earth.

2. Let every one now turn him away from the wicked world, and from the
Abomination of Dan. 9. Matthew. 24.
her desolation, and make his repair hither to the Isai. 2. Mich 4.
hill of the love, whereon the Lords house is builded, that he may be preserved
in this same day of the righteous judgment of God.

3. Yea, turn you hither betimes to the house of the Love of Jesu Christ, and
to his sake-making service; bear sorrow rightly for your sins, Matthew 3. Luke 3.
Luke 13. Acts 2.
and show forth upright Repentance or amendment for the same, O ye strayed
people, before the day of the Lord fall upon you, Soph. 2. Mal. 4.
to the recompencing of your wickedness.

4. Come now all hither, where the heavenly day light, Isai. 60. Sap. 5
the Sun of righteousness shines, and where the waters Ezekiel. 36. Apoc. 22.
of life flow forth out of the fountain of the living Godhead, to the purging
of your Sins.

5. Let every one now forsake his own word, doctrine, and taken-on knowledge,
and also the word, doctrine, and knowledge of all Ier. 23.27.29. Ezekiel 13. Mich.
3.
unsent preachers, and good thinking wise-ones, whereby ye be seduced, blinded
from the true fruits of Repentance, and estranged from the true sanctification
of your spirit and mind: and come now all to this same Ier. 29. Ier. 31. Mich 1.
sanctuary of God, out of the which the Lords living Isai. 2.
word is witnessed, the true repentance for the Sin made known, and the
upright Ephesians. 4. Col. 3.
righteousness and holiness of Jesu Christ taught, where-through ye be brought
to the right quieting of your Consciences, to the Mat. 11.
health of your souls, and to the sanctification, or Romans 12. Ephesians. 4.
renewing of your spirit and mind.

6. For that cause, come now all to this same hill, Isai. 2.
or house of Love: and in his out-flowing water, Ezekiel 13. Ezekiel. 36.
cleanse and amend, or hallow your being under the obedience of the Love of Jesus
Christ, that your sins may be Acts 3.
wiped out, and ye become led even so into the Isai. 32. Heb. 3. Heb. 4.
rest of all the children of God, and Saints of Jesus Christ.

7. Come now all likewise, which through your Romans 1. Ephesians 4.
ignorant knowledge, or misunderstanding, have turned away your selves from
this same Isai. 16. Heb. 5.
seat of Grace, and lovely house of the love of Jesus Christ, and from our John
17. 1 Ioh, 1.
Commonalty, grown offended at our means or 2 Cor. 1.
simpleness, and at the godly testimonies of our sayings, and so made up your
selves 2 Timothy 1. 2 Timothy 3.
resistant against us, and our good doctrine and exercises, separated your
selves from us, and grown bitter or wrathful toward us, together withal ye
that have mistrusted us, and John 8. John 10. 2 These. 2.
not believed the holy word of the eternal Truth, which we by Gods grace, do
administer under the obedience of the love, but doubted thereof, and so for that
cause, through some perverse conceiving toward the same, or, toward us,
refused the Prove. 1.
proffered grace, or kept your selves back: e Ezekiel. 18.
and repent you for your sins, to your sanctification, and to the health of
your souls.

8. Come likewise all ye, which through any opinion of the self-wise-ones, or
through any good thinking, or imagination of the knowledge, have bin Prove. 18.
unregarding toward this same gracious and godly service of Love, and toward
his requiring; and also ye, which have heard or read the testimonies of the
holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ, and showed no right obedience; as
likewise all ye, which have overreached your selves in any disorderly Sap. 14.
Romans 1.
dealing, or false 2 Pet. 2. Jude 1.
freedom, or in hearing, and believing of any Ier. 23. Ier. 17.
unsent Preachers, and so are fallen to your Ier 7. Ier. 18.
own counsel, or to the counsel of those that stand not submitted to the
house of the love of Jesus Christ, nor to his service and requiring, or are
strangers thereunto; or ye that through your negligence, or little regarding
Pro. 6. Prove. 24.
of the requiring of the service of love, are become vainly minded, with the
wicked world, and with the vain or false Romans 2. 2 Pet. 2.
Praters through the imagination of the knowledge, that false light, come and
Ecles. 7. 1 Pet. 5.
humble you, and let all your understandings be renewed, and to the obtaining
of a good, Ephesians. 4.
knowledge of Jesus Christ and his godliness, brought to right under the
obedience of the love: and under the same 1 Pet. 1.
obedience, Ezekiel. 36.
wash your bodies with the pure water of the love, and so cleanse your hearts
from all ungodly being, Isai. 1.
and wicked thoughts.

9. Come now all hither, and Gal 6. Ephesians. 5. Apoc. 2. Apoc. 3.
neglect not your time, to day becomes the grace of the love of Jesus Christ,
poffered yet unto you all, and the hand reached forth serviceably with the
same, to a peaceable Ephesians. 4. Col. 3.
Reconcilement with each other in Jesus Christ, to an unity of heart with us in
all love.

10. Yea, to day (ere ever the Prove. 1. Mat. 15.
punishment of the last judgment go forth over all ungodly ones, to their
condemnation in the hellish fire) yet ye be all called and bidden, even out of
mere Grace Ephesians. 1. Ephesians. 2.
and hearty love, to the Commonalty of Saints, which 1 Ioh. 1.
have their fellowship with Christ in the house of the love of Jesus Christ, and
that altogether to the preservation of you all in the godliness.

The third Chapter.
COme likewise all ye People, Governors, and Subjects, noble, and unnoble,
rich, and poor, wise, and simple, as also all men Mat. 9.
sinners, and women sinners: Turn you about betimes Heb. 5.
to the Mercy seat, ere ever that ye be quite and clean swallowed up by the
wicked world, or with seducing babbling, through the false light, and
overwhelmed with the curse by the wrath Eccles. 5. Mal. 4. Romans 2.
of God.

2. Come now all hither, and confess your sins, lay open the Prove. 18. Eccles.
4.
inwardnes of your, hearts, and bring forth right Mat. 3. Luke 3.
fruits of Repentance: and so then suffer your selves to be Ezekiel 36. Heb. 10.
washed with the pure and safe-making water of the love in the Font of Sap 3.
Eccles. 2.
humiliation, to the end, that ye may be Romans 5. Romans 8. Heb. 9.
justified or cleansed from all your sins, received into the holy Commonalty of
love, to be Romans 12. Ephesians. 4.
fellow members of the Body of Jesus Christ; and bide standing in holy Psalm. 45.
Sap 5.
garnishing, and not perish with the wicked world, when as she now in this same
day is judged with the Lords mighty hand.

3. Which wicked world is kept 2 Pet. 3.
to the hellish fire till unto this day of love, for to condemn the same for
evermore in the same day of love, to her eternal cursing and Mat. 25. 2 Pet. 3.
judgment of other fires cruelty, together with all those that maintain the
wicked world, as also are affected to the same, and will not turn them to
Repentance.

4. Verily, in the same day, when as now all ungodly ones, Mat. 25. 2 These. 1,
2 Jude 1.
and all self-wise-ones, with all unrepentant ones, and false hearts of the
Scripture-learned, which in their own opinion, have falsely Mat. 24.
boasted themselves very stoutly to be Christians; do inherit the terrible
Psalm. 13. Psalm. 47. Romans 2.
condemnation with many smarts in the cruelty of the hellish fire, then shall
the people of God, [namely, the whole Commonalty of the love of Jesus Christ,
and all those that have turned them penitently from their sins, to the same
Commonalty or family of love] Isai. 35. Isai. 65.
rejoice them in all love, and obtain a perpetual Isai. 32. Sap. 3.
rest in the everlasting life, according to the promises of God the Father, and
his Christ.

5. For that cause, O all ye people upon earth, take heed to this my voice or
calling, to this proffered Prove. 1. Isai. 49.
Grace, and to my warning, all ye, says the holy Spirit of love, which will
remain preserved, and be saved now in this same last day.

6. For after the day of love (inasmuch as it is the last or newest day, on
Acts 17.
the which the whole earth shall be judged with Righteousness) there shall no
Apoc. 10
day of grace appear any more upon the earth, but a severe, or hard Heb. 10. 2
Pet. 3.
judgment over all ungodly ones, as is before said.

Take it to heart.

The End of the first Epistle.
The Second Epistle. A short and pithy Instruction of the Mystery of the Love.
Labor for Love: Earnestly covet spiritual Gifts: but chiefly, that ye may
prophecy,

1 Cor. 14.1. The End of the Commandment, and the chief sum of faith, is love,
with a pure Heart, and with a good Conscience, and with unfeigned faith,

1 Timothy 1.5.
There was demanded, and an Instruction required thereupon in writing, which is
the Secretness, or Mystery of the Love; and thereupon is answered by H.N. in
writing, according to the Declaration of the spiritual and heavenly truth; this
Instruction here following.

He that has Ears to hear, Mar. 13. Luke 8. Apoc. 2.3.
let him hear.
He that has Wisdom, let him conceive understanding.
The First Chapter.
WIth whom shall I Prove. 8.
speak (says the Wisdom) that shall understand my words?

2. To whom shall I reveal the Mystery of the love, that shall conceive or know
it?

3. Who are those that give ear unto my doctrine, and have found my ways?

4. Who has marked where my dwelling is, and followed after me in my out-going
and in-going?

5. Who has born the contempt, blasphemy, and shame with me, when I lay in the
Prove. 1. Isai 59.
street, where the people shaked their Heads at Psalm. 22. Psalm. 109.
me (as at a Isai. 53. Sap 2.
filthy thing that is worthy to be cast away) and as mad and frantic men, ran
over me with feet?

6. Who has had his pleasure in me, when I was so Isai. 53. Sap. 2.
filthy and so loathsome to look upon, or to behold, before all wisdom of the
flesh and of the Unrepentant ones?

7. Who has denied Mat. 10. Mat. 16. Mar. 8. Luke 9. Luke 14.
himself, and is for the loves sake, gone out of himself with me, when I did in
the love require the man's salvation, and was condemned to the death Mat. 26.
Mat. 27. Mark 15. Luke 22. John 18. John 19.
of the Cross, and killed with the same death by the wise ones of the earth,
as a despised one, or an outcast upon the earth?

8. Who has born such a death Rom 6. Phil. 2.
of the Cross with me, in all shame, despising, blaspheming, and wicked
defamation, and showed patience therein, even unto the death?

9. Who has suffered himself to be buried in the heart of the earth with me,
like one that is dead?

10. Who has believed my Job 19. Dan. 12. 1 Cor 15. 1 These. 4.
rising from the death, or trusted thereon, for to rise also with me, with his
body?

11. Who has seen mine Mat. 16. Luke 24. Acts 1
ascension to God my Father, unto his right hand in the heavenly being, and
waited my coming Isai 25. Isai. 30. Mich 7. Phil. 3.
from thence to a righteousness upon the earth?

12. Who has marked that I live and reign with Ecclus. 24.
God, and that my greatness is more then all 3 Reg. 8. 2 Par. 2.6.
heavens can comprehend; where also no earthly 1 Cor. 2.
understanding, nor all whatsoever is born out of the earthly blood, can know
me?

13. And if now there be any man that is passed through all these things with
me, or that does now presently go through this narrow way 4 Esd. 7. Mat 7. Luke
13.
with me to the life, he shall understand, and know the mystery of the love.

14. He shall likewise taste and feel the perfection of all goodness, and
approach to the love in her virtuous nature, and become of one being therewith.

15. Behold and consider, that is the ground of the holy and godly
understanding, touching the Mystery or Secretnes of the upright love.

The Second Chapter.
OYe lustful Souls to the mystery of the love, gather out the 1 Esd. 8.
mind, and search no further. For doubtless the love suffers not her self to
be approached unto, understood, nor known, neither for this nor that, nor
through any manner of cause (let it be by what means soever it will) nor
through any manner of mind or will, but only by her own virtuous nature and
lovely being, as through her self, or through her service. For she, the
everlasting good, excels it all far away.

2. Also, she receives nothing of any man; but she her self, out of her
almighty and virtuous nature and spirit, is a plentiful distributrix of her own
abundant riches, as an infinite flowing river of all godly goods, always Genesis
2.
refreshing the Paradise of the Lord.

3. The Love is her self a nurse unto her children, and a sure band unto all
those that are incorporated to the everlasting life, and a mighty strength,
which is able to suffer and to endure Cor. 13.
all things.

4. The Love is also an Exodus 3. cap. 19, 20 Isai. 33.
holy mountain, the which no man being unhallowed, or unprepared, may touch or
come near. For whosoever touches the same mountain, and is not of her part, to
him is she a consuming fire, whose burning heat Isai. 33.
no man can endure, but he which is of her like nature or seed. Who so
resists, and submits not himself under her, and her service, he shall be
broken and battered to pieces like Psalm. 2. Isai. 30. Ier. 18. Ier. 19.
a Potters Vessel.

5. The love in her service, is an original, or beginning of all good and
upright life: For through her service, she draws the mind, and thoughts of
the heart away from all that is vain, corruptible, and evil.

6. She unbindeth, or loses the everlasting perfection: For to come into the
life of the eternal uncreatedness, in the kingdom of the God of heavens, full
of all pure beauty, wherein all earthly, and corrupt self-minded thoughts do
cease, and where the corruptible mortality is not beholden.

7. For in the love is nothing else but all good and life, as also the heavenly
and endless kingdom of Jesu Christ, in full undisturbable power, wherein the
minds of the pure hearts do dwell free without care or fear, with all Isai.
35. Isa. 51. Apoc. 21.
glory and joy, and with Christian Triumph.

8. Which freedom of the children of God, which fullness of the godly delights,
and of the godly life, no man can obtain, that hangs his delight, will, and
life, and tyeth, or binds himself, on the earthly, visible, or corruptible
being. But they remain vainly-minded in the darkness of the unbelieving
minds, whose Romans 1. Ephesians. 4.
hearts are blinded with the vain comfort of this world, and of the
good-thinking wise ones. For which Ignorances cause they cannot understand the
right ground of the secret love.

9. But salvation and Luke 2.
Peace be unto all those that are good of will, and that take heed to the time
1 Cor. 6. Heb. 12.
of grace, that give their understanding captive under the obedience of the
Love, and that do even so with humble and obedient hearts, believe, or trust
the love in her Service.

10. Happy are they, whose devotion of heart God stirs up thereto. For
through the love of God the Father, it shall all be Acts 5.
restored again, whatsoever is estranged or turned away from God from the
beginning of the World, and that is well-minded to the Conversion unto his God,
to the end, that it may all through the Love stand firm in his upright estate
for ever.

11. Even thus it shall all be accomplished in the love, whatsoever God has
spoken in time past Acts 3.
by the mouth of all his holy Prophets. For all what is gone forth from Mat.
22. Mar 12. Luke 10.
God in times past, even from Adam till unto Christ, reaches to the love,
because that the love may in the last time, as an everlasting remnant, grow and
blow, and bring forth her fruit abundantly. For the Love is the Inheritance of
the everlasting Kingdom, as an endless safe-making service, according to the
Promises, unto all, and over all those that believe thereon.

12. The same verily is the Genesis 12. Gen 13. Genesis 15. Genesis 17. Genesis 22.
Blessing which the God of heaven has promised to Abraham and his seed, to the
blessing of all generations of the earth.

13. Of the same Blessing and upright being of the Love, we have witnessed and
set forth in writing, with more and fuller Instruction or larger Declaration,
in the glass of righteousness, to the end that every one which with our
Commonalty gives himself to the Love, and to the requiring of her service,
might be satisfied in his understanding. And likewise to the peace and joy of
all lovers of the truth which are furthersome to the service of Love, to the
salvation of many men, Because that even so, through Esa. 32. Esa. 62.
the Love, the peace may be prepared upon the earth, which has long lain Esa.
24.
waste.

14. For the end, Romans 13. Gal. 5. 1 Timothy 1.
or the perfection of all things, (namely, the chief sum of all good, or all
what one can name for righteousness and truth) that is the Love: Yea, all what
is to be known or understood of the godly things, that 1 Cor. 13 1 John 2. 1
John 9. 1 John 4.
is the Love; and her mystery is the everlasting life.

The Third Chapter.
BEhold and consider; to that end has the Truth her flowing forth (like as the
same is Image-like or figuratively set forth or patterned out Exo. 25. Act. 7.
Heb. 8.
by Moses in the former example) for to draw it all under the Love, even as the
same is now likewise by the holy spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ, openly and
nakedly declared unto us, in the true being. But not by figures, Images, nor
out of the letter, but by the cleerness and appearing of the Mal. 3. Mal. 4
Mat. 16. Mat. 24. Mat. 25. Mark 13. 2 These. 1. Act. 1. Apoc. 1.
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in his glory. In which day or cleerness of the
coming of Christ in his Glory, the Resurrection of his dead Dan. 12. John 5. 1
Cor. 15. 1 These. 4. Apoc. 20.
comes to pass; who do also live with Christ in glory, and do keep the
judgment with him, against all ungodly ones.

2. This verily is the true Esa 3. Sap. 3 Mat. 19. 1 Cor. 6. Jude 1.
coming of Jesus Christ, who appears and comes now unto us, from the right
hand of God the Father, who is almighty; to keep a righteous judgment upon
earth, even as is written thereof.

3. In which righteousness, the true Love of God the Father stands
comprehended or grounded; and out of the same righteousness has the Love her
Service upon the earth, to a perpetual banishment of all wicked and
evill-willing nature, and to an everlasting implanting of the holy ones of God,
into his Love, to the end that the earth may even so (through the Love and her
Service) be renew-and cleansed from all her unrighteousness.

4. But all those that are unbeleeving touching the Romans 2.
truth, and ungodly or evil of will, shall also be judged in this same day,
through the Love and her Service.

5. There shall no man likewise remain standing in the same judgment, that
resists the Love, and despises her service. For the Esa. 40. Esa. 60. and 62.
glory of God is revealed, through the revealing of the coming of Jesu Christ
in the obedience of the Love, for that the earth may be full of the Number. 14
Psalm. 72.
glory of God, according to the Promises, and that all people may walk in the
Love; and that the Love in her Service, may even so (as a light of life)
flourish for evermore, among the children of men, and get the Col. 3.
superiority in their hearts, to an everlasting thanksgiving unto God, for
their salvation of life in the peace, which (by Gods grace) is come unto them
upon the earth, through the Love.

6. This same (even as we have here witnessed and declared it) is assuredly the
right mystery of the Love. It is also the true laud of the Lord, and the
triumph of Christ with all his Saints, to an everlasting establishing of the
promises of God the Father; and that altogether through the 1 Cor. 13
Love and her Service. Which Love and her Service shall (according to the
promises of God the Father and his Christ) continue from everlasting to
everlasting. It is very true.

The End of the Second Epistle.
The Third Epistle. A groundly Instruction, wherein the difference betwixt God
the Father, and his Son the Lord Jesus Christ, is declared, according to the
spiritual and heavenly understanding.
Holy Father, this is the everlasting life; that they know thee, that thou only
art very true God, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ.

John 17.
There was demanded by a lover of the truth, and an Instruction desired,
touching the difference betwixt God the Father, and his Son the Lord Jesus
Christ. And thereupon is answered by H. N. in writing, according to the
declaring of the spiritual and heavenly truth, this Instruction hereafter
following.

The First Chapter.
I Have thus long deferred for to answer thee thy demand in writing, which thou
beloved brother desiredst of me, when I was last with thee; because of certain
matter that were needful for me first of all to further. Wherethrough I, by
that occasion, have not hitherto had convenient time to accomplish the same.

2. But I have not for all that forgotten thy demand, nor through slothfulness
neglected to write unto thee: neither do I desire in any wise, to deny thee thy
request: but am always welwilling to witness the same unto thee, according to
that understanding which the Lord gives unto me; so much as it is profitable
for thee to edification. Notwithstanding, I am burdened in my heart, because I
have promised upon thy demand to write thee an Answer.

3. But not that the ground of the matter about the which thou have questioned
with me, and desired of me to answer the same in writing, is so hard or
profound of understanding, to answer, oh no, but because that the understanding
of the same mind, is so utterly unknown Mat 11. Mat. 13. John 14. Ephesians. 3.
before all sense of the flesh.

4. Yea, how naked and bare soever the Scripture shows it, according to the
mind of the Spirit, yet can it not for all that be understood 1 Cor. 2.
nor conceived by flesh and blood, unless the man must first, according to the
counsel of the Scripture, be turned into another mind.

5. Seeing now that the Scriptures of the Apostles of Christ is spiritual, 1
John 5. 1 John 6.
and witnesses of spirit and life, and that the man which reads the
testimonies thereof in the Letter stands captived with a fleshly mind, Romans 7.
under the sin of his own good-thinking and sotaketh upon him out of the same
mind of the flesh, and his own good-thinking, to understand the mind of God out
of the Letter, 1 Cor. 2.
so can he not doubtless bring it to pass, for his fleshly senses, and
good-thinking thoughts, do surely stretch no further, but like to such an
Intelligence, or knowledge of the fleshly understanding.

6. For that cause also the mind of the man does not out of the letter of the
Scriptures, understand nor comprehend the mind of God rightly, by means
whereof there is likewise now at this present day (like as came to pass also
in times past among Ier. 26. Ier. 28. Ier. 29. Mat. 12. Mat. 23. Mat. 26. and
27.
the worldly wise, and Scripture-learned ones) much contention, variance, and
controversy found among the children of men, who do contend about that which
they themselves understand not, and will seem to know that which according to
the mind of their understanding wherein they are comprehended, is not to be
known, nor understood.

7. The whilst now that the rich bountiful God, out of the love of his grace
understood, gives unto us in 1 Cor. 2.
our inward mind, another Spirit for to discern and understand withal, which
1 Cor. 1. 1 Cor. 2.
is not of flesh and blood, nor yet minded according to the earthly and fleshly
wisdom of this world, nor according to the Prudence of the Ingeniousness of
the worldly wise, and of the contentious Scripture-learned, or those of famous
Schools, therefore we do perceive, that it is perilous to write over unto any
man of the secretness of God Ephesians. 3.
and Christ; and that therefore we do daily bear a care or a suspicion,
whether those that ask after the understanding of the godly truth, do not
desire to know the same Act 17.
out of curiousness or sensuality, or John 8.
to judge the same according to their own good-thinking.

8. Therefore it is dangerous in this perilous time to discover, or to write
over the groundly depths Rom 11
of the godly wisdom unto any man, because that we do now find many men that
do ask, to the end to know much; Yea they seek many knowledges, whereby to
understand, and to judge the godly things, out of their sharpwittedness or
industry. And that likes all those well, which have no lust to do the Lords
will. For therein lies the old root of Genesis 3. Romans 5.
Adam. where-out the disobedient knowledge springs or comes forth.

9. But to John 8.
submit themselves obediently to the requiring of the gracious word of the
godly wisdom, and to the right Service of the love of Jesu Christ, also to
cleave unto the living God in his godly nature or being, Exo 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
and to serve, to praise, and to honor him, as he is a God in his Christ, that
likes few or none. Yet is the same the new fruit of the planting of Jesus
Christ, whereunto the Scripture points us, which neither the Mat. 11. John
14. 1 Cor. 1. 1 Cor. 2.
world nor her wise or Scripture-learned ones do understand, nor yet conceive
the mind, for they know not the same.

10. Although I do thus rehearse these things my beloved, and that my
Carefulness stands to such a suspicion toward many, yet do I notwithstanding
hope and trust somewhat better of thee, as that thou art more inclined to
understand the will and mind of God, to the intent to 1 Pet. 5
submit thy self obediently thereunto, to thy salvation, and to the Ephesians. 1.
laud and praise of the godly glory, and so to believe the living God and his
Christ, to incline unto him, and to become 2 Pet. 1.
partaker of his being, then for to know much thereof, according to the
pleasure of thine own mind.

11. Therefore also I will not think it tedious unto me, to answer thy demand,
with diligence out of fervent Love; If happly God would vouchsafe through my
small service; to open Ephesians. 1.
thine understanding, and through his Increase or Blessing, to endow thee in
thy Spirit with his Grace, and to stir up thy heart to a pure mind toward God,
and toward his Love in Jesus Christ.

The Second Chapter.
THus was then thy saying unto me as I remember, that the word which the
Apostles of Christ do write, was dark or incomprehensible for thee to
understand, Romans 1. 1 Cor. 1. 2 Cor. 1. Gal. 1. Ephesians. 1.
namely, God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. And that in certain places,
Christ in stead of the Son, is also uttered forth for a Father and God.

2. Forasmuch as thy understanding supposed that there was no more but one
Deuteronomy. 3^ Esa. 44. Esa. 45. and 46. 1 Cor. 8.
God (as it is also true) therefore was thy demand thus unto me, whereof thou
requiredst an Answer in writing: Seeing now that there is no more but one God,
wherefore is he then pronounced forth in two manner of states? The which
seems according to the sound of the Scripture; as though the Apostles
published two Gods.

3. Verily* the difference of this matter whereof thou desire the Instruction,
could not likewise John 6. John 7. and 8.
certain Jews in times past conceive according to their understanding out of
the flesh, yea, the same is yet also rightly understood of few. Yet do many
persuade themselves notwithstanding, because that they in historical manner,
are minded after the new Testament, that they have thoroughly well conceived the
understanding of this matter, and do for that cause persuade themselves, that
they do far exceed and excel the Jews, supposing that they have the faith
and the salvation, and that the Jews remain by the works of the Law. Now this
passed over, we will proceed to further the intent of our matter.

4. Verily, as we have spoken before, of God the Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, these are hard things before the man, for to search out the
understanding of them in his knowledge, if he do not know God and Christ, and
the true righteousness of the godly-beeing in himself, but imagines of God and
Christ without him, and so goes on according to his own good-thinking, without
the Administration of the true light and his Love. Yea, it is Mat. 11. Mat. 13.
and 19. John 14.
unpossible after that manner, to understand the right mind clearly. And
although likewise he would search out all the knowledge of the world, yet is it
all in vain, for to understand the same.

5. Although the man should imagine of the same mind, in the deepest ground of
his reason, yet can he not doubtless, with any manner of prudence of the flesh,
conceive that understanding. For it is an understanding, Esa. 57. Esa. 66. Sap.
1. Mat. 11.
that rises not up in the knowledge, but to the lowly and poor of spirit,
namely, in the belief of the holy and gracious word, under the obedience of the
Love.

6. For God, the Father, the Lord Jesus Christ, nor yet the true light of the
godly wisdom, shall Sap. 1. 1 Cor. 2.
not be known, out of the blood or will of man, nor out of any deep searching
with the knowledge. For God is a John 4.
Spirit, a very true light, John 1. John 8. John 9. John 11. John 12. and 14.
and an everlasting life; which God also, is not known, seen, nor understood,
but in his own Spirit, and in his true light, and godly being.

7. Seeing then that the only God is a 1 John 1.
very true Light, that no darknesses do know or behold, and is not to be known
or beheld but in his light, Psalm. 36.
therefore is not he known likewise, but by those that do hear and believe his
gracious word, and that submit them John 8.
obediently under the requiring of the same word and will; and so do carry the
Image 1 Cor. 15. Ephesians. 4.
of his godly-beeing, or do behold the same 2 Pet. 1
in their Spirit, as a pattern of God, and hope thereon, through faith. And the
Spirit of those same obedient humble ones, is the spirit that gives respect
too the serviceable testimonies of the holy Spirit of Love, to the end to be
incorporated John 15. John 17. Ephesians. 3.
to the like-beeing of God (namely, the brightness of the cleerness of the
godly being, the upright Righteousness Ephesians. 4.
and holiness that God esteems) and then to know God the Father and his Son
Jesu Christ rightly and according to the Truth, and to understand the John 17.
Mat. 13.
secretness of the kingdom of God and Christ.

8. But seeing now that the man is gone back or fallen away Genesis 3. Deuteronomy. 32 Ier.
2.
from his God, and from this pure beauty and cleerness of the godly-beeing; and
Romans 1. Ephesians. 4.
estranged from the understanding of the wisdom of Jesus Christ, therefore is he
also become dis-inherited of this cleerness or brightness of the godly light,
and has neither known the Father, nor his Son, the Lord Jesus Christ; by means
of which estranging, he has not borne or carried in his spirit, 1 Cor. 15.
Ephesians. 4.
the Image or like-beeing of his God, namely, Jesus Christ, to which effect the
Gospel or Mat. 28. Mar. 16.
joyful message is published, whereby to bring the man again to Christ, and to
establish him in him. But Gen 3.
the man is by the self wisdom of the flesh, and by his own opinion, quite led
away from the upright mind or understanding of the Gospel, and from the
incorporating or establishing in Jesus Christ, and brought to the corruption;
and has with smart and calamity, born the ungodly being or the contrary
nature unto his God, Sap. 1.
to the which he is neither created nor called.

9. This contrary nature unto God or darkness, has captived Mar. 6. Romans 1. 2
Cor. 4.
his senses and thoughts, and stolen away his heart and understanding, so that
he can conceive or understand very little of the true light or Christ of God,
and that only because he is so utterly estranged from Ephesians 4. Col. 1.
the being of God, and has grounded him on the knowledge.

The third Chapter.
NOw for to discover the mind a little, how or in what being or form, the
word, God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, is witnessed by the Apostles
of Christ; So must I rehearse a little of Adam, to what end he was created,
whereby men may understand the intent whereto Christ is preached.

2. When the Almighty God who is full of wisdom and righteousness, had
finished Genesis 1.
heaven and earth, and all their garnishing, then did he also create him a man,
Genesis 1. Gen 2. Sap 2. Eccles 17.
according to the likeness of his Godhead, who should carry or bear the very
like being of God, and the Image of his glory, as a fellow partaker of or
being like unto the godly nature and kind. Through which like being of God,
God would be known everlastingly in the man, as a true God.

3. Here through was God in the beginning as a light of life, of one substance
with the manly creatures, God Gen 2^.
brought forth the memory, for a good and holy understanding, because that his
like-beeing should not be alone in the manly creatures, but that the memory
should in all good and holy understanding, be an help 2 Gal. 10
or aid to the like-beeing of the Godhead in the manly creatures, to all peace
and concord, and to all Love and welfare upon earth.

4. Behold according to all like resemblance, even as God is a very true John
1. 1 John 1.
light and everlasting life, so is also his like-being a true light and
everlasting life in the manly creatures, (that are comprehended in the upright
Estate of their manly being, and in Christ) in such like manner also in them,
the memory that God has brought forth out of his like-being: which memory in
those same manly creatures (namely being in their right estate) is likewise a
light of the true light, and a life of the true life, and that altogether to
peace and righteousness upon earth.

5. This in the former Kingdom, was Gods glory in his manly creatures whom he
had chosen to himself to the end that they should 2 Pet. 3.
inhabit the earth with righteousness, and that even so, there-through the
highest God (as a living and true God) and his holy being and virtuous nature,
should as well upon earth, as in heaven, be known for evermore in the spirit of
the manly creatures, and have his shape in them, and so live in them.

6. Behold that same true and like-beeing of God, which is flowed or born out
of the eternal and living Godhead, is the first born 1 Cor. 15. Col. 1.
of all creatures; and is the true and living Christ of God, Psalm. 16. Act. 2
Act. 13.
which cannot be corrupted; but he continues always Psalm. 9.
and everlastingly. For he is the John 3. Romans 1.
only born son of God, and avery true Ioh. 1. John 14.
light, and eternal life for evermore like unto his Father.

7. From hence has the man turned him, and seen and tasted the corruption: but
so has not the Christ of God. For Gods very like-being, the true Christ of
God, Ephesians. 4. Col. 3.
is the upright righteousness and holiness, which is everlasting and Sap. 1.
immortal, also undestroyable, unchangeable, and uncorruptible. But the
unrighteousness is the obtaining of death, and of the corruption; which
corruption or deadly mortality Genesis 3. Romans 5. 1 Cor. 15.
the man has taken on, and there-through has born the contrary being to God,
Sap. 2. John 8.
that Antichrist, the like-being of the devil, and so is driven from the
beholding of God, Genesis 3
without the riches of the godly goods; and has lost the mercy-seat of his
salvation.

8. Which salvation of the mercy-seat, is Genesis 12. Genesis 22. Act 3. Gal. 3.
covenanted and promised again, by the God of life unto Abraham and his seed:
And through that same, the blessing of all generations of the earth; after
which salvation many Mat. 13. Luke 10. 1 Pet. 1.
Kings and Prophets have sought and inquired, which they saw into afar off as
coming: but they could not attain unto it, but have witnessed and prophesied
thereof that the same should be inherited in all Love, Peace, and upright
Righteousness, in the last time.

The Fourth Chapter.
THis grace of salvation, and this like being of God, which became unknown
through Adam, did in times past appear in Israel, out Mat. 1. Luke 1. Luke 2.
of the house of David, of the tribe of Judah, like as God had promised Psalm 78.
Esa. 9. Ier. 23. Ier. 30. Dan. 9.
through the Law and the mouth of all his Prophets; and he is published Act. 2.
Acts 3. Acts 13.
to the whole generation of Israel to be their King, Savior and Messiah, and
that God had showed the mercy Luke 1.
on them for to help up Israel his servant: And so at the same time God was
merciful unto his chosen people and has not forgotten his Covenant, even as
he had promised unto Abraham and his seed.

2. Even thus verily was this like-being of God, the true Christ and only born
son of God from Eternity; born of the Luke 2. Romans 1.
seed of David according to the flesh, to be a Savior to the generation of
Israel, for to set up Israel in his righteousness. But certain of the wise and
scripture-learned ones after the Law, Mat. 12. Mat. 15. Mat. 21. and 27; etc.
Acts 2. Acts 3.
have neither believed nor received the same Jesus Christ according to the
flesh, but have withstood him, and refused both him and his requiring, Mat. 23.
and not allowed of him but have delivered him over unto the Heathen, Mat. 27.
to the death of the Cross.

3. Yea, so far is the unregenerated man differing from the mind of God
(although he bewise, prudent, or understanding in the knowledge and
Scripture-learnednesse) that he (for his own wisdoms cause) does understand
Mat. 11. 1 Cor. 2.
nothing at all of the mind of God, nor of the setting up of Israel; neither
yet can he attain thereunto, with his own wisdom: like as it has also come
to pass with the wise and Scripture-learned ones of the Law. And this Christ
of God Luke 24. Acts 3. Acts 17.
has been forced to suffer (yea, from the Apoc. 13.
beginning of the world forth) for the wisdom of the flesh, and the sins
cause. And it went with him, Mat. 26 Luke 22.
as was written thereof: and he was killed on the earth, with the contemnable
Sap. 2. Mat. 27.
death of the Cross, and buried in the heart of the earth.

4. Seeing now that it was impossible, that the death could hold him, or that
he should see the Psalm. 16. Acts 2. Acts 13.
corruption, to a consumation; therefore is he risen again Mar. 16. Luke 24.
Acts 2. Acts 10. 1 Cor. 15.
from the death, for a perpetual conquering of the sin and death, through
his death of the Cross, and has made himself manifest unto his friends, that
loved him, and were his Disciples: and renewing them in the word of his
doctrine, he Luke 24
showed them (through his suffering and death of the Cross) the victory 1 Cor.
15
against the sin, death, Devil, and Hell.

5. Now when as these his disciples were renewed and established in the word of
his doctrine, and armed 1 Pet: 4.
with the same mind of the suffering of Jesus Christ, Mar. 16. Luke 24. Acts 1.
then was he taken up from them to the right hand of God his Father, in the
heavenly being. From thence has he comforted his disciples, and comprised his
shape in them, out of the heavenly being; Acts 1. Acts 2.
pouring forth v his holy Spirit into them, as a new and true Apo. 21.
Jerusalem, which is not prepared by men, but by God, like a garnished Bride
for her Husband. And even thus became God the Father, through his only-borne
Son (Christ) of one substance again Acts 2.
with the manly creatures: And to that end also, because that all manly
creatures, should (through Christ) be John 17.
one substance with God the Father, is Christ preached. And in such a state
does God require to have his people, or the Congregation of Jesu Christ.

6. Behold, these disciples of Jesu Christ (who through Christ, were sealed
with the holy Acts 2. Rom 8. 2 Cor. 5.
Spirit of Christ, from the right hand of God, Mat. 13.
taught to the Kingdom of the God of heavens, and established in God the
Father, and in the Lord Jesu Christ) were the right christians, not out of the
letter or flesh, Mat. 26. Luke 22. John 6. 1 Cor. 11.
wherewith they had been served till unto the coming of the same clearness of
Christ: but out of the power of God, Luke 24. Acts 1. Acts 2. 1 Cor. 2.
in the Spirit: and did bear even thus 2 Cor. 4.
a costly treasure, in earthen vessels; namely, the very like-being of God the
Almighty.

7. Which being of God, 2 Cor. 4. Phil. 2. Col. 1. Heb. 1.
is the true Christ himself, according to the spirit: with whom they had their
fellowship. And through him (seeing he was one with God) their 1 Ioh. 1.
fellowship was also with God the Father. Whereby they used that word: God our
Father, and the Lord (his Son) Jesu Christ. The which also, many no doubt, do
speak or witness in that manner, out of the letter, and out of the imagination
of the good-thinking knowledge: but they are wide of it, according to the
truth. But these (who Acts 2. 1 Cor. 2. 1 John 1.
witnessed that word, out of the spirit and truth) have witnessed the grace
from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesu Christ, in the truth of God. And
yet notwithstanding, have confessed no more but one God: but have witnessed the
wonderful acts of God, showed on them through Jesus Christ. And Joel 2. Acts 2.
it shall come to pass (says God) in the last days.

8. This grace of salvation, that Luke 1. Luke 2. Acts 2. Acts 3. Acts 4. etc.
appeared to the Jews (which many of them in that time refused) is published
to the Heathen, Mat 3. Luke 2. Acts 13.
to a Repentance for their sins, to the end that they should John 1.
believe on the like-beeing of God the Almighty, that was appeared unto them,
and so become partakers likewise of the gifts of the holy Ghost (through Jesus
Christ) out of the fatherly grace: and that their fellowship might be one 1
Ioh. 1.
with God the Father, and his Son Jesu Christ, in one manner of faith.

9. And to that end was the service of Christ ministered 2 Cor. 10
under the obedience of faith (by the Apostles of Christ) to the unbelieving
Heathen, namely, in the word of the preaching of the Disciples and Apostles of
Christ, to the intent that the same life of righteousness (that was refused
Acts 3.
by the Jews) should be set up among the Heathen, through faith; and so they
sought to confirm the Law among the Heathen, through faith, and to bring forth
the righteousness thereby, Romans 3. Gal. 2. Gal. 3. Phil. 3.
that is required by the law.

The Fifth Chapter.
BEhold, even thus, for a Luke 2.
Light and Salvation of the Heathen, is this same (only out of grace,
undeserved) published unto the Heathen, for a Gospel, to a mortifying of their
vain understanding, Romans 1 Romans 6. Rom 8 1 Cor. 5. 1 Cor. 6. Gal. 5. Gal. 6.
and of the corrupt ungodly being, and to an incorporating to the new man,
whom the Apostles of Christ did publish, namely, Christ (the like-beeing of
God) Luke 1. Ephesians. 4.
in upright righteousness and holiness. In whom (and in none other) stands
the forgiveness of sins.

2. These publishers of the holy Word or Gospel of the Kingdom of God (seeing
now that Jesus Christ had a shape in them, as a very true light and life of
God, and that Gods shape was in Christ, where-thorough they likewise were in
Christ, and God in them) have published that word (Grace and Peace from God our
Father, and the Lord Jesu Christ) in the truth.

3. But although the Apostles did publish this after this manner, yet have they
notwithstanding, spoken no otherwise then of one God, who had showed his
procreation or generation in them as a John 1.
glory of the onlyborne Son of the Father, full of grace and truth: namely,
that God the Father had begotten and declared in them, his like John 1. 1 John
1.
life of God, out of his life, and his like light, out of his light.

4. Seeing then that they did bear this likebeeing of the Godhead, in them,
therefore have they (through the same) known the living God, who was their
salvation: namely, through the life of God, Jesu Christ, being appeared unto
them Ephesians. 3
in the spirit. Where-through they also published the life that is everlasting:
and so witnessed likewise, that those which had 1 Ioh. 5.
not the Son of God, could not also have the Father, and that they were without
Ephesians. 2.
God in this world. For the like-life of God, John 1. 1 John 1. 1 John 5.
is the only born Son of God himself. And whosoever refused him, might not
obtain the grace before God. For it is so concluded by God for ever, that in
the Son is the life of salvation, John 10. John 14.
and that it shall also be obtained in him.

5. This is verily the grace of God the Father (which was published in times
past unto the children of men, under the obedience of Faith, and which is also
published now in the last time, under the obedience of the Love) that the life
of the living Godhead is appeared upon earth, and that (through the same) the
Unity in the Peace with God the Father is to be obtained, whereby to John 8
John 14. John 17.
know him in his glory, and his uniformeness with the manhood, through the Lord
Jesus Christ. Read, John 17.

6. Behold, this is the difference (with a brief Instruction) betwixt God the
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Take it to heart.

7. My service to content thee, my Beloved, vouchfase to take in good part,
with a regard to the God of the living. And this my writing (to the answering
of thy request) have I rehearsed in this manner; seeing otherwise no means for
to open the understanding of the Godhead of Christ, and to content thee, or to
satisfy thy demand.

8. Behold, I have here witnessed the mind unto thee in full manner; so that in
this Instruction (so far forth as the Lord Ephesians. 1.
dothilluminate thine understanding) there shall be sufficient to answer thy
request. And thy intent of heart in the Spirit, shall likewise through the
belief of the truth, if thou have a right regard hereunto, Prove. 4.
and take this same to heart, be well-minded to our most holy Service of
Love. The Almighty God lead thee into his Righteousness, Amen.

The End of the Third Epistle.
The Fourth Epistle. A clear Instruction of the Mediation of Jesus Christ, that
comes to pass in the spirit, for a Reconciliation betwixt God and the Man.
Jesus speaks to his Disciples:

I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, no man comes to the Father, but
through me,

John 14.6. If any man enter in through me he shall be faved,

John 10.9. I am the light of the world: who so follows after me, walks not
in darkness; but he shall have the light of life,

Joh. 8.12. If any man will follow after me, let him forsake himself: and take
up his Cross on him, and follow after me,

Matthew. 16.24. Luke 9.23. He that takes not up his Cross on him, and
follows after me, he is not worthy of me, or he may not be my Disciple,

Mat. 10.38. Luke 9.23.
There was demanded by a lover of the Truth, and an Instruction in writing
desired thereupon, how the Mediation of Jesu Christ, (according to the Spirit,
or spiritually,) comes to pass in us, to our Romans 5.
Reconciliation with God the Father: and how Christ is an Heb. 1.
heir of all things, and how 1 Cor. 15.
God is all in all.

Whereupon this present Letter is written by H. N. out of an Inclination of the
Love; very profitable and needful to the understanding thereof, for all those
that hope upon God, upon Christ, and upon their salvation, To the end that they
may understand which is the right ground of the belief in Jesus Christ,
where-through one is justified from the Sin, for to be in that sort reconciled
with God in a new Life, according to the Scripture.

The First Chapter.
FOrasmuch as I have always found my self willingly bent to do thee service,
my beloved Brother, so do I also still find my self ready prepared thereto,
namely, in that wherein I may be serviceable unto thee, to a guiding into the
holy understanding, to the end that thou (if God vouchsafe the same) might
(through my small Service) be a little furthered to the good knowledge in God
and his Christ.

2. But seeing I am always careful, and do stand in fear to write much of the
deep grounds of the Romans 11.
secret knowledges of God and Christ; so am I always careful, lest that the
same (if we should write boldly thereof) might thrust back any one from us and
our godly doctrine, or offend him thereby: or that any one should desire to
glory or to boast therein, as in a knowledge of the flesh, and not before all
things or with his whole heart, to be partaker in the spirit, 2 Pet. 1.
of the being whereof we do write or witness.

3. For albeit that we do know well (according to the comprehension of our
natural reason) that there is a God, a Christ, and a holy Ghost, and so do
talk of them; and yet do not (through that knowledge) believe, serve, nor love
the same God, as he is a God, and his Christ, as he is a Christ, and the holy
Ghost, as he is an holy Ghost, nor yet desire to become partakers of his being:
but to live in a Romans 1. Ephesians. 4.
strange being, which is none of Gods being, and to cleave unto the same, so is
then the knowledge of the holy secretnesse of God, more hurtful then
furdersome unto us. For if we know in what form or being, that there is a God,
and yet do not honor nor serve him, as he is a God, but have a lust to the
contrary-being unto God, then is that same to a Mat. 25. Luke 12.
more grievous condemnation unto us.

4. Seeing now that I (through the light) do behold these perils, so am I
likewise careful therein, to write of the secrets of God, before many. And if
thou look with me into the perils, then know I well, that thou will not
disalow me in my carfulness. For I have much more delight in the obeying of
the requiring of the service of Love, and where Gods being, light, or upright
righteousness, does even so then rise up in Esa. 58.
power, in the inward man, then, where as men do with speakable words (out of
the knowledge) talk much of the secretnesse of God, according to the outward
manner.

5. Thou also know partly my conversation, in what sort it was with thee,
and how fearfully touching many words, I have behaved my self with thee:
showing thee, that the Mat. 13.
secretnesse of the Kingdom of God or Christ, consists not 1 Cor. 2
in the multitude of words, nor in the riches of the knowledge, because that
thou should not suffer thy self to be bewitched by any man, with outward or
strange words, or sayings of plentiful store of Languages, as to let thine
heart commit whoredom therewith. But that thou might have a much more
regard unto the power of God, and unto the upright righteousness that God
works through the ministration of his gracious word and service of love, in
the spirit of the inward man, to the end for to live uprightly therein, with a
meek-minded spirit. For a meek-minded Psalm. 5. Esa. 57. Isa. 61. Esa. 66.
spirit (which has his proceeding obediently, according to the requiring of
the Lords word) is very precious and acceptable before God.

6. And although that we do (in the same spirit) go on in silence, as
touching the outward manner, and are poor of spirit in Tongues or Languages,
yet is not for all that, the richness of the spiritual and heavenly knowledge
of God, ever the less among us, but rather the greater: and the same, and all
that which is of God and Christ, do we esteem very Job. 28. Psalm. 19. Pro. 3.
Pro. 8. Sap. 7.
precious, yea much worthier then all the riches or costly treasures of this
world: for that same (of worthiness part) excels it all. For which
occasion, we let our words be few because that the same which we speak, may not
proceed out of the knowledge, but out of the 1 Cor. 2.
power of God, and out of the truth of Jesu Christ.

7. And in the same speech of the godly things, we do also take heed with
foresightfulness (so much as we may therein) of the loose ones of heart, to the
end, that there be not one godly saying of the precious secret wisdom spoken
out in vain. O! how Eccl. 14. Eccles 15. James 3.
happy is he that falls not in his tongue, and whose words Col. 4.
are tempered with salt?

8. Now this being omitted, I rejoice me doubtless of thee, and of the
Commonalty that is with thee; and I hope to rejoice me yet more with thee with
greater joy, by means of the Answer unto me, that I have heard from thee, as
that ye altogether are welminded to that which is the being it self, whereof
the Scripture witnesses (as personally) of God, of Christ, and of the holy
Ghost: Which being (for those that be partakers thereof) are the secret
Treasures, and Mat. 12.
heavenly riches of God, whereof the world, the rich Scripture learned ones,
nor the good-thinking wise (with all their deep-groundly knowledge) do neither
know nor understand Mat. 11. 1 Cor. 2.
any thing at all.

9. It is true, they have the Scripture of the godly witnesses, where-through
they suppose to be wise and understanding. But seeing they give not their
understanding captive under the obedience of the Love of Jesu Christ and come
John 5.
not even so to the being, whereof the Scripture speaks, nor yet believe
thereon, John 7.
as the Scripture says, so is there likewise no light, nor truth, nor yet
spirit nor being of God, among them, and they also do neither know nor Mat.
22. 1 Timothy 1.
understand that which they themselves speak thereof.

10. But the God of life ( Ephesians. 2.
who is rich of mercy) has (out of his hearty Love) Ephesians. 1. Ephesians. 2.
Ephesians. 3. Col. 1.
revealed the being of his glory unto us, renewed our ignorant understanding
(under the obedience of his Love) to a spiritual mind of the upright
righteousness, and (when we were full of infirmities, Romans 5. Ephesians. 2. Col.
1. Col. 2.
and dead, for the sins cause) begotten us again, out of his Love, Tit. 1.
Tit. 3.
to a sure hope of his life.

11. Seeing then that Heb. 12.
such a cloud of holy dew, is (by Gods grace) appeared in our sight, according
to the spirit, and come from Gods right hand, as an heavenly blessing, and
whereout also the right being of God (whereof we speak) 2 Cor. 4.
arises unto us, as a light and cleernesse: therefore have we (although the
Scripture witnesses thereon, and that we do hear many speak thereof) more
regard unto that which is the upright being it self (wherein our joy
stands) then unto that which witnesses thereon.

12. For the same light that shines now unto us, out of the heavenly truth, 1
Ioh 1.
is the everlasting life, which was with the Father, in the beginning: and it
is Psalm. 45. Heb. 1.
the Mercie-seat of the godly Majesty, which continues from everlasting to
everlasting: Even as I likewise have talked with thee of the same, when I was
last with thee.

The Second Chapter.
FOrasmuch then as thy request was unto me at that time, to write thee an
Instruction of the mediation of Jesu Christ after the Spirit: and how the same
comes to pass in us, Romans 3. 2 Cor. 5. Ephesians. 2. 1 John 2. 1 John 4.
for a reconciliation betwixt God and us: and how Christ is Heb. 1.
an heir of all things: and how 1 Cor. 15.
God is all in all: therefore will I open a little of the same unto thee: and I
hope also to satisfy thee well with this instruction.

2. Inasmuch then as I have partly marked thine Inclination to the holy and
spiritual understanding of the upright righteousness, therefore can I not of
natures part omit, but must witness unto thee of that which thou desire at
my hands, also reveal the Ephesians. 3.
Mystery of Christ, and make known unto thee, that which is hidden Romans 15.
Ephesians. 1. Ephesians. 3. Col. 1.
before the world, and all her wise ones, and describe it unto thee in writing,
accordingly as the Lord illuminateth mine understanding thereto, and as it may
be profitable for thee to edification.

3. There is testified in the Scripture, (the which according to the spirit, is
also very true) that God is John 4. 2 Cor. 3.
a Spirit, and a 1 Ioh. 1.
very true light, with whom no darknesses or sins are mingled. But seeing that
the man is fallen Gen 3. Esa. 59.
into a strange contrary-beeing unto God, and goes on, and lives therein, so
is he likewise Ephesians. 4. Col. 1.
estranged from God and from his light, and walks according to the flesh or
outward, and according to the requiring and desires of the foreskin of his
uncircumcised heart, and not according to the spirit, or according to the
requireing of the godly-beeing; and so he Psalm. 82. Ephesians. 5.
walks in the ungodly-beeing of the darknesses; and that same ungodly-beeing
of the darknesses has Romans 1. Ephesians 4.
blinded his heart. And that verily is the sin, Esa. 59.
which separateth the man from his God; and it is the Ephesians. 2.
middle wall, as an enmity between God and the man. By means of which middle
wall, both God and the man are grown into two parts, and are partially minded
against each other. Yet ought they (both God and the man) to be John 17 Ephesians.
5.
one, like as it was Genesis 2.
in the beginning.

4. Seeing now therefore that they are divided, (either of them in his own
mind,) Gal. 5.
against each other, so is God, ( John 4. 2 Cor. 3.
who is a spirit) spiritual and minded to all upright righteousness, against
the mind of man, and the man who is Genesis 6.
flesh and blood, and not yet circumcied Genesis 10. Ier 4.
on the foreskin of his heart, to a laying away of the sin, Romans 8
is fleshly and ungodly minded against the mind of God.

5. Now does Gods love and mercy extend toward the man, as alluring, John 6.
and drawing him daily (by his gracious word and service of Love, and by his
Ministers) unto him, and to his spiritual mind of upright righteousness. But
seeing that the darkness, the sinful flesh, or ungodly being, is grown
between God and man as a foreskin Esa. 59. Ephesians. 2.
or middle wall, and as an enmity: and that God is spiritually minded, and the
uncircumcised man, fleshly minded, according to the mind of his foreskin of
the sinful flesh; therefore does not the Romans 8. 1 Cor. 3.
man understand the spiritual mind of God the father, neither yet know the
good will of God, that loves him to Salvation; and he believes not God in his
word nor service: but he believes the darkness which has enclosed him; and
following those sad lusts Ephesians. 4.
of error, he goes back, and so sins daily against the father; and that is
the sin that is forgiven Mat. 12.
the man, in his repentance for the sin, because of his ignoance through
unbelief.

The Third Chapter.
NOw might thou demand, what spirit or being is this God, of whom the
Scripture witnesses, or unto whom we ought to turn us in the Spirit? the
Answer: Of the same have we rehearsed in the Intro. 22 Intro. 23.
Introduction to the holy understanding of the glass of righteousness. But
now for to come to the knowledge of our selves, and to a good knowledge of our
God and his righteousness, so will we (to a larger declaring of our
understanding, touching that whereof we speak, and to a distincting of the true
light, the living God, who Heb. 13.
was, and is, and continues for ever) rehearse and testify here in this place
also, of the being of the only God.

2. This God (the living and very true one) is the true Exodus 3.
God of Abraham, through whom the Genesis 12. Romans 4.
promises of the man's salvation or blessing, do come to pass in his faith,
the true God Mat. 22.
of Isaac in whom the Genesis 21. Heb. 11.
promises be inherited, and in whom the seed of blessing is named, and the true
God of Acts 7.
Jacob or Israel, in whom the promises of the glory Numb. 14. Esa. 40.
of God, and of the man's salvation, or Ier. 23. Ier. 33.
blessing become established, and Luke 1.
Gods true righteousness, this self same God, Sap 5. Eccles. 24. 1 Pet. 2.
James 1.
is a very true unchangeable light, a clear Ephe. 1.
day, and a glistering delightful beauty.

3. This light is the Ioh. 14.
everlasting life of the upright righteousness, an overflowing Ps. 42. Ier. 2.
John 4.
fountain of living waters, full of joy, full of all sweetness, full of Love,
and full of peace, abounding with plenty of grace and mercy.

4. This life is the John 1.
everlasting firm-standing essential word, 1 Cor. 2. Heb. 4.
full of power and possibility.

5. This word is the John 6. Ephesians. 1. Ephesians 6. and 4.
true spirit, with full power of sealing, or to an everlasting establishing of
the living Godhead, with the manhood, and that is unto the man the certainty of
the truth, that he the same God is only Ps. 116. John 3. Romans 3.
a very true God.

6. This spirit is Sap. 7.
the holy wisdom, and the upright understanding, full of all spiritual
heavenly goods.

7. This holy wisdom and upright understanding is the Eccles. 4.
providence, which so reseeth every thing that is good: and discerns life and
death, and gives knowledge of the good, Pro. 2.
to a warning from the evil.

8. This providence is the will Sap. 1.
which wills that all that which is good should be and come to light.

9. In this same good will is the Heb. 11.
belief grounded, as a sure and firm confidence, that all that which is good,
and foreseen to the good, shall be performed or come to light, the which the
good will desires, that all that which is good may be, become manifest and
live.

10. The belief 1 Cor. 2. Ephesians. 1. Ephesians. 3. Phil. 3.
is the power as mighty to bring to light all good there through.

11. This power is the deed, or the work of all good, and Phil. 2.
the accomplishment of all the works of God.

12. Behold, such a spirit or being, is the true God, of whom the Scripture
speaks, and unto whom the man ought to turn him: for he the same God is the
right Father, who out of himself, and through the like-being of his Godhead,
has made Gen 1. Psalm. 33. John 1. Ephesians. 3.
all that is any thing, and all his Psalm 19. Ps. 89. and 97. Romans 1.
works do testify of him, that he the same God, is an everlasting living and
true God, to the end that he only should be Deuteronomy. 6. Deuteronomy. 10.
served, honored, and worshipped in all his works, as a great glorious God
Ps. 10. and 29.
who only is the Lord and King.

13. This everlasting God, seeing that he has made Pro. 8. John 1.
all that is any thing through his like-beeing (for that the same like-beeing,
should be Heb. 1.
an heir in all things) has also in the beginning, formed Gen 1. Sap. 2.
that same (his very like-beeing) in the man: And so has God made and ordained
every thing Eccl. 39.
well through his godly being. And John 1.
without that same being, God has made nothing that is any what, nor ordained
any thing, without the same; and that same like-beeing of his Godhead, John 1.
John. 6.
is his only born Son Jesus Christ, and is the 1 Cor. 15. Col. 1.
firstling or the firstborn of all creatures, whom God has foreseen thereto,
ere-ever Pro. 8.
the foundation of the world was laid, Heb. 1.
and to be an heir of all his works.

14. He is promised John 3. Romans 8.
and given unto us by God the Father, (as a Christ of God) for a life and for a
Salvation: and is likewise so Ps. 19. Acts 2. Act. 3. etc.
preached and published to the world. But the world has not believed in him;
and therefore also John 8. John 9.
remains her sin and death.

15. For in no man else but in that same only Christ John 1.
is the life. Which life, is a light of men, and that light shines in the
darknesses, and the darknesses have not comprehended it.

16. That same is a very true light, John 8.
which lights all men, through his coming into this world; and he was in the
world, and the world was made through him, but the world knew him not.

17. He came into his own, and his own received him not. But so many as
received him, to them gave he the power to be children of God; namely, Those
that believed on his Name, which are not born of blood, nor of the will of the
Flesh, nor yet of the will of man, but of God.

The Fourth Chapter.
OF this self same only born Son of God the Father, the Prophet Isaiah does
also witness; Esa. 3.
A child (says he) is born unto us, a son is given unto us, whose dominion is
upon his Shoulders, and he is called wonderful, counsel, power, giant,
everlasting Father, a peaceable Prince: Because that his dominion may be great,
and no end of the Peace, upon the seat of David and his Kingdom.

2. Him has likewise the Prophet David seen in the Spirit, and witnessed of
him, that God has Ps. 110. Heb. 5. Heb. 7.
sworn (and it shall not repent him) that he is a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedech; and he continues also an High Priest Heb. 3. Heb. 10
over the house of God for ever, as Heb. 8. Heb. 9.
a Minister of the spiritual and heavenly goods. Which ministration comes to
pass in the spirit, and not in the letter, even as is written of him.

3. But seeing now that the man is fallen away Genesis 3. Ephesians 4. Col. 1.
or estranged from this upright being of his God; therefore has this Christ
(the true Lamb of God) suffered Phil. 2.
the death of the Cross in the man. Which Lamb of God was killed Apoc. 5.
Apoc. 13.
from the beginning of the world, for the sins cause. But seeing he is not of
the death, but of the living Father, the God for ever, therefore is he also
risen Mar. 16. Luke 24. Acts 2. Acts 10. 1 Cor. 15 Col. 1.
again, and as the Mat. 28.
firstling, risen up from the death, Act. 1. Act. 2. Acts 10. and 13.
and has showed himself alive unto his Disciples and Believers, and set
himself at the 1 Cor. 15
right hand of God his Father, in the heavenly being, bearing the dominion,
till that all his enemies be laid under his feet, to a conquering of sin and
death through faith.

4. This is that Jesus Christ, which (like as he was preached before, and Acts
1. 1 These. 5. 2 These. 1.
should be seen in his coming) is 2 Cor. 4 2 Timothy 1.
appeared and come unto us, in the obedience of the Love, according to the
scripture, who must possess the heaven, till unto this time, Acts 3.
wherein all becomes restored again, that God has spoken by the mouth of all
his Prophets, from the beginning of the world.

5. This same was in times past published in the world, Mar. 16. Luke 24. Acts
1. Acts 2.
for a Gospel or joyful message, to the end that all those which were burdened
with sin and captived with darknesses, should be baptized or washed Romans 6. Col.
2.
in his death of the Cross, according to the inward man, and planted into him 2
Cor. 4. Phil. 3.
with his like death, for that all those which beved in him, should be born again
out of the same death, and so become partakers of the Romans 6 2 Cor. 4. Phil. 3.
resurrection of Christ, (the very like-beeing of God, the righteous one) and
that they might even so then (in the spirit) have their fellowship with Christ,
Ephesians. 2.
in the heavenly being, in the Kindom of God his Father, and so rejoice them
in this coming in the everlasting Life.

6. Behold, that is the upright Luke 1. Ephesians. 4.
Righteousness and holiness, which comes to the Man in the Spirit, through
Christ, to an everlasting Reconciling of the Man with God, or to an John 17.
Ephesians 2.
Unity, betwixt God and the man, to the end that God may in that sort, be 1 Cor.
15
all in all, according to the Promises.

The Fifth Chapter.
BUt seeing now that thy question is, how, or in what manner the same shall
come to pass in us* so can I not omit to give thee a full instruction thereof.

2. Therefore behold, and consider in thine understanding, my beloved, how that
now in the last time, the same living God (out of Grace undeserved) is 2 Cor.
4. 2 Timothy 1.
appeared unto us out of his holy heaven, and dwells, 2 Cor. 6. Apoc. 21.
lives, and walks among us, (the family of his Love;) and how that he and
his upright righteousness is (by his gracious word) administered in the family
of Love: and how that likewise in the same administration, 2 Cor. 10. 1 Pet 1.
the belief, and the obedience to the requiring of the same God, is required of
all men, Ephesians 4.
to an unity of heart with us in all Love.

3. So consider then wheresoever the same living God of heaven and his
goodness (as an upright being, and very true Light, and as the right Father of
his like-beeing and James 1.
light for ever; and his will and requiring (as a fatherly Love, to the man's
preservation in the godliness) is administered, in the ministration of his
gracious word under the obedience of the Love (of whose being and upright
form, we have witnessed before) and that then likewise in the same
administration, belief and obedience is showed by the man, in the same will and
requiring of God, even there (in the belief) is the same living God seen and
known, like as he (according to the Spirit) is an upright being John 1. John 8.
1 John 1.
and very true light, for a life of men, and the right Father of his
like-beeing and light: there is also seen and known that the same Gods
procreation or seed, is likewise his upright being and very true light, and is
even so (in the believing and obeying of the same administration) proceeding
from the same Father, and that the same is wholly and altogether of one mind,
and John 17. Col 8.
of one substance with the Father, and is the true Christ himself, and geteth
in that sort, his form in the man.

4. To whomsoever now the same Christ does come thus in the spirit,
essentially, 1 John 1.
to those is he also seen and known rightly in the spirit: and he is likewise
of John 17.
one substance with them, in all Love and upright righteousness.

5. This self same Christ, the true Son and like-beeing Col. 1. Heb. 1.
of God his Father (although he (from eternity) be the 1 Cor. 15. Col. 1.
first born of all creatures, and the only Mat. 16 Luke 9. John 6.
born Son of God) is also (according to his birth of the seed of David after
the flesh) named the Son of Mat. 8. Mat. 12. Luke 6. Luke 9. and 21.
Man, because that he (as the true seed of the promises of God the Father) is
sown or planted in our manhood, through the ministration of the gracious word
of the Lord, and through the belief and obedience to the same word; also manned
with our manhood; and so (after our passing over his like death of the Cross,
unto the John 3. Romans 12. Ephesians. 4.
second birth from the death) borne again out of our manhood.

6. And that is the very true Seed of God from heaven, which is sown in our
Mat. 13. Mar 4. Luke 8.
manhood, through the Administration of the holy and gracious word, under the
obedience of the Love, and (at the appointed time) born again by us and out of
us, as a Ioh. 15.
fruit of the overflowing good life and of the upright righteousness and
holiness; and where-through we are then likewise (according to the word of our
Lord Jesus Christ) the Mat. 12. Luke 8.
Mother, brothers, and sisters of Christ, which do the will of his heavenly
Father.

7. This same Man of God from heaven according to the Spirit, and the Son of
man Mat. 1. Romans 1.
of the seed of David according to the flesh, is in all points minded Mat. 26.
John 4. John 6. and 8.
according to the will of God his Father: and his will is, that all what is
good, should be, and he bears in us the Phil. 2. Heb. 2. Heb. 5.
image of the earthly man, and suffers with us for our sins.

8. But now when the believer of his gracious word, has 2 Pet. 1.
regard obediently unto his gracious word, according to the requiring of his
Service of Love: and that even so (in his belief and obedience) the same word
begins to appear or break through, as a very true John 1.2 Cor. 4.
light of the upright life and like-beeing of the perfect clearenesse of God,
and as a 2 Cor. 5. Gal. 6.
new creature from heaven, then has God the Father his pleasure Esa. 42. Mat.
12. Mat. 17. 2 Pet 1.
only in the same light and life of his like-cleernesse and upright
righteousness. For that is his beloved Son (his spiritual heavenly being)
whom he has given unto us for an everlasting Heb. 1.
heir, to the end that we should live through him.

9. Seeing now that the Lord (the God of heaven) is spiritual, and minded to
the upright righteousness, and that the man of the earth is fleshly, Gen 6.
Romans 7.
and minded to the sin, and unbelieving and disobedient to the requiring of
God in the ministration of his gracious word and Service of Love, therefore
has God (according to such a mind of the man) no Romans 8.
pleasure in the earthly man, nor yet the earthly man, in God, nor in his
requiring.

10. But seeing now that the only-borne Mat. 16. Luke 9. John 6.
Son of God the Father according to the spirit [namely, Christ, the like Sap.
7. Col. 1. Heb 1.
being of God] is also the only-borne Son, out of the Mat. 1. Romans 1.
manhood, of the seed of David according to the flesh, and bears in us the
Image of the earthly manhood, as well as the Image of the heavenly Godhead,
therefore it is not his will that the man (whom he has created Sap. 1. Sap. 2.
Eccles 17.
to be an Image of his like-beeing) should perish in the disobedience of the
earthly man, Ezekiel 18. Ez k 33. 2 Pet 3.
nor in the sins of the earthly being but should live for ever and ever, with
him and with his spirit, in the upright righteousness of his heavenly being,
and that all men likewise (which love God and his righteousness) should be
assembled into the same being, and be saved both in soul and body.

11. Behold, the same forementioned Christ and Son of God (who for our sins
cause, has suffered in us the death Romans 6. Phil. 2.
of the Cross, and armeth us 1 Pet. 4.
with the same mind of his suffering and death) makes known unto us (as is
before said) through his Service of Love, his upright being of righteousness.
And in our good will to the same, he brings his belief unto us: and so in
belief, he himself Esa. 53.1 Pet 2.
bears our sins, and justifies Rom 3. Gal. 2.
us from the same, through the belief. And so taking our sins upon him, in
patience he 1 John 1. John 4.
reconcileth us before his Father, and makes his John 14. Apoc. 21.
dwelling in us.

12. Even thus verily with patience does Christ come before the man (for his
Romans 8. 2 Cor. 12. Heb. 5.
ignorance and weakness cause) in the ministration of the gracious word of God
his Father: and in the same patience, he (through his Service of Love) r
draws the man away from all that is ungodly and unreasonable, and whereunto
he is bound, or wherewith he is bewitched, according to his earthly and manly
mind.

13. Behold, in this sort does Christ (in the obeying of the requiring of the
service of his Love) Oze. 13. Romans 8. 1 Cor. 15. 2 Timothy 1. Heb. 2. 1 John 3.
break all the bands of the Devil and of the selfe-mindednesse of the flesh:
and brings the believing and obedient man, to his spiritual and heavenly
mind of the upright righteousness, according to the mind of God his Father:
and even so (as the 1 Timothy 2. Heb. 9.
true mediator, to our reconcilement with God the Father) he puts away the
Esa. 59. Ephesians. 2.
middlewall betwixt God and us: and procures the man, that he uniteth him with
a good will, with a Godhead, and God, John 17.
to an uniting with the manhood.

14. Behold, and have a good regard hereunto, my beloved, for even thus (as is
rehearsed) is Romans 55.
the peace and reconciliation with God the Father, prepared for us through
Christ: and so he makes of two, Ephesians. 22.
that they be one, namely, the Godhead and the manhood.

15. But in the mean time that we do suffer with Romans 22. 2 Cor. 44. Phil. 3.
2 Timothy 22.
Christ, for the sins cause, and do daily take our Mat 16. Luke 14.
Cross upon us, with him, so do there yet daily no doubt, many temptations
meet with us, through the unbelief of the earthly man: and we do stumble or
fall, and do sin also yet sometimes, by reason of our ignorance and
weakness. Which sin we do not then commit in the Father, but Mat. 12.
in the Son. But if we be good of will, and continue steadfast therein, then
is the sin Act. 10.
forgiven us, through his name.

16. For inasmuch as he himself bears in us our sins, therefore has he
Heb. 55
compassion with our weakness: and suffers likewise with us, in the belief,
till that all the contrary-being that is against the upright being of God the
Father, be overcome through the belief, in the like-suffering with Christ, Romans
6. Phil. 2.
of the death of the Cross, and that Christ with his Father, have gotten 1
Cor. 15.
the dominion against the sin. Which Cross or suffering of Christ, is the
altar of the offering of Christ, Heb. 9. Heb. 13.
in the holy, whereon our sins be offered up through the offering of Christ,
as a sinne-offering, death offering, and debt-offering. Through which offering
of Christ wherein we do obediently follow after 1 Pet. 2.
him, till unto the second birth from the death) we be 2 Cor. 5. Ephesians. 1.
Ephesians. 2. Heb. 9.
sprinkled with his blood of the true testament, to the forgiveness of
sins, and to an everlasting reconcilement with God the Father, through faith,
and that same is the fulfilling of the true God-service in the holy.

17. Through which fulfilling of the foregoing Service in the holy, the godly
understanding 1 Cor. 13 Ephesians. 4
of the true age of the manly-beeing of Jesus Christ, is inherited by us. 2 Cor.
3.
the veil before the most holy, put away from us, and the Esa. 16. Heb. 1. Heb.
5.
mercy-seat, uncovered and declared unto us: and likewise all the costly Col. 2.
riches of the upright spiritual and heavenly Goods in the very true most holy.

18. When as we now are thus renewed Romans 12 Ephesians. 1.
in Jesus Christ, through faith, also come to the same Ephesians 4.
age of the man Christ, and become one body with Jesus Christ, so is God the
Father then likewise Ephesians. 2.
one substance or manned with us, through Christ: and 1 Cor. 15.
is all in all: and we have the 2 Cor. 1.
paune of his inheritance: namely, the holy Ghost, wherewith we be grounded,
sealed, and established Ephesians 3.
in God, through Jesus Christ. And all that godly being (even as we have
witnessed before of God the Father) does then live substantially in us: and so
we have our 1 Ioh. 1.
fellowship with God the Father, and with his Son (the Lord Jesu Christ) in
the everlasting life, wherein our joy is perfect.

19. Behold, that is the true joyfulnesse with Christ, which we do inherit in
the Kingdom of God his Father: and do know no more of the Sin. For in that
we are dead, Rom 6.
that are we dead unto the sin, and in that we live, that live we unto God,
in Jesu Christ: and so have a good and quiet conscience through Jesus Christ,
in his dominion over the Sin and death.

20. Which dominion of Christ and Luke 16
Kingdom of God, is as then come inwardly into us: and it is with us in all
points, one God in one being, namely, the Father, the Son, the holy Ghost,
with the manhood, in all Love. And that is the life and peace, and the Gen 21.
Rom 4. Gal. 3.
seed of Promise, to the blessing of all generations of the earth.

The Sixth Chapter.
MY beloved, this same (even as I have here witnessed unto thee) is the right
mediation of Jesu Christ, inwardly in us, to our safe-making and reconciliation
Romans 3. 2 Cor. 5. Col. 1. 1 John 2.
with God the Father: wherethrough also Christ is an Heb. 1.
heir of all things, and God, all 1 Cor. 15.
in all. It is very true.

2. And with this Instruction out of the heavenly truth, do I heartily salute
thee in the Lord, Ephesians 4.
to an Unity of heart in the Love: and look thou with spiritual eyes of a pure
heart, into the ground of that whereof I write unto thee, to the end that thou
may comprehend the secret understanding of the spiritual and holy knowledge
whereof I write unto thee; and let thine understanding awake, to the Love and
to her Service.

I desire likewise of thee, that the Commonalty which is with thee may also
read the Letter, and salute them all in my behalf, Romans 16. 2 Cor. 13.
with a salutation of the Love, and if there be any among you that are
acquainted with any people, whom they know to seek God with heart, or that are
no undiscreet blasphemers, but stand wellminded to the unity of heart in the
Love, let them also read over this writing: And love always the unity of heart
in the Love, to an increasing of the hely knowledge, and rejoice you among each
other in the Love, through the spiritual Ephesians. 1.
heavenly goods, which do come unto us in the Spirit, out of the godly Love.

4. The love of God the Father Col. 3.
get the victory in all your hearts, Amen.

5. Pray for me that the Lord will strengthen me in my Spirit with his Love, to
the end that I may be strengthened in him without fear, and so may stand fast
against all mine enemies, and that the concord of Peace may be prepared upon
earth, through the Love and her Service, according to the Promises.

The End of the Fourth Epistle.
Our heart is the mind of God most High.
Our being amiable, as the sweet Lilly.
Our faithfulness, love, and truth upright,
Is Gods light life, and cleerness bright.

FINIS.

