NEVVES, True News, Laudable News, City News, Court News, Country News:
The World is mad, or it is a mad World my Masters, especially now when in the
Antipodes these things are come to pass.



LONDON, Printed for F. Cowles, T. Bates, and T. Banks. MDCXLII.

NEWS, True News, Laudable News, City News, Court News, Country News:
The World is mad, or it is a mad World my Masters, especially now when in the
Antipodes these things are come to pass.
THere are many whose brains are bewictht with reading Histories of great
Travelers and their discoveries, that wonder at Mandeviles Relation of strange
wildernesses full of wonderful wild beasts, and of Countries where the Geese
had heads, and Hens bore more wool than sheep, which whether they deserve
credit or no, is unknown to most understandings. But if you would have just
and true cause of admiration, look for it in this Relation of a most certain
and real Country called the Antipodes, a Country furthest distant, foot to
foot against our Region; the poople whereof in outward seature, language and
religion, resemble those to whom they are supposite or underneath, as those
under England are like to the English, but in their manners, carriage, and
condition of life extremely contrary, for there the people rule the
Magistrates, the women over-^ule the men, Maids woo the Batchelours; and it is
most probable, the wives lie uppermost, and at Gossips feasts the men do all
little-tattle duties; and the women instead of lying in, lie out, and let out
their f^re-roomes, and lie backwards themselves, for their husbands advantage;
and their husbands lie abed in their rooms the whole month, while the women,
hunt, hawke, and take their pleasures; and generally they carry themselves in
life and conversation quite contrary to the English fashion.

And first, to describe the manner of the City, the Governor there does
nothing but jeere the Delinquent, and is not guided by the Laws, but his own
pleasure to give judgment: the Aldermen there want money and wit, all the
City Poets are Puritans; the Gentlemen there entreat Sergeants to arrest them,
and the Sergeants will by no means do it, if they have a little conniving
money given them before they arrest the party. The Maids there correct and
command their Ladies and Mistresses, and sometimes lie with their Masters, it is
allowed. Young men are the Lords of mis-rule, and the old men their fathers are
put to School again, with a piece of bread and butter in their hands, like
towne-borne children, whither they go every day with satchels at their backs,
and bottles in their hands. Citizens will give rich wares to Gallants to lie
with their wives, and if they receive them, and afterward do not perform
their wives business, ipso facto, the Citizens arrest them and sue them, and
recover costs and damages of them for not making them Cuckolds.

Lawyers there think themselves much abused, if you offer them any fees, and
unless you keep your money, you cannot retain a Lawyer there. Fether-men and
Taylours will trust out their commodities with much cheefulnesse and
willingness, and afterward Captains and roaring Blades are feign to have an
action of trespass against the owners of the wares, for troubling them with
importunate requests to pay them no money, but take longer day, a very easy
request: but yet their Captains are sometimes beat and kicked down stairs,
for offering to pay money.

The Beggars are the most absolute Courtiers in the Antipodes, and again in a
contrary manner the Courtiers are the best Beggars: The Beggars also in the
Antipodes will walk abroad to fee Lawyers, but the Lawyers will take no money,
and so the Lawyers there prove Beggars, and the Beggars only thrive by going to
Law: and as here Gallants follow Lawyers, and the Beggars them, so there the
Lawyer is followed by the Beggar, and the Gentleman follows him: and moreover,
all the money that the Lawyers receive of Beggars, of whom they only receive
money, they send it all up to other Lawyers to stop their mouths, that curse
poor Clients that are put upon them in forma pauperis.

Now these Beggars that do thus get aforehand to follow suits of Law, do
receive the greatest benevolence of Usurers, and who do you think these
Usurers are there? even younger Brothers, Soldiers, Courtiers, and some grave
and pious Churchmen; thus there is a fine contrariety in all things. As for
example, a young Boy that has no hope of beard, will keep an old servant whom
he calls Boy, and abuse him at his pleasure: and you cannot walk the streets,
but presently some hand some Gentlewoman will take you up, carry you to the
Tavern, woo you, nay and be ready to do you, and afterward carry you home to
her lodging, and for a nights activitie give you your mornings breakfast with
a piece or two of gold, and you will say that's pretty.

Moreover, in the Antipodes Merchants wives do deal abroad beyond seas, while
their husbands cuckold them at home. And cuckold-making is held there in great
reputation, so that all your old men do marry Girls, and old women Boys, as
if generation were only to be maintained by Cuckold-making. Divines are there
the greatest wranglers in Lawsuits, and you have not there a Gentleman in
debt, though Citizens haunt them with cap in hand to take their wares on credit.

Besides, there are in the Antipodes women Foncers, that will venture with
loss of blood to play Prizes, while the men keep School, and teach
Needle Work; and the men are as arrant Scolds as the women are here, and are
often duckt for scolding. And in the Antipodes you shall see a sick man give
counsel to a Physician, and a Puritan Tradesman teach a great Traveller how
to lie, a Schismatic teach a Scrivener how to keep his ears, and an old
Usurer how to keep his bags of money out of a Bush; a Parish Clerk there gives
the rudiments of Military Discipline to a General: and it is a common thing
for a Basket-maker, or a Felt-maker, to confute Bellarmine in two words,
saying; Bellarmine thou lie. In the Antipodes every Cooler and Button-maker
will get into a Tub, and talk to the people of Divine matters, while Scholars
walk up and down in silence, or else are feign to cry Small coal.

As for Love matters, the women generally woo the men, stroke them and kiss
them, and will tempt them unto wanton dalliance, they make the men joynctures,
and the husbands give their wives portions, and sometimes the men wear
petticots, and the wives wear the breeches; and they think it a disgrace to
many a maid that has not played the feat before hand and lost her maidenhead,
which is called in the Antipodes Pye-corner Law. Rich men there marry beggars,
and Beggars there ride a woing to old Ladies. They choose poor honest men to be
common Counsel men, and the arrantest drunkards are always made Constables,
that they may the better reele away, commanding others to aid them, and young
boys are watchmen, Old stale Chambermaids that are like a broken wicker Bottle
do there become Citizens wives, and old widows in the Antipodes do marry
younger brothers, only for the recreation of their old worn bodies: You may
drink in the Antipodes all day long in a Tavern, and though you pay nothing
you shall be very welcome, especially if you have a whore with you, for then
you shall be lighted home to your chamber.

And for Traylers, there be them in the Antipodes that make suits on purpose
for gentlemen, which they take up, and never pay for then, it is the fashion.
The women there usher the men and the men come behind, and carry up their
trains, holding their wives Fan in their hands, and when they look back they
put off their hats, and stand bare like servingmen. The Prentises here
domineere over their Masters, scorning to carry water, or sweep their doors,
or be out of the fashion, and while Masters stay at home in their shops, they
walk abroad like Freemen, and take their pleasure with their wenches. It is
held a very comely sight in the Antipodes to see a man in bad apparel, and a
cloak lined with plush shall not be respected so much as a beggar that has
money. Carmen in the City of the Antipodes do not load their horses, but come
whistling after the Cart; and their horses have almost as much understanding as
their Masters. The Mercers and Drapers will have their wives sit always in
their Sellers, but never in their Shops; and he that proves a Banquerupt, or
most refractory; is made the soonest Warden of their Company. Your Cooks go
there in white satin doublets, very neat and spruce, and your Barbers are very
slovens, and as greasy as any Sculliions. Whores there are in great esteem,
and ride in Chariots, and go there as demurely dressed as any Nuns, and are
called holy Sisters. Your gallants there are mighty precise, and will run away
from a whore, while a sort of people called Roundheads are your only private
Gallants for keeping of wenches. Your Merchants in the Antipodes live in great
ease and wealth, whiles their wives venture their commodities abroad, and trade
in all countries. There is no striving in the Antipodes either to be Clarks or
Churchwardens for those places are always conferred upon most undeserving
fellows: The Clerks can hardly read, and those Churchwardens are only
thought worshipful, that do cosen the poor, and after sell the bells, and
then break in policy; for breaking in the Antipodes is held one of the best
trades, in these times; and to shut up shops in the morning, and compound for a
noble in the pound, before night: this is held deep policy, and they can bring
Scripture for it too: and to conclude the City customs, the Hangman in the
City of the Antipodes is accounted the chief Physician, because he cures all
the vicious humors and knaveries of the Commonwealth, and can make a Deputy of
any man.

Now for the Court, the fashions there are also retrograde, and contrary to
other countries: there is a very miserable house kept there, so that Citizens
coming to Court, and finding not satisfaction according to their own
stomachs, they depart thence very much discontended. In the Court of Antipodes,
you shall see watermen, and country fellows complementing together with great
ceremony, and conferring of passages of State and Court-newes, whiles the
Courtiers play at push-pin, nine-pins, and Pidgeon-holes; and sometimes about
trifling matters they go together by the ears, and the proudest that is does
sometimes get a fall. In the Court of Antipodes you cannot have an office for
any money, unless you be of the Arminian garb; saying, ye shall prey, and
pray, yea cringing and bowing to the Altar: but if you are bashful, and stand
behind a door, whistling Fortune my foe, you shall presently be put in some
great place. Great Ladies do never come to the Court of Antipodes, but
milke-maids in white wascoats and red petticoats, who know how to complement
and speak French, and are carried about in Coaches, and Sedans by pattent. The
Court fool in the Antipodes goes in the habit of a Cardinal or Bishop and
will discourse of all serious matters, and pleases the Court with a formal
ignorance. The Bishops there be all honest, preaching Bishops, not studying
Court policy, but preferring sollid divinity: there is not one of them
suspected to have a Pope in his belly, and an Altar in his chamber: All the
Chronicles of the Antipodes, that ever were heard of, or read in, that ever any
Bishops for their goodness were committed to safe custody; here a bishop once
paid the fool soundly; now the fool laughes in his sleeve, and asks, Who is
the fool now? There is nothing but fasting days in the Court of Antipodes, so
that all the Courtiers look very lean, and are nothing given to the flesh, but
only of one side. The black guard are here all white men, and are never drunk
but on a Coronation day, and at other times they serve for Landresses, while
the Landresses show their skill in scouring the Court spits, and dripping pans.
If you are a stranger, the Courtiers will carry you in to dinner, although you
have no friend at Court but of all things they cannot endure Citizens wives in
the Court of Antipodes. Footmen and horse-keepers do there hare whores
extremely, so that before they will lie with a whore, they will rather lie in
the stable amongst their horses Now the King of this Country of Antipodes is a
Prince so full of virtue, that he is beloved and admired of most of his
subjects; he is a pattern to his servants, and an example to all Princes
whatsoever: for he always keeps himself in an excellent temper, and no one
vanity reigns in him: and whereas before he was attended with large
multitudes, he now desires no company; if any one offend him, he is so patient
and gracious that he will not offend any of his Subjects, but whereas he should
pardon them, he desires they should need no pardon; he goes and means as
plain as any common man, and takes his progress always in the winter: evil
people dare not come near him; or if they do, he gives them no countenance:
and when in his travailes he sees great company of people gathered together, he
cries God bless my loving subjects, before they can say, God save the King. In
Antipodes the King seldom hunts, but the people hunt all sort of beasts, but
especially the Fox: Any of his subjects dare do more than he does and not be
questioned neither.

The King of Antipodes has no players, but every one of his subjects strains
to act a part that may please him: Some play Citizens, some country men, some
courtiers, and some soldiers, but all in conclusion give the King great
content. He never uses any guard about him, but a certain company of young
men, who are called the guard of love, and when he rides abroad, these stay at
home, and other guards meet him by the way.

And as for beggars they will presume in the Antipodes to come into the Kings
presence, while Gentlemen are thrust out, until the King does entreat his
Courtiers and subjects to be obedient. In the Antipodes the King is the
poorest, and cares no more for pride and ambitious honor, than if he were no
King, and lives under no vanity, and guilty of no crime, there being more pride
a great deal in his common subjects, both in their own and wives apparel.

Religion that was heretofore contrary unto true Divinity, shall be now
Regulated and an ended, and made conformable to Divine. Scriptures; and whereas
before vice, and folly, and bribery bore sway through many Arbitrary Courts of
the whole Antipodes, it shall be so no more; but godliness shall be planted in
every corner thereof: so that this confused Country of Antipodes where Bishops
were, and where Divines were Usurers, Gentlemen were Beggars, Prentises were
Masters, Knaves got Offices, women, madmen, Magistrates did injustice, and the
common people and Brewers Clarks would needs be Priests, and maintain that
there is not one honest man now living there, that was made a Minister by a
Bishop which is surviving, and so all things were carried in a contrary manner
to law, equity, and reason.

Now the King of the Antipodes has given Order, that this Country shall in
all points be reduced to the form and fashion of this upper England: So that
now one Sergeant shall affright half a dozen Gentlemen, as they do here in
England; men shall rule their wives if they can, as they do here; beggars
shall not go to Law, nor poor men taken into an Hospital and be turned out
before they be well, that Lawyers shall make a thousand beggars, as they do
here in England; and in like manner gentlemen shall not run from whores, but
run to them as formerly; so that this Country (not so before) in fashions and
manners shall now be made by Reformation as like as may be to old England; that
so there may be soundness of Doctrine, and integrity of manners in the
Clergy, the pure profession of the Protestant Religion in the common people,
valor, virtue, and magnanimity in the Gentry, Justice and uprightness of
dealing in the Magistracy; unity and conformity in opinion, and matters of
Religion, that so the Antipodes may flourish, and be happy as England is, under
the most pious and gracious Reign of our Sovereign Lord and King.

FINIS.

