HOSANNAH: A Thanksgiving-Sermon, JUNE 28th. 1660.

By J. M. Presb. Anglic.

(...). S. Ignat. Ep. ad Philad. ACADEMIA OXONIE^SIS
seal of Oxford University

OXFORD, Printed by H. Hall, for Rich. Davis, 1660.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, BRIAN LORD BISHOP of SARVM.
Right Reverend Father in God,
IT was once the complaint of the Sons of the Prophets, that the place wherein
they dwelt was too straight for them. The Prophets of the Church of England
have for diverse years, like a kind of (...), had room enough to wander about
in, though little enough to dwell in. Yet I believe they never missed their
houses so much as they did their Pulpits on the 28th. (...) June. This made me
take the Press for my Pulpit, and (by a very easy conversion) my Readers for
my Auditors: for my Lord, if we should hold our peace, the stones would
immediately cry out.

I present this Sermon to your Lordship, not for any confidence I have of the
worth of it ( for I know my own size well enough) but to account with your
Lordship for the duty I owe you, as your Curate of Souls. I have this then to
add to the greatning of your joy in the day of Recompenses, that as I have, by
the grace of God, through all the intrigues of the late Julian days,
faithfully kept your depositum down to these very times of the Restitution of
all things, so was it the good pleasure of God to pitch upon that little flock,
for such Sacrifices as were ready to be offered up for the testimony of a good
conscience.

My Lord, the insolence of this address, will hereafter receive an alloy, even
in your Lordships own judgment, when you shall be informed of your Lordships
more individual concernments upon this Author, who is,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble, and o^ ^^^^t Servant, IO. MARTIN.

PSALM. 118. 22. The stone which the builders refused, is become the head stone
of the corner.

23. This is the Lords doing, it is mavelous in our eyes.

24. This is the day the Lord has made: we will rejoi^ce, and be glad in it.

25. Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord; O Lord, I beseech thee, send thou
prosperity.


IN Isa. 61. one of the great changes which the Lords, Anointed should make at
his coming, was; that he should appoint unto them that mourn in Sion, the
garment of praise, for the spirit of heaviness, v. 3. This Psalm is that
garment of praise, a garment of praise delivered out of Gods Wardrobe; for his
Church, and people to rejoice in, upon two very remarkable occasions. First,
for the people of the Jews, when their Civil Wars were at an end; the two
great Factions, managed by Abner, and Joab; this, for David; that, for the
house of Saul; being fairly, and unanimously complied, in the sol^
establishment of David over the whole Kingdom of Israel. Upon that conjuncture
it was, that this Psalm was first composed, and this garment of praise
bestowed upon his Subjects by David, the Lord's Anointed, and the Inspired
Penman of this Psalm. But yet the wr^^^^side of this garment of praise, (as I
may speak) was by them worn outward: for it belonged to them (the Jews) only
typically, and literally: the prophetical and hidden part thereof, being a
mystery to be revealed, in the ages then for to come. Which were

That second, and more admirable occasion of putting-on this garment of praise;
and that was at the Inauguration of our blessed Savior, when he ascended up on
high, led captivity captive, and sat him down on that Throne, whereon he shall
rule, till he has put all his enemies under his feet, For this, the whole
Church of Christ is decked with this garment of praise, upon Easter, and
Ascension day; on the former whereof, the Church has appointed this Psalm to
be read, or sung in her public service. To this occasion you see the Psalm
referres in the Antitype, and so our Savior is pleased to interpret it, by
applying part of my Text unto himself, Mat. 21.42. Did you never read in the
Scriptures, The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become, etc? And
so St. Peter twice; once in Act. 4.11. and a second time in his 1 Ep. c. 2.4.

This being the greatest conjuncture, that ever did, or should happen in the
world; namely, the uniting of the Jew and Gentile, into one, holy, Catholic
Church, under Christ their head; and typified by the uniting of Judah and
Israel, under David their King, was the most solemn, and proper time for this
garment of praise to be worn; the right-side thereof being now displayed; and
the solid designations in the curious needle work of this garment, easily
discernable through the mysterious contrivances of Ceremonial, and Historical
adumbrations.

Here Is now a third occasion, to make use of this garment of praise; and that is
for us; us, the Churches and people of three great Kingdoms: we, who have for
so long time, languish'd under the spirit of heavyness, may now, upon the
coming of the Lords Anointed, boldly put on (I presume) this garment of praise.
For first, by the perfume and smell thereof, I cannot think, but it belongs to
us: Isaac knew his son Esau's raiment, by the sweet savor of it, Genesis 27. and
so may this garment be known, out of whose Wardrobe it came, and to whom it
belongs, it smells so strongly of Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia, Psalm. 45. bitter
things; the best perfume for the robes of the Church; who, as Christ her Head,
must be beautified and perfected by sufferings. This garment then has been
perfumed with afflictions, and therefore sorts well with us. And then, it is
very fit for us; for us, on this occasion, the coming of the Lords Anointed,
and the uniting his people under his Government. Be pleased to put it on with
me in this Text, and you shall then see, how well it sits; for the Text is but
the Analysis of the Psalm, and is (as I may speak) a Psalm in a Psalm;
containing in brief, the whole matter of the Psalm in these four verses; which
are as so many quarters of this garment of praise, and which we shall, in their
turn, put on, without making any rent, or division thereof, or cracking so much
as a stitch therein, by any strein'd and forced Application.

First then, here is mirandum; then, mirandi admiratio; next, admirationis
solennitas; and lastly, solennitatis celebratio.

1. First, here is mirandum, somewhat that did not ordinarily come to pass; nay
a thing extraordinary and mavelous it was; and that is, The stone which the
builders refused, is become the head-stone of the corner. v. 22.

2. Secondly, here is mirandi admiratio, men's admiring and wondering at it;
notice was every where, by every one, taken of it, as a thing, wherein God had
a very special hand, This is the Lords doing; or, this is from the Lord, it is
mavelous in our eyes. v. 23.

3. Thirdly, here is admirationis solennitas; a solemn, and fit manner of
expressing this admiration, with respect unto due circumstances; not barely to
wonder at it, and no more; to wonder and perish, as they in the Acts; to
wonder, and give God no glory, for working this wonder; but, a set time
appointed, for making man's wondering to end in the glorifying of God; public,
prefixed, national blessing of God, and rejoicing in a public place, at a
public time, a day for it, and a congregation on that day; this day, and we.
This is the day the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it. v. 24.

4. Lastly, here is solennitatis celebratio, the celebrating, or keeping this
solemnity, as it ought to be kept, with praise and prayer, nay with a set form
of praise, and with a set form of prayer; not in such a manner as every man
pleases; as though there were no King in Israel; or such a King, as had no
care of the Church; but celebrated it must be with Hosannah's, the usual
manner of celebrating praise amongst the Jews, Psalm. 20. Mat. 21. as are Te
Deum's amongst Christians: and a form of prayer, for continuing and enlarging
this mercy [O Lord, I beseech thee, send now prosperity] (...), quick, earnest
prayer, the pattern of the Antiphones in our Liturgy; the choicest part of
all, and therefore the Devil shoots most of his arrows against it, even bitter
words, [ O Lord, show thy mercy upon us, O Lord, save the King, etc.] perfectly
resembling these of the Text, Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord; O Lord, I
beseech thee, send now prosperity, v. 25.

Be pleased to try the first quarter of this garment of praise, and if that
fits, there is no fear of the other three. The stone which the builders r^fused,
the same is become the head^stone of the corner. The mirandum, or thing to be
wondered at.

1. The manner of expression is clearly parabolicall (and, as I conceive,
proverbiall too) (...), in speaking plainly it signifies, the unlooked for, and
unhop'd for promotion of a person, to a place of greatest trust and dignity.
Such was that of David unto the government of all Israel; being not only taken
from following the Ewes great with young, Psalm. 78.71. and so a great change
made, when his Shepherds crook was turned to a Regal Scepter, but compassed
about with enemies on every side; hunted as a partridge upon the mountains,
where little, or nothing of covert, and shelter could be had to secure him: the
whole house of Saul, and all the dependents thereon, and adherents thereto, to
be laid aside, e're the thing could be brought to pass. Tantae molis erat -- so
very great a difficulty, that there was little, or no probability, that a stone
by the builders (with reason enough as they, and a world of others, thought)
refused, should in despite of all opposition, become the head stone of the
corner. Yet thus it was in the issue, and the difficulty of effecting it, made
the thing, when done, the more remarkable.

Such likewise was the (...), Gods exalting of Christ, Phil. 2. who by taking
upon him our humane nature, and the infirmities thereof (sin only excepted)
and being found in the form of a servant, and so nothing in him, which in the
eyes of the world, rendered him desirable, was by the Jewish builders, the
Chief Priests, the Scribes, the Pharisees, the Lawyers, and the Elders of the
people rejected, and not barely so, but set at naught too; vilifyed,
reproached, and blasphemed: and in fine, laid safe enough (as they thought) in
his grave, for ever pretending any more to the place and dignity of being the
head stone in the corner: yet was he, by the mighty power of God, raised from
this lowest step of exinanition; the prison of the grave, and the honds of
death, being unable to secure the resolutions and practices of those builders;
but God raised him from the dead, through the spirit of holiness, and set him
at his own right hand in h^avenly places, far above all Principality, and
power, and might, and dominion; with other such marks of universal
Sovereignty, as you may hear from that great Herald of the Lords Anointed, St.
Paul, Ephesians. 1. at the end.

Thus far, you will say, the garment of praise sorts well enough with the
occasion of wearing it: but how for us? we'll parallel the case and see.

First then, here is a stone, a stone refused, and that not by ignorant men,
standers by, men of no judgment in such matters but by men of skill, the
builders themselves; and then this stone, after all this (...), and (...), this
reprobation of him, and this setting of him at naught, become the head stone in
the corner. We'll pursue it for a while in the Parable.

Stones, you know, are a very considerable part of the materials of building;
without them, no building is strong and durable. Babel may be built with brick
instead of stone, and laid with slime instead of mortar; but a Building of
Church, or State, must be like Solomon's Temple, and Solomon's house of the
Kingdom, of hewn stones; such stones as are wrought by the square, and tried
by the line, and these set in well-temp^red mortar, or else 'twill not be
right. And a building there was amongst us of these Nations; a building of the
Church, and a building of the State, excellently wrought, as men well-skill'd
in such kind of buildings, have often acknowledged, both of our own Countrymen
and Strangers. But whether there were any neglect in those, whose office it was
to look unto, and secure these buildings; or whether time, which gnaws out, and
vitiates things moral and politic, as well as natural, had weakened these
buildings by any dangerous faultrings and decays; or whether the fashion of
the Structure was not such as pleased some capricious build^rs, who (like Ahaz
when he had been at Damascus, 2 King. 16.10.) must needs have the form altered,
and quadrata mutata rotundis; or what else was in the cause, I shall not
trouble my self to remember, or imagine; but sure it was, that these active
Builders, like Solomon unto Lebanon, sent out their Laborers by ten thousand
at a time, and quickly pulled all to pieces; all was levelled with the ground;
the materials scattered; not one stone to be seen upon another, the very
corner stone being dug up, and cast away.

To set this together again, was in the judgment of all men, a work of much
time and difficulty; and by some conceived, a thing utterly impossible; there
being so many of the materials, and they the choicest, spoiled with the fall;
many others lost, and scattered, which could neither be found or supplied; and
the shape of such as remained, unreducible to the new model and platform.

Upon this the builders sat for some years together, consulting and contriving
what was fit to be done, and frequently ejecting some or other of their
fellows; either for that their numerousnesse, and equality, being all
Master Builders, might cause distractions, as fell out at Babel; or, for that
some of them (like the old men at building the second Temple, Ezr. 3.12.) were
not so forward, as those who had either not seen, or not duly considered, the
beauty and stability of the first building.

But at last, somewhat was resolved on, and the stately, magnificent Fabric of
Regal Government was changed into the low, flat-roof'd structure of a
Commonwealth. This was so much disliked by some, who as Adoniram, 1 King. 5.
were over the Levies, that they conceived their pains ill bestowed, in
contributing all their endeavors ( the expense of blood and treasure, as they
called it) to so homely a Pile. Resolved therefore it was, that it should have
somewhat in it of the former firmness and magnificence; and one choice stone
should be laid under the corner, upon which the weight, safety, and union of
all should depend. For this purpose one was thrust in, hard, and heavy, like
that piece of a Millstone wherewith the woman dashed out the brains of
Abimelech, Judge. 9. a stone so hard, that it would be brought to no other
shape, but what it naturally had; breaking and battering the edges of their
tools, who either endeavored to Vemove him from that place, or to work him
into such a shape and sigure as better liked them. So that as he was no tried
stone, so in nothing so much as resembling a precious stone; save, that as the
Naturaltists observe of the red and fiery Carbuncle, Quod solus possit figuram
suam aliis gemmis imprimere, that the Carbuncle, when it is set near other
precious stones, imprints his color and form on them, which no other stone
does; so this stone by its approximation, could fix impressions of his shape
and color on any stone in the building, how opacous, and opposite soever to
compliances with such reflections.

But the ground being somewhat boggie and unsound, whereon the foundation was
laid, this heavyst ne after a while, sank into the very bowels of the earth:
And the whole building had then falien, if they had not quickly seized a stone
at hand, to fill up the chasme: a soft stone, and such as would very well
answer the strokes of the Workmen, and be, with no great difficulty, brought to
what shape, and size the builders pleased. But in fine, it appeared, that this
stone was as much too soft, as the former was too hard: and therefore after
some few months, the Build^rs, for fear it should shiver to pieces, thought fit
to remove that stone out of its place in the corn^r: an enterprise of great
hazard, and such as was more easily than safely effected: for thereby the whole
pile cracked immediately: Yet Buttresse after Buttr^sse were set up, till in
the end, as the manner of such supports is, they fell, and with themselves
pulled down the whole building.

All this mischief was, by many of the builders themselves, acknowledged to
happen for want of a sound, and truewrought cornerstone. Told they were, and
foretold by diverse, that unless they did make use of the stone they had
formerly rejected, the building could hardly ever be finished; or if it were,
could not possibly be safe and per^anent. But r^s^lved it was by them, that
that stone should never be admitted to that place: yea, though the builders
should labor for ever in endless confusions, yet rather so, than that stone be
set in.

Nay, so unworthy was he thought to be the corner^st^ne in this building, that
the builders would not allow him the place of a perpin; nay not so much as to
be a filler in this building: no place at all for that stone which ought to
have had the first and chiefest place. And to be sure it should be as they
desired, they ever wrought about this building, as they that built the walls of
Jerusalem, Neh. 4. with a sword in one hand, and a trowel in the other.

Nay more yet; the Resolves of these Builders against this stone, in the
midst of all their misfortunes and confusions, were so desperate, that after
he had been with much violence tumbl^d out of the Land wherein he was dugg'd
(presuming that he was too heavy to be brought in again by their hands, whose
hearts were set upon him) they took a course like that of Andronicus, to
strangle and suffocate all good inclinations toward him; of whom it is storied
by Synesius, that not so much as a poor Bishop of the Church, durst show any
compassion to that man who was by him persecuted; (...) Ep. 58. ad Epis.
so desperate and diffusive was the rage and malice of that Tyrant. Not a man
that durst speak of bringing back this stone, or so much as commend the
fitness of it, to be the head stone of the corner: A word spoken as fatally,
as to have mentioned the recovery of Salamis to the Athenians of old: Nay,
really to have been not compos mentis, as Solon counterfeited, would have been
no security to him that should have done so; against the passionate fury of
these builders.

But do you not think I may possibly wrong these builders? For surely this
seems to charge^ them with intolerable ignorance, or malice; that either they
know not the things that belonged unto our pence; or if they did, that they
would not make use of the only expedi^nt; which was, to lay that stone in its
own place.

Indeed, of ignorance I cannot accuse them sor^n^any of them were old builders;
and the building of the Church to be sure, if not that of the State, has been
long since acquainted with the fiery strokes of their Axes, and Hammers, and
therefore I cannot say of any of them, (...), that he was so ridiculous, as not
to understand the Principles of his own trade. They knew it well enough: and so
did many of those Jewish builders, who rejected the bead stone of the corner of
the Church, Christ himself; they knew him well enough (if they had not, the
Devils were able to have informed them) and yet they cried out, Nolumus hunc
regnare, We will not have this man reign over us; and therefore, venite,
trucidemus eum, Come left us kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours, Mat.
21. 'Twas malice then no doubt, with covetousness, and other sins springing
from that root of all evil.

But being calumniari fortiter was an Aphorism amongst these builders; not
only to refuse, but to set at naught this stone (their persectly (...)) the
seeds of which mischief are not yet dead (perhaps) in all men's breasts; so
that, I fear me, I may boldly say with Tertullian, Post vindemiam, P^s^
^^^demiam Parricida^^^ racema^^ su^^^sies, qui a^^^^ s^l ^^itate exemplum a^que
im^gi^em ^pei s^^ i^aug^rarent, ^o^ed Pr^ncip^^ in cord muta^^^. Tertul.
Apo^^^. 35.
etc. which I shall no otherwise translate than thus; That every man's heart may
not be so cheerful as his face this day. We will therefore lay aside the
Parable, and see what it is that may be desired, or wished for in a Prince, that
is wanting in ours, the now (blessed be God for it) head-stone of the corner,
of our Church and State; whereby ye shall see how justly desirable he was to
these Nations, and with what insolent malice these builders rejected him, let
Synesius, Bishop of Cyrene be our guide herein, if you please, in his excellent
Oration to Arcadius.

1. The first thing that he recommends unto that Emperor is Piety; because a
Government laid on that, (...). Synes. (...).
is founded upon a Roek, no way liable to the invasion of Storms: that is his
reason for it, and it is a sound one. Princes are jealous of nothing so much as
of their States. If therefore they would have their State secure, they must be
pious Princes. The Throne never stands so sure, as when the Pedestals thereof
are fixed upon Religion. We do not mean hereby such a Religion as Machiavel
recommends to a Prince; away with it, we have seen a transcript of that in the
late Usurper: But such a Religion it is as Eusebius speaks of, (...). Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. l. 6. c. 3.
and commends in one of the Ancients, wherein holy principles were made legible
by holiness of life: Practical Religion, which in a Prince does not terminate
it self only in his own person: no Prince is religious enough, that like
Gideons fleece is wet only, and all the ground about him dry: an impious Court,
and an impious Kingdom, though himself be pious. He must be a godly Prince as
well as a godly person; advance Religion in the capacity of a King too, at his
Council Table, in his Parliaments, in his Courts of Judicature: in a word,
over all his Dominions; by his politic as well as by his personal
conveighing it, unto every joint and knot of public Societies; which like
those, in stalks of corn, will diffuse nourishment unto each grain in the ear.

Thus it should be with Princes and (blessed be God) so it is with ours. Let a
Pharisee with his Incision-knife dipped in vinegar and gall, Anatomize his
conversation; make inspection into his public deportment, and his most
private recesses, and then tell us where lies the redundancie or defect:
wherein he fails of the true Symmetry, of a rational practice of Religious
duties. I am very confident, that there is not a Prince or person in the world,
that carries himself so well poyz'd, betwixt the slovenlynesse of the
misgovern'd Zelot, and the capriciousness of the nice Romanist.

And what is the greatest comfort to all honest-hearted Christians, we have
cause to trust, that God has rewarded his Majesty's sufferings (for that is the
usual season of dispensing it) with the grace of perseverance therein; having
for a long time, diverse years together, endured the assaults of two the most
powerful temptations, not only to fall-off from, but even to hate the
Protestant Religion: That of scandal from the men of his own (at least from
such as pretended to be of his own) Faith, and the immense favors of such as
are known to be of a contrary persuasion: these, who by the former sort, were
accounted little other than ravening Bears and Wolves, doing the offices of a
Nurse (as one may speak) to this poor Prince, when his own Subjects had
rejected him, unto the invasions of all imaginable mischiefs and calamities.

2. A second thing is, not only the choice of good and wise persons, with whom
he may communicate his counsels freely, (...), etc. ib.
but whom he should in earnest style his friends. It Is a very great happyness,
both to Prince and people, when wise and good men, faithful to the interest of
the Church as well as of the State (otherwise indeed they are neither wise nor
good) shall sit at the helm of Government; so sit there, as not to be squinted
on by their Prince; who may be rather contented than pleased, that they should
be there; or sit there as ciphers, whilst all is managed by favorites, or by a
Cabinet-councill Princes may indeed be necessitated to do thus sometimes; but
then we may assuredly conclude, that if the Princes be wise and virtuous
persons, they have the worst of ill lucks, to be pestered with wicked subjects:
For Religion and Virtue, are firm bonds of mutual confidence, and as they open
the breasts of all, to freedom and sincerity of councils, so they unite all
men's hands unto uniform, regular, and seasonable execution.

And has not his Majesty given a very remarkable testimony of this? See,
though himself be young, whether his Counselors are like Rehoboam's, the men
that he was bred up with, and not rather those whom he was bred up under?
Persons, for their descent, honorable; for their gravity, reverend; for their
experience, safe; for their fidelity, trustable; for their piety, exemplary:
and these entertained by his Majesty with such demonstrations of affection, and
(for ought we know) with such conformity of judgment, that surely the double,
but unison-string'd Instrument of Government (I am loath to use that notion, it
sticks by me like meat offered unto an Idol) must needs sound harmoniously,
when the strings are so well accorded.

(...).
3. A third thing is, that a Prince should, next to his Counselors, receive
his Armies as his friends; put himself into the field with them, exercising
himself in feats of Arms. And he gives this reason for it, That his Soldiers
may be cordially affected toward him, (...) etc.
for being able to style them his Fellow Soldiers, by joining himself to them
in Martial exercises. You must consider this was written to a Roman Emperor,
but enough of it is applyable to his Sacred Majesty: For was he not bred up in
Arms? Was he not scarcely out of his Cradle, ere he was got into the Camp? Will
not Scotland where he laid the first, and Worcester, where he placed the second
Scene of his Enterprise to recover his Crown, speak aloud for his Majesty?

No doubt those who were his Enemies can witness enough in his behalf. The
virtues of his Majesty had (questionless) very much prepared a way in the
hearts of his now Armies; it were not otherwise possible with men, that he
should meet with so universal, and cordial a Reception with them, as we have
reason to believe he does at this time: this being but the finishing of that
Victory, which his magnanimity, courage, temperance, patience, and other
Princely virtues, had before began in their minds. So that from this we may
take an omen of his Majesty's future quiet Government: saying as St Cyrill of
our Savior, That if he could begin to govern them by the power of his
virtues, (...): Cat. 15.
whilst they were in hostility against him, how much more obedient will they be
unto him, now he is become confessedly their King?

And now what more is it that you would have added to this (...), this image
and portraiture of his Majesty? You cannot but believe but such a one as my
self cannot be though capable of expressing him fully: Nay, who will be able to
do it, when years and practice shall enlarge his Sphere of splendor, and fill
it yet fuller of Her^ick and Kingly Actions? May I not say then, as the people
of Israel concerning Solomon, Because the Lord loved Israel for ever, therefore
made he thee King to dee judgment and justice?

And what think you now of this stone which the builders refused? was he not
fit to be caput anguli, the head-stone of the corner? Doubtless so fit, that no
stone fitter; yea no stone so fit. Fit for his strength, fit for his beauty:
strong such a stone had need be; for it bears a great weight; the weight of the
two sides; the two sides of the building united: So did David of Judah and of
Israel; so does our Savior of the Jew and of the Gentile, as Theophylact
inferres, himself being the chief corner stone of the Church: (...). Theoph.
Mar. 12.
And so does CHARLES the burden and union of Great Britannie and Ireland, of
the Church and State: and then bea^^full he must needs be, because a tried, and
a precious stone; precious in the eyes of God and man. Let His Name be
therefore blessed for him, and for that we have found him there, after almost a
Zodiac of years spent in wishes and prayers that he were there. That we have
found him not Lapis positus, which some thought enough, others too much; not
only a stone in this building, but lapis summus, the chief, the head-stone of
the corner; there where we have wished him; there where we would have set him.

And now let me tell you (how much prolixity soever the handling of this part
of my Text does portend, yet) I cannot, I must not let go this quarter of the
garment of praise, till I have somewhat settled it upon you, with a word of
Exhortation: which is,

That you not only reflect with thankfulness, upon this great mercy of God,
who has found this way for atoning all parts, and composing our animosities;
but that you sincerely endeavor to answer the Divine providence therein. Can
there be a greater honor unto you than to bear a part in this building, when
you shall lie on such a cornerstone as this? when you shall be built on a
tried, and a precious stone? and together with your fellow Subjects, become a
building, not cemented with blood and tears, but with charity and brotherly
kindness?

Take heed, I beseech you, that this stone become not such unto you, as was
prophesied of our Savior, that he be not unto you a Rock of offense; that you
do not stumble and fall at him, and so dash your selves; or that this stone
do not fall upon you, and so grind you to powder. It will be your own sin,
whether you do one, or suffer the other. Honest, humble, and obedient hearts
will help all; and penitent too, if need be. It was no dishonor to the
Athenians, (...) Propterea damnatus est Socrates, quia Deos destrucbat: plane
olim, id sempe est, veritas odi^ est. Tamen cum poenitentia sententiae
Athenienses criminatores Socratis postea afflixerint, and imaginem ejus auream
in Templo collocarint, rescissa damnatio testimonium Socrati reddidit. Tert.
Apolog. c. 14.
that after they had in their tyrannical popular government, condemned Socrates
(afterward executed by his own hand with a cup of poison) for defaming their
Idols, that they erected him a golden statue in one of their Temples, as a
token of disallowing the judgment and actions of his accusers.

Take heed, I say, for believe it, God will own his King; He has done it
heretofore in his wonderful preservation of him, and he has done it now in
his more wonderful Restoration of him. Take heed then of opposing God, as at
all times, so most especially when He is working of wonders; and of resisting
him for whom God does work wonders. No man ever did, no man ever shall prosper
in such attempts. And to further your propensity to embrace this admonition,
give us your company in our admiration of this mavelous thing that God has
wrought, that you may the better acquiesce, when you shall see such a world of
men acknowledging, confessing, and saying with us, that this is from the Lord;
it is mavelous in our eyes. And so I pass to the second thing, mirandi
admiratio, as we have termed it, the next quarter of this garment of praise.

2. And is it indeed (may some say) so great a wonder with you, that his
Majesty is restored to his Throne? and why was it not as great a wonder, that
an Usurper should get into it? By no means; there be several reasons of
disparity in the case; we shall name only two.

1. That Andronicus, that (...), that miscreant, that feared nor God nor man
(as the world will further see, when the big-swolne belly of that Trojan
stalking horse of his pretensions shall be ripped up) had prepared himself a way
to absolute power, by creating a new Faction in both Houses of Parliament, and
in the then Armies; some of whom were in omne facinus parati, men of desperate,
bloody tempers, and (which was the enchaunted circle of all their attempts, and
the (...), the amulet against all repentance) secured by an opinion, that men
acted by a Stoicall, fatal necessity, being (in reason) no more responsible
for any thing they did, than a beast for acting by the instinct of Nature, or a
stone for moving downward. That Catiline himself, having (I conceive) raised
his first Troup under the provocation and impulsion of the same fate; and
therefore giving no other answer to a Kinsman of his, that diswaded him from
his rebellious attempt, than this, it must be. An answer so very well like that
of Alaricus, King of the Goths to a Religious man, who when he demanded of
him, (...). Socrat. Eccles. Hist. l. 7. c. 10.
why he should delight in doing so much mischief in the world? and that if he
should go on to the populous City of Rome, he could not but foresee the most
deplorable outrages, and bloody rapines which his Soldiers would commit:
answered, that he had no great propension in himself thereto, but that there
was somewhat within him impelling him to go on, and sack Rome. Their answers
(I say) and the bloody complexion of their spirits sorted so well, that the
one, as well as the other, deserved the Title of Flagellum Dei, as Alaricus was
then called all the Christian world over, The scourge of God. No mavelous
thing then it was for one to get up to the Throne, who had a way made for him;
and if not, a Sword in his hand, sharp enough, and long enough to have done it
himself.

2. Again, in what posture trow ye was the spirit of this Nation at that time?
But basely dejected, by poverty and oppression? how compliant and ready to yoke
under any proposal, that might give hopes to a faction that they should be the
leading party, and their guilt and rapine secured? Of which devices the Usurper
was so well provided, that he could threw out one of them, as the Prophet did
the pe^^^^s wood upon Jordan, and no Faction was so heavy, and deeply sunk,
that would not presently show its head above the water. You cannot but remember
how all Factions moved within his Tropicks, and had their vicissitudes and
returns: and what hopes they had sometimes given them, if not of being the
highest, yet of not being to low and d^prest as they were. Which Factions were
by him so artificially poyz'd, that he was sensible of, the smallest lust that
brake the scale: himself like a great poisonous Spider sitting in the midst
of his w^bb, which though spread, over three Nations, nay over the greatest
part of Europe, yet so acute he was by his own sagacity partly, partly by the
diligence of his Ministers, and partly by the vigilance of his numerous spies
and intelligencers, that scarce a Gnat could strike upon any meash of his Not
(that Webb of vanity, as since it proved) not so much as a small blast upon it,
not a word spoken against it, but timely notice thereof came to his ear.

But what saw we of any such advantages toward his Majesty's Restoration*
What rational account could those of his party give for being so highly
sanguine and hopeful as they were? if they had been put to it, could they have
given another more satisfactory answer than that which Celsus in Origin
derides? All things with God are possible. (...). Orig. cont. Cels^l. 5.240.
Surely I cannot apprehend my self mistaken, if I say what I then thought, that
all things were not long before, in a posture diametrically opposite to his
Majesty's return: And if not that, yet to such a return as this: to the return
of him as a free Prince; and to be carried into his Throne upon their
shoulders, whose necks were ever thought to have too stiff a sinew in them,
for ever enduring to wear, though but the easy yoke of Monarchical
Government, at least if imposed by one of the Royal Family.

But when a man's way pleases the Lord, Solomon tells us, that he makes his
enemies to be at peace with him. It Is the work of God that, to make a man's
enemies to become his friends: such a multitude of enemies, of victorious
enemies, and that on a sudden, that his Majesty like the Church in the Prophet,
might wonder and say, who has begotten me all these? Isa. 49.21.

Immediately before the day breaks, the night (they say) is darkest. It is Gods
manner, to show himself in the mount of the Lord, when things are desperate, in
the very conelamatum est. If I am able to guess any thing, within few months
before the Lord stirred up the spirit of his servant, the now Lord Gen^rall,
the Kings affairs (...) (as one speaks of the state of the Empire in his time)
were upon the edge of the razor.

Again, what does more demonstrate a very special hand of God in the
Restoration of his Majesty, than the universal reception of him, with such
joy, and acclamations of his people? Reception said I? yea, than such
impatiencies and longings for his return; all men fearing, they should be
thought the last that should desire to bring back the King. Think you that it
may not be said of these, as of them who stuck to Saul in the Sedition, 1 Samuel
10.26. That God had touched their hearts? Must all be lodged upon the mobility
of the vulgar, the changeable temper of the people? For my own part, I say with
the Father, hoc soli Chamaeleonti detur, de c^rio suo ludere; let the Chamel^on
be the only turn-coat. I shall for ever commend the ingenuity of my
countrymen, Tertul^de Pallio.
and bless the Providence of Almighty God, saying with St. Iraenens, Volunt as
and operatio Dei effectrix est and providens causa, Cited by De^^tr. D^acop. a
v^^^. Se^m. de Ign. I rag. Iren.
omnis temporis, loci, and saeculi, itemque naturae omnis. That the will and
operation of the Divine Majesty is the efficacious and provident cause of all
changes, in times, places, ages, and natures. Take heed therefore, that you do
not rob God of any part of this honor, therewith to raise Trophies, and
cbelsques to men; who though free Agents, are yet but second causes. When you
see the nimble, and advantageous motion of a ship, (...) etc. Theoph. ad
Autolyc. lib. 1.
weathering of it out in a storm, and coming safe into the harbor in the end;
you cannot but believe she is guided by some skillful Pilot within; whose art
and directions are not seen by you on the shore. Apply this with Theophilus to
the providence of God, in governing invisibly the Affairs of the Universe, and
you will be ready to say with the Prophet Daniel (one who saw wonderful
changes, not only in his native country, but in the Land of his captivity)
Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever, for wisdom and might are his,
and he changes the times and the seasons, he removes Kings, and he sets up
his Kings, Dan. 2.20, 21. And these Eucharisticall devotions of that holy
Prophet has arrived me at my third part, Admirationis solennitas, the
solemnity of that admiration, which is due to this mavelous thing, by
reflecting upon fit circumstances for performing it, place, time, persons, etc.
a fit day for it however. This is the day the Lord has made, etc. the third
quarter of this garment of praise.

3. Though God be in truth the Author of all good things, and the Creator of
time (being himself not measured by any time, no not by eternity it self, but
rather eternity by him) so that we may truly say, the day is thine, and the
night is thine, thou have prepared the light and the sun, Psalm. 74.16: Yet has
not Satan failed to play his part, in filtching away some days from God, which
he has made days of his solemn worship. Of old he had his Festivals and his
days of Expiation amongst the Heathen; yea some imitation he had of the Crown
of Martyrdom, as we know by his Mithrae milites. And it was one of his
Devices, by these imitations to lie as close upon the confines of the true
Religion as might be; and to keep as narrow land-shares betwixt the fields of
Truth and Error, as possibly he could, that affecting the app^arance of divine
things in his service, (...) -- id^^rco quadam de (...) ^os de s^o^um fide
consund^^^ and (...). Tert. de Co^on. mil. c. 15.
he might by the faith of his own worshippers, stagger, and ensnare the
servants of God. But has he not his days amongst us? his days they were I
think (for I am sure God disowns them) where men fasted to smite with the fist
of wickedness; (...) -- Philem. in Just. Mart. d^ Monarchia D^i.
and instead of letting the captive loose, to make his bands strong: And what
were the Thanksgiving days amongst us, but such as they observed in Rev.
11.10. who when they had slain the Witnesses of God (two it seems of so great
note, that they were thought by the Holy Spirit fit to comprehend a great body,
or Army of Martyrs) made merry, and sent gifts one to another. God Almighty
forgive the deep dissimulation, hypecrisi^, and blasphemy of those days.

This to be sure is no such: this is the day, the day the Lord has made. Made?
why so he has yesterday, and the day before. But God has provided us a
special business for this day: the cause of our Rejoicing upon this day is
from Him; this was his doing; to thank him for it is that we do, and so this
day is his by a double account.

It is His day because it is the Kings day; and it is the Kings day, because it
is the Lords work. I hope I need not spend any part of this day in proving,
that the King has power to dispose of this day. Allow him but as much as has
been given to his Subjects, and they the worst of them, and we need not dispute
for it. I ain methinks I would have all things done in the Church as St. Paul
advises, Phil. 2.14. without murmuring and disputings: and that men would but
be so modest and ingenuous as to learn an example of the Jews (though it be not
so much for the credit of a Christian to be set to School to a Jew) that as
whatsoever King David did pleased the people, 2 Samuel 3.36. So what the King
does, at least what our King does command, might please us. That was spoken in
respect of a day too; that day for a Prince that sell, this for a King that is
risen up.

Shall I give you some motives to encourage you to an hearty complacency with
his Majesty? Why then know,

First, that it is your duty to your King, who has power to determine things
indifferent, and exact your obedience to what part him pleases: And if you
were not sensible of this, yet ingenuous nature could not but be willing to
comply with such a Prince as ours, and congratulate him into his Throne: of
whom I may say, as Synesius of Dio, that he is A- (...), a cornu-copia of
virtues. Nay, do but consider whether you are able to get quit of the (...),
the other part of St. Paul's similitude, 1 Cor. 12.26. where he tells you, that
if one member be exalted all the members rejoice; much more when a dislocated
Head, the chiefest member of all, is put in its own place. This is all the
Presents his Majesty expects from you; and remember I pray you, that such as
brought Saul no presents when he was made King over Isra l, are styled Sons of
Belial, 1 Samuel 10.27. indeed the foulest names I meet with in Scripture (as
well as the horriblest punishments) are ever fixed upon Rebels, and Rebellion,
and despisers of Government.

2. Again, conceive your self obliged to answer the provid^ne^^ of Allmighty
God; as well those which concern you in your public, as in your private
capacity: not such only which concern you as a father, husband, brother,
neighbor, friend, and the like; but as you are a Subject and a Christian, as
you are a member of the Church and of the State. Can your reason persuade you,
that God does things worthy your rejoicing and of your thanks in your family,
and yet not so in Church and State! or that you are not as much (though indeed
you are more) concerned in national^ than in personal blessings? and that God
expects a tribute of praise from you for the one and not for the other? no man
can be so unreasonable as to think it. But if it be so with any men, let me
tell them, that for so doing, they are neither wise nor righteous men: Epithets
that they will be loath to part with at every price; yet you shall have the
Holy Ghosts word for it in Psalm. 64. wherein David having made mention of the
defeat of his Enemies, whose character you have at the 5, and 6. verses, worth
your perusal; and these suddenly destroyed with an arrow shot from God; so
suddenly shot, that all men must needs know it came from his bow; and so surely
shot, that men could not choose but think it was from one that was ready for
them; and shot so home, that they must needs know it was his strength that drew
the bow: says the Psalmist, men shall fear and declare the work of God, for
they shall wisely consider of his doing: and then v. 10. the righteous shall be
glad in the Lord. Like enough the wicked will not be so; perhaps they had lost
a party by it; perhaps more, their ill-gotten goods to boot: and fools would
not be so; for as they consider not when themselves do evil, so they take no
notice when God does good: but for wise and righteous men, they were glad and
rejoiced in the Lord; wisely and duly acknowledging that is was his work.

3. I am loath to add one reason more, because it is taken ex materia humili,
yet it is ex fortiori, from too low and d^spicable ground, to be pleaded to
Christians, yet (such is the age) from one strong enough to persuade: Well
then, it is the Peace, the Liberty, and the Plenty you are likely to enjoy under
this Prince, whom you may be assured will be a King, and not a Tyrant; one that
will govern his people by known Laws, and not by his will, as Tyrants; (...),
and you are sure you have no Usurper set over you, but a King, one that is the
right heir to his Fathers Kingdoms and Virtues too, and so never likely to
tyrannize over his people.

Only this let me mention, which is not of small importance, that if it please
God to take us away from our children e're they can discern betwixt good and
evil (and 'twas no easy matter to discern, when from the very Pulpits you
should hear evil called good, and good evil) they have now some water-marks
set up in Jordan again; the revivall of their engagements in their Baptism;
and the former assistances for guiding them into the profession and practice of
the true, ref^rm'd, Catholic Religion. The bounds whereof were of late so
defaced, or plucked up; and Truth and Error lay so intermixed and promiscuous,
that of what truth almost soever any of us was in possession, he might say as
the African Philosophers in Hermias, (...). Hermias.
it was dangerously bordered upon some phanatique principle or other; in so
deplorable a condition had we left our Posterity: Nay I am very well assured,
that no person living could have given convincing reasons, that this Nation
should be long secured from Atheism under the f^rmer Usurpations. So fatal a
thing is this (...), this popular Government, if not to Christian Religion in
general, yet to the Reform^d Religion I am afraid.

But some perhaps there may be, who after all this, may tell me, that this
cannot find such matter of rejoicing on this day, as I speak of. Shall I divine
the reasons of it? and will you not think I am become your enemy, if I tell
you the truth? Well, if you do, no great matter to me. I know it is that you
would have called [conscience] that the grumbling lies in: But I pray examine
your selves well, and see whether,

1. Your conscience may not be in your purses. Men may fear that Taxes and
Subsidies may grow heavy: O how dislike Issachar and his Emblem are we become
now! I have somewhere read of the Polanders, that they conceited the Christian
Faith so chargeable to them by their payment of Tithes, that after a very
succesfull conversion, they well-nigh all fell back again into Paganism: A fate
somewhat like that of the Israclites, who for fear of Payments, at once turned
Rebels and Idolaters: God permitting that the Mammon themselves adored in their
purses should by Jeroboams wicked policy, be turned into Idols for them to
worship at Bethel and Dan.

But, beloved, will you see what opinion the Primitive, holy Christians were
of, concerning this point? let Justin Martyr inform you, who tells you, that the
Christians were the first that strove to pay in the Emperors Tributes and
Customs, (...). Ap^l 2. p ^4. and ^^rt. Ap^l. c 42.44.
You Will say perperhaps, 'twas more for fear of being plundered and und^ne, than
for any love they bore them. Not so: 'twas for conscience sake they did it; so
the Father adds [ as He, that is, as Christ has taught us.] and after him St.
Paul the same Doctrine, Romans 13. But this is a needless fear in them, who do
it not for conscience sake; for why should we fear the Kings Sh^ars having been
so lately under the Usurpers Razer.

2. Again, your conscience may swim (perhaps) in your brains, and then your
fantastical, imaginary Religion will overruled you into real, practical
sins; for dis^bedience and murmurings against lawful Govern^urs are such, and
damning sins too. Let such men therefore turn imagination out of the Throne of
R^as^n, and begin upon Principles of meekness and humility; and believe that
we, some of us at least (and perhaps more of us than your uncharitableness will
yet give you leave to think) who profess our selves, Sons of the Church of
England (which by the Logic of this Nation God has very signally owned in his
providence) are as careful to save our souls, as any of those who make more
noise about it; and rather than walk with us in a way cast up, the ancient
paths of the Church of God, leap all the mounds and hedges of duty and
obedience. Beloved, I speak it confidently, that the greatest part of the
deserters of the Church of England, are more, at best as much, liable to a
charge of an implicit faith, as any Romanist whatever; the having men's persons
in admiration having clearly (I had almost said, alone) seduced them into their
Schism, Errors, and Heresies: of which (I am satisfied) they are never able to
give any rational account, beyond the credit of their Teachers, who to them
are Scripture, Church, Canons, and what not.

3. Lastly, your conscience may be, perhaps, in your custom, and practice, men
will not, they cannot tell how to lay down former usag^s; it creates a blush in
them. But, beloved, let such men get humility, and love of the truth; and if
need be, confess^, give God the glory of their c^nversion, and return into the
Communion of the Church: and for our parts, we will provide our selves to
receive them with all ^^^erness and br^therly kindness; giving them all
satisfa^^^^ (...) any scruple or doubt they may have, so they desire it in
sincerity. If this, or what else they can think on, be an expedient for
cleansing the wound, and healing these breaches amongst us, we are ready for
our parts, in our places and callings to assist in the cure, laying aside all
bitterness and anim^sities: which being first done, and so the wound wiped and
cleans'd thereby; that balsamum natural will be excited (as in bodily cures)
the natural disposition of mankind into sociablenesse and converse; which
will, by the blessing of God, grow in a short time, into brotherly kindn^ss^
one for another.

I am loath, methinks, to part with any man in this solemnity: the [we^] here
is a word of communion: all have their share in the blessing; let none then be
wanting in the rejoycings of this day: I mean alacrity and cheerfulness of
heart; nor a smooth forehead only; but a ser^ne and calm mind; no cloud nor
st^rm there. However, fail who will, either of rejoicing at all; or of
alacrity and cheerfulness of doing it; yet there be enough, who having felt
the smart and misery of the punishment, will be very forward and active in
blessing God for their deliverance from it. See then, how the Tribes go up to
Sion to give thanks to the name of the Lord; and it may be, that as Saul also
prophesied, when he met the company of Prophets, 1 Samuel 10. So the provocation
of the example, may make you sensible of your concernments in the duty.

1. First then, here are the Nobility and Gentry of this Nation; they rejoice
this day: because now the fountain of honor is again unstopt, and the stream
of it, likely to be pure, without mingling with muddy currents, broken in by
popular inundations: And not their Honor, but their Estates lay unfenc'd too,
and open to all invasions: the invasions of such as would make men offenders
for a word; yea, not so often for a w^rd by them spoken, as by a word or name
fixed upon them by that nest of wasps, those Delat^rs and Informers, that (as if
Nero, after a transmigration into all the ravening beasts of the earth, had at
last completed the Metempsychosis into a greater monster amongst us, and
revived here) did then swarm so thick^ in this nation; an abject, base
condition, they were then cast into; when it might have been said of them as of
the Christians in Athenagoras, (...). Ath^nag. l^g. pro Christ.
that the very name of cavaliere (which being interpreted out of the riddle,
signified better importance than was intended) was crime enough, if not for
present punishment, yet to dispose them for a quarrie and prey, at those
seasons wherein that whole airie, and n^st of Harpies were cast off at the
royal game; which all know was frequently enough; yea so frequent, that in few
years there would have been not much variety of sport, for those Aucupes and
venatores hominum, those devourers of whole families.

Well now then, good luck may they have with their honor: they are now
incircled with advantages of filling up their wide and lofty spears with
bright and shining examples of virtuous and religious actions; which I know
they are so wise as to consider, that God expects by way of return at their
hands.

2. Again, the Judges and Magistrates do rejoice and are glad this day; I mean
such of them as are men fearing God, and hating covetuousnesse; because now
they shall not be compelled, or seduced to act against their consciences;
either by administering Justice without authority, or by giving sentences of
judgment upon such as were not offenders against known Law, but rather the
maintainers and vindicaters of Law.

3. The Commons also, for the comfort and security they have, of their lives,
estates, and religion, without being endangered in the two former, by being
left to the will and discretion of others: and in the latter, by being left to
the government of themselves.

4. But then for the Clergy (who might with St. Polycarp, (...); Frag. Ir^n.
^p.ad Flor.
as well in respect of heresies and blasphemies (as that holy man was wont) as
in respect of their own sufferings, have cried out, unto what times, O good
God, have thou permitted us to live, that we should suffer such things as
these?) their part and proportion of rejoicing is like Benjamins, four times
bigger than their Brethrens: for they do not only share with their Brethren in
their portion of the blessings of this day; but they have many things very
peculiar unto their calling, for which they must give thanks; for now that
abominable, hypocritical Act, for ejecting them out of their Churches, and
that Abomination of desolation, the Proclamation commencing from the first of
January, 1654 are rescinded for ever; and never to be revived, till the Usurper
and his Instruments shall stand trembling before the Judgment seat of Christ,
accounting for the blood and tears of three Nations: the first of which was
clearly designed to render the Clergy base and odious, and to lay our t^nd^r
Mother the Church of England, under the feet of thick-shood Rupices and Barbari
of this Nation, who were empowered cognoscere at least, if not judicare, to take
cognizance of (those (...) like the (...), and the (...) in Athenagoras, the
three great crimes objected against the Primitive Christians) the ignorance,
scandal, and insufficiency of their Pastors: crimes as untelligible, as
undeterminable by such Judges. And the later a project to cut up the remaining
root of our Liturgy, by prohibiting, under the displeasure of that Usurper
(which was, I warrant you, as far as his chain would reach) not only the
reading of Common prayer, but the making use in public of any clauses and
expressions therein. So that that excellent Book (once the Crown of our
Martyrs, but since the scandal of our Ministers) was by all presumed to be
(like the Idols of Israel) left to the Bats and to the Owle^; as many of our
Churches long since were; most of the rest being either supplied by
Idoll-pastours, or groaning under the desolating caprices of Zijm and Oijm, and
Satyrs that dance therein.

But blessed be God, who though for our sins he suffered that Bellows of H^ll
to kindle and blow the fire of Schism, Her ^^e, and Sed^ti^n amongst us* yet
he did not permit him (no not when his lu^^* ^i^gorg'd a whirlwind against it)
to blow ^ut the ^ardle of his truth, set up in this poor Church of his Be sad
the^ who w^ll this day (though I would have none but Devils y^ll^^ ^o^i at it)
yet will w^ be glad and rejoice in it.

No d^^bt (will some be ready to say) the day will be well observed the^ (...)
^^^^gs will have the face of heathenish Bacchanals* rat^^^ ^^^n (...) a
Christian festival. I wish (if it might please God) (...) judging upon one
side, and this despising upon to'ther might have an end. But whatever occasion
of provoaking th^se ^ensures may be given by the extravagancies of some men;
yet you shall see by what follows, we teach no such things, in the celebration
of our solemnity; the fourth quarter of this garment of praise, and my last task

4. Solennitatis celebratio, the way we prescribe for testifying and setting
forth our Rejoycings, v. 25. First in Praises, or Hosannah's. Save now I
beseech thee, O Lord: and then in Prayer; O Lord I beseech thee send now
prosperity. Though both these found like Prayers, yet the former of them is well
known to have been the common acclamation of the Jews at their Feast of
Tabernacles; and was likewise used at other times of Festivity and public
joy. So the multitude sang, or cried out Hosannah, and Hosannah in the highest
(that is poetically, in the Heavens) when our Savior rode in triumph unto
Jerusalem on Palm Sunday: the same word being used in the original of the
Text: and it is thus much, let us sing to day Hosannahs unto the Lord, for the
good he has shown to us this day. And so if it be a Prayer yet it is a Praise
too; and it is as if one should say, Blessed be thy name, O Lord, for this
salvation; save us henceforth, O Lord, as thou have hitherto preserved and kept
thy people.

The latter part of the verse, is a prayer for temporal, and spiritual
happiness [O Lord I beseech thee send now prosperity.] n^w, after the time
wherein we have been afflicted for our sins, but are mercifully relieved by
thy power. Quick and pr^gnant returns of D^v^tion; from which and such like
places of Scripture it is that the Church in all Ages has taken her pattern
for the fashion and (...) of Antiphones: of which this Psalm is according to
the C^^dee a notable instance; as the most judicious, pious, learned and never
enough to be lamented, because never so much as now wanted Dr. Hammond has
observed in his Annotations on this Psalm. So that I take the result to be
this; that this solemnity is to be cel^brated with praise and prayer unto God.
We must praise God for the salvation given, and pray unto him, that we may see
more prosperous and happy times than we have seen.

Note, I beseech you, that the Church of God has esteemed it very well worth
our most solemn address of Thanksgiving; when a Good King (such as David) is
settled in his Throne: and not that only, but a ground to hope and pray for
prosperous times. This doctrine results from the literal interpretation of the
Text.

A good Prince is indeed a great salvation from God unto his people; therefore
when God threatens destruction to a people, one thing amongst the rest for
effecting of it is, that God will give children to be their Princes, and babes
shall rule over them, Isa. 3.4. and so to have many Princes (the once
darling-government of this Nation) is with God esteemed a curse, and a
punishment for the iniquity of a people. And in Homer's time, (...), a popular
government was esteemed the worst.

Nay, to have had a Prince that had but shown himself a friend to the
Christian Religion, would have been by the Primitive Christians esteemed a
great blessing: as bad as their Emperors were, they held themselves obliged to
pray for the^, and to keep such days of solemnity for them as this; See
Tertul. A^o^^ c. 30. and Just. Mart. Apol. 2. p. 64.
and never to oppose and resist them, though many hundreds of Christians fell
in some days by the hands of their bloody, persecuting Ministers. I have heard
some heretofore object, that it was for want of a sufficient strength to make
head against them. But such had small acquaintance either with the virtues, or
with the writings of the Primitive Christians. Tertullian can tell you, that
vel una nox pauculis faculis largitatem ultionis possis operari, si malum malo
dispungi n^bis liceret, c. 36. a few fires in one night would (...) given them
a very plentiful revenge if they durst have returned evil for evil. They were
but the Emperors Ministers whom they durst not resist, though they did many
times persecute them without any commission at all, or under very poor
pretenses. More may be seen of their number and valor in those Apologists to
the Emperors, who were very well able to discern when they spoke truth.

From this it was that their joy was inexpressible at Constantines coming to
the Power; the first that ever did any thing for the Christian Religion in the
capacity of an Emperor and member of the Church, though Philip indeed
preceeded him in profession of the Christian says. And how can we choose but
rejoice then, and bless God, not only for that he has given us a Christian
King, an Orthodox King, but a wise and courageous Prince; (...). Cyr. ip. ad
Constable.
and what crowns all, a Religious Prince, of whom we may say, as Cyril in his
Epistle (if it be his) to Constantius that he is such a one, who by his
profession and examples of Religion will teach others: and this too in the
judgment and opinion of his enemies, and (...); it is a considerable testimony,
if it be for good, that one has from his enemy. And as thanks are due to
Almighty God for the good that we have received, so also for the evil that we
have escaped; from what we have felt, from what we have feared Nay, from more
than most of us have either felt or feared: for what man was able to foresee
the mischief that this Nation was exposed unto both in Church and State, until
this settlement? They were no men to be scared with mormo's that feared an
utter desolation of this kingdom, in all the ugliest shapes of misery, and
mischief, that malice and revenge could practice. And certainly we have
encouragements given us by a time so opposite to that, to expect and pray for
prosperity; not that we may wallow in the milk and honey of Canaean; stuff our
skins full o^ Gods blessings, and then spew them up again in his face as
formerly: (I hope that (...), that holy flagellation wherewith we have been
disciplined, under the hand of God will preserve us from running into such
excesses,) but the prosperity that we ought to hope and pray for, is that the
Church has taught us in her Responds, O Lord save thy people, and bless thine
inheritance, etc. and give peace in our time O Lord, etc. and the point or
c^^^r wherein all these lines should meet, must be the same which is by St.
Paul said to be the great end of Christians, in praying for their Kings and all
that be in authority, 1 Timothy 2.2. That we may lead a quiet, and peaceable life,
in all godlyness and honesty. Other carnal designs of such prayers for
prosperity, are but to pray to God to set an edge upon that knife wherewith a
man intends to destroy himself.

And this Prosperity is very emphatically desired and prayed for, now: now,
after thou have, O Lord, been graciously pleased to begin to visit us: now,
after that we have suffered so much, and so long: now, after we have again put
our necks under the easy yoke of our lawful Government, in Church and State:
now, after we have repented us from all our former transgressions: now, after
we have endeavored to show our selves thankful for our deliverance.

And now what have I more to do, since I have told you, for what God is to be
praised this day; and for what this day to be prayed unto. Surely, I think,
this garment of praise is very well fitted unto our occasion. And if it sits
too straight on any man here, it is because he is not clean-limm'd then; some
humor perhaps, and swelling of the old disease; which I hope this garment of
garment of praise may heal in time, as well as hide now.

That which remains to be done, is to let the world see what doctrine it is that
we preach: preach with a desire and a design to have it practiced; and that
must be in your discharge of the duties of this day; so as is fit, for such a
day as this; the Lords day; a day extraordinarily made his, by the
extraordinary blessing of this day.

Shall I tell you how the Primitive Christians were wont to keep such days as
this? this very day of their Heathen, bloody, persecuting Emperors? (O patient
souls! that could do that for them, who shed their blood, which some of us
will scarce do for them who have adventured their blood for us!) well then, let
the Ancient Father speak out the truth of it -- Solennia little conscientia
potius quam lascivia celebrant; The Christians keep these solemnities for the
Emperor in purity of conscience, and not in lasciviousness of behavior. And
afterward, speaking of the wild demeanor of the Heathens upon such days,
grande videlicet ossicium (says he) they think they have done a great matter
by benefires, and prof^^se sp^nding* etc. and then after that slo^^ together
unto many inordinate, and filthy actions, and injuries of others. S^ccine
exprimitur publicum gaudium, per publicum dedecus? Is it fit thus to express
public joy by public l^wdnesse? Thus much the Father clearly to the very
point in hand.

I am mostly jealous of them, who take themselves to be more his Majesty's
friends, or to have been longer so than others: And therefore cannot but press
this point the more earnestly: Let it not be said of any of us (as of those
Heathens) (...) Majestas, Tertal. Apol. 6.35.
and Divinitas coastrupratur, laudantibus vobis: That God in his glory, and the
King in his honor do suffer by any disorderly rejoycings of ours.

The Passion of joy, is a dil^ting Passion: the spirits in it are scattered,
and diffused; as we see by the motions of the lips in laughter, and of some
other parts that are filled with spirits; from whence proceed ridiculous and
mimi^all actions, which are avoided by the contraction of the spirits. Be
masters then of your spirits. Public civil testimonies of joy and rejoicing
are not to be denied unto men: reason and examples approve and allow it: but
the danger is, in falling into extremes.

Therefore take both his Majesty's Proclamations in your hands; let the one be
a Canon and a rule for your demeanor in the the other: that against v^tious, and
debauched Persons, your rule for giving obedience to that which has appointed
this for a day of Thanksgiving, and holy rejoicing unto God. Praise, the
Psalmist tells us, is comely; and no uncomely action must be seen in it: if
something slips out, that sorts not with grave men; yet set a surer watch over
all that misbecomes a Christian man.

I had almost forgot one thing. You know this day we are to solemnize the
positure of the cornerstone of our Church and State. Have some respect, I
beseech you, to the (...), the fortune of this structure: do what you can to
secure it against any evil accident, by your Christian (...), as I may speak,
and telesmatical Charity. You know what the custom is, when the first-stone of
the Building is laid. I beseech you purchase the prayers of the poor this day
by your bounty, that their hearts also, may partake of the rejoycings of this
day.

This is the way to have more cause of rejoicing; for such rejoicing as this,
God will accept; and in the company of this, he will receive our prayers, and
will make us to rejoice in our King, and our King in us, and all of us to
rejoice in the Lord; who has given us this day to rejoice in. For which we
humbly bless and praise his holy name; beseeching him to bless our King to
us, and to bless us; us and all our Fellow Subjects unto our King; that being
mutually happy in each other in this world, we may be eternally happy with each
other in the world to come. Amen.

FINIS.
royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

portrait of Charles II


