NEVVES FROM YORK.

Being A true Relation of the proceedings of Sir Hugh Cholmley since his
coming to Scarborough: with the reasons why he did not march to Tadcaster, as
was desired by the Lord FAIRFAX.

Directed in two several Letters to the Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons, with his advice of the affairs of the County.

Together with the opinion of his Officers concerning his repair back to
Scarborough.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Best. 1642.

Several Letters.
SIr, I perceive by a letter I received from Mr. Pym, the dividing of my Forces
from the rest of the Army, is by the House apprehended to be very prejudicial
to the service of the Kingdom, as that this place is conceived not to be very
useful. The former of which particulars trencheth so much upon my discretion
and honor, as for my vindication I must crave your favor in presenting this
enclosed to the House, containing my whole deportment since I came hither;
which if it prove to my justification, I shall humbly crave their sense so upon
it; if otherwise, that I may be called to make answer to any particular may
stick with them, and receive according to my demerits: for if I have failed in
my duty, I am unworthy to be employed longer in public service: if not, I
trust they will not think it reasonable I should lie under so heavy a censure.
I hope my retreating to Scarborough will appear to be upon good grounds, and
only to discharge the trust upon me; and that my not obeying my Lord Fairfax
Orders, can be no great crime, since I protest I did not then, nor of a good
time after, know the power he has over us: for I should not then so much have
scrupled, in respect his command had been a security to me for any
inconvenience which might have happened: nor can I remember I ever dissented
from what he propounded, saving this last, to cast my self and Forces into the
West Riding so remote from my charge, For those several orders mentioned in
the printed papers, to which it is said, I found such impediments, I could not
obey them, had but the times been mentioned, or copies of them produced, I
could have answered; and till then I must put them in balance with the seven
hundred men (is said in print too) that I retreated with to Scarborough. Sir,
if the affairs of this Court^ are not in so good a condition a^ a few weeks
ago there was hopes for, I humbly beseech the House, the blame may not be (as
it (...) some would have it) wholly imputed to my neglect: For to (...) plainly
and clearly, I think it proceeds from this cause, that ^^ drew not near to
the City of York, and made some attempt upon it, (wherein I shall make my
forwardness manifest) and if we had not prevailed before my Lord of
Newcastles approach near us, yet we had been united in a body to have opposed
him. For the other point, touching this Castle, I offer the opinion of all my
Captains, which I do merely that it may be considered how far it may be
useful; not that I would thereby make advantage to continue this command: For
since I am so unfortunate, as the care of the place makes my actions subject to
misconstruction, and that I am so little thought upon, as there is neither
course taken for supply of money or ammunition, nor that I can receive
commission or instruction for my better direction, I shall most humbly beseech
the House to discharge me of this trust. And however I have erred, I have not
failed in my pains and faithfulness since I came hither. Nor as I did not
seek the employment, so was I not drawn into action by private ends, but out
of desire to contribute my poor endeavors to the settling the truth of the
Gospel, liberty of the Subject, and peace of the Kingdom, which I shall wish
and heartily pray for, and that with as much honor as possibly may be to his
Majesty. For if there be not a good understanding between him and his
Parliament shortly, so that these unhappy distractions may be composed, to my
judgment the Kingdom is in danger to be ruined. I shall not need further to
relate how affairs stand here, in respect the bearer my Lieutenant Colonel,
can inform in every particular; and therefore will only add my desire to be
in your esteem, as I shall ever approve my self, Sir,

Your most humble Servant, H. Cholmely.

Another Letter.
SIr, before my coming to Scarborough, or that I could draw any considerable
forces hither, a great part of my Regiment was disarmed; and this place being
at an out Angle, I did not without difficulty in three weeks draw together
four hundred (...), and being much importuned by Sir John Hotham to march
toward York, I acquainted my Captains with it, who jointly presented their
opinions and advice in writing to dissuade me, in respect of the weak
condition I should leave this place, and the strength of the enemy at York,
who was then reputed two thousand: Yet conceiving my advancing into the
Country, would be much for the service of the public, leaving only one
hundred and twelve men or thereupon in the Castle; I marched from hence with
under three hundred foot, and quartered at Stamford bridge within five miles of
York: then two hundred and twenty men more came to me from Sir John Hotham,
and these with two troops of horse was my whole strength, and with them, as I
was desired, I endeavored to cut off all supply from the City, but finding an
impossibility to do it at that distance we were, I moved both my Lord Fairfax
and Sir John Hotham that we might quarter our selves within the Suburbs of the
City, and having as I thought by a letter I writ to my Lord Major set the
minds of many of the Citizens not to endure a siege, I resolved my self,
though none joined with me to fall upon some part of the Suburbs, and for that
purpose sent for a great Ordnance to Scarborough, and when she was within two
miles of my quarters at Stamford bridge, I was forced to send her back again,
in respect I received a letter from Sir Christopher Wray, Captain Hotham and
Captain Hatcher that they were advanced toward the Teas, to stop the Earl of
Newcastles passage into Yorkshire, and desired me to march up to them, which as
I was preparing to do, comes another letter from them for my stay, where I was
at Brigge till I heard further from them, and though perhaps they after writ
some letters which came not to my hands, yet upon the first from my Lord
Fairfax desiring my march to Thirske, the next morning I broke up in quarters,
and marched to Malton, where I met Colonel Boynton, who being commanded to
march two days before me, was retreated thither, in respect the enemy advanced
so fast, he could not come to join with Captain Hotham; and hither to Malton
my Lord Fairfax writ to Colonel Boynton, and my self, that we would march
back into the East, and by passing some Ferries come up to his quarters at
Tadcaster, which I profess I was resolved to do, but I found all my Captains
of a contrary opinion, and to dissuade me from that course, and then I began
more seriously to think of the business, and resolved it was fit for me to
repair to Scarborough with some forces for these reasons: First, my order was
to repair with my Regiment to Scarborough, and principally to secure the
Castle and Town, and to continue or remove from time to time, as I should
receive directions and order from the Parliament, the Lord General, or
Committee for the safety of the Kingdom. Secondly, I had left the Castle with
a weak garrison, ill fortified, not a Platform or Ordnance mounted within the
walls, unvictualled, ill provided with ammunition, there being but eleven
barrells of powder. Thirdly, though I was willing to march to any place to
oppose the enemies passage into the Country, or to give him battle, and bring
the business to an issue; yet I thought it not fit to be cast into a part of
the Country where I might not upon any occasion resort to my charge, nor was
there any certainty, if the enemy once got into York when we should encounter
with him. Fourthly, when I marched from Scarborough, I left no enemy at my
back, my party was matters of the field, I could resort to my charge upon
every occasion; he case was now otherwise, should I have gone with my forces as
was desired into the West, I should have left a powerful enemy behind, that
might have marched hither without opposition, and as my Captains conceived
might have taken the Castle without much difficulty in the condition it then
was. Fifthly, my march from Scarborough was against the consent and opinion of
my Captains, and though I had craved the Committees approbation for my doing
so, and their further directions, I could never obtain it: so that having
marched from thence against my Captains consent, and not to retire when they
conceived it of such necessity; I thought it would be interpreted beyond the
bounds of my order or discretion, and not suting with the discharge of the
trust imposed on me. Sixthly, I had not money to pay those forces with me a
week, nor had left for the garrison much longer. So for these reasons I
thought fit, and resolved to repair to Scarborough with some forces, which
were under three hundred foot, and forty horse; yet had I such care as well in
respect of the public, as to satisfy my Lord Fairfax his desires; I declared
mine opinion, it was fit for Colonel Boynton to march with all his forces to
the Lord Fairfax, and he being very ready, and resolved to do so, I designed
Captain Mildem^y, and Captain Al^reds troops which were with me, with the
two hundred and twenty foot sent me from Sir John Hotham to march with him;
and in respect we were informed the enemy had drawn some forces on the other
side of the river of Darwent, opposite to where Colonel Boynton was to quarter
the first night; I did send my carriages, and the foot being in number as I
said under three hundred, from Malton the direct way to Scarborough, but my
self with my forty horse, marched the first day along with Colonel Boynton,
and then apprehending there would be no great danger between that place and
the Ferry whither they were directed; I marched the next day to Scarborough,
which I think was so far from a disservice, as it was advantageous in these
particulars, I strengthened the garrison, I brought a supply of as many
barrells of powder as I had left in the Magazine, as likewise two pieces of
small Ordnance, of which there was great need at the Castle: I have fortified
the place in much better manner then it was: And lastly, by returning thither I
got a supply of money from the adjacent parts, without which, we could not have
subsisted till this time; and though by these reasons I was induced to retreat,
it was not with an intention to immure my self in the Castle, but resolved as
soon as I had fortified the same, and left it in better security to march to
my Lord Fairfax with my troop, and such a number as could be spared from the
Castle, and might be mounted for Dragooners, which I had performed before this,
but that I was drawn another way by commands from the Lord Fairfax.

Now this resolution being duly considered, I hope it will not appear I have
been remiss in performing my duty to the public, or the service and trust
committed to me, nor yet that the Lord Fairfax in the managing of his affairs,
could receive much prejudice by my retreat, considering how few I drew* with
me, except the presence of my own person should be more considerable then my
merit, or the printed paper makes me.

Hu. Cholmley.

IT being propounded unto us by our Colonel Sir Hugh Cholmeley to declare our
opinions touching the proposition for our marching from Malton to Tadcaster to
join with the Lord Fairfax: We considering that the Castle of Scarborough was
left with a weak Garrison, unfortified, unprovided of ammunition or victuals.
And as the place seems to our judgments to be of great importance, so we had
reason to think the enemy had a special eye toward it; That if all our
forces should have been drawn so remote from Scarborough, the enemy might
have advanced thither without opposition, and have been master of the town
and place without any great difficulty. And therefore we gave our opinions and
advices; that it was fit and requisite our Colonel should retreat to
Scarborough with three hundred foot which was all the forces belonging to that
Regiment, except those which were in the Castle, to fortify and secure the
place better then it was at that present, or else we conceived he could not
discharge the trust that was reposed in him: And for the strength of the
Castle, we conceive, the same being well fortified, and victualled, that a
Garrison of three hundred men will be able to defend it, against any force that
can come to oppose it.

And we do further conceive, the same to be a place of very great consequence,
for these reasons.

1. He who is Commander of the Castle has a great power over the adjacent
parts of this Country.

2. Considering, as affairs now stand, it is the only Port to land men or
ammunition to supply the enemy, and that if the enemy were possessed thereof,
it lies so opposite to Holland, or Denmark, that he might take opportunity to
send men or provisions from thence hither in despite of any Navy upon the Sea.

3. That from this place, Ordnance or Carriages, may pass in the depth of
winter to York without difficulty, which cannot be done from Newcastle both in
respect of the distance and illness of the ways.

4. This Fort lies more conveniently then any other in the Kingdom for
Pinnances that may upon every occasion make out and hinder the bringing of
Arms or Ammunition from Holland or Denmark.

Subscribed by Lancelot Alured Lieutenant Colonel. George Orme Sergeant Major.
Brown Bushel, John Colborne, Richard Medley Captains.

When my Colonel was at Malton with his Forces I was at Scarbrough entrusted
with the Castle, so that I was not then present to give my opinion for his
retreat. At his coming hither there were but eleven barrells of powder in the
Castle, one hundred and twelve men, diverse of which unfit for service, not
victuals for ten days to keep them, nor any one piece of Ordnance mounted
within the Castle, and therefore I conceive it was very necessary for him to
retire hither, for supplying all these and other defects.

Subscribed by John Legard Captain.

FINIS.

