AN APOLOGY FOR THE Discipline OF THE ANCIENT CHURCH: Intended especially for
that of our MOTHER THE CHVRCH of ENGLAND: In answer to the Admonitory Letter
Lately published.

(...). Nazianz. Ephraim feeds on wind. Hosea 12.1. By William Nicolson,
Archdeacon of Brecon.

LONDON, Printed for Willim Leake at the Crown in Fleet Street, betwixt the two
Temple-gates. 1659.

THE COPY OF A LETTER Written by a Divine, A Friend of the AUTHOR.
SIR,
I Thank you for the favor you did me in imparting those papers to me,
composed by our learned friend in defense of the Ecclesiastical Government,
under which the Church of God has lived ever since it was established by the
Preachings Apostolical. I see and love his zeal, and honor his learning, but
am most pleased with his method and order of argument; for having prosperously
defended and illustrated the Doctrine of the Church of England in his material
and grave discourses upon the Church Catechism, he does to very good purposes
proceed to defend her Government; that as it already appears that her Doctrine
is Catholic, so it may be demonstrated that the Government of the Church of
England is no other than that of the Catholic Apostolic Church; she by the
same way being truly Christian, and a Society of Christians, by which all
Christendom were put into life and society, that is, became collective and
united bodies, or Churches. And indeed they are both of them very weighty and
material considerations; For more things are necessary to the being of a Church
than to the being Christian. First, the Apostles preached Jesus Christ and him
crucified, and every day winning souls to Christ did adopt them into his Body,
and joined them to that Head; and there they had life and nourishment. But
until their multitudes were much increased, they were no Body Politic; they
were so many single persons; till the Apostles according to their places of
abode, gathered them under one Pastor, and they grew into Communion, and were
fastened to one another by the Masters of Assemblies. This Government with the
alteration only of some unconcerning circumstances has continued in the
Church of God; and the Church of England was baptized by it at the same time it
was baptized into the faith of Christ; only of late some endeavors have been
to rifle this Government, and to dissolve her being a body Politic, and almost
reduced her only to the being Christian; which because it seemed also to be in
some danger, Being and Unity having so near relation to each other, I suppose
it very advisedly done of him first to do what he thought fit for the securing
the Doctrine, and then by the method Apostolical proceeding to the immuring of
that Doctrine by the walls and towers of Government, and I find he has done
it well. His arguments are grave and close; not florid, but pressing; his
observations choice, his (...) and little by-discourses pleasant and full of
instructions, his refutation sharp and true; his returns pertinent; and
nothing trifling but his adversary; who, because he speaks but weak things,
ministers not occasions worthy enough for this learned man to do his best. But
he has made supply (I perceive) and by taking little occasions by the hand, he
has advanced them to opportunities of handsome discoursings; and to my sense,
has to better, more full, and excellent purposes than any man before him,
confuted the new fashion of Congregational and gathered Churches; which must
now needs appear to be nothing but a drawing Schism into Countenance and
Method, and giving a warranty to partialities; it is a direct crumbling of the
Church into minuits and little principles of being, just as if the world were
dissolved into Democritus his dream of Atoms, and minima naturalia. Every man
loves Government well-enough, but few of the meaner sort love their Governors;
especially if they think themselves wise enough to govern; for then they are
too wise to be governed. Now this Independent or Congregational way seems to
me the finest compendium of humouring and pleasing all those little fellows
that love not, that endure not to be subject to their betters; for by this
means a little Kingdom and a royal Priesthood is provided for every one of
them; a Kingdom of Yvetot; and some had rather be chief but in a garden of
Cucumers, and govern but ten or twenty absolutely (so they do) than be the
fifth or the twentieth man in a Classis, or inconsiderable under the
Apostolical and long-experienced government by those Superiors which Christ by
himself, and by his Spirit, and by his blessing, and by his providence, and by
the favor of Princes has made firm as heaven and earth, never to be
dissolved, until the Divine Fabric of the house of God it self be shaken.

I pray give my service to the good Man; and I do heartily thank him for my
share of the book, by which I have already had some pleasure and some profit,
and hope for more, when my little affairs will give me leave strictly to peruse
every unobserved page in it. When I only heard of it, I was confident he would
do it very well; and now I see it is so very well done, and in that grave
judicious manner, if you had not told me, I should have been confident it had
been his, Vox hominem sonat. I pray God that he may find encouragement
according to the mertt of his labors; and acceptance according to his good
intentions, and that his book may not receive its estimate according to the
cheap and vast numbers of others, but according to its own weight. The strength
that was put to this would have resisted a stronger adversary, but it could not
readily have supported a worthyer cause; and because I believe it was done with
as much charity as learning, I hope it will have the blessings of God, and of
the Church, and the peace of all good men. I only have this to add further: I
wish that this worthy man would enter into no more war but against the open
enemies of mankind; that he would dispute for nothing but for the known
Religion of Jesus Christ, that he would contend for no interests but the known
concernments of the Spirit in the matter of good life, which is the life of
Religion; and my reason is, not only because I find that he calls his
adversary Brother, and it is not so good that Brethren should contend; but
because men are wearied with disputes, and the errors of this or any age, after
the first batteries and onsets by the Church, are commonly best confuted by the
plain teaching of positive truths and the good lives and the wise governments
of our Superiors; and after all, I believe that though he does manage this
contest prudently and modestly, yet the spiritual war against direct impiety
he would manage much more dexterously and prosperously; and for his auxiliaries
he would be more confident of the direct and proper aides of the Spirit of God.
This is very well, and he will I doubt not still do better, when a more
concerning argument is managed by so excellent a hand. Sir, be pleased when the
Book is printed (in case you think it fit, and that it be approved by
authority) to send me a Copy of it into the far distant place of my
retirement; that I may be recreated with the worthiest productions of my
friend; for it will be instruction and refreshment too, to

Your very loving friend and Brother J. T.

TO THE Reader.
THe Prince of peace knows who bequeathed peace as his last Legacy to all his
followers, that I am not a man of contentions, or have loved to strive, this
being the first time that ever I set pen to paper in a contestation with any
man. And to this kind of any other I have been most averse, because I have
found by experience in falling upon, and passing through the controversies
Theological, the ardour of devotion has been abated, and many hours that might
have been better spent in piety, and the study of necessary fundamental
doctrines, surreptitiously stolen from me. When therefore I had set up my
resolution to meddle no more with the Polemicks, I was awaked by an importunate
Letter, in which finding many foul aspersions to be cast on my Mother, or
rather the Catholic Church, (I mean not the Roman, for I never did, nor do
acknowledge her to be worthy of that name) in whose steps the Reformed Church
of England has trodden in her Doctrine and Discipline legally constituted, I
thought my self bound according to my Talent to vindicate her in her
constitutions.

If any man shall say this needed not, it having been so often, so vigorously
done by abler pens; yea, and confirmed to be wisely constituted, by the
distractions and divisions which have fallen upon it, since those foundations
have been shaken and removed by aerie brains, then which there cannot be a
stronger plea for the necessity of that Discipline which is here opposed and
vilifyed: I must confess this is true, and that by all wise and sober men, our
Mother has gained hence thus much advantage, that Plus colitur, placet, atque
viget, laudatur, amatur.

Yea, and her greatest Adversaries, were they unbiassed, might come to know
quae recta sunt, although Athenian like for some reasons, they are all for
news, and therefore facere nolle.

Yet being provoked I held my self bound to answer, yea, though I did but say
over again those things which Wise, Learned, Pious men had said before me; for
I intended not to impose upon my Reader, which is usual, by obtruding that for
my own, which indeed I have but borrowed from other men. Easy it had been for
me to vary phrases, and in other words so to have dressed up the judicious
determinations of the Learned before me, (who have in this discourse said so
much that little can be added) that men might have attributed something to me.
But neither the subject upon which I was to write would suffer it, nor yet mine
own inclination. For suppose I should magisterially deliver the self same truth
as from my self with those Worthies; yet when were I able to do it with the
same vigor and eloquence? how could an equal credit be given to my words, as
to their gray hairs, and impartial relations of Church-practice, who were
eyewitnesses of what they have delivered? Besides, it more sharply strikes the
mind, and more deeply seizes upon the understanding, and wins belief sooner,
what the Pillars of the Church have left to us in their Monuments, then what I
or Cluvienus shall set down. And this is the reason, that where I found any
thing opposite, either in Ancient or Modern Divines, I have expressed it in
their own words, and not in such as I could easily have disguised. And in this
I have followed the judgment and authority of the gravest men, who have taught
me, that in eo laborare quae semel rectissime dicta sunt, nova orationis forma
enunties, intempestivae est ostentationis. Moller, praefat. in Psalm.
Therefore whatsoever the Reader shall observe in this Apology spoken to the
point in hand, I desire he would not attribute it to me, but to those who have
labored before me upon that subject, whose Disciple I willingly profess my
self to be, and a Pigmy upon their shoulders. Only if the Reader shall find
their allegations more aptly and vigorously applied and pressed home, or more
perspicuously opened and closely laid together, or some defects here supplied,
and looser discourses fortified, I have my aim.

This Apology had not appeared in public, had not the publication of the
Admonitory Epistle called it forth. For my intent in it was first to satisfy
my friend that sent it, an old acquaintance, though always of a dissenting
judgment, which yet I hoped had been better bottomed: and then to put into the
mouths of my brethren of the Clergy (to whom I understood the Copy was sent as
well as to my self) what to reply. But when I found it abroad, I conceived my
self bound to let the World know what might be returned to the imputations; for
I conceive to the considerate Reader they will appear no more, after he has
perused the Reply.

So fairly I have dealt with the Admonitor, that I have not here and there
catched at pieces, or taking any advantages by wresting any expressions in the
letter; But deduced the whole into parts, and the parts into several
paragraphs, and resolved every paragraph into distinct propositions, framed in
the very words of the Letter, which the writer cannot deny to be his own
assertions, and annexed a several answer to them, that so the Author of the
Admonitory should not complain that any wrong is done him, or his sense
mistaken, as is usual among Litigants in this kind: And I hope withal I have
so demonstrated the Truth, where the matter was capable of a demonstration,
that there will be left no more just cause to wrangle. And my hope is in part
confirmed by this, that the first part of it being sent to the Author of the
Admonitory more than sixteen months since, it received no return; which gives
me just occasion to suspect it is not subject to any notable exception. The
other two parts have lien by me ever since that was sent; and that they were
not made companions with the first, some reasons there are, which I hold it not
necessary to make known.

From any bitterness of language (though sometimes justly provoked to it) I
dare say the frowardst adversary will acquit me. Sarcasms you shall meet with
none, Astismi now and then; and that cannot be imputed; for it was the honor
of Socrates, the gravest and wisest of the Philosophers, that he was (...) What
Tully said of old age, cannot be disliked in any style, severitatem in
senectute probo, acerbitatem nullo modo. That sharpness which having overmuch
of the sour will distaste, being brought to a right temper pleases the
palate, and provokes the appetite. Reader, it was the Authors purpose sometime
to delight thee, but most of all to edify, inform, confirm thee, which if it
may be effected, he has his end. For it is my hearty prayer that a period may
be set to this wrangle, and that we may all turn to the way of truth and peace.

Farewell, W. N.

A KEY to open the Debate about a Combinational Church, and the power of the
KEYS. The first Part.
THE chief point of the Controversy lies in this, to know in whose hands the
power of the Keys shall be, or rather who shall be the Prime subject of the
Keys.

Of this I find three opinions. Cotton, Burton, Goodwin, Nigh, Assert the name.
Bailey, p. 132.
The first defended by the Independents or Combinationals. A second defended by
the Presbyterians; and a third by the Prelates.

1. The Combinational Churches are divided in this point; for some seat power
in the whole Congregation so soon as associated in Covenant, even before they
have any Officers. Others after the Officers are chosen settle it in them
alone. A third even then conjunctim, make the whole body the subject of the
Keys. Which of these, or whether any of these is like to be true, will appear
if we consider these two or three things.

1. That the Presbyters and Ruling-Elders cannot be the prime subject, is
apparent, because that the Keys were seated in some, before they were in them,
if you be constant to your own principles; For how came they to be Elders and
Rulers? were they not created by the power of the Keys? and who created them?
was it not they who did elect and ordain? The prime power then must be in the
electors and ordai^ers, not in the elected and ordained, whence it will follow
inevitably, that the Ruling Elders are not the prime subject of power; for a
power there is which precedes theirs.

2. After Election and Ordination, they, viz. Ruling Elders cannot be so
neither, because it is your common Tenet, that the Congregation may again upon
displeasure resume the Key, Depose, Excommunicate, cast out their own Elders,
which they could not do, were they not the prime subject of the Keys, and
authority primarily in them.

3. But if you shall say, that conjunctim, people and Elders together are the
prime subject, this cannot be neither. Because before they are thus conjoined,
the Electors and Ordainers had the true essence of a Church (as you teach) both
for matter and form, though they had no Officer nor Elder, and then must
radically and originally be invested with this power in the first combination,
without any reflection on this conjunction. So that as they are an organical
Church heightened by Rulers and Elders, it makes them not the prime subject of
the Keys, for this you say they had before.

That the people divisim without the Elders and Rulers are not the prime
subject of this authority, I prove in this Tract demonstratively. I only here
add, that the power of the Keys consists in binding, loosing, preaching,
administering Sacraments, etc. which till you can prove to be in the people
originally, I shall never yield the power to be originally in their hands.

The difficulties are so many, and the subtleties so nice among you in this
dispute, that they have forced your finest heads, Robinson, Cotton, Goodwin,
Norton, to invent so many distinctions, divisions, subdivisions, that a man
must needs think himself in a maze that reads them; the (...) of the Schoolmen,
which you so much complain of, are exceeded by you. And yet when all is done,
by these you could never yet satisfy your own party, and therefore expect not
to settle others. It shows you are in a Labyrinth, and would feign help your
selves out by the small threads of these prettily invented distinctions. In a
word, that there are very many knots and objections, to which your Tenet is
liable. For you know that all distinctions were invented to give light to that
which is very perplexed, intricate, dubious, ambiguous, and ae^uivocal.

2. That this your assertion is mainly denied, opposed, battered and beat down
by the Presbyterians, I need not tell you, or that they deny the the
Congregation to be either conjunctim, or divisim, the prime subject of the
Keys, and settle it upon the Eldership primo, immediate, adaequate Finaliter
and objective; they will grant you that the whole Church is the subject; but
autoritative and formaliter, they place it in the Guids, or Presbyters without
a Bishop. And of this opinion Rutherford is an (...). But he runs into the same
inconvenience with your Rabbis. For to make his thoughts good, he has so many
nicities, so many new-coined distinctions of power, of the Church, of I know
not what, that he is able to confound any Reader, and indeed drives on the
point till he becomes almost unintelligible. Is not this think you a rare
device in him and in yours to find out a Truth, and settle a conscience about
Church Government?

3. The P^elates are opposite to both, they deny the Congregation conjunctim or
divisim to be the first subject of the Keys: They deny the Presbyterian
Eldership to be the prime subject of Church power. And they place it under
Christ in the Apostles, and their successors; and for this they plead our
Saviors promise, Matthew. 16. and his donation, John 20. They plead again the
Apostolical practice extant in the Scriptures, Acts 8.17. Acts 14.23. 1 Timothy
4.14. 1 Timothy 5.22. 2 Timothy 1.6. Tit. 1.5. and again the perpetual practice of
the Catholic Church ever since: according to that of Jerome, Decretu^ est toto
or^e, ut unus e Presbyteris electus ceteris superponeretur, which testimony I
have at large afterward cited and opened at full.

This is the state of the whole question, and which of these is likelyest to be
most true, I shall leave it to the unbyassed Reader to judge after he has read
over this Treatise.

In nomine Domini, October 29. 1656.
and ad honorem Jesus Christi and ipsius Ecclesiae, ad veritatis aram haec
offero. An answer to the Admonitory Letter. The words are these. SECT. I.
Reverend Sir,
THat the glorious God who is the giver of all grace as well as of every good
and perfect gift, would never be weary of conferring on you, or of continuing
in you, or yet of increasing by you, those real and rich gifts and graces,
which he out of his good will and mere goodness was pleased to indue and
adorn your precious soul withal: for the due and daily use and exercise
whereof his maine aim and uttermost end was his own service, and your own
solace to train you up higher in holiness and happiness (as I am hopefully
persuaded in my very heart) then most of your companions, or acquaintance,
kindred or country (and that at the least) by the head and shoulders; 1. An
humble motion for you.
is one of those motions with which I have frequently and unfainedly found my
self moved (and that as I trust from the highest heavens) for to make unto the
hearer of prayers, and the granter of requests. This motion is my humble motion
for you.

Tbe Answer to the first Section.
AMong those different kind of prayers the Apostle mentions and enjoins,
Intercession is one. 1 Timothy 2.1.
That therefore you are pleased to intercede for me at the throne of grace, is
an act of piety and charity, and I heartily thank you for it, and desire the
continuance; and I beseech the hearer of prayers, and granter of requests, to
hear and grant to us both a clear understanding, a ready will, obedient
affections to embrace the naked Truth, as it shall be manifested unto us, all
partialities and sactions, or inclination to any parties being set aside. For
thus much I may assure you, that I am of a peaceable and docible disposition.
Peaceable, and hate contention and wrangling, well knowing that pruritus
litigandi est scabies Ecclesiae, Eccles. 12.12.
it cooles devotion, and animates faction. I verily believe he is the less
Christian, that knows best to wrangle. There is no end of making many books,
especially of Controversy. For of these there is no end either for cessation
or profit. None for cessation, because the parties interessed either through
self-love or pertinacy, rarely are by the most forcible arguments drawn to
retract what they have once maintained. None for profit, because the contenders
are seldom bettered or made more religious, would I might not say far worse,
more fierce and of alienated affections. This needs no proof, since it is too
apparent in the encounters of all sides, whether for Papistry, Prelacy,
Presbytery, Independency, etc. The Writers pens are for the most part steeped
in gall, of which tart juice I promise you, you shall not taste one drop, it
being so contrary to my nature, whom the Dove that descended on our Savior
has embued with mildness and a study of peace. And as I am inclinable to
peace, so I am very docible also. Wax is not easier to receive an impression,
than I am the seal of truth, but then it must be made evident unto me either
by plain and express Scripture, or else by some demonstration and deduction
evidently drawn from thence, for otherwise I must remain where I was. This
because I find not in your discourse, my judgment is not upon it altered. The
words I find in it many, the arguments and proofs in it very few. It Is a
pretty Narrative, not any demonstration; pardon me therefore if I yield not.

The gifts and graces you take notice of in me, I freely and openly acknowledge
are far short of your conceit; they cannot swell me but humble me, being laid
together with my imperfections; and were it not partiality in you, you might
behold them far more eminent in many of my companions and acquaintance. But
your friendly mind has presented me unto you as an object through a mist,
which makes it seem far bigger than indeed it is. Yet your error of love
shall not make me believe I am a giant, when I am but a Pigmee, and so rich in
grace, goodness, holiness as you intimate, being conscious to my own defects.
However I am what I am, 1 Cor. 15.10.
and I hope his grace which is bestowed upon me is not in vain. My talent I
received from him, to him I acknowledge it, and give thanks for it, Ephesians. 4.12.
and I shall endeavor to employ it to that end it was given, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ. Hic labor, hoc opus. And it is my grief, that I am forced to
wrap it up in a napkin, and me thinks it should breed in them singultum cordis,
that have forced me to it. But no more of this. It follows in your Letter.

SECT. II. The words of the Letter.
THat you would call to remembrance, and also seriously consider and lay to
heart what (I in the judgment of rational charity am bound to conceive) you
cannot choose but know, by what Christ did reveal to you, and by what you did
likewise receive from Christ: namely how our God in covenant has thought meet
to constitute three several sorts of visible Churches, and no more to be owned
and acknowledged as his, to be founded and found successively on earth from the
beginning of the world to the end of the same.

Answer.
OF what you write in this paragraph in general, I am not now to consider, to
wit, what has been the external government of Christ's Church from the
beginning to this day. And how far I agree with you, will by and by come to
be examined. But in the mean time let me put you in mind that these words [
God has thought meet to constitute three several sorts of visible Churches]
are improper. For the Church of God, before, under, after the Law, was but one
in essence and being; so we believe One Holy Catholic Church, the bonds of
whose unity are extant, Ephesians 4.4, 5, 6, 7. Let then the external government be
what it will, yet this cannot constitute three several sorts of visible
Churches, because distinction of species must proceed from internal principles,
not from extrinsecal accoutrements. This then is not properly expressed. But if
you mean, as I hope you do, That the visible Church of God has had a different
kind of regiment and existence, one from the beginning under the Patriarchs to
Moses, another from Moses to Christ, and a third from Christ to the end of the
world, I assent to you. And I suppose your meaning to be this, by your words
which thus follow:

Whereof the first was Oeconomical or Domestical; the second the National or
Judicial, and the third was the Presbyterial or a Combinational Church.

Reply.
In the general I told you I assent to you, but about the particulars I shall
offer unto you some considerations, especially about the first and the last.

1. You say the two first, viz. the Oeconomical and Judicial Church continued
of a space of time allotted to each of them of two thousand years or near about.
Here you are not so exact in your Chronology as you ought, for the first
continued longer, and the last fell short, as Junius has given us the account,
and other Chronologers dissent not much from him. For the Oeconomical Church
continued two thousand five hundred and ten years, and the Judicial and
National one thousand five hundred and two only, if you set the period at
Christ's ascension; but if at the final overthrow of Jerusalem by Titus, one
thousand five hundred forty two. For then it may be better supposed was the
abolition of the Ceremonial Law, when the Scepter was utterly departed from
Judah; and now your words will run smoothly on, in this last and third kind of
Church Government every child of man, that is an ingenuous child of God, and a
conformable member of Christ, either really has for the present, or else
earnestly longs and desires to have for the future both a name and a nail
according to what is promised to the believing Gentiles, and was performed to
the believing Jews, Isa. 56.5. Ezra 9.8. such a nail was Eliakim the Type of
Christ, Isa. 2. An hearty motion to you.
22.23. Upon this you move me to spend sometimes a few of my morning thoughts,
maturely to peruse, ponder and apply what is by you set before my eyes, and
propose to my consideration. And I assure you I am not now to begin to do it;
for I could present you if I pleased with many animadversions on this subject
many years since collected. I am not such a stranger in Israel to be ignorant
of these things, which are obvious to any one that has been conversant but
meanly in the Scriptures; however for your monition I thank you. (...).

SECT. III. The Letter.
NExt you begin to enlarge upon your distinction: and move first, That some
others (especially such of yours whom it may more nearly concern to be well
seen and skilled therein) may have made known unto their souls by your (that
is my) self (how and where you shall see cause and think fit) that the firt
visible Church, etc.

This motion I embrace, and it shall be performed. But whom you note out by
such of yours I know not. If you mean those of my own Order, I know many of
them as well if not better seen and skilled in these things already than my
self, so that this were operam and oleum perdere, however they shall have
notice of it. But if you mean of the common sort, it has been so often
inculcated by me into them, that to do it again is actum agere.

Yet by the way, give me leave to intimate, that I am not pleased with the
phrase [ Such of yours] for it seems to me to be distinctive, and among
Protestants I never liked these pronowns, Yours and Ours, they border too near
upon separation, which I would not have amongst us, who are all one in Christ
Jesus. Phil. 3.15.
We may in some things think otherwise, and yet belong to the same fold. God in
his good time will reveal the Truth; away then with these terms of distance
Yours and Ours. Now I proceed with your words.

The Letter. The first visible Church which was constituted by the wise Builder
thereof was a Domestical Church, being outwardly guided and governed by the
first borne of the family, who were types and shadows of Christ Jesus in the
several houses of professing Saints: and did continue from Adam and Abels days
to the time of Moses and Aarons pilgrimage in the wilderness of Sin: as does
plainly appear to all that do deliberately weigh both what is expressed, and what
is necessarily employed in Genesis 4.4. compared with Exodus 12.7.

Answer.
IN the substance I agree with you; But I pray take it not ill, that I clear
up some expressions that may be mistaken.

1. You say the first visible Church is Domestical, and did so continue from
Adam to Moses. That at first the discipline and government of the Church began
and continued in certain families, cannot be doubted, but that it so continued
till Moses days, is not easy to conceive, because as families multiplied,
there must be a multiplication of these Chu^ches, as there was of houses,
whence it will follow that every eldest son must be King and Priest in his
own house; and then what will become of the prerogative of the firstborn,
Genesis 27.29.
who during life was to be Lord over his brethren?

Better therefore I conceive it is to say, that this reglement was Paternal,
and that all the several families were to depend on him durante vita, both for
instruction and discipline. For while the first father lived, he was, 1. a
Prophet to teach. 2. A Priest (...), to sacrifice, intercede, to bless and
give thanks. 3. A Prince to rule and punish. Thus Adam as a common father
guided the Church for nine hundred and thirty years. Seth the son of Adam was
his fathers assistant for five hundred years, and taught his children who were
then the Church to call on the name of the Lord, Genesis 4.
and continued that charge one hundred and twelve years after his fathers
death. Enosh did the like to Seth, and all the heirs of the promise to the
fathers. God always stirring up the spirits of some excellent men to preach in
his Church, while their fathers yet lived and guided the number of the
faithful; as for example, Enoch that prophesied three hundred years, Genesis
5.22. 2 Pet. 2.5. Genesis 5.27.
first under Adam, and after under Seth, in whose days he was translated. So
Noah a preacher of righteousness began under Enoch, and held on for six
descents, till the year the flood came, the very year his grandfather
Methusalem died. I would call these then extraordinary and immediate Prophets,
raised up by God to instruct his Church during the time of their fathers
principality and priesthood.

Noah after his grandfather Methusalems death governed the Church for three
hundred and fifty years, and left the reglement to Sem, who succeeding his
father in the Covenant, and adopted into the dignity of the firstborn,
governed the Church one hundred fifty and two years after his father, even till
Abraham was dead, Isaac dim, and Jacob fifty two years old, and therefore
might be the Melchizedech, Genesis 14. Heb. 7.
the Priest of the most high God. The next that succeeded Sem was Jacob by Gods
especial choice too, Esau having sold his birthright. As for Abraham and
Isaac, they could not lay claim to the^e rights of primogeniture, Sem being
yet alive. Called indeed Abraham was, and promised to inherit it, but possessed
of he was not, because Sem outlived him, he therefore is called a King, and
the Priest of the most high God. In Jacob this primogeniture was estated, among
whose sons God divided the honors and dignities of Sem, 1 Chronicles. 5.1.
appointing the Scepter and seed to Judah, the Priesthood to Levi, the double
portion to Joseph, which never were again conjoined in any but in Christ Jesus
the only Priest that ever succeeded according to the order of Melchizedech.

By whom the Church was after Jacobs and Joseph's decease governed in Egypt, is
not so certain, but very probable it is, that it was done by the fathers and
heads of the twelve tribes, over which I conceive Judah was the chief, Genesis
49.8.
according to the tenor of Jacobs blessing, Thy fathers children shall bow down
before thee. The sum of this is, that when the people of God increased and
multiplied into a Nation, and diverse Nations for ought we know, as before the
flood they did, and when after the flood they did the like, it is not so proper
to call it a Domestical Church that was so far extended. And if the
instruction thereof was Domestical because every father was to teach his
household and offspring: yet the government thereof was Paternal; He that was
set over the rest being to be a father to the rest, and to perform all
Natural, Civil, and Ecclesiastical offices to them, and they again to do all
duties to him by which they are bound by the fifth Command, Honor thy father.

2. Your next words are, that this Domestical Church was guided and governed by
the firstborn of the family]. But this must be understood with a grain of
salt; for this though for the most part, yet is not always true; for what will
you say to Abel who was younger then Cain? to Sem younger brother to Japheth?
as Junius intimates in his notes, Genesis 5.32. and proves, chap. 10. verse 21.
which is therefore thus dubiously rendered by our Translatours. Unto Shem also
the father of all the children of Eber, the brother of Japheth the elder, even
to him were children borne. What will you say to Jacob? to Ruben when his
primogeniture was lost? Necessary then it is, that you limit your words, that
they carry this sense. God did consecrate the firstborn of the family, as
holy to himself, to be Priest in his Church, and increased their dignity with
this princely prerogative, that they should be Lords over their brethren, and
honored by their mothers children, as succeeding their fathers in the
government and priesthood; unless they were rejected from that honor by Gods
secret counsels or manifest judgments, and others named by God himself to
sustain that charge. Thus the clause is clear, and true.

3. Again you say that these were types and shadows of Christ Jesus in the
several houses of professing Saints]. What then is every professing Saint a
King, a Priest, a Prophet in his own house? This I dare not assent to, and I
hope you will not; there were no more words to be made of a Presbyterial Church
if this were true: for every man might officiate at home, and need not subject
himself to any Presbytery; he might baptize, administer the Sacrament, etc.
being authorized by this Type. I should rather then say that these were types
and shadows of Christ Jesus who is the King, Priest, and Prophet in his
Church, and yet executes all these offices for her good and salvation, then
make them types of professors in their several houses, who nor may nor can ex
officio undertake these functions. It follows,

4. As does plainly appear to all that do deliberately weigh what is expressed,
and what is necessarily employed in Genesis 4.4. Exodus 12.7.

These texts I have deliberately weighed, and find not in them, neither
expressed, nor yet necessarily employed what you produce them for; In Genesis 4.4.
I read, that Abel brought the firstlings of his flock, and of the fat thereof,
and the Lord had respect to Abel and to his offering; but can any man either
expressly or by necessary implication ever prove from hence, that the first
visible Church was a domestical Church, or that it was governed by the
firstborn of the family? that they were types and shadows of Christ Jesus in
the several houses of professing Saints? Or that this Church did continue from
Adam and Abels days to the time of Moses and Aarons pilgrimage in the
wilderness? That Abel sacrificed to God, that the offering he brought was of
the best, that God respects, loves, and is reconciled to the person before he
accepts his gift and service, may easily be collected from hence. But I cannot
discern which way to deduce from this text any of the former propositions.
This text you compare with Exodus 12.7. When I thus read, and they shall take
of the blood, and strike it on the two side posts, and on the upper door post
of the houses wherein they shall eat it: An injunction I find here concerning
the use of the blood of the Paschal Lamb, but not a syllable that can be drawn
to your purpose. But the best is that what you say for the substance, is so
clear in the book of Genesis, that no man need question it. Let the mistake be
but notified, and we agree, and therefore I proceed.

SECT. IV. The words of the Letter.
THe Chuch of the second sort was a National Church, consisting merely of
Jewish persons, and their Proselytes for its members, who were instrumentally
enlightened and led by the Priests and Levites, as their ordinary Ministers; the
which kind of Church Government lasted among them from the life of Moses to
the death of the Messiah, and no longer, as it is exceeding plain and clear
to any one that can find in his heart advisedly to compare the several
testimonies of the Old and New Testament together, which will contribute
pregnant light to this particular point; such as are Exodus 19.6. Number. 8.10.
Deuteronomy. 7.7. with Gal. 4 9, 10. Coloss. 2.14.17. and Heb. 7.12.

The Replication.
THe substance of this Paragraph is agreed on also. To wit, that the Jews with
the Proselytes were a National Church, taught and led ordinarily by the Priests
and Levites; extraordinarily by the Prophets; and when they ceased, and the
Urim and Thummim, God spoke sometimes to us so by the Bath Col, or silia vocis.
And that kind of government began with Moses, and ended at the death of the
Messiah, or a little after, as I hinted before, and rather incline to think.
For I am sure actually till then it did not, howsoever it ought to have done,
Christ's death upon the Cross putting an end to all the rites and sacrifices of
the Ceremonial Law.

Many things I could here observe about their Proselytes, their Priests and
Levites, their whole government, which yet I pass by, as not so necessary to
the present question. One thing only give me leave to tell you, that some of
these texts are not so conclusive to your purpose, as you conceive. For first
out of that of Exodus, that the Jews were a holy Nation and people, will easily
be deduced, and as much may be said of the Christians, is as evident, if you
compare the place with the first of Peter 2.9. for to this place of Exodus I
make no doubt the Apostle alludes, when he affirms of the Christian Church,
that it is a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar
priesthood, etc. I would gladly know why I may not out of these words as well
conclude a National Church of Christians, as you do out of the other a National
Church of Jews and Proselytes. And then your National Church will not be proper
to the Jewish State, but communicable to the State of Christianity also.

2. Out of Heb. 7.12. you conclude rightly that the Priesthood being changed,
there must be a change of the Law, that the Ceremonial Law of Moses was quite
abolished, no more sacrifices to be offered, legal purifications to be
observed; no nor days, months, times, years in a Jewish sense to be kept up,
Gal. 4.9, 10. In a Jewish sense I say; for this is plain Galaticari. Tertul.
But to prove from hence, as you usually here do, that no feasts may be
observed by Christians, was never meant by the Apostle. Compare the text with
Col. 2.16, 17. and you shall find that these were shadows of good things to
come; shadows, and then they must point out a body, and that was Christ; Amrs.
Medul. lib. 2. c. 15. p. 16.
under Christ then the substance of these rites must be looked for; and here
give me leave to put you in mind of a rule of Amesius, Festi dies
anniversarii, novilunia, and sumiles institutiones, quae mere ceremoniales
fuerunt, aequitatem istam generalem in se etiam continent, and adhuc uos docent
certos quosdam and accommodatos dies cultui publico assignari debere. But of
this more afterward.

That place you produce from Col. 2.14. speaks home to your purpose, and I
shall endeavor to give a further light to it. Thus the Apostle begins, verse
13. And you being dead in tespasses and sins, and the uncircumcision of your
flesh, has he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses,
blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against, us, which was
contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross. In which
words three things are to be observed. 1. The misery of man. 2. Who freed him
from it. 3. The manner of his freedom. His misery was that he was in
trespasses and sins, and uncircumcision of the flesh. He who freed, was God in
and by Christ, quickening, pardoning; it was a work of power and mercy; for to
raise to life and quicken is an act of power; to pardon and forgive, of mercy,
which was gratuita, and universalis; free, for it is (...), of free grace then;
and universal, for it is (...), all trespasses. 3. And then follows the manner,
Blotting out the handwriting. A bond or handwriting is that act which passes
betwixt a Creditor and his Debtor; that put case the Debtor should be so
impudent as to plead non factum, the creditor might have his own seal, act
and deed to produce against him. This God had against man; it was contrary to
him; but now through Christ it was blotted out, it had no power to condemn, it
was taken out of the way, it had no force to keep God and man asunder, it was
nailed to the Cross, torn in pieces, thrust through with nails, fastened
openly there, and as it were proclaimed publicly that it was cancelled. And in
this all Interpreters agree. But what this Chirograph or handwriting was, they
agree not. For some restrain it to that bond which Christ made with Adam, Of
every tree of the garden thou may freely eat, Genesis 2.16.17.
but of the tree of knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat. Others to
that Covenant and stipulation which the Jews made with God, All that the Lord
has spoken we will do. Exodus 19.8.
Which they did not, and therefore it was Chirograph^m contra. A third sort to
that command, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc. To
which command the conscience within bears witness, non dilexi; and this is
also Chirographum contra, this makes against us. The last sort refer these
words to the Ceremonial Law, to whom you incline, and I do not decline; for the
Ceremonies of the Law might very aptly be called Chirographum contra, in that
Circumcision denoted, that our flesh was polluted in the very birth; the then
washing and purgations, that we had contracted spot and filth; and the
Sacrifices that we deserved to dye; which of these senses to fix upon I know
not; I suppose it best therefore to take in all, for I am sure all was nailed
to the Cross, all blotted out and taken out of the way; whether the curse that
fell upon us by Adams disobedience, or that guilt we contract by breach of our
vows, promises, or undertakings with God, or that horror that arises from an
accusing conscience, or our original and actual pollutions for which we ought
to die. I pray pardon this digression; the richness and comfor of the text
drew me into it. After I shall speak closer to the point, to which indeed now
you come, and I shall follow you.

SECT. V. The words of the Letter.
ANd that the Church of the last and longest constitution was a Presbyterial or
Combinational Church, whose commendable opinion and practice (and that without
any ground of contradiction in the best judgment of unbyassed believers) it is
quietly and cordially to subject the earthy, erring and unruly will of every
creature therein unto the heavenly, infallible, and uncontrolable will of
Christ: who peremptorily wills and enjoynes all his professed subjects, and
professing Church Members to be indoctrinated and disciplined by the prescribed
ministry of these Presbyters or teaching and ruling Elders that are of their
own voluntary election and regular ordination. Whose office-extent reaches
from Christ's ascension to the Creations dissolution: as is witnessed by what is
written, Acts 6.5. and cap. 14.23. Romans 12.7, 8. 1 Cor. 12.8, 28. Ephesians. 4.7,
14. Rev. 4.6. and 5.6. and 19.4.

3. A harmless motion by you.
And here you make this harmless motion by me, That you would resolve (in time
whose you are, and in whose hand your life and whole time is) to reveal and
manifest unto some of yours, somewhat at least of that much, which the loving
and liberal Lord, and lender of pounds and talents did see good to commit to
the care of your conscience. This is a third motion, which I was stirred up to
spread before you. This motion is my harmless motion by you.

Reply.
I Do very willingly embrace this motion, and because I account you in the
number of those you are pleased to call [ some of yours] I shall begin with
your self, and reveal and manifest (according to the talent which my good Lord
has bestowed on me) to you first what I judge of this Section, after of the
rest. And that the truth may the better appear, I proceed to answer
methodically; I shall reduce your discourse to these propositions, and after
examine them. Of which the first is,

1. That the Church of the last and longest constitution was a Presbyterial or
Combinational Church.

2. That the commendable opinion and practice of this Church is quietly and
cordially to subject the earthy, erring, unruly will of every creature therein
to the heavenly, infallible and uncontrolable will of Christ. This proposition
is so certain, that it needs no dispute or proof. Only I shall enquire whether
you have performed it.

3. That Christ peremptorily wills and enjoynes all his professed subjects and
professing Church Members to be indoctrinated and disciplined by the prescribed
Ministry. None will deny this but Quakers. Neither do I well see how
Itinerants can readily yield so much.

4. That this prescribed Ministry must consist of Presbyters, or teaching and
ruling Elders.

5. That these Presbyters, teaching and ruling Elders must be of the professing
members own voluntary Election, and regular Ordination.

6. That their Office-extent reaches from Christ's ascension, to the Creations
dissolution. This is granted in a right sense.

7. And for all this you bring your proofs out of the Scripture, Acts 6.5. Acts
14.23. etc.

This is the Analysis of the whole, and I descend to examine it by the parts,
and shall open the Scriptures as I conceive they refer to the proposition.

Proposition 1. That the Church of the last and longest constitution was a
Presbyterial or Combinational Church.
THat the Church you mean, viz. the Church of Christ is to be last, is easily
granted; but whether to be the longest or no, is more than you or I, or any man
else can tell. But to let this pass. Hic opus est Oedipo; for I conceive not
well the sense of your proposition, because you phrase it Presbyterial, or
Combinational, since these two by the contending parties are made Disparata,
and then must really differ. I know not therefore what to make of this; Or
whether it be here a Divisive or an Explanative particle. If you make it
Divisive, then it seems not to agree with your following words; for you know
that those of the Presbyterial Church, though they will allow your professing
members liberty to elect, yet they stoutly, and with open mouth decry their
power to Ordain: and you allow the Church you speak of to do both. If you make
Or Expositive, then it can but only declare the sense of the former word
Presbyterial, and will be far from your intent, which is, if I mistake not,
that all the professing members of a Church be combined in a Church Covenant,
which you know the Presbyterial Church will never admit. For although
Presbyters can be content to be in their own sense Covenanters, yet they
abominate to be in a Church-Combination; and again, though the Church combiners
will join in a Church Covenant, yet they will not yield to be Presbyterial
Covenanters.

These Disparata then are not hansomely coupled in this place, neither can I
guess at any other intent you have in it, except it be to Umpire betwixt the
two parties, by finding out a Church that should be both Presbyterial and
Combinational, which hitherto the heat of zeal would never suffer the
learnedest of both sides to do. For the Presbyterians condemn your Combination
by a Church Covenant as a Chimera, a fancy, a novelty, a mere humane
invention, contrary to Christ's Ordinance, and destructive of all Church power:
And the Combiners on the other side, judge as harshly of the Presbyterian
Elderships in the whole reformed Churches, as of the Prelacy: nay and worse
too, if Bastwicks words be true, which he has in the Postscript of his second
part, page 6. viz. The Presbyterial government not suiting with the humor of
the Independents, they abhor it, and all such as endeavor to establish it,
and wish rather that the old trumpery were brought in again, and profess they
had rather have the government of Prelates. That which follows I forbear, that
I offend not. Thus Bastwick; which if true, it is not possible that a
Presbyterial and a Combinational Church should be all one as you seem to make
it. And therefore you must forgo one of the terms, and make it only
Presbyterial, or only Combinational, if you will speak intelligibly in this
question. But I shall make the best sense I can of your words, and in order
speak to them both. And first of the Presbyterial Church which you call also
Combinational, upon what ground I know not; for I meet with neither of these
Epithets fixed to the Church of Christ in the Scriptures, nor in any antiquity.
The first of these is new, and and the second naught; for I never read of a
Combination in a good sense. Why can we not speak as good Christians have done
before us, and call it the Christian, Catholic, and Apostolical Church, but
must please our fancies with these new terms of Presbyterial, or Combinational?

Act. 20.28, etc. Col. 1.24. and 13. Act. 11.26. Ephesians. 2.20.
I often read in the Scriptures of the Church of God, and that this Church is
the Body of Christ, the kingdom of Christ; to whom because it was united by
faith it was called Christian. And that this Church was built upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone. Whence it was called Apostolic. And again that this Church is
Totum integrale, Ames. medulla. lib. 1. c. 31. Sect 19.
of which the parts quae totum integrant, are all several and particular
Churches diffused in all Nations, in all places, at all times, whence it was
called Catholic. But of a Presbyterial or Combinational Church I hear not.

Good Sir, consider how harsh it sounds to style Christ's Church the Presbyters
Church, and the number of the Professors that are united by faith to Christ, to
be combined in I know not what. But now I shall take into consideration these
terms severally, and first I will begin with the last.

1. A Combinational Church. The first Author whom I meet with, it is Amesius,
and he defines it to be Parochialis, vel unius congregationis, cujus membra
inter se Combinantur; lib. 1. c. 39. Sect 22. cap. 2. Sect. 4.
there is your word, and ordinary conveniant in uno loco ad publicum religionis
exercitium. This your Synod at Cambridge in New England, chose rather to call
Congregational; for the word Independent they like not, (though I see no cause
of dislike, if the particular Congregations must not depend one of another, but
remain in full liberty, as Ames delivers in the same chapter, Sect. 20. and
26, 27.) And thus you there define this Congregational Church to be a company
of Saints by calling, united into one body by a holy Covenant for the public
worship of God.

But I pray you tell me what needs this combination by a second Covenant? would
not the first in Baptism have served, if heeded and kept, to have done all
this? and it seemed it did, by the very text your Synod produces to prove it,
Acts 2.42. For the Penitents and believers pricked to the heart by Peter's
sermon, gladly received the word, and were baptized, and continued steadfastly
in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in
prayer, etc. where we read of their Baptism, and continuance in
Church Fellowship, and in the duty of that fellowship; but that this is done by
a combination, a confederation or holy Covenant, a Vow, other than that made in
their Baptism, we read not.

2. And indeed it needs not; for what is it that Professors can bind
themselves unto by Covenant, when they are admitted into the Congregation, that
they have not in their Baptism bound themselves to before? Whether you shall
consider the Mystery, the Form, or the end.

1. In Baptism for the Mystery there is an Indument, and a stripping, Romans
13.14. Gal. 3.27.
which the ancient Church reduced to two words, Credo, Abrenuncio: In the first
there is the putting on of the Lord Jesus Christ: For as many as are baptized
have put on Christ. First, as Lord, acknowledging no other Master, whose voice
to hear, whose doctrine to rely upon, but only his. Secondly, as Jesus,
assuring themselves, that there is no other Name given under heaven whereby
they may be saved. Thirdly, As Christ, as well their anointed King submitting
themselves to his will: giving their names in to fight under his banner, and
swearing themselves his subjects: As also their anointed Priest, resting in his
one sacrifice as the only sufficient; in his sole intercession, as the only
powerful. Secondly, In the Abrenuncio, or stripping part, they renounce and
forsake the Devil, Gal. 5.20.
and all his works, the pompes and vanities of the wicked world, the sinful
lusts of the flesh, among which are all Heresies and Schisms.

2. For the form it is by our Savior appointed in the name of the three
persons of the indivisible Trinity, and so it is performed; neither of Cephas
the surnamed Rock, nor of Paul a great Apostle. Mat. 28.19. 1 Cor. 1.13.
The reason whereof you may read in my exposition of the Church Catechism, page
172, 173.

3. For the end, they which are baptized are thereby made the sons of God by
Adoption and Grace, invested with an inheritance everlasting: Gal. 3.26. Rev.
1.5. Mal. 1.11. Romans 12.1. Col. 3.5.
made Priests to God, to offer and slay: To offer that mund^m oblationem, pure
offering, or living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is their
reasonable service, viz. the clean and unbloody sacrifice of prayers and
thanksgiving: and then to slay themselves, mortifying their affections and
lusts.

Yea but men may be minded of all this by a new Covenant, and upon a second
engagement made more watchful to keep their first vow. Be it so, for this also
the Church had provided, without this separating combination, when she
ordained, that all baptized children when they could say their Catechism,
should be brought to the Bishop to be Confirmed, which order; were it in use,
and restored to its original purity, the wrangle about the formality of a
Church, Covenant, and collecting of members might be quieted and composed;
There being in Confirmation the substance of what is so much and so hotly
contended for, and that far better grounded and bottomed than any new device
can be, as I show you in my Catechism, page 6.

Thirdly, This Elogy you give to your Combinational Church, that it is their
opinion and practice quietly and cordially to subject their earthy, erring, and
unruly wit, to the heavenly, infallible, and uncontrolable will of Christ.

That so it should be I confess and desire; but how it is we see and feel
ever since the Combination. But what now is this but an opinion, and only
commendable? I thought it had been necessary, and de fide; that it must be so,
and could not be otherwise. For Opino is eutis vel non e^tis. You shall have it
in Amesius words. Assensus ille qui praebetur veritati contingenti propter
rationem pracipue probabilem ab intellectu apprehensam, Medulla. 1. These. de
fidei divina unitate.
opinio vocatur. The truth must be contingent and probable only, of which a
man retains an opinion; it may be, it may not be; if no other reason can be
produced for it, but a Topical. But that all men must subject their earthy will
to the heavenly Will of Christ is so certain, that it cannot be denied by any
good Christian: Hereafter let it pass then for necessary, and let it be a
principle of faith, which is more than opinion.

2. But you go on and say; This has been the commendable practice of your
Combinational Church. But here you must give me leave to think; for if I would
say what I know, I should fetch blood and perhaps pay for it too. Your
Combination was for the worship of God, and that cultus naturalis institutus,
Amesius so divides it; the principles of the first are faith, hope, charity;
the acts, hearing of the Word and Prayer, under which is an Oath: Of the last,
Gods prescribed Will or his Word. This is the Rule; but what is become of the
practice? I will not meddle with your faith, which yet you know in many of your
Combinational Churches is not sound, nor in the Socinians, nor Antimonians, nor
in the Brownists, Familists, nor the Anabaptists, nor the Quakers, nor the
Singers. These you will say are not of you, but are gone out from you; yet you
cannot deny, that these are Combinational Churches. The practice then of all
the Combinational Churches is not commendable in Gods worship in this respect.
Your hope may be great, but I fear it may be presumption, when the foundation
of faith upon which it should be built is so uncertain and tottering. As for
the charity of your party in general, I find it dying rather ^uite dead;
charity teaches a man to love his neighbor as himself: charity to be just,
and to do to all men, as he would all men do to him; Amongst your Combinational
Churches, what is become of this charity, this justice? Religiously observant a
man may find diverse of you of three of the Commandments of the first Table, but
of the third, your practice shows you make little account; and as for the
second Table, he who shall lay to heart your actions, must needs conceive that
you esteem it but for a cipher. I will no farther rake into this wound. I wish
you had not given me occa^ on to do it, when you affirmed that it was the
commendable practice of your Combinational Church to subject their earthy,
erring and unruly will quietly and cordially to the heavenly, infallible, and
uncontrolable will of Christ, to which I find their practice so contrary. I
pray press me not for instances, for I am resolved not to give the^ you. but
if you are desirous to be satisfied of the opinions and practice of the
Combinational Church I aim at, be pleased to read a book written by Robert
Baily a Scot, entitled, A Disswasive from the Errors of the times, Printed in
London, 1645. and published by Authority. Where he makes a large Narrative of
the opinions and practices of your Churches in New England; and whether he
says true or no, you can best judge, because you were upon the place. If true,
all is not gold that glisters.

2 A Presbyterial Church.

THis is your other Epithet, and I suppose you mean by it a Church to be
governed by Presbyters. The word (...) is equivocal, and therefore till it be
distinguished, nothing can be concluded from it.

1. Presbyter in the Old Testament properly belongs to the Elders of the
people, either in a common notion, or as members of the Sanhedrim: not any body
or persons peculiarly Ecclesiastique, Numb. 11.16. Nay, Godw. ant. l. 5. c. 1.
it is distinguished from it; for in the Civil Consistory the Judges were
called Elders; in the spiritual priests, Matthew. 21.23. and 26.3. The chief
Priests and Elders of the people are named as two distinct Consistories, though
Vossius, Doctor Hammon, Downham and Weames admit not this distinction.

2. (...) in the New Testament sometimes, but rarely, is taken in the same
sense as in the Old. But most commonly it is attributed to an Order of
Ecclesiastiques, whether in a higher or a lower Order and degree.

3. (...) is by the maintainers of the Congregational and Consistorial Church
taken for a mixed company of Lay men and Ecclesiastics, to whose government
they suppose the power of the Keys is committed, and this they call the
Presbyterial Church; and if I am not deceived, of this you speak in this place.

But against this I affirm, that there never was any such Presbyterial Church
before Calvin, and to that purpose I here propose, and hope to make good these
Propositions against any opponent.

1. That there must be government in the Church.

2. That Christ instituted this government, and Governors for it.

3. That this government must be perpetual.

4. That the Apostles were those Governors for the time; and for perpetuity,
their Successors appointed by them.

5. That their Successors were Bishops in Name and Office.

6. That for the execution of this Office Christ gave to the Apostles the Keys,
and they to their Successors only.

7. That this power consisted in Ordination and Jurisdiction, and therefore
that they only could ordain, and juridically proceed.

8. That at first the Apostles, and after the Bishops, did both without a
Presbytery.

9. Yet that by the Apostles a Presbytery was instituted in some Churches, who
were Ecclesiastiques only.

10. That yet none of these Presbyters were Bishops, but assistants only,
being distinct from them.

11. That this Presbytery without the Bishop, could not use the Keys.

12. That no Layman was of the Apostolical Presbytery, nor no Layman after
for 1500. years.

13. That at first the people elected not any Church Officer.

All these Propositions will require much time to be made good. I shall now
therefore omit the demonstration of them, and go on to you fourth and fifth
Proposition, where I shall use some of them.

Proposition 4. Viz. That this prescribed Ministry must consist of Presbyters,
or Teaching and Ruling Elders.
THe subject of this Proposition is the prescribed Ministry, and it has two
Attributes. 1. The Presbyters. 2. Teaching and Ruling Elders, and both must be
distinctly considered.

1. The prescribed Ministry consists of Presbyters. If by Presbyters you mean
Presbyters in the second acception, as it comprehends those of an higher and
those of a subordinate degree, this part of your proposition is most true, and
it shall be granted you. But if you exclude the Bishop properly so called, I
absolutely deny it. For the Apostles were Bishops, Matthias elected (...), Acts
1.20. There you have the Name, and accordingly the Fathers of the Church called
them Apostolos, i. e. Episcopos. Dominus Elegit, Cyprian. Epist. 9. lib. 3.
Cyprian. They had the power of the Keys promised, Matthew. 16.19. Matthew. 18.18.
and actually estated on them, John 20.23. In these texts you have the power
which lay in jurisdiction and ordination. In that was the office. The Apostles
were then in Name and Office Bishops.

This is performed in the second part.
I will give you a breviate of what I could say at large for the first
Government of the Church. I find only in Scripture mention of three
Church Officers, Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons.

1. The highest function which was Episcopal, the Apostles reserved to
themselves for some time, and that for three reasons. At first there were but
few convicted, Acts 14.27. 1 Cor. 16.
whence their labor was employed in turning the first Key, in opening the door
of faith, that great and effectual door; and all the helps they could make
either by Prophets, Evangelists, Coadjutors, Pastors, Doctors, Planters,
Waterers, to this purpose was little enough. But none of these qua tales, were
Bishops. 2. After the conversion of Jews and Gentiles, yet in many Churches
they yet settled not a Bishop; first, because a Presbyter fit for a Bishops
office, is not so easily found; it is Saint Paul's rule, that (...), Epiphan.
a Novice, one newly come to the faith, be not made a Bishop. Secondly because
while the Apostles remained in or near any place, they reserved the power, 1 Timothy 3.6.
there being no need of Bishops; The Apostles for that time supplying the wants
of those Churches, either with their presence, letters, or messengers, as the
cause required. 3. And yet there is a third reason; The Apostles suffered the
Churches to make a trial what equality of many Governors would do; but when
they found the fruits thereof to be dissension, and that every one would be
master, parity and plurality breeding dissension and confusion, they committed
the Church to one. I shall set you down this in Hieromes words, Hieron. Com. in
Epist. ad Titum.
even in those very words which are produced against Bishops. Idem est
Presbyter quod Episcopus, and autequam diaboli instinctu studia in religione
fierent, and diceretur in populis Ego sum Pauli, ego Apollo, ego Cephae,
communi Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae gubernabantur. Post quam vero
unusquisque eos quos baptizabat, suos putabat esse, non Christi, in to^o orb
decretum est, ut unus de Presbyteris electus superponeretur cateris, ut
Schismatum semina tollerentur. Haec diximus and ostendim^s eosdem fuisse
Presbyteros, and Episcopos, and ut Episcopi noverint se magis consuetudine,
quam Dominicae dispositionis veritate Presbyteris esse majores, and in communi
debere Ecclesi^m rege e. I have recited these words of Hierome at full, because
in them there be many things clearly for me, and some other passages seemingly
against me, to which I will give light.

Note here then first the cause of the Bishops creation. 1. The causa (...), or
occasion, was factions and Schisms; and the end, that Schisms might be taken
away: so his words are, cum diceretur ego Pauli, etc. ut schismata tollerentur.
Secondly, The time when the Bishop was ordained, old enough; for it was in the
Apostles days; for then it was said ego Pauli ego Cephae, etc. 1 Cor. 1. a
sufficient authority I suppose for the Bishops institution: it must needs be
granted Apostolical if it began then. Thirdly, this institution was Decretum,
and pray say, who then could decree except the Apostles; or durst decree
without them. Fourthly, that this Decree was generally assented to; for
Decretum est toto orb, it must be then Apostolical and Ecumenical. Fifthly,
now consider the words of the Decree, ut unus de Presbyteris electus
superponeretur caeteris. Rev. 2. and 3.
1. It is Unus, it is One, not many, that the care of the Church might
especially belong to one. Christ directs his message to the Angel individually
of such or such a Church. 2. He must be Electus, of whom Hierome says not, (of
that more anon) but I dare say considering the time of which Hierome speaks, it
was not without the consent of the Apostles, if not by them. 3. Note out of
whom he was to be elected; it was de Presbyteris, and I shall prove unto you
after that they were no Laymen. 4. Ut superponerentur caeteris. He was to be
super over the rest, whether Clergy or Laity, and that not only in
pre-eminence, honor, and dignity, but in power of jurisdiction also; for
otherwise how could the end be obtained here aimed at? how could Schism be
restrained and removed? Thus far you see what makes for me; and now I shall
clear up, what seemingly makes against me in this testimony.

1. The first words seem against me. For Hierome says, Idem est Presbyter
quod Episcopus. But he can mean no more than that the Bishop is sometimes
called a Presbyter. The Names then may be common, that is true, but not the
Office. Now the Office consists in Ordination and Jurisdiction, as I shall by
and by make appear. That Presbyter and Episcopus was Idem ordinatione, and
consequenly in Office, Jerome could not mean, except he should contradict
himself; Hieron. ad Evagium.
Ordination he reserves to a Bishop, and debarres a Presbyter from it. Quid
facit Episcopus, quod Presbyter non faciat, excepta ordinatione? Mark, the mood
is potential; He may not do it, He may not meddle with Ordination, for that
sure belongs to the Bishop in his own judgment. In this power then the Identity
lies not. 2. He must then mean in Jurisdiction, and that this is his meaning,
is apparent, by those words Communi Presbyterorum consilio Ecclesiae
gubernabantur, which your side catch at too, as making for the present Ruling
Presbytery, as indeed at the first sight they may, but thoroughly looked into,
nothing at all. I will show you where the mistake lies. First, in the word
Presbytery; for yours apply it to the whole Presbytery, Lay and Clergy, whereas
Hierom as is manifest, speaks only of the Ecclesiastique; for it is of the
Presbytery that was before or when those Schisms reigned. Secondly, he says
gubernabantur in imperfecto; and when was that? in the Apostles days; for then
in a Church that had a Presbytery without a Bishop, put case at Corinth, or had
a Presbytery with a Bishop over them, as at Jerusalem, Antioch, Alexandria,
Ephesus, it is most true Communi Presbyterorum consilio gubernabantur, the
Presbyters were admitted in partem s^llicitudinis. It cannot be denied that the
Apostles ordaining these Presbyters, had power in themselves, and might have
governed durante vita, alone retaining the power; when then they gave any power
to others, it was deligated; for I hope they lost none of their power in giving
Orders. Whence it will follow, that the Presbyters when admitted in some acts
of Jurisdiction with the Apostles, cannot challenge a right of governing
affixed to their Order, qua Presbyteri, because they did assist in
subordination and dependencie. That the Apostles assumed these Presbyters in
acts deliberative and consiliary to assist first at Jerusalem, Acts 15. was a
mere voluntary act, from which example that it was derived to other Churches,
will not be denied; and hence the last clause of Jeromes words will be most
clear, Noverint episcopi se magis consuetudine Ecclesiae, quam Dominicae
dispositionis veritate Presbyteris esse majores, and in communi debere
Ecclesiam regere. For by the Commission Sicut misit me Pater, given to the
Apostles, and in them to their successors only, they could not challenge it.
It may well, proceeding from the voluntary act of the Apostles, be called an
Apostolical Tradition and Ordinance; but in strict terms Dominica it was not,
nor Dominicae dispositionis veritas, according to Jerome.

2. But if this sense of Jeromes words like you not, I shall yet offer you
another; At first, as I said, the Presbyters by delegation from the Apostles
with common advice and equal care guided the Church under the Apostles; but
after Bishops were appointed, the whole care by little and little was derived
to one, and so at last by custom Presbyters were utterly excluded from all
advice and counsel, and Bishops only intermedled with the regiment of the
Church. This indeed grew only by continuance of time, and not by any Ordinance
of Christ, or his Apostles; this Jerome disliked, and to that purpose he fixes
his Noverint Episcopi, etc. And that this is likeliest to be Jeromes meaning in
that place, his following words show, Imitantes Moysen, qui cum haberet in
potestate solus praesse populo Israel, 70. elegit cum quibus populum judicaret.
The Bishops then ought to do as Moses did. What, to have Governors equal? No,
but when they might rule alone, to join with them others in the fellowship of
their power and honor, as Moses did. Moses did not abrogate his superiority
above others, but took seventy Elders into part of his charge. So Jerome would
have them. And thus much the King was content to grant, and restore, as you may
read in his book cap. 17. about the middle. I says he, am not against the
managing of this precedencie and authority in one man by the joint council and
consent of many Presbyters; I have offered to restore it, etc. You see of what
Presbyters I am content the prescribed Ministry shall consist, and what
Presbytrry I shall allow you.

2. Or Teaching and Ruling Elders.

HEre again your words are dark. For if by (...), Elders, you mean those in
Orders, I shall readily admit them to the Church ministry, whether Teaching or
Ruling. But if you intend under these words to introduce into the Ministry
either to teach or rule men, that are not of the Clergy (so you know we speak,
and so I must speak for distinction sake, for else I cannot be understood in
this question) I absolutely deny it.

For there was never any Layman ex Officio, admitted to teach ordinarily in
Scripture; called and sent he must be before he did undertake to preach. So the
Apostle intimates, Romans 10.15.
How shall they preach except they be sent? If any be gifted, I shall allow him
ex debito charitatis, privately and charitably to make use of his talent, to
exhort, to reprove, to admonish; but publicly to divide the Word of God, and
to teach, I may not admit him. For as a man must have inward endowments, gifts,
and sufficiency, so he must have an outward calling before I shall call him a
Teacher in the Church of God. And I hear you are not against me in this.

2. But about a Ruling Elder, I fear you and I shall differ; for in your
Presbyterial Churches, you admit into that number those who are not of the
Clergy. Many of your Presbyters being mere Lay men. Of the Texts you hope to
prove it, I shall consider anon. And here about these Ruling Elders I shall
deliver my mind. 1. Negatively. 2. Positively.

1. Negatively. That Ruling Elders in the Church were never Laics. Presbyters
we read of, and Presbyteries in the Apostolical writings, but none Lay. This
negative will be proved as all other negatives are; that is, by the contrary
affirmative. These Ruling Elders were always of the Clergy, and consequently
no Laics: for you know d^ae contrariae propositiones non possunt simul esse
verae. I shall therefore show you what I have to say of Ruling Elders.

2. Positively. The Keys Christ gave to his Apostles, and they to their
Successors; and with them so much power as was ordinarily of permanence and
perpetuity in the Church, which power consisted in four particulars; the
Dispensation of the Word, the Adm^nistration of the Sacraments, Imposition of
hands, and guiding of the Keys. With the three first I hear not that Ruling
Elders of the Laity undertake to meddle; and if they shall lay claim to the
last, they must show when and where any such donation was made over unto them;
otherwise, I shall call it an usurpation. The contrary is clear in the promise,
Tibi dabo claves, and in the performance, sicut misit me pater, sic mitto vos;
quorum peccata remiseritis, etc. Let it be showed that any Laick here had any
Key, any power made over unto him, or that the Apostles ever made any
designation of it to a Lay hand, and you shall for me carry the cause.

Well then, to whom did they assign it? That is clear to me in the Scriptures,
to the Bishops that they ordained. I shall instance only in two, Timothy and
Titus; the one at Ephesus, the other at Crete, ordained by Saint Paul; though
if you would believe Anci^nt Records, I could name you many more. James the
brother of our Lord Bishop of Jerusalem; Mark at Alexandria; Clemens at Rome;
Euodius at A^tioch; Polycarp at Smyrna; Dionysius at Athens; Caius at
The^olonica; Archippus at Colossi; Epaphroditus at Philippi; Antipas at
^ergamus; Crescens in Galatia; Sosipater at Iconium; Erastus in Macedon; Silas
at Corinth; with others; all which if there be any credit to be given to O^d
R^cords, were set by the Apostles themselves to be the Ruling Elders of the
Church.

But perhaps you will say these were chief in their own Churches respectively,
but they had their Presbyteries and Presbyters to govern with them. Well, be it
so, for in some it is evident it was so; Yet it lies upon you to prove, that
those Presbyters were Lay Elders; for otherwise I shall presume to the
contrary, because I find it oth^rwise in the Churches of Ephesus and Crete,
where Timothy and Titus were Bishops, and in all the Churches where I read of a
Presbytery.

That it was thus at Ephesus, is beyond all exception. For Timothy was there
ordained by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. 1 Timothy 4.14.
I hope you will not say, that T^mothy was made the chief Pastor there, by the
imposition of any Lay-hands. No man ever yet so interpreted that text; as for
the fathers, they expound it of the College of Presbyters, which they say was
of Prelates, Heb. 7.7. Calv. Instit. lib. 4. c. 6. 2 Timothy 1.6.
because minor non ordinat majorem. Calvin of the Office, and that it was given
by the laying on of Saint Paul's hands, and he is resolve, that Saint Paul alone
did it, because of that Exhortation, Stir up the grace of God which is in thee,
by the laying on of my hands. Take it in which sense you please, here is no
place left at Ephesus for a Lay-Presbytery.

No nor yet in Crete; for to that end was Titus left there to ordain Elders in
every City, and in the following words the Apostle tells what manner of persons
they must be, Tit. 1.5.7.
who were to be ordained; and what their office to be, Bishops; for a Bishop
must be blameless; these Elders then at Crete must be Bishops; not then of the
Laity.

And if you shall consider what these Elders were to do at Crete and Ephesus,
you will easily conceive that many of them fell not within a Lay-mans capacity.
If any man did (...), preach any other doctrine then that was sound, the
Ephesian Elder must prohibere; 1 Timothy 1.4. 2 Timothy 2.16. Tit. 1.9.
if preach profanely or babblingly, he must cohibere, restrain him. At Crete
the ordained Elder must have ability (...), to convince the gainsayers, and
that (...), with force of Argument. Tit. 1.10.13.
For particulars, if any preach otherwise than becomes him, (...), his mouth
must be stopped, they must be reproved (...), taken up short, Tit. 2.15.
with all authority. Say in good sooth, whether you conceive these to be the
Works of a Layman; I wish all Clergymen were ad haec idonci. But I fear few
are. Lastly, the rod, power of excommunication was in the hand of Saint Paul's
Elders, which I shall never yield to be in your Lay Elders.

But were the Word of God in this point indifferent, which for ought I see is
yet very resolute against them: the general consent of all antiquity, that
never to your sense expounded Saint Paul's words, nor never mention d one
Lay-Presbyter to govern the Church, is to me a strong rampire against all these
new devices. And here did I list, I could press you down with a whole load of
fathers and Councils; but I spare you, for I fear you would cast them off with
some scorn. The Catalogue you shall have, if you desire it; For my part, I
shall close up this point with the words of a wise learned man; Bilson's
preface to the Government of the Church.
I like not to raise up that Discipline from the dead, which has lien so long
(if it ever lived) in silence by your own confession; which no father ever
witnessed, no Council ever favored, no Church ever followed since the Apostles
times till this our age. I can be forward in things that be good; but not so
foolish, as to think that the Church of Christ never knew what belonged to the
government of her self, till now of late; and that the Son of God has been
spoiled of half of his Kingdom (as you use to speak) by his own servants and
citizens, for these one thousand five hundred years, without remorse or
remembrance of any man, that ever so great a wrong was offered him. You must
show me your Lay-Presbytery in some Ancient Writer, or else I shall avouch
plainly, your Consistory, as you press it, is a Novelty.

And yet I shall add one thing more by way of Apology; for I would not be a
stumbling block to you in the least; That I have made use of the common
distinction, Lay and Clergy, and Presbyters or Elders of both sorts. I have
been forced to it, because I could not otherwise speak intelligibly and
distinctly enough in this point. And that in this I speak in the language of
the Ancientest of the fathers; so speaks Clemens in that famous Epistle to the
Corinthians, so cried up by antiquity; and lately set forth by Master Patrick
Young. Clem. Romans Ep. 1. ad Cor. Ignat. ad Philip. ad Magnes. Just. Martyr.
Apolog. 2. prope finem.
(...) So Ignatius, (...); and again, (...), and yet again, (...). So Justine
Martyr, (...). So the Canons attributed to the Apostles; Si quis Clericus
abscindens seipsum, etc. Can. 22. Laicus seipsum abscindens, etc. Can. 23.

Tertull. de prescript. In exhortat. ad castitatem.
Tertullian. Hodie Presbyter, cras Laicus; and again, nisi Laici observent, per
quae Presbyteri allegantur. I should trouble you to reckon up infinite variety
of other testimonies down-ward. By these it sufficiently appears, that these
two terms Presbyters and Laics, were opposite terms; so that Presby ers were
not Laymen, nor Laymen Presbyters; they were m^mbra dividentia, and it is a
Logic rule, that membra dividentia must be (...), so disjoynd, that they never
interfeer; which will not be so, if Presbyters and Laymen may be affirmed of
the same person. What should I tell you, that if you approve not this
distinction of the Primitive Church, you may read it plainly in the Prophets;
so that it is not profane, nor strange. Isaiah 24.2. It shall be as with the
people, so with the Priest; Hosea 4.9. There shall be like people, like Priest.
And also Jeremy divides the Church into Prophet, Jerome. ad Nepotia^.
Priest, and People, cap. 23.34. and cap. 26.7. As for the Clergymen, Jerome
shall give you the reason of the name; propterea vocantur Clerici, vel quia
sunt de sort Domini, vel quia ipse Dominus sors, i. e. pars Clericorum, either
they are the Lords portion to do service in the Church of Christ, or that the
Lord is their portion and part; that is, to live on such things that are
dedicated to the Lord. And thus have I stopped two gappes with one bush.

Proposition 5. That these Presbyters, Teaching and Ruling Elders must be of
the Professing Members own voluntary Election, and regular Ordination.
Of the Presbyters, Teaching and Ruling Elders, as you call them, I have spoken
hitherto; Now of that which you require in them, which are, 1. That they be of
the Professing Members voluntary Election. 2. That they have their Ordination
frnm them, and that it be Regular. In neither of which I can assent to you.

1. Of Election of Presbyters and Ruling Elders.
THe Debate about Elections of Church-Ministers, cannot be better determined
than by the Scriptures; let us look then, how it was ab initio. I find three
sorts of Election mentioned in the New Testament; By the Spirit, by lots, by
voices.

1. By the Spirit speaking in his own person, were Paul and Barnabas called
from Antioch to preach to the Gentiles. By the Spirit speaking in the Prophets,
Acts 13.2. 1 Timothy 4.14.
was Timothy designed; Neglect not the grace which was given thee by prophecy,
with imposition of the hands of the Presbytery. And again, 1 Timothy 1.18.
This commandment I commit to thee according to the Prophesies, that went
before of thee, that is, by direction of the Holy Ghost, and not by voices, as
Oecuminius, Theodoret, Chrysostom, Throphylact, expounds the place. For this
kind of Election was usual in the Apostles times, the Spirit of God directing
them on whom they should lay their hands. By that Spirit were Peter and John
directed on whom they should lay their hands at Samaria. And so was Paul at
Epheses, when he laid the foundation of that Church; so that he might truly
say, Take heed to the flock, Act. 20.
whereof the Holy Ghost has made you overseers. For it was the Holy Ghosts
doing to notify unto Paul the persons that should receive imposition of hands,
and to pour out his wonderful blessings on them, to make them meet Pastors
and Prophets, whereto he had chosen them.

Yea, this dured some time after Paul's death, as Eusebius reports, Eusebius. lib.
3. cap 23. ex. Clem. Alex.
even in the time of John the Apostle; for after his return out of Patmos to
Ephesus, being requested, he went to the Churches adjoining; some were
appointing Bishops, some were setting whole Churches in Order, some were (...).
i. d. Supplying the Clergy with such men as were signified or marked out for
that purpose by the Spirit. Or if you read it as Hanmer translates it choosing
by lot, then this was done to avoid ambition and contention: however it was of
those who were (...), and so the mixed multitude chose not whom they pleased.

2. For secondly, by lot, I grant it might be done, and then Saint John
followed the pattern in the Election of Matthias to the Apostolate; Act. 1.
which is the sole example, that can be given in Scripture in this kind. And in
this the people could have no voice, if you will weigh the circumstances of the
Text. For first the company that were then present were only one hundred and
twenty, of which eleven were Apostles, seventy two disciples, Ver. 15.14.
diverse women, with Mary the mother of Jesus; now if you deduct eighty three,
and the women out of one hundred and twenty, what a small remnant will there be
of the people left to vote. Secondly, it is recorded indefinitely; they
appointed two not determinately expressing who they were, Ver. 23.
and so it might be the Apostles alone, or the Apostles and disciples together
for ought any man can say to the contrary. Thirdly, make what can be made of
it, yet here is no more than presentation which falls very short of Election;
for it is written they presented the two. Fourthly, they committed the Election
to God, Show whether of the two thou have chosen: Ver. 24.
and so it was reason; for the place to which one of them was to be advanced,
Gal. 1.1, 17, 18, etc.
was an Apostles place; and an Apostle might not be chosen by men, but by God
alone.

And here to remove a mistake, I shall entreat you to observe this distinction;
that the name of an Apostle has a double acception. 1. In a strict sense, for
an eyewitness of our Saviors actions, life, death, and one immediately
chosen and sent by God, and so there were no more but twelve. Whence says
Peter, Act. 1.20, 21.
of these men that have accompanied with us all the time, that the Lord Jesus
went in and out among us; -- Must one be ordained to be a Witness: 2. Or else
the name of an Apostle is more largely extended, for an instructed Witness,
and sent by the Apostles, Phil. 2.25.
who yet had that honorary name; so Epaphroditus is called the Apostle of the
Philippians; Judas and Silas are so termed; Titus and others, 2 Cor. 8.23. and
James the brother of our Lord is called an Apostle, Gal. 1.19. He was not
Jacobus Alphei, nor Jacobus Zebedei, and therefore none of the twelve; and 1
Cor. 15. this James is named as distinct from the twelve; for there it is
written, that Christ appeared to the twelve, then to five hundred brethren at
once; after to James. In the first sense no man ever did, ever could choose an
Apostle; for they had an immediate vocation, and immediate mission. In the last
sense there is not a syllable in the Scripture of their Election by the people.
Perhaps, for so it is recorded by Dorotheus, that they were of the seventy; but
when they were advanced and authorized to be Apostles, that is, Bishops in the
latter sense, the Apostles only elected them, and imposed hands on them.

3. Hitherto we hear not a word of any Election by the Professing Members to
the work of the Ministry; let us then come to the third way, which was by
voices; and let us consider whether we can find it that way. It is most true,
that the Election of the seven Deacons was referred to the multitude; and to
this purpose your text is rightly cited, Acts 6.5. But this proves not what you
would infer from it; for by this choice, the Deacons received not the charge
of the Word and Sacraments, but a care to see the Saints provided for; and the
collections and contributions faithfully and uprightly employed; Hieron. ad
Evagrium. Epiphan. 4. Conc. Carth. cap. 4.
they were only mensarum and viduarum Ministri. (...), consecrated to a
service, not to a priesthood. And among you for ought I know, the Deacons have
no other office than the care of the poor. And then I pray, what can this place
make for the Election of the Presbyters, and Ruling Elders by the people? Are
these no more but Deacons, Officers of Tables and Widows? That the people
should Elect these there was great reason; for they were to be Stewards and
Dispensers of their Charity; and therefore to stay the murmr that might arise
of partiality in them, and suspicion of any unjust dealing, they advised the
multitude to choose their own Almoners. The Churches treasure was laid at the
Apostles feet to be distributed as every one had need; they left it, Acts. 2.
Acts 4.
in all likelihood, in the hands of converted Jews to be distributed; these
regarded the Widows that were Jews, more than the Hellenists; this caused the
(...) the murmr; To cease this, the Apostle bespeaks the multitude to
consider, Acts 6.1. Ver. 3. Ver. 5. Ver. 6.
(...), of fit men for that service. They did so, and (...), they chose out
seven, and (...) they presented or set out these before the Apostles, that is
all. It was but a presentation, so that it seems as yet it was in the Apostles
power to admit or refuse even these. But they accepted of their presentation,
and with prayer laid their hands on them for the Office; which was at the
highest a dispensation of money, and no cure of souls. No hurt then can be done
to our tenet by this Election, since as they who urge it, confess they were
not in orders; and therefore what has this example to do for the Professors
Election of Presbyters or Ruling Elders?

Yea, but you will say, the other text you cite, Acts 14.23. Acts 14.23.
will strike it dead; but upon a serious view nothing less. For thus we read
there (...), etc. Ordaining them Elders in every Church. This word is a
participle, and must agree with somewhat; and if you look before, it was Paul
and Barnabas; the word (...) signifies not to Elect, but to Ordain; of which
more by and by. The Ordainers were Apostles, Paul and Barnabas; the Ordained
Presbyters; here is not so much as a syllable of the people, no mention of any
act of theirs. This then is so plain a perverting of the text, that I hope no
wise man will ever more object it. The truth is, the Apostles imposed hands to
make Pastors and Prophets in the Churches as they traveled, popular Elections
they made none. For your other texts, I shall consider apart, because they are
not directly to this purpose.

Thus I hope I have made it appear, that there is not any firm ground, I had
almost said any color for Election of Presbyters or Ruling Elders by the
Professing Members of the Church in the Scriptures.

Yea, but did not then the People choose their Pastor in the primitive ages of
the Church? To gratify you, I confess they did: but this was after the
Apostles days, and then Scripture must not be urged for it. It was not a
privilege, that belongs to them of right, but out of convenience; and was
derived from the rules of Christian equity and society. Hence it came to pass,
that the people when their desires were accomplished did quietly receive,
willingly maintain, diligently hear, and heartily love their Pastors. And
could the people have tempered their grief, when their desires were crossed,
their interest in Electing their Pastor had been better regarded, and longer
continued: But experience of their Schisms, Factions, Tumults, Uproars,
Murders, if they might not have their wills, caused both Ancient fathers and
Councils to mislike that the people should bear the sway in these Elections,
and forced Christian Princes, if not wholly to exclude them, yet greatly to
abridge them. I could if I pleased give you in a long list of examples of both
kinds, both of whom, when, where, and how long the custom of their Election
continued; and by whom, and upon what occasions abridg'd: But I spare you. This
in a word; when they did Elect, it was not by any Scripture-right, and at most
it was no more than a presentation; and it lay in the power of those in
Authority to refuse the presented, which was sometimes done. And the emergent
mischiefs took it away; which it never could have done, had it been a command
of God. Now that it is possible, that such mischiefs may arise, and frequently
do arise from popular Elections, I appeal to your conscience, who have been an
Eyewitness of it in New England.

One thing I shall add more; that you, I mean your Combinational Churches in
Old-England, should of all other press upon us popular Elections, makes me
wonder, since it is your practice to eject Pastors approved by their people;
and by the approvers from above to settle other over their Congregations. Tell
me I pray, what vote has the people in any of these? If this be not to break
your rule, and to practice what you declaime, I must profess I understand
nothing. But (...). I conceive what you may answer, but I will not now reply to
it.

2. The other part of your Proposition is; that these Presbyters and Ruling
Elders be of the Professing Members Regular Ordination.
THat the Presbyters and Ruling Elders in the sense above given of them, have a
Regular Ordination, is necessary, but that they shall have this Ordination from
or by the Professing Members, I cannot yield.

That Ordination is an act of the Keys, I suppose is an axiom that will be
granted on all hands. For otherwise, your Professing Members can have no right
to Ordain, who make their claim to it, because they are subjectum clavium.
Rutherfords plea for Presbytery. Sect. 6.
But that they are not so, Rutherford and B^res demonstrate: whence it will
necessarily follow, that they cannot ordain Presbyters and Ruling Elders.

Before he proves the minor, he thus distinguishes The power of the Keys is
given to the Church of believers two ways. First, As to the end and object;
and thus we acknowledge the Keys may be given to the whole Church, because it
is the object upon which the power of the Keys is to be exercised; for what
have we to do to judge those that are without? and then it was the end why
Christ gave the Keys, 1 Cor. 5.
he gave some to be Apostles, etc. for the perfecting of the Saints, etc.
Secondly, The Keys may be said to be given to them who are the subject; Ephesians.
4.
that is, to such in whom the power does rest to use them, and who have
authority to weild them, and in this sense the believers in the whole body is
not the formal subject of the Keys, neither may they authoritatively use them.

And this is demonstratively thus proved. For that which is primum and proprium
subjectum, cum suo accident reciprocatur; The attribute agrees to it primo,
Rutherford. p. 12.
per se, adaequate, (...) as rationale or risibile agrees to man, all these
ways: so that a man only is the first and adequate subject of reason or
laughter, and consequently every individual man reasonable and risible. To
apply this to my purpose, if the body of any visible Congregation be the
adequate and proper subject of the Keys, the power must of right belong to
every individual of that Congregation; so that every one has a power to use
them; women, young men and all: for quod competit (...), competit (...), but
such a power I dare say, you will not put into women and childrens hands. Then
you must not make the whole Church the subject of the Keys, but that some
Professing Members have the keys in their hands and that these only have power
to ordain.

Now let us enquire who these Ordainers must be; You say your Presbyters, and
if I mistake not, ruling Elders* We say Bishops, Austin in Psalm. 22.
or at least Bishops with their Presbytery. As Augustine said excellently in
another case, so say I in this. Fratres sumus, quare litigamus? non intestatus
mortuus est pater; fecit testamentum and mortuus est; tam^iu contenditur de
haereditate mortuorum quamdiu testamentum profetatur in publicum, and cum
testamentum prolatum fuerit in publicum, tacent omnes, ut tabulae aperiantur
and recitentur; judex intentus audit, advocati silent, praecones silentium
faciunt, universus populus suspensus est, ut legantur verba mortui non
sentientis in monumento. I^c sine sensu jacet in monumento, and valent verba
ejus: Sedet Christus in caelo, and contradicitur ejus testamento. Aperi,
legamus; fratres sumus, quare contendimus? pl cetur amicus noster, non sine
testamento nos dimisit pater. And for this Will, the search will not be long,
nor the trouble much; it is extant, John 20.21. As my Father sent me, so send I
you; and presently he enstates them in the power of the Keys: Whose sins you
remit, they are remitte^, etc. John 20.23. Matthew. 28.20.
And this power was to be perpetual, to remain and continue till his second
coming; for these are his last words; Lo, I am with you always unto the end of
the world. With them personally he could not be; for the Apostles are dead;
this promise then must be made good to them and their Successors.

They then questionless had the Keys: which consisted in Jurisdiction, and
Ord^nation, of which I am now to speak. And out of our Fathers testament I
shall show you how they used it. Act. 8.14, 17.
Peter and John were sent down by the Apostles from Jerusalem to Samaria to lay
their hands on them that should receive the Holy Ghost. Philip preached and
baptizd, but he could not give the graces of the Holy Ghost by imposition of
hands, to make fit Pastors and Teachers for the work of the Ministry. The like
we find of Paul and Barnabas in the forecited place, Acts 14.23. who visited
the Churches where they had preached, and supplied them with Presbyters (...)
Wh re it were absurd to say, that this was done by lifting up of the hands of
the people, since it was the work of Paul and Barnabas alone. And by the way,
Act. 10.41.
though (...) does sometimes signify extensio manuum, yet always it does not
so; for Acts 10.41. we thus read, That God showed Christ openly after he was
raised, not t^ all the people, but unto Witnesses, (...) ordained by God: and I
could show you that (...) is (...), in a hundred places of the Greek fathe^s
and Councils. But to let this pass I go on, 2 Timothy 1.6. Tit. 1.5.
Timothy was ordained by Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 1.6. and Titus by him left in Crete
to Orda^n: and therefore Ordained himself. For nihil dat quod non habet. All
these Ordinations we find in the Scriptures by the Apostles themselves.

2. Now if you shall demand by whom these Ordinations were performed
afterward? I shall answer you, by their successors. Yea, but who were they? I
answer, that it being a matter of fact and story, later than the Scripture can
reach to, it cannot be fully satisfied or answered from thence any further than
the persons of Timothy and Titus, Epaphroditus, etc. and the several Angels of
the seven Churches, (who by all the Ancients are acknowledged to be single
persons, that had power over all other in those Churches) but will in the full
latitude through the universal Church in those times be made clear by the next
and best evidences we have, viz. From the consent of the Greek and Latin
fathers, who generally resolve, that Bishops were those Successors. So writes
Clemens, Ignatius, Iraeneus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Theodoret, Hilary,
Chrysostom, who not? Whose Testimonies shall be produced with a wet finger.

And one part of their Offices in the Church was to Ordain. This is manifest
first in Timothy, in the Church of Ephesus, Acts 20. There were many Presbyters
before Timothy was appointed their Bishop, yet Saint Paul sent him of purpose
to impose hands; 1 Timothy 5.22.
and say it was with the Presbytery; yet it can never be proved that any of
that College was no more than a Professing Member. You know how strongly all
the Presbyterians plead for the contrary; and was this injunction only
personal, and to end with Timothies life? 1 Timothy 6.13, 14
Not so neither. For this charge he lays upon him in fearful words; I charge
thee in the fight of God, who quickens all things, and before Jesus Christ,
who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession, that thou keep this
Commandment without spot, unrebukable, till the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ. It Is agreed by all, that Saint Paul in this Epistle especially sets an
order for the Government of the Church, 1 Timothy 5.22.
among which, that a Bishop lay not hands hastily upon any man is one. This
then was not Temporary, but to last till the end of the world.

That they were to Ordain is every whit as plain in Titus; for, for that
intent he was left in Crete. Neither would the Church succeeding admit of any
other but Bishops to that business for one thousand five hundred years, Tit.
1.5.
as I will prove unto you, if you require it by unpregnable records. Two
evidences there are of it beyond exception. First, the condemning Aerius as an
Heretic for opposing Episcopal power. Secondly, that if any one of an
inferior rank presumed to ordain, his act was reversed by the Church as
unlawful, and the ordained admitted no otherwise to the Communion than as a
Layman. As it befell Ischyras, and those who were ordained by Maximus and
another blind Bishop, Athanas. apol. 2 Greg. Presb. in vita Nanz. Conc.
Constant. 2. cap. 4. Conc. Hisp. 2. cap. 5. and 7.
and others in the Church story.

I beseech you now, if you little regard the Fathers and Councils, yet view the
Scriptures with an unpartial eye, and then if the Commission our Savior gave
his Apostles, or the Apostles to their successors: if the practice of the
Apostles themselves, or Apostolical men can any whit move, consider whether the
Presbyters or Ruling members ought to be of the professing members regular
ordination. Make it plain that the power of the Keys is subjective,
formaliter, inhaesive, authoritative in them, and I yield you the whole cause.

Your sixth Proposition, that their Office extent (understanding by that the
Ministry which Christ ordained in his Church) must reach from Christ's Ascension
to the Creations dissolution, I easily grant. I shall therefore say nothing to
that, but come to examine your proofs out of Scripture. And here I could have
wished that you had applied every text to that part of the Proposition you
intended it. For it had been far easier for me to have judged of the
validity of it, and more readily have shaped my answer; whereas now I can but
rove at it, and therefore if I mistake, you must thank your self.

The texts alleged.
Acts 6.5. and 14.23. I suppose you refer these to the first part of the
fifth proposition for election by Church Members, and I have answered them
already, and shall therefore spare my labor.

The other, if I be not mistaken, are to prove your Teaching and Ruling Elders,
Romans 12.7, 8. 1 Cor. 12.8.28. Ephesians. 4.7.14. Rev. 4.6. and 5.6. and 19* 4.

But among these I find not one text to prove your Presbyterial or
Combinational Church: nor your regular Ordination by professing members.

The Text then out of the Romans, Corinthians, Ephesians, and the Revelations I
am to examine, and see how they will conclude what you intend.

Romans 12.7, 8.
Or ministry, let us wait on our ministry, or he that teaches on teaching,
or he that exhorts on exhortation, he that gives let him do it with
simplicity, he that shows mercy with cheerfulness.

The words are Elliptical, and therefore must be supplied from the former
verses. The Apostle being to deliver diverse precepts, first gives a
signification of his power, verse 3. Then he prescribes in general (...). To
every one God as he pleases gives a measure of his gifts, and therefore no man
ought to arrogate to himself more than he ought; for this were absurd, as if in
the body one part should assume and usurp the faculties of another; for to that
purpose he makes use of that comparison of a natural body, verse. 4, 5. As then
the parts of the natural body have their proper endowments, so also have the
several members of Christ's several graces bestowed on them by God, and these
gifts must be employed for the benefit of the whole, and the parts; he thus
infers, verse 6. Having then (...), freely and graciously bestowed, he shows
how we must bestow them. And then he reckons up these gifts, these (...).
First, prophecy. Secondly, (...), Ministry. 3. Ability to teach. 4. A faculty
to exhort or comfort. 5. A heart and power to give. 6, Wisdom to govern. 7.
Bowels of mercy. These are the (...), those Gratuito's, those talents we have
received from our Lord, and they must be laid out for his honor, for our
brethrens good. This I conceive to be the prime intention of the Apostle in
this place, for he expressly names gifts, and not men.

But because these gifts must upon necessity be exercised by men, therefore he
intimates on whom they are bestowed more peculiarly, not all gifts to one man,
neither is one man by God sitted always for all gifts. One man he calls to be
a Prophet, and gives him a gift to foretell things to come, or to interpret the
Scriptures; let him then interpret according to the Analogy of faith, not add,
nor diminish, nor alter at his pleasure. To another he has given a gift to
teach, let him aptly and in easy, plain, intelligible words explain the will
of God, and teach them he ought. To a third he has given an admirable faculty
to stir up and move another to the actions of piety, or else to be a Barnabas,
a son of consolation, in raising and comforting an afflicted and oppressed
soul; let him use this exhortation, exhibit this comfort as occasion is
required. To a fourth God has been graciou, and gifted him with wealth and
riches; of these he is to impart a portion (...), ingenuously, liberally,
freely, simply, without any doubting either in respect of persons, or a regard
to his own profit. Upon another is bestowed a gift by which he s made a fit man
(...), Numb. 10.17.
to be over others (you know that God took of Moses spirit and put it on the
seventy Elders) and he that has this gift, must use it with diligence. Lastly,
it is a touch of the Spirit when a man is (...) of compassionate bowels; his
abilities yet may be small to help the indigent members of Christ Jesus, and
his own necessities may retard him, and make him murmur at the duty of alms.
Well, what he can spare, yet let him give, though it be but two mites, and when
he bestows it, let it be given with a good heart, for hilarem datorem amat
Deus. 2 Cor. 9.7.


I have not strained the text one jot, and you may see how naturally all this
does follow, if you refer it to that of which the Apostle began to speak, the
(...) that God gives to several members of his Church. Whereas if you follow
those who are of your mind, the interpretation will be forced, and very
improper; For then we must have seven several functions here set down in the
Church of God distinguished by these gifts. Next you must prove that the (...),
these gifts of the Spirit belong to the Officers of the Church only, and not
to the rest of the faithful, which I know you dare not say, it is so
contradictory to Scripture, when we read of other that did prophecy, Acts
21.9. 1 Cor. 11.5. Acts 18.26. 1 These. 5.11. 1 Pet. 4.10. 1 Timothy 3.4. Luke 6.36.
that did teach, that must exhort and edify, that are bound to distribute and
minister, to rule, and to show mercy as well as Church Officers. Yet further we
must know whether these offices must be distinct and remain divided, or else
may meet in one person; if they must remain distinct, no Prophet may teach or
exhort, no Ruler may give or show mercy: if they may meet and agree in one
subject, then are they no Offices, but graces, and he that has one may have
all, and so you are further from your purpose in concluding any thing from this
place than you were before. Lastly, make them Ecclesiastical functions if you
list, but then you must appropriate them; and then not any one of them can be
atributed to Lay-persons.

That which I fasten upon here I know is (...), He that rules, for thence you
would collect you Ruling Elders. A very strange inference, and illogical; it is
as if you should argue a genere ad speciem, as thus, est animal; ergo est homo;
est substantia, ergo est corpus; est arbor, ergo est quercus, when you know
it is a certain truth in reason, that A genere ad speciem non valet argumentum.
For thus you must argue out of this place. It is a Church Ruler that Saint Paul
means in this place, (which is very doubtful too) but if granted, then by your
Logic it must be the Lay-Ruling Elder which you intend; whereas you know that
we assign you other Ruling Elders that are no Laymen: and among you even your
Pastors bear rule too, and so may be understood in this place, rather than
those other. There is then no necessity that (...), in this place must be your
Lay-Ruling-Elder, and then you conclude nothing. And as little can you gather
from the next place you bring out of the Corinthians, which is indeed parallel
to this, and gives light to it.

1 Cor. 12.8. and 28.
For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of
knowledge by the same spirit. Verse 8.
I profess a blind man may see as much in this verse as I do, that makes to
your purpose; I go on then to the 28. And God has set some in the Church,
first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles,
then the gifts of healings, helps, Verse 28.
governments, diversities of tongues.

First, I shall give you the judgment of a grave Expositor on this place,
though an adversary. Apostolus hic non agit de gradibus hierarchicis; alioquin
Pastores, Presbyteros, Diaconos praetermittere non debuisset; Estius in locum
sed recenset quaedam Ecclesiae membra praecipuis Spiritus sancti (...)
insignia, sive constitutae sint in ordine hierarchico, five non.

Secondly, that this place cannot be understood of the functions of the Church,
will be evident these two ways. 1. Teachers are here expressed, but Pastors
are omitted, and therefore might Governors (the word you catch at) be
mentioned in stead of Pastors. If this satisfy not, then tell me, what
functions can you call these that follow in the Church of Christ? are Miracles,
that is, power to work miracles, gifts of healing, a faculty to speak diverse
tongues, functions and offices? Ornaments I shall grant you they were of the
Pastoral calling, and so was ability to govern. To rule wisely is a great gift
of the holy Ghost, and more needful than the other. To the government of the
Church belongs more than censuring of manners, and examining witnesses; wisdom
to prevent dangers, to direct doubtful cases, to discern spirits, to calm
strifes, is requisite, which rarely are eminent in your Lay Elders. Besides,
pray consider, that if in this place you should make your Governors distinct
from the Apostles, the Apostles themselves could not qua Apostoli, be
Governors, which I hope you will not say. Had not the Apostles, Prophets,
Teachers, power in the Church to do miracles, to heal, to speak with tongues?
If these three be no diverse offices, but graces, and all three found in every
Apostle, in some Prophets, and Teachers, then why should not government also
that is reckoned in the midst of them be a gift also of the holy Ghost,
bestowed on such Prophets, Pastors and Teachers, whom the Spirit of grace and
truth would vouchsafe to honor?

This is my first reason, and my second will be clearer by reflecting upon the
gifts of the Spirit, of which we have a list in this chapter, and comparing
them with the functions. Let us then number the gifts of the Spirit, and see
whether the public functions can be proportioned to them. 1 Cor. 12. Verse 8.
To one says the Apostle, is given by the Spirit the word or reason of
wisdom; to another the word of knowledge according to the same Spirit; to
another faith by the same Spirit; 9.
to another (...) the gifts of healing by the same Spirit; to another (...),
the powerful working of miracles, or the operation of great works; out to
another prophecy; but to another discerning or judgment of spirits; but to
another diverse kinds of tongues; but to another the interpretation of tongues;
but all these (...) works evidently one and the same spirit, 10.
dividing (...), prpperly or severally to every man, 11.
as he will. Here are nine gifts of the holy Ghost numbered in verse 28. we
meet with two more, (...), and (...), 28.
undertaking or helping, and governing; in the forecited place to the Romans
are five different from these, ministering, exhorting, teaching, giving, showing
mercy. In all sixteen. I hope you will not say there must be so many distinct
Offices and functions in the Church. For so it may happen that the offices may
exceed the number of the officers, and so every one must have more than two of
them, Robinsons Justif. p. 107. and p. 111.
three at least, or else the Church shall nor be supplied. For put case that
Robinsons words be true, that a company consisting, though but of two or three
gathered by a Covenant made to walk in the ways of God known unto them, is a
Church, and so has the whole power of Christ, Answer to the 32. Quest. p. 43
even the same right with two or three thousand. Generally you know it is
received among you, that seven will make a full and perfect Congregation, and
that the association of these few thus separate by a Covenant, is the essential
form of the Church. Which if true, then is it not possible to find so many
distinct functions in the Church, because in so small a number, there cannot be
found men for them. Let it be then granted, that the Apostle in this chapter
speaks of diversities of gifts, not of functions, and the sense will be clear.
Apostles there were then in the Church, and they had all these gifts in a
greater measure than any other. Prophets there were and Teachers, and to these
the Spirit divided the gifts as he pleased, in what measure, and to what
persons he best liked; to one to work miracles, to another to heal, to help
and comfort, to guide and govern, to speak tongues, to interpret tongues as
might best serve to gather the Saints, to plant the Church.

I must profess unto you, that I have both now and heretofore looked into this
text with as quick an eye as my weakness would give leave, and could never yet
find it in any thing that made for your Ruling Elders. No, you perhaps will
say, do you not find here (...), governments? Yes, I do, but will it thence
follow that it must upon necessity be the government of the Lay-Ruling-Elders
you dream of? Why might not the Apostles, the Prophets, the Teachers here
mentioned by the Apostle be those Governors here intended for ought you know?
Of them the other gifts were verified, and why not then this also? They could
work miracles, they could heal, they could help and comfort, they could speak
all languages, and interpret tongues; what should now hinder but they might by
the same Spirit be endowed with the gift of government also? Which if it fall
out to be true, as it indeed did, (yet the Apostles either by themselves, or by
those they placed in the Churches which they planted, who were Bishops, and
only Bishops exercised the jurisdiction) you shall never be able to conclude
out of this or any other place of Scripture, that the Governors of the
Churches were a distinct company from the Pastors, which is I know, that you
drive at.

But to gratify you a little, I shall here willingly yield you more than I
need. That in the Apostolical Church and after till Constantines time, there
might be certain men chosen by common consent of the Church to judge of all
civil debates, that might arise betwixt man and man; you perhaps would call
these Governors, I should rather call them Arbitratours, because they had no
coactive power to compel any Christian to stand to their Arbitration farther
than they would bind themselves. And in case that any were refractory and
obstinate, the Pastor might and did make use of the Church-Key, and debar
him from the participation of Christian privileges, so that he was by them
esteemed no better than a Heathen or Publican. 1 Cor. 6.1, etc.


And now I will show you the ground of my conjecture, it is out of Saint Paul's
words; Dare any of you having an action against another, a Christian he means,
go to Law before the unjust, and not before the Saints? Paul did not debar
the Magistrates that were Infidels of their jurisdiction, nor create new Judges
or Governors for civil offenses in the Church; it was beyond his calling and
commission to do either of them; but when he perceived the Christians for
private quarrels pursued each other before unbelievers to the great shame and
scandal of Christian profession, he says, Ver. 7.
they were better to suffer loss, to take wrong, to be defrauded. Ver. 4.5.
But if this would not satisfy, if yet there were who would be contentious,
then he wills them to choose if not the wisest, yet the lest esteemed among
them in the Church to arbitrate their causes, rather than to expose themselves
and their profession to the mocks and taunts of Heathen and Profane Judges.

These Arbitratours you may call Governors if you please; but properly they
were not so, because they were chosen either by consent of the Litigants, or
else appointed as I am induced to opine, by the choice of the Church for that
purpose, but they could not interpose themselves as Judges authorized by
Christ; because he himself as Mediator claimed no such power, would use none.
Luke 12.24.
You know his answer to the brother that moved him to divide the inheritance,
Man who made me a Judge or Divider among you?

Now grant that all this be true, and that such Governors began betime and
continued long in the Church, even until the Conversion of the Heathen
Emperors: Can you hence conclude, that they must upon necessity continue
still? no such matter. For the Civil power and the Sword is in the Magistrates
hand, and he is to take up all debates betwixt man and man; of these then there
is no use. From these then to argue, that there must be Lay Ruling Elders in
the Church is a fallacy, since the causes they were to dcide were other, and
their Authority by Church-right none at all. A d such, it is probable, may be
found in the Scriptures and in the Church-story, but never any other Ruling
Elders invested with the power of the Keys, except in Orders.

I have been long upon this place to the Corinths, but it was because I would
leave no scruple unsatisfied. That I be not tedious of it I will add no more,
but consider your next proof which you bring out of the Epistle to the
Ephesians.

Ephesians Chap. 4. Verse 7. and Verse 14.
Ver. 7.
But to every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of
Christ.

Ver. 14.
That we henceforth be no more children, tossed too and fro, and carried about
with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness,
whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

Now here I must confess it befell me, which happens to them who search for
gold-ore in the vaults of the earth; they open the turfe, dig, delve, labor
long to effect their desire, but at last being frustrated of their expectation,
they depart in a discontent, resolute that the metal is there, though that it
be their hard hap not to find it. This has fallen to me in the search of this
place; I opened the book, I dugge and delv'd deep with all possible endeavor
to find out the rich Mine you give notice of, but I could not light upon the
least signification of it, or the least inkling that ever it had been there.
For tell me I pray, what intimation is there in either of these verses of any
kinds of Elders, Lay or Clergy? Every one here, takes in every Inviduum of the
mystical body united in all those bonds, who have their particular grace given
according to that measure that God pleases: and these are advised to be
constant, and contend for the faith once delivered to the Saints; Jude 1.3.
not babes tossed too and fro with every wind of doctrine. No way then being
able to find what you pointed at, in a discontent at my own dullness, I was
passing off the place, but as I was departing, by chance I cast my beard upon
my shoulder, as the Spanyard speaks, and glanced my eye upon the eleventh
verse, where I met with, He gave some Apostles, Ephesians. 4.11.
some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and Teachers; and then I
had a thought to set to work again, as supposing to find what you intended.
But upon second thoughts, I found that could not be neither, 4.
because all the Officers here named extraordinary, or else ordinary,
temporary, or to continue, were of the Clergy, not a Lay-Ruling Elder among
them. In despair therefore ever to light upon what you signified I should
find, I clearly took my farewell of the place, and never stayed till I came
unto the Revelation, whether you next and in the last place send me.

Revel. 4.6. And before the throne was a sea of glass like unto Crystal: and
in the midst of the throne, and round about the throne were Four Beasts full
of eyes before and behind.

Rev. 5.6. And I beheld, and lo, in the midst of the throne, and of the four
beasts, and in midst of the Elders stood a Lamb, as it had been slain, having
seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God sent forth
into the earth.

Rev. 19.4. And the twenty four Elders and the four Beasts fell down and
worshipped God, that sat on the throne, saying, Amen, Allelujah.

This Book of the Revelation is so dark, that as King James was wont to say, it
needs another Revelation to give light to it. Out of this you have cited these
three texts, and one answer will satisfy them all; which is that you can
positively conclude nothing hence for your Ruling Elders. There be but two
words you can fix on; either the four Beasts or twenty four Elders, or else on
both; choose which you will, or both, it will much trouble you to draw your
Conclusion; the reason is, the words are subject to so many interpretations,
and none make for you.

I begin with the four Beasts, Or Animalibus rather, for it is (...).

1. The Church is Gods throne, Calvin. Hieron. Augustine. Ambrose.
wherein his Majesty rides as in a Chariot, and the four wheels of this
Chariot are the Gospels; whence some Divines make the four Evangelists these
four Beasts that draw the Chariot. Matthew is that (...) that has the face of
a man, beginning his Gospel at Christ's generation as he was man: Mark the Lion,
beginning his Gospel with the voice of John the Baptist (...), roaring as a
Lion in the Wilderness, Repent, for, etc. The Calf represents Saint Luke, for
he begins with Zacharies sacrifice. Saint John is the Eagle, for at first he
mounts to heaven, beginning with our Saviors Divinity. Napier.
This Napier makes his nineteenth proposition, and by a Metonomy he includes
all that profess and believe the Gospel.

2. Others expound it of those Orders of Angels which excel in dignity,
Couper. Beza.
and are nearer to the throne, who are generous as Lions, stout and valiant as
Bulls, prudent as Men, swift as Eagles; most able to do Gods command, and to
aid his servants.

3. Others hold that these four Beasts are the four great Prophets, Jo.
Baconth. Albertus. Aretius.
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel Daniel.

4. Some again will have signified by these four Beasts, the four great
mysteries of our Christian belief; for Christ in his Incarnation was found as a
man, in his sacrifice on the Cross as a Calfe, in his resurrection the Lion of
Judah, in his ascension an Eagle.

5. Brightman expounds it of the faithful Ministers and servants of God,
Brightman. Bailey. Lambert. 2 Cor. 5.20.
especially Pastors. But some more largely, of all faithful believers and
earnest professors of the truth in all the four quarters of the world. These
are in Gods seat, when they teach Gods people to persist in the truth, and
round about his seat, when they labor diligently to defend them from the
doctrine of devils and fallacies of hypocrites.

I remember when I spoke with you, you urged this place and the four Beasts
for your Ruling Elders, as you do here. But you see how various the judgments
of learned and pious men are upon it, and that the most of them vary clearly
from your judgment, and the last which comes nearest, does only squint that
way; for their words carry a larger sense, then you would put upon the place.
It can be no wisdom then peremptorily to conclude that from hence, which may
and has been taken By the gravest and modestest Divines in another acception.
You must demonstrate to me your interpretation to be solely true, and the mind
of the Holy Ghost before I shall yield you this place. viz. That the four
Beasts are Ruling Elders. Theologia symbolica non est argumentativa.

2. And touching the twenty four Elders, Interpreters are of many minds; Quot
homines, almost tot sententiae.

Napier.
1. Napier out of Jerome understands the twenty four books of the Law by the
twenty four Elders, and he brings Zanchy to countenance it; to which opinion he
is so fixed, that he makes it his eighteenth proposition and asserts it again
in his notes, the which says he, are clothed in white, for that in them is
found no lie, and crowned with victory, for conquering Satan, and enlarging
Gods Kingdom; but he adds that by these books Metonymice, all that profess
the doctrine of the Old and New Testament contained in the books, are to be
comprehended.

Brightman.
2. Brightman for ought I see dislikes not this opinion, but understands with
him all professors, or at the least true believers; but explains aptly the
reason of the number of twenty four. For he says, the Holy Ghost alludes to
David's order in disposing all things in the Temple and his Kingdom. The chief
Priests were distributed into twenty four orders; so the Levites that served
the Priests. 1 Chronicles. 24.18, 31. chapter 25.26. chapter 27.
The Musicians also were divided into as many, and the Dore-keepers. There were
also of every course that served the King twenty four thousand. Seeing then the
whole Congregation of Levi and the people that served the King were divided by
twenty four, it might be a shadow and type of that number who were made Kings
and Priests unto God to serve Christ; under that number, the whole people;
under this, the whole company of the redeemed are contained.

Couper.
3. And Couper says the same, that under this number the whole Church both
Militant and Triumphant is contained, though he make his allusion otherwise;
for he divides the twenty four into two halfs; the first he makes to consist of
the twelve Patriarchs from whon descended the Jews; the other of the twelve
Apostles who converted the Gentiles, the Elders then of both Nations; that is,
the professors in both were about the throne; and he proves this sense out of
the fifth Chapter. Ver. 9. where the twenty four Elders fell down before the
Lamb, Rev. 5.8.9.
having har^s in their hands, and they ^ang a new song saying, Thou art worthy
O Lord. -- For thou wast slain, and thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood
out of every kindred, and tongue, and people and Nation, 10.
and have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, etc.

Beza.
4. Beza conceives these Elders to be Prophets and Apostles. Summus judex, says
he, comitatu honorificentissimo instructus Prophetarum and Apostolorum, tum
veteris, tum novae Ecclesiae.

Greg. lib. 4 in. reg. 1. chapter 9.
5. Gregory expounds this of the Preachers of Gods holy Word, being graves
moribus, and sensu maturi.

6. But most interpret this of the Saints departed out of this world,
Bullinger. Traber^n. Marlorat.
and now reigning with the Lord Jesus in heaven. Indeed their number is without
number, chap. 7.9. But the set and certain number is put for the full and
complete number of the Saints under the Law and under the Gospel, discending I
say from the twelve Patriarchs, or begotten by the twelve Apostles. The Jews
and Gentiles with their twenty four Elders are to sit upon twenty four seats
clothed with white raiment, having on their heads crowns of gold.

I leave it now to your choice which sense to follow, and it is evident if you
will follow any of them, that your Ruling Elders can never be fetched out of
any of these. Among the company I confess they are in the Church Militant or
Triumphant, because they are professors; but in a districtive notion to call
them Elders, and prove them so from these three texts, is toto errare caelo,
that I say no worse.

Conclusio Parainetica.
All this while you have bestowed your labor in the building and erecting a
Presbyterial or Combinational Church, and having set it up as you supposed, you
have called me to view your goodly fabrique. I with heed looked upon it,
searched into the foundation, and considered the walls and columns, and at last
judged that it could not stand, because the foundation was laid in the sand,
and the pillars and supporters over-weak; the materials you have dugge out of
your own fancy, not out of the true Rock; and cemented them together with
mortar of your own making. Whether this be so or not, I leave it to them to
judge, who shall sadly weigh those stones you have collected and brought out of
the quarry of Gods book to set out this your work. You in the Acts find an
Election by the Church of Deacons; will it thence follow, that all future
Elections for Presbyters must necessarily proceed by and from their votes and
voices? or that such Election is of the necessary constitution of a Church? the
Apostles to avoid an imputation, that might be laid upon them in meddling with
many matters; and that they might attend more seriously a greater business,
suffered it to be then so done; and is it a good consequent, that therefore it
must be always done! Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders in every Church; can
any man thence rationally conclude that the Presbyters, and Teaching and Ruling
Elders must be of the Combinational Churches Regular Ordination? What, were
Paul and Barnabas of the people? or were they the Combinational Church? A
twisted cord will never draw and knit the premises and the conclusions
together. The Apostle to the Romans, to the Corinthians, gives a large
Catalogue of the gifts and graces of the Spirit; and must there therefore be so
many functions in the Church? He speaks of governments, must they be of
necessity in the hands of such governors as you suppose? In the Revelation he
mentions twenty four Elders, and will you thence deduce that they must be
necessarily such Elders as you fancy in your brains? Had all or any of these
texts enforced your conclusions; a wonder it is to me, that none of the ancient
fathers, none of the reformed Churches Barrow. Cann. Robinson. Johnson. Syons
Prerogative voted by Bailey page 35. 36. Vide etiam eundem. p. 104. 105 108,
109, etc. Bailey page 53, 54, 55.
(for you set them all by, as well as the Church of Old- England in this your
device) should out of these Mines dig such stones for the building. In
labors they were indefatigable, for piety exemplar, in judgment acute, for
learning very eminent, in defense of Religion courageous; great talents and
measures of the Spirit they no question received; content they were to hazard
all, life, limbs, goods, preferments (as many at this day do) for the truth;
and can it be conceived that the Spirit of our good God, would suffer them all
to be blinded or hood-winked in this necessary of Church Government till you
arose? It is not yet full twenty six years, since Robinson the first perswader
of this way arrived at Plymouth in New- England; from him Mr. Cotton took it
up, and transmitted it thence to Mr. Thomas Goodwin, who helped in this our
land to propagate it; you see then your Discipline has not yet the third part
of the full age of a man. It Is so youthful, that as yet the beard is not well
grown, and will you then say that all parochial, cathedral, provincial,
national, ecumenical Churches are degenerated from it? you must adorn it with
more gray hairs, and make it Apostolical (which you can never do) before any
man will believe you. Your endeavors I have frustrated by restoring the
Scriptures you produce to their genuine sense, about which I have not relied
wholly upon my own private spirit, but upon the judgment of the learned,
gravest, and most pious Divines new and old, indeed upon the concurrent
judgment of the whole Church. Tantum veritati obstr^pit adulter sensus,
Tertullian.
quantum corruptor stilus. And indeed I am possessed with such fear, when I am
to interpret the Word of God, lest I should say, thus says the Lord, when he
says it not, that in any dubious text I call for my books, turn over all
expositors I have; weigh well what is said by each, consider of their reasons;
and thence collect the conclusion, judging what was the intent of the Holy
Ghost. That yet I may mistake, it is possible; but you may see it is not
wilfully, when I take along with me such Counselors. Where it is evident to me
they did mistake, I lay them aside, yet not without some honor and veneration;
where it appears to me they were in the right, I embrace them, and bless God
that he has made them my guides. And what is there why I should not attribute
unto them as much as to any new man? If they were ancient, they were nearer the
times, Eusebius. lib. 4.22
when the Church was Virgo a pure Virgin; and therefore were better able to
judge what became her Virginity, and I am sure they never adjudged her
adulterate for her discipline. If they be new, and of the Reformers, I must say
that God has brought to pass wonderful things by their endeavors, and yet
never made them acquainted with this new light. I shall not then easily be
drawn to throw them off, and their expositions of these places of Scripture,
till I find somewhat to convince. And this conviction must not proceed from
blind guesses and conjectures. I shall yield when I find clear demonstrations,
which as yet I do not; no nor so much as probable arguments. It cannot be long,
but that you and I must stand before that great Tribunal, and because we are
both Teachers, account we must give for what we have taught, and upon what
ground we have taught it. It will not be enough for us to answer, we followed
the judgment of this or that Church, but upon what certain ground we followed
it, because we were to lead the multitude, and not to be led by them; to be
lights to others, and therefore to have light in our selves. That Caveat of our
Savior would be lad to heart, Take heed that the light within thee be not
darkness; for then how grert is that darkness? Luke 11.35 Matthew. 6.23.
This light within us is the light of conscience, and the ground of that is
science, which always flows from certain, prime, immediate, known
principles, not from probable and conjectural. If our science then be not sure
and certain, our conscience can never be well fixed; if there be blindness in
the one, there will be darkness in the other. We may mistake that for
conscience, which is but humor; fancy, a passion, animosities may seduce us,
and zeal hurry us too far; yea, perhaps the zeal of God, for that zeal is a
passion still, and the more dangerous, when not guided by knowledge. What
should I say, that the actions which conscience may persuade us to, may be an
infusion and enthusiasme of the black spirit, as it is, when many works of the
flesh come to us under the disguise of Religion and Conscience! It is with the
conscience of man, as it is with the eye of the body; be the object never so
bright and visible, if there be in the eye any thing that may impeach the
sight, either mist, or dust, or lime, the light within us will be but
darkness. False doctrine of it self, (set off sometimes by the authority of
the Teacher or by the power of some eminent followers and practisers of it, or
thickened by pride and obstinacy, always by self-love that always makes us
think our opinions the truest) is this same caligo tenebrarum, the mist that
dusks the eyes of the understanding: Cant. 3.6.
Worldly profit and wealth are the pouders of the Merchants, the dust that
tickleth the eyes, and blinds the sight of the wisest. Envy by emulation, or
prejudice of affection, or wilfulness by opposition, like lime torments the
eye, and perverts the judgment concerning the object. To what purpose you will
say is all this? you shall now see, it is that both you and I may retain a
good conscience (for when I speak to you, I speak to my self) And that I am
sure, nor you nor I shall be able to do, if either humor or fancy, or
passion, or black Enthusiasme over-sway us, or the dust of false doctrine, or
the world, or envy, or hatred, or wilfulness dim, tickle, or torment our
eyes. The Father of lights remove all darkness from us both, and guide us by
the light of his Law. For without all doubt, it can never be truly called
conscience, unless it produce his Law for its rule to direct us by in this
matter.

To conclude, I wish I might be so happy as to reclaim you, from what I
conceive is a mistake, and bring you home again as Saint John did the young man
to your mother. My prayers, Eusebius. 3. c. 23.
nor my pains shall not be wanting to effect it, might it be effected. For I
believe you are of a tender heart, and have a scrupulous soul, that smites you
for any error, as the least gritts will trouble a tender foot in a narrow
shoe; it persuades me the more, that you may lay to heart what I have written,
and the God of heaven give to it such an issue, that you may say it was a happy
hour in which you writ your Letter.

Let it not be an offense unto you, that I account you in the case of that one
sheep that strayed into the Wilderness; an innocent sheep I say; not one of
the Wolves in sheeps clothing; and this makes me go after you, to try if by any
endeavor I may bring you back again to the fold. My endeavor you know was for
that before you were quite gone; and I confess it seemed to me not to be taken
in vain, which yet puts me in some hope, that such a thing possibly may yet be
effected. Why will you remain among those whom the Apostle brands with this
mark, they separate themselves? I beseech you lend me your ears or eyes rather
with a little patience, and hear me speak; Jude Ver. 19. compared with Heb.
10.25.
it may be in voce hominis tuba Dei, Gods Trumpet at my mouth; and if you will
but listen and suffer your self to be rouzed by the shrillnesse of the sound,
you may perhaps yet make a stand, consider where you are, and retreat. The
enemy smites at your separation, the Angels would rejoice to behold you leaving
it, and return back to your Mother the Church of Old- England.

She is indeed now as the Teyle Tree, or as the Oak, when they cast their
leavet, Isa. 6.13.
yet the substance is in her. Her beauty is decayed through bitter affliction,
and her face furrowed with sorrows, there is nothing now left about her to
make her lovely; yet she is your Mother still, she washed you with water, she
gave you milk when a babe, she fed you with strong meat when a man; she
honored you with orders when grown; for a Mothers sake I crave one good look,
some pity; some regard! Why fly you from her? I cannot conceive you think her
so dishonest, as some Separatists report; or that you will fasten upon her the
name of a Whore; if you should, I should grow angry; and tell you, that in her
Constitutions she came nearest the Apostolic Church of any Church in the
Christian world; and this I openly profess to make good against any Separatist
whatsoever. Many ungracious sons I confess she had, and they brought an
aspersion upon her, and the vials of Gods wrath have been justly, justly I
proclaim poured upon her for their iniquities. The constitution was good and
sound, the execution passing through some corrupt hands too often subject to
reproof. Let not her then, who had declared her mind by rules and cautions
against all abuses, and taught what only she would have done, be charged with
her sons irregularities. Set in Gods Name the Saddle upon the right horse,
and let not your Mother bear the whole blame.

1. But if yet any will say she was blameworthy; then either it must be in
manners, doctrine or discipline. The manners of her children might be
unmannerly and unchristian; and are all the sons of your Combination been
morati? were all at Corinth so? all at Thessolonica? at Corinth there were
incestuous, factionists, etc. at Thessalonica disorderly walkers; but I read
not that the Apostle advises them for such enormous persons to separate, to
combine, and confederate into a new Congregation. Such were to be separated by
the Authority of the Church, and no man farther to separate from the Church for
these then by dislike, by disclaiming, by disallowing and discountenancing of
their evil deeds: which was done by all good men in the English Church; I never
learned yet, that corruption in good manners was a sufficient cause of
separation from a Church. Calvin disputes it strongly; Lib. 4. Instit. cap. 1.
Sect. 13, etc. will you hear Austin? There are says he, bad fish in the net of
the Lord, Austin. Ep. 48. Read Cyprian Epist. 51.
from which there must be a separation ever in heart and in manners; but a
corporal separation must be expected at the Seashore, that is, at the end of
the world; and the best fish must not tear and break the net because the bad
are with them.

2. To come to the second head, Doctrine. In this you confess that the Church
of England was not faulty, in that you approve her doctrine Catholic as
expounded by me in the Catechism: your Salvo will fall upon the third. Yet
suppose that in her doctrine there had been some error, yet this had not been
sufficient to give countenance to a separation. For it is not every light
error in disputable doctrine and points of curious speculation that can be a
just case of separation in that admirable body of Christ, which is the Church,
nor of one member from another. I shall go one pin higher.

It is not an error in a fundamental point, and yet that amounts to an heresy
by conviction, that can justify a departure. Perkins in Ep. Jude.
At Corinth there were that denied an article of faith, the resurrection. At
Galatia, they foully were mistaken in that great and fundamental doctrine of
justification; and yet the Apostle dedicates his Epistles to them as to a
Church, as to Saints, and persuades not to separation. Christ gave his natural
body to be rent and torn upon the Cross, that his mystical body might be One;
and he is no way partaker of divine Charity, who is an enemy to this Unity. Now
what errors in doctrine may give just cause of separation in this body, or the
parts of it one from another, were it never so easy to determine (as I think
it is most difficult) I would not venture to set it down in particulars, lest
in these times of discord I might bethought to open a door for Schism, which
surely I will never do, except it be as a wise man said, to let it out.

Among your Combinational Churches, this seems to me to be one of the easiest
tasks, among whom there have happened so many unhappy Schisms. Browns collected
Church that went over to Middleburge, Bailey page 14.
fell to such jarring among themselves, that they soon broke all to pieces, the
most turned Anabaptists. At Amsterdam, Ainsworth and Johnson could not agree;
page 15.
which rent the Brownist Church into three fearful Schisms: page 16.
Ainsworth excommunicating Johnson, and Johnson Ainsworth, and all his
followers and that for trifles. Mr. Smith not agreeing with his Church at
Amsterdam g^^ him to Ley in Holland, and accused his Church of Idolatry and
Anti-Christianisme; of Idolatry for looking on their Bibles in time of
preaching, and their Psalters in time of singing: Of Anti-Christianisme,
because in their Presbytery they joined to Pastors other two Officers, Doctors
and Ruling Elders.

At Leyden, Mr. Robinsons small company by divisions was well near brought to
naught. page 54. page 57. page 61. page 75. page 76. page 77. page 79.
Mr. Cotton patronized it in New- England, but fell into grievous errors and
heresies, as did the Independents of New- England. At Roterdam, Mr. Peter's
erected his Church, was the Pastor, but he was either quickly weary of them,
or they of him; and then Mr. Ward and Mr. Bridge succeeded, at what time Mr.
Simson came thither, who divided the Church upon a trifle; and Mr. Simsons
separation burst out again to another subdivision, and the Schism grew
irreconcilable. At Arnhem in the Church, the spirit of error did predominate,
and protruded most abominable errors. I have given you a taste only of these
things, that you may see what sober and grave men will be very loath to do; that
is, make a rent into the Church: your hot and fiery spirits have done even for
slight causes, almost in all your Collected Churches. It would be well
considered, what Doctrine that must be for which a man is bound to separate
from a Church, before he makes a rent.

3. And now there is nothing left but discipline, that may be a sufficient
cause of separation. And this has divided you among your selves, as well as
divided you from us. For the power of the Keys radically and originally you
place in the Congregation without any subjection to any superior; and by this
you make the Church remediless to suppress any disorder or heresy in any
other Congregation, Bailey page 109. 110, 111.
because there is no superior over them but themselves who can have authority
to restrain them, which is the cause of many Sects among us at this day.

In the Congregation you say the power is, (they may elect, ordain, depose,
excommunicate Officers) to judge and determine without any appeal. But upon the
passage and settling of the power you differ: for Johnson would give all these
acts of power to the Eldership: but Ainsworth would reserve it in the
Congregation, and adhuc sub judice lis est; though as I am informed, the common
opinion among you is, that the power of the Keys is not in the hands of the
Presbytery, but the fraternity, and so you are of Ainsworths opinion.

Of the power or Keys, I see there is no difference betwixt us; both are agreed
to what end they serve, both use them to effect that: the sole quarrel is in
whose hands they shall be put. On all sides the buzzle is, who shall be
Prelates. The Presbyterians would have them in their hands, and Johnson* fights
on their side; The Congregation stiffly wrangle for their right, and Ainsworth
and most of New- England take their part. Cotons Keys page 10. 13.
Mr. Cotton and some others, sensible of what might ensue by this just power of
the people over the Eldership, have begun to fall from Ainsworth to Johnson,
and to plead the authority of the Eldership over the brotherhood, and the
necessity of subjection of the people by divine right to the Elders, as to
their superiors. Some wiser than some; yet he has such fine evasions and
distinctions to blind and content the people, that a man would think he were
playing at hocus pocus. But be it as it will, a blind man may see that the
Prelacy is the game that they have all in chase. Now this methinks is not fair
dealing, to put down Covenant, and swear down Prelacy, and hunt after it
themselves, to cry out against others, that their whole aim is (...), lord it
over Gods inheritance, when they would be the sole Lords themselves. Now among
the heat of these contenders, the old Prelate appears and puts in his claim;
he pleads Scriptures, he pleads antiquity, and the perpetual practice of the
Church for one thousand and five hundred years. And by my consent, he that can
show best Cards for it, let him carry the game. Nor this then hereafter shall
be any just cause of separation; separation! O how I hate the syllables, the
Author of it sure was taught by the Prince of darkness, and came to some
Bolton the first Separatist hanged himself. Brown the second dyed in prison
Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
unlucky end. Unity is the child that God blesses. We all acknowledge one
Father, we all hope in one Redeemer, we serve one Lord, we are united by one
Spirit, we profess one faith, we were baptized in one water, we have but one
hope of our calling, for we all hope to meet in one heaven. Let us therefore
endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. And so the God
of peace will take delight to dwell with us, and bless us; And the Son of God
who made our peace, and left it to us, as his last Legacy, will give rest and
peace; peace of conscience and reconciliation with God, while we live here, and
eternal rest with him in heaven. Amen.

To the first part of your letter you have here my answer, and if it find
acceptance, I shall proceed to satisfy the other. First, to vindicate the
Church in general from those you call corruptions, and degenerations in her
government. And secondly, the Church of England in particular, touching those
enormities you conceive committed by her. That I have not now done it, there
are some reasons, which I will conceal.

A KEY to open the Debate about a Combinational Church, and the power of the
KEYS. The Second Part. The words of the Letter.
IN case the frequent pondering of this profitable point (which is of so much
concernment to be thoroughly versed in) should puzzle any one, that begins to
question how, where, or when did the Christian Church (which at the first was
Presbyterial and pure,) become so corrupt and polluted, as that scarce is the
sceleton, fashion or face thereof as much as to be perceived (the more is the
pity) in most places, or (as yet) amongst most professors of godliness? I was
really persuaded, that a little pains might prove not only acceptable, but
advantageous to a person that were so puzzled about the particular; for to
hear, and to have it not alone boldly and barely affirmed, but also fairly and
firmly confirmed by unanswerable arguments, that it fell to that foul and
fearful degeneration (under which it now does or should groan, and for which it
has good cause to grieve) by no fewer than five distinct degrees, whereof the
first was into a Parochial, 2. The second into a Cathedral. 3. The third into a
Provincial. 4. The fourth into a National. 5. And the fifth was into an
ecumenical, or a Roman Catholic Church.

SECT. I. The Reply.
IN this second part of your letter you propose a point I confess of greatest
concernment, and such which is most worthy of the sad and serious disquisition;
which is, how, where, and when the Church became so corrupt, polluted and
degenerate, as scarce the secleton, fashion or face thereof is to be perceived,
no not among the professors of godliness.

Good words I pray; The Reformed Churches you say cannot show it, the Prelates
cannot produce it, the Papists are at the same loss, and among the professors
of godliness, (be they who they will) the Sceleton is scarce to be perceived,
hardly the fashion, the face appears among them. And where then shall we look
for the substance, the body it self, of which, if any man be not a part, it is
but in vain to look for salvation? Since out of the Church no man can have hope
of salvation, no more than that creature had of life, who was out of the Ark of
Noah. God be merciful to us all poor Christians, if our Mother that should
nourish us, be brought to bare bones, have but a face and fashion of a Mother
and nothing else; surely she will never be able to give her children milk while
they are babes, and strong meat when they come to be men, if this be so.

Now tell me I pray, what is the case, why she is brought to this pitiful and
lamentable condition? how came she so corrupt and polluted? Oh say you, that is
quickly discerned; she is fallen from her Presbytery; for all the while she was
Presbyterial, she was pure: First, I could advise you to take heed of this
affirmative, except you put Combinational unto it. For all the Presbyterians
will catch at it, and run away with it in triumph; and where are you then,
and I believe your own party will not con you much thanks, that have given the
adversary so great advantage. Secondly, it behoved you, (since you have laid
the strength of your cause upon this word) to have demonstrated by infallible
arguments out of the Scripture, that the Church was at first governed by that
kind of Presbytery you mean, which you have not done, before you pronounced all
succeeding Churches corrupt and polluted because they degenerated from that
Presbytery. This is petitio principii, the foulest way of arguing. Thirdly,
that the most learned and modest of the Prelacy, though they will grant you a
Presbytery in the primitive Church, yet will never grant you, that from thence
the Church shall be denominated Presbyterial; or that if it should vary from
thence, that therefore it had no more than the Sceleton, fashion, face of a
true Church. All these things should have been better cast up before you had
been so positive.

The degeneration then you dream of, is grounded upon a false supposition, that
there was at first such a Presbyterial or Combinational Church, that was
conjoined in any Church Covenant beside Baptism, that had the native power of
the Keys, etc. which you never shall be able to demonstrate. The contrary to
which Rutherford has nervously proved, more particularly in his seventh
Chapter of his peaceable and temperate plea, to whom I refer you. The sum
of whose discourse is, that there were at Jerusalem, Father f. cap. 7. Conclus.
4.
at Samaria, at Ephesus, at Rome, at Galatia, at Antioch Presbyteries, (which
shall be granted) but that these Presbyteries were not of one single
Congregation. From these then you can never prove that the following Church did
degenerate, because they were not.

The manner of this degeneration you make gradual, and you give us in five
steps, descending from the Parochial till it came to the ecumenical Roman,
as you call it. But supposing a degeneration in the degrees, you are mistaken;
for as I suppose the first should be last, and the last first, which will
appear, if we examine how the Church was governed from the Apostles times to
this our unhappy age. But first I will transcribe your whole discourse.

SECT. II. The words of the Letter.
1. THE first rise of the rottening of the Church, was its falling from a pure
poor Presbyterial Church, (which in respect of its primitive constitution was
made up of living stones, namely, lively Members, and laborious Ministers,
being firmly fastened and united to the Lord Jesus as their only head by
faith: one to another by a fraternal Covenant of love, according to the pattern
that was proposed and prescribed in both Testaments, Is. 44.5. Jer. 50.5. Ezra
20.37. Zach. 11.7, 10, 14. 2 Cor. 8.5. Ephesians. 2.13, 19, 22. Col. 2.2, 19. 1
Pet. 2.5.) into an impure and unpolished parochial Church: At that time when
(ceasing to elect and ordain a Teacher, a Pastor, a Ruler, a Deacon and
Diaconesse, or a Widow in conformity to the heavenly Canon, Romans 12.7. and
15.4. and 16.1. compared with 1 Timothy 3.1. and Titus 1.5, 6.) it was well
content to admit and accept of a Parson, a Vicar, a Warden, an Over-seer of the
poor, and a Midwife. By which wisdom of the flesh, being no better then
enmity against God, within a short time after the days of the Apostles,
Christ's spiritual house and growing as well as living Temple, was turned and
transformed into a carnal and dead Town or Apostatizing Parish. The very
beginning and breeding of which Parochial Church is seen to have been in the
time of Polycarp and Irenaeus, one of them being an Elder of the Church at
Smyrna, and a disciple of John the Evangelist, and the other a Pastor at
Lions, and a disciple of that Polycarp, as any man may easily perceive, that
will peruse what is to be observed in Eusebius Ecclesiastical history. 4. lib.
c. 14.15, 16. lib. 5. cap. 23.24.

2. The second degree of the Combinational Churches corruptions was the
Cathedral Churches generation, which did presume to alter, and to elevate the
places and appellations of the Teacher, Pastor, Ruler, and Deacon, into those
unscripture-like titles of Lord-Bishop, Dean, Chancellor, and Archdeacon, who
ventured to usurp the power of excommunication against the Members and
Ministers of many Congregations in their Synods and Councels, contrary to what
was practiced in that Orthodoxe pattern, Acts 15.24. which is laid down and
left as well for the imitation, as information of after-ages; whose work it was
by Scripture-proofs to confute soul subverting positions, and to confirm
Christian-doctrines, without any manner of authority to censure any man's
person, being that that is the express privilege of the Presbyterial Church,
1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 2 These. 3.15. The babe-age of which usurpation is made mention
of, as newly appearing in the world by what was exercised by Alexander of
Alexandria against Eusebius of Nicomedia, as well as against Arius in the
reign of Constantius and Constance the sons of Constantine the Emperor, as
it is to be seen in Lib. 2. Socrat. Schol. c. 3. compared with the 32 cap. of 2
book. Evagr. lib. 1. cap. 6.

3. The third degree of the Presbyterial Churches degeneracy, was its climbing
up to the style of a Provincial Church, whose Pastor was not afrai'd nor
ashamed to assume the name and office of an Archbishop, and Metropolitan;
leaving the servile and subservient titles of Prebende, Surrogate, and
Vicar General, as terms good enough to the inferior Officers his underlings.
Of which proud and profane Pesthouse, that Austin which was sent from
Gregory, the last of good Bishops, and the first of evil Popes of Rome, is
reputed and recorded to have been the father and founder in this Land; even
then when he was stiffly and stoutly opposed by the Monks of Bangor, Anno Domini
596. and in the reign of King Ethelbert, witness Fox Martyrol. page 119.
together with the rest of the Eng. Hist. and Evangr. lib. 2.8.

4. The fourth famous degree of the Combinational Churches infamous defection,
was its notably naughty enlarging it self into a National Church; when, and
whence without controversy arose that Jewish imitation, and irregularly
Religious observation of five frivolous and foundationlesse customs and
traditions, of which the first was of National times, as the fifty yearly
Festivals, or holy working-dayes, Cursed-Masse, Candle-Masse, etc. The second,
was the National places, as the Consecrated meeting houses, Porches, Chancels,
Churchyards. The third, was of National persons, as the Universal Preachers,
Office-Priests, Half-Priests, and Diocesan Deacons. The fourth, was of National
pious performances, as st^nted Worship, Quiristers, singing of Psalms with the
Rubrique Postures. And the fifth was of National payments, or spiritual
profits, as offerings, tithes, and mortuaries; the which faithless and
fantastical fashions were the illegitimate offspring of National Parliaments
in this and the Neighbour-Nations. Witness the public Acts, Statutes and
other Ordinances in that behalf.

5. The fifth and highest degree of Church-deformity, is the ecumenical
Church, otherwise called Roman Catholic; the which in the apprehension of I
know not how many Kingdoms is the very best, though in the judgment of Christ
Jesus it is the very basest; because the beastliest and the most blasphemous of
all the bastard-Church constitutions, that ever were till now. Witness what is
written, Rev. 13.1, 3, 5, 6. whose Pastor and other Presbyters the
sinne-pardoning Pope, Cardinals, Abbots with others, were owned and
acknowledged for to be, and that not a few (if not of the summond Councels) yet
in several Synods, in sundry Countries. Insomuch that Churches abominable
iniquities were so increased over their heads, and their traiterous trespasses
were so grown up to heaven, as that the long-forbearing Lord could no longer
forbear, but was put upon it, and as it were necessitated for to take vengeance
on their inventions, as on Aarons golden Calf, and Samuels grievous connivency
at the evils of his sons, spoken of Psalm. 99.6, 8.

SECT. II. The Reply.
THis is your charge you have brought against our matter, and you have loaded
it with all the aggravations you could think of. It brings to my mind a bill
exhibited against me in Chancery about thirty years since, being the first and
last that I was ever troubled withal, and upon no ground, for ought I know,
except for paying another man's debt; when it was brought to my hand, I began to
read, and far I had not past, but I found my self charged with foul crimes,
of which I was no way guilty. This put me into some choler; I champed on the
b^t, and vowed to be righted on that man that had so falsely slandered me, and
cast such foul aspersions upon my credit and reputation. All this while my
Attorney stood by, and smiled; I guessing what the truth was that he laughed at
me, fumed and fretted the more; at which he let go the sleider of his sides,
and burst into an open laughter; this set me on fire to know what the cause
should be; but his immoderate bounds and curvets of laughing made such stops
and jumps in his words, that as yet I could perfectly understand nothing. These
delays were so many spurs in my sides, so that I was all this while upon
thorns; I could have burst for anger that my ears were put off from a having
a present hearing. But at last, this mountain brought forth its mouse; for the
man composing his countenance, gravely told me, that such words were usual in
these bills, and that the Clerks commonly used to do so pro form^, that they
might fill up their sheets, and that my good name was no way impaired by it;
which for the present g^ve me satisfaction.

Had I not been used to read from your party such a bill as this against the
Church, I should have been as much moved at your charge, as I was at my
Chancery bill; but I am now satisfied, it is pro forma, it must be done, and so
let it pass for this time. Though because I know the particulars in it, you
will expect an answer, I promise you to receive it in its due place.

To the whole, I say, you have not drawn up your bill aright; for supposing the
corruptions and deformities you mention, they stole not in upon the Church by
those degrees you have thought of. It was not the Parish that was first
corrupted, then the Cathedral, after the Province, lastly the Nation; as for
the Ecumenical Church I know none,, except the Representative in a General
Council, which whether it may be corrupted or no, is a dispute of a high
nature. Now. I shall set you right, that against you frame your bill next, you
may proceed by a better method. The first Church in respect of Discipline was
Cathedral, the next Parochial, the third Diocesan, the fourth Provincial, and
the last National; out of all these you may if you please, frame the
Ecumenical. Now if you will fancy unto your self corruptions, which I shall
not deny you in Paradise, but altogether in the constitution, which is the true
question, you must proceed by these degrees, and not by the former.

Now that this was the first constitution of the Church, even common reason
shall inform and convince you. The Cathedral must needs be first, yea suppose
it had been but only Congregational. (That you mistake me not, do not think I
speak of a fabric or a stately building, that came in after; for I speak only
of some set place, City, or Town, or house if you will, where the people of God
were gathered to worship him; put case Jerusalem, Antioch, etc.) This I say
must needs be first; and because the Apostles in these greater Cities first
gathered Christians, and were in them for some time resident, therefore these
Cities had from thence their Appellations, and were called Cathedra Petri,
Cathera Jacobi, Cathedra Pauli, Cathedra Marci, etc. which is no other than the
place where any Apostle, or Apostolical man seated himself, and in that Sede,
seat or place exercised Apostolical or Episcopal jurisdiction. Tertull. to this
purpose, Apostoli primo contestata fide in Jesum Christum per Judaeam, and
Ecclesiis institutis: deinde in orbem profecti, eandem doctrinam ejusdem fidei
nationibus promulgarunt, and proinde Ecclesias apud unamquamque Civitatem
condiderunt, a quibus traducem fidei and semina doctrinae caetetae exinde
Ecclesiae mutuatae sunt, and quotidie mutuantur ut Ecclesiae fiant, etc.
Tertull. de praesc^ipt. cap. 20. and paulo post cap. 26. (...). Eusebius. l. 3. c.
21. cap. 4. c. 11. cap. 31. lib. 5. c. 7. cap. 3. c. 28. cap. 22, 23, 27.
Apud ha^ adhuc Cathedrae Apostolorum suis locis praesidentur.

2. That which we can in reason next reflect upon is the (...), which is
properly the franchises of that city; for it is a foul mistake and abuse of the
word to suppose that (...) imports a Country Village, Hamlet or Township. For
Parochia in the prime sense of the word, and in Church Records contains the
Citizens of any great City, with all such borderers and strangers as dwelt
near, and repaired to any chief Church or City. Eusebius calls Alexandria,
Corinth, Jerusalem, Ephesus, Athens, Lions, Carthage, Antioch, etc. by the name
of (...), and that must needs be more than Villages are with us. The very same
is to be seen in the beginning of Clemens first Epistle to the Romans. Now
tell me in reason what can be easilier conceived, than that the Pastor, who had
his seat in the City, would employ his endeavor next to bring to the faith
those who were his next neighbors, and lived in the (...), the Franchises, the
Suburbs, and neighborhood. This Parochial Church then must be second.

3. These being converted, no question the chief Pastor did extend his
charity, and by all possible means sought to win those who were further off
dispersed in Towns, lesser Cities, Vilages and Hamlets; what he could not do by
himself, being to attend the flock in the City, out of doubt he endeavored to
effect by those he sent, Gods blessing being upon their labors, it fell out as
at Samaria by Philips preaching, Acts 8.
that many were converted to the faith, and by reason of the number that
believed, they needed a Minister of the Word and Sacraments to be resident
among them, and were able and willing to maintain one; To whom could they
repair more fitly, than to the Bishop of the next City, and desire a fit man to
serve their necessity? and he appointed them their Pastor and Minister, and he
and they became subject to the Pastor of the chief City. This is evident to
me, Acts 8. in the conversion of Samaria, Socrat. Schol. lib. 1. cap. 19.
and in that story of Adesius and Frumentius that converted the Indians. And
now the whole, viz. the City, the (...), and these Villages, Towns, etc. thus
converted being under the regiment of this Bishop, were called (...), that
Bishops Diocese, which was the Original of a Diocesan Church.

4. But the charity of the first planters of Christianity staid not here; they
never thought they could bring fish enough into Christ's net. As they were
fishers of men, The Roman Provinces as I take it, were under Augustus Casar.
22. After Marius thus conquered Syria, Germany, Brittanny, etc.
so they fished still to catch more, until they gained whole Provinces. (Now a
province was a large territory conquered by the Romans, which they put under
the government of a Proconsul or Propretor.) Such a tract being converted by
the foresaid endeavors, was put under the government of the foresaid Bishop,
and so of a Diocesan, his Church had the name of Provincial; and because the
City where he was resident was the Metropolis o^ Mother-City to that whole
Province, and under that many less Cities with their (...), and Towns and
Villages, so that Pr^vince being so large, that it was not possible or not
convenient for the Bishop of the first seat to over-see all as he ought,
therefore prudence taught the Church to appoint Bishops in lesser Cities, and
to assign them their Diocesses, over which yet the Bishop of the chief Cities
should have a supervision, whom they called a Metropolitan, after a Primate,
and in some Churches a Patriarch, and all the subordinate Bishops under him
Diocesan.

5. And again if this Church consisted of Converts of a whole Nation in which
there were diverse Provinces, as it fell out in Africa two, and Spain three,
then the Church had the name of a National Church: and there might be diverse
Metropolitans in it, and more Primates, of which yet one was chief, and under
these the foresaid Diocesan Bishops with their Clergy.

These are steps in the judgment of reason by which the Church arrived to its
em^nency; and therefore if it decay and rot by degrees, as you will have it,
the corruption must begin in the Cathed^al, desc^nd to Parochial, and thence
spread to the Diocesan, Provincial and National, and settle in the Ecumenical,
if such a local Church can be found.

Besides that great reason, the propagation of the Gospel, why the Church was
at the first thus settled, one was, the exercise of government, and the more
convenient administration of the discipline thereof. For being thus disposed,
the power of the Keys both in Ordination and Jurisdiction might be more easily
and prudently turned.

The great Masters of Policy could never yet acquaint us with any more than
three kinds of government, Monarchy, Aristocracy, Democracy* Monarchy, when the
supreme power is in one. Aristocracy, when it is in more, but those the
noblest, the best, the wisest, the prudentest. Democracy, when the people have
the power and rule, which if it be in many of them they call Polyarchy, if in a
few only, they term it Oligarchy. The two first of these the learned teach
us, proceeds a jure divino gratios^; for our gracious God having all dominion
and power in his hands, is pleased out of mere grace to impart of it to one, or
some choice men, that they may use his power, and rule us for our good. But the
last they inform us, proceeds a jure divine vindicativo, from an angry and
revengeful God, that puts such power in the hand of the many, or few, to make
use of it for our punishment. This is the worst of the three, and if any man
doubt of it, let him call to mind the answer that Lycurgus gave to the
Lacedemonian, that importuned him for an erection of a Democratical government
in that Commonwealth; go says he, Plutarch.
(...), and do thou make a trial of that kind of government in thine own
family, and if thou find it advantageous to make thy servants Masters in thy
family, then renew this suit, and I will hear it. This is absurd in nature, in
policy. In nature any body with two heads is monstrous, and in policy a Ship
governed by two Pilots, or an Army swayed by two Generals with an equal power,
has not been read of to have good success.

To apply this to my purpose. The Church of God is a society, and then it must
be governed one of these ways. Either by one, or by the best, o^ the most. If
either of the first two ways, then it is a Deo propitio; if the last, a Deo
irato; for I could evidently prove to you if I list, that Democracy is a
consequent of Gods anger. Now for the government of the Church there are who
strain the pin too high, there are who let it down too low; bewixt both lies
the medium.

1. Those of Rome that they may advance that man of sin, and make him an
ecumenical Bishop, contend hotly for a Monarchy. The Bishop forsooth of Rome
must be accounted the sole Monarch of the whole Church, and be put into the
definition of it, so that no Pope, no Church. But we acknowledge no such
Monarchy, nor no such Monarch. Christ Jesus alone is the sole head of this
body, as it comprehends the Church Militant and Triumphant.

Neither are Bellarmines arguments of any validity for Papal Monarchy. In a
Kingdom says he, is but one King; but Christ's Church is a Kingdom;
therefore. There be in this syllogism four terms; for Kingdom in the major
is taken for an earthly Kingdom, in the minor for a heavenly, whence it will
not follow that because in an earthly Kingdom there must be but one King or
Monarch, therefore in Christ's heavenly K^ngdome there must be but one also.
Then besides there is a great disparity betwixt earthly Kingdoms and the
Church of Christ. For the Church Militant remaining one is spread in many
earthly Kingdoms and cannot well be ordered like one particular Kingdom, and
therefore it follows not though in one particular Kingdom there be many
visible Judges and one supreme, that in the Universal visible Church there must
be one supreme.

To that his other popular Argument, that Monarchical government is the best,
and therefore that undoubtedly, which Christ instituted for his Church, it is
sufficient to answer, that a Monarchy is the best form of government in one
City or Country; but it follows not, it is best in respect of the whole world,
where the parts are so remote, and the dispositions of men so various; The
Courtiers of Rome go too high.

Arist. Ethic. lib. 8. c. 10.
2. On the contrary side all the Combinational Churches fall too low, who plead
stiffly for the peoples right to govern; the administration of discipline say
these must be Democratical. The Papalins are not more hot for one, than they
are zealous and contentious for the many-headed multitude. But say in good
sooth, whether this can be likely. Even the very Heathen Politicians have
branded this kind of government. Plato Aristotle, Lycurgus, profess it is of
the three the very worst, and experience convinces us it is the worst: and
shall any man imagine that Christ who so loved his Church, that he bought it
with his own blood, would institute in it the worst kind of government? A
discipline he left to it; that is confessed; and would he leave the rod in the
hands of the bellua multorum capitum? credat Judaeus Apella, non ego. Besides
popular government proceeds from vindicative justice; it is absurd in nature,
it is absurd in policy. But Christ was not angry when he gave the Keys, then he
was pleased, then he was reconciled to the world; he could not when he was thus
affected with love, give them to the people in anger. The end he gave them was
to purge his Church, to keep out scandals, to keep out Schisms, Errors,
Heresies out of his Church; but being in the peoples hands, by this means they
are let in, and that not thinly, but in whole swarms. Deny if you can since the
people have griped the Keys, whether Arianisme, Atheism, Antinomianisme,
Montanisme, Euthusiasme, Anabaptisme, Familisme, Quakerisme, Chiliasme,
Socinianisme, I want breath to reckon the rest, has not polluted, and to use
your own word, rottened the Church? shall we say this government is from Christ
which has brought forth such effects? The children betray the mother.

And now they are brought forth, the Key you so much boast of in the peoples
hand, has no power to shut them out of the Church; out of your particular
Church you perhaps may (though I have good ground to doubt of that too,
especially if they grow nume^o is as they do of all Sects.) How I pray was it
Arnhem Rotterdam, Amsterdam, New England? what is this to purging of the whole
Church? I had thought the Keys had been given for the benefit of the whole,
and not for the cleansing only of one single Congregation. Well, keep your own
as clean as you can, without spot, without wrinkle, and let many of your
sister-Combinationals remain defiled as they do, then you may admonish,
council, grieve for them, lament over, press your non-communion to them.
They Will do as much for you, as you do for them, but power nor means you have
none to mend them, nor they you, and so Christ's Church by commssiion of the
Keys unto single Congregations becomes remediless. If a corrupt or negligent
Presbytery do not censure their own Members, all the Assemblies of the world
may not attempt to censure any of them, Bailey page 112.
though most apparently they did corrupt a whole Nation with the grossest
heresies or most scandalous vices.

What can make the house of God worse than a den of thieves, if this do not?
Well, you may perhaps reply, which is indeed all you can say for your selves,
This may be the conseqent, but not the cause: Be it so, which for present I
shall give you, but never grant you; even this, were there no more, should
rouse you to look about, whether your tenure of your Keys be good, and your
claim and possession justifiable by clear evidence of Scripture. Show me the
words there written, to^idem syllabis, and I will yield. Show such an evidence
as others can, sicut ne misi^ pater, sic mittovos, and I will never question
the peoples right any more. Nay, I will go lower, show me but one example of
the peoples practice in this matter, and I have done. Mr. Cotton saw the
inconvenience, and with fine distinctions strugled what he could to withdraw
the power from the people, and I hope in good time, God will open your eyes to
see this error, and leave the Keys in their hands to whom Christ bequeathed
them.

3. There is but one way left by which the Church can be governed, and that is
Aristocracy. Which is no sooner named, but all parties strive, and eagerly
contend that their title is good to it, as the two women did for the child.
The Presbyters put in for their right, the Independents will have it in their
Congregations; but the Prelates will not suffer themselves to be so cheated out
of their old inheritance, but stoutly maintain their Church, and that it is
alone to be found among them. With the first I am not to skirmish at this time;
were I, then I should tell them, that Aristocracy is not like to be found in
their Country-Presbyteries. The second are the men, whose claim and title I am
to show invalid; and though I have done it in part before, yet I will more
clear it here by an evident and demonstrative argument. The first we know, that
opposed holy societies were Anabaptists; the next who followed was John M^rell,
who stood up for popular government of and in Independent Congregations, whose
opinion when we object to the Combinational brethren, their common assertion is
that they are far from Democracy, and ready to forsake their tenet, if that can
be demonstrated. Democracy then even in these men's eyes is no lovely and
beautiful child, that at the very name they startle and fly from it, tanquam
pedibu^ qui presserat anguem. And now you shall see, how I can make it appear,
that it is no false imputation, and I believe I shall be able to do it. Let us
only cast our eyes upon the birth of this child the Combinational Church; and
denied it will not be, that three, seven, twenty, thirty, more or less joined
together in a holy Covenant made this Church (for the greatest number I have
here named were at first ample Congregations.) These as Democritus his atoms
which were only similar parts, falling together made up this body; but by
their own confession all this wh^le it was homogeneou^, one part, equal, every
way like to another, it was inorganiz'd, having no distinction of parts, nor
head, nor eyes, nor hands. Methinks I behold Aristotle's materia prima, nec
quid, nec quale, nec quantum. When they saw themselves Chaos like, they thought
it not good to remain thus misshapen, and therefore they cast about how they
might lick themselves into some form. An Heterogeneo^s body they thought it
necessary to be, and to have Organs by which they might work; and at last their
fancies suggested how they might clap a head to this body, and supply it with
eyes and hands. They agreed that actu primo they had power sufficient and
authority in themselves, viz. the power of the Keys, and therefore they might
organize their own body at their pleasure; upon this thus set to work, they
elected, they ordained, they chose a Pastor for their head, and Elders for
their eyes, and other Church Officers for their hands, and so out of a lump
they became a man; of a Homogeneous and Inorganical, an heterogeneous and
organical body. At first they were but (...) a people, but this (...) had
(...), power and authority in themselves; for why else did they all this! And
if this be not an act of Democracy, I must profess I understand not the name,
nor definition of the word; I shall take it kindly that any man will inform my
ignorance. Yea, but it may be said, that now in organizato corpore this
Democracy is at an end; for now it is a well shaped creature, it has a head,
it has eyes, it has hands, and all other parts in a goodly symmetry (though I
could ask, what kind of Church was that of Mr. Canns at Amsterdam, which for a
time had no Pastor, that lived a long time without Officers or Eldership, yet
I spare you.) Not so neither; Answer to the thirty two Questions. page 48. page
44.
for the people for ought I can see, as they had authority in actu primo to
elect and ordain, so they have authority in actu secundo to depose and
excommunicate their Pastor and Elders, and so to reduce themselves to what
they were in puris naturalibus, from an heterogeneous body to make themselves
homogeneous; from an organized body, to make themselves inorganiz'd; and either
to remain so if they please, or to choose again. And for ought I conceive,
Cottons Keys.
Mr. Cotton intends no other by his new-coyned and applauded distinction of
power and authority, and power of liberty; for whatever authority he gives to
the Eldership, he makes it vain and frustaneous without the consent of the
people; and notwithstanding all the obedience and subjection he puts upon the
people, yet he gives to them such a power of liberty, that their concurrence
with the Eldership in every act of power is not only necessary, but
authoritative. In a word, if the people have (...) authority of institution and
destitution, as your parties say, if you should tell me a thousand times over,
I shall never believe otherwise but your Combinational Church is governed by a
Democracy.

I hope I have proved sufficiently what I undertook; and now I return to my
purpose, for I leave the destructive part, and come to build. And here I shall
lay that in the foundation, which none but Papists for ought I perceive will
deny; That our Savior Christ left the Church Militant in the hands of the
Apostles, and their Successors, and an Aristocratical government, which I
shall illustrate unto you by an induction of particulars.

1. The first constitute Christian Church we read of in the world, Isa. 2.3.
was that of Jerusalem; for the Law was to come out of Zion, and the Word of
the Lord from Jerusalem. There the Apostles and Disciples first preached; so
that Eve was not more properly termed the Mother of all living, then this
Church by Theodoret, (...), Theodoret.
the Mother of all believing Churches. From thence, the Apostle being to
depart, for that they might execute our Saviors command to preach unto all
Nations, left the government of that Church unto James the brother of our Lord,
not the Apostle; and ordained him then the first Bishop. Eusebius. lib. 2.1, and
l. 1.19. Jerome Hegesip. Ambr. Eusebius. 3.11. Hegesip. 4.22. Jerome. in Isa. 3.
Ambr. in 1 Timothy Ignat. ad Trall. Acts 21.18. Acts 15.
Et post Martyrium Jacobi -- traditur; says Eusebius, Apostolos commune
concilium habuisse, quem oporteret dignum successione Jacobi judicari, omnesque
uno concilio, and uno consensu Simeonem Cleophae filium decrevisse, ut
Episcopatus sedem susciperet. And if I list, I could give you in the Catalogue
of the succeeding Bishops, for the first six hundred years.

To him I doubt not but there was joined a Presbytery, which Jerome calls
Senatus Ecclesiae; some Collegium Presbyterorum, Ignatius, (...), which he thus
describes, (...), and they were those Elders present with James their Bishop,
to whom Saint Paul went in. And if I shall name Judas and Silas for two of
them, I am partly assured, that I am not mistaken, because the Decree made by
the Synod at Jerusalem was sent by them. The government here then was
Aristocratical.

2. Acts 11.22, 26, 27, 28. cap. 13.1. Origin in Luc. Hom. 6. Eusebius. 3. cap. 35
Ignat. ad Antiochen.
The next instance I shall give you for a constitute Church is at Antioch. And
in this City being the Metropolis of Syria, Barnabas, Paul, and other Prophets
and Teachers, Simeon, Lucius, Man^en were sound: and hither also Peter came,
Gal. 2.11. Of this Church, Origin, Jerome, and Ignatius who best knew it, for
he conversed with the Apostles, Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 8. make Saint Peter the
first Bishop, that Evodius succeeded is the testimony of Ignatius. He, says
he, (...); Ignatius was the next himself, from whom I can give you a clear
succession to the term I mentioned.

And those I mentioned, Barnabas, Simeon, Lucius, etc. I shall not doubt to
call the Presbytery, of which almost in every Epistle, Ignatius makes express
mention, as Counselors, Assistants, and Co-assessours of the Bishop. At
Antioch then was an Aristocracy also.

3. At Ephesus we meet again with a constituted Church, where Timothy was made
Bishop by Saint Paul. The subscription of the second Epistle shows that he was
the first Bishop there, Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 4.
and Eusebius who saw the Records of the Primitive Church affirms the same.
That he was ordained by Saint Paul by the hands of the Presbytery, Calvin
conceives is beyond question. Now if it be demand^d when Timothy was made
Bishop? it is most probable, when Paul was at Miletum.

When the Apostles departed from any Church which they had planted, in that
then they appointed a Bishop. For while they remained in or near the place,
there was no such need, the Apostles supplying the wants of those Churches with
their presence, letters or messengers, as the cause required. But when they
were finally to forgo those parts, then they began to provide for the necessity
and security of that Church, by settling Episcopal; power; which in all
probability was the reason, that they so soon provided a Bishop for the Church
of Jerusalem. Saint Paul at this time was to take his leave of the Churches at
Asia; he says it plainly in that Chapter, Acts 20.25.
that they should see his face no more; most probable then it is, that at this
time he left Timothy to supply his place of Ephesus: yea, and that the six
other Angels of the Churches were then by him ordained. Think of these seven
Angels of the Churches what you please; I shall not doubt to esteem them single
persons and Bishops, and that upon stronger evidence then any can be brought to
the contrary. But that is no discourse for this place. I suppose, that it is
very probable, that they were ordained at this meeting at Miletum; except you
judge that Saint John the Apostle settled them in those Churches before his
banishment to Patmos; for in those Churches they had the power, when he wrote
the Revelation.

Howbe^t it will serve my turn well enough, if they were only Pastors with a
Presbytery; for this will prove the government then of the Church to be
Aristocratical.

4. If we come to Rome, there we find Paul an Apostle; and as all Church
Records assure us, Peter. Bishop there needed none where they lived. Romans 16.
Presbyters there were then many, Junius, Clemens, Cle^us, Andronicus, Urbane,
Tripheus, Perses. Of these, Cletus and Clemens were Bishops after the Apostles
Martytdome, and their Succesours so apparent, that I need not recite them.

Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 24. Hieron. ad Evagr. Origin. Ambrose.
5. What should I speak that Mark was Bishop of Alexandria, who died six years
before Peter, in whose Church there was a Presbytery? of Titus appointed Bishop
by Saint Paul, and left to ordain in the Island Presbyters, and to have
jurisdiction? Of Dionysius the Areopagite, the first Bishop of Athens? Of
Archippus at Colosse? Of Onesimus at Philippi? Of Gaius at Thessalonica? The
Records were infinite that I could produce in this kind. You see I have not
instanced in any but such who were Bishops, viventibus and videntibus and
approbantibus Apostolis, that so the truth may be apparent. I shall not
therefore doubt to affirm that the government of the Apostolical Churches was
by Bishops, as such who had the chief power, and that it was Aristocratical.

Neither can all the Arguments of the Presbyterians any whit enervate this; for
you see I grant and prove a Presbytery; in these two only lies the difference
betwixt them and us. First, that they would have a Presbytery established by
the Apostles without a Bishop, which I shall never grant, and I know they can
never prove. Secondly, that the power of this Presbytery without a Bishop,
should be the most supreme in the Church, and that to it, without a Bishop the
Keys were delivered.

For this is it which I affirm, that originally the whole power was in the
Apostles, and by them exercised where they settled no Bishop. But to him, where
they fixed a Bishop, they committed their power; yet so, that so long as they
lived it was but in subordination and dependency on them; for out of question
they might have governed alone; when therefore they gave any power to others,
it was only delegated, and they lost not any of their own in giving orders.
What therefore Bishops were to the Apostles, that must needs all Presbyters
ordained by the Bishops be to them; voluntarily assumed they were in partem
sollicitudinis and reginimis, and had their power by delegation to assist in
acts deliberative and consiliary. But by virtue of their order, they had no
jurisdiction in causes criminal. For in the Scripture there is not any
commission extant to mere Presbyters; there is no institution of any power of
Regiment in the Presbytery; no constitution Apostolical, that mere Presbyters
should alone, or without Bishops govern; no example in Scripture of any censure
inflicted by any mere Presbyters; no specification of any power they had so to
do. But the contrary to this may well be collected, because to Churches where
Colleges of Presbyters were resident, Bishops were sent by Apostolical
ordination; as Titus to Crete, Timothy to Ephesus, the seven Angels to the
seven Churches, with power of ordination, excommunication, and taking
cognizance of causes and persons, even of Presbyters themselves, as is apparent
in th Epistles to Timothy and Titus, and in the Revelation. And a more evident
example cannot be given then in the Churches of Corinth and Thessalonica, in
both which were Presbyteries; but as then no constituted Bishop: In one of
which was an incestuous person, in the other disorderly persons; why did not
these Presbyters then cast them out? It was for want of coercive power; the
Apostle as yet kept that power in his own hand, and therefore advises the
Thessalonians, that if any man obey not his words, 2 These. 3.14, 15
that they signify that man by an Epistle to him; they in the mean time should
forbear his company, and admonish, but not count him as an enemy; that is,
eject him by Church censure: that they should leave to him in whose hand as yet
the power was. But at Corinth upon signification, he gives order to the
Presbytery to execute his sentence. For I verily absent in body but present in
spirit, that is, by my Apostolical power, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4.
(...) have already judged or determined; the judgment you see was his, the
decretory sentence his, as though I were present conce ning him that has done
this deed; In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when you are gathered
together, and my spirit, that is, my power with you, with the power of our Lord
Jesus christ, that is, which power the Lo d Jesus Christ has committed unto
me, that then you prono nce my sentence, and deliver such a one to Satan. This
shows clearly where the power was settled, in the Apostle first; In them
secondly; In him it was primative; from him to them it was derivative. All was
to be done by his spirit.

And that this was so, viz. that the Presbyters power was not absolute, but
dependent; not prime, but delegate, there be two testimonies; the one in
Ignatius, the other in Cyprian, which seems to me to evince it. Ignatius writes
to his Church of Antiochia, being then in prison in Rome; and he gives his
Presbyters there this advice, that they rule the flock of Christ, Ignat. ad
Antioch.
until God should declare who should be their Pastor. His words are, (...).
The Presbyters were to feed or rule the flock, (...) until God should show and
design him, qui principatum habiturus sit, as Varlonius renders it, who to be
their chief Pastor. Their government there was to last till then; but when God
had once designed him, Cyprian Ep. 21.
their (...) was at an end. The other testimony is that in Cyprian, in the case
of Candida, Numeria and Etecusa, women that were accused to have fallen in the
persecution, and offered incense to Idols. Of these the Presbyters in the exile
of Cyprian the Bishop took the cognizance, and were ready to pass a sentence
upon them; Cyprian interposeth, and upon it, causa audita, perceperunt
propositi eas tantisper sic esse, to remain in the state they were, Donec
Episcopus constituatur, until the Bishop should be appointed. Here again, we
see the verdict suspended till there were a Bishop, intimating that the prime
power of jurisdiction and censure was in him, and that without him it might not
be lawfully laid on. Nor do I see what can be answered to these two fathers.

Hitherto I have kept my self within the bounds of the Scriptures, and out of
them clearly demonstrated as I suppose, that the first government of the Church
was Aristocratical. It was in the Apostles and the Bishops which they settled
with their Presbyteries.

Now should I descend lower, and show the practice of the Church, especially
for the first three hundred years, I should fill a volume; here I could tell
you of those famous Presbyteries of Alexandria, in which Origin, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Eusebius. lib. 6. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 43. Cypr. lib. 3. Ep. 6.10, 14,
17, 18 19, 21, 22, 24.
Pantenus, Hieroclas, were the Presbyters of Rome; in which under Cornelius and
Stephen, there were forty six Presbyters with many other Officers: Of Carthage
in which under Cyprian, as appears, in many of his Epistles which he writ to
them in his exile, there were many Presbyters. Of Smyrna, Antioch, Philippi,
Magnesia, Trullis and Ephesus, all whose Presbyteries are remembered by Ignatius
in the Epistles he writ to those Churches. This is so clear, that it is written
as it were with a Sun beam, and it were ignorance and impudence to deny it.
To which, if those who so hotly contend for their Presbytery, would add but
these two things, which are as evident in Records, as is the Presbytery it
self; First, that none of these Presbyters were Lay Elders; and secondly, that
after the Apostles days, there never was any Presbytery without a Bishop, the
contest were at an end.

One thing only more I shall add about these Presbyteries, that they never
were erected but in the greater Cities, where the Patriarch, Primate,
Metropolitan, or Diocesan Bishop had their seats, (pardon me if I speak in the
language of those Ancient times) and therefore to distinguish them from the
Presbyters dispersed in the less Villages and Towns, Conc. Ancyr. Can. 13.
Can. Apollon. Can. 37.
they were called (...), and sometime (...); the Presbyters of the City or
Metropolis: and their institution was to help the Bishop in sacred actions, and
to advise him in all judicial and Ecclesiastical proceedings. In ordination
what they were to do, 4. Council. Carthag. cap. 3.
is set out by the fourth Council of Carthage, cap. 3. Presbyter cum ordinatur,
Episcopo eum benedicente, manum super caput ejus tenete, etiam omnis Presbyteri
qui praesentes sunt, manus suas juxta manum Episcopi super caput illius
teneant. 1. Council Arel. Can. 19. Apollon. Canon. Can 35. Council. Antioch. Can.
9.
A custom which was continued in our Church. And for their jurisdiction, that
was limited by another Canon, Presbyteri, sine consensu Episcoporum nihil
faciant. The Ancyran Council was before the Nicene, and that of Arles under
Constantine. So ancient were these provisions about the Presbyters and their
power.

But methinks it were worth enquiry, how these Presbyteries that so long
continued in the Church, became in difuse; for I will not say they were ever
abolished, in that I find them in many Churches after the three hundredth year
of Christ. I shall deliver what I conceive to be most probable; and I
conjecture these to be the causes of it.

1. Upon the general prevailing of Christianity, Synods began to assemble, and
the Pastors of diverse Churches in these meetings conferred and agreed upon
such rules, as they thought needful to be observed in all their Churches, which
they committed to the oversight of the Bishops in their Diocesses; and in case
they were negligent, the especial supervision and execution was laid upon the
Metropolitan; and if he were slack in doing what was enjoined, an appeal was
permitted to the Patriarch. This was the first occasion that gave Presbyteries
leave to play, by reason provincial Synods undertook the debating and resolving
those doubts, and ordered those difficulties which before troubled the
Presbyteries. And reason it was, that the consultation and determination of
Synods should be preferred before that of Presbyteries, as Courts of greater
Judgment, higher power, better experience, and more indifferency.

2. Another reason may be, that when Emperors became Christian, all those
civil cases betwixt man and man, which were (to avoid the scandal that might
arise by Lawsuits among Christians if tried under Heathen Judges) debated and
ended in these Presbyteries, fell to be decided and adjudged in the Imperial
Courts, and men had reason to repair to that seat of justice which had a sword
and power compulsory to force obstinatemen to do right to any injured party,
which the Church Court had not. When the causes grew less, the less respect
was had to the Court and now the Presbytery having less to do, weakened and
mouldred away by little and little of themselves.

3. And yet I shall venture at a third reason. Upon the great peace which the
Church enjoyed, with the privileges, immunities, and ample endowments granted
by Christian Emperors, Magnificent Temples, and goodly fabriques were erected
for the public service of God; some there were before, but not so many, nor
yet so beautiful. These commonly were built where the Bishops had their Seas,
and were therefore after called Cathedral Churches. In them the Bishop at first
with his Presbyters of the City made his residence, and to his Court there kept
the greater matters of the whole Diocese or Province referred. Found it was
that in this Presbytery it was too easy a matter for the Bishop to bear so
great a sway, that matters were ended often, as the man was by him friended.
The dignities in that Church were in his donation, the dignified were his
creatures, were subject to him, and many ways might be displeased by him, if
he would seek revenge. This being perceived, brought a great neglect and
contempt upon the Presbyters. And the Bishop taking his advantage thereby made
use of his power, more than was fit. And if you shall say, that by this door
corruption entered into the Church, I shall not deny it. But then I shall
rejoyn, that it was not the institution; not in that the Church became
Cathedral, Diocesan, or Provincial; not in that it was governed either by a
Bishop, a Metropolitan, a Primate, or a Patriarch with a Presbytery, and so
was Aristocratical; but in that this just and regulated power was ill used. It
was not the constitution of the Church that was corrupt, but the Churchmen; and
then lay the load upon the right horse, and fly not violently in the face of
your Mother.

Cant. 6.4.
For the constitution was holy, good and wise. God himself in the Canticles
gives this testimony of his Church, that she is terrible as an Army with
Banners; if an Army, then she must be ordinata; and the order in an Army is,
that there be a General, a Major General, Colonels, Captains and
Underofficers. Wisdom then taught the Church to order her self; and yet she
sat up no other orders then God had appointed. viz. Bishops and Presbyters,
Deacons; these only she prudently marshalled; some she thought good to place
in more eminent degree. Will you then ask me, what are Metropolitans, Primates,
Patriarchs? I readily answer, gradus in Episcopatu, all set in the chief places
of the Army, for the safe guard of the whole, and for the better advantage to
fight against the enemy. Yea, but who set them there? Prudence, and it is nere
the more to be disliked for that it was prudentially done; for I must tell you
that prudence is to bear a great sway in Church Discipline. The substance it
may not alter, neither has it; but in the circumstantials it has a power; and
if Saints Paul's rule be observed, 1 Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done decently and in order, all is well. What more decent
among Church Governors, then that some be superiors, some subordinate; how
can order be better observed, then making the Church like an Army? Even among
the twelve were there not chief Apostles? They were all equal Apostolatu, all
equal in power, yet some priority and precedence might be among them. For
Peter, James and John are called P^llars; Gal. 2. Chrysostom. in loc. Victor.
Antioch. in Mar. cap. 9. Hieron. ad Evagr. Cyprian de simplicitate Praelatorum.
hi tres tanquam Coriphaei, primas inter Apostolos obtinebant: Thus is it with
their Successors the Bishops; they are all pares potestate, in the power: he
at Eugubium, is as great as he at Rome; he at Tanais, equal with him of
Alexandria; for he is ejusdem meriti, ejusdem sacerdotii; that rule of Cyprian
being undoubtedly true, Episcopatus unus est, cujus a singulis in solidum pars
tenetur. But yet for all this, one Bishop may be set in a higher degree then
another, and one set over another; and I shall make little doubt to make m
words good out of the Scriptures; for what was Titus and Timothy? were they not
more than ordinary Bishops? Titus had the charge over the whole Isle of Crete,
Miraeus lib. 4. de Notitia Episc. page 181. Chrysostom. Him. 1. in Titum.
in which there were seven Bishops besides. This was Paul's companion, says
Chrysostom, that was approved; otherwise Paul would not have committed unto
him all whole Island, and the trial and judgment of so many Bishops. To
Timothy, if we believe Theodoret and other Ancients, was committed all Asia the
less; in which were questionless instituted by the Apostles many Bishops. Of
the last example there may be some scruple; of the first there can be no doubt
to any one that lists not to be contentious: but the Ancient, evident, and
constant course in the Primitive Church to admit of these degrees in
Episcopacy; and to have Primates and Metropolitanes for the calling and guiding
of Synods in every Province, is to me a pregnant proof, that this order was
either delivered or allowed by the Apostles and their Scholars: o^ found so
needful in the first government of the Church, that the whole Christian world,
till some of late fell from it, ever since received and continued the same.

If you suppose it came from Rome, you are much mistaken; for it bore sway in
all the Eastern Churches, before the Roman Bishop was of any great note, power
or reputation, or at least had any more precedence then any of the Eastern
Patriarchs. Socrates relates that the first Council of Constantinople, (...),
ordained Patriarchs; Socrat. lib. 5.8.
may be the title was then given to those who were only called Primates or
Metropolitans before, and bounds set to their jurisdictions, which any man will
judge, that considerately reads that place in Socrates.

The truth is this. The name of Patriarch I find taken in a double sense;
largely or strictly. Largely, for a Primate of any Province that was under the
chief Patriarch; and so there are man^ at this day, Brexwoods enquiry of
Religion and Languages.
as the Abannah the Patriarch of the Aethiopians; or the Primate of Mosco, who
is the Patriarch of all Christians under the Muscovites Empire: The Primates of
Sic and Sebasha, who are the Patriarchs of the Armenians. The Primate of the
Jacobites, who has his Patriarchal Church in the Monastery of Saphran, near
the City Merdin in Mesopotami^. The Primate of the Maronites, who resides in
Mount Libanu^. The Patriarch of the Nestorians, who has his residence in Muzal
or Mosal. I could give in a list of many more of this kind, as well in Europe
as in the Eastern Churches; by which it appears, that in a large sense the
Prime Bishops set over one or more Provinces may be called Patriarchs. Spalat.
lib. 3. c. 10. Sect. 43.44
And it is the judgment of a learned, but unhappy man, that were there more of
this kind erected in Europe, who should have no dependence on Rome, that it
would be a ready way to restore peace and unity to the distracted Church, and
to shut out the confusion we groan under. All which are under one or other of
those Patriarchs of the Church, as their jurisdictions were limited in the
first erection; for that is the strict acception of the word.

2. And three they were only at first. The first at Rome, the second at
Alexandria, the third at Antioch; the first had the power in Europe, and in the
West; the second in Africa and in the South; the third in Asia, and over the
East. Neither were their seats there placed, as Baronius would persuade us,
because that the Apostles founded those Churches (for were this reason good, we
should have more Patriarchates than these three, there being more Churches
planted by the Apostles than these; neither were all the Churches they founded
Patriarchates, Hegesipp. de excid. Urb. Hieros. lib. 3. c. 5.
not Corinth, not Ephesius, not Philippi, Smyrna) the reason then is that which
Hegesippus the younger has given, because these three Cities were the three
Metropolies of the Empire, and so the Church in the institution for the seats
of their Patriarchs followed the secular power of the Roman Empire. The dignity
of the Cities gave them the dignity and priority of their Seas. And it should
seem the erection of these three was very ancient, in that when the
Alexandrian Patriarch began to incroach upon his neighbors, Council. Nic. can.
6.
the Nicene Council made this Decree, Mos antiquus perduret in Aegypto, Lybia,
Pentapoli, ut Alexandrinus Episcopus horum omnium habeat potestatem, quoniam
quidem and Episcopo Romano parilis mos est, similiter autem and apud
Antiochiam. (...), says the Canon; it seems even then 'twas an old custom;
and the Council of Antioch in the like case, though it names not the Churches,
Council. Antioch. c. 9.
yet provides to secure the rights, (...), secundum antiquam consuetudinem a
patribus nostris constitutam. And again upon the unjust claim of the
Patriarchs of Antioch over the Bishops of Cyprus the Ephesine Council decreed,
ut singulis provinciis pura and inviolata manerent quae (...), Ephesians. Conc.
cap. 8.
from the beginning upward they had (...), according to old prevailing custom.
You see I do not exspatiate beyond the bounds of the first three Ecumenical
Councils, all which confess that these Metropolitans, afterward Patriarchs,
were no late nor new device; first authorized by the Council of Nice, but their
right and pre-eminence was even then an ancient usage and Canon of the Church,
even from the beginning. Now if I may take liberty to conjecture, I may
strongly presume, that the fathers of these three Councils had an eye to the
constitution extant in the Apostolical Canons; The Bishops of every Nation must
know (...), the chiefest, the first, Apost. Can. can. 35.
the Primate, and wills him to be (...), as head among the Bishops of that
Province: who in the Africane Council is called (...).

These three were the three first and most ancient of the Patriarchs. To whom
the fi st Council of Constantinople erected that Bishop into a Patriarch, and
for the honor of that City, being now called Nova Roma, gave the Bishop the
second place, next after old Rome, who remains a great Patriarch to this day;
and thus there became four. As for the fifth, it was of Jerusalem, and it
obtained the privilege of a Patriarchate in the fifth general Council. 1.
Council. Constantinop. can. 5. G. Tyrius de bello sacro. l. 14. c. 12. Nic.
coue. can. 7
Thus the case stood, Jerusalem being destroyed by Vespasian, Caesarea was made
the Metropolis, and so is acknowledged in the Nicene Council, and the Bishop
Primate, even to ^erusalem. A great honor they are content should be yielded
to the Jerusalem Bishop, or Aeliae, as he is there called, according to the old
custom, yet manente metropolitanae civitatis propria dignitate, meaning
Caesarea. In the Council of Chalcedon there was a trial past betwixt the Bishop
of Antioch, and Juvenal Bishop of Jerusalem about jurisdiction, in which it was
decreed that the Phaenicia's and Arabia should be given to the Patriarch of
Antioch, and all Palestina, Council. Chalced. Act. 7.
jure Metropolitico should be under Jerusalem, and so Caesaria lost the
Metropolitical right, and Jerusalem was preferred, which afterward in the fifth
General Council as I said, was advanced into the first Patriarchate.

And now if you shall ask me why I have so enlarged my self to discover the
rise, the antiquity, the institution of these Patriarchs, it was, that you may
see how the Church was governed at first. There was no Monarchy in it, no
Democracy, but an admirable Aristocracy; it was like a well marshalled army
indeed; it had the Primates after called Patriarchs, as it were the Generals;
the Metropolitans as Major General, the Bishops as Colonels. The Bishops again
with their Presbyteries as a Council of war, The Presbyters of the C^ty and
Country as Captains and underofficers, the people as the soldiers under
obedience, but without command. Never tell me this was a corruption; for thus
it was ab incunabulis Ecclesiae, if credit may be given to all Church stories,
to Acts of Councils, to Records, to Fathers; and thus it was not in one, but in
all Churches throughout the four quarters of the world. And if you shall yet
demand upon what ground of Scripture this Hierarchy was taken up, Saint Paul
shall inform you, where he commands, Let all things be done decently, and in
order.

Calvin being to set down the form, this very form of government in the
Primitive Church, in the beginning premiseth these words: Calvin. instit. cap.
8. Sect. 51, 52, 53, 54.
Tametsi multos Canones ediderunt illorum temporum Episcopi, quibus plus
viderentur exprimere, quam sacris litter^s expressum erat, ea tamen cautione
totam suam oeconomiam composuerunt ad unicam illam Dei normam, ut facile
videas, nihil fere in hac part habuisse a Dei verbo alienum. And again, Sect.
54. Quod autem singulae provinciae unum habebant inter Episcopos
Archiepiscopum, quod item in Synodo Nicaena constituti sunt Patriarchae, qui
essent and ordine and dignitate Archiepiscopis superiores, id ad disciplinae
conservationem pertinebat. By this means all inferior Clergy were better kept
in order, informed in their duty, contentions were composed, which to use his
words, ex aequalitate nascerentur, confusion was avoided; and dissentionum
semina tollerentu^, cum ad unum omnis solicitude est delata, which he has out
of Jerome; Hieron. ad Evagrium.
and if antiquity of the institution may satisfy, Jerome derives it from the
Evangelist Saint Mark. This form of Government, the ancients called the Church
Hierarchy; and it is true, that Calvin conceives the name improper; but then I
pray mark how with in four lines he shuts up his discourse, Verum si omisso
vocabulo, rem intuemur, reperiemu^ veteres episcopos non aliam regendae
Ecclesiae forman voluisse fingere, ab ea, quam dominus verbo suo praescripsit,
and he means that which I have set down. Men are much mistaken, Calvin. Epist.
ad regem Polon. page 140, 141. edit. Genev. an. 1576.
who conceive Calvin to have been an enemy to this ancient Church Government;
let them but read his Epistle that he writes to the King of Poland about the
Reformation of the Kingdom, and they will tell me another tale; for he there
sets down to the King the order of the Primitive Church for a pattern, where,
says he, there were Patriarchs and Primates, and subordinate Bishops to tie
the whole body together with the bond of concord; And advises the King to
establish Bishops in every Province, and over them an Archbishop and Primate
of that Kingdom; Calvin. Instit. lib. 4. c. 12. artic. 6.
and if the Popish Bishops were true Bishops, he would allow them some
authority, not as much as they challenge, but as much as he thinks would serve
for the right governing of the Church. Not so much as they challenge; good
reason for that, for this would set up regnum in regno. Independent for soo^h
then they must be of any but the Pope, which Princes have no reason to take
well; but if they shall be content to move within their proper Orb of
Church Government, he is not against it.

Now with Calvin agrees that learned and judicious Zanchy; his words are, Non
improbamus patres, quod juxta variam tum verbi dispensandi, tum regendae
Ecclesiae rationem, Zanch. de relig. Christ. cap. 25. Sect. 10, 11.
varios quoque ministrorum ordines multiplicarint, quando iis liberum fuit,
sicut and nobis, and quando constat, id ab illis factum honestis de causis, ad
Ordinem, ad Decorum and ad aedificationem Ecclesia, pro eo tempore,
pertinentibus. And thus he begins the next paragraph, Novimus enim Deum nostrum
Deum esse Ordinis non confusionis, and Ecclesiam servari Ordine, perdi autem
(...), quo de causa non solum in Israele, verum postea in Ecclesia ex Judeis
and gentibus collecta, multos etiam and diversos ministrorum ordines instituit;
and about twenty lines after adds these words, Hac sone ratione, quae etiam de
Episcopis, imo and de quatuor Patriarchis, ante ipsum etiam Concilium Nicaenum
creatis, constituta suerunt, excusari, defendique posse sentimus.

And that this learned man may give more light and strength to what he delivers
in these two paragraphs, in his observations upon these paragraphs he inserts a
very sober and clear discourse out of Master Bucer de disciplina Clericali,
which is very well worth your reading. The sum of it is, what I have already
set down, and Bucers conclusion is, Quia omnino necesse est, ut singuli Clerici
suos habeant proprios custodes and curatores, instauranda est, ut Episcoporum,
ita and Archidiaconorum, aliorumque omnium, quibuscunque censentur nominibus,
quibus portio aliqua commissa est custodiendi gubernandique Cleri authoritas,
potestas: sed and vigilantia, and animadversio, ne quis omnino in hoc ordine
sit (...). This is the close of Bucers discourse, not only reciting, but
praising and commending the constitution and custom of the old Church, in the
various distribution of the Ecclesiastical functions and degrees.

I have many years since heard a wise man affirm, that a little insight into
Natural Philosophy is apt to make a man an Atheist, as a litttle knowledge in
Physic creates an Emperick, a little sight in the Law a petty fogger; for it
prides men with the confidence of knowledge, and makes them pragmatical:
whereas a deep search in any art humbles the man, brings him to the sight of
his own mistakes, and makes him sensible, that truth, as Plato was wont to say,
lay in the bottom of a deep well, and without labor and a long rope it was
not to be fetched from thence. Was it not so with Aristotle, with Plato etc?
whereas others upon the slight search of nature became Atheistical, the last of
these by his depth of enquiry, became to acknowledge the prime cause of all
things to be (...), very little differing from that ineffable name, by which
God was made known to Moses (...). Justin. Martyr. Paraenetic. ad Hellenas.
Exodus 3.14.
I am that I am. And the other, not being able to search, why the Euripus
should ebb and flow seven times a day, cried out, O eus entium. This shows
what a little skill in any science, and what a profound knowledge will do. The
one will raise strange confidences, and Chimeras in the brain, the other will
allay and settle them.

He who would be quieted and satisfied about Church Government, I could advise
him to search this point to the depth; for otherwise he may be transported with
strange fancies. His little knowledge may swell him too much, and make him
over-confident to practice upon the Church, and make experiences before he is
thoroughly skilful. Whereas if he will stay his pace, and not venture and vent
his drugges, till he has consulted the Ancients, and seen what judgment his
forefathers, and those that lived nearest the Apostolical times gave of them,
I believe he will not be overhasty to prescribe any new dose; especially when
he shall find, that the old was held safe and sufficient to preserve the
health of the Church, and to prevent incroaching diseases.

This course if you disdain and dislike, you condemn the whole Church of Christ
from the first increasing and spreading thereof to this present age; and
prefer your own wisdom before all the Martyrs, Confessors, Fathers,
Princes, Bishops that have lived, dyed, governed in the Church of God since the
Apostles times. How well the height of your conceits can endure to blemish and
reproach so many religious and famous lights of Christendom, I know not. What?
all the old Fathers, all the zealous first Reformers, all blind, in comparison
of your selves? for my part, I wish the Church of God in our days may have the
grace for piety and prudence to follow their steps; and not to make the world
believe, that all the servants of Christ before we lived, favored and
furthered the pride of Antichrist, till now in the fagge end of the world,
when the faith of most men, and their love and charity are quenched and
decayed; some new lights arose to restore the Church to that perfection of
discipline, which the Apostles never mentioned, the Ancient fathers and
Councils never remembered, the Universal Church of Christ before us never
conceived, nor our chief Reformers never imagined: for they have as you have
heard, delineated and commended the old way of discipline.

But here before I end my general answer, I must remove one block which some
have cast in my way. For I have heard it objected that these Patriarchs were
Independents, which I confess in some sense is true, because one Patriarch was
not to intermeddle in the jurisdiction of another; the Canons of the Church
having set out the extent of their Provinces, and limited their power. But this
will make nothing for the present Independency of Combinational Churches; for
they had Churches, many Metropolitan sees, many Diocesses under their power and
oversight. But these have but one single Congregation. Those could call Synods
through their whole Province, and punish any Bishop or Churchman or other
under them: An Independent dependent Church can call no Synod, nor punish nor
reform any member that is not of their own society or Combination. Those were
not so absolute neither, but they were bound upon their elections to inform
their fellow Patriarchs, and by theit communicatory letters to give account of
it, and of their faith: The Pastors of the Combinational Churches are not
accomptable to any sister-Church. Lastly, put case, as it sometimes fell out,
that Factions, that Schisms, that Heresies arose in their Patriarchates, the
Church was not left remediless; for the Patriarch or Church being not able to
quell, compose, or extirpate them, a General Council was called to which they
were all inferior, and to whose verdict they were bound to stand, as is
evident in the case of Nestorius, Dioscorus, etc. who were deposed by general
Councils, and their Heresies condemned; and the like may be said of Arrius and
Eutiches, condemned in general Councils; which shows that the general Council
was the supreme judicature, and that the Patriarchs had their dependence on it,
and so were not absolute Independents. Now for the calling of these and other
Councils, they had their warrant and pattern from the Apostles, Acts 15. who to
redress a contention then arose in the Church, called that Synod to Jerusalem,
and composed it.

And indeed were there no other argument against Independent or Congregational
Churches, Rutherford peace, plea. c. 7. Concl. 4. Bailey c. 10.
(as there be very many and very strong, as you may read in Rutherford and
Bailey out of him) yet this one drawn from this Apostolic Synod, I suppose were
unanswerable. No Synod can impose Decrees upon any Combinational Church; That Is
your own Maxim. But this Synod did impose her Decrees upon those Churches
which you say were Combinational: This proposition is evident in the Scripture,
Acts 15. and verse 22, and 35. Therefore now if this Church of Antioch were
subject to the authority of Synods, what Church might plead a freedom from the
like subjection? and consequently none is Independent.

Thus have I as it were in a Table, presented you with the plain face of Truth,
and sent it you bare and naked as Truth should be; If the visage seem old, the
better; it is as I intended it; that hinders not, but she may be comely,
venerable, amiable; for he that will reverence and love truth, he must do it,
because she is an Ancient Matron. For Quod primum, verum, sed enim in omnibus
veritas imaginem aniccedit, p^stremo similitudo sucoedit. Tertull. Praes. c.
29. cap. 31.
Ex ipso ordine manifestatur, id esse Dominicum and verum, quod sit prius
tradijtum; id autem extraneum and falsum, quod sit posterius immissum. A rule
which that learned father often inculcates, but nowhere more clearly then in
this fourth book against Marcion, where he has these words by aggravation:
Tertull. l. 4. adversus Marcion. c. 5.
In summa si constat, id verius quod prius, id prius quod est ab initio, ab
initio quod ab Apostolis, pariter utique constabit id ab Apostolis traditum,
quod apud Ecclesias Apostolicas fuerit sacrosanctum; which Chapter is worth
your reading, for there the learned man refers the Original of Bishops to the
Apostles; intimates their succession, which in many Churches he does more
clearly in the thirty second Chapter of his prescriptions.

This prime Truth I have here represented with her Ancient Officers about her,
the Bishops with a Presbytery; of which in wisdom she thought fit to raise
some higher, not in Office, but in Degree; ne quid detrimenti Ecclesia capiat.
And this advancement was no new device neither, for we read of Metropolitans,
and Primates, before the Nicene Council, as I have proved after of Patriarchs.
Yet all this while, the Church remained a pure Virgin; Thebulis being the first
that corrupted the Church, Hegesipp. apud Eusebius. l. 4 c. 21. Tertull.
because he could not be a Bishop, as did afterward Valentinus and Marcion
upon the same occasion: and I had almost said Tertullian himself. This
certainly shows that the Office of a Bishop even then was no contemptible
dignity. For certainly the rejection of such men from the oversight of a
Congregational Church, could never work such men to so great discontent; Of
such parties they were the chief, even after they had failed of their expected
hopes. No question they were of Diotrephes mind, John Epi. 3.10
they were (...), they desired to be (...), Primates (so old is that word) in
the Church; to which because they could not be admitted, they corrupted it with
their doctrines. Ambition is by Charron called the shirt of the soul, Charron
of wisdom.
being the first garment that it puts on, and the last that it puts off! for
men while there be men, will be of aspiring minds.

-- (...),
(...),
(...).
Even a beggar will strive to be chief of his company, and a tradesman to be
Master over those of his own profession; this cannot nor ever will be avoided.
Such thoughts have always tickled Churchmen. Now to satisfy this desire, God
has appointed higher places in his Church, and so they be desired in a fair
way, and to lawful ends, it is commendable. 1 Timothy 3.1. ver. 31.

Conc. Afric. Chalced. Sardic. Naz. in Athanasij vita.


This is a true saying, says the Apostle, If a man desire the office of a
Bishop, he desires a good work; and again in the same Chapter, they that have
used the office of a Deacon well, purchase unto themselves (...), a fair step
to ascend to a higher degree;) as first to a Presbyter, then to a Bishop. And
it is written of Athanasius that he ascended by all these steps, till he became
Patriarch of Alexandria; then he was set upon the highest step: and yet this
advancement of his, or any other, cannot hinder the government of the Church
for being Aristocratical, but confirms it rather; since in this eminence he was
to guide the Church, not according to his own pleasure, but according to the
prescribed Canons of Synods and Councils; from which if he erred, he was liable
to answer to the supreme Court of an Ecumenical Assembly.

I have you see laid the foundation of the Churches government in Aristocracy,
of which Monarchy and Democracy are the extremes. If you can show me any Church
that has deviated from the middle way, I shall confess it to be corrupt. And
for the first it is easy to instance; viz. the Roman Church, whose Patriarch
affects a Monarchy, and his Courtiers and learned Rabbis the Jesuits plead
stiffly for it. But then you must not take that way you do to prove it; for the
erection of Cathedral, Parochial, Diocesan, Provincial and National Churches
through his Patriarchate will never do it; Since these were from the beginning
in other Patriarchates, and in his too, when no Monarchy was ever dreamed of or
challenged. That his challenge I acknowledge to be a corruption.

And if any Church shall affect Democracy, I shall say it is corrupted also; in
that it observes not that Apostolical rule of government and discipline which
was then used, as I have demonstrated. It is then a great mistake in you, to
make the Presbyterial or Combinational Church to be the sole pure and
Apostolical Church; and that all Churches that are fallen off from that
government are corrupted. This if you can confirm fairly and firmly by
unanswerable arguments as you make show of, then you have reason to fasten your
degeneration and corruption on Cathedrals, Parishes, Diocesses, Provinces and
Nations; but if this can never be done, as I am assured it cannot, then I shall
affirm, that the casting the Church into Cathedrals, Parishes, etc. was not
error, since by that the discipline of the Church might be better administered,
and the Aristocratical government far advanced and furthered.

And so having expressed unto you my thoughts in the general, I now come to
examine what you lay to the Churches charge in particular; in the discussion of
which I hope you will give me leave to prosecute my own method; and I shall
begin with the Cathedral, which you say was the second degree, but I conceive
it the first. Of this your words are.

SECT. III. The words of the Letter.
The second degree of the Combinational Churches corruption was the Cathedral
Churches generation, which did presume to alter and elevate the places and
appellations of the Teacher, Pastor, Ruler, and Deacon, unto those
unscripture-like titles of Lord-Bishop, Dean, Chancellor, Surrogate and
Archdeacon, who ventured to usurp the power of excommunication against the
Members and Ministers of many Congregations in their Synods and Councils,
contrary to what was practiced in that Orthodoxe pattern, Acts 15.24. which is
laid down and left as well for the imitation as information of after-ages;
whose work it was by Scripture-proofs to confute soul subverting positions, and
to confirm Christian doctrines, without using any manner of authority to
censure any man's person, being that that is the express privilege of the
Presbyterial Church, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. and 2 These. 3.15. The babe-age of which
usurpation is made mention of, as newly appearing in the world by what was
exercised by Alexander of Alexandria against Eusebius of Nicomedia, as well as
against Arius in the reign of Constantius and Constance the sons of
Constantine the Emperor, as it is to be seen in Socrat. Schol. Lib. 1. c. 3.
compared with the 32 cap. lib. 2. and Evagr. lib. 1. cap. 6.

Reply.
That I may return you a full answer, I must take asunder into propositions
what you here deliver. You say, 1. The Combinational Churches corruption was
the Cathedral Churches generation. 2. The corruption was by changing the places
and appellations of Teachers, etc. into the titles of Lord Bishop, Dean,
Chancellor, Archdeacon. 3. That they ventured to usurp the power of
excommunication in their Synods and Councils. 4. That this was contrary to the
Orthodox pattern, Acts 15. 5. Authority to censure any man's person is the
express privilege of the Presbyterial Church, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 2 These. 3.15. 6.
Alexander ab Alexandria, began this against Arrius and Eusebius of Nicomedia,
so that it was an usurpation, and a new age in the Church.


1. Proposition. That the Combinational Churches corruption, was the Cathedral
Churches generation.
IT is a rule in Philosophy, Non entis non sunt accidentia.
that corruption is mutatio entis ab esse ad non esse tale. That which is
corrupted then must have an entity, for else it can never be corrupted. Now
your Combinational Church in the time you speak of was a non en^, there was no
such thing, and then it could not be corrupted, nor any other Church rise from
that corruption.

Which shall further appear, if we shall distinguish of the term Cathedral,
which I hinted at first; for as among Logical notions there be termini primi,
and a primo orti, so also it is in this; the word Cathedral being taken in a
primitive and in a derivative sense. If you take it in the prime sense, it
denotes unto us those places or chief Cities where the Apostles for some time,
or Apostolical men by their appointment took up their residence for conversion
of the people, and reglement of the Church; hence it is, that we so often read
of in the fathers Cathedra Jacobi, which was at Jerusalem; Cathedra Petri,
which was for seven years at Antioch; after at Alexandria; and last of all,
Cathedra Apostolorum Petri and Pauli at Rome. In those Churches where they
staid for any long time and preached, and planted Religion, which were commonly
the Metropolis of that Province or Country, as Ephesus, Corinth, Philippi, at
their departure, they left a Bishop with a Presbytery to govern, and thence
these Churches were called Ecclesiae Cathedrales. This is the prime importance
of the word. But after as Christianity was extended, and Bishops were seated
and erected in diverse Diocesses they began to build Churches, in which at first
the Bishop and the Presbyters did reside, who were to over-see the Diocese;
and because of their residence in this place, the Church in imitation of the
Apostles Chairs, was called the Cathedral Church. Neither was this Cathedral so
new, Eusebius. l. 2. c. 17.
as most men suppose. For I shall not stick to call the (...) in Egypt
mentioned by Eusebius out of Philo the Jew a Cathedral; it will seem so to any
man, that shall advisedly read that Chapter; for he writes of their government,
of them to whom the Ecclesiastical Liturgies are committed; Of their
Deaconships, of the presidency of Bishops, placed above all. To which, that of
Palladius will give much light; for he says, Palladius in Histor. Lausiaca.
that in this (...) there were eight Presbyters, and that so long as the chief
over them lived, none of the rest might (...). Here the Scriptures were read,
prayers continued, Hymns and Canticles in every kind of Meeter sung to God,
penances transacted, (...), upon the old Sabbath and every Lords day. I cannot
conceive but this might be a Cathedral, even in this last sense. I shall
instance in another which was old, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 23.
even in Saint John's time the Apostle. He commended the young man to the chief
of all the Bishops, (can any man think he was less than a Metropolitan?) the
man proved deboist, ran from the Church and became a thief. At his return, John
demanded of the Bishop his charge; the Bishop sobbing and sighing said, he is
dead, dead to God, for he is become wicked and pernicious, and to be short a
Thief; for he keeps this Mountain over against this Church together with his
associates; it is more then probable this was a Material Church; for how else
could the hill be over against it? and presently it is said, that the Apostle
hastened out of the Church. Now I judge it to be Cathedral, because he that was
the chief of the Bishops had his residence in it. Let it be also considered
what Eusebius writes in his tenth book, Eusebius. l. 10. c. 2.
cap. 2. that in the beginning of Constantines reign, that the Temples were
again from the foundations erected to an unmeasurable height, and received
greater beauty than ever they enjoyed before their destruction. They were then
before, and were but now again erected. And we of all other have least reason
to doubt of this, since Joseph of Arimathea erected a Church at Glastenbury, as
the best of our Historians record, Gildas, Spilman, Cambden.
and Spilman has in picture given us the extent and fashion, and materials of
it. After, diverse other Cathedral Churches were erected in this Island by King
Lucius, if there be any truth in our Records, at Landaff, at London, at
Chester, etc. as you may read in Ephraim, Pagetts Christianography, part 3.
page 1, etc.

Now take the Cathedral in which of these acceptions you please, your assertion
cannot have any truth in it. Not in the first; for then you make the Apostles
the authors of this corruption, since they were the erectors of these
Cathedrals; not in the last, because they were erected after the Apostolical
pattern. The plain truth is, that the corruption of the Combinational was not
in the erection of either, because the combinational never was before either.
What was it precedent to Saint James his Cathedra in Jerusalem? I marvail when
it should begin? His was then set up before the Apostles departed to preach to
the whole world, and under him it is not possible to conceive the Church could
be Combinational; Acts 1. and 2. Acts 4.41. Acts 4.4. Acts 5.14. Acts 6.1.
for upon necessity in that Church at that time there must be more than one
Congregation; for from 120. to 3120. to these were added 5000. which makes
8120. and yet more multitudes of men and women were added, and still the number
of disciples were multiplied. And out of doubt the increase staid not here, God
adding to the Church daily such as should be saved. That so many thousands
should meet together in any house to perform their Christian duties was
impossible; they must be divided into several Congregations, Had these been
Combinational, then Saint James had been by the Apostles made Bishop of
Jerusalem to little purpose; for he could nor must not have taken the
oversight but of one of them, the rest had been out of his jurisdiction, which
I suppose no wise man will ever think, since the Apostles no question had the
same charity, and would have the same care of the rest, as of that one, and
then would have set up as many chaires as there had been Congregations. But of
such we hear not, of this one we do, which is a sufficient evidence to me, that
all the Christians of that City at least, if not of all Palestine, were under
his jurisdiction, and subject to his Cathedra. Out of which it will necessarily
follow, That the Cathedral Church was the prime institution, not the
Combinational, and that therefore the Combinational Churches corruption, was
not the Cathedrals generation, but rather the contrary, which we have lived to
see, that the Combinationals generation, is the Cathedrals corruption.

And what I have said in particular of the Church of Jerusalem, is as true of
all other Churches the Apostles planted, and in others planted by their
pattern, Antioch, Corinth, Atheus, Rome, etc. for the same reason holds in all
these Cities where the multitudes of believers grew so numerous; one
Congregation could not hold them. I ask now, had the Apostles, put case Peter
or Paul there present, had they jurisdiction over them all, or had they not? If
they had, then the Combination and Independency of Churches is at an end in the
Primitive Church. If they had not, I wonder they should stay for diverse years
in one place, having no more to do, than to supervise one single Congregation;
besides, that then there must be as many as there were Pastors in those
Churches of equal power in their several Churches with the Apostles, which he
that can believe, may digest any thing.

Ephesus was a great City, Rev. 2.3.
and had in it those who took upon them to say they were Apostles, the Angel
(be it Bishop or College of Presbyters) is commended for trying them, and
finding them liars; if they were not of his own Congregation, what had the
Angel to do to try them? if your Tenet be true, he deserves no commendation at
all, but rather reproof for being (...). But that they were, is more than ever
you can prove. I am apt to believe, that if it had been so, the Epistle had not
been directed to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, but to the Angel of such
or such a Congregation in Ephesus. Verse 24.
And the like may be said of the Churches of Pergamos and Thyatyra, Verse 18.
the last being reproved for suffering the woman Jezabel, calling her self a
Prophetess to teach and seduce. For if the Angel had not power over all the
Congregations of that City, say that this Jezabel had taught in another
Combinational Church, which is very possible, and not in his, the answer had
been easy, Jezabel is out of my reach, out of my jurisdiction, and therefore
you have nothing against me for her misdemeanour.

This that I have said destroys clearly the subject of your Proposition, the
Combinational Church, and that being gone, what you affirm of it will fall of
it self. I shall therefore hereafter desire you to lay your foundation deeper,
before you go about to build, or to speak more properly, to destroy any thing
upon such a groundless supposition, which you and I have reason to suspect,
were it only but for this, that all the Churches of the Christian world, East,
West, North, South, for these 1600 years and more have been of another
constitution. Were it Rome alone, I should suspect; but when all are otherwise,
none Combinational, no not those who scarce ever heard of Rome, and all
Cathedral, I cannot be persuaded that the love of Christ has been so cold to
his Catholic Church, to suffer this Cathedral corruption as you call it so
long, so universally to overspread her face. It seems to me contrary to his
promise, behold, I am with you to the end of the world. And so I end what I had
to say to this Proposition. I now come to the next, in which you tell us, what
this corruption was, viz.

Proposition. 2. A presumption to alter and to elevate the places and
appellations of the Teacher, Pastor, Ruler, and Deacon, into those
unscripture-like Titles of Lord-bishop, Deane, Chancellor, Archdeacon.
TO this I in the first place shall return you the words of Zanchy. Quid quod
in Ecclesis etiam Protestantium non desunt reipsa Episcopi and Archiepiscopi?
Zanchy append. de fide Aphorism. 11.
quos mutatis bonis Gracis nominibus, in male Latina convertimus; vocant
superintendentes and generales superintendentes. Sed ubi etiam neque illa
vetera bona Graeca, neque haec nova male Latina nomina obtinent, ibi tamen
solent esse aliqui primarii, penes quos est authoritas. De nominibus ergo
fuerit controversia, verum eum de rebus convenit, quid de nominibus altercamur?
This first.

2. Next to your Distribution I say, that perhaps by Teachers and Pastors you
may intend two sorts of Ministers in the Church; for so I know some
distinguish, that Pastors in Saint Paul were such as had not only the office
to preach the Word and administer the Sacraments, but had also the Church and
care of souls committed to them; Teachers, those who labored in the Doctrine,
but received no charge of Sacraments or souls. Some make the Teachers to be
public professors of Divinity, and Governors of Ecclesiastical Schools; but
Pastors, to be the Ministers of particular Congregations, which I will not
deny but it may be true; but I shall remember you that four of the Fathers,
Jerome, Austin, Chrysostom, Theodoret, were unacquainted with the nicetie; for
they thought the Apostle expressed what belonged to the Pastoral office under
two names, that the Pastor was to be Doctor, to remember he must labor in
doctrine, as well as (...), which often signifies to rule. And then your third
word Rulers will come under that notion also, and so Teachers, Pastors and
Rulers will not denote three distinct sorts of Church Officers, which I have
some reason to think you aim at, but one and the same man qualified both to
teach and to rule. At Geneva, Calvin and Beza were made both Pastors and
Readers of Divinity, being men so able to discharge both; and yet no man did
say, that they did not content themselves with their pastoral votation, or
allege against them, He that teaches on teaching, or he that exhorts on
exhortation. For as I have often told you, and have proved, Lay-Ruling Elders,
except you mean Arbitratours, there were never any in the Primitive Church.

The last word you use is Deacon. Hieron. ad Evagrium. Epiph. lib. 1. Tom. 1.
de adventu Christi in carnem.
And under that name are properly comprehended those who by the first
institution were only mensarum and viduarum Ministri: who if we believe
Epiphanius, were chose out of the seventy; of which, two of them did preach.
Stephen and Philip, they were more than Deacons, they were Evangelists, and so
Philip is styled. But he that shall heedfully consider Saint Paul's precepts,
and the conditions required by him in those that should be Deacons; would
easily collect, that their Office was not only a charge to look to the poor,
but that they were to attend the sacred services and Assemblies, and even to be
a step to the Ministry of the word.

I shall therefore willingly admit of the distinction, that there were in the
Primitive Church two sorts of Deacons. One of the first institution, who were
to have a care of the poor; and of a second kind deputed by the Church, who
were to attend on the Church; give unto eve y one present of the sanctified
bread and wine, to command the people silence, attention, Council. Ancyr. Can.
2. Cypr. lib. 3. Epist. 9. ^ust. Apol. 2. Ignat. ad Heronem.
and devotion; all which may be collected out of the Council of Ancyra,
Cyprian, Justin Martyr, and Ignatius, who mentions his own Deac Heron at
Antioch, and Stephen to be the Deacon to Saint James at Jerusalem.

Thus much it was necessary to premise before we joined issue; now you charge
us with presumption in removing the Landmarks, that we have altered the places
and appellations, by bringing in of new names, unscripture-like titles: So
belike it is not lawful to use any titles of honor or command, but such as are
used in Scripture. The Jews then belike offended, when they used these
unscripture-like titles of Reschignim, Tsadikim, Chasidim, and so after the
captivity they divided the people. The Reschagnim, were the (...) the wicked;
the Tsadikim, their (...) their just men; the Chasidim, their (...) or (...)
their good and holy men. And yet Saint Paul serves himself of this distinction;
for questionless he alludes to it, Romans 5.6, 7.
amplifying the great love of Christ dying for us. Scarcely for a righteous man
will one dye, yet peradventure for a good man, some would even dare to dye; the
gradation is this. Some peradventure would dye for one of the Chasidim the good
men, scarcely for one of the Tsadikim, for the just or righteous men; But for
Reschagnim or ungodly, none would dye; In this then appeared the love of
Christ, that when we were Reschagnim ungodly sinners, Christ dyed for us. A man
is a Ruler of an Army, and he shall not call some Majors, some Colonells, some
Centurions, Pentacurions, Decurions, etc. because these are unscripture-like
titles. Nomen is rei notamen, invented it was to denote the thing, neither do I
know which way it is possible to understand and distinguish but by names; vox
being rei and conceptuum signum; and therefore must necessarily be admitted, if
we will not confound our selves in the understanding of things. But now to the
names you mention, Lord-Bishop, Dean, Chancellor, Surrogate, Archdeacon. The
end of two of these, I find in Scripture, Bishop and Deacon; but you will say
the syllables, Lord and Arch, are unscripture-like. I must confess, that I
find not Lord before Bishop in the Scripture, nor Arch before Deacon; but this
will not prove that we have altered the places and appellations: for what place
have we altered either of Bishops or Deacons, by calling one Lord-Bishop, or
the other Archdeacon? Still the place and office is the same; for the
Lord-Bishop has no other power than he had at first, which is potestas
clavium; nor the Archdeacon any more than he had, to be oculus Episcopi, and
see that all be well administered that concerns the poor, and service of the
Church. To be offended with a title is to pick straws, especially when the
substance is observed.

For how have we altered the places, when we have yet in our Church Bishops,
who are Pastors, Teachers, and besides these public Professors of Divinity,
Doctors, Catechizers, whom Saint Paul, says Saint Ambrose, meant by Teachers,
such as were in the Churches of Alexandria, Clemens, Pantonus, Origin,
Hicroclas. As for those other three appellations, Dean, Chancellor, Surrogate,
no Scripture can be brought for them, nor needs it, it being lawful, no
question, to give fit names to things, though no text can be produced;
otherwise your parties were to seek, who call him who is to preside in a Synod
by the name of a Proloquutor, and those that govern in your Combinational
Churches Lay Elders; and are not these unscripture-like? for I find no such
titles in the Scriptures.

As for the name of Deane, it is ancient, and it signifies no more than that
Presbyter who was the chief in any Collegiate Church, and was to have a care
that the Statutes of the Church were observed, being like the the Principal
Warden or President of a College, and you may as well be offended with any of
these Appellations as with this, with which yet it is evident many of your
party are well pleased, for they enjoy it, and the honor and profits,
notwithstanding the names are not found in Scripture. And should any man lay
this objection against any of them, I dare say he would answer him with a
smile. I am confident he would, who being a prime man among you, at this day
enjoys a Deanery, and doubtless hugs himself, applaudit sibi ipsi domi; Aha,
I am warm, I have been at the fire. That you like the name nere the worse it
was fetched from the Militia. The Roman soldiers were when drawn to their
winter quarters to lodge by companies, and so many as lodged together, being
commonly ten, were called Contubernales, the chief over them was called
Decenus, or decurio, Hadrian. Junius.
being praeses manipuli, dexinier en guerre Gall, or the Corporal from the
Italian word Caporale, or Spanish, Corporal. We in Enlglish Corporal: and from
hence it was borrowed and brought into the Church, that the chief of the
Capitulum should be called Decan, which I think is Arch-Presbyter.

3. I come now to your other two disliked Appellations, Chancellours and
Surrogates. That the Bishop was at first the chief Judge in his Church I have
before proved, and then no dought he might appoint his subordinate Officials.
This being a confessed rule in the Law, that when any cause is committed to any
man, he is also conceived to receive full authority in all matters belonging to
that cause. When the Emperors became Christian, they judged it equal and pious
to reserve some causes to be tried in the Christian Court, in which they
constituted the Bishop to be the Judge. These causes were properly called
Ecclesiastical, such as were Blasphemy, Apostasy, Heresies, Schisms, Orders,
Admissions, institution of Clerks, Cooks Reports fol. 8.
Rites of Matrimony, Probates of Wills, Divorces, and such like. To give
audience to these, the Bishop otherwise employed, could not always be present;
and yet there was no reason that for his absence justice should not take its
course. And in some of these had he been present, great skill in Civil Laws is
requisite, that they be ended aright. This gave occasion to the Bishop to
appoint his Chancellor and Surrogate. A Chancellor (who had his name a
Cancellis within which he was to sit) a man brought up in the Civil Laws, and
therefore fit to decide such causes that did depend upon those Laws, who being
at first a mere Layman, and therefore having no power of Exommunication,
therefore the Bishop thought fit to adjoyne a Surrogate to him, that in case
that high censure were to be passed, this man being in Orders, and therefore
invested with power, actu primo, and by Commission with the Bishops power actu
secundo sub Episcopo rogatus, being demanded, and an Officer under the Bishop,
Actu primo.
might pronounce the Sentence. This was the original of their names and power.
Now prudential necessity first instituted them, and prudence where Episcopal
power is of force continues them. If a Superior shall be pleased to revoke
some of these causes, which were by him made of Ecclesiastical cognizance, and
cause the litigants to take their trial at Common or Civil Law, Vide the book
of Order of Excommunication in Scotl. and Hist. of Scot Amon 2. page 46.
then in the Church I confess there will be no use of the Chancellor. And if
the rest shall be tried by the Bishop and his Presbytery, as they were at
first, neither will there need much a Surrogate. But now if that rule of the
Presbytery should prove to be true, who do challenge cognizance of all causes
whatsoever, which are sins directly, or by reduction, then they have power, if
not to nullify, yet to give liberty to play, all Courts and Judicatories
besides their own, and must bring in thither Sollicitours, Atturneys,
Counselors, Procters, etc. which will be as un-Scripture-like names as
Chancellours and Surrogates.

Cinod. de off. Eccl.

Joannes Epis. Citri in respon ad cabasil. Naz. Testam.


4. The fourth Appellation that offends you, is the Archdeacon, who was a very
ancient officer in the Church, and of great esteem in the Greek Church.
Neither was he chosen to that place by the Patriarch, but came to it by
seniority; the name then gave him no power, but only this prerogative to be
chief of the Deacons of the Church, as if you would say of the eldest standing.
In the Church of England he was more than a Deacon, for he was a Presbyter, and
his office was to be present at all ordinations, to enquire into the life, the
manners, the abilities, and sufficiency of him who was to be ordained, and
either to reject him if he saw occasion, or to present him to the Bishop to be
ordained, to induct into any Benefice that man who was instituted by the
Bishop, to have the care of the houses of God were kept decent, and in good
repair: lastly, to take account of all who had to do with the poors money. And
this last was it which gave him the name of the chief Deacon; Ambr. lib. 1. de
off. c. 41. Prudentius.
for when the charity of the Church was great, and ample gifts were bestowed to
the relief of the poorer Christians, the Church stock was ample, (as appears by
Lawrence the Martyr, who was Deacon to Sixtus Bishop of Rome martyred under
Valerian) This being committed to the Deacons care, that no fraud might be
committed, as it happened too often in money-matters, the Church thought fit to set
one of the Deacons over the rest, who might call them to account, as ours were
to do the Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor, to whom they gave the name
of the Archdeacon.

Now speak impartially, what harm was in all this? What that may offend you?
Deacon cannot, and Arch should not, since you know it signifies no more but
chief or prime, as in these words (...), Patriarch. And that you may carry some
affection, or at least not a loathing to it, I pray call to memory, that a
worthy Martyr of our Church John Philpot adjudged to the fire, and burnt in
Queen Maryes days, Fox Martyrol. An. 1553. primo Mariae.
resigned up his soul in the flames, being then Archdeacon of Winchester. And
that with him Master Cheiny and Master Elmour that refused to subscribe to the
doctrine of Transubstantiation in the Convocation-house, were both Archdeacons.

5. But now I return back again to that Appellation Lord-Bishop, at which so
many have stumbled and been scandalized; that others before you have done it, I
have reason to attribute to envy and an evil eye, but in you I shall only
impute it to inconsideration. Genesis 24. 1 Kings 18. 2 Kings 2. 2 Kings 4. 2
Kings 8.
For you are mighty in the Scriptures, and therefore might have known that the
Hebrew Adoni, or the Greek (...), or the Latin Dominus, which in the Spanish
is Don, in the French Sciur, in English Sir, is only a name of civility,
courtesy, respect, reverence. By this Rebecca calls Abraham's servant, Drink my
Lord. By this Obadiah the Prophet, Art thou my Lord Elijah? By this the
children of the Prophets, the inhabitants of Hiericho, the Sunamite, and
Hazael, the Prophet Elisha. By this, Mary the Gardner, (...), Lord, or Sir, if
thou have taken him hence; with this civil respect the Greeks accost Philip,
John 20.15. John 12.21. 1 Pet. 3.6.
(...), Sir, we would see Jesus. In all which places, the word imports only a
courteous and respectful compellation. And St. Peter commends the woman that
shall with this name endear her husband, proposing the example of Sarah that
obeyed Abraham, and called him Lord.

To a Bishop double honor, respect, reverence is due; for he is comprised
under the name of father in the Commandment, and whom we must honor in heart
and deed, why not in words? shall the lips neglect, whom the heart regards,
especially when the tongue is the interpreter of the mind within? And what do
we more, when we call a Bishop Lord, it is but respect, honor, reverence, that
we then tender unto him. And if Rebeccah signified to a servant; if Obadiah and
Hazael to a Prophet; if Mary to a Gardner; if Hellenists to Philip; if an
obedient wife to a Mechanic, a hard-handed Artisan, may attest her reverential
regard, by this word Lord authorized in Scripture: why should the same word be
called an unscripture-like compellation, when affixed before the name of those,
who are by their place and office to be the lights of the Christian world, and
really endued with power for the regiment of the Catholic Church? Had they yet
assumed this name, and fastened it upon themselves, there had been some
exception to be laid against it. For it is but reason, he who exalts himself,
should be abased; but they were others, and those no mean ones, that thought
them worthy of this honorable title. To omit other Kingdoms, the Princes of
this Nation, who were the fountains of honor, thought it fit that no Laws
should pass for the government of the Nation, to which they gave not their
vote; and for that end, called them to their Parliaments, by the same Writ that
they called other Lords. And I am certain, before some men's heat had corrupted
good manners, it was the guise of Christendom, not to speak of Bishops, fine
praefatione honoris, in particular this honor. I shall give you an instance or
two. The inscription of a letter to Julius Bishop of Rome from some of his
brethren, Sozomen. lib. 3. cap. 23.

Nazianz. ad Greg. Nyssen. Theodoret. lib. 5. c. 9.


is (...). Let no man speak untruths of me, (...), says Gregory Nazianzene.
And the Synodical book of the Council of Constantinople, is inscribed Dominis
Reverendissimis, ac piissimis fratribus ac Collegis Damaso, Ambrosio, etc. and
they were Bishops. I spare more testimonies; these may suffice that the title
Lord-Bishop was not new, nor invented in this Land. Yet that those, who were
honored among us might bear this title without any derogation to Scripture;
even by Scripture testimonies I have said enough.

I am not ignorant that there be two places of Scripture produced, as if they
were a prohibition to this title, Luke 22.25. 1. Pet. 5.3. (...), and (...).
But he that shall considerately weigh both places, will never be able to
infer any such conclusion For let it be thought on, what was the occasion of
our Saviors words; Zebedees wife comes and petitions for her sons, that one
might sit at the right, another on the left hand in his Kingdom; which out of
a Jewish opinion they then thought must be earthly and temporal. At this
ambition of the two brethren the Disciples murmured; they thought they had
deserved as well as mother Zebedees children, and knew no reason why they
should be preferred before them. To still this contention our Savior tells
them, that this his Kingdom was not to be like that of the world, in that the
Kings of the Nations, (...) dominantur, so Junius, so Beza translates it, do
domineere, rule and govern with a high hand, in potentia gladii, or as it is in
Saint Matthew, Mat. 20.25.
(...), and (...), do pro arbitrio exercise dominion, and exercise authority
over them; but with you it shall not be so; You no such Lords as they are, use
no such domineering power as they do. A power you are to have, but not like
theirs; yours is to be spiritual, their's temporal: their power they use with
pride, rigor, sometimes tyranny, and against the good of their subjects; for
it is (...) in the genitive case (and the Scholiast upon Nazianzene observes,
Scholiast. Nazianz. in (...).
that (...) in any compound Verb with a genitive case, signifies against) But
your power must not be so used, vos non sic; It must be with mildness,
meekness, humility; he who is to be (...) among you, let him be your servant.
It is not the word, it is the ambitious seeking of a temporal principality, as
an affix of the Apostolate, that Christ interdicted his Disciples. Bern. lib.
10. de Consider.
Forma Apostolica haec est, Dominatio interdicitur, indicitur Ministratio.
Dominatio is forbid, is therefore the word Dominus? were this so, a temporal
Lord must go without his title of honor, as well as the Lord-Bishop; for the
dominion they use may possibly be more rigorous, arbitrary, Lordly, tyrannical,
than ever was that of the Bishop. Well, however they use it, who can help it?
with them it must not be so, though they have and may be allowed in civility to
be (...), yet they never were allowed to be (...), tyrannous, rigorous Lords;
Saint Peter's words are clear against that, (...); the Apostle would not that
any superior should lord it over or against Gods inheritance. That service,
that humility, that meekness, which our Savior prescribes his Apostles, is
against that: and who so shall make use of the text to any other purpose, goes
about to find in it, that which our blessed Savior never intended; he may as
soon fetch gold out of a pibble.

One thing yet does amaze me, that those men should be so much startled at a
civil title, who yet make use of the power even in the most rigid construction.
They who first pressed it against Bishops, were the Anabaptists of Germany;
nothing was so frequently in their mouths, as the Kings of the Nations, but
these at length had Consuls and Kings of their own erection among themselves.
To them succeeded the Presbyterian consistory, and so eager they are for this
government, that they call their Discipline the Kingdom of Christ, the
Tabernacle which God has appointed; and where this Ecclesiastical Synod is not
erected, Brown in a Treatise against one Barrow.
they say that Gods Ordinance is not performed; the office of Christ as he is
King, is not acknowledged; and in this Kingdom who were like to bear most
sway? are they not the Ruling Elders? This Brown, not I, calls a Lordly
Discipline; and says, that instead of some Lord-Bishops in name, we should
have a thousand Lordly Tyrants indeed, which now do disdain the name; for,
says he, if you could but once get up the names of Elders and Presbyters, what
mischief, cruelty and pride would not stream from that name? with much more to
that purpose. At last we feel into whose hands the power is come, and this I
may be bold to say, that the loins of the Lord-Bishops were not so heavy as
have been the little fingers of such of your Pastors, who have declined the
name. I list not to grate your ears with this harsh music; but lay your hand
upon your heart, and say, whether the Masters of your Congregations be not the
men (...). God is my witness, and you partly know that I never was guilty of
the smoothing of any man's pride, of favoring of any man's rigorous domineering.
Of honor I always thought him most worthy, who I saw did least affect it;
affectation of honor, and desire of superiority, I know, our Savior
prohibits; and on the contrary, humility, lowliness and meekness is that
which he commands* And yet I see no reason why it should grieve any godly mind
to hear a Bishop called by that name, with which Saint Peter willed every woman
to call her husband, and Mary Magdalen called him who had but a spade in his
hand. They are not titles that can swell any man, who has not pride in his
heart, and that may leven as much and puff up him, that puffs at this title,
and bears other names, as he that was once called Lord Bishop. And so much of
the titles you except against; I come now to what you lay to their charge

Proposition. 3. Who ventured to usurp the power of excommunication in their
Synods and Councils.
WHO is a Relative, and it has so many Antecedents, that I know not whether
you refer it to all the foregoing titles, or to some in particular. To all
you should not, for the Dean intermedled not with excommunications; the
Chancellor de facto did; but should not; so I grant you that was an
usurpation, and complained on; and preached down by me, as well as decryed by
you. The Surrogate and Archdeacon did; but then it was not jure nativo, but
delegato; for their commission they had from the Bishops: I shall therefore
more willingly conceive your thoughts reflect upon them, and especially because
you mention Synods and Councils, which they alone at first had power to
assemble. But then to affirm that it was an usurped power in them to
excommunicate in Synods and Councils, seems to me a Paradox. For I shall here
ask, whether the Bishops being not assembled in Synods or Councils had power to
excommunicate or no? If you say they had, then it will seem strange that
meeting in Synods and Councils they should lose this power. This is as if you
should say, that Corporations meeting in Council should lose the power, which
every single Alderman had before he came thither, or the people their rights
and privileges when assembled in Parliament, which they had before; Vis unita
sortior; and certainly what power any man has to act singly and by himself,
when he meets with other Commissioners associated in that power, he works more
vigorously, and his act is of the greater authority. But if you shall say, that
the Bishops had no power of excommunication, nor then, nor before, nor in
Council, nor out of it, you plainly contradict the Scriptures, which I shall
evidence unto you, by examining the Commission given the Apostles and their
practice; and what is true of the Apostles, will be as true of the Bishops: for
I have before proved unto you, they were their Successors, and by them settled
in some Churches, And the ordinary power which was given to the Apostles was
given to them; for otherwise Christ's promise cannot be verifyed, behold, I am
with you, signanter, to the end of the world.

John 20.
The Commission is extant. As my Father sent me, so send I you; and then
presently breathing on them, he adds, Receive the Holy Ghost. Whose sins ye
remit, they are remitted; whose sins ye retain, they are retained: Cyril.
lib. 12. in Joan. cap. 55. Cyprian. de unit. Ecclesiae. and Epist. 73. ad
Julian.
which words are understood by all the Ancient Doctors of authority, as though
he said that with the same power and authority my Father sent me into the world
to gather and govern my Church, I do also send you, that is, with all spiritual
power necessary to your office and charge. Now I ask, whether the Apostles must
be assembled in Council or not, when they were to execute this authority? if
you say they must, then you grant the question; for then the sentence of
excommunication may be passed in a Synod or Council. If you should say they
could not, then a single Apostle could not excommunicate, which I yet never
heard affirmed; all granting, that they were pares potestate, except the
Papist, who will have all Episcopal power and authority originally invested in
Saint Peter, and from him derived to others. But this I conceive you will not
say neither, when I find St. Paul assuming this power to himself. 2 Cor. 13.10.
Therefore I write these things being absent; lest being present, I should use
sharpness according to the power the Lord has given me. What can be more
plain? power given by the Lord to me, a single Apostle; and therefore he tells
them that heretofore had sinned, Ver. 2.
and to all other, that if he came again he would not spare, spare to lay his
rod upon them. For in the first Epistle, he proposes such a thing to them, and
wills them to consider of it; quid vult is? what will you? 1 Cor. 4.21.
shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love, or in the Spirit of meekness?
as who should say, choose which you will. Compare this with 2 Cor. 10.4, 8, 9,
10, 11. verses, and you will easily conclude that a single Apostle had
authority enough to lay his rod upon a scandalous contumacious offender. This
for the power, now to the practice.

According to this power Saint Paul exercised judgment, and gave sentence in a
certain grievous case of incest among the said Corinthians, in these words. I
absent in body, but present in spirit; have judged already, as though I were
present concerning him that has done this deed; in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ when ye are gathered together, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5
and my spirit with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such a one
to Satan. Who I pray was it that censured this man? was it not the Apostle
himself? If I understand (...), ego judicavi, it must be so. And the same
Apostle writing to his Scholar Timothy, makes mention of another sentence by
him pronounced against Hymenaeus and Alexander, two seditious and heretical
men; whom says he, I have delivered, ego tradidi, 1 Timothy 1.2^
to Satan: i. e. excommunicated, and cut off from the Church of God, that they
may learn not to blaspheme. What should I tell you that the learned draw the
words of Saint Peter to Simon Magus to this purpose? Acts 8.21.
Thou have no part nor lot in this matter. That Diotrephes cast some out of the
Church, it was his fault; but for this, Saint John when he came, Joh. Ep. 3.10.
threatens to remember his deeds; i. e. as all Expositors agree, by his
Apostolical power to proceed against him.

From the Apostles I descend lower. First, to the Angels of the Churches, who
were commended for not bearing with them that were evil; and for trying them
who said they were Apostles, Revel. 2.2.6.20. 1 Timothy 5.19, 20 21, 22. Tit. 3.10.
but found upon trial liars: and again, blamed when they neglected their
duties. They were neither worthy of praise, nor yet blameworthy, had they not
had authority in their hands. Timothy is commanded to do the like at Ephesus,
Titus at Crete.

Yea, but perhaps it may be replied, these directions were not given to Timothy
and Titus as single Bishops, but as chief of a Presbytery: well then, the
conclusion will hence easily follow, that a Bishop with his Presbytery may
excommunicate. If so, then I pray tell me, what usurpation it can be for
Bishops assembled in a Synod or Council to do the like? They being chief cannot
want that authority which the Presbytery has; and why then should they not use
it? From an inferior to a superior power, the argument follows strongly. The
Justices may punish such or such a Malefactor, much more the Judges, but much
more the Superior that empowred them. The reason is the same; The Bishop with
the Presbytery may cast a scandalous person out of the Church, therefore much
more the Bishops themselves assembled in Councils, because among them there is
a subordination. And what a lesser power may do, that a higher may, which is
empowred to that end. Thus have I wrestled with your assertion, and foiled it.
I come next to grapple with your reason, and if that prove to be weak, your
affirmation will fall of it self. You say,

Proposition 4. That this was contrary to what was practiced in the Orthodox
pattern, Acts 15.24. which was laid down and left as well for the imitation as
information of after-ages.
FIrst, I thank you, that you grant this Synod to be a pattern for after-ages
to imitate, and be informed by. For first, then we have from this a sufficient
authority to call Synods and Councils. Secondly, a pattern to imitate in making
Decrees, that it be by way of deliberation, declaration and decision. Act. 15.
ver. 7.
For the acts of this Council which the Presbyters and brethren used, were
disputative, or in genere deliberativo; they disputed; Saint Peter's act was
declarative; and when there had been much disputing, Verse 12. Ver. 19.
Peter rose up and said, etc. and the like was that of Barnabas and Paul. But
Saint James his act was decisive, wherefore (...), I judge or give sentence.
Thirdly, There ought to be a President in a Council, who is to moderate the
whole action, and to pronounce the sentence. Fourthly, That the Synodical
decrees materially and Ecclesiastically are obligatory, Ver. 22.23. Acts 16.4.
Acts 21.25.
and tie the absent, as this did the Churches of Syria, Cilicia, yea, and all
the Churches of the Gentiles, who had no Commissioners in that Synod, as well
as those of Jerusalem and Antioch. Fifthly, that the chief man of a Council is,
that you say, by Scripture Proof to confute soul-subverting positions, and to
confirm Christian doctrines, as it was in this. But this was not the sole end;
for another there was; viz. to cast out of the Church, Disturbers and
Heretics, as I shall by and by make good unto you: and so your position of
usurpation in Bishops of the rod will not prove true.

But this you say, was contrary to the orthodox pattern; how so I pray? if a
contrariety, then it must be opposite, and I have never yet heard, that
subordinate ends come under any species of opposition. A man binds his son
Prentice, his end is, that he learn and be skilful in his profession, but yet
he has a farther reach, which is, that he may get a livelihood; the first he
intends less principally, the last chiefly; and can a man say now, that these
two ends are contrary, or thwart one the other, when indeed they are but
subservient the one to the other? and the like is to be said of all
intermediate ends. For that rule of the Civilians is most true, finis
principalis non tollit accessorium; to apply this, the chief end of the
Apostolical Synod was to confute false positions, and establish the truth;
suppose now, that they had there pronounced an Anathema against those Jewish
Christians, who would be still zealous for circumcision and the observation of
Moses Law after the publication of their decree, had this been contrary and
opposite to their first and prime intent? you cannot say it. Neither is it then
contrary, when a company of Bishops meet in a Synod or Council to illustrate
and hold forth the truth, and condemn heresies, that they pass also a censure
upon the Heretics. I can find no contrariety or opposition in this. Yea, but
you will say, here is no pattern for it. Neither is it necessary; it suffices
that here is a pattern set to compass the chief end of all Councils; as for
the accessories they may be regulated by prudence. A Prince calls a Parliament;
in it there be good Laws established for the peace of his Territories, and not
one delinquent punished or censured. Must this particular Session be such an
absolute pattern to all following Parliaments, that shall only make good Laws,
and never call to question, or pass sentence upon any offender? I hope you
will not say so; neither can you say it in this case. For I find the Apostles
singly, as I have proved, and out of Council to have done it; and therefore I
doubt not, that if being in Council assembled they had done it, it had been no
error. Yea, but this you will say could not be done. For it follows,

Proposition 5. To censure any man's person, is the express privilege of the
Presbyterial Church, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 2 These. 3.15.
Privileges and Prerogatives are tender things; and it behooves those who stand
for them, to produce infallible Records, lest it appear their claim be louder
than their right. A Corporation struggles hard for a privilege, fees a Lawyer
to plead their Charter; he picks out some weak words in it that may look that
way; at last the Judge tells him, that he has betrayed his Clients cause, for
the words in the Charter carry no such meaning. The like I must say to you; A
privilege you plead, for your Corpse the Presbyterial Church; the evidence you
give for it, is out of Gods great Charter, 1 Cor. 5. 2 These. 3. Now if you had
studied to betray your case, you could not I believe have lighted upon two more
weak evidences.

For does Saint Paul assert a privilege of the Presbyterial Church in that
place of the Corinths, where he makes himself the Judge; where he passes
censure himself? (...), I have decreed or judged? he asks not their consents,
he prays not their aid, he refers not the matter to their liking; I have
says he, already determined, before he wrote, and before they read that part of
his Epistle. And what to do? to join with them, to deliver this trespasser to
Satan! No says he, I have already decreed to deliver him. By what means? what,
by their power and privilege? not so, but by the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Then for ought we can find in this place, the Apostle though absent,
decreed to do the deed himself, by the power of Christ, and not by the consent
and help of the Corinthians. Certainly had this been a Privilege of the
Presbyterial Church, Saint Paul would never have invaded it; what an Apostle
guilty of such presumption, such usurpation?

Yea, but the sentence was to be pronounced by them. When ye are gathered
together in my Spirit, i. e. my power, my authority, then deliver. True, they
were bound to do it; but by what right? their own, or the Apostles? by his
certainly, for it is In my spirit. So all their power is delegate, not native;
it is derivative, not primitive; declarative, not judiciary, and consequently
from this place no privilege of the Presbyterial Church to censure any man's
person can be deduced. But rather the quite contrary, in that the Apostle a
single person judged and decreed without them.

I shall mind you what may well be concluded hence, which is, that the censure
should not be past in a corner, but in a full Assembly, because the Apostle
says, When ye are gathered together; and if you shall complain that it was
otherwise, I shall not stick to confess that your complaint is just, and I
have and shall ever join with you in it.

But I shall add what strength I can to your plea out of this chapter. Some
may say the authority was in the Presbyterial Church, because the Apostle
reprehends them, verse 2. that they had not past censures on the peccant. Ye
are puffed up, and have not rather mourned, that he that has done this deed
may be taken from you. That I may give light to this dark place; A custom was
used in the Church, when any was to be excommunicated, to join in mourning.
This duty the Corinthians had neglected, and he reproves them for it; they were
puffed up in an opinion of their own deeper wisdom, they joined not in
mourning; they complained not to Christ or his Apostle, that a Censure might
pass on such a one. This was their fault; for a course they should have taken,
that such a one should be taken away. But by whom? that is the question; Not by
them to be sure. For Taken away from you, implies that it is by the power of
another, not by their act; for no man can take any thing from himself. He may
put it away, not take it; the expression had been veen very imperfect if this
had been the meaning. And so for you nothing can be included hence.

But again, it may be objected, verse 7. Purge ye out the old leaven. And
again, verse 12. Do ye not judge these who are within? where purging and
judging is laid upon vos, and is therefore a Church-priviledge.

I answer, that vos is no way exclusive of the Apostles power, but rather
includes it; for sure he may judge them that are within the Church, and does
it, verse 3. Vos then has reference to this third verse. Vos you gathered
together in my Spirit, do you purge out the old leaven? do you judge those who
are within? You to whom the Keys are given, you to whom I have delegated, my
power, being of the Presbytery, not the Layity; do you judge and purge. This is
the clear intent of the Apostle, and so has been given by all ancient
Interpreters. Whence it will follow, that a Presbyterial privilege to
excommunicate can have no footing in this chapter.

As for that other place, 2 Thessalonians. 3.15. it gives no countenance at all to the
Presbyterial Church for Censure. For the Apostle gives order only about a
disorderly person, that he might be signified to him by a letter, that if
occasion required he might be censured; yea, in express terms forbids them to
Censure him. Matthew. 18.17.
For he says, Count him not as an enemy, that is, as an Heathen. (for so the
word enemy probably signifies, Romans 11.28. Ephesians. 2.16.) I must confess
ingenuously unto you, if I would pick out an argument against the Presbyterial
privilege to censure, I would make choice of this place; for to what purpose
would the Apostle have this unruly man noted by a letter, if they had power to
proceed against him? Now why nor they nor the Church of Corinth had not power
without the Apostle to Censure, I have given you an account before, and need
not here repeat it.

You see you must produce stronger evidence for your privilege than hitherto
you have done, before I can yield it. And I am confident that better you cannot
bring forth. Since the power of Censures must be necessarily in some hands, I
shall leave them in theirs that they have been for sixteen hundred years;
Primarily in Bishops by commission and delegation in Presbyters, and therefore
much more in both assembled in Councils, so that it cannot be any presumption
or usurpation of power, if in them they use their authority to censure any man's
person; of which you assign the time to be Anno Dom. 320. or thereabout when

Proposition 6. Alexander Patriarch of Alexandria began this usurpation against
Arius and Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia in the reign of Constantius and
Constance.
JF there were no more to be said for it, yet this were Antiquity sufficient,
that it was used in the Church before the Nicene Council about 1300. years ago.
This would be thought on.

2. Next I could wish that you were better versed in the Records of the Church,
the histories of those first times, and acts and proceedings of Councils; for
then I am persuaded you would never have pointed out Constantines days for the
babe-age of that usurpation; for clear it is, that there then was no more done,
but what was ordered to be done, and was done before. Read but the Apostolical
Canons, Apost. Can. 3.6, 7, 8, 12, 29.
and in most of them you shall meet with these phrases, Si quis Episcopus,
Presbyter, Diaconus, Laicus, etc. be found guilty of such or such an offense,
deponatur, excommunicetur, dejiciatur, eijciatur, abjiciatur, communione
privetur, damnetur, ab Ecclesia penitus abscindatur. Again, in the Council of
Ancyra order is taken that some be deprived of the Sacrament for three, some
for four, Conc. Ancyr. c. 4, 6, 8.
some for five, some for fifteen years, some a longer time, all which space
they should be reckoned among the penitents; Basil. Can. 58.77.
to which order those two Canons in Basil give great light, (...). And again,
Can. 77. (...). Zozomen. lib. 7. cap. 17.
For these were the four Classes of the Penitents in the Primitive Church. And
it is evident that they charged the execution of these Canons upon the Bishops,
first because they had power, that to those, who by humility, and tears, and
patience, Zonaras in Explic. Can. 12. Conc. Nic. Alcimus Epist. 16.

Conc. Nic. Can. 5. Conc. Antioch. cap. 20.


and alms-deeds did demonstrate their conversion to be sincere and unfeined, to
remit the severity of the Canon. So Alcimus to Victorius the Bishop.
Authoritatis vestrae est, errantium compunctione perspecta, severitatis ordinem
temperare. And secondly, because they ordained that in every Province twice
ever year there should be a Synod, that all the Bishops of the Province meeting
together might in common examine such questions as are occurrent in every
place, and particularly to enquire, si forte aliqua indignatione, aut
contentione, aut qualibet commotione sui Episcopi, excommunicati quidam sint.

This was the Church Ordinance, set before the time you speak of, which clearly
makes against you, and now I shall show you de facto, what was done, before
that time too. In Asia there was held sundry Synods about the time of the
Emperor Commodus, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 16, 19.
in which Montanus was excommunicated, and his Heresy condemned. Victor about
the same time held a Synod at Rome, and excommunicated all the Eastern Bishops
about the celebration of Easter, Eusebius. l. 6.23, 24, 25.
which Act of his, though unjust, yet it shows the judgment of those times,
that such a thing upon a just occasion he might do, and that it was no
usurpation in a Bishop with his Council to censure any man's person. Again,
under the Emperor Decius there was a Synod gathered together at Rome of 60.
Eusebius. l. 6. c. 43.
Bishops, besides many Ministers nd Deacons, whither also there came many
Pastors of other Provinces, where by uniforme consent of all it was decreed,
that Novatus together with such as swelled, and consented to his unnatural
opinion repugnant to brotherly love, should be excommuicated, and banished the
Church. And the same was confirmed by another Synod held at Antioch by Elenus,
Firmilian, Yheoctistus. I pass by here the several Censures passed in the
Synod held at Carthage upon the Lapsi and Thurificati, as may be seen in very
many Epistles of Cyprian. To give light to this, there is not any example more
evident, than the Synod of Antioch held about sixty years before the Council of
Nice, where Paulus Samosatenus, the Bishop of Antioch was deposed, and
condemned for Heresy. Eusebius. l. 7. c. 30
The Epistle then written by the Bishops, Presbyters, etc. to Dionysius Bishop
of Rome, and Maximus Bishop of Alexandria, etc. is yet extant, wherein they
write thus. Wherefore necessity constraining us so to do: we excommunicated the
sworn adversary of God, viz. Paulus Samosatenus, and placed Donneus in his
room, etc. Farther yet there was a Council of 320. Caranza. Platina. Tom. 1.
Conc. apud Binnium.
Bishops called together at Sinuessa in Italy, where Marcellinus Bishop of Rome
was condemnatus, and anathematizatus accepit Maranatha. And all these instances
I am able to give you before that yo name, so that there it cannot be true
which you say, that the babe-age of this usurpation is made mention of as newly
appearing in the world by what was exercised by Alexander of Alexandria against
Eusebius of Nicomedia as well as against Arius in the reign of Constantius and
Constance, etc. In relation of which story, you are not exact enough neither.
For I read not of any power that Alexander usurped over Eusebius, nor any
Censure he passed upon him; he wrote indeed a letter to the brethren of the
Churches, that they should beware of Eusebius and his Arianisme, because he was
the patron and ringleader of the Apostates; in his letter he sharply reproved
him, but he censured him not, neither indeed could he, because he belonged to
the jurisdsction of another Patriarch. But touching Arius and his adherents, he
summoned together a Council of many Bishops, and deprived him and such as
favored his opinion; Achillas, Aeithales, Carpomes a second Arius, etc. of the
Priestly order. And this he might do, for they were under the jurisdiction of
the Church of Alexandria. But the Heresy being not so extinct, and matters
growing by the contenders to greater heat, Constantine thought good to call the
Nicene Council, where the question was debated, the Creed called the Nicene
composed, the clause of one substance ratified, and the 318. Bishops, except
five, subscribed unto it, viz. Eusebius, Theognis, Maris, Theonas, Secundus.
These derided the clause, Socrates lib. 1. cap. 8.
and would not subscribe to the deposition of Arius. For which cause the
Council accursed Arius and all his adherents, and forbade him Alexandria.
Moreover by the Emperors Edict, Arius, Eusebius, Theognis, were banished. cap.
14.
But Eusebius and Theognis recanted. All this was done in the reign of
Constantine; while he was alive it was that Alexander first, then the Council
proceeded against Arius and his adherents; cap. 38.
and under Constantine it was that that Arch-heretique came to that miserable
end. Yea, and Alexander himself died also, and Athanasius was chosen Bishop in
his stead before Constantine died. cap. 15.
So that it cannot be possibly true which you say, that Alexander of Alexandria
did exercise or usurp authority against Arius in the reign of Constantius and
Constance, for while their father lived they were not Emperors. Socrat. l. 2.
c. 32
Well as you intimate and direct me, I turn to the second book of Socrates,
cap. 82. but in the Gree. 40. and 41. chap. but there I find no mention of
Alexander nor Arius. A Council at Seleucia we there read of called in
Constantius's time, and that there was hot disputes betwixt the Arians and the
Orthodox, but at last the Orthodox prevailed, deposed Acacius the Arian, and
his accomplices; and excommunicated diverse others, among which was Eusebius;
Socrates lib. ^. cap. 2. lib. 1. cap, 23. 29. graec.
whether it was he of Nicomedia or no, it appears not; but in all probability
it is the same man, because after his recantation he relapsed to his Arianisme,
and was one of the persecutors of Athanasius. However this makes against you;
for here we find some Bishops deposed, others excommunicated by a Council. But
this by the way. In the last place you send me to Evagrius; lib. 1. cap. 6. but
to seek for what, I know not; for I pray look again, and you shall not find
any thing of Alexander, Arius, Evagr. lib. 1. cap. 6.
or Eusebius, no nor their names in that chapter, it is wholly of another
matter, and nothing to your purpose, and therefore I pass it by, and set it
for a cipher.

But were your opinion true, that it were usurpation for Bishops assembled in a
Council to censure any man's person; consider I pray what an aspersion you lay
upon the first four general Councils, who have been hitherto received with so
much veneration by the whole Church of God. For in every one of these we find
the Heresies, and the Heretics censured. In that of Nice, Arius and
Arianisme; in that of Constantinople, Eunomius, Arius, Macedonius, Photinus,
Apollinarius, and their Heresies; in that of Ephesus, Nestorius, and
Nestorianisme: in that of Chalced^n, Dioscorus, Eutyches, Caranza in his
Council.
and Eutychianisme. I verily believe these grave Fathers, the flower then of
the Christian world, renowned for piety, honored for learning and integrity,
would never have ventured to have passed so dreadful a Censure upon any man's
person, had they not been verily persuaded that from the Word of God, they had
a sufficient warrant to authorize them unto it. I shall shut up this point,
when I have told you that it seems to me very unreasonable that a few met
together (as in a Congregational Church, they cannot be many) should have a
privilege to do that, which the Catholic Church assembled in a general
Council should not be able to do: or if they did, should be noted with the
black Character of usurpation or presumption; and so much of this. I come next
to that corruption, which you say was brought upon your Combinational or
Presbyterial Church by the Parochial. Of which, your words are these that
follow.

SECT. IV. The words of the Letter.
Mr. Matthews.
THE first rise of the rottening of the Church, was its falling from the pure
poor Presbyterial Church, (which in respect of its primitive constitution was
composed and made up of living stones, namely, lively Members, and laborious
Ministers, being fastly and firmly knit unto the Lord Jesus as their only head
by faith: and one to the other by a fraternal Covenant of fervent love,
according to the pattern which was proposed prescribed in both Testaments, Is.
44.5. Jer. 50.5. Ezekiel. 20.37. Zach. 11.7, 10, 14. 2 Cor. 8.5. Ephesians. 2.13, 19,
22. Col. 2.2, 19. 1 Pet. 2.5.) into an impure, unpolished parochial Church: At
that time when ceasing to elect or ordain a Teacher, a Pastor, a Ruler, a
Deacon or Diaconesse, or Widow in conformity to the heavenly Canon, Romans 12.7.
15.4. 16.1. compared with 1 Timothy 3.1. and Titus 1.5, 6. it was well content to
admit and accept of a Parson, a Vicar, a Warden, an Over-seer of the poor, and
a Midwife. By which wisdom of the flesh, being no better then enmity against
God, within a short time after the days of the Apostles, Christ's spiritual
house as well growing and living Temple, was turned and transformed into a
carnal and dead Town or Apostatizing Parish. The very beginning and breeding of
which Parochial Church is seen to have been in the time of Polycarp and
Irenaeus, one of them being an Elder of the Church at Smyrna, and a disciple of
John the Evangelist, and the other a Pastor at Lions, and a disciple of that
Polycarp, as any man may easily perceive, that will peruse what is to be
observed in Eusebius his Ecclesiastical history. lib. 4. c. 14. 15. lib. 5.
cap. 23. 24.

The Reply.
That my answer may be the clearer to what you here propose, I shall cast your
words into this method. For first I will consider of, 1. The constitution and
description you give us here of your Presbyterial Church, and the proofs you
bring for it, out of both Testaments. 2. Whether the rottening of this Church,
was the falling of it, from a poor pure Presbyterial Church, into an impure
unpolished Parochial Church? 3. Whether your assertion be true, that when it
ceased to elect or ordain either a Teacher, a Pastor, a Ruler, a Deacon,
Deaconesse or Widow in conformity to the Canon, Romans 12.15, 16. 1 Timothy 3. Tit.
1.5. but admitted of a Parson, Vicar, etc. that then it was corrupted, and
became an Apostatizing Parish. 4. Whether the beginning and breeding of this
Apostasy and corruption began in Polycarps and Iraeneus days.


These four points being examined, the weakness of your aspersion will very
evidently appear. And first to the first.

1. You say, That the Presbyterial Church in respect of its Primitive
constitution, was composed and made up of living stones, namely, lively
members, etc.
NOw here I must put you in mind of an old Proverb, Cantherius in porta. For
you stumble in your first setting out, and go about to impose upon me by a
fallacy, which if you will not grant, I shall clearly deny your description;
for you discourse a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter.

I am confident you will not deny but your Presbytyrial Church is a part of
Christ's Militant Church, visible with us on earth. And that is compared to a
Net, in which be good and bad fish; to a field, in which are wheat and tares;
to a Barn-floor, in which is Corn and Chafe; to a house, in which are vessels
of honor and dishonor. Your visible Presbyterial Church for ought I know then
must be like all other Churches; have in it professors, as well as true
believers; hypocrites, as well as sincere worshippers: which if you should
deny, I would ask you whether the Church Acts 2. or any that the Apostles
planted, were Presbyterial Churches or not. If they were not, there was never
any; if they were, then there may be hypocrites and profane persons in them.
For in those we read of Ananias, Sapphyra, Simon Magus, Hymineus, Alexander,
Demas, Diotrophes, the Nicolaitans, and those that said they were Apostles, and
were not. How then was the Primitive Church composed and made up of none but
living stones?

Here then lies the fallacy, a dicto secundum quid. The Church in respect of
the Elect, who to us are invisible, that belong unto the mystical body of
Christ, is composed of living stones, namely, lively members, etc. and thus
much those texts you produce very strongly prove. But the Church as it is
Militant and visible of which you must speak, because you speak of a
Presbyterial Church, comprehends all sorts in it, who though they be true, real
and univocal parts of the visible body, yet they are but aequivocal parts of
the mystical, and to them your description belongs not. To argue then from the
part to the whole, is a fallacy. Some in the Presbyterial Church are living
stones, therefore the whole Presbyterial Church is in its Primitive
constitution composed of these, is fallacious.

We grant that it were earnestly to be wished, and all lawful means would be
diligently used both by Pastor and people, to have all the members of a Church
most holy and gracious. But to say a Church has no right constitution where
all the members are not such, is a foul error.

For never yet was their any Church of such a constitution; not the Domestical
under the fathers, not the Jewish or National under Moses, not the Christian
under the Apostles themselves, and therefore assume not that to your
Presbyterial Church, which yet never was in any, nor never shall be. All
Churches as visible, consist of heterogeneous parts, and so does yours; which
if it should mar the constitution of a Church, it must needs mar yours as
well as others. For I hope you will not say, that all yours are Saints more
than by calling, and so are all Christians, even those at Corinth and all, 1
Cor. 16.2. Cap. 1.12, 13. cap. 5.1. cap. 6.15. cap. 11.21. cap. 15.35. cap.
8.12, 13.
among whom yet were schismatical and contentious persons, envying and strife,
incest, and incest tolerated, going to Law with their brethren, Harlotry,
coming to the Lords Table drunk, a denying of a fundamental point of says, the
resurrection, little charity to the weak brother. Now then if Corinth were a
Presbyterial Church, certainly in the Primitive constitution it was not
composed of living stones only, etc.

To conclude, to the constitution of a Church there can be but two things
required; the materiale, and the formale; the matter, are a people gathered and
united, called by the Word to live in a divine policy under Christ their head.
The form that unites them to him, is as you say rightly, faith and charity.
That they be truly and indeed united to him, requisite it is that their faith
be lively working by love. But that they be united to the body the visible
Church, which is the (...), there is no more, nor can be no more expected, but
that they make outwardly a profession of faith, and fraternal love. For whether
either be true, unfeigned and sincere or no, we can never know, and should we
stay till those were manifest unto us, it would be long enough before we should
constitute our's, or you your Church: pray take this better into your
consideration. Now I proceed to that wh ch you more aim at; viz.

2. That the rise of the rottening of the Church, was its falling from a pure
poor Presbyterial Church into an impure, unpolished Parochial Church.
TO which I have this to say. First, that if this position be true, then
Amesius was mistaken, Ames. Med. l. 1. cap. 39. Sect. 22.
who makes a Combinational Church all one with a Parochial. He tells us there
of a Church instituted by God, and says, that it was not National, Provincial,
nor Diocesan, but Parochialis, vel unius Congregationis, cujus membra inter se
combinantur, and ordinary couveniunt in eodem loco ad publicum Religionis
exercitium. If you shall say, that this kind of Parochial Church differs from
ours at this day, because it is combined in Covenant, which ours is not: I
grant it: but add, that such a Combination is not necessary. For I know no
other Covenant requisite, but that in Baptism to make a man a member of any
Church, as I formerly proved unto you. Neither can you give any one instance of
any such Covenant before your time, was taken by any Parochial Church in
Amesius sense.

Secondly, I shall here again put you in mind of that I intimated at first,
about this word Parochia, and give you farther light in it. For Parochia has a
double acception, eirher as it was at first, Seldom. of tyths, cap. 6. Sect. 3.
or as it is used in our days. At first the word Parochia denoted a whole
Bishopric (which is but a greater Parish) and signified no other than a
Diocese. That in these there were Towns and Villages cannot be denied; for the
proof of this we need but run over the names of Cities, Towns, etc. of Judea
mentioned in the Old and New Testament, and all plantations will teach us, that
in process of time it comes to be thus; at first in greater Cities, then in
these Religion was planted. Among these it cannot be well conceived, that the
whole hamlet was at once converted, but it must be done by little and little,
till at last the whole Township received the faith. Together then they met for
the service of God, and as the Jews in their several Towns had to that purpose
their Synagogues; so Christians began to think of convenient places, where they
might meet to this purpose, (as you in New England) they built them Churches,
and so from meeting in private houses, they met in these. Where yet they
entered not into a Combination to be an absolute and Independent Congregation,
but did depend on the chief Church, where the Bishop was resident; and this is
evident, by what I shall now say. The Pastors of these Parishes were such as
the Bishop appointed under him to have care of souls in them; and those are
they, Conc. Neoces. cap. 58.

Conc. Antioch. cap. 87. and 89.


whom the Old Greek Councils call (...), or (...), or (...). And in the
Churches where they kept their cure, the offerings of devout Christians were
received. All that was received in the Bishopric, was as a common treasury to
be thus dispensed; one part of it was allowed the maintenance of the Ministry;
another, to the relief of the poor, sick and strangers; a third, Conc. Antioch.
cap. 103, 104.
to the reparation of Churches; the fourth part to the Bishop. Thus it was many
years before the Council of Nice, that the Bishops Parochia extended far; and
that the whole was under his jurisdiction, and consequently, had not absolute
power within themselves.

2. But when the word Parish in that sense it is now used, began, it is not so
easy to avouch; yet for it we have these Records: Damasus in pontific. Eusebius.
l. 2. c. 17. Epiphan. Haeres. 69.

Eusebius. l. 6. c. 43.


Evaristus who lived in Trajans time, and succeeded Clemens, divided Rome into
seven Parishes, assigning to every one a Presbyter. And it may be easily
collected out of Eusebius, that it was thus at Alexandria; and Epiphanius names
many which bore these titles; Theonae Serapionis, Pierii, Persiae, Diseae,
Mendidii, Amriani, Baucalis, etc. For indeed necessity required it, when the
Christians grew to be (...), as Cornelius called the Christians, and did
impl^re omnia. Tertull. Apol. cap. 37. Then they were forced to divide
Congregations, and assign several Presbyters to their cures, yet in
subordination to their Bishops, as is evident in all Records of the Church.

This being so, how is it possible, that the rottening of the pure poor
Presbyterial Church, should be the rise of the Parochial? when the Parochial in
the first sense was the first Church that ever was in the world as I have
before manifested. In which sense it is that Cyril calls Saint James, Cyril.
Catechis. 16.
primum hujus Parochiae, meaning Jerusal. Episcopum: and in that signification
it is very obvious to be read in the old Councils of both tongues, as Filesacus
has observed; you then argue ex non concessis. For in the first sense, the
Parochial had the precedence, and was older than your new device. Your
Combinational might corrupt and rotten it, but that could never corrupt and
rotten that which was not. If you take it in the last, for Parishes as they
after were restrained, and are constituted at this day, you must show that your
Church had the priority of them, which you are never able to do: else you
cannot say that they corrupted it. And indeed your allegation that follows is
so weak, that any man who reads and considers it, will suspect that you have
little to say for your cause.

3. At that time this was, when ceasing to elect and ordain either a Teacher, a
Pastor, a Ruler, a Deacon or Deaconesse, or Widow, in conformity to the
heavenly Canon, Romans 12.7. and 15.4. and 16.1. compared with 1 Timothy 3.1. Titus
1.5.6. it was well content with a Parson, a Vicar, a Warden, an Over-seer of
the Poor, and a Midwife.
THE time of this corruption you point out, and set it to be when it ceased to
elect and ordain a Teacher, etc. Here again you commit the same error,
supposing I am bound to trust and believe you on your bare word. Ceasing to do
any thing, presupposes that there was a time when one might or did do it: Now
it behooves you to show the time when Parishes in general, (for particulars
will make no rule, and few, very few are to be given;) did ever elect their
Pastor. I am sure to ordain him, in antiquity you can produce not one example.
It Is not possible, since the Records of the Church are open, and he that runs
may read them; that at first the Teacher and Pastor sent to any Church, was
sent and there placed by the Bishop. The instances are so many, and the
practice of the Church so universal, that it were lost labor to produce them;
yet here I shall ask you only one question; if this were a corruption, I
wonder why by your pure Presbyterial Church it is retained? why are men now
elected, approved, sent and settled to be Parsons and Vicars in Parish Churches?
who you know are neither elected nor ordained by that Church over whom they are
set. Remove this beam out of your own eye, before you see the mote in you
brothers.

Well, but what was the error? this, that the Parish contented it self with a
Parson and Vicar, for a Pastor, Teacher, and Ruler; as if the Parson and Vicar
might not be all these; might not feed, teach and rule his flock? what should
hinder him? for call him by what name you please, his office and duty is the
same; and a Parson and Vicar is bound as much to feed, teach and guide his
flock, as is your Pastor, Teacher and Ruler; and must answer the neglect of it
as well as they; this is to seek a knot in a rush. Be pleased to translate
Parson by a Latin word, and you shall always find it rendered by Pastor or
Rector Ecclesiae, and how then is the man or his name changed? and if the
Latins may content themselves to be under the Pastor or Rector, I see no
reason but the English may as well be content with their Parson. He because in
case of necessary absence, disability of body, age, or other casualties which
may be, when the Parish was of a very large extent, assumed unto him a helper;
who because he was vices ejus supplere, was called Vicarius; this was the
original of Vicars; and that you look not so strangely at the name; in the old
Law, the High Priest had his Sagan, Casaubon. Exerc. 13. Number. 9.
who in case of the High Priests pollution performed his office; such was
Zephaniah 2 Reg. 25.18. and nAnas unto Caiaphas; the Chorepiscopi were of the
same kind to the Bishops of old. And the Protosincelli to the Patriarchs of
Constantinople. And in this there was no hurt that came in from Rome, when by
appropriations of the revenues of the Church to Abbeys, Monasteries, Seldom of
tyths, cap. 12. Sect. 1.
etc. perpetual Vicarages were erected. But this was so late, that no injury
could be done to the Combinational Church by it, since that was corrupted and
gone, when Parishes were erected many hundred years before, and then there were
none of these Vicars in rerum natura; I see not then to what purpose this name
is here inserted, except to make up the tale; and the same may be said of the
Parson also, for it is no ancient name. A Deacon we retain, though in another
employment, and probably in the very office that Timothy puts; Vide sis Aretii
loc. Commun. loc. 66. de Diaconis.
and indeed instead of those that served Tables, we have Wardens and Overseers
of the poor, which at first was but a mere secular, but charitable employment,
as was a Deaconesse; and putting honest men into such an employment, though
under another name, is no corruption of any Churches constitution, for it marrs
not the matter nor form of it. How your Midwife comes in, I must profess I am
to seek; for I never heard any man more look upon her as an officious and
useful handmaid of the Church, then upon the Mid-wives of Egypt. About these
two last, the Deacon and Deaconesse, Aret. in Tim. 1.3.
Aretius in his Commentary upon 1 Timothy 3. has a very good observation, that
these were very necessary in the first planting of the Church, and before there
were Christian Magistrates; but after that Kings became nursing fathers and
nursing mothers to the people of God, they took a care that the poor Christians
should be relieved in another way than by the Church-stock. There were (...),
and (...) erected in Hospitals, Almes-houses, etc. they were provided for, then
they made Laws for a common-stock to be collected in every Parish for that
purpose, and appointed by Statutes, Overseers of the poor, and other Officers.
We, says he, therefore have not in our Churches such Deacons and Deaconesses
as they had; neither is it requisite we should have, because the duty is so
wisely ordered by the political Magistrate. To this purpose, that grave and
wise Expositour.

But this you say should be done in conformity to the heavenly Canon, and many
texts you cite for it; but I can find no Canon at all in any of them for what
you aim at. Romans 12.7. I read, he that has (...), let him wait upon it. But I
have told you it is of gifts the Apostle there speaks, not of functions, 2 Cor.
4.1. and 6.3. Romans 11.13.
or if of functions, the words is (...), and the doctrine of the Gospel is
adorned with this title, and the Ministers in what degree soever, called passim
Diaconi, Col. 1.7. and 4.17. and 1.23.25. 1 Cor. 3.5. 2 Cor. 3.6. The next
citation, Romans 15.4. passes my reach, for I see not how it can be drawn to say
any thing to this purpose, therefore I pass it by. You urge Romans 16.1. and
that indeed speaks of Phaebe as (...) a servant of the Church of Cenchrea. Be
it so, that una hirundo non facit ver, were it true in your sense, yet one
example will make no rule; again, a servant she might be, and yet not such as
you intend; for if you will admit of Ignatius description of those servants,
(and he was near the Apostles age, and could best describe them,) I dare say
you will not acknowledge your Deaconesses to be such; his words are, (...).
Ignat. Ep. ad Antioch.
But to yield to you all you can ask, Aretius gives you a reason why they may
be spared. You advise that these places be compared with 1 Timothy 3.1. I suppose
it should be the 11. And then Expositours will tell you, that Saint Paul speaks
not all of Deaconesses, but of the wives of Deacons, and other Church men,
enjoining that they be grave Matrons, no Slaunderers, but sober, faithful in
all things. Your last place, Tit. 1.5, 6. makes clearly against you; for if
Titus were left in Crete to ordain, then the Combinational Church was not to
elect and ordain Pastors, Teachers, etc. Here I can find no Canon for that.

Logicians observe that those arguments have little force in them, that mutatis
mutandis may be returned, for they are but like Tennis balls that are banded
from hand to hand, and serve only for sport. Will you have but patience then,
while I return your discourse? The first rise of rottening the Church, (being
it is falling from a poor pure Apostolical Church, which in its primitive
constitution was made up of living stones, etc.) was at that time when ceasing
to elect and ordain Bishops, Presbyters, Evangelists, Teachers, Catechizers, in
conformity to the heavenly Canon, 1 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Titus 1.5, 6. Ephesians.
4.11. 2 Timothy 4.5. Gal. 6.6. it was well content to admit and accept of
Approvers, Ruling Elders, Lecturers, Itinerants; by which wisdom of the flesh,
being no better then enmity against God, in this last age of the world, long
after the Apostles days, Christ's spiritual house, and growing as well as
spiritual Temple, was turned and transformed into a carnal and dead
Congregation, an Apostatizing Combinational Church. No question the argument
thus returned will displease, and yet there is as much strength in this, as in
the other. This may make us both wary, how we make use of such Cothurni,
reasons that as buskins may be drawn on either leg. That which in the last
place you allege is

4. The very beginning and breeding of which Parochial Church is seen to have
been in the time of Polycarp and Irenaeus.
What Is this I read? a Parish Church of that antiquity? Parsons, Vicars,
Wardens, Overseers of the poor then? What these while Saint John might be for
ought we know yet alive? For Polycarp you confess was his Disciple, and in it
you say true; for thus Irenaeus witnesses; Polycarpus non solum ab Apostolis
edoctus, Iren. lib. 3. c. 3.
and conversatus cum multis ex eis, qui Dominum nostrum viderunt, sed etiam ab
Apostolis in Asia, in ea quae est Smyrnis Ecclesia constitutus Episcopus. This
is greater antiquity for a Parish Church in that sense you intend, then I or
any body else could ever find before. That which deceived you, as I am apt to
believe, is the translation by Hanmer, who renders the words of the Epistle of
the Church of Smyrna, unto the Parishes throughout Pontus, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 15.
not understanding that (...), the Greek word is often taken, and most usually
in the eldest of the Greek Writers, for regiones suburbicariae the neighboring
habitations, before there was any distinction of Parishes; Ephesus, Smyrna,
Pergamus, Laodicea, were (...), as in respect of secular jurisdiction, so also
in Ecclesiastical regiment; when then the Smyrneans directed their letter
(...), they meant no other then those Churches which were under the Smyrnean
jurisdiction.

But admit it were true in your sense, what have you gained by it? nay rather
what have you not lost? for to say your Combinational Church should fail in the
Apostles or his Disciples time, by the setting up of the Parochial, will give
such encouragement to the adverse party, that they will not doubt to say, That
was well done which was then done; especially when they cannot find for
sixteen hundred years any man that opened his mouth against it. And the
self-same answer will serve to your other instance of Irenaeus.

Of these two worthies you affirm, that one of them was an Elder of the Church
of Smyrna, the other Pastor of Lions. And I pray, why could you not as well
have called them by other names? I am sure your Author Eusebius does. For of
the last thus he says, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 5.
that when Pothinus of the age of ninety years had ended his life, -- Irenaeus
succeeded him in the Bishopric. He was a Bishop then, but if you take Pastor
in that sense, as it is almost taken in Church Records, we agree. But yet I
must remember you that Lions was a great City, and somewhat more than a Parish,
as you mean.

As for Polycarp, your Author tells you that he was President of the Church of
Smyrna, and so Irenaeus calls him Episcopus ab Apostolis constitutus, and under
that title Ignatius writes to him; Ignat. Epist. ad Polycarp.
and in all probability he is that Angel of the Church of Smyrna, to whom that
Epistle was written, Rev. 2. He was then capable of a higher title then of an
ordinary Elder; he had indeed in his Church many Elders, even a whole
Presbytery; and therefore Ignatius gives this direction to those of Smyrna,
(...) (...). Idem Epist. ad Smyrn.
In this elegant gradation, you see he makes a distinction of Laics, Deacons,
Presbyters, and a Bishop; and therefore Polycarp was more than a common
Presbyter, to whom he persuades all the Presbyters to be in subjection. And
which is yet more, which makes clearly against your Combinational Churches,
(for you grant there were Parishes at Smyrna) in the close of his Epistle to
Polycarp, he persuades them to continue in the unity of God; and the Bishop his
words are these, (...). In which unity had we remained, we had not lived to see
the Church so rent, and overcome with so many Heresies, as we behold and lament
at this day. I come to your third degree of corruption.

SECT. V. The words of the Letter.
The third degree of the Presbyterial Churches degeneracy, was its climbing up
to the style of a Provincial Church, whose Pastor was not afrai'd nor ashamed
to assume the name and office of an Archbishop, and Metropolitan; leaving the
servile and subservient titles of Prebende, Surrogate, and Vicar General, as
terms good enough to the inferior Officers his underlings. Of which proud and
profane Pesthouse, that Austin who was sent from Gregory, the last of the
good Bishops, and the first of the bad Popes of Rome, is reputed and recorded
to have been the father and founder in this Land; even then when he was stoutly
and stiffly opposed by the Monks of Bangor, Anno Domini 596. and in the reign of
King Ethelbert, witness Fox his Martyrol. page 119. together with the rest of
our Eng. Hist. and Evagr. lib. 2. c. 8.

Reply.
Sect. 5.
YOu so promiscuously use these terms Presbyterial, and Combinational, that I
know not readily how to shape my answer; for were I to deal with the
Presbyterians, I should reply one way; but to you I must return another
answer. You say here, that the third degree of corruption was when it
degenerated into the Provincial Church. But this is not likely,; for when the
Church became Cathedral and Parochial, your Combinational Church vanished, it
was no more; now what has no existence, cannot by degrees degenerate: since
degrees belong to qualities which have, must have some subject to exist in. Had
you then said the Church by these degrees rottened, it had been sense, but to
say that that which long before this, was not, did rot and degenerate, is not
intelligible. But to omit this, I shall now consider in what you place this
Degeneration.

1. This was when it climed to be styled a Provincial Church. 2. When the
Pastor was not afraid nor ashamed to assume the name and office of Archbishop
and Metropolitan. 3. When he left the servile and subservient names or titles
of Prebend, Surrogate, and Vicar General to inferior Officers. 4. That of this
proud and profane Pesthouse, Austin sent from Gregory was the father and
founder in this our Land.
This is the sum of what you deliver. To which I return you this answer with
what brevity I can.

1. The degeneration was, when it climbed up to be a Provincial Church.
But what if this prove no Degeneration at all? For every thing is said to
degenerate when it is changrd to the worse, whereas this change (if there were
any, which I shall not easily grant you) was into the better; for by this the
Church was better ordered and governed than it could be without it. At first
the Church was so small, that an upper room was able to contain it; it
enlarged in Cities, then in Countries, after into whole Provinces. Governed it
must be, when small or great; and governed it was by the Apostles while they
lived, and by those whom they appointed. These Governors by them placed, were
seated in chief Cities, as at Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, Corinth, etc. And
because they had the Provinces allotted to them, the Churches were called
Provincial. This I have showed before clearly in Titus, who was set over Crete.
But it may be said the Provinces were not then converted, how then could such
Governors be set over them? This is not material. For as the Apostles might
rightly be called the Governors of the whole world (because Christ committed
all Nations to their charge) though at first a small Congregation did obey them
actually: So that Governor that was placad in any Metropolis or chief City by
them, though actually he had in his communion and subjection some few, yet he
had in Charge, the conversion of the whole Country; and being converted, they
were under his government, and he was called their Metropolitan. That you
startle not at the word, I have told you before, that it was very ancient, to
be found in the Apostolical Canons, in the Nicene, Antiochian, Conc. Ephesians.
edictum post adventum episc. Cypri.
and Ephesine Councils, the words of this last Council being these, It seems
good to this sacred and Ecumenical Council to reserve unto every Province
untouched and undiminished the rights which they have had (...), from the first
beginning, every Metropolitan having liberty according to the old custom to
take the copy of our Acts for his security.

I know well what you will cast in my teeth, that this was the wisdom of the
flesh, and the wisdom of the flesh is enmity with God. But first consider that
it was (...), a custom of old, and (...), a custom from the beginning; and
the period of that may be for what we know to the contrary set in the Apostles.
Secondly, I deny it absolutely to be the wisdom of the flesh. For there is
flesh that is unregenerate, and the wisdom of that flesh is enmity with God;
for ambition that is a corrupt quality residing in it, will prompt it to desire
honor; covetousness to aim at wealth; self-love to promote and serve its
lusts. But there is flesh again that is regenerate and borne anew, which is
contented to be guided by Gods Spirit instructing a man to obey Gods will
revealed in his Word, and this is not enmity with God. I shall never think that
Grace outs any man of his reason; it may perfect, heighten, enlighten it, but
darken or dim it, it can never do. Whatsoever therefore a man shall do by the
light of reason raised by Grace to this pitch, I shall not call it the wisdom
of the flesh, nor be persuaded it is enmity against God.

The first Fathers of the Church were men very eminent for the graces and gifts
of the Spirit, men who were signal for illuminated reason: Even reason taught
them that there must needs be confusion where there was no order; where there
was equality, there could be no order, and therefore in an equality it was not
possible the Church should continue. They saw that there was in one family but
one Master; in one Army but one General; in one ship but one Pilot; in one
Bee-hive but one King; reason taught them that there must be, and experience
that there was sub and supra in all Societies, and therefore that it must be so
in the Societies of Gods people. Thus far nature. But Reason improved by
Grace taught them again, that God would not be served according to man's
inventions, and therefore they must look, that though Reason suggested this or
that, yet nothing must be done, that was contrary to Gods will revealed in his
Word. They here then cast about to find, if they could, any thing contrary to
what reason dictated; now this appeared not, but rather the contrary; for they
found it written, Let all things be done decently and in order, all to
edification, and that this was a precept for the regulating of the Church. And
upon it, it was established (...), from the beginning to this day, that in all
Provinces there should be one chief Bishop, which from the mother City was
called a Metropolitan, to whom all the other Bishops should be subject, and who
to him should be accomptable for what was done through the whole Province. This
then was not the wisdom of the flesh, but the wisdom of God, who would have
all things done in order. If any man did (...), teach other things than he
taught, or (...), teach any new things, and not according to the Analogy or
rule of faith, or (...), teach any vain things, he might according to that
direction that Saint Paul gives Timothy, have his mouth quickly stopped. For
Discipline is the preservation and hedge of Doctrine; and Discipline can never
be well administered among them that have an equal power. I pray tell me, what
was the reason that moved his Highness the Lord Protector to take upon him the
government of this Commonwealth? was it not because he foresaw that all would
come to ruin in a parity of Governors? which was the aim of those who
fancied a fifth Monarchy. This is the very reason that he himself assigns. And
say what you will to the contrary, this is and will be the fate of the Church,
except in one Province there be one chief. Could I give no other instances of
it, yet that which we have lived to see is enough.

This Calvin, Bucer, Zanchy, in their testimonies before alleged, foresaw,
Bezae responsio ad tractatum de ministrorum evang. grad. fol. 143.
and therefore commended and allowed the ancient Primitive institution. I shall
only add the testimony of Beza, and so shut up this point, especially having
said so much before about it, when I spoke of Patriarchs. Dicamus ergo Primatum
illum ordinis per mutuae successionis vices (for such the Presbyterians plead
for) ipsa tandem experientia compertum fuisse, non satis virium, nec ad
ambitiosos pastores, nec ad auditores quidem vanos, alios vero adulatorio
spiritu praeditos compescendos habuisse, communicata viz. singulis pastoribus
per vices hujus primatus dignitate. Itaque quod singulorum secundum
successionem commune fuit, visum fuit ad unum, and eum quidem totius
Presbyterii judicio delectum transfer, quod certe repraehendi nec potest, nec
debet: quum praes^rtim vetustus hic mos Presbyterum deligendi in Alexandrina
celeberrima Ecclesia jam inde a Marco Evangelista esset observatus, etc. Yea
but say you say

2. This man was not afraid nor ashamed to assume the Name and Office of an
Archbishop and Metropolitan.
AND what fear or shame then should be in this assumption, I see not. The
Office was very useful, and the Name not so impious and profane, as you imagine.

1. His office was to call the rest of the Bishops of the Province to the
Synods, which were to be held twice every year, Council. Antioch Can. 19.

Conc. in Trullo. cap. 8.

Antiochenum. Can. 9.

Conc. African. cap. 127. and 28. Council. Sard. cap. 14.


to appoint the place of their meeting, when the Ordinations of Bishops were
examined and determined, and the deprivation and rejection of all such as were
found unworthy of that honor and place was handled. In the Synod he sat as
President, and things were so moderated, that neither the rest might proceed to
do any thing without consulting him, nor he without them, but was tied in
matters of difference to follow the major part; when they assembled but once a
year, many causes that abide no delay, were committed by them to the
Metropolitan hearing the judgment. To him then lay Appeals. And yet his power
was not absolute and arbitrary, for he was to execute the decrees of the Synods
only, and to judge according to the Canons. And if he neglected his duty, he
was by the Canons liable to Censure and punishment in a general Council. And
the Church story is a plentiful record, that by Councils Metrapolitans have
been punished, censured, deposed. Now say truly, what is there that in this
Office or Order that should offend any discreet man?

2. Oh but his name is profane, and it is blasphemy to assume it; and for this
afterward you give in this reason, because it is such a style and title as is
not communicable to any creature, but is proper and peculiar to Christ's own
sacred person, being that besides himself none can be safely said to be an
Archbishop, or chief Shepherd.

I shall first encounter your reason, and invalidate it. For first you impose
upon me; for Saint Peter's word is not (...), 1 Pet. 5.4.
but (...). (...). Secondly, were it so, yet it is but an argument a notatione
nominis, which of all Topic arguments is the weakest. Thirdly, if this reason
were good, then it would hold as well in all other names of Christ, and it were
profane and blasphemous for any man to bear any of them. And yet I read there
is not one of them except Immanuel, which has not been attributed to man;
Psalm. 105.15. Matt. 2.6. Heb. 2.17. Heb. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.25.
Jesus is attributed to Joshua, Hebr. 4.8. Christus to Kings and Patriarchs:
Nolite tangere Christos meos. He is called (...), and so are the praepositi,
Heb. 13.17. (...). He is styled (...), and yet how many in the Gospel are
called (...); he the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, and yet Saint
Paul often calls himself an Apostle; he by Saint Peter is called (...), and yet
under him the Ministers of the Church are often styled Shepherds and Bishops.
There can be no strength then in this reason, which is everted by so many
examples; it must needs be as much profaness and blasphemy for any creature to
bear any of these appellations, since they were the names of Christ, as it can
be for an Archbishop to take that name, if it had been his, which it was not.
But it was no profanesse or blasphemy in them, and therefore not in him.

But that the name may the less offend you, call to mind the antiquity of it,
and what kind of men have born it, and yet the Church never held them for
profane persons. It is as old as are Metropolitans, and they are as old as
Metropolies or chief Cities, where Christianity was planted. Chrysostom sticks
not to call Titus (...), and well he might who had seven Bishops under him.
Cypr. Epist. 45. Edit. Pammelii.
Cyprian was Archbishop of Carthage a Martyr, a great Archbishop, for he
says, late pa^et nostra provincia, habet Numidium and Mauritaniam sibi
cohaerentes. Athanasius, who stood against all the world for the truth of
(...), and had all the world against him, was Archbishop of Alexandria. What
should I tell you that the first thirty two Bishops of Rome, who were all
Martyrs, except one, bear that name? and that Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Basil,
Nazianzene, Cyril, etc. were all called Archbishops? And that you be not quite
out of love with it, that glorious Martyr of our Church Cranmer dyed
Archbishop of Canterbury. I can never be drawn to imagine, that had there been
profanesse and blasphemy in the name, such glorious lights of the Church, such
pious, good, learned men, such pillars of the Faith, such Martyrs in defense of
the Truth, would ever have owned it, been once styled by it. And so you see
that (...) is (...).

3. When he left the servile and subservient names of Prebend, Surrogate, Vicar
General to inferior Officers his underlings.
THese names or titles I never heard the Archbishop or Metropolitan had,
therefore I know not how he could leave them. Under him perhaps these were; but
for the Prebend, he was no Officer. The Bishop and his College of Presbyters
first lived together, and were maintained out of a common stock or treasury of
the Church, the Bishop allotted to every one his salary monthly, which in
Tertullian is called stipes, in Cyprian sportula; Tertull. Apol. c. 39. and 42.
and it was an honorable stipend or portion, as appears by the words of
Cyprian, when he would have Clemens and Aurelius who were Confessors, admitted
into the College of Presbyters, that they might be honored with this stipend.
Sciatis nos honorem Presbyteris illis jam d signasse, Cypr. Ep. 34. Edit.
Pammel. and 27. 36.
ut iisdem sportutis cum Presbyteris honorentur; and in another Epistle he
calls these, menstrae divisiones, agreeing with his Master Tertullian, who
says these stipes were given menstrua die. Thus it was at first, but afterward
when Cathedral Churches were built, these Presbyters were called Prebends, and
their salary Praebenda, Spalatens. lib. 2. cap. 9. Sect. 6.
not that they had a separate part or portion of that Church revenue to
themselves, as afterward it was thought fit; sed quod cuique ex communi illius
Ecclesiae reditu alimenta praebebantur. Now this was the Original of Prebends,
neither was he any more a Church Officer, then as a Presbyter, which if you
take in the old sense, you have no reason to carp at.

2. As for the Surrogate, I do not find that ever any Archbishop had such an
Officer; I suppose, that you should aim at, Conc. Ancyr. Can. 13.

Neoces. 13. Antioch. 10. Conc. Sardic. cap. 6,

Laodic. cap. 56. Socrat. Schol. lib. 5. cap. 21. Possidon. in vita Aug.

Aug. Ep. 110. Naucler. Vol. 2. Generat. p. 667.


is the (...) or Rural Bishops, who were brought into the Church to supply the
Bishops place in absence or sickness, who because they abused their power,
were disliked, and timely abrogated. Or if not these, yet the suffragan Bishops
or Coadjutors, for such then were, as it appears in the Church Records. Agelius
the Novatian Bishop being ready to dye, first imposed hands on Sisimius to
succeed him, but upon the request of the people, made choice of Marcian, then
of Sisimius; the story is worth your reading in Socrates. Austin was also made
the Suffragan to Valerius in Hippo; and afterward Austin himself took for his
Coadjutor Eradius. Thus you may see a Coadjutor was allowed, but such a one as
should be only a Presbyter, while the Bishop lived; and therefore long after
the time of Augustine, when Zachary Bishop of Rome associated another Bishop,
as a Coadjutor to Boniface the Bishop of Mentz, he confessed it to be a thing
forbidden by the Canons, and worthy reprehension, but that upon his
importunity, of special favor, he had yielded so much unto him, that he might
have such a Coadjutor, whom with the advice of his brethren he might appoint to
succeed him when he should dye. Now if you do aim at these, there could be no
great error in the institution, if the Bishop either when he was in remotis
agendis as the Lawyers speak, or disabled by infirmity or age, he made choice
of some worthy person to be his Coadjutor; no otherwise then the High Priests
among the Jews did of their Saganim. For I read not of any express text of
holy writ, that could or did warrant them to do it.

3. Thirdly, the last name that does displease, is the Vicar General, but
neither was he properly any Church Officer. A Judge he was in the Archbishops
Court, for such matters as were reserved by Princes to the Christian
judicature, to visit for the Metropolitan the whole Province, and and so came
into the place of them, whom the Laodicean Council calls (...); Caranza
translates the word Visitatores, but Meursius Circitatores, Lustratores, quorum
munus esset circumire per omnes universae regionis Ecclesias, Laodic. Conc.
Can. 57.

Meursii. Lexico mixobarb. Balsam. in Can. 57. Conc. Laodiceni.


and inquirere de illarum statu. And of these Balsam^^ upon the Canon of the
Laodicean Council has these words, (...). A Commission to this purpose I find
given by Henry the eighth to Thomas Cromwell, after Earl of Essex; that great
instrument of expulsion of the Popes power out of England: by which authority
he visited all the Abbeys and Monasteries of the Land, and finding in them foul
enormities, opened them in Parliament the next year, in which he sat with the
title of Vicegerent, or Custos spiritualitatum; this power was not much unlike
a Vicar General. And were it safe to utter my thoughts, I should not stick to
put you in mind of those, who have lately done the same work under other
names. For what else I pray, were the Propagators of the Gospel? what else the
Commissioners for scandalous and ignorant Ministers? what else the Committee
men? under whom I am sure the Clergy felt a sharp visitation, yea, and sharper
then that of the Custos spiritualitatum; for then the ejected had a competency
of maintenance allowed them for their lives, which by these is not done.
Lastly, if I should call your Approvers Vicar Generals too, I should not much
err; for have they not the care of all the Churches? Modesty retains me, or
else I could say, that some of your Pastors of Congregational Churches have
been (...), and been Informers or Agents to the prejudice of many an honest and
laborious Minister.

But you say these Officers were Underlings; how otherwise could it be, if they
were Officers? for Officers must be under; they were subservient, so they must
be also; for indicitur ministratio, whosoever will be great among you, Mat.
20.26.
let him be your Minister. To be under was humility, to be subservient their
duty; but if among them any were servile, so slavish as to be at the
Archbishops or Metropolitans beck, and to drudge for his ends, this was
baseness; and if you note the men, they shall not be defended, but condemned
by me as well as you.

But while I go along with you in the pursuit of these, I find my self in some
danger; for I find a Pesthouse nigh, in which plaguey people are used to be
put; and to this those you mention are sent for their pride and profanesse, and
I wish that all who are infected with the same Leprosy were placed there with
them; for then it is possible we might meet with Corah, Dathan, and Abiram
there, as well as Moses and Aaron. For is pride and profaneness only in
Prelates? I shall speak a bold word, and I know I can make it good, that I can
show you many more Archbishops and Metropolitans exemplar for humility and
piety, then you can exemplify as notorious for pride and profanesse. The birth
of it in this land you intimate in these following words.

4. Of which proud and profane Pesthouse, that Austin who was sent from
Gregory, the last of the good Bishops, end the first of the bad Popes of Rome,
is reputed to be the father and founder in this our Land, etc.
1. OF Gregory, I know what you bring is so common that it is in every man's
mouth, for as it is in M. Fox in the place you cite, that of the number of all
the first Bishops before him in the Primitive Church, he was the basest, and of
all them that came after him he was the best. Upon what ground the first part
of this sentence was spoken I know not; let them give account that said it. For
this is certain, that he was a learned and pious father of the Church, as his
works testify; and the strongest battery out of the fathers we can make
against the Popes claim and usurpation to his universal supremacy, is fetched
from him. For he calls the title of universal supremacy by these appellations;
1. Typum superbiae. 2. Nomen novum. 3. Vocabulum temerarium stultum. 4.
Superbum pempaticum. 5. Jewel. Cont. Hardingum. Act. 4. Sect. 4.
Perversum. 6. Superstitiosum Profanum. 7. Scelestum. 8. Nomen erroris. 9.
Nomen singularitatis. 10. Nomen vanitatis. 11. Nomen hypocriseos. 12. Nomen
blasphemiae, as Bishop Jewel has taught me out of his Epistles. Some men may
perhaps esteem meanly of him for giving countenance to some then growing
superstitions in the Roman Church; but the commendation given him by two, who
lived near the same time is great. The first is Isidore Archbishop of Syvil,
who writes thus presently upon his death, Gregorius Papa Romanae sedis and
Apostolicae Praesul, Isidore de viris illustrib. cap. 17
compunctione timoris Dei plenus, and humilitate summus, tantoque per gratiam
Spiritus sancti scientiae lumine praeditus, ut non modo illi praesentium
temporum quisquam, sed in praeteritis quidem par fuit unquam. Hildef. de viris
illustrib.
This is the testimony of Isidore, which Hildefonsus Archbishop of Toledo
having cited not long after, adds these words, Ita virtutum omnium claruit
perfectione, ut (exclusis omnium virorum comparationibus) nihil illi simile
demonstret antiquitas. Vicit enim sanctitate Antonium, eloquentia Cyprianum,
sepicutta Augustinum. And though no question these praises of Gregory were
hyperbolical, yet they justify the latter part of Mr. Foxes words, that of all
the Popes which came after him he was the best. He that shall read his life in
Paulus Diaconus, will have just reason to have a charitable opinion of him;
that I say not his own writings yet extant proclaim him in the gate.

Before I come to his Legate Austin the Monk, Juel. Artic. 3. Sect. 24.
necessary it is that I premise somewhat. That Christianity was early planted
in this our Island, is evident by the testimonies of Tertullian, Origin,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, which you may read in Juel: Patric. Junius Annot. in
Ep. Clementis. Dorotheus in Synopsi.
That Paul and Peter came hither and preached, there are some Records; some say
Simo^ Zelotes, some speak of Aristobulus; but that which is generally received,
and for which there is good evidence, is that Joseph of Arimathea sailing out
of France with his son Joseph and ten others, travailed through Britain, and
preached the Gospel there; Vide Ephraim. Pagit. part. 3. page 1. 2, etc. Baron.
Annal. Anno 35.
to which purpose serves that testimony of Gildas, Tempore ut scimus summo
Tiberii Caesaris radios suos huic insulae primus indulget Christus, and
Cardinal Baronius sets down the year of Joseph's coming hither, out of an
Ancient Manuscript of the Vatican, viz. the nineteenth of Tiberius reign, and
the 35 of our Lord. Some testimonies also there are for the improvement of it
in the next Century, but the light broke forth clearest under King Lucius about
the year 180. who consulted Eleutherus the Bishop of Rome, and from him
received advice. It Is the honor of our Nation, to have had the first Christian
King of the world: he was instructed in the faith by Elvan and Meduni, Lib.
Til. Bal. Script. Britanniae. Cent. 1. page 17. Bishop Godwin, Dr. Pitsae.
and with these he sent his own Ambassadors Fugatius and Damian, qui quibusdam
ritibus, ac solenni Episcoporum dispositione eandem formarent Ecclesiam. And he
erected three Arch-Bishopricks, one at London, and record we have of the
particular Bishops that governed in that Sea. A second at York. A third at
Caerleon upon Vsk, in which Dubritius and Saint David were Archbishops wirh
others too long to name. For four hundred years then and more, that is, from
the conversion of King Lucius to Austins coming, this was the state and
government of the British Church; but in the latter times much eclipsed by the
incursion of the Scots and Picts, and the tenth persecution under Dioclesian,
but more by the invasion and cruelty of the Saxons, Beda. lib. 3. cap. 6.21,
22, 24. etc.
when they were forced to retire, and their Pastors with them into Wales and
Cornwall. The greater part of the Land being now again become Idolatrous and
Heathenish: this gave occasion unto Gregory to send Austin the Monk for their
conversion, which he effected in some part; but the greatest part may not be
attributed unto him; since it is well known that Aidan converted the North
parts; Finan the East Saxons and the Mercians, whose Coadjutors were Ceadda,
Colman, etc. These professed no subjection to the Church of Rome, and deserve
to be partakers of as much honor from our British Nation, as Austin. Him I
shall easily grant you, upon the credit of the Records, to have been a proud,
undiscreet, and cruel bloody Prelate: Bale. Fol. 35. Cent. 1. Bed. lib. 2.2.
but never that he was the father and founder of this proud and profane
Pesthouse as you called it in this Land; I mean the government of the Church
by Archbishops and Bishops. For it is evident that in King Lucius time they
were instituted: And before Augustins arrival, Anno 522. at the Coronation of
Arthur, there was a great meeting of Lords, Galfrid. Monum. lib 9. cap. 12. 13.

Bale fol. 28.


Princes and Bishops at Caerleon; and that of the three Archbishops of
Britain at that time, Dulritius Archipraesul, Primas, Archbishop of Caerleon
did the Office of the Church that day, being the feast of Pentecost. This
Archbishops seat was afterward by his Successor Saint David translated to
Saint David's, which so continued till the Norman Conquest. Bale. Cent. 1. fol.
30.

Bid. lib. 2 c. 2. Galfr. Monum. lib. 11. cap. 12. Godw. page 45.


But the answer which the British Bishops gave to Austin, being summoned to
give him a meeting, where by persuasions, threats and all manner of means, he
endeavored to draw the Britain Bishops to an entire conformity to the Church
of Rome, is so clear an evidence, that I cannot see how it can be evaded; for
the answer was short and peremptory, that they might not submit themselves to
him, having an Archbishop of their own, etc. And in a second meeting, being
offended with his pride, Sir H. Spelman. Conc. Britan. An. 590. ex Manusc.
Saxon. Bed. lib. 2. c. 2. Bale Cent. 1. fol. 35.

Bid lib. 2. c. 2.


because he would not rise to them at their coming into the Assembly, they
gainsaid him in every thing; for say they, si modo nobis assurgere noluit,
quanto magis si ei subjici ceperimus, nos pro nihilo contemnet?

This repulse occasioned the slaughter of the Monks of Bangor, over whom Dinoth
was the Caenobiarcha, as Bale calls him, who as it is supposed was that holy
man in Bid, that taught them how to discern whether he was sent of God to them
or no. For says he, if he be a meek and an humble man, it is an evident sign,
that he bears the yoke of Christ, and offers the same to you; but if he be
stout and proud, he is not of God, you may be sure; and his deportment was such
as I said, which alienated the Bishops minds, and the Monks with them. Our
adversaries of Rome take it very ill, that Austin should be thus accused of
pride and cruelty, and use all their wits in his excuse. They would persuade us
he was dead, when this Massacre was committed; but Bishop Juel has evidently
confuted their allegations, and made it appear that in that War he was alive,
Juel. defens. Apolog. quinta pars. cap. 1. divisio prima.
and the instigator of it. Had you then set the saddle upon the right horse,
and fixed those Epithites of proud and profane upon Austin, you had some color
for it. But to fasten it upon the whole order, upon Archbishops and
Metropolitans, for one man's sake is want of charity, of which he was not the
founder neither in this Land, as I have proved to you. Nor Fox, nor any English
Historians, nor Evagrius say any such thing; Evagrius could not, for nor
Gregory was Bishop of Rome, nor Austin sent hither when he writ and ended his
History. All that Fox or any other Historian can say, is that Austin was the
first Archbishop of Canterbury; and that shall readily be yielded you; now
when I hear, how you can improve that concession to your advantage, you shall
receive an answer. I could if I pleased anticipate your objections, but I will
not now do it, because I hasten to what follows.

SECT. VI. The words of the Letter.
THe fourth degree of the Combinational Churches infamous defection, was its
notably naughty enlarging it self into a National Church; where, and whence
(without controversy) arose that Jewish imitation, and irregularly Religious
observation of five frivolo s and foundationlesse customs and traditions, of
which the first was of National times, as the fifty yearly Festivals, or holy
working-dayes, Cursed-Masse, Candle-Masse, etc. The second, was of National
places, as the Consecrated meeting houses, Porches, Chancels, and Churchyards.
The third, was of National persons, as the Universal Preachers, Office-Priests,
Half-Priests, or Diocesan Deacons. The fourth, was of National pious
performances, as stinted Worship, Quiristers, singing of Psalms with all the
Rubrique Postures. And the fifth was of National payments, or spiritual
profits, as offerings, tithes, and mortuaries; all which fruitless and
fantastical fashions, were the illegitimate legal offspring of National
Parliaments, in this and in the Neighbor-Nations. Witness the public Acts,
Statutes, and other Ordinances in that behalf.

The Reply.
SIr, that affection which I have always borne you as a friend, and that duty
which I owe you as a Christian, moves me in plain words to tell you, that the
indulgence you bear to the Combinational Church, has in this Paragraph
transported you beyond the bounds of moderation and truth. For to omit your
common Sophisme, petitio principii, which is the foulest in all Logic; that
there was at first a Combinational Church, and that this did precede a
National; which is as if you should say, the parts are before the whole, when
the contraty in nature has hitherto been received for truth, that omne totum
sive universale sive integrale est prius partibus. But to omit this, you
over-load your assertion with many unnecessary Epithets, and those sometimes
unapt; whereas attributes are ornaments, and where they are not decently
affixed, they become our speech no more, than a fair gold lace does a coarse
garment, or a rich jewel fastened to a straw hat. Thirdly, the five frivolous
customs and traditions you reckon up, are no proper accidents of the National
Church, but were common to the Provincial, Cathedral and Parochial, and so no
distinct notes to know that the National Church was corrupted more than they;
should I yield them to be corruptions. Lastly, you say they were brought in by
a Jewish imitation, which if granted, it would not at all help your cause; as I
will after make appear. These are your undertakings in this Section, and I
shall not need to analyze it, as I have done before; because you have
methodiz'd it to my hand, for which I thank you. The first thing then I shall
prove unto you, is that there is such a thing as a National Church, and that it
was before your Combinational, so that it cannot be true which you affirm;
that the fourth degree of the Combinational Churches defection, was its notably
naughty enlarging it self into a National Church.

1. That there is a National Church, and that this was, first, is consonant to
Scripture, to reason, to experience.
1. FIrst it is very consonant to Scripture. God after Adams fall made a
Covenant with mankind for salvation: The seed of the woman shall break the
serpents head. The words of the Covenant were obscure, and therefore God was
pleased to add light to them, Genesis 3.15. Genesis 12.3. Gal. 3.8.
in that promise he made to Abraham; In thy seed, i. e. Christ, shall all the
Nations of the earth be blessed? That this promise was made to the Church, is
beyond all question; and who were this Church but all Nations? not to Abraham's
seed after the flesh, Romans 4.13. and 9.8.
but to Abraham's seed through the righteousness of faith was the promise made;
not to the Jews, but to the Gentiles also was the promise made, and both go
here under the name of Nations; and what should hinder now, but the Church into
which both should be gathered, should be called a National Church? The argument
is drawn a Denominatis; Natio is Denominaus, National denominativum, Jews and
Gentiles Denominatum; the proposition then is true, that Jews and Gentiles
make one National Church. Hence it is, that what God said of the Jew, Exodus
19.6.
ye shall be to me a Kingdom of Priests and an holy Nation, is by Saint Peter
affirmed of the Christian Church, ye are a chosen generation, 1 Pet. 2.9.
a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation. Which when effected, our Saviors words
were fulfilled, other sheep I have which are not of this fold, John 10.16.
them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice, that there may be one
fold, and one Shepherd.

Farther yet a prophecy is extant, Isa. 2.2. Isa. 2.2. Mic. 4.1, 2, etc. Jer.
4.2. Isa. 65.1. Zach. 2.11. Zach. 14.9. Psalm 2.8. Psalm 22.27. Matthew. 21.43.
Romans 4.17.
And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of the Lords
house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted
above the hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it. Let other texts be
compared with this, which speak the same thing. Thus it was foretold, and that
what was foretold might accordingly be fulfilled, our Savior gave his
disciples a Commission in these general words, Go ye therefore and teach all
Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost, etc.
Matthew 28.19. And I pray call to mind, that when Peter baptized the
penitents, Acts 2.39. he comforted them with these words, for the promise is
unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as
our Lord God shall call. And yet after this even Peter himself, and the
Apostles, and the brethren that were in Judaea, of this had but a confused
notion; for when Peter came up to Jerusalem, Acts 11. Acts 10.
they that were of the Circumcision, contended with him about it, to whom he
was feign to make his Apology, opening to them the vision of the sheet, which
when they heard these things, they glorified God, saying, then has God also
granted to the Gentiles repentance unto life. In effect, they attested the
truth of Peter's words, Verse 34.
Of a truth I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, looks now no more
upon a Jew, than he does upon a sinner of the Gentiles, but in every Nation, he
that fears him, and does righteousness, is accepted of him. The partition
wall being broken down, what could they be but one church?

I can never sufficiently wonder at your words, when you call this access of
all Nations a naughty enlargement. What? is that which God by Covenant with
Abraham promised naught? that naught which he foretold should be? that naught
which Christ gave Commission to his disciples to do? that naught which the
Disciples did? All Nations, Isa. 2.2. All flesh, Isa. 66.23. All the kindreds
of the earth, Psalm. 22.26, 27. A multitude, which no man could number of all
Nations and kindreds, and people, Rev. 7.9. are said to be the people of God
under the New Testament, and yet you will not allow them the name of a National
Church.

But a stronger foundation for this Truth there cannot be, than that which
Saint Paul has laid under the similitude of an Olive which had two kinds of
branches, natural, verse 21. and wild, 17. Romans 1^^
The natural were the Jews, the wild the Gentiles; the natural were broken off
through unbelief, and the wild by faith graffed in. These wild now being
naturalized, are in the same condition that the Natural were before they were
broken off. But the Natural branches were in the Olive totally, the whole
Nation, they and their children, which made the National Church of the Jews,
and therefore the wild branches must be so inserted, they and their children
also, which will make the National Church of the Gentiles, which is the full
scope and intention of the Apostle in that chapter. Finally, the very same
Covenant that was made with Abraham, 2 Cor. 6.16.
is made with the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6.16. I will be their God, and they shall
be my people. As that then was extended to the whole Nation of the Jews, Lev.
26.12.
Levit. 26.12. so also is it now to be extended to the whole Nation of the
Gentiles, so that all those Nations that have had the Gospel preached unto
them, and answering that Gospel, have received the doctrine of Christ,
submitting to his Ordinances in the profession of his Name, are to be reckoned
as they were, 1 Pet. 2.10. Acts 8.12, 13. John 6.66. Acts 11.26. 1 Cor. 1.2. 1
Cor. 12.13. Matthew. 8.11.
the people of God, 1 Pet. 2.10. Believers, Acts 8.12, 13. Disciples, John
6.66. Christians, Acts 2. Saints by calling, 1 Cor. 1.2. The Church of the
Gentiles, 1 Cor. 12.13. The Kingdom of Christ, Matthew. 8.11. Thus have I showed
you that since the whole Church quoad materiale does consist of Nations, there
can be no impropriety or absurdity in it, when we call any part thereof a
National Church, or the Church of Believers in any one Nation. And now let us
see what help you can have for the confirmation of this besides Scripture out
of the principles of reason.

2. We believe in our Creed the Catholic Church, and Catholic it is called
in respect of all ages and times, because, before, under, and after the Law it
always was: and secondly, in respect of persons; for there is not any person
of what degree, sex, condition or age, that may not be a member of it. And
thirdly, in respect of places, in that as formerly the Jews, so now all
persons in all Nations have a capacity to be of the Church of Christ.
Universality then being an attribute of the Church, it cannot be found in any
one Church limited either in respect of time or place. Either then make your
Combinational Church the Catholic, or you must extend it farther; and if so,
why not to a Province? and if to a Province, why not to a Nation, nay many
Nations? And be it you should assume the name of Catholic, and fasten it to
every particular Combinational Church, yet particular Societies of Christians
can lay no farther claim to it than they can demonstrate themselves to belong
to that Church that has a true and a just title to it; which no particular
Church can do, but by proving that it holds the common faith once delivered to
the Saints without heretical innovation, Ames. lib. 1. c. 31. Sect. 20.
or schismatical violation of the Unity and Peace of the Christian world. This
being the way for particular Churches to demonstrate themselves to be
Catholic, necessary it is that they be united at least to those Congregations
of that Nation; whence we may infer that there must needs be a National Church,
which also that must do, and show clearly that it maintains whole and
undefiled the foundations of faith, before it can be acknowledged to be
Catholic.

2. That which makes men mistake in this point, is, that they make the Church
to be species specialissima, whereas it is Locale genus, such are other
collective words, exercitus, Keckerm. syst. in fin. c. de genesis
respubl. which kind of genus being but Analogum, must have under it species
Analogas, not such as are true, as it is in true Entities, but such as have an
Analogy with them, and fall into a Logical consideration under that similitude.
Say then, that this word Church is totum universale, then it must have parts
subjectivas under it, and so it has; for Ecclesia Britanica, Belgica,
Genevensis, Germanica, Scotica, etc. are as it were so many Species, where you
may find so many National Churches that do equally participate of the nature
of the Genus, and under them so many Individuums as there be particular
Congregations in any of these Nations. Neither does Amesius, Ames. Loc. citato
Sect. 18.
who affirms the Church to be a Species specialissima, give any teason for it,
but that nullas habet species proprie dictas, which is illogical; for I told
you, that it was Genus analogum; and will any Logician expect species proprie
dictas? it is sufficient for such a genus to have species improprie dictas, by
comparison and resemblance only to a true Genus; and such the Church has as I
have proved, and therefore there may be a National Church.

Thirdly, that which is capable of the definition of the Church, may be called
a Church. But a National Church is capable of the definition of a Church;
therefore there may be a National Church. The major is out of question, and
needs no proof. The minor I make good by setting down, and applying the
definition of the Church to it. Amesius. Ames. lib. 1. cap. 31. 7. Junius de
Ecclesia c. 2. Trelcat. lib. 2. cap. de Ecclesia.
Ecclesia est caetus hominum vocatorum. But his definition though it would
serve my turn is a little too short. Iunius has more fully expressed it.
Ecclesia est caetus eorum quos Deus evocat e natura and modulo naturali ipsorum
per gratiam in dignitatem filiorum Dei ad ipsius gloriam. Trelcatius gives us
three definitions one after another.

First, to the Church in common, which is, Ecclesia est caetus eorum quos Deus
gratuita vocatione, ad gratiae suae and gloriae communionem evocat, Matthew.
11.29.

And secondly, that belongs to the visible Church, Ecclesia visibilis est
caetus eorum quos Deus externa vocatione, seu praeditatione verbi, and
Sacramentorum administratione evocat ad cultum gloriae suae, Mat. 28.17.

A third, which belongs to the invisible Church, which is, Ecclesia invisibilis
est caetus praedestinatorum, qui vocatione efficaci and salutari ex statu
corruptionis in dignitatem adoptionis filiorum Dei evocantur, and Christo
tanquam capiti adun^ntur, non ad cultum tantum, sed ad fructum gloriae. Luke
1.33.

All which definitions, especially those of Junius and Trelcatius, are full and
artificial; for Ecclesia is by all put in the predicament of relation, and all
relations are defined mentione subjecti, relati, correlati, fundamenti, Keck.
syst. Log. cap. de Definit.
quod supplet locum causae efficientis, and Termini vel finis. And in these
last we meet with all these. The relatum is vocans, the correlatum is evocati,
the subject or materiale, Men, or more largely, those who who have a capacity,
e natura and modulo naturali ipsorum, to be called, which takes in Angels also.
The Formale or foundation of this Relation, is that gracious call that God
gives; and the end is, that they being adopted for his children, may
communicate in his worship, grace and glory.

Now what one word is there in any one or all these definitions which are not
as well applicable to a National Church, Deuteronomy. 5.22. Exodus 16.1.
as a Combinational? Is this caetus, kahal, an Assembly, a Gnedah, a
Congregation? that is much more. Does this consist of men? There are more in
that. Have those in this a Call, a gracious call given them by God? so have the
other. Are they adopted and brought into the state of sons? so are they too.
I have nourished and brought up children: Are these called to worship God, to
be partakers of grace and glory? Isa. 1.2. ^ Cor. 6.18.
So are all Nations whom the Lord our God does call. They then who partake
fully of the nature and essence of a Church, and to whom all the causes that
constitute a Church may be attributed, of whom the efficient, matter, form,
end are verified, without question are a Church; but such is the National as I
have declared; I pray therefore let it have the name.

I know your exception lies against the formal cause; for that gracious call of
God will not satisfy you, which has contented all other judicious Divines
before you: But you assign another, viz. a Church Covenant, fancying that none
can be truly members of Christ's Church, but who have combined and joined
themselves together in this League of Church Fellowship. This say you, is the
chief essential part of a Church, and the true formality of it.

Amesius teaches us truly, that Ecclesia is a Deo instituta. If so, let it be
shown where God instituted his Church under this condition; produce the
precept, bring forth the command for it, or else you shall never persuade me
that this Institution is from God. Nay, I shall yet descend lower, Demonstrate
to me the practice of it, or the pattern for it, either in the Apostles age,
or any age after it, till you arose, and you shall carry the cause. I know that
the wisest among you is not able to show me one example for it in all antiquity.

We cannot therefore choose but set upon it the character of Ionah's gourd,
that is, filia noctis, a daughter of a nights growth, it sprung up so lately.
The farthest the pedigree can reach, is either to the Montanists, Novatians, or
Donatists, those children of Separation; and yet when alls done it does but
resemble them neither, since I read not that they and their parties were ever
bandied together by a solemn Covenant. They could think themselves a Church,
and indeed the sole Church without this formality. They had their Bishops under
whose jurisdiction all the several Congregations of their profession were. And
therefore I shall again repeat my words, that no pattern for this in any age
can be found; and I add to it, no not among Heretics and Schismatics.

Secondly, we shall give a poor account of former Churches and Christians, if
this Covenant-invention should be of such concernment to Christianity: when it
is not easy, nor as I believe, possible to find a Church anciently so bound.

Farther, yet this seems to me altogether useless and superfluous, and that in
two respects. First, it seems useless to them who are so bound; for these new
small bodies are so loosly tied together by these sorry withs of man's
invention, that they quickly upon humor, anger and heady animosities fall
asunder, and break into several fractions and subdivisions; so that they by
reciting a certain form of words, seem to meet as pieces of wood finely glued
together, which a little spittle or wet dissolves. Then again, it is useless
to them who are bound already by a higher and more solemn Covenant; for this is
as it were to bind a man with wisps of straw, that is already bound with
chains of gold. For every true and conscientious Christian knows and owns
himself to have upon his conscience, far more strict and indissoluble ties,
not only of nature and creation, but of the Law and word of God: yea, and of
Christian Covenant and Profession by his Baptismal vow, besides that bond of
the other Sacrament, that I speak not of his vows renewed by often promises in
his prayers, and repentant promises: All which binds the consciences of all
good Christians to all duties of piety and charity according to the relations
wherein they stand to God and man, far more firmly than any external
profession in a Church way can do. An external I say; for so it is, and being
merely external, it cannot ingredi rei essentiam, make any man formally a
Church member; that which does this is the call of God, and not the profession
of man. And now having removed this rub out of my way, I shall go on to give
you a fourth argument for a National Church.

4. That to whom the proper, essential and inseparable notes of the Church
belong is a Church; but to a National Church these notes belong; therefore a
National Church is a Church. The major is certain, for it is nota proprii; the
minor I easily prove. The essential notes of the Church, as Junius has
excellently demonstrated against Bellarmine; Jun. de Ecclesia. cap. 16.

Doctor Field of the Chapter lib. 2. cap. 2.

Whites Orthodox. cap. 3. Sect. 6.


first the entire profession of these supernatural verities which God has
revealed in his Son: Secondly, the use of such holy Ceremonies and Sacraments
as he has instituted and appointed: Thirdly, an union and connection of men in
this profession and use of these Sacraments under lawful Pastors and guides,
appointed, authorized and sanctified to direct and lead them in the happy ways
of eternal salvation.

Now do not these belong to a National Church? is there not in it a profession
of supernatural verities? is not the Word of God publicly preached in it? are
not holy Rites and Sacraments administered according to Christ's institution? is
there not a succession of lawful Guides and Pastors in it, as I have elsewhere
proved? what then can hinder, but there should be a National Church? Whatsoever
you can say against these notes, I have so clearly as I conceive proved, that I
hold it superfluous to add any more; and therefore I come unto my third proof,
experience.

3. Experience is that wisdom and knowledge of any thing that a man has by
the trial of particulars. For when upon a sad examination he finds that so many
Individuums agree in aliquo tertio, he presently concludes, that they all
partake of the same nature. Let us then take a view of several Churches, and
those most eminent at first; and if it appear that those were National, we may
from hence easily infer, that the constitution of a Church may be National.
It is in all Church Histories most evident, that as soon as the Gospel was
first planted, it spread from great Cities into the Neighbor Territories and
adjacent Countries; which Christians so converted, though they exercised the
acts of Religion in particular Congregations, yet still continued in a
fraternal subjection, and filial submission to that Bishop and Presbytery which
resided in the Mother City: It is a foul mistake for men to conceive of the
Church of Ephesus, Smyrna, Thyatyra, etc. of Corinth, Antioch, Jerusalem, Rome,
etc. as confined to that City; whereas he who is acquainted with Histories
profane and sacred, must know that under these Cities were principalities, and
so the jurisdiction of that Church was extended to all Christians in that
Territory. Which to deny, is to slight all Records, and to prefer his own
single imagination before all antiquity; Titus was Bishop of Crete an Island;
Timothy of Ephesus a Province; Polycarp of Smyrna a Territory; and what is true
of these, is as true of all the rest; whence we may conclude, that a Church may
be National; for if jurisdiction of one Bishop may extend over so great Cities
as they were, being then the chief of the world; why not then to a Province?
why not to a Nation? especially since by this way, mutual peace, truth and good
order is best preserved.

This consideration caused the first small company of believers, multiplied
from a Church in one family, to a Church in many Congregations, that could not
meet together in one place, yet as branches to continue still united to the
root Christ Jesus; and also to the main body and bulk of the Church by union to
that part whence they descended, and to which they related. For reason taught
them that they should be weaker, and exposed to more danger, if they should be
disunited and rent from the body, and quickly wither, as boughs separated from
the stock. I need not mind you of that old Apologue of Menenius Agrippa, that
the head and feet quickly starved and windred away, when they would not hear of
any longer dependence upon the belly.

He that would be magnified for Simon Magus, or magnus, Simon the great, and
wise for his invention of rarities and Paradoxes in any art or science, ought
to furnish himself not with popular and specious, but with solid and sound
arguments, if he intend to win prudent and sober men to be of his judgment:
for (...); wise men will not be caught with those sophisms, with which it is
easy to take the multitude. After the flood, there were but eight persons in
the world; they lived together in a family for some time, and Noah as a Prince
ruled them. But they quickly increased, spread, multiplied, grew into those
Nations that now live, and being dispersed over the earth, they yet joined in
societies, and for their mutual preservation, thought it fit to be governed
that way that we now behold. Suppose now some great and wise Magus, should in
these words charm and bewitch the people, Non sic fuit ab initio, in Noah's
days the ordering of the world was not as we see it now; there were then no
mighty Monarchs, no surly Lords, no Judges, no Magistrates. Who then spoke of
National societies or civil confederations? Oh 'twas a brave world then, when
the government was domestical; a golden age when no man ruled beyond his own
doors, but every one was a King at home. Could we but contrive a way, and live
to see it so in our days, 'twould be no question a brave world again.

When Adam dugge and Eve span, who was then a Gentleman?

The like argument to this is used by those of the Combination. At Rome they
find a houseful of Christians; at Corinth another handful met together in the
house of Cloe. Romans 16.5. 1 Cor. 16.29. 1 Cor. 1.11.
In Asia there is mention made of single Churches. (but by the way, that these
were bourd together by a Church Covenant, and a separate, and Independent
Congregation, that had no relation to the Presbytery in those Cities, that is
not mentioned, not a word of that) Then there were no National Churches; this
was afterward brought in by lordly Prelates: Oh if we might but see the Church
restored again, and all things done according to the pattern in the Mount, then
it would be a glorious Church, Gods people, precious people, all Kings, Priests
and Prophets within their own doors. You then of the people, even the poorest
Plowman, and ignorantest Mechanic should recover his right, primo questu, and
be subject to no other Pastors and Elders then were of your own choosing, nor
to them no longer then pleased you. Now is not this kind of arguing very
plausible in the peoples ears? Oh how they will hug themselves, when they
shall find themselves to become some body? Let us, say they, but join our
selves in this Combination, and then God knows what goodly great things we may
come to be; we may come to be Pastors to feed; we may come to be Elders to
rule the flock; we may come to be Deacons and carry the bag: and if we sail of
these our hopes, yet however we have voices in the Election of Church Officers,
and the highest of them all must depend upon us. This is that which tickleth
the multitude to reduce the Church to the house of Cloe, as those Sophists
would do the world to the Ark of Noah.

Now one of these is as absurd as the other; as contrary to reason to bring
back the Church to particular houses and Combinations, as it is all the
societies of men to domestical government. Shall an example or two, (which yet
comes not home neither) be pleaded against a cloud of witnesses to the
contrary? when we can instance in Presbyteries constituted by the Apostles in
chief Cities, which were heads of whole Provinces; shall we plead that two or
three houses were patterns in the Mount? This is so childish a fancy, so weak
and unreasonable an imagination, as if they would reduce themselves to their
infants Coats, now they are grown men; or think they are bound to wear a
leathern girdle, because Saint John Baptist did so.

To conclude this point, we dare appeal to the consciences of any of these
bodying Christians (whom charity may presume to be godly and judicious) Dr.
Gauden.
whether they find in Scripture, or have just cause to think that the blessed
Apostles ever constituted such small bodies of Covenanting Churches, when there
were great numbers, and many Congregations of Christians in any City, Province,
or Country, so as each one should be thought absolute, independent, and no way
subordinate to another? Whether ever the Apostles required of those lesser
handfuls, those peti-toes and fingers of the body (which might and did Convene
in Cloes house) any such explicit forms and Covenants, besides those holy
bonds, which by believing and professing of the faith by Baptism and
Eucharistical communion were upon them? Or whether the blessed Apostles would
have questioned or denied them to be true Christians, and in a true Church, or
have separated from them, or cast them off as not engrafted in Christ, or
growing up in him, who without any such bodying in small parcels had professed
the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the due use of the Word, Sacraments,
Ministry? who endeavored to lead a holy life themselves, and sought by all
means which charity, order, or authority allowed them to repress the contrary
in others. The wisdom of these first planters of Religion was so great, their
charity so warm, their persuasions to unity so earnest; the Character they set
upon those who separate, so black, that it cannot be believed that ever they
would admit of a rent in that body, which was instructed by one head, enlived
by one spirit, formed by one faith, and quickened by one and the same hope. And
if these excellent Christian virtues had continued, we had not seen the
seam-lesse Coat of our Savior rent into such small shreds as we behold and
lament at this day. And so much of this.

2. The next thing that in general you charge the National Church withal, is,
that they took up the customs you name by a Jewish imitation.
COncerning which I have diverse things to reply. First, if we must be accused
for this apish imitation of the Jews, yet we are not the only Apes, since you
for this are no less guilty than our selves; and then you know, qui alterum
incusat probri, ipsum se tueri oportet. For do you not imitate the Jewish
Sanedrim in your Elderships? why is it else that from it most of your party
fetch their defense? why from it do they borrow their light to expound dic
Ecclesiae? Again, that the Scripture is not to be read, except expounded, is
your common tenet; we press you for a precept for this, and none you do, nor
none you can bring; only you produce the example of Ezra the Scribe, Nehem. 8.8.
that he read the book, and gave the sense; and upon this example you do it,
and tell us it is to be done; now what is imitation, but the following of an
example? Besides you your self would have all your Elders stand and sit
together in the face and full view of the whole Assembly; now what command can
you find for this? all you can say for it, Verse 4.
is the pattern in the former place of Ezra; and then I hope you will not deny
but you in this are to answer for a Jewish imitation also. Your letter bears
date the 22 day of the eighth month, which is you know to speak the language
of the old Jew.

Secondly, I ask how ever you can make good that, in most of the instances
which you allege; that the Christians took their pattern from the Jews after
they were formed into a National Church, and were put under the Ceremonial Law.
If in these they imitated any, I may as easily say that they took their pattern
from the Patriarchs for these; before the Ceremonies of the Law were imposed,
as you can reflect upon the Nation of the Jews. For the Patriarchs had their
feasts, their places whether to bring their offerings, Genesis 8.20. and 13.18.
and 28.22. and 33.20. Genesis 2.2. Exodus 5.1.
They acknowledge a high Priest, Genesis 14.18. They paid tyths, Genesis 14.20. and
28.22. Four then of these five frivolous traditions, as you call them, were in
use before the Jews were a settled Nation, and to those old and first people of
God the Primitive Church might have an eye when they admitted these usages, as
well as to their posterity. And the Jew strictly so taken need be cast in our
teeth no more.

Thirdly, Suppose it were granted that these customs were brought in by a
Jewish imitation, yet it will not hence follow that they are ere the worse, or
are therefore to be rejected. The objection is old, Hook. Eccl. pol. lib. 4.
Sect. 11.
and to it Mr. Hooker has given a satisfactory answer. For the Jewish
Ordinances were of two sorts, positive, or moral. The moral were never to be
abolished; the positive again were such which were not necessary for ever to be
retained, or such as were left indifferent to be kept or not. Sacrifice and
circumcision were of the first kind, and must necessarily be removed, which was
done in their due time; in these the Christian Gentiles, no not at first after
the decree, Acts 15. must not imitate the Jews. But for the second sort, such
which were of an indifferent nature to be kept or not to be kept, (of which
kind I will by and by produce many instances,) the Gentile Christians were no
way blameable, if they conformed themselves to the Jewish custom; Leo Sermon.
sept. de jejun. mensis septim.
which gave Leo occasion thus to begin his Sermon. Apostolica institutio,
dilectissimi, quae Jesum Christum Dominum ad hoc venisse in hunc mundum
noverat, ut legem non solveret, sed impleret, ita veteris Testamenti decreta
distinxit, ut quaedam ex iis, sicut erant condita, Evangelicae eruditioni
profutura decerperet, and quae dudum fuerant consuetudinis Judaicae, fierent
observantiae Christianae. And this very fast of the seventh month then kept,
may serve for one instance. Another shall be that Apostolical decree, Acts 15.
imposed on the Gentiles, that they abstained from meats offered to Idols, and
from blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication. Acts 15.29. R.
Solomon. liber, qui Seder Olam inscribitur.
For the understanding of which decree, know we must that among the Jews were
two kind of Proselytes; the first were called Gertzedek or Proselytae
justitiae, or foederis, for he submitted himself to circumcision, and the whole
Mosaical Law. The second were called Ger-sahagnar Proselytae portae, a
Proselyte or stranger within thy gates, Deuteronomy. 14.21. such was Naaman the
Eunuch, etc. He was not circumcised, nor bound to observe all the Mosaical
Rites. Only it was an opinion constantly received among the Jews, that God
delivered unto the sons of Noah seven precepts, which went under the name of
Noah's seven Commandments. 1. Judgments and punishment for Malefactors. 2.
Blessing and calling on the Name of God, under which was contained the keeping
of the Sabbath. 3. Disclaiming Idolatry. 4. Uncovering of ones nakedness, or
all unclean knowledge in the flesh. 5. Shedding of blood. 6. Robbery and
rapine. 7. Not to eat of any living creature whereof the blood was not let out.
Four of these Commands the Gentiles were apt to observe of their own accord,
nature leading them thereunto; but the other three, the Apostles thought good
to impose upon them; viz, the third, the fourth, and the seventh, to give
content to the Jews, that the Gentiles being conformable unto them in the
observation of these Laws of Noah, they might cleave the better together. Dare
any man now say the Apostles were too blame, to bring the Gentiles to a Jewish
imitation? what should I tell you, that all the East Church, and we in this
Island did celebrate the Feast of Easter upon the fourteenth day of the first
month, upon what day of the week soever it fell, until Constantines time? and
was not this a Jewish imitation? for which indeed Pope Victor condemned and
excommunicated the Eastern Churches, and all the (...); but he himself for this
presumption and rashness, is condemned and censured by Irenaeus. That the
Christians at first kept the Jewish Sabbath, as well as the Lords day: That the
West Church celebrated the Eucharist in unleavened bread, is a known truth to
all that are acquainted with antiquity; and what were these but Jewish Rites?
and whence could they learn them, but from the Jewish Synagogue? and yet I
never read any condemnation of the Primitive Church for these. Whence had they
their osculum pacis? whence then Ag^pae but from the Jews? From hence then two
conclusions there are, which may be evidently drawn. The one, that whatsoever
positive Laws the Apostles or their Successors did bring in, between the
Churches of Jews and Gentiles, it was in those things only which might either
cease or continue a shorter or a longer time, as occasion did most require: The
other, that things indifferent though brought in by the pattern of the Jewish
Synagogue, yet are not to be condemned and cast out upon this ground, because
they are of a Jewish imitation.

If these instances be not sufficient, I yet shall add more that may convince
any man who will not be obstinate. It is an ordinary observation, which P.
Fagius in his notes on the Targum first suggested to me, and after him Dr.
Godwin, Fagius in praeced. Hebr. Godwin antiq. lib. 3. cap. 2. Hamm. vind.
Liturg. Sect. 43. Cass. Liturg. page 1. Genesis 48.14. Godw. ant. lib. 1. cap. 3.
and Dr. Hammond, and George Cassander assert, that many of the Jewish
Ceremonies were imitated by Christ himself under the Gospel. I might show it
you in the imposition of hands, a form of benediction among the Jews, as
ancient as old Jacob, in blessing Manasse^ and Ephraim, and as often used by
Christ to the same purpose. But I rather choose to do it in the two Sacraments,
and in the censures of the Church. To the making of a Proselyte, one of the
three Ceremonies required as purification by water, which yet was not
Sacramental till Christ's institution; now the Baptism by water commanded by
our Savior, related to this (...) or washing of Proselytes, which was used by
the Jews at their admission or initiation. After the Jewish Feasts they had a
Postcaenlum, of which Cassander at large thus discourses. Primum omnium Judaeus
Paterfamilias cum fuis convivis mensae accumbit, Cass. Liturg. cap. 1.
p^culum vino plenum dextra manu tenens, Precatur in haec verba, Benedictus sis
tu Domine Deus noster Rex mundi, qui creas fructum vi^is. Quo dicto primus
omnium vinum degusta^, quod idem continuo onnibus mensae accumbenibus bibendum
por^igit. Postea panem (quem int^gram esse massam oportet) accipit, eumque
utraque manu tenendo, his verbis consecrat, Benedictus sis tu Domine Deus
noster, qui educis panem de terra. Hoc dicto pan m frangit, and ex eo
particulam comedit, ac singulis mensae accumbentibus singulas buccellas
distribuit. Hinc cons^quenter prolixam dicit precem, qua in prece grati^ram
actiones, non solum pro concesso omnibus alimento, sed pro omnibus beneficiis,
olim patribus, and hodie quoque Israelitiae genti collatis, concipiuntur, etc.
As for their present food, Drus. in N. T. part altera. page 78. Fagius in
Deuteronomy. 8. Luke 22.17, 18.
for their deliverance from the Egyptian servitude, for the Covenant of
Circumcision, for the Law given by Moses, This grace of Thanksgiving they
called Bircath hasasen, the blessing of the Cup, with which Christ himself
seems to have begun his supper; He took the Cup and gave thanks, and said,
Take and divide it among you. After the blessing of the Cup, the Master of the
house took the bread, and consecrated it in the words before, which they called
Bircath halechem, or the blessing of the bread, and then brake and divided it.
So did our Savior, Verse 19.
He took bread and gave thanks, and brake it, etc. At the end of the Feast,
they again gave thanks, and then the Master of the house took a Cup of wine in
both hands, beginning thus, Let us bless him who has fed us of his own, and
of whose goodness we live. This grace they called Bircath hamazon, and the Cup
Cos hillel, poculum (...), and both these Cups are mentioned by Saint Luke; but
the words of institution added only to the last. This Cup is the New Tstament
or Covenant in my blood, Verse 20. Scalig. de emend. temp. lib. 6. page 273.
which is shed for you. After all this they sung Hymns and Psalms, which also
was practiced by our blessed Savior, Mark 14.26. These Rites were all Jewish,
and yet our Savior dislikes them not for that, but observes them in the
institution of the blessed Sacrament. That you may see the weakness of the
argument, that no usage of the Jew may be followed in the Christian Church: I
promised you one instance more; it was in the Jewish censures, in which they
observed three degrees; Niddui, Cherem and Schammatha. Niddui signifies
separation, Buxtorf. ex Rabb. Epist. Heb. page 55. Lex. Rabb. page 827.

Godw. Ant. lib. 5. cap. 2.

Dr. Hamm. of the Keys, cap. 4. Sect. 60.


and by it the delinquent was separate from all society or commerce with others
for four Cubits, and for thirty days. The second was Cherem, which is thus
defined by Buxtorf; an exclusion from the sacred Assemblies, a casting out of
the Synagogue, with all the curses of Deuteronomy. 28. The third was Schammatha, the
Etymology of which word, Godwin tells us is twofold; for says he, Schem is
Lord, and Atha comes; others say it sounds as much as, There is death; for
Scham is there, and Mitha death. Hence it may be rendered excommunication to
death; and so Dr. Hammon out of D^lhen. defines it. Ea excommunicatio, qua quis
totaliter and finaliter ab Ecclesia segregatus, divino judicio sit devotus, and
cum ea mors and exitium. Now to these three the censures of the Christian
Church were very correspondent. Luke 6.22. John 9.22. John 16.2.
The first was (...), separation or remotion, that answers to Niddui. The
second was (...), that answers to Cherem, which in other words is tradere
Satanae, 1 Cor. 5.5. The third was Maran-atha, 1 Cor. 16.22. To which he was to
be left, who loved not the Lord Jesus, which was the self-same with Schammatha;
for Maran is Lord, and atha comes: so that it is evident in the Church
censures also, the Christians took up their pattern from the Jews. All this I
have said, and could add to it much more, to make the proposition appear no
unreasonable maxim; that it may be lawful for the Church to use a custom
which has some resemblance of some Ceremony in force anciently among the Jews.

4. Lastly, I observe that you make your Jewish imitation very ancient, in that
by the Adverbs, quando and unde, when and whence, you fasten it upon the
National Church; had it been a birth of yesterday, I should have suspected it;
but when I find it a plant of so many ages, I cannot choose but rise up to the
gray hairs; either accuse the Apostles for it, (who did imitate the Jews, as I
have proved, as well as we, and at that time when they preached and gathered of
all Nations into the fold,) or else we are blameless. This was it I had to
return to your two Generals; now I come to your five degrees, in which this
imitation lies, and will consider them in the same method you propose them. You
say

1. Yhe first was of National times, as the fifty yearly Festivals, or
holy-working days, Cursed-masse, Candle-masse.
WHich words I must profess I clearly understand not in all points; for what
is it you mean by these fifty yearly Festivals? are they all the Sundays of
the year? if that, we own them, and that not upon any Jewish imitation. If you
mean those other, which our Church enjoined to be observed for holy days, the
number will not arise to fifty. For they are only twenty seven, and so you have
over-shot your self.

As for your term Cursed-Masse, I hope you intend not the day of our Saviors
Nativity, when for the glad tidings the Angels joined in a Quire, and sang an
Athemne in the fields of Galilee. Could I conceive you intended to black that
day with that accursed word, I should grow impatient, and return, The Lord
rebuke thee. But the word Candlemas that follows it at the heels, makes me
somewhat suspicious that you might squint an ill eye that way. If so, you are
much to blame; if not, there is no harm done.

I know yet that these words Christmas and Candlemas often offend many; but
then you must lay the blame (if there be any) on those who deserve it. It is
the multitude and vulgar that has taken up and makes use of these names; the
Church so imposed them not. Turn over our Calenders, and you shall find them
appointed to be kept holy under these titles. The Nativity of our Lord, the
Purification of the blessed Virgin.

And yet had the words received countenance from the Church, there is no such
cursednesse in them as is conceived, if we shall cast our eyes upon the first
native use. For no question missa, from whence Mass came, is a Latin word,
and signifies no more than remissa, used by Tertullian and Cyprian for
remissio; for remissa peccatorum, is with them remissio peccatorum. Tertull.
advers. Marcion.

Cypr. l. 3. Ep. 14. Amb. lib. 5. Ep. 33.

Chem. Exam. Trid. Conc. de Miss. Pontif. Juel. artic. 1. 31. Cass. Liturg.
cap. 16.

Whites Orthodox. lib. 2. Sect. 26.

Zanch. de cult. exter. cap. de Sacrific. Sect. 13.

Cass. Liturg. cap. 26.


Ambrose is the first of the Latin Fathers that used it. It first signified no
more than to call together to celebrate divine service, as both Chemnitius,
Juel and Cassander have observed; and therefore when the Greeks used (...), or
(...), The Latin Translatours turned it missas facere, missas celebrare. After
it came to signify the whole form of public prayer, which the Greeks called
(...), we our Liturgy. Lastly, it was most strictly taken for the
administration of the Eucharist, whereunto the Converts unbaptized, the
Catechumeni, the Penitents, the Energumeni were not admitted, but dismissed and
commanded to depart. For when the celebration of those mysteries began, the
Deacon stood up and said a loud to those, Ite, missa est. Now let it be taken
in which of these senses you will, there can be no great harm in the name
Mass, being a suffix to these days. For it is not intended, that thereby men
should meet on these days or any other to say Mass, i. e. to offer a
propiatory sacrifice for the quick and dead: But only that they should (...)
meet and convene in Gods house, that there they should have the glad tidings
which the Angels proclaimed to the Shepherds, hodie natus est vobis; that they
should praise God for it, and pray, that as he was born for them, so he may be
given to them. Of which the Sacrament being a sign and a seal, they there met
together to be partakers of it. This is all, that to a good intelligent
Christian the Mass can import; and if any be other minded, they may be easily
informed, and then I see not what scandal can be taken at the name of
Christ-Masse.

And I am sure much less at the Feast; For if ever God bestowed a blessing
upon the world, it was his Son, and the flesh of the Son of God, is the
Channel in which it flows to us: This flesh he took at his birth; his birth day
then is worth remembrance; that then we perform opus diei in die suo: and the
opus diei is that we be glad and rejoice in it. Never fear, there is no
Judaisme in it; then I am certain in this you cannot imitate; for they are
enemies to his name, enemies to his birth, enemies to his day; they if they
could would expunge his memory out of the hearts of Christians, out of the
Calender; join not with this perverse and obstinate generation. I shall set
before you a more noble example to imitate, the first Martyrs, the first
Confessors, the first Fathers of the Church: for these worthies kept this day;
to them it was a holy, no working day; on that day they did feast, not scorn
and revile.

Telesphorus celebrated it in the Roman Church; but it is so ancient, Caranza
in vita. Telesp.
and of so general observance in the Church, that Zanchy confesses he knows
not when it began. No Council instituted it, that we know of; and therefore by
Austins rule, it should be ab Apostolis traditum. That it was a very ancient
and universal Feast of the whole Church, appears by that Sermon of Cyprian (and
he lived diverse years before the Nicene Council) which he preached upon the
day, Cypr. Sermo de nativitate Domini.
which he begins with these words; Adest Christi multum desiderata and
expectata nativitas: Adest solemnitas inclyta, and in praesentia salvatoris
grates and lauds visitatori suo per orbem terrarum sancta reddit Ecclesia.
Whence it is evident, that it was a solemn universal Feast in his time, kept
with thanks, with praise; and after him there is so frequent mention of it in
all the Fathers, and their Sermons; as of Basil, Nazianzene, Chrysostom, Leo,
and who not? extant, preached on the day in honor of Christ, and his birth
day; that it were to light a Candle to the Sun to produce them. Other men may
follow what new lights they please, but I shall desire to be guided by these
old Lamps in this practice of praise and thankfulness. I know there is no
superstition,, no imitation of Judaisme in it. It is a Christian, a laudable, a
pious, a profitable duty, and it is no fear of a shadow shall drive me from it.

2. And so having accounted for this particular Festival, I come to answer for
our Church holy days in general; Christ is both the Author and Finisher of
our Redemption, which work before it could be consummated, the purchase must be
made, applied, proclaimed. That he might be apt to lay down the price, he must
be made man, conceived of the Holy Ghost, born of a woman a Virgin, born under
the Law, of which he gave an evidence when he was circumcised the eighth day,
presented in the Temple at his Mothers purification, and baptized by John in
Jordan. This showed that he took upon him the form of a servant, and humbled
himself. But he thought himself not low enough, till he humbled himself to the
death, even that bloody, shameful, painful, accursed death of the Cross, upon
which he was crucified, upon which he dyed, and was afterward buried. By all
this the purchase was fully made, and the ransom fully paid, Consummatum est.
But it must be applied also, and conveyed to us, or we are nere the better. To
effect this, he rose again for our justification, he ascended into heaven to
make intercession, and prepare a place for us, he sent down his Spirit to make
all sure. And that all this might be made known, published and proclaimed, he
gave some to be Apostles, some to be Evangelists; these to write the whole
story, and those to attest it, publish it, and apply it in their Epistles.

Now this is the original of our Festivals, there being not one retained in our
Church, which is not to the honor of Christ, to the memory of some Evangelist
or Apostle. The wisdom of the Church was such, that she would not have so
great benefits forgotten, nor the purchase, nor the application, nor the
proclamation. Into the Creed they are all put, but words are like wind, they
may quickly pass away. The wise founders therefore of our Church, and first
planters of Religion, set out a day for every Article, that in the time to come
when the children shall ask their fathers, What means these days, these
Festivals? they should answer and say, This day Christ was conceived, this day
he was born, this day he was circumcised, this day his Mother was purified,
this day he was baptized, this day he was crucified; and so laid down a ransom
for us, and so redeemed us that were all lost. And that we might know, that
what he undertook, he went through, and has conveyed unto us; this day he
arose from the grave, this day he ascended to heaven, this day he sent down his
holy Spirit upon the Apostles, who have proclaimed and published so much to the
world, and with their blood sealed the testimony to be true. All this was the
work of the whole Trinity; for the Father he gave the Son, he was given, and
the Holy Ghost filled him full of grace for this work; And that so great
benefits might never slip out of our minds, these days are set apart for
commemoration, for praise, for thanksgiving, for imitation. Men may feed
themselves with fancies if they please, but it may be well feared, that when
the Festival and solemnities for the birth, life, death, resurrection,
ascension of Christ, the mission of the Holy Ghost, the Trinity, and the
Lessons and Sermons upon them, with the Creed also, shall be turned out of the
Church, 'twill not be in the power of weekly Sermons on some head of Religion
to keep up the knowledge of Christ in men's hearts. A thing it seems observed by
the Casuists, who use to make the number of those things that are necessario
credenda, no more then the Festivals of Christ make known to men; and how sure
a way this is, to instill these necessary principles into the heads of the
easiest capacity, give me leave to assure you upon my own experience. For when
all I could say, would not teach the Article, the mention of the day, and
inculcating why the day was to be kept, did with much ease and facility do it:
I can never therefore sufficiently admire the wisdom of the Church in the
institution of these Festivals.

And yet had this been an institution of the Church, Vide sis Zanch. in expos.
praecep. quarti. de diebus festis. These. 1.2, 3.
after she ceased to be a Virgin, I should have suspected it. But when I find
a Record for the Festivals, that concern our Savior in the best times, and
that these were observed as Augustine says, semper, ubique, ab omnibus, this
so far sways with me, that I dare not assent to abolish them.

It is with days, as it is with men. They are pares in esse naturae. Ecclus.
33.
All equally from the ground, the first man an earthen vessel, and the best
since but sherds of the old pot. But in esse morali, an imparity there is; some
are vessels to honor, some to dishonor. The comparison will hold in times,
and seasons; the periodick motion of the Sun gives being to them all; yet are
they not all of equal esteem. For some are made holy, some common; these put
among the days to number; those raised and made high days, and set above
their fellows to a holy purpose. Which yet was not done by chance, as it falls
out in the advancement of men; but it was propter opus p ivilegiatum, quod Deus
in eo fecit; some extraordinary beneficial work that God did upon that day:
this is the formale diei, that gives it being and pre-eminence above another.
This God would have remembered; for this work he would be thanked and praised,
and to that end he will have some especial time set apart.

Neither of this is there any doubt, when the Author and Institutor is God.
But man, say some, may not usurp upon God, and set apart any day of the six
appointed for labor to a holy use, and thus much you intimate, when you call
these holy working days. But of how little strength this is, will hence
appear. To work upon the six days the Jews were bound, no less then we are;
and yet even then, when they were to do all things according to the pattern in
the Mount, they never thought they should transgress Gods holy Command, though
without any express precept they set out some days to remember his mercies,
and bless his Name. Upon no other ground did Mordecai institute the Feast of
Purim, and ordained it to be observed in their generations for ever: An
anniversary Festival it was to be, Esth. 9.21, 22. 1 Maccab. 7.49. and 4.54.
John 10.22.
and yet we find no precept to warrant it. The Encenia or Feast of Dedication
of the Temple was no other. The ordainer was Judas Maccabaeus, a Civil
Magistrate; the observation required by Law, by ordinance, and the
solemnization continued 165 years. And yet notwithstanding the Author man, and
the obligation a Command; our Savior himself went up to Jerusalem to observe
it. I cannot believe that our good Lord, that did nothing amiss, would have
honored the Feast with his presence, had the ordinance of man in such a case
been displeasing to God. To come closer to the point, should a man press these
strait-laced men for a Command to keep the Lords day, I am sure they could not
find it. That it was observed by the Apostles I easily believe, because upon
the first day of the week they brake bread, they enjoined the Collect; because
even then it is called dies Dominicus. Acts 20.7. 1 Cor. 16.2. Revel. 1.10.
But still the difficulty remains, quo warranto? by what Command is this done?
where is the precept for it? Neither is it possible to remove the scruple, but
by acknowledging power in the Superior to appoint a day as for humiliation, so
for thanksgiving. Which because it is done, and daily practiced by your selves,
you of all other should not make this objection: and if it be sinful not to
work the whole six days, you make men sin, when you call men from their work
to follow you, and hear your Lectures.

But still being indulgent to your error, if it be an error, you ever set the
same Coleworts before us, and would make us believe it is (...) will worship;
and upon the same ground because we have no precept for it. But first, if it be
so in us, so also it must be in you; because you find no more precepts for
your days of thanks and fasts, nor yet for your lecturing upon working days,
then we can do for these. Secondly, you understand not the nature of
will worship, as it will appear, if you will vouchsafe to read, Dr. Hamm. of
will worship.
Dr. Hammonds Tract of that subject. Thirdly, what if no precept in Scripture
for them? which of the Ancients ever taught men in Adiaphorous things to
conclude ab authoritate Scripturae negative. The Scripture has not taught,
will never teach all those rites and customs in Religion, Socrat. Schol. lib.
5. cap. 22.
which have been in continual use and practice in the Church; Sufficient those
Oracles of God are (...), to the end they were ordained to perfect the man of
God. Other things what if (...) they ordain not; The essential parts of Gods
worship are there found; no man may add or diminish from it. The agends in
many things are left to the prudence of the Church, who then ordains a right,
when she ordains nothing contrary to the Word. Should you be pressed with these
queries, upon what text or subject a Minister must preach, in what method and
place, or how long time, and how often he must pray or preach; and the people
must hear Sermons, and attend holy duties; I know you would be to seek for a
particular rule in Scripture; your answer must be that Christian prudence must
guide these actions, and angry you would be, if any man should fasten upon you
will worship for these or the like, because you can produce no express text.
Be not then so hasty to fasten upon a whole Church, what every single man of
you does, and thinks he may do, and be blameless.

But to return, (...) in this case we are about is very inconsiderately
objected; for that in the institution of holy days there is very much light
given from the heavenly Lamp. 1. Ratio legis Mosaicae, the equity of Gods Law
that enjoynes a thankful remembrance now as well as then; for it is
unconceivable, that a Jew should have a command upon him to be joyful and
glad-hearted, when the day came that God had done him a good turn; and that a
Christian had a dispensation to be unthankful, and to receive blessings with a
heavy dull soul. This Amesius saw, and therefore says, Festi dies
anniversarii, novilunia, Ames. lib. 2. Medull. cap. 15. Sect. 16.
and similes institutiones quae mere Ceremoniales fuerunt, aequitatem istam
generalem in se etiam continent and adhuc nos docent, quosdam and accommodos
dies cultui publico assignari debere. 2. Exempla piorum. The Worthies in old
time performed some Religious duties without a special warrant. Abraham pays
his tyths; Jacob consecrates his Bethel; David prays seven times a day;
intends to build a Temple to God; The Rechabits refrain wine; Mary breaks her
box, and freely bestows her ointment, Precept then was none for any of these
particulars; performed they were upon common prudence, guided by a general
rule; and yet I dare say of all these, as our Savior did of the last, they did
a good work, a work acceptable in Gods eye.

How far is will worship from such services, that being merely a fiction, a
fancy of man's brain, taken up without any foundation at all in the Word of God,
either by precept or pattern, or the equity of any Law? The Characters thereof
are vain. 2. Erroneous. 3. Repugnant to the will of God. Now I wonder what
vanity, error or impiety can be affixed to the Church in the institution of
holy days? The object of our worship then is the ever-living God, and so no
vain worship. The form of worship the same as at other times, and so no more
erroneous then at other times. It Is not the time then, but the form, that must
be faulty, if at all. 3. But that it is not so, the whole is conformable to
those general rules and Canons of the Holy Ghost delivered for the external
circumstances of Gods worship, (as I shall prove it after) and so not repugnant.

Yea, but say our good Mother the Church may be quit from will worship, yet she
and her sons may be charged with superstition. For this is an old relic of
the Jew. But who told you, that to observe these Feasts was to bring back Moses
from the dead? what of Judaisme is in them? The days are not the same, the
cause of observation is not the same, the service in them not the same; they
are neither materially nor formally the same; why then should you cast the old
Synagogue in our teeth? I know not any thing they participate with the Jews,
except it be because they are Feasts. And in the same respect you may call them
Heathenish also if you please; for they had their several Feasts, their (...),
their (...), their (...), Meursius Graecia feriata.
etc. as you may read in Meursius his Graecia feriata, no less then we have
our Feasts; and if general resemblances be strong arguments, you may prove an
Identity of any thing. But here those of your opinion, put us in mind of that
of Saint Paul, who reproves the new planted Churches of Galatia and Colossi for
Judaizing in observing of days, months and years, and part of a holy day. But
had these diligent Textuaries more diligently plowed with the Apostles Heifer,
Gal. 4. Coloss. 2.15.
they might have better guessed at his riddle. It was never Saint Paul's intent
to decry Christian Festivals; his purpose is to beat down the Jewish opinion,
not the day. The new converted Proselytes conceived they must keep their old
Sabbath, and the ancient Feasts as before, when Moses Law was in force,
expecting justification by the observation of those legal Ceremonies. Thus to
keep any Feast, is to bring Moses back from the dead; and what Christian is
there that keeps a holy day upon this motive? this were indeed to use
Tertullians phrase, plane Galaticari; his words are, Galaticamur plane,
Tertull. advers. Psych. cap. 14.
si Judaicarum Ceremoniarum, si legali um solemnitatum observantes sumus. For
these were buried with Christ. Quod si nova conditio, jam and nova solemnia
esse debebunt: aut si omnem in totum devotionem temporum and dierum and mensium
crasit Apostolus, cur Pascha celebramus, annuo circulo in mense primo? cur
quinquaginta exinde diebus in omni exultatione decurrimus? Out of which words
we may easily collect these Conclusions.

1. That Christians being in a new condition, must have new Feasts.

2. That they, even then 180 years after Christ, kept their Pasch, and
Pentecost.

3. That they kept not these upon the Jewish ground. Id plane Galaticari.

4. That notwithstanding the Apostles text, their Festivals they had; and
therefore it never was the Apostles Intention to abolish them: mark his words.
Si omnem in totum devotionem temporum, dierum, m nsium erasit Apostolus, cur
celebramus Pascha, etc. Upon which words lies the strength of his argument.

It is then a fallacy to argue from the Jewish Feasts to the Christian, and to
urge that Text to the abolition of ours, which Saint Paul pressed to the
evacuation of theirs, betwixt which there is not any Analogy. For as Athanasius
said of Judaical Baptism, so I may say of all their holy days now; Athanasius.
(...). The superstition then is on your side, not on ours; not on ours, who
observe them not out of a superstitious and Jewish opinion; but on yours, who
prohibit them, and will not have them observed. For in things indifferent it is
certainly as criminous and superstitious to place piety in the negative, as in
the affirmative; in abstaining scrupulously from Ceremonies, as in using them
over scrupulously. These are the men, who have always in their mouths, touch
not, taste not, handle not; being false Apostles, Col. 2.21. Thomas Estius in
locum.
who have a show of wisdom, but not true; being placed in superstition, which
shapes and affects a Religion and worship out of their own brains.

To close this point, this we say, and we color not to say it, that these
Festivals are days hallowed, consecrated and set apart to the performance of
holy duties. Holy they are in use, not in virtue, holy by application merely;
for there is not any holiness either of inhesion or infusion more in them,
than in any other days. Let not then this flower of our time suffer by an
Ostracisme; nor fancy, nor imitation, nor superstition, nor will worship has
set the mark upon it: the Jew may lie in his grave, and yet our holy days
live. These are like the good and virtuous Ladies of our Land; few they are,
and being observed they make us happy. Suffer them but to depart, and you will
deface the splendor and dignity of Christian Religion. You will blot out the
memorial of ancient Truth, give a great impediment to the increase of faith,
give an occasion of ingratitude, obstruct the praises of God, hinder the Hymns
and Psalms we ought to sing to his honor; in a word, deprive your selves of
the shadows of your future felicity. I come to your second exception of places.

2. The second was of National places, as the Consecrated meeting houses,
Porches, Chancels, avd Churchyards.
BEfore you fell foul upon the times, now upon the places of Gods service. I
see nothing can please, but what is according to your mind. Quod volumus
sanctum est. That seems to befall you, which happens to eyes over-runne with
the icterisme; every thing they behold seems to be yellow; or to such who are
in a high feavour, whose palate is so affected with the overflowing of choler,
that the most pleasant Dose seems bittet to their taste. How comes it else to
pass, that these innocent, but necessary circumstances for the performance of
Religious duties should so strangely disgust you? Time and place are such
necessary circumstances of all individual actions, that they cannot be done
without them. And therefore, if men will serve God, some time must be set out
when, and some place where to do it; where God has assigned none, there the
choice is left in their own breast: if the service be private, a private time
and place is to be chosen; if public and in conjunction with others, a public
time and place must be thought on. To this last only I am now to speak of
public service to be performed, for which there must be designed a public
place, which you in scorn are pleased to call a meeting house, Tie Cwrdd; but I
pray do you not unawars Judaize in the name? for tell me what is the English of
(...) a Synagogue? is it not the place where the Jews first met together; pray
take heed, that you turn not Jew on a sudden, by erecting of meeting houses,
instead of Christian Churches.

In these there is nothing can escape your rigid censure, not the Porches, not
the Chancels, not the Churchyards. Alas, what have these done? The Porches
were set up for beauty, for shelter; and upon the same reason you may find
fault with the Trees growing in the Churchyard, which serve only to beautify
the place, and defend the Church from injury of wind and weather. But Zanchy in
precept 4. Loc. 2. in Thesi. Sect. 3. gives us another use of these Porches,
that in them the Ostiarii stood. Horum enim officium erat primum temporibus,
quibus sacra public peragebantur, cavere, ne indigni admiscerent se sacro
cetui, ne quod sanctum canibus. Deinde Catechumenos jussos per Diaconum egredi,
e Templo educerent, foresque occluderent, and post sacra peracta clauderent
Templum, ne cuivis in illud pateret accessus. Quid ita? quia quae usibus sacris
destinata sunt, in alios usus profanos usurpari non debent. The Chancels were
thought fit to be separated Cancellis from the body of the fabric, that in
them the Tremenda mysteria, and the action belonging to them, might be
celebrated with the greater reverence. The Churchyards were enclosed, that in
them the dead bodies of Christians might decently be composed and laid to sleep
in their beds of dust. And what harm is there in all this? what subject to so
sharp a censure? must the Combinational Church be corrupted, if all this be
done? certainly not; for even you, who were wont to assemble in other places,
can now be content to make use of these, notwithstanding the Porches, Chancels,
and Churchyards. You meet in them, you preach in them, you bury your dead in
them, without any scruple that I can hear of. Nobis non licet esse tam profanis.

Oh but you say these were consecrated. Grave crimen Caie Caesar; and to it I
shall return you my answer by and by. But first I shall show you, that the
Christians borrowed not their pattern from the Jews to erect houses and places
for the public service of God. Even that light of reason, which taught the
whole stock of men, before and under the Law, I had almost said Heathens
themselves, that public places must be set apart for public Religious duties,
directed them to set up these structures.

Before the Law, the Patriarchs had their set places to serve God; Adams sons
a place where to sacrifice. In Enos days there were Assemblies; Noah and
Abraham had assigned Altars; Jacob his Bethel, with which place God was so well
pleased, that he would be called the God of Bethel, as you would say, the God
of Gods house, to which this title was given. Haec est domus Dei, and porta
caeli, that you be not quite out of love with Church-Porches. Well, Jacobs
children are carried into Egypt, and become bondmen there; all that while we
read not of any designed places for Sacrifice, for Prayers, for Religious
performances; and no marvel, for they were in bondage; and to look after
public places then, were as if you seek for Solomon's Temple in the Captivity,
'twas enough that then they met as they could, assemble by the Rivers side, and
sit down and weep by the Waters of Babylon.

Flebile nescio quid queritur Lyra, flebile lingua
Murmurat exanimis, respondent flebile ripae.
But when once God had delivered them from that servitude, and brought them
into the Wilderness, even in that vast Desert, when they had no settled
habitation, yet a moving Tabernacle they had for Gods worship. Exodus 26.27.
After they were brought into the Land of Canaan, this Tabernacle was first
fixed for five years at Gilgal; in the sixth it was translated to Shilo, Rivet.
in Hos. cap. 4. 15.
where it remained till Eli's days, when taken, but after restored, it was set
in Kiriathjearim, and last in Misphat. Israel then was never to seek whether to
resort for their public service. And when they were dispersed in the Land, and
settled in their divisions, that they might acquaint themselves with Moses Law,
and offer up their petitions and thanks to God, they built themselves
Synagogues, even before the Temple was erected. For they were in David's time,
that appears by his complaint, Psalm 74.8.
They have burnt up all the houses or Synagogues of God in the Land. But when
God had chosen Jerusalem, and in Jerusalem Mount Moria, there to have his
standing habitation made, it was in the chiefest of David's desires to have
performed so good a work; but Solomon built him a house. The Temple then was
like a great Cathedral, Sigon. de rep. Hebr. lib. 2. c. 8. Marc. 1.39.
Maimonides in Tebilla. cap. 11. Sect. 1.
and the Synagogues were like our Parish Churches, of which there were in
Jerusalem alone 480. and out of Jerusalem many Synagogues in Galilee, Matthew.
4.23. Synagogues at Damascus, Acts 9.2. Synagogues at Salamis, Acts 13.5.
Synagogues at Antioch, Acts 13.14. Yea, their tradition is, that whersoever ten
men of Israel were, there ought to be built a Synagogue: and in these our
Savior preached.

The Church of Christ which began at Jerusalem, and held that profession which
had not the countenance and allowance of public authority, could not exercise
some duties of Christian Religion, but in private only. What they did as Jews,
they had access to the Temple and Synagogues; what as Christians, they were
forced otherwhere to assemble themselves, which at first must need be private
Rooms, and private houses. And as God gave increase to his Church, they both
there and abroad, sought out not the fittest, but the safest places. And it was
not long but they began to erect Oratories, denominating these places from the
principal part of Gods service; Prayer, to which how our Lord himself stood
affected, we may acknowledge by that, where he calls his Church his house of
prayer; and such an one Tremellius finds, Acts 16.16. (...). Tremell. in Acts
16.13.
And the thirteenth, And on the Sabbath day we went out of the City by a River
side, where prayer was wont to be made; the Greek is, (...), he reads it ubi
conspiciebatur, it should be, ubi decernebatur domus orationis; for (...), is
used sometimes not for the action, but the house it self. In qua te quaero
Proseucha. Juvenal.
And then if Tremellius version and note be true, we have an early Oratory. But
be it as it will, thus much may easily be granted, which I have learned from a
great Clerk, Seldom de decimis.
yet no great friend of the Church; that it cannot be conceived how
Christianity should be in any Nation (if publicly and generally received) much
ancienter then Churches, or some convenient houses or places in the nature of
Churches appointed for the exercise of devotion. And therefore in the Apostles
time, places they had to meet in upon the Lords day, perchance at first made of
private houses public, dedicated by the owners and accepted, and set apart by
the Apostles for that use. In these public services was solemnized, a woman
might not speak, 1 Cor. 14.35. In these she was not to be uncovered, a man not
covered, 1 Cor. 11. In these the Eucharist was administered, Acts 20. In these
the collect for the poor gathered, 1 Cor. 16. Other houses they had to eat and
drink in, and a man that could not make that distinction, did despise the
Church of God, 1 Cor. 11.22. And this place was some noted place; otherwise
Saint Paul could not have said as he does, 1 Cor. 14.23. If therefore the whole
Church be come together into one place, and all speak with tongues, and there
come in one that is unlearned or unbelievers, will they not say that you are
mad?

Soon after this, we read of (...), Kirks, Dominica set apart to Gods service.
I mentioned three before, the (...) in Nitria in Egypt; the Church where Saint
John with his Asiatick Bishops kept his Synod; That built by Joseph of
Arimathea at Glastenbury; Theophilus house in Antioch was consecrated into a
Church. Clem. Recog. lib. 10.

Dion in Adriano.


The Centurists confess Anno 193. that Severus the Emperor allowed the
Christians a Church ad pium usum, and before him Adrian had done the like.

I do not say, that these were at first sumptuous; the poverty of the Church,
and the envy that thence might be drawn upon Christians would not permit it.
But at length, when it pleased God to raise up Kings and Emperors, favoring
sincerely the Christian faith, that which the Church before either could not,
or durst not do, was with all alacrity performed. Basilicae were in all places
erected, no cost was spared, nothing was thought too dear, which was that way
spent. And their bounty this way, was to this day spoken of with honor, till
the Anabaptists first cast in their exceptions against them; and you after them
show your displeasure, for some certain solemnities usual at the first erection
of them. At which you aim, when you call these

Consecrated meeting houses.

That there may be some Ceremonies blameworthy in the consecration of them
shall be confessed; But yet notwithstanding these, that they should be the
worse for consecration, this we deny. For what is intended by consecration more
then that we make them places of public resort, that we invest God himself
with them, that we sever them from common uses?

1. It behooves that the place where God is to be served, be a public place:
For leave but every man alone to serve God in a Parlour, and it will never come
to be what it was in the Primitive Christians, who were all of one heart and
one soul. Men may conceive as they list, but as experience teaches, men will
never be (...), busily and piously intent about the same thing, till they meet
(...) in the same place. Division of places will not be long without division
of minds, which the ten Tribes were jealous of, Josh. 22.
when they questioned their brethren for building their Altar; Deuteronomy. 16.16.
and God prevented by requiring the presence of all the males at that place
three times a year that he should choose. For by this meeting in a public
place, the instillation of heretical and schismatical positions may be
prevented. But this is not all, the razor of sharper tongues may be dulled, who
have given deep wounds and gashes to the reputation of the best Christians;
even then, when they were forced to serve in Grots, and Cells, Tertull. Justin.
Epiph. Eusebius.
and retired places: The setting apart then of public places, has both these
benefits to attend it, that it prevents heresies and scandals.

2. By this the place is delivered from common hands, and a surrender made of
that right which the Owner of the ground might claim in it, till this Ceremony;
that being once past, the possession is severd from the free hold. His own it
was, and he might have kept it; now it is a Deodate, Gods house, not his; his
for no other purpose, but to serve his God. The Workman might draw the line
and plummet upon it, and make it a house, but it is the assignation of it to
Religious duties that makes it to be (...), the Lords house. Good it were, that
some difference were put betwixt Gods dwelling place, and our houses. Now
consecration is that which sets the note of difference; by it there is a
dedication and assignation given, and livery and seizen taken. And that you be
not so much offended hereafter with it, I could put you in mind of the
consecration of Solomon's Temple; 1. Reg. 8.
but I know you will say that was Jewish, though it be an exception of no
moment. I shall therefore bring to your remembrance an older example, which
has nothing of the Ceremonial Law in it. The first that erects a fabric to
Gods service, is the Patriarch Jacob, and very Ceremonious he was about it. He
takes the stone whereon he slept, Genesis 28.20. 21, 22.
makes it as it were the first stone of the building, then pours oil upon the
top of it, as the consecration; calls it Bethel, Gods house, and endows it too,
vowing the tenth of all he had. A place we have here separated to Gods use by a
Religious Ceremony; a Dedication, a Consecration, a Dotation: and I doubt not
but the equity of the Law which prevailed with him, will also justify us in
the like case. Under Severus, Gordian, Philippus Arabs, Eusebius. l. 8.1, 2. lib.
10.2.
and Galienus, the Christian ability growing greater, and their liberty
enlarged, they built spacious Churches. These the bloody Dioclesian threw down,
and good Constantine gave leave to reaedifie, where no Ceremony was omitted
that might honor such intents. The Celebration of Dedications, and
Consecration of Oratories lately builded was the desired spectacle of those
times, to which Prince and people, people and Clergy resorted, and some with
Orations, some with Sermons, and some with the sacrifices of prayer, in an
Assembly of the greatest part of the Bishops solemnized that happy day. You may
at your leisure read a whole Sermon, extant in Eusebius, directed to Paulinus
Bishop of Tire, lib. 10. c. 4.
by whose means that famous Temple in Phaenicia was builded and consecrated in
a solemn manner. The story accounts of the day of Consecration as of a wedding
solemnity, when the new erected Church as a Virgin was joined fast in the bands
of Matrimony by the Bishops prayers and office unto her Lord Christ. I could
add to this that the same Constantine so often as he was forced into the Field
in Arms to encounter his enemies, carried along with him a Consecrated Tent,
which he set up and spread in the fashion of a Church in that place, he did
castrametari, that in that with his Army he might offer his devotions to his
God.

To Consecrate is no new word, nor to be disliked, for it signifies no more
than to depute to a sacred use, and dedicate and assign to God; whether times,
persons, things. To draw to an end, there ought to be among Christians scarce
(...) any thing common or profane. A kind of Consecration passes upon all we
have. Our (...) our income is not profane, that is consecrated by a Collection,
set apart for the Saints. Our meat nor our drink are not profane things, 1 Cor.
16. 1 Timothy 4.5. Mal. 3.8. ad 12.
when they are Consecrated by the Word and Prayer: Our goods are not then
profane, when Gods part is set aside: Our selves, our Children are Consecrated
to God by Baptism, and so of profane, become holy persons. And shall the
Church then, in which we are to render our thanks for all these, and to pray
for a blessing upon these, want its Consecration by the Word and Prayer? for
other Consecration we allow none.

It has often put me into an astonishment to find out the cause why you
should dislike these places, because Consecrated; and at last I could find no
other, except this, that you would not be bound to put off your shoes, nor to
take heed to your feet, when you entered into the house of God; Exodus 3.5.
Eccles. 5.1.
but left at liberty to use other homely familiar gestures. If any guess be
right, in this place I shall say little to it, only remember you, that the
Publican who entered the Temple, and stood afar off, and smote his breast,
thrived better than the Pharisee in his loftier garb, for he went home to his
house justified. Luke 18.14.


3. The third was of National persons, as Universal Preachers, Office-Priests,
Half-Priests, or Diocesan Deacons.
TO this my answer shall be in brief, that among the Jews I find no Universal
Preacher, no Office-Priest, no Half Priest, no Diocesan Deacon; and therefore
these among us could not be taken up by imitation from the Jews. Priests indeed
they had, but no more like ours, than an apple is like a nut. Similitudes in
general make but a poor resemblance; Men and metals may be all one this way.

Secondly, I reply, that against Universal Preachers, you of all others have
least reason to take exception, because you allow all that have gifts to be so.
Millers, Mercers, Thatchers, Weavers, Trunck-makers, and who not? for of such
consist the greatest body of your Itinerants, upon whom, what name can you more
aptly put than Universal Preachers, since they are not confined to any one
flock? A Sermon preached by a Presbyt. Anno 1589. page 27. 28.
Concerning whom, let me return you the words of one of your opinion, whose
name is to me unknown, in a godly Sermon preached and printed Anno 1589.
Alas, must we not look for the heavy hand of the Lord, when we see many
ignorant men, not only void of all skill in the Hehrew, Greek and Latin
Tongues, in Logic, Rhetoric, and other Arts; (but also which I am ashamed to
speak) not acquainted with the true Doctrine of Repentance; who are yet so
bold, so impudent, and of so hard faces, that they dare to extend and stretch
out (I will not say) their gifts, which they have not, nor the shadow of a
gift, to take upon them the high Message of God, to carry to his people the
glad-tydings of salvation, which Christ has purchased for them with his
precious blood. Oh shameless impudency! shall he take upon him to hold the
Helm, that is scarce worthy to labor at the Pump? O damnable boldness! O
wretched covetousness! That for an Annual stipend, will undertake so sacred a
work. O foolish men, that will commend them whom they ought to dispraise. O
miserable, -- that lift up those to Moses Chair, who ought rather to be thrust
to the tail of the Plough. What does more dishonor God, discredit the Gospel,
confirm the Adversaries of the Truth, than this ignorance and boldness of
your Universal Preachers? For I beseech you tell me, can the honor and praise
of Gods Wisdom be commended by the folly and ignorance of his Minister? Can
the inestimable treasure and riches of a gracious Prince, be seen in the
beggarly nakedness of a base Ambassador? Can the Adversaries of the grace of
Christ, by looking upon an Idol which has nothing but a show of that it is
not, be dissuaded from the worship of Idols? Can he bring men from Error, that
knows not when he teaches Truth? Finally, can the carnal minded Atheist be
persuaded that Christ is the Redeemer of the World, whose Ministers these be?
These are the words of that Author, which I thought good to transcribe, that
you should not impute to me any Satirical expressions; let him who has printed
the passage answer for it.

Farther yet, that I may a little allay your odiun and spleen to these
Universal Preachers, I pray tell me the meaning of those words of your
New-Englands constitution, delivered in these words, Synod at Cambridge. cap.
9. Sect. 6.
Nor can constant residence at one Congregation be necessary for a Minister,
nor yet lawful, if he be not a Minister to one Congregation only, but to the
Church Universal: because he may not attend to one part only of the Church
whereto he is a Minister, but he is called to attend upon the whole flock. I
see that magna est veritas, and praevalebit: that Truth, when men are out of
their heats, shall have a fair testimony, even from its enemies. For what could
be said more clearly by us for Universal Preachers than is here delivered? And
what is more consonant to our Saviors charge to Peter, which Saint Paul
ingeminates to the Pastors of Ephesus, Feed the flock, Joh. 21.15, 16, 17.
Acts 20.28.
over whom the Holy Ghost has made you overseers? Every Minister is a
Minister of Christ Jesus, and ought to have a care of the whole Church, though
more particularly of that Congregation to which he is designed; yet with this
proviso, that he remember that the whole is within his charge, and that
therefore he ought to promote the welfare of the Catholic, so far forth as
lies in his power.

2. Office-Priests.

You delight in compounded words, which the Greek elegantly, but our language
kindly bears not. I must then take your compound asunder, and ask you, which
of the words displease, whether the Priests, or their office? The word Priest
is derived some say from (...), and then it is the same with St. Paul's (...),
from whence you derive your Ruling Elders. and will you catch up the Office,
Etymolog. magn.
and not own the Name? But others more probably from the French word Prebstre,
in which the letter b is quiescent, as all know that know the language; and
then I hope you will not so much scorn the name hereafter, since that Prebstre
is the same with (...), the word so often used in Scripture; you say for a
Lay-Elder, we for a Priest, yea for that very Priest you jear at, the
Office-Priest.

For what is an Office, but that duty which every one is bound to do? and shall
a man be mocked for doing his Office? The Office of him who is sometime by us
called the Priest, sometime the Minister, sometimes by other names (and yet
all is but one and the same man) is to preach the word, to administer the
Sacraments, to make prayers and supplications, to give thanks, and make
intercessions for all men, which when he performs he does his Office, and for
the doing you ought not to condemn him. If you, or any other in your place,
shall not conscientiously perform these Offices, I shall say he is unworthy to
carry the name of a Presbyter, which is all one as if I called him Priest.

But make the most and worst you can of it. I tell you that there was to remain
a Priesthood under the New Testament, not that of Aaron, but that of
Melchizedech. For Christ was to be a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedech. Heb. 10.10. Thom. part. 3. 9. 48 art. 3. Jewels reply. Art. 7.
Sect. 9. Id. art. 17. 14. Fulk. in Matthew. 26. Casaub. exer. 16. Sect. 43. Romans
12.1.
And an Analogy there is betwixt these two. They had their bloody Sacrifices
then, and we have our Sacrifices now to offer. For as Christ offered up himself
once for all, a full and all-sufficient Sacrifice for the sin of the whole
world, so did he institute and command a Memory of this Sacrifice in a
Sacrament, even till his coming again. For at and in the Eucharist, we offer up
unto God three Sacrifices. One by the Minister only, that is the Commemorative
Sacrifice of Christ's death represented in bread broken, and wine poured out.
Another by the Minister and people jointly, and that is the Sacrifice of praise
and thanksgiving, for all the Benefits and Graces we receive by the blood of
Christ. The third by ever particular man for himself only, and that is the
Sacrifice of every man's body and soul to serve God in both. Then in this for
ought I know to the contrary we all agree, that though the propitiatory
Sacrifice was made by Christ himself only, yet that in the Eucharist there
remains a sacrifice of Duty, and a sacrifice of Praife, and a sacrifice of
Commemoration. And therefore I see no reason, but the name of Priest may be
retained also, who is to do the chiefest work in the offering of all these
sacrifices.

3. Half-Priests, or Diocesan Deacons.

But you are not offended with the whole Priests only, but with the
half-priests also as you call them, and you interpret your self by the Deacons,
whom in scorn you call Diocesan. But I pray over what Diocese were they ever
set? in what Diocese employed? That the Bishop of the Diocese ordained them,
and permitted them as Probationers sometimes to preach, no otherwise than the
Catechizers were allowed in the Church of Alexandria, or as Origin by the
Bishops of Jerusalem and Caesarea, this is certain; Eusebius. lib. 6. c 20.
but that they were Diocesan Deacons, I never heard before.

I know what you drive at, that the Deacons must only be viduarum and mensarum
Ministri, as at first, and must not meddle with the word. But to this Mr.
Hooker if you please to consult him, will give you a full answer, which is the
same I formerly gave in its due place. Hook. Eccl pol. lib. 5. Sect. 78.
Distribution of the Church stock, and attendance on the divine service, was
the use for which the Deacons were first made; but if the Church has since
extended their Ministry further then the circuit of their labor was first
drawn, we are not herein to think the order of Scripture violated, except there
appear some prohibition, that had abridg'd the Church of that liberty. Suppose
we the office of teaching so repugnant to the Office of distributing, that they
cannot continue in one and the same person? How was it with the Apostles before
that Election? How with the 70. out of which they were chosen? It seems then,
that these duties are not so incompatible, but they may be found in one man.
When the duties are such that they cannot be well discharged by one, then it is
good to make a division, and substitute under officers, as did Moses. But when
the same man is of ability to do what is laid upon him, and to undergo somewhat
more, it can be no error to lay a double Task upon him. I proceed. You say.

4. The fourth was of National pious performances, as stinted worship,
Quiristers, singing of Psalms, with all the Rubrique postures.
I could forgive you the rest, because you acknowledge these performances to be
pious; for if they had piety in them, I see no reason why you or any body else
have cause to note them for corruptions. But when I came to this place I entered
into debate with my self, which part of Solomon's counsel I should take, whether
I should answer or not answer. Not to answer, Dr. Bancroft. Featly. Hammond.
Fulke. Taylour. Hooker Prideaux. Preston.
might give you occasion to boast I could not. And to answer, was to say over
again that which has been so often said by worthy and learned men, whom if you
have not consulted, you are to blame, and I wish you would; if you have and are
not satisfied, I fear my labor will be lost. However I shall set before you,
what they have said before me. And first I shall speak to your stinted worship.

1. And here give me leave first to ask you, to what you refer this word
stinted, whether you strictly restrain it to the word worship, or to the Spirit
by which we are to worship. If to the first, I see you are against all set
forms of worship; if to the last, that you think the Spirit is restrained by
these set forms. And because both are said by your party, I shall answer to
both: and to the last first.

These conceived forms are either premeditate, or extempore; if premeditate,
then the Spirit is as much limited in their conceived forms, as by any form
conceived by the Church. But if extempore, then the Spirit only of him that
makes the prayer is left at liberty; for the whole Congregation is by that
means as much stinted and bound to a set form, to wit, of those words the
Minister conceivs, as if he read them out of a book. And is not the Spirit
restrained when the Congregation shall be confined to the form of this one
man's composing? If this be not stinted worship, if this be not to stint the
Spirit, I know not what it is. And I can see but one way to avoid it, that
every one in the Congregation conceive and offer up a prayer with his own
spirit, and not be forced and confined to the Ministers single dictate; this
would preserve entirely that liberty of the Spirit you pretend; that other will
not. To this if you will not yield, as I know you will not, it lies upon you to
answer the objection, which I never saw yet done.

2. As for set forms of prayer, which I conceive you principally intend by
stinted worship, I shall next endeavor to justify them upon many grounds.

1. In the old Testament we find set forms of blessing and thanksgiving, and
prayers appointed by God himself. He it was that framed to his Priests the very
words with which they were to bless the people. Numb. 6.23.24, 25, 26. Numb.
10.35.36. 2 Chronicles. 29.30. Exodus 15. Seldom in Eutychium.
Speak to Aaron and his Sons, saying in this wise shall ye bless the people;
The Lord bless and keep thee, etc. At the remove of the Arc, a form is set
and taught the Priests, exurgat Deus, dissipentur inimici. At the Arks return a
form, Return O Lord into thy resting place. Hezekiah prescribed to the Priests
to sing praise to the Lord with the words of David and Asaph the Seer. Moses
Hymn for the overthrow of Pharaoh is extant, and in the same chapter taken up
and sung by Miriam, which afterward grew a part of the Jewish ordinary Church
Liturgy, for such they had, being instituted by Ezra and the Consistory. What
should I tell you that the 92. Psalm is a Psalm composed for the Sabbath? The
20. Psalm to be sung by the people when the King went forth to battle; The
113. to the 118. the great Hallelujah; 13. whole Psalms, or as some say, 15.
viz. from 119. to 134. Songs of degrees, Moller. Ames. Musculut. in Ps. 21.
because upon every one of the steps, which were 15. betwixt the peoples court
and the Temple, the Priests made a stay, and sung one of these Psalms; and the
21. Psalm composed by David to be sung by the people for the King when he came
home with victory.

Yea, but say some this was in the infancy and minority of the Church, as
children then they needed their Festra's; as infirm bodies, their crutches; but
now under the Gospel it is otherwise, we have more light and gifts of the
Spirit than they had. True, more light we have, because the Mystery kept secret
from the beginning of the world, is more clearly revealed to us, then it was to
them, but that is not the question; prove they should, if they speak to the
purpose, that we have now more ability to compose a prayer then they had, more
of the Spirit of Grace and supplications. Men may have a high conceit of their
own abilities; but I suppose no wise man will conceive but that Aaron and his
sons, Moses and the Priests, Hezekiah and the Levites had as great an ability
to pray ex tempore, as great a measure of the Spirit of grace and
supplications, as any man that now lives, and yet they used and prescribed set
forms. Their minority then was in respect of the object of faith, not in
respect of the spirit of supplications. These men therefore show themselves
children to talk of Festra's, and cripples in their understanding to talk of
crutches; since those men's legs were far stronger then theirs, and their graces
of the Spirit far beyond any Enthusiasts in these days. We may think of these
forms as meanly as we please; but Chrysostom was of another judgment;
Chrysostom. Hom. 1. of prayer.
for thus he begins one of his Homilies of prayer. For two reasons it becomes
Gods servants to wonder and bless him, both for the hope we have in their
prayers, and that preserving in writing the Hymns and Orisons they offered to
God with fear and joy, they have delivered to us their treasure, that so they
might draw all posterity to their zeal and imitation. Yea, but the Spirit must
teach us to pray, it helps all our infirmities, it is the promise of God to his
Church, I will pour upon them the Spirit of Grace and supplications. Zach.
12.10.
And all this may be done in a set form, as well as by any extempore prayer.
True, it is the Spirit must teach us to pray, both for matter and form; for we
know not what to ask and must teach us how to pray, for we know not how to ask;
zeal and fervor, and faith, and perseverance, and importunity, all necessary
affections in every supplicant are gifts of the Spirit; and groans and sighs
proceed from the Spirit; he moves the heart first to supplicate, brings a man
to see in what a wretched case he is, one that by his sins has pierced the Son
of God and therefore to deprecate and ask pardon; deprecentur ipsum, implorent
illius misericordiam. Junius in Loc. Zach.
But why all this may not be as well in a petitioner that prays in a set form,
as in him who pretends to the Spirit, and yet utters so much cold and low stuff
on a sudden, no wise man can imagine.

Compare but these extempore raptures with the words of Moses, David and Asaph
the Seer, with the prayers, intercessions, Hymns and Psalms of the Servants and
Prophets, and holy men of God uttered and left upon record, and then it will be
easy to put the difference betwixt those who are truly taught by the Spirit,
and those who presume to be taught. For from the one has proceeded prayers and
supplications, and forms of thanksgiving so high and admirable, that they are
beyond imitation: from the other a shower of words so flat, so jejune, so
confused, so unsignificant, that sometime they pass all understanding. Will
you but have patience to hear the Censure of Brown himself after his
conversion, Bancroft ser. preached 1588.
who thus speaks to his friends concerning their extempore prayers. Good God,
what worship or prayer do you use! I am ashamed to name the boldness and folly
of some, who scarce able to utter three words orderly, will yet take upon them
to babble out a tedious, long, and stuttering prayer, wherein every tenth word
shall be the repeating of O heavenly Father, O merciful Father, O dear Father,
O good Lord, O merciful God, etc. and all things so foolishly packed together,
that their prayer seems rather the lisping and prattling of an infant that
would tell a great tale could he hit of it, then the petition of a zealous
devout soul to his God. These are the words of Brown the Patriarch, and woeful
experience does justify him; for in many Extemporaries, the matter of the
prayer is so indigested, the words so incongruous, the periods so broken and
interrupted, the length so tedious, the Tautologies so many, that a mean
capacity may be apt to say, The prayer was never dictated by the Spirit.

To break off from this; to pray by the Spirit is two ways taken. Either for
prayers made by the assistance of the Spirit, and so they which use
premeditated prayers or set forms, may pray by the Spirit as well as others,
for the Spirit assists in the premeditation and in the delivery. Or else to
pray by the Spirit, is to pray by the immediate inspiration of the Spirit; as
the Prophets and Apostles spoke and wrote, and thus neither they who now use
set forms, nor yet they who pray extempore, can be said to pray; for then their
prayers should be of equal authority with the Psalms of David and Asaph, and
other prayers set down and taught by divine inspiration. And it seems that
wisdom is the daughter of time; for even they in whose mouths there were no
other prayers lawful but extempore, have now persuaded and commended to their
proselytes the Practice of Piety, and advised them to make use of those set
forms in their devotions, which I am sure will as much stint the spirit as any
Collect in the Liturgy.

2. But I leave the old Prophets, and that which occasioned this discourse, and
come to the Christian Church. Christ did not only use himself a set form of
words in prayer, but three times together used the same words. Mat. 26. Luke 11.
Saint John Baptist taught his disciples to pray, and it cannot be conceived
but it was in a set form, for two reasons. For had he said to them, the Spirit
shall teach you, then he had not taught them, but the Spirit. Secondly, a form
sure it was that the disciples came to be taught to pray, as John taught his
disciples, and upon it Christ prescribed them a form; When you pray, say, In
Matthew indeed it is, When you pray, say thus, but in Saint Luke, where the
form is prescribed, say This, Our Father, etc. It seems he meant it not only
as a pattern, but as a form it self (as the standard-bushel is not only a
measure of all bushels, but may it self be used) which precept no man can with
a good conscience obey, that holds all set forms of necessity to be cast out
of the Church.

August. epist. 59.

Tertull. in exposit. orationis dominicae.


And therefore the ancient Churches began and concluded their Liturgies with it.
This Tertullian calls Legitima oration, and affirms that this being premised,
men have liberty to add other petitions, praemissa legitima and ordinaria
oratione quasi fundamento, accidentium jus est desideriorum, jus est extruendi
extrinsecas petitiones. His words are very material. This prayer is lawful, and
legitimate; this is ordinary, it must be premised, it must be the foundation of
our petitions; and this being laid, then a man may lay his right and claim
upon it to build other desires, other petitions. And as the Ancients would
begin with it, so also they had a care to end with it also, it being a
comprehensive prayer, Directory. Perkins on the Lords prayer.
that whatsoever might be defective in the rest, this might complete it. And
this again is the most powerful eloquence to draw God to audience; Could we
speak with the tongues of men and Angels, yet certainly our petitions cannot
find so easy an entrance into our heavenly Fathers ears, as when we tender
them in his Sons own words. This was the judgment both of Cyprian and
Chrysologus, Qui fecit vivere, docuit and orare, ut dum prece and oratione,
quam filius docuit, apud patrem loquimur, audiamur: agnoscit filii sui verba,
Cyprian de orat. dominicae.
cum precem facimus: and in dictandis precibus vota supplicum praevenit. Add
to this, a man is bound to say Amen at the end of a prayer; now a man may much
scruple whether he is bound to say Amen to such a prayer, which he has not
time to weigh, which he has not time to consider. For put case that he who
takes upon him to speak unto you in the Name of God, Chrysologus in eadem.
shall teach some false doctrine, or covertly deliver unto the people some
error; and after pray that God would bless the seed which he has sown; is it
not dangerous to join with him in his desires? Such a thing may possibly fall
out. And this inconvenience is quite removed, partly by subjoyning this prayer,
partly by using those forms the Church has enjoined, to which a man may upon
deliberation say Amen.

But this is not the sole example we have in the New Testament patterns for set
forms. The Apostle nine times reiterates the same words. The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ be with you all. And to put the matter out of doubt, the Saints
for their victory over the Beast, sang the triumphal song, as Moses and the
Israelites sang of old, when they were delivered from the Egyptians. No marvail
if the same benefit be celebrated with the same song. In these passage, Revel.
15.3. Bright in lec.
of holy Scripture we have set forms of prayer somewhere commended, somewhere
commanded, somewhere used, somewhere reiterated, and all inspired by the holy
Ghost; and therefore certainly the use of them can be no quenching of the holy
Spirit, whom we find to inflame our hearts in rehearsal of these sacred forms.

3. And in the last place if we look upon the custom of Gods people, find we
shall that in all places, and in all ages they have made use of public set
and sanctified forms of prayer. H^gesippus an ancient writer, one that was near
the Apostles times, writes that St. James chosen Bishop of Jerusalem by the
Apostles themselves for a form of service or common prayer composed by him for
that Church, yet extant, was called Jacobus Liturgus. To omit Justin Martyr, in
whom I find (...), Common prayers, and (...) prescribed prayers in Origin. Just
Mart. Apol. 2. Orig. lib. 6. contr. Cells. Cypr. in Orat. dominicae.

Perk. resut. of the real presence Fox. Mart. fol. 1275.


In Cyprian we find the Priest before prayer using this Preface; S^rsum corda,
and the people answering habemus ad Dominum, which form as Perkins confesses
was used in all Liturges of the ancient Church. This then was no rag of Rome,
but as Mr. Fox truly says, was borrowed from the Greek, not the Latin Church.
Which is so true, that the Centurists confess, that in the blessed Martyr
Cyprians days without all doubt, formulas quasdum precum habuerunt. Be pleased
to look in the latter end of my Catechism, where you shall find the old
Lyturgies cited to that purpose.

And as Christianity begun more and more to flourish, so were the Fathers of
the Church careful that the people should not be destitute of these excellent
means to serve God; the Bishops for their several Diocesses composing their
Liturgies; Basil for Cappodocia and those parts: Chrysostom for
Constantinople, and the Greek Church under his jurisdiction: Ambrose for Milan,
Gregory and Isidore for the Western Churches; all which are extant to this
day; and out of these and some more ancient attributed to the Apostles
themselves, all the famous and known Churches of the world have composed their
(...), and we among the rest, so that it was no vain brag which Archbishop
Cranmer made, that if he might be admitted to call Peter Martyr, and four or
five more unto him, he would make it appear that the same form of worship
which was set forth in the Book of Common Prayer, had continued for substance
even then one thousand five hundred years: and give me leave to add this to
the honorable burial of it, since it must be buried, that before it was
authorized and published in that beauty we lately saw it, it went under the
file fifteen times. And by what men? even by those, who many of them, sealed
the truth of it with their blood in the fire.

It should seem about those former times, when those Liturgies were first
published, there were some so wedded to their own fancies, that they preferred
their own conceptions before the Churches Ordinances, and yet they came not to
that brain-sick-fancie as to bring into the Church extempore prayers. Angry
they were not with set forms, but displeased because they might not make them.
And against these, two famous Councels have provided; Council. Laod. Ca. 18.
Can. 159. Council. Mil. c. 12. Caranza legit comprobatae.
first that of Laodicea, (...), and ad horam nonam and vesperum celebretur,
(...). And in Africa the Milevitan Council more expressly, Placuit ut preces
and orationes, quae probatae fuerunt in Concilio ab omnibus celebrentur, nec
aliae omnino dicantur in Ecclesia, nisi quae a prudentioribus tractatae vel
compositae in Synodo fuerunt, sufficiently divised, considered or approved by
the wiser men, and allowed in a Synod; and the reason which the Council adds
is most essectual, ne forte aliquid contra fidem, vel per ignorantiam, vel per
minus studium sit compositum. Which is the very reason that Master Seldom one
of the last Assembly gives for the Jewish Liturgy from Ezra's time. Seldens
notes in Eutychium.
The Jews, says he, about the end of the Babylonish Captivity, had their
ancient manners as well as language so depraved, that without a Master they
either were not able to pray as they ought, or had not confidence to do it. And
therefore that for the future, they might not recede, either in the matter of
their prayers through corruption, or expression through ignorance from that
form of piety commanded by God; this remedy was applied by the men of the
great Synagogue, Ezra and his one hundred and twenty Colleagues; out of which
words Doctor Hammond makes this collection, Ham. viero of the Direct. Sect 15.
That one special use and benefit of a set form is not only to provide for
the ignorance, but to be a hedge to the true Religion, to keep out all mixtures
and corruptions out of a Church.

To this purpose it is no news to tell you, that all reformed Churches abroad
have some form of worship or other; that Master Knox in Scotland composed a
Liturgy for that Church. That those zealous brethren who were so earnest for
Reformation in Queen Elizabeth's days, Anno 1585. though they complained to the
Lord Burleigh against the Church Common Prayer Book, yet professed they were
not against Liturgy, and it is evident they were not by the composing of two
forms, one year after another. And here I cannot choose but put you in mind
of a passage of Master Cartwright which I have seen in a little Manual of his
in answer to one that charged him as an enemy to set forms; To which his reply
was, that he was so far from this conceit, that if any were pleased to come
to Coventry (where he then did preach) and hear his Lectures, they should
before and after his Sermons hear the same prayers used by him, except that
portion of Scripture upon which he insisted, gave him occasion to add some few
words. I shall shut up this point with the judgment and practice of Master
Calvin; Calvin. epist. ad Protect.
his judgment he has fully declared in his Epistle to the Protector then,
Quod ad formulam precum, etc. As for forms of Prayers, and Ecclesiastical
rites, I very much approve, that it be set or certain. From which it may not be
lawful for the Pastors in their function to depart, that so there may be
provision made for the simplicity and unskilfulnesse of some, and that the
consent of all the Churches among themselves may more certainly appear: and
lastly also, that the extravagant levity of some who affect novelties may be
prevented. Thus he. And his practice is evident, The Liturgy by him composed
for Geneva being yet extant.

I am no Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet, yet thus much I dare be bold to
forecast, that when all hears and animosities being deposed, men shall return
to an humble, sober and Christian temper, some form or other for prayer will
be judged necessary to be composed, set forth and enjoined, without which the
dislocated parts of a Church will never kindly join. The experience of the
present distractions ever since a set form, as you in a Sarcasme call them,
stinted prayers, has been cast out of the Church, will make men wiser for the
future.

Let men in private use what forms they please, and choose their own helps, to
which they may add, as occasion requires, words suited to their present
necessities: But when they are to join with the Church, the petitions being
such as are more necessary for the whole Corpse of Christians, than for any one
part, fit it is, that the mother be judge what is useful for her children, and
teach them what and how to ask. Leave men to their own inventions, and
possible it is, that the petition be not framed to the present exigent, which
the Church in all particulars has taken care of. Yet if this fall out, another
inconvenience there is, that too often happens; These extempore men dealing by
their prayers, as school-boyes do by their lessons, or Musicians with their
plain song: Those the children vary into so many formula's for want of
judgment, till they come to nonsense: and the unskilful artists run so far in
their divisions and descants, till they mar the plain-song. And the like will
happen to thy, great service of God, when it shall fall to the variations and
descants of inartificial swains, and heavie-headed Mechaniques. The house of
prayer will be a house of pratlin and Sion turned into Babel.

To conclude with the words of a wise man, I never yet could see any reason why
any Christian should abhor, or be forbidden to use the same forms of prayer,
since he prays to the same God, believes in the same Savior, professes the
same Truths, reads the same Scriptures, has the same duties upon him, and
feels the same wants daily, for the most part both inward and outward, which
are common to the whole Church. When we desire the same things, what hinders,
but we may use the same words? except we measure our God to be like our own
appetites and stomachs, which are best pleased with fresh and fresh. I go on.

1. Quiristers and singing of Psalms with all the Rubric postures.

The Rubric I have consulted, and I meet not with any posture at all
prescribed at the singing of any Hymn or Psalm. But say it had, some posture
or other must be used, and had it been the worse, because prescribed? I trow
not. For prescriptions in adiaphorous things does not so alter their natures,
as to make them naught; to prostrate the body in prayer, to lift up the eyes
and pure hands, are actions of indifferency; and do they become naught, because
God in his Word prescribes them? God in his Word has given the Church liberty
to prescribe in these things; Let all things be done decently, and in order;
Say then the Church had prescribed by the Rubric, that a man should have
stood, have kneeled, have sat, have lift up his eyes and hands at the singing
of this or that Psalm respectively; she might have done it, and the singing of
the Psalm had been nere the more un-Christian, had the Rubric posture been
observed. You needed not therefore have girded at this, and the rather because
it was not. But I see nothing can escape you, not the poor boy, the Quirister.
But happily you will say, you take it in a larger sense, and by it mean the
whole Quire, and so I think you do, and therefore I shall shape my answer
accordingly.

2. Quiristers and singing of Psalms.

Could I imagine that you were of the Anabaptists opinion, who will not admit
of singing of Psalms in the Church, I should put you in mind of that which
Saint Paul writes to the Ephesians and Colossians, Be not drunk with wine,
wherein is excess, but be filled with the Spirit, speaking to your selves in
Hymns and Psalms, Ephesians. 5.18, 19. Col. 3.16. Beza in loc.
and spiritual songs, singing and making melody in your hearts to the Lord.
Beza conceives that the Apostle alludes to that Music then in use among the
Jews, who had their Mismorim, their Tehillim, their Schirim. Be it then which
you here object, that these were taken up by Jewish imitation, yet it follows
not they were the worse; for we have here Apostolical authority to make good
the use, let this then be cast in our teeth no more.

The Christian Psalms were like the Jewish Mismorim, Odes they were, either
Doctrinal or Ethical; Hieron. Chrysostom.
written upon sundry matters or arguments, exhortatory, consolatory, preca^ory,
deprecatory, such as are many Psalms of David. 2. The Hymns were like their
Tehillim, setting forth the praises of God, for his greatness and goodness to
the sons of men; such were the Hymns of Moses, Deborah, Zachary, Mary,
Simeon. 3. The songs answered to their Schirum, which were peculiar songs
composed for general blessings; praises they continued, but in a more large and
universal sense. When any of these were expressed by voice and instrument
together, they were called properly Psalms; when by voice alone without the
concent of instruments, they were named Hymns and songs. Zanchy in loc.
This is the descant that the Learned have used in their Expositions of these
words; and that we are hence to collect, is, that Music has its use in the
service of God.

1. By this the honor of God is more magnified and celebrated, then it could
be by a still and soft voice. To speak of God does well, to whisper out his
Name is commendable; this is for those who have received primitias Spiritus;
but such who are filled with the Spirit they ought to go further; as the
Apostle exhorts, (...), they will magnify his Name in Psalms and Hymns and
spiritual songs, and so make his praise to be glorious. The concealment of Gods
praise did never like him, no nor the cold expression of it, as if men would
slip it over; it has been best pleasing to him, when it has been most made
known: And therefore he has had in all Ages perpetual remembrances of what he
has done, Chronicles, Annals, Books of Record. These indeed speak out his
noble Acts, but it is for the most part to the Wise and Learned. But let but
one of these be conveyed into a song, and it will quickly be upon the tongue of
the unlearned; you shall have the Maid at her wheel, the Prentice in the shop
warbling upon it; and if any be skilful in Music, it will please him to sing
to his Harp or Viol the wonderful works of God. The praises of our God are
conveyed into the soul with more delight, are fastened with more affection, are
perpetuated to succeeding ages with more certainty, when they are measured out
by Hymns.

2. This is one reason; but this is not the sole; for this is done to edify.
Men I conceive are then most edified in Religious Worship, when their
affections are ordered, as becomes pious and devout men. Now in the World there
is not any thing of more power, than is a Musical Harmony either by instrument
or voice, to quicken a heavy spirit, to temper a troubled soul, to allay that
which is too eager, to mollify and soften a hard heart, to stay and settle a
desperate. In a word, not any way so forcible to draw forth tears of devotion,
if the heart be such as can yield them; whence Saint Augustine makes this
Confession to Saint Ambrose, Aug. Conf. l. 9.
Quantum flevi in Hymnis and canticis Ecclesiae tuae! Men may therefore speak
their pleasures, but let reason be heard to speak, and then the songs of Zion
will much edify, if not the understanding, because as they say they teach not,
yet they will build up the affections very much, which are more requisite in
this work; or he that doubts of it, let him remember Basha's Ministrel that
composed his own soul, and David's Harp which allayed Saul's madness. No art in
Divine Worship can be of more use than this, in which the mind ought sometimes
to be inclined to heaviness, sometimes to a spiritual ecstasy of joy,
sometimes raised to a holy zeal and indignation, ever carried with such
affections as is suitable to the present occasion.

3. And yet I do not, I dare not say it does not teach; for are there not good
instructions in Psalms? not many profitable lessons in Anthynms? and these by
the sweetness of melody find the easier entrance, and longer entertainment.
Hear the judgment of the great Basil, When the Holy Spirit foresaw that
mankind is to virtue hardly drawn, Basil in Psalm.
but is propense to what delights, it pleased the wisdom of the same Spirit to
borrow from Melody that pleasure, which being mingled with the heavenly
mysteries, might by the soft and smooth touch of the ear, convey as it were by
stealth the treasure of good things into the mind. To this purpose were the
Harmonious tunes of Psalms devised for us, that they who are yet in knowledge
but babes, might, when they think they sing, learn. Oh the wise conceptions of
that heavenly Teacher, which has by his skill found out a way, that doing
those things wherein we delight, we may also learn that wherein we may profit!

4. This is the lesson may be learned from the Ditty; now from the sweet
agreement of these voices and instruments, Christians may learn to agree. One
Harp or Viol out of tune abates the pleasure of the rest; and one jarring
Christian, Couper in Rev. 5.8.
and therefore much more many marres the Music of the whole Church. Oh how
melodious was the praise of God, when it came from men of one heart, and of one
mind, as pleasing then, as is the symphony of well tuned instruments. Let us
then learn from the songs of Zion to come into tune again; these discords and
harsh sounds God likes not in his service.

Pliny secundus. Ep. lib. 10. 103. and citatur a Tertull. Apolog. cap. 2.

Eusebius. l. 2. c. 17. Pallad. in Hist. Lausiaca.


5. Upon these reasons the Primitive Christians sung their praises to God. In
Pontus and Bythinia, Pliny writes to Trajan the Emperor, that their only
fault was, that they met before day to sing Hymns to the honor of Jesus, secum
invicem. I pray mark those words, for they speak for the use you mock at of
Quiristers; for it was secum, together, and Invicem by turns, that is
Quire-wise. And in Nytria, Philo the Jew, (and he lived in Caius Caligula's
time,) and after him Palladius, deliver, that they were accustomed in their
Temple, with Hymns and Psalms to honor God; sometimes exalting their voices
together, and sometimes one part answering another, wherein he thought they
departed not much from the pattern of Moses and Miriam. In Ignatius the first
of the Greek Fathers, we read of (...), Ignat ad Antioch. Council. Laod. Can 15.
1 Cor. 14.16. Socrat l. 6. c. 8.
and after mention of them in the Councils, and what should they be but
Quiristers, which Saint Paul is also supposed to intend, when he asks Has he a
Psalm? At Antioch, Socrates affirms that Ignatius began the custom of singing
of Hymns interchangeably upon a vision of Angels. And if Ignatius did not, yet
one who is of more authority did, I mean the Prophet Isaiah, for he saw the
Lord sitting upon his Throne, and above it stood the Seraphims, Isa. 6.1, 2, 3.
and one cried to another, and said Holy, Holy, Holy. Flavius and Diodorus
continued it in the same Church against the Arrians. Damasus and Ambrose
brought it into the West. Vide Hooker. Eccl. Pol. lib. ^. Sect. 39.
And among the Grecians, Basil having brought it into his Church of
Neo-Casarea, to avoid any thoughts of singularity and novility pleads for his
warrant the Churches of Egypt, Lybia, Thebes, Palestine, the Arabians,
Phenicians, Synians, Mesopotamians, among whom the custom was, for his was
such, to give power to one, by him called, (...), the Chaunter, Basil ad
Neo-cas.
to begin the Anthymne, and then the whole Quire came in, (...).

These were the songs of Zion, which our forefathers used, and it is, and
ought to be our grief, that they are not heard still. For who that has an
Harmonious soul, would not sit down and weep to be deprived of that Harmony,
which the Angels and Saints practice, which so many Christian Churches have
received before Papistry was thought of, so many Ages kept on foot? That which
entunes the affections, that which teaches us so many good Lessons, fills
the mind with comfort and heavenly delight; teaches us to be of one heart,
one mind, and makes the praise of God to be glorious; In a word, that so fitly
accords with the Apostles exhortation, Speak to your selves in Psalms and Hymns
and spiritual songs, making Melody, and singing in your hearts unto the Lord;
would not upon slight, or rather indeed no grounds be cast out of the Church.

And that you or any other doubt the less, that Psalmodie is no new device,
but of very ancient institution in the Church, David exhorts young man and
Maidens, old men and children to praise the Name of the Lord. In which even
Children were so skilful, Psalm. 138.
that they received Christ into Jerusalem with an Hosanna, and applied fitly
those words to him, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord. Among
us, says Hieron, Hieron ad Marcellum.

Basil in Psalm. Chrysostom. Han. 9. in Coloss.


you may hear Plow-men singing Psalms at the Plow-tail. And Basil bids an
Artisan sing Psalms in his shop. Chrysostom lays this charge upon the
parents, that they teach their children to sing Psalms. And Augustine is of the
same mind. It was then no dull and heavy age, such as we now live in, in which
a man shall scarce hear a Psalm in a shop, or out of a child's mouth; Now it may
well be supposed, that this they practiced alone, that they might be the better
able to bear their part, when they met in the Quire. For here I shall make bold
to tell you, what I know is true by my own experience. I have known Artisans by
bearing their part at home, grow so skilful in Psalmody, that when they met in
the Church, one would bear the Base, another the Trebble, others the inner
parts so skilfully, so Harmoniously, that I suppose had you been present, you
would never speak against a Quire more. And this custom so prevailed, that
there was not any in Congregation, but according to his voice, could bear his
part in such time, in such tune, that these six notes being curiously varied
and carried from the ear to the spiritual faculties of the soul, were able With
rare divisions of a choice device,
The hearers soul out of his ears entice. Du Bartas.


If I grate your ears too much upon this subject, you must pardon me; for from
my childhood I have born a great affection to this divine art, and glory in it,
that I am able to sing a Psalm or Hymn to the praise of my God, in or without
a Quire. I come to your last exception.

5. And the first was of National payments or spiritual profits, as offerings,
Tyths and Mortuaries.
For the first and last of these, I believe you have little knowledge beyond
the names. For what were offerings but free and voluntary contributions? and I
hope you will not be against such, who would have your Pastors to be
maintained by what the people should contribute. But it seems in New England
you were quickly weary of this way; for charity growing cold, a better
provision was made, not only by a proportion of Land, but by a certain tax of
money which was laid on by the Magistrate, Plain dealing page 19.
both upon the Members of the Congregation, and upon all the Neighbors, though
no Members of the Church; yea, and others are beholding now and then to the
general Court to study ways to enforce the maintenance to the Ministry. But
this by the way.

Offerings were used in the Primitive Church, and they were of two sorts. Acts
24.17.
1. Properly Alms, for the Church then raised a stock for the relief of the
poor Brethren; to that purpose were they collected, to which Saint Paul
advises, 1 Cor. 16. 2. Or else they were offerings which the Rich contributed
for other uses, being like the Jewish Therumaths which belonged to the Priests.
Out of these there was a treasury made; and out of these, Seldom de decimis.
cap. 2. Sect. 1.

Cap. 4. Sect. 1, 2.


those who first labored in the Ministry were maintained; and a treasury out
of these offerings continued in the Church, till such time as Ministers were
provided by a settled maintenance; then these stipes, sportulae, mensurnae
divisiones ceased. After I know none imposed by the Church; if any were, it was
custom brought them in, and time continued them; and what was freely given,
might be freely taken. And yet I could if I list, acquaint you with
constitutions against them.

2. Mortuaries.

Mortuaries you needed not have named, and I believe you would not, had you
understood the original of them. In an old Synod of Ireland, it appears that
any man might bequeath his body to be buried in what Abbey it pleased him; In
statut. Synod. Ms. cap. 9. Seld. cap. 9. of tyths.
and that the Abbot to whose Monastery the bequest was made should have the
apparel of the dead, his Horse and his Cow for a Mortuary. Abbots with us
there are none, and Abbeys are dissolved, and therefore we have nothing to do
with this charge.

3. Tithes.

To give you an answer to this charge, I shall refer you to those who now
receive them, and keep such a buzzle about them. I hope they are best able to
defend their receipts, since they grumble so much, when they hear of the least
news that they should be taken away. Had you asked me, when I was in possession
of them, and if you should ask me an account, if ever I come to enjoy them
again, you shall see I can prove, and will make my title good jure divino:
without which, I suppose they of your party, who pretend they may do nothing
without an express text of Scripture, cannot with a quiet conscience grow so
pursie and fat with them. You should do well to call them to account about this
point, and it will not satisfy us to tell us of public Acts, Statutes, and
other Ordinances in this behalf; for then we shall tell them in your own words,
that these were faithless and fantastical fashions, the illegitimatelegal
offsprings of National Parliaments in this and in the Neighbor Nations. Pray
consult with them about it, they are of age to answer for themselves. I leave
them, and return to your Paper.

SECT. VII. The words of the Letter.
THe fifth and highest degree of Church-deformity, is the Ecumenical Church,
otherwise called Roman Catholic; the which in apprehension of I know not how
many Kingdoms is the very best, though in the judgment of Christ Jesus it is
the very basest; because the beastliest and the most blasphemous of all the
bastard-Churches constitutions, that ever were till now. Witness what is
written, Rev. 13.1, 3, 5, 6. whose Pastors and other Presbyters, the
sin-pardoning Pope, Cardinals, Abbots and others, were owned and acknowledged
for to be, and that by not a few if not by them of the summond Councels yet in
several Synods, in sundry Countries. Insomuch that Churches iniquities were so
increased over their heads, and their traiterous trespasses were so egregiously
grown up to heaven, as that the long-forbearing Lord could no longer forbear,
but was put upon it, and as it were necessitated for to take vengeance on their
inventions, as on Aarons golden Calf, and Samuels grievous connivency at the
evils of his sons, spoken of Psalm. 96.6, 8.

The Reply.
My reply to this Paragraph shall be very short, since it concerns not us of
the Church of England. I had thought at first to have said something of an
Ecumenical Church, which you know we call usually a general Council; but since
you otherwise interpret your self, that by it you mean the Roman Catholic, I
will not meddle with it. For we no less then you are against all Papal
usurpations. Jun. de Eccl. Romans cap. 17.
I shall only return you the judgment of Junius about this matter. Ecclesia
Romana, quod divina habet omnia, a Deo est: quod corrupta habet omnia, ^ib ipsa
est: quod divi^a habet omnia, Ecclesia est: quod eadem habet corrupta omnia,
Ecclesia corrupta est: Ecclesia non tollitur corruptione nisi rotati, quam
vocant interitum. Ecclesia non tollit partialis corruption, sed infirmat:
Ecclesia Romana omnia habet corrupta, sed non omnino, haet non interitus est,
fed partialis corruption ejus disendu est. And therefore to your accusation it
is fit for them to answer, not for me, who maintain none of their corruptions.

God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ grant by his eternal Spirit that
Spirit of eternal Truth, that all the deceits and fallacies of Satan being laid
asidet, we may daily grow up in Christ and his Church, and in the truth of
Christ and his Church, and that we may confirm and establish one another more
and more by unfeigned Charity, and the bonds of peace to his glory, and the
common salvation of our selves and all Christians, Amen.

A KEY to open the Debate about a Combinational Church, and the power of the
KEYS. The Third Part.
HItherto you have held forth the doctrine in your Letter, now you come to the
use and application, and that you may be the better understood, you have
thought upon five heads, and upon every one of these fastened either a bitter or
a joculary Epithet; one is vile and virulent, another is violent, a third is
haughty and horrible, the fourth is idle and addle, and the last an odd head.
The Spaniard gives us this caution, that he, whose head is of glass, ought to
take heed how he casts up stones into the air, left by chance they fall upon
his own pate and crack his crown. Before then you made your self so merry with
these heads, you should have considered whether some ridiculum caput, could not
have created to himself and others laughter at the invention of more heads in
your Combinational Churches, than yet you could find in the Catholic; and
tell you, that you are a Monster of many heads, that the Presbyter is a vile
and virulent head, the Independent a violent, the Anabaptist a haughty and
horrible, the Notioner an idle and addle, the Quaker an odd head. You perhaps
will ask him, how it will be proved; I will answer for him; on the same day
when you prove your words true of these Churches you jest at. It Is but the
imagination of your own head it is so, and I know not anybody that is bound
presently to fall down and worship it. But I come to your Letter.

The words of the Letter. MAy not any one, to whose inwards the knowledge of
these particulars is come, ingenuously confess that his very soul is clearly
convinced of the mighty and wonderful corruptions which have crept into, are
cherisht within, and contested about by many, yea, by too too many Christians,
of too too many Churches?

The Reply.
Those indeed who are convinced, that they are mighty and wonderful
corruptions, in ingenuity can do no less but confess it. But it is not a bure
relation or recital, without any proof (as you for the most part have done)
that will convince any ingenuous man. You must set to work again, and fortify
your words with plain Scripture, or sound domonstration; yea, and remove those
blocks I have cast in your way, before you shall convince any one who is not of
a weak and servile judgment. If they crept in, you must show when, and by whom?
which you have not done, your bare affirmation being of no validity. That they
were cherished was well, because no corruptions as I have showed. That too too
many Christians, and too too many Churches contest about them, I am sorry for
it. Better it were we were at peace with our selves, and employed our forces
against the common enemy, to whose entrance by our dissensions we have opened
too wide a gap. I fear me, we shall contest so long, that his words will be
verified, who said at his death, Venient Romani.

The words of the Letter.
ANd may not I (though a stranger to my nearest friends, because an Exile,
newly arrived in the Land of my Nativity) safely appeal to any person either of
conscience or common sense, whither Christ Jesus our supreme Lord Protector,
upon whose shoulder the government of the Churches is laid, has not of late
years bo n a loud witness against every one of those five aforementioned kinds
of deformed Churches, and that in these very Countries, which are counted and
commonly called Christendom? If so, God forbid that there should be any
Christian man, and more especially any Clergy man so carnal, or so careless in
all those coasts, as not to be both able and willing to conceive and to
conclude himself to be called upon for to consider and lay to heart the great
and grievous desolations which his hand has made, amongst the most and
mightiest of the sons of men.

The Reply.
And here I shall with tears in my eyes Echo back unto you, (...), God forbid
it should be otherwise. Oh never let any Christian of what rank soever, add
that talent of lead to that sin which has so highly provoked our good God to
pour out the vials of his wrath against this our Church, and these three
Nations, (that I mention not the other of Christendom) as not to lay it to
heart. Conceive not there can be so much carnality or carelessenesse yet left
in any person imbued with conscience and common sense, who has not considered
what God has done unto us in the fiercnesse of his wrath. Mic. 2.3. Lam. 2.17.
Dan. 19.14.12 Psalm. 79.1.2, 3, 4.
We do acknowledge that Gods Word has taken hold of us, that the Lord has
devised a device against us, and has done that which he devised; that he has
watched upon the evil, and brought it upon us; for under the whole heaven has
not been done, as has been done upon Jerusalem. O God the people are come into
thine inheritance, thy holy Temple have they defiled, and made Jerusalem an
heap of stones; the dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat to
the fowls of the air, and the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of the
earth; their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem, and there
was no man to bury them; we are become a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn
and derision to them that are round about us. Gods sinking the gates, his
destroying the walls, his slighting the strong holds of Zion, his polluting the
Kingdom, his swallowing the Palaces, his cutting off the horn of Israel: Gods
hating our Feasts, his abominating our Sabbaths, his loathing our Solemnities;
Isa. 1.
Gods forgetting his footstool, his abhorring his Sanctuary, his suffering men
to break down all the carved work thereof with axes and hammers, Psalm. 74.6.
Lam. 2.6.
are all evidences to me, that in the indignation of his anger, he has
despised the King and the Priest.

Neither are we so carnal nor careless neither, but to consider why this is
done; Justly, justly we suffer. For the Lord our God is righteous in all his
works which he does; for we obeyed not his voice. We have sinned, Dan. 9.14. 5.
6.
and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even by departing from his
precepts, and from his judgments; neither have we hearkened to his servants
the Prophets, which spoke in his Name to our Kings, our Princes, and our
Fathers, and to all the people of the Land. Yea further, that I enter no
Apologies; no not for them I plead (for I set my self now before Gods Tribunal,
not yours.) I never read those piercing Scriptures, 1. Sam. 2. and 3. Jer. 23.
Ezekiel. 33. Hos. 4. Mal. 2. I never reflect upon the common conversation in the
day of our prosperity, and behold Hophni and Phinehas with a flesh-hook in
their hand, ravening for their fees, and wallowing in their lust at the door of
the Tabernacle, but I find we were highly defective in every duty, and thence
conclude that our sufferings are not the sufferings of pure Martyrs, but of
grievous transgressors. There is no credit lost by giving glory to God. And
therefore we shall not stick to acknowledge as much as Cajetan did of the
Romish prelates, when the Army under Charles the fifth 1527. took Rome. He was
then upon the interpretation of the 5. chapter of St. Matthew. Ver. 13. Ye are
the Salt. of the earth; if the salt have lost his savor, what is it then good
for but to be cast out, etc. The Army had then entered the City, and had offered
great abuse to the Clergy in it, which he presenting in a Christian meditation,
inserts these words; We Prelates of the Church of Rome, do at this time find
this truth verified on us in a special measure; we who were chosen to be the
salt of the earth, Evanuimus, we are become light persons and unsavory; and
therefore by the just judgment of God we are cast out and become a spoil and a
prey, and Captives; not to Infidels, but Christians.

Habes jam confitentes reos, and yet I see not what advantage you ever shall be
able to make of it no more than Romanists. They tell us these miseries are
fallen upon us because we departed from them; you, because we oppose your
forms; for this you intimate Christ of late years to have borne a loud witness
against every one of those fire aforementioned kinds of deformed Churches. But
both they and you are mistaken, assigning Non causam pro causa. For the cause
was not because the Church was either Parochial, Cathedral, Diocesan,
Provincial, National, or a true part of the Ecumenical; but that which I have
said, the abominations that were committed by us, our formality and coldness
in Gods service, our ill administration of the keys, our not profiting and
bringing forth fruits worthy of repentance. This has provoked our God to
jealousy. This has moved him to remove, for ought yet appears, our
Candlestick. This has caused him to visit the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children. And for this there be yet those that mourn in Zion, and melt in the
threns of Jeremy, c^ing night and day unto him, Joel 2 17. Isa. 18. Exodus 34.6,
7.
saying; Spare thy people O Lord, and give not thy heritage to reproach;
wherefore should they say among the people, Where is their God. And who can
tell if the irreversible decree be not past? but the merciful Lord will be
jealous for his Land, and pity his people. For he is a merciful and gracious
God, long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquities, transgression and sin. I will not despair
when I shall see a sincere national humiliation, for this national sin, or
sins rather, but God will return and have mercy on this National Church. He
that would have spared Sodom upon Abraham's request, could ten righteous men
have been found in it, will yet I hope spare this Church, Jer. 14.20.21. Isa.
5.30. Isa. 1.25.26, 27.
in which there be hundreds of tens who pour forth their hearts with Jeremy. We
acknowledge O Lord, our wickedness, and the iniquity of our fathers, for we
have sinned against thee. Do not abhor us for the name sake, do not disgrace
the throne of thy glory, remember, break not thy Covenant with us. And that
though now, if one look unto the land, behold darkness and sorrow, and the
light is darkened in the heavens thereof, yet these penitent sighs and groans
will be so effectual, that God will turn his hand upon us, and purely purge
away our dross, and take away all our tinn, and will restore our Judges as at
first, and our Councillors as at the beginning, and that afterward our Church
shall be called the City of righteousness, the faithful City. Zion shall be
redeemed with judgment, and her Converts with righteousness.

This was considered before you returned into the land of your Nativity, (from
which I knew not that you were exiled before, but thought you voluntarily
departed) and shall be considered after your return: For you appeal to men of
conscience and common sense. And now also I shall make my appeal to you,
whether or no it be not a bitter thing to help forward affliction when God is
but a little displeased. Remember the insultation of Edom, and what came of it.
Men should take small content in being flagellum Dei. For Jerusalem shall be a
burdensome stone, and a cup of trembling to all them that cry down with it.
Zach. 12.2.3. Isa. 10.5.6, 7. ver. 16.17.
Assure was the rod of Gods anger, and the staff in his hand was his
indignation; sent he was against an hypocritical nation, and against the people
of Gods wrath to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down
as the mire in the streets; howbeit he means not so, neither does his heart
think so; but his heart is to destroy and to cut off nations not a few, etc.
Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of hosts send among his fat ones, leanness,
and under his glory he shall kindle a burning like the burning of a fire; and
the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his holy One for a flame, and it
shall burn and devour his thorns and his briars in one day, etc. Compare this
with the 14. Chapter, and tell me then what comfort any man can have in being
the rod of Gods wrath against his people. An office which I must plainly tell
you, I read not any of Gods servants ever employed in. Howbeit we shall
patiently submit unto it, and kiss the rod: For thou Lord, have ordained him
for our destruction, and established him for correction, even for our
correction, to purify us sons of Levi from our dross; and by his hand who
punishes us for our sins to put upon us Confessors Robes, by that contrivance
both chastening and covering our sins; as the Persians used their Nobles,
beating their clothes, and sparing their persons. Though by it, qui foris est,
the outside be scorch't, yet qui intus est, the inward man is renewed day by
day, 2 Cor. 4.16.
the faith, hope, obedience, charity, humility, and patience of many by this
fiery trial has been made more conspicuous.

SECT. 1. The words of the Letter. Of the vile and virulent head the Pope.
1. FIrstly, has not the long provoked Lord begun in this Island and in
Ireland to pull down lowest that loose, that lofty, and lawless Church, which
the corrupt Clergy had lifted up highest? namely the Ecumenical or Roman
Catholic Church; whereof the sinne-pardoning, or rather soul-poysoning Pope
was the Vile and Virulent head; who was therefore, and upon that account
publicly declared, and generally (though not universally) believed to be a
horrible Monster, as well as a very abominable beast because of his ten horns,
Witness what is written, Revel. 17.3.5.

The Reply.
To what you say of the vile virulent head the Pope, I assent, and so did and
do all Orthodox Divines of our English Church; holding his claim to be
Universal Bishop to be Antichristian, profane, proud, foolish, blasphemous, by
virtue whereof he does ingrosse to himself full power and authority over all
Christians in the world, both Ecclesiastical and saecular; the principal
actions whereof are. 1. To frame and set out for all Christians the rule of
faith and good manners; to point out the books of Canonical Scriptures, and the
traditionary word, and to deliver the sense and interpretation thereof; and to
determine all controversies in religion with an unerring sentence. 2. To
prescribe and enact laws for the whole Church equally obliging the conscience
to obedience with the divine Law. 3. To exercise external power of directing
and commanding, and also of censure and correction of all Christians. 4. To
grant dispensations, indulgences, absolution from oaths and vows. 5. To
canonize Saints, institute religious orders, to deliver from Purgatory. 6. To
call and confirm general Councels. 7. To dethrone, and conculcate Kings, etc.

All this we disclaim as well as you, and you needed not have said, that it
begun in this Island and Ireland, as if it begun with you: for it begun more
then one hundred years since; assume not therefore that to your selves, which
was done to your hands; to take down this head was the work of the National
Church you so slight, and had it not been done to your hands, I doubt whether
all the power you could make, had ever been able to have done it. And for this,
that head being of a revengeful nature, has ever since been plotting which way
it might unroot us that unrooted it; For the proof of this I shall acquaint
you, with what a friend acquainted me and others about five years since. A good
Protestant he is now, but about 30. years before, was as he confessed,
reconciled to Rome, by one Meredith an ancient and learned Jesuit (for he was
one of those that Dr. Featly had to deal with in France.) This man told him
that in England they had been long and industrious about their work of
conversion; but it went on slowly, and so would till they took a wiser course.
Two things there were that must be done before they should bring their
business to a full effect. They must first find a way to remove the Bishops
and Ministers, in whose room they must bring it so about, that all should have
liberty to preach. Then secondly they must get down the Common Prayer book, and
suffer every man to use what prayer he list. Thus much the man offered to make
good upon his Oath before any Magistrate he should be called. And now I pray
tell me out of what shop do you think your work comes? That generation are a
sly subtle people; as the devil, they can transform themselves into an Angel of
light. If many printed books lie not, there have been many among you, and they
know to insinuate their poison under gilded pills. Positions they have many
like yours, and beware least when you think you suck in the Truth, you drink
not poison. Verbum sat Sapienti. They owe us a spleen for casting off their
head; and they will never give over to seek a revenge.

We were the men that cut it off, and take heed least unwittingly you set it
not on again. It Is too true; I speak it with grief; they have won to their side
in the time of our dissentions more proselites then they did in diverse years
before. The Laws are now silent, and any man may be now any thing, so he be not
an old Protestant of the Church of England; that if he profess, then there
will be a quick eye upon him; An Ordinance shall be sure to reach him, which
for ought I heard is but brutum fulmen to a Papist. Boast not then of your
taking down that same vile and virulent head the Pope, when it is permitted to
stand in more favor then a Protestant, whose work has been to take down that
abominable beast with his ten horns as you call him.

SECT 2. The British King the Violent Head. Mr. Matthews.

2. SEcondly, has not Christ hid his face from, and bent his brow against the
National Church, as being that very next naughtiness. Whereof the British King
was (although not an invincible) yet a violent Head; which was therefore less
victorious and more vincible, partly because the head, not only of a very
uncanonical, but also of a very unspiritual corporation: and partly because of
the said national-corporations inconsistency with the Scripture precepts,
Matthew. 18.17. and 1 Cor. 14.23. which does require its ordinary congregating in
one place; seconded and aggravated by its notorious inconformity to the
Scripture patterns, Ephesians. 2.19.22. Philip. 2.15. Revel. 5.9. where the Scripture
Combinational Church is called not a whole nation, but a holy City, a growing
Temple, a Spiritual house, or a sin-enlightning, and a soul-enlivening Church;
gathered, built, framed, culled and called out, of, and from a carnal and
crooked nation, which was both dark, and darkness it self; witness what is
written, Ephesians. 5.8.

The Reply.
That Christ has hid his face from, and bent his face against this National
Church, you have reason to lament and grieve, and not to stand by and clap your
hands at it; Rather take up the Lamentation of David for Saul and Jonathan. The
beauty of Israel is slain upon the high places; how are the mighty fallen! 2 Samuel 1.19.20
Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Ashkelon, least the
daughters of the Philistims rejoice, least the daughters of the uncircumcised
Triumph, etc. Posterity will have cause to mourn, when you and they shall be
invaded and set upon by those uncircumcised Philistims of Rome, who will smile
at the armor wherein you trust; and the spears you brandish against them as a
dart of a bulrush. It Is not your Sophisms that will prevail with them, nor your
popular arguments that they will regard; and they as smoke being vanished, set
upon you they will with armor of proof, and so inviron you, that you will wish
again for those worthies of the National Church to fight your battles. These
were the men that stood up in the gap, these have bore the burden and heat of
the day, these have beaten these Philistims at their own weapons; from the
blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan turned not
back, and the Sword of Saul returned not empty. Verse 22.
Rejoice not therefore at their fall, since after ages may have occasion to
say, if we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been
partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets. Matthew. 23.31.


2. Yea, but you say Christ has bent his brow against this National Church, as
being next in naughtiness.] Next? to what? to the Roman Church. That Is to be
proved. And it is more than ever you shall be able to make good, that qua
National, or qua a Church in her constitution she was naught. It was the
acknowledgment of that great and learned Casaubons then whom there was none
more skilful in all the Records of antiquity, that there was not any Church in
the Christian world, that came nearer in her Doctrine and Discipline to the
Primitive, than this of England. His words in his Epistle Dedicatory to King
James are these, before his exercitations to the Annals of Baronius. Casaub.
Ep. de die. ad Annals.
Tuum est, proprie tuum pro veteris Ecclesiae disciplina pugnantes regii
clypei, quem pro sincere pietatis defensione gestas, umbone propugnare. Qui
Ecclesiam habeas in tuis regnis, partim jam olim ita institutam, partim magnis
tuis laboribus ita instauratum, ut ad florentis quondam Ecclesiae formam nulla
hodie propius accedat, quam tua, inter vel excessu, vel defectu peccantes
mediam viam sequita. This man lived in and was brought up in the Reformed
Church in France, and might be therefore thought to incline to a Presbyterial
Discipline, and yet after he came into England, and took notice of the
constitution, you hear what he attests, that was no question able to judge,
that had seen and read so much. And in this point he stands not single, nor
alone, for from Alexandria we have like approbation, from Cyril the Patriarch,
there in his Letter sent to my sometimes Lord George Abbot ArchBishop of
Canterbury. Cyril. Litt. ab Aegypto missae. 1616.
Fix not then this naughty term upon the Church of England, because National.
The naughtiness that was in her I have confessed, and for which we justly
suffer under the hand of a just God, and for which when you come to be as
naught as we, think not you shall escape. It Is not your Combination shall
privilege you from the Cup of Gods wrath. Think you that those Galileans on
whom the Tower of Siloam fell, were greater sinners then all that dwelt in
Jerusalem? I tell you nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.

3. You go on to the British King. Placida compostus pace quiescat. Soil not
his ashes. Invincible he was not, nor any man ever thought him so. For thine, O
Lord is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, ^ Chr.
29.11.
and the Majesty, for all that is in the heaven and earth is thine; thine is
the Kingdom O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above all. But whereas you say
that he was a violent head, and was therefore less victorious, and more
vincible, you are a little too quick with your ergo. More can never be in the
conclusion, than is in the premises, and say he had been a violent head, which
I shall by and by prove he was not, yet it will never necessarily follow, that
thence he should be less victorious. For how many violent heads in your sense,
meaning National Churches, have their been, who yet have obtained victories?
Sometimes God punishes a people for the transgression of a King, sometimes a
King for the transgression of his people. Israel is smitten with the pestilence
for David's sin, and Eli is cast off, and the Ark taken for the sin of his
sons. Where therefore there may be diverse causes of a discomfiture, is overmuch
rashness to fix upon one, nay, to imagine that to be the cause, which was not,
viz. because he was.

4. A violent head.] For what I pray? is it a sin for a Prince to be the
head, that is, the governor of a National Church? so you seem to affirm.
Beware, look about you, and consider with whom at unawares you join, for the
Jesuit will make you a low Congee, and thank you that you shall assert their
rebellious position, that Princes and supreme Magistrates have nothing to do in
the Church; in temporal things supreme, and Lords they are, but in spiritual
matters they may not meddle. The difference lies only in this, that they would
draw the Supremacy to one, even, that man of sin, and advance him to the
head-ship. You draw the Supremacy to the Pastors and Elders in every
Combinational Congregation, and so there should be as many supremacies and
heads, as there be of these Churches.

For which his Highness the Lord Protector has little reason to thank you;
for of what Church will you make him a governor? Not of the National, that was
the Kings sin; a violent head he was, and God forbid that according to your
tenet any should come into that place again. His headship and government can
extend no farther than the Combinational, that very Combinational, of which he
is a member, and in which he must act not as Protector, or the Supreme in the
Nation, but as an Elder only. In all other Combinationals he has nothing at
all to do, for they have a supremacy among themselves. He may not then order
National Fasts, nor days of Thanksgiving; he may not make Ordinances to eject
scandalous and ignorant Ministers; he may not set up Approvers of Ministers for
the whole Nation; he may not punish Papists, imprison Blasphemers, ask any man
out of his Combination, why he does so or so, if your position be true. It Is
violence, it is usurpation, it is tyranny. Supreme he is now in the Nation, and
by the power of the supremacy all these things are done, and you and I, or any
body else would be smiled at, if not frowned upon, that for this should call
him a violent head. And what did the British King more than this?

It may be thought, that I have put in this plea in favor of the British King;
he needs it not, for he has long ago answered for his violence, if there were
any. I tell you plainly I plead for his Highness, and for as many, who are
supreme in any Nation, be they Potentates, Princes or governors over any
Christian Church. For the cause is alike in all, and they have external
government of the Church in charge; and to say the contrary, is to open a sluice
to the over-flowings of impiety. I shall put you a case. Suppose the Jew should
be admitted into a Nation, and shall fall to their old work of crucifying
children to the scorn and disgrace of our Savior; say that a Heathen should be
enfranchized, and worship the Sun and the Moon, and all the host of heaven,
yea, and make their children pass through the fire to Moloch; Be it that one
should say he were God, another the Devil; a third acknowledge not God nor
Devil; say there arise false Christ's and false Prophets, one who will blaspheme
and say he is the Messiah, and rejoices to hear Hosanna cried before him; If
there be no supreme over a National Church, I wonder what order could be taken
with any of these? suffered they must be to go on, and blaspheme still, for any
power you have to restrain them. Convent them before your Congregation, they
appear not. Cast them out, if they be of your Combination, they regard it not.
The gangrene goes on, the blasphemy increases, and will increase, except you
admit of one supreme head in a Nation, who may have so much power over the
body, that he may cut off that part from the body, which is like to infect and
poison the whole. The mischief that may ensue upon a Church by the admission of
this your paradox is unconceivable. I can never enough admire the wisdom both
of God and man, who has appointed a supreme power in all Nations, for the
suppression of all inconveniences. With their Civil power I am not at this time
to meddle; I shall only insist upon that which is Ecclesiastical; and that you
may the better go along with me, I shall reduce what is to be said to certain
heads.

1. The first work of the supremacy is to call Assemblies. For, for men to
assemble together, without leave of the supreme power, and consult of Religion,
is to make a Rout. In Israel God commands Moses to make two Trumpets, Numb.
10.12.
and to keep them for that end to call the Congregation. Moses had no other
right but that of the chief Magistrate. In that right he received his Trumpets,
and in that right he had the property of both. Aaron, verse 10. had the use,
but the use only, never the right. May be if we call flesh and blood to
counsel, it will be thought more convenient, that God delivered one Trumpet to
one, and the other to the other, and so have power to call; but God says
peremptorily to Moses, erunt tibi, they shall be and remain in thy hands: and
so, no man has power to remove the Camp, to assemble the Congregation, to
found to the Celebration of the solemn Feasts, but Moses and his Successors.

By virtue of this power, Joshua assembles all the Tribes, Levi and all to
Sichem. Joshua 24. 1 Chr. 15.4. and 23.2, 3, 6. 2 Chr. 15. and 20.3. and 24.5
and 34.29.
David calls together the Priests and other Ecclesiastical persons; and for
what matters? for secular? nay, mere Church-work; first, when the Ark was to be
removed; again, when the offices of the Temple were to be set in order: things
merely pertaining to Religion. Asa, Jehosaphat, Joas, Josias, gave a solemn
call in matters of Religion. But the fact of Hezekiah is of all most memorable.
He gave forth a precept for the Priests, and all their brethren to assemble; 2
Chr. 29. Verse 12, etc. Verse 15.
and to what end? ad res Jehovae. There be fourteen men, chief men of the
Priests set down there by name, that by virtue of that Writ came together, they
and their brethren all ex praecepto regis ad res Jehovae, for matters merely of
the Church.

Thus it was while there was a King in Israel. But after, when the Scepter was
departed, how was it then? how, when the fullness of the Gentiles was come in?
who then called the Assemblies? A time there was after Christ, when Kings were
Infidels, and the Church under persecution. As the Jews at Babylon, being under
pressures, they must meet, and did, as they could; and yet diverse such meetings
in Synods we find recorded, as I have instanced before, which for the present
were called by their Patriarchs.

But no sooner did God raise up Constantine to be a nursing father to the
Church, but he resumed the right of Moses; and his Successors lay claim to
them at this day; the four general Councils, the great Nicene against Arrius;
the second of Constantinople against Macedonius; the third of Ephesus against
Nestorius; the fourth of Calchedon against Eutichus, were all called by several
Emperors. And by the same power all other National and Provincial Synods have
been accustomed to be assembled till this our age.

2. And the Church being assembled by this Warrant, had power to establish Laws
for the Discipline of the Church, so they be consonant to the Word of God, tend
to edification, decency and order; So that if there be no error of man
concerning their determination, the determining of them is to be accounted as
if it were divine. Though then he who is the chief in any State, has not power
to determine judicio definitivo, what is sound and to be received in the
worship of God; yet judicio executivo, Synod at Cambridge in New Engl. cap. 2.
he may and ought when the Church has determined, command the profession
thereof in his Territories; and from this I do not see that your Synod held at
Cambridge does much dissent. Cap. 17. Sect. 7, 8, 9.

I have hitherto opened unto you what the supreme power may do. I shall now
show you by what right he may do it, which is indeed by all right, jure
naturae, jure divino, and positivo.

First, they deceive and are deceived, who go about to persuade that the
supremacy in Church matters is derived unto any superior by municipal Laws;
for this is a right with which he is invested by God himself. Declared it may
be, and made known to the world, written more at large, and expressed more
clearly in Acts and Statute Laws; Cook de jure. reg. and Ecclesiae. page 8.
but this jurisdiction was from above, whence the Fathers of the Law have thus
delivered this truth to us, that the Act past concerning Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, non novam legem introduxit, sed antiquam declaravit.

Ask the Fathers and they shall tell you, the gray hairs and they shall
declare unto you. In the Law of nature, it can be no question but causes Civil
and Ecclesiastical belonged to one man, since the King and Priest was united in
one man; The eldest ordinarily of the Family being chief Magistrate and Priest;
And after the partition was made, yet the chief power remained in the
Superior. Such Religion as the Heathen had, was yet ordered by the Princes
directions, which gave Aristotle reason to say, Quae ad Deorum cultum
pertinent, Aris. Pol. lib. 3. cap. 10.11.
commissa sunt regibus; and again, Imperator est Rex and Judex rerumque
divinarum ei cura commissa est.

A Law there was made by Solon, that all Assemblies (...), Plutarch in Solone.
were unlawful, that the highest authority did not cause to meet. Among the
Heathen Nebuchadnezzar makes a Law, Darius a Decree, the King of Nineveh sends
forth a Proclamation for a Fast, for a Religious service, which certainly they
had never done, had it not been received, that they were empowred. And among
the Romans there was no sooner an Emperor, but he took upon him potestatem
pontificiam. In the Acts we read that the City of the Ephesians was (...),
which Mr. Seldom teaches us, was an Office to take care of the whole worship
and Temple of Diana. Seld. not. in Marmor. Arundel.
Now this could not be done by any warrant from Scripture, evident therefore it
is, that even by the light of nature seen it was, that the supreme power is
invested with anthority in Religious duties. Care they ought to take, that God
be served, as well as the people governed, since they have been hitherto taken
to be Custodes utriusque Tabulae.

2. Thus it was, while reason bare the sway. But now let us look into the
Scripture. How is it written in the Law, how read you? There it was ordained,
that the King should have a book of the Law, written by the Priests, and the
end was, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20.
that he might fear the Lord, and keep it. And in this Law there be many
precepts that concern him as a man, many as a Prince; for as Austin Rex servit
Deo, aliter qua homo, aliter qua Rex, as a man by a holy Conversation, as a
Prince by making and executing holy constitutions. Austin Ep. 50.
As he is the Superior, he is there made the Guardian of Gods Law, and the
whole Law is committed to his charge. By virtue of which Commission, when the
Kingdom and Priesthood were divided, Moses the Civil Magistrate made use of
his power over Aaron, and reproved him for the golden Calf. Joshua a Prince, no
Priest, by the same authority circumcised the sons of Israel, erected an
Altar of stone, caused the people to put away their strange gods, and renewed
the Covenant betwixt God and the people. And what other Kings did, you have
heard before. These Acts of these famous Kings performed in Ecclesiastical
causes, shows clearly what power Kings had under Moses Law. And one thing more
let me put you in mind of, that when there was no King in Israel, that was a
supreme power, for it was no more, every man did that which was good in his own
eyes, and that good was extreme bad, as the story shows.

3. Yea, but it may be said, that thus it was, while the Judicials of Moses
were in force; but why so now? Now the Superiors authority is confined to
Civil Laws: Now the Kingdom is Christ's, and he must rule. Indeed could we
find in the Gospel any restriction, or rather revocation of what power had
formerly belonged to Superiors, this plea were considerable, but since the
rule is true, that Evangelium non tollit precepta naturae and legis, sed
perficit. The Commission once granted to the Superior, by nature, and the
Moral Law must be good.

And be it that the Kingdom is Christ's, and all power in his hands; yet this
will be no impediment to what I contend for neither. That Christ wants no Vicar
on earth, but as head of his Church does govern it, is a truth beyond
exception. But this is to be understood of the spiritual internal government;
not of that which is external; because he must be served with the body, as well
as with the Spirit, in an outward form of worship, as well as an inward;
therefore he has left superiors to look to that. Their power extends not,
their account shall not be given for what is done within; for they cannot see,
nor cannot judge what is done in that dark cell; they have nothing to do with
the secret affections of the heart, with the sacred gifts of the Spirit, with
the steadfast trust of future things. They are only to moderate and direct the
outward actions of godliness and honesty, and what may externally advance
Christ's Kingdom. So that the question is not here of the internal, and
properly Spiritual; but of the external government, order, and discipline of
the Church; which when the supreme power administers as it ought, it sets up,
and no way pulls down the Kingdom of Christ. These two are then well enough
compatible, that the Kingdom is Christ's, and yet the Superior way make use of
his power in Christ's Kingdom.

A Prophecy there was, that under the Gospel Kings should be nursing fathers,
and Queens nursing mothers to the Church. Isa. 49.23.
Nourishment then they must give; that ordained for babes; that for men, the
Word and Sacraments they cannot give; no more then Uzziah could burn incense,
or Saul burn Sacrifice; no, nor yet ordain any to do it: The sustenance then
which Christians are to receive from them, must be that of external discipline
and government. Those that gave such food were called nursing fathers; those
that denied it, tyrants and persecutors; without the favor and execution of
this duty, Christian Religion had never been so highly advanced; and therefore
the Apostle ordains, that Christians pray for those in authority, that we may
live a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness, 1 Timothy 2.
and honesty. Godliness comprehends all duties of the first Table; Honesty all
duties of the second; and where those who are in authority are careful, both
will be observed, both shall be preserved, because they know they have a charge
of both. Thus you see reason, Law and Gospel have given a supremacy to those in
power, non solum in ijs quae pertinent ad humanam societatem, verum etiam in
ijs quae attinent ad religionem divinam.

I have enlarged my self on this subject beyond my intention, least you should
split upon that dangerous rock of Jesuitisme, while out of a dislike of the
British King, you make him a violent head of the National Church; for what you
say of him, is as true of all others; and what is denied of him, is denied of
all others, in that their claim and right is all alike; and in case it be not
just, their violence and usurpation is all alike, which to affirm is perfect
Jesuitisme; And wheresoever this doctrine is turned into practice, it sets up
regnum in regno: and if it should be brought into this Commonwealth, would
reduce again what Henry the eight cast out, though under another notion; for
every Eldership of a Combinational Church would be perfect Papacy, absolute,
independent, answerable to none, to be guided by none in Church matters,
punishable by none but themselves; to which if you will give a right name, it
is mere Popish power.

This is it which Superiors have wisely disclaimed, and not admitted
themselves like children to be cheated out of their native rights and
inheritantes, as they must if you deny a National Church; for that power is in
vain which has no subject to work upon; on the Church National it cannot,
because in your opinion it is not; on the Combinational it may nor, because
that is absolute, and to be ordered and disciplined by its own Elders; non
datur tertium; and so the supremacy which all Superiors challenge is
frustrated.

To this the British King did never yield nor would; and I believe his
Highness will be as little persuaded by you. For this you make him less
victorious and more vincible; but you cast up your account too soon; for had
you said, for the male administration of his supreme power this had fallen upon
him, that might have carried some color of sense with it, (which will also
happen to any that shall not use it as they ought) but to affirm, that the
claim to the power, and exercise of that power was the cause of his fall, is
rash, false, inconsiderate, dangerous. But you go on, and endeavor to make it
good by two reasons.

Mr. Matthews. The Admonitory Letter.
1. Partly because the head, not only of a very Uncanonical, but also of a very
unspiritual corporation.
BY Corporation I conceive you mean the body of Professors within this Land, or
at least the Clergy, upon whom you bestow these two Epithites, that they were
very uncanonical, very unspiritual. How can you be ever able to make good this
charge? Had you said seemingly only such, it might have been passed over, but
that they were vere, truly such, is a high part of presumption in you; for
peremptorily to prononounce such a sentence, belongs to a higher judicature.
The judgment is Gods alone.

But to remit unto you that slip of your pen; Why I pray uncanonical? Those are
uncanonical, who reject and throw aside the Canon, either in judgment or
practice. Why unspiritual? Those are unspiritual who have not received the
Spirit; neither of which you can with a good conscience more affirm of this
corporation then of your own.

1. For what other Canon can you name for Christians, then the books of
Canonical Scriptures? Gal. 6.16. Phil. 3.16. 2 Cor. 10.13.
which appellation was taken up after St. Paul, who thrice calls the Scripture
the Canon. (...), and again (...); and yet more plainly he says, we stretch
not our selves beyond our measure, meaning the doctrine of the Gospel, but
(...), according to the measure of the rule or Canon which God has distributed
to us. And Chemnitius has observed, that the word is derived from the Hebrew
word Chan, Chemnitius Exam. Council. Trid. part. 1. de script. Can.
which signifies that perpendicular line which Masons use in building, by which
the exorbitancy or evennesse of their work is proved. And the Metaphor is very
apt. For the Church is the house of the living God, the builder is God, the
Ministers of the Word the Architects; that then their work go evenly and
conformably on, they had need of a Canon, or a rule by which the Architects
examine their work, lest the building, should just too far outward, or lean too
much inward, and so deviate from the just order and proportion. For the proof
of this, the Master Builder has left to his under workmen his line and level,
which is the Canon of the Scriptures, the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles;
whatsoever agrees to this rule, is right and sound, and Apostolic; what is not
every way conformable to it, but either in excess or defect swerves from it,
that is, supposititious, adulterine, erroneous. And now I pray, has not this
Corporation you mention, professed to the world that they receive the books of
the Canonical Scriptures, and only those books for their rule and Canon? do
they not confess that they fully comprehend all things that are needful for
our help? that they are the sure and infallible rule, whereby may be tried
whether the Church do swerve or err; and whereunto all Ecclesiastical doctrine
ought to be called to account; and that against these Scriptures, neither Law,
The English Confession art. 10.
nor Ordinance, nor any custom ought to be heard; no, though Paul himself, or
an Angel from heaven should teach the contrary. How unadvised then and
inconsiderate is this Epithet of yours, by which you brand us for an
Uncanonical Corporation, who stick so close to the Canon, and have and do
maintain it against the Church of Rome, who would with it, as if it were
imperfect, obtrude another Canon upon us? God give you repentance for this your
uncharitable Censure, and make you as Canonical as we are. In doctrine I am
sure; as for the practice we have both too much to answer; The Lord have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

2. Now you thought it not enough to put us out of the Canon, except you
deprived us of the Spirit also. We are in your judgment an unspiritual
corporation. What Sirs, have you such a Monopoly of the Spirit, that none can
partake of it, except he be a member of one of your corporation? Pray show your
Charter, produce your Grant, that the Spirit would not descend upon any, nor
impart his gifts and graces to any, except he were within your Church Covenant;
For if that be not the sole impediment, I see no color why you should call us
unspiritual. The graces of the Spirit are by all Divines reduced to two heads;
either they are (...), or (...); The one peculiarly called Graces, the other
more properly styled Gifts. The Graces are media salutis immediata, such by
which the good will of God shapes the heart within, freely justifies a sinner
by the imputation of Christ's righteousness, wonderfully converts a heart of
stone into a heart of flesh, clears the conscience toward God, and settles a
welcome peace. These are gratiae gratum facientes, are bestowed upon all Gods
Saints. The Gifts are media mediorum, which it pleases the wisdom of God to
use, as fit means to perfect in all his those former gifts of grace, such as
are gifts of prophecy, eloquence, utterance, knowledge of tongues, depth of
learning, wisdom in government, functions, and ability to discharge these
functions, etc. And now consider which of these endowments, whether gifts or
graces of the Spirit has not been as eminent and evident in our National
corporation as ever it was, or ever will be in your Combinational? I cannot
therefore with any patience hear that you should call us unspiritual; and you,
had you had any of the meekness of the Dove in you, would not have done it;
since you know, that those who have not the Spirit of Christ, are none of his:
and that you cut us off from Christ, can you think that we can take it
patiently? There was less charity in this word, then when you writ it I
believe you were aware of; and therefore I hope when you write next, you will
show more Christian love; To conclude the Corporation of which the British King
was head, was as I have proved, both Canonical, as adhering to the Canon of the
Scriptures; and Spiritual, as endowed with the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit;
and so your reason has no reason at all in it. Well, if this will not do it, a
second shall, which is,

2. Partly because of the said National Corporations inconsistence with the
Scripture precepts, Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor. 14.23. which does require its ordinary
congregating in one place. The words of the Letter.

A Wonderful demonstration' The Church must be gathered together in one place
to the service of God; as that place of the Corinths proves, and must be
assembled to exercise discipline, as in that of Matthew; therefore there may be
no national Church, therefore no head or governor in that Church. Baculus in
angulo; It Is as if you should argue thus; such or such a County must meet
together to elect a Burgess to the Parliament, or to see justice done at a
Quarter Sessions, or at an Assize; therefore it is inconsistent that there
should be a head over the Nation, whereof they are parts. Who sees not the
absurdity of such an argument?

But now in particular to these places. The first is Matthew. 18. verse. 17. And
if he shall neglect to hear thee, tell it to the Church, which is so difficult,
that St. Austin says of it, dicant qui possunt, si tamen probare possunt quae
dicunt, ego me ignorare profiteor. And the reason is, because the word Ecclesia
is (...), a term of diverse acceptions; and from terms aequivocal nothing can be
concluded till distinction be made. But this I must tell you by the way, that
no man by Ecclesia understood the Combinational Church, til you arose; and
therefore you can never conclude out of this place, that a head of a National
Church is inconsistent with Christ's precept. For the Pope, Presbyter, Praelate,
all acknowledge a National Church, and a head of a National Church, and yet
never thought that they did transgress Christ's precept. Your proof therefore
cannot stand secure til you have everted the claim of every one of these, no
more then til he who pretends a right to a piece of Land, which is in other
men's possessions, has showed his own title to be only good, and all the rest
of no force. Be not so hasty then with your inference; for there is not one of
these who will not say you are an intruder.

It would fill a book to tell you what is written, and what I have read upon
this place. Whether by the Church you are to understand a civil or an
Ecclesiastical consistory, or whether a mixed, because our Savior alludes out
of question to the Jewish Sanedrim. Beza Annot. in locum. Rutherf. cap. 8.
Then whether by the Church again you are to understand the whole Congregation,
or the chief in that Congregation; the Elders say the Presbyters only; you, as
by Rutherfords disputes against you, I guess the whole body of believers; or
as the Prelates contend, those to whom Christ gave the Keys, meaning the
Apostles and their successors. Yet farther, whether the wrong to be here tried
by the Church be only that which is private; because of those words, If thy
brother trespass against thee. Lastly, whether our Savior speaks here of any
Church censure at all, because our Savior says not, let him be excommunicate,
but sit tibi, Let him be unto thee as a Heathen and a Publican.

Among many interpretations of these words, I shall propose one, which I
prefer above the rest, as that which to me carries the fairest evidence with
it. The Jews were at this time conquered by the Romans, under their power and
judicatory; yet they left unto the Jews so much power as to judge betwixt man
and man, according to the Law of Moses: reserving strangers and Publicans to be
tried in the Roman Court. This being the state of the Jews, when our Savior
spoke these words, in private quarrels and actions Christ proposes three
degrees of proceeding. The first by the Rule of charity. If thy brother
trespass against thee, tell him privately of the wrong offered thee, betwixt
thee and him alone: and if this prevail not, in charity go one step further,
call two or three Witnesses and rebuke him before them, manifest the wrong; if
he hear thee, thou have won thy brother; there ought to be an end of the
debate. This is the first direction. 2. But say he be yet refractory; then thou
may proceed further, even by the order of Moses Law, then convent him before
the Mosaical Magistrate, the Triumvirate, the 23. or the great Sanedrim, the
71. Dic Ecclesiae. 3. But if he will not hear them, to which he is bound by
Moses Law, then take help from the Roman Sovereignty. Let him be unto thee as
a Heathen or Publican; esteem him for a brother Jew no longer, but proceed
against him in that Court where Heathens and Publicans were to take their
trial. This is the natural and genuine Exposition of these words; the precept
belongs to the state of the Jews at that time, and cannot be applied to the
Christian Church, except by the way of Accommadation. For it is clear that the
case Saint Peter put was of private wrong, Master, how often shall my brother
sin against me, and I forgive him? and the case is put of a private wrong, if
thy brother shall trespass against thee, etc. Whereas those cases in which the
Church ought to proceed must be notorious and scandalous, in which it is not
necessary that the two admonitions precede, either that private, or the other
under Witnesses, neither after sentence past by the Church, is the man to be
accounted in the state of a Heathen or Publican; for Christ and his Church did
never refuse to converse with either. So that it as not proper to understand
these words of the Christian Church, which then was not.

That yet they may be referred thither, I gainsay not; but then that which
will be collected from hence, can be no more but this, that in the Church of
Christ there must be a Court erected; And so there always has been; that it
be Combinational only, there is not any man, who looks upon this place with an
unpartial eye, can ever say that in this place there is a precept for it. He
may with more reason conclude the contrary, because the Church concerning whom
the precept was given, Dic Ecclesiae, was the Jewish Church, which is confessed
at that time to have been National, not Combinational. In this place then you
missed your mark. As for the other,

That to 1 Cor. 14.23. I wonder what you can pick out of it for a Combinational
Church, much less a precept for it. The words are, If therefore the whole
Church be gathred together in one place, etc. or as it is in the Original,
(...), and that may be about the same thing. It puts me to stand what you can
collect from hence that may serve your turn. Gather you may that the whole
Church at that time was small, or so many as could conveniently meet together
in one place, or that they met about one and the same service; but that there
was a precept here given, that those which met together must be combined in a
Church Covenant, is a collection out of your own brain. Before your Combination
was heard of, the Church met together in Synods Provincial, National,
Ecumenical; men met together in one place to serve God; and therefore the
meeting together in one place will never be inconsistent with Scripture
precepts. But in case these two places should prove infirm, you have thought
upon your Optiones, your seconds to undertake the Combat.

3. Seconded and aggravated by its notorious inconformity to the Scripture
patterns.
SEconds commonly are men more skilful at their weapons, then the prime
Combatants, and so then should these Scriptures be of more evidence to prove
what you intend, that the National corporation is inconsistent with these
Scripture, and no way conformable to the Scripture patterns, which are as you
allege.

Ephesians. 2.19, 22. Philip. 2.15. Revel. 5.9. Where the Combinational Church is
called not a whole Nation, but a holy City, a growing Temple, spiritual House,
or a sinne-enlightning and soul-saving Church, gathered, built, framed, culled,
and called out of and from a carnal and crooked Nation, which was both dark,
and darkness it self; witness what is written, Ephesians. 5.8.

These places of Scripture I have reviewed, and I do not find one syllable of
the Combinational Church in any of them. Alchymists who profess themselves
skilful to extract gold out of a pibble, may perhaps light upon some such
thing, but this passes my art. There was a man, who was wont to stand upon a
Key at Athens, and every ship that approached the Harbor, he judged to be his
own. The like you do by Scripture, and every Text where you can but meet with
the name of Christ's Church, presently you conceit it makes for your
Combinational; had not your head run this way, you would never have alleged
these.

In that Chapter to the Ephesians, it is the Apostles purpose to show that the
partition betwixt Jew and Gentile was by Christ taken down, He was laid in the
foundation for the cornerstone, and both Nations built and united in him unto
one Church, so that both by him in one Spirit had access to the Father. The
Gentiles were no more strangers and Forreiners, but fellow Citizens with the
Saints, and of the Household of God, built upon the foundation, Jesus Christ
being the corner stone, in whom the whole building fitly framed together,
grows into a holy Temple. The end was, as you cite, Philip. 2.15. That they
should be blameless and harmless, and the sons of God, without rebuke in
the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, among whom ye shine as lights in
the world. And these were they, Rev. 5.9. who were redeemed by Christ's blood
out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and Nation.

But what could not all this be effected but within your Combination? No
fellow-Citizens of the Saints? none blameless and harmless, and sons of God?
none redeemed by Christ's blood, but those within your Church Covenant? What
Arrogance is this? what Papisme? what Do^^isme? all other are notorious
Inconformists, without the lists of Christ's Church, by your rule, a carnal, a
crooked Nation, darkness it self; and how then can they ever hope for
salvation? Fie, fie, give over this peevish singularity, and since Christ has
redeemed by his blood some out of every kindred, tongue, people, Nation; let
those whom he has so freely and dearly bought be fellow Citizens with the
Saints, whether they be of your Combinational Church or not. The consequence is
very sad, which may be drawn out of your own words; and if I have forced them
beyond your intention, I am not altogether too blame in it, since it may move
you hereafter to look, that words which may be construed to an uncharitable
sense fall not from you.

But yet that I may be more particular in my answer, The Apostle here describes
to us the Catholic Church, and not any particular in the judgment of all
interpreters, under the similitudes of a City, a Temple, a House, a City which
is governed by the same Laws under one King, a Temple consecrated to the same
God, and sanctified by the same Spirit; a house in which the domestics are all
under one and the same father of the family; The Citizens of this City, the
Worshippers in this Temple, the children, servants and attendants in this house
and family are both Jews and Gentiles. The time was when it was not so, for the
Gentiles were (...) aliens and strangers, no free denizons of this City, but
now they are enfranchized, and made fellow-Citizens of the Saints; they were
not a people, but now are admitted for his people, but now admitted into his
Temple with his people, to offer praise and prayers unto him; nay, which is yet
more, are themselves living stones of this Temple; they were afar off, but now
are come so near, that he acknowledges them for sons and household servants.
This City is so ample, this Temple so spacious, this house so great, that it
takes in both the Saints triumphing in heaven, and that part also of this
Corporation yet Militant on Earth, of what Nation soever.

This being the full scope of the Apostle here, I wonder that you should put
such a restraint upon his words, as to limit them to your Combinations; it is
overmuch boldness in any part to usurp and appropriate that to it self, which
belongs to the whole.

A holy City this is called, you say, not a Nation; true it is so here; yet in
Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 2.9.
this holy City is a holy Nation; which shows there is no strength in your
(...), in that the same Church, which is a City in one Apostle, is a Nation in
the other; and then out of the one I shall as easily prove a National Church,
as you out of the other shall prove a Combinational. A City it was, and who
were the Citizens? Jews and Gentiles; that is evident in the chapter; now say
if you can without blushing, that such a multitude of all kindreds, languages,
nations, people, could combine and meet together in one place; which is one of
the ingredients of your Combination, if Amesius says true. Farther yet, had it
been only of the Ephesians, that St. Paul had spoken, this had been no
convincing argument, that he spoke of a Combinational Church; For that the
Ephesians were a people, and Ephesus the Metropolis of that people, which did
impart her privileges to all those in Asia the less, who were under her
jurisdiction; A City at that time being not taken, as it is now with us,
strictly for one determinate Town, as London, Bristol, etc. but for a whole
people which enjoyed the privileges and immunities of that republic, as in A
hens, Lacedaemon, Corinth, etc. and is now at Florence, Venice, and diverse
other places.

A holy Temple you say it is, and what of that? must it therefore be of
necessity a Combinational Church? this would shrink your Combination to a small
number; nay to principium numeri, to one alone if you press the Metaphor too
far; for St. Paul asks every Christian, Know you not that ye are the Temple of
God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? If any man defile the Temple
of God, 1 Cor. 3.16.17 2 Cor. 6, 16.
him shall God destroy; for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are. You
see then out of this Metaphor you cannot conclude a Combination.

Yea, and much less out of that which follows, a spiritual house. For the
house of God is taken for the whole Church; nay, a National Church Moses was
faithful in all his house, Heb. 3.2.5. and that I am sure was a National
Church. Again, judgment shall begin at the house of God, 1 Pet. 4.17. what
shall judgment, the judgment of afflictions begin at the Combinational Church
only? I have hitherto thought it the cup of which all that are of Christ's
household must taste; for datum est vobis pati, for our Saviors words must be
verified; Philip. 1.23. Joh. 16.33.
In the world you shall have tribulation. And to return to this very house of
which the Apostle speaks, that of the Ephesians, over which Timothy was
appointed the Bishop, St. Paul writes his Epistles to him, that in case he
tarry long, he might know how to behave himself in the house of God, which is
the Church of the living God, which is the ground and pillar of the Truth. St.
Paul calls the Church indefinitely without addition, 1 Timothy 3.15.
either of National or Combinational, the house of God, and who can conceive
that the Combinational, as put case that of Swansea, Ilston, etc. should be the
pillar to hold out, or the foundation to support the Truth? This is somewhat
worse then those of Rome, who plead these words for their Church with more
color, with more reason; and yet we believe them not, because they are but a
particular Church; and why then should we believe you?

Observe farther the absurdity that would follow upon your collection. The
Church of God is a house, therefore it must be a Combinational Church. Possibly
it may fall out, that a house may consist of two persons only; Tota domus duo
sunt, an old man, and an old woman; and thus much you confess when you bring
your proof for it, when two or three are gathered together. Now say that one of
these two trespass against his brother, what will become of Dic Ecclesiae, to
whom shall the Plaintiff complain? where be the witnesses he shall bring with
him? who shall be judge? Do not then use to press Metaphors too far, for they
will bring you into inextricable difficulties.

I shall therefore put you in mind of an old rule, Kecker. 1. Syst. log. part.
1. c. 4.
Similitudo seu parobola adaequetur principali scopo, and intentioni
declarantis, atque extra eam non extendatur. To which had you had a regard, you
would never have brought these comparisons of a City, a Temple, a house to
prove your Combinational Church. Similitudes do very well in a Pulpit; they are
of excellent use to illustrate, to amplify a doctrine, but they are of little
use in the Schools, because they prove nothing that is not true without them.
The position must be true in proper and plain words, before it can have any
truth at all in the improper and Tropical. As for example, it must be true,
that the Minister was not to be debarred of his just allowance and maintenance,
before St. Paul could prove it by that text out of Moses, thou shall not muzzle
the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Co n. And so you must prove there is
a Combinational Church, before you produce these allusions to prove it; Then
indeed I shall give you leave to illustrate your position by them, and descant
as you please by these excellent Metaphors upon them, but not till then. For
nulla Theologia symbolica est argumentativa, and the reason is, Chrysostom. in Mat.
hom. 65.
because, omne simile est etiam dissimile. Whence says Chrysostom
excellently, In parabolis non oportet minia in singulis verbis cura angi, sed
cum quid per parabolam Dominus intendat, dicimus inde utilitate sumpta, nihil
ulterius anxiis cogitationibus investigandum. And so as I have showed, out of
your Metaphors is nothing proved.

SECT. III. The words of the Letter. Of the Provincial Church and its haughty
head the Archbishop.
THirdly, did not Christ's own mouth marvellously condemn the prevailing
corruptions of the Provincial Church; whereof the chief Prelate or Archbishop
was the haughty and horrible head? which was therefore so much the more absurd
and bold head, because of its base and blasphemous blindness, in daring to
take up and ascribe to its self, such a style and title as is not communicable
to any creature, but is proper and peculiar to Christ's own sacred person, being
that besides himself none can be safely said to be an Archbishop or chief
Shepherd; if one of the Eminenst of the Apostles may be believed, whose words
imply no less, 1 Pet. 5.4. When the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall
receive an incorruptible crown of glory. Who was that Church Minister? what was
his name? or where did he dwell, who came once into a capacity to be accounted
such a Superlative Counselor or Comforter, as was endued either with ability
or authority, as to confer a spiritual Crown on any one of the sincere Elders
of a Church of Saints, which is such a matter, as a dying son of man should
not dare to have, much less to make any mention of, without some measure of
amazement in his very soul.

The Reply.
Two of your heads I have considered already, and now out of your own shop you
present me with three more; for I never heard any one of them called heads
before. And the first of these is the Archbishop, about whom you are pleased
to open your purse, and very liberally to bestow your benevolence; presenting
him unto me, for a haughty, a horrible, an absurd, and a bold head. He is
haughty, that is, puffed up with pride; horrible, that a man cannot without
some amazement approach; absurd, that acts against reason; bold, that will
attempt any thing. I will not deny, that it is possible to meet with such an
Archbishop; but then blame the man, fly not upon the Office. Only before you
be over hasty to do it, look at home: And perhaps you may find that true, which
has been observed, That there has been more haughtiness, horror, absurdity,
boldness found in some of your Pastors; then you can exemplify in any
Archbishop. If among you or us any Prelate were guilty of these foul
enormities; I excuse him not, only object not these faults of particular
persons, till you be free.

But how do you prove your aspersion? by a demonstrative reason no question. It
was say you in daring out of base and blasphemous blindness, to take up and
ascribe to its self such a style and title as is not communicable to any
creature, etc. To this I have given you your answer before, and I list not to
repeat it.

The rest of this Section I understand not well, not your interrogation; who is
that Minister? what was his name? where does he dwell? etc. To the Archbishop
sure they belong not, for none that I know, that was ever in that place, did
conceive himself in a capacity to be accounted such a superlative counselor
or comforter, that was endued either with ability or authority, as to confer
a spiritual Crown on any one of the sincere Elders of the Church. Among us
there never was, nor never will be any such man; if you can find him in the
society of your Combinationals, you should do well to name him; for to us he is
a non ens. These words therefore I pass by, as I would the noise of a sounding
brass, or a tinkling Cymbal, that make a great disturbance in the ear, but
signify just nothing.

The words of the Letter.
FOurthly, was it not Christ's own hand that did pour out a dreadful Vial of
visible vengeance upon the Cathedral Church? where the Lordly Diocesan, was not
so much the idle, as the addle head, which therefore under that notion was not
venerable, nor tolerable, because of its direct and point blank opposition unto
diverse and downright peremptory prohibitions, as Mat. 20.26. Ye know that the
Lords of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them; but with you it shall not be
so, etc. and 1 Pet. 5. Feed the flock of God which depends on you, -- not as
though you were Lords over Gods heritage. Which Royal Laws do testify all such
lofty Lords, and Lordlesse Out-Lawes to be such illegal and irregular livers,
as that their unhallowed dwellings appear to be long since destined and
appointed for hedg-hoggs to house and harbor at, yea, for Iim and Ohim with
the wild Satyrs to dance in, and for Owls and Vultures to dung^on, being
afraid of none to drive them away, thus verifying that terrible threat to be
performed and fulfilled at length, which was proph sied of old: witness what
is written, Isa. 13.19, etc.

The Reply.
We are ready to acknowledge more than you can say, that Christ's hand has
fallen heavy upon us, that the vengeance is just and visible, Rev. 16.5, 7.
and with the Angel of the Waters at the pouring forth the third Vial, we are
ready to praise him saying, Thou art righteous O Lord, which art and wast, and
shall be, because thou have judged thus; and to echo unto you those words,
from the other Angel out of the Sanctuary, even so Lord God Almighty, true and
righteous are thy judgments. Verse 10.11.
For whereas that Antichristian train under the Throne of the Beast, blasphemed
the God of heaven, for their pains, and for their sores, and repented not of
their works; we under the Cross bless God, and are heartily sorry for our
misdoings. For this is a true difference betwixt the servants of God, and
Vassals of Antichrist, that under Gods severe hand the one blesses, Jer. 5.3.
1 Timothy 3.13. Bernard in Cant. 26. Sermon.
the other blasphemeth, the one rejoices, the other rages, the one repents,
and amends, the other goes on, and grows worse and worse. Stellae nocte
splendent, quae die non videntur. And we have hope in this our sorrow and
amendment, that God may yet stay his hand, and not make us drink the dregs of
the Cup. For remember that this plague was poured out of a Vial, which is a
certain measure, and more or less he can dispense of it, Jonah. 3.9.
as he pleases. Insult not then over us in our misery. For who can tell if God
will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger that we perish not.

2. But whereas you say this Vial was poured out on the Cathedral, it is true,
but you must prove that it was poured out upon it, quatenus or because it was
Cathedral, or else your censure is uncharitable and rash. For many enormities
and misdemeanors there might be in the Cathedral, which I excuse not, that
might cause God in his fierce wrath thus to proceed against her, and yet she no
way guilty, quatenus Cathedral. God punishes his servant David, the sword
shall not depart from his house, for the matter of Vriah; but was this heavy
judgment inflicted on him, because he was King of Israel? The punishment
overtook him for his sin, not for his regality; his power was justifiable, not
his wickedness, and God showed his anger against his sin, not his Crown. The
case is the same, the Cathedral I grant was sinful, and for that God proceeded
against it, but not in that Notion as Cathedral, for that was justifiable, as I
have before proved unto you. It is then a great shortness of discourse in you,
to conclude, that as Cathedral it was punished, which if you conclude not, you
conclude nothing: since this vengeance proceeded against the sin of the
Cathedral, not the Church.

3. Of this Cathedral, you joy that the lordly Diocesan was not so much an
idle, as an addle head.] I little doubt but you pleased your self with this
paranomasia, as much as the Mathematician did with his Diagramme, for the
invention of which he offered to Jupiter a whole Hecatombe. But what now, were
these qualities proper or common to the Diocesan? if common, then it is
possible that the Pastor of a Combinational Church may be an idle and an addle
head as well as the Diocesan; because common accidents are communicable to
subjects of diverse kinds: if proper, then it must agree omni, to every
Diocesan, and so every Diocesan an idle and an addle head. Cranmer, Ridly,
Latimer, Hooper, idle and addle heads; Jewel, Armagh, Andrews, Morton, White,
Montague, Bilson, both the Abbots; all those eminent and learned Bishops of our
Church, that have stood up in the gap, and fought the battles of the Lord,
against that Goliath of Rome, idle and addle heads. Do you not blush at these
obloquies, by which you impute idleness to them, who wore out their bodies in
continual study and labor in defense of the Truth; and addleness, such as in a
rotten egg, to such, whose names, say you what you please, will be venerable
to posterity for their wisdom and constancy. You usually call all yours,
painful Preachers, and yet what is their pains more then that of the lungs?
since by your own principles they may not take pains for what to deliver, but
must rely upon that ill applied promise, It shall be given you in that (...):
Which yet no man, but he that has an addle head will trust too; and so your
itinerants may be idle and addle heads also, Nobis non licet esse tam disertis.
Most of our Bishops were laborious, wise, discreet men; if all were not so, let
not the whole order be branded with that black coal of reproach, for somes
sake. I know you would be loath to have the same measure meated out to you.

4. But you have reason for what you say, and then very good reason you should
be heard. Reason the strongest that may be given, even out of our Saviors
mouth and his Apostle Saint Peter. There must be no lordly Diocesan; so say I
to, that is no domineering and tyrannical Superior in the Church; and yet they
may be called Lords for all that; neither are these words of Christ or Peter
any prohibition against it, as I have showed you before, when I gave you the
true intent of those Scriptures, whether for the meaning I now refer you.

And yet one thing more I shall be bound to tell you, that if you look
heedfully into the Text, the word Lord is not in the Original; for thus the
words are, they that bear rule, are called (...), Benefactours; or Ptolomy in
Egypt, (...), but with you it shall not be so. The simple then may be deluded
by you, but the Learned know it is a gloss besides the Text; your illation, no
translation of the words. There is no more prohibition for being called Lord,
then for Rabbi, or Master, or Doctor, Mat. 23. v. 9.10.
or father, as is evident in the Gospel, and may not then a man be called
Master or father? Let an answer be thought upon for these appellations, and it
will serve for the other without any sensible error. Lord and servant are
opposite terms, and not Lord and sons or brethren; now the flock are no
servants, but brethren, and the Pastors no Lords over Gods inheritance, but
fathers to the faithful; what marvail therefore if Christ prohibited a Lordly
authority to his Apostles, since they were to entreat them kindly, as fathers
do their children, as one brother should do to his brother, and not think to
command and compel them as their Vassals; for this is (...) (...), which Saint
Peter forbids. Such an usurpation, tyranny, domineering as this, would have
made your words good, and testified them to have been lofty Lords, and
Lordlesse Outlaws, to have been illegal and irregular livers; which I shall
not yield you true of that Diocesan you speak, much less that because they
were called Lords, that this was the cause that their unhallowed dwellings were
destined and appointed for hedg-hogs to house and harbor in; yea, for Iim and
Ohim to dance in, and for Owls and Vultures to dung on: had there been no
greater transgression then this, I believe they might have kept their dwellings
still.

But what now, are those that house and harbor in their dwellings, become
hedg-hogs, and hob-goblings, and Satyrs? good words I pray, lest this prove
scandalum magnatum; should I say so much, I fear I should have swords about my
ears; for consider who they be that have taken possession, and dwell in these
houses. They be Saints I hope; not Devils; the meek that are to possess the
earth, and not prickly hedg-hogs, the chaste, no wanton Satyrs, and they will have
a care no doubt to keep their houses clean, so that no Vulture nor Owl shall
dare to a light and dung there, for they have power enough to drive them away.
Or if by these houses you mean the Cathedrals themselves, pray consider again,
who has the use of them, who preach in them? and are these also hedg-hogs, and
foul spirits, unclean Satyrs, Vultures and Owls? do these defile these places
with their dung? should they do so, 'twere your grief, that no man dare drive
them away. What Phineas birds suffered to defile Gods Temple? Deus meliora.

Yea, but so it must be, for so it was prophesied of old; how could that
terrible threat be performed and fulfilled? at length it came to this, witness
the Prophet, Isa. 13.19, etc. For so much you shall evidently confess, if you
look but on the first verse of that Chapter, where you shall read onus
Babylonis, The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amos did see; and
this Prophecy was never fulfilled till England became Babel. And so much
again, if you read but this 19. And Babylon the glory of Kingdoms, the beauty
of the Caldees excellency shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.

Your luck is very ill in alleging of Scripture; this I am certain which makes
so little to your purpose. Had you inferred from hence, let Tyrants beware how
they oppose the people of God, as the Babylonians did the Israelites, before
they were overthrown by the Medes; let them take heed that they commit not
Idolatry, and serve not Devils in their Temples, as did the Caldeans, upon whom
the words you allege were fulfilled; then you had hit the Prophets meaning;
for what he foretold came so to pass; but to tell us, that thus it should be
done to our Cathedrals, that this terrible threat might be performed and
fulfilled at length, and that this was prophesied of old, and to call the
Prophet Isaiah for a witness, it must be so, is to take Gods Name in vain, no
less then if you should take a vain or a false oath. I am loath to say it, but
your impertinent allegation has forced it from me.

The words of the Letter.
FIfthly and finally, was it not Christ's own foot that has kick't at, and cast
contempt, and that not a little, upon those ill-favored and condemned
Churches, which are yet standing in many Countries, though they are remarkably
reeling, and ready to fall? Is It no! Christ's own voice, that is at this time,
and in most places audibly pleading his own cause against the Parochial Church?
whereof the preaching Parson (being it must not be denied, that many of the
Parish Parsons are no preaching Parsons, witness all the oppressing
Impropiators) is openly seen to stand upon his Trial, as the odd, and the
eldest evil head. And though this head be the last head, and did the least hurt
of all the other heads, yet the Almighty Lord has as yet lift up his hand
against him: yet at this time it is his turn to lie down under the lash, and
like the lukewarm Angel of Laodicea, (by taking shame and confusion of face
unto himself) to receive whatsoever sharp correction, shall (as a cordial of
love) be administered unto him, for the preventing of the spuing his name out of
Christ's mouth, as is manifest by what is foretold, Revel. 3.19. Therefore the
whole half-blind political body of the Parish Church does openly appear to be,
though not utterly incurable, yet in respect of its present posture, in its
numerous abominations altogether unapprovable, because its rejecting the
Commandments of God, that it may observe the traditions of men. Against which
hateful offense Jesus Christ does sadly complain, Mark 7.7, 9. And concerning
which offensize hatred, Christ's sincere servant does seriously caution, Col.
2.8, 18. Beware lest there be any man that spoil you through Philosophy and
vain deceit, through the tradition of men according to the rudiments of the
world, and not after Christ. -- Let no man at his pleasure bear rule over you
by humbleness of mind, etc. which holy watch-words, and wholesome warnings
had they been heedfully hearkened unto by such as were Church Officers, would
without question have restrained the multitude of Church hearers from many such
observations and aberrations as must of necessity be either amended timely, or
mourned for eternally; witness what is written, Revel. 14.9.

The Reply.
Hitherto you coupled your heads together, the virulent and the violent, the
haughty or horrible, and the idle and the addle, and now you have one odd,
which I think you so call it, because it is the fifth, five being an odd
number; For other reason I can guess at none. This is the poor Parish Parson,
who might have escaped your fingers sure, for any injury that I know he has
done you, but that you are resolved to break every head that comes in your way.
It Is enough that you will have him the head of a Parochial Church, which he
never was, nor never took upon him, and upon that you take up your quarrel
against him. His sin if any was, his submission and obedience unto his
superiors in those indifferent things that they had power to command him, and
therefore you for charity sake might have past him by. No, no, that may not be,
to his trial he must come too, for being an odd, an old, nay, the eldest evil
head. Pity him for his gray hairs sake, if it be but because he is an Elder, a
Presbyter, though not odd, nor yet eldest as you may suppose. For there was an
Elder before him, old Polycarp an Elder of Smyrna, and his Cathedral, before
this his Parochial, as I have proved unto you.

But against him and his Church you say, Christ has proceeded, kick't at, and
cast contempt, and that not a little upon them both. Easy it is for men to
cast what they do maliciously upon God. Isa. 36.10.
Am I come up now without the Lord against this Land to destroy it, said
Rabshekah? Many things God permits to be done, of which he is not the doer; it
is therefore over hastily said, that Christ's own foot has kick't at the
Parochial Church, had you said only, that he has suffered you in justice for
our sins to kick at it, and cast it into contempt, I would not gainsay; but
do not attribute the action to Christ, before you have better warrant for it.
God has nothing to do in the malice of men, except it be to restrain it, that
it break out no farther then he is pleased. I will put a hook into his
nostrils, etc. except it be to order objects and means in such sort, that they
may be by way of occasion incentives to provoke the wicked to exercise that
maliciousness which is in them, and from themselves, where, when and how God
will have it so break out, for punishment, correction, example, trial. Your
censure was here over-rash.

2. But those following scorns and insultations you bestow upon the Parish
Churches, those ill-favored and condemned Churches yet standing, (which it
seems you grieve at) that yet are remarkably reeling and ready to fall, (which
I suspect you joy in) I read not I say, these words without passion and
compassion; without a deep passion of sorrow in respect of them, without the
bowels of compassion in respect of you. When our Savior beheld Jerusalem,
foresaw that one stone of the Temple with the City, should not be left upon
another, he wept: when Gods people remembered Sion, it pitied them to see her in
the dust: When David heard Gods adversaries roar in the midst of the
Congregations, Psalm. 74., 56, 7, 8, 9. Psalm. 84.1.
and set up their Banners for signs; when he saw them break down all the
carved work thereof with Axes and Hammers; then his heart was moved within him,
sadness and astonishment surprised him, and he prays, Lord how long shall the
adversary do Thee this dishonor? He that loves God, will love his Sanctuary,
it is an amiable dwelling; you must pardon me therefore if you find me in a
melting affection, when I find them in that reeling tottering condition ready
to fall; For I am as much affected to the Cathedrals and Parish Churches, as
ever Jew was to their Temple and Synagogues; for there is an equal reason, both
erected by prudence, not command, (what I say I will justify, if you doubt of
it) both equally the houses of prayer, both of equal holiness; for not one nor
other capable of inherent holiness, but holy only as applied to holy uses;
lastly a promise of audience to both. Blame me not then if I be struck into
much sadness, heaviness and sorrow to see the stones of these lie in the
dust. You have the cause of my passion; sit down and mock on, which if you do,
it matters not, I am resolved to mourn still. And next I shall give you the
reason of my compassion; that is for you, for my bowels yearn within me; that
any man who bears the name of a Christian, should call that ill-favored, which
God will call the beauty of holiness; that should be glad, that that is
condemned, which Christianity through the whole World has hitherto approved;
that should stand by and clap his hands, that those sacred buildings are
reeling and ready to fall, which the piety and bounty of our forefathers has
erected to the service of God; (...) is a proud sin, but to rejoice and in
this, is a superlative degree of it, a sin out of measure sinful. The charity
therefore that I owe you, stirs my very inwards to be compassionate toward you,
and to solicit the Almighty for you, that you may repent of this wickedness,
and pray to God, Acts 8.22, 23.
if perhaps the thoughts of your heart may be forgiven you, for I perceive you
are in the gall of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity: for else your gall
had never so overflowed against the houses of God. And I pray yet satisfy me
in one thing more; if they be such abominable places, such unhallowed
buildings, how comes it to pass that you, I had almost said solely, make use
of them? Two or three years since, Sheer Halls, Market Houses, private
Conventicles were the only lawful meeting houses; but now these are of no
esteem, none now to the old Fabrics; these you frequent, these you invade; in
these you preach, censure and break bread. So that it seems now, that the
Parish Parson being turned out of doors, all the ill-favourednesse and
unholinesse went out with him.

3. Against this poor Parson you are very bitter; arraigned he must be, brought
to the Bar to take his trial. And him you endite for luke-warmnesse; like he is
to the Angel of Laodicea, not hot, nor cold, and therefore condemned he is to
lie under the lash, and take his correction kindly.

It Is manifest indeed, that all lukewarm, hypocritical Professors, shall be
spued out of Christ's mouth; for vomitum faciunt Deo. To him they are as
lukewarm water to the stomach that procures a vomit; and if so, it is good
counsel you give him, or any other in his case, to receive what ever correction
shall be as a cordial of love administered unto him, for preventing of what may
follow.

But here I must put you to it, to prove your enditement, the punishment he is
under will never do it; -- careat successibus opto
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putet.


This will prove him culpable and guilty, and so I admit he was; but whether he
were hot or cold, an hypocrite or otherwise, is more than you can ever know.
For zeal and sincerity in Religion are qualities that lie very much inward; and
he that is cold in it, may seem to be very zealous, as did Jehu; and he whose
heart is not upright, may pretend to be very sincere, as did the Pharisees; Now
how can you pass your judgment in such a case? And it seems you cannot, for
you confess there may be hypocrites, lukewarm men, even in your
Combinational Churches, which if you knew, you would cast out from among you;
and so would we do, spue them out after Gods example. Forbear therefore
hereafter these harsh and uncharitable censures, especially against a whole
order of men. For they must ^and and fall to their own Master.

Were they ignorant and scandalous? so were these. But now I remember it, this
is no sign of luke-warmnesse in the Parish Parson, since they who were truly
ignorant and scandal ^, were for the most part kept in; and those who were
knowing and blameless, were cast out.

1. But now I pray tell me in what sense it is that you accuse them; is it for
being Parsons, or for preaching, or for preaching Parsons? Take it in what
qualification you will, beware upon whom this blow will light, and what a
company of precious ones you will presently endite to be like the lukewarm
Angel of Laodicea. For how many of your Preachers are now become Parsons? you
know they have the fattest Benefices of this whole Country. If plurality were
an argument of the Parish Parsons luke-warmnesse, it is theirs. If
non-residence an argument, they are guilty of it. If handling the flesh-hook
too much, none more guilty. If neglect of Catechizing, they cannot be excused.
If frequent preaching, they exceed. If forbearance of Sacramental
administrations, this by them is seldom done. That I say not, that in life and
example they are no whit better. In Gods name therefore, since in
luke-warmnesse they are so like the old odd head, the Parish Parson; let them
lie down under the lash with him, and with shame and confusion of face to
themselves, receive a sharp correction, that they may prevent the spuing of
their names out of Christ's mouth, as it is manifest by what is foretold, Revel.
3.19. One thing only I may not forget, that whereas the old odd head you
mention did least harm, this last Parish Parson you have imposed upon us does
all the mischief.

4. In your conclusion; yet God be thanked, you show more charity to the
Parish, than to the Parson; of it you say, that the whole half-blind political
body does yet appear not to be utterly uncurable. You do so load your sentences
with strong words, that they pass my capacity. I know not what to make of this
political body of a Parish; for I never understood they were under any other
policy then that of the Commonwealth or Church in which they lived; nor that
they were any Corporation at all. I profess, I understand not what you mean, if
you intend any thing besides this. But whatsoever you intend by it, this I
find that you affirm, the whole was half-blind; they have not yet then lost
their sight altogether; that little light they have, may in good time make them
see how they have been deluded, and so free them from all the fallacies that
have been put upon them; which when it happens, both you and I are in hope of
their cure. But that you say must not be expected, so long as they remain in
their present condition. For in respect of its present posture and numerous
abominations, it is altogether unapprovable, and I say the same too; and upon
the very self same ground, because it rejects the Commandments of God, that it
may observe the traditions of men.

For what is the whole constitution of your Church, but the tradition of men?
what is your plea all this while, but a tradition of men? That a company
collected under a Covenant, without either Pastors or Elders is a true Church,
is a tradition of men; That they may create, elect, ordain their Pastors and
Elders, is another tradition of men; That the power of the Keys subjectively
and authoritatively to invest and divest, is in them: is a third tradition of
men. That there must be Lay-Presbyters, which must be Ruling Elders in the
Church, is a fourth tradition of men. That the erection of the Cathedral,
Parochial, Provincial, National Church was the corruption of the Combinational,
is another tradition of men. That the Supreme power in any Nation is a violent
head; the Archbishop a haughty horrible head; the Diocesan an idle and addle
head; the Parish Parson an odd head, is another of your traditions. That there
may be no set forms of prayer used in the Church, no singing of Psalms in mixed
Congregations. That the Scripture may not be read in the Church, except
expounded. That those Rites which you call but falsely Romish and Humane, may
not be used in the Church. That Godfathers and Godmothers may not be used in
Baptism, nor the children of those who are out of your Combinational Church
baptized. That those whom you usually call profane, ignorant, scandalous
persons, may not be admitted to the Sacrament: That there must be an upper seat
erected for the Elders, to sit in their ranks, as Aldermen upon the Bench in
the Church. That there must be Tables set up for the maintenance of the Ruling
Elders. All these are the traditions of men, and doctrines of men; and
therefore I give this counsel to the whole half-blinde political body of the
Parishes, where you have prevailed most, that while they are curable they
tender their health; and to beware of the Scribes and Pharisees, who in vain
worship God, teaching for doctrines the Commandments of men; and to beware lest
any man spoil them through Philosophy, or vain deceit through the tradition of
men, etc. This is a holy watchword, and a wholesome warning, and I desire it
may be heedfully hearkened unto by such as are your Church Officers, for then I
doubt not, but that they who have so much power, and have such an influence on
the multitude, might be excellent instruments in this cure, and quickly be able
to bring back the multitude of Church hearers, from those many abovenamed
observations and aberrations, into which they have been cunningly, and in
simplicity of heart drawn, as those poor Israelites were to follow Absolon.

That it be speedily amended, I wish with all my heart; but say it be not, but
these poor simple souls seduced by and through Philosophy, do not amend so
timely as is desired, my charity will not permit me to damn them eternally;
and that they shall partake of the judgment of those who worship the Beast;
that they shall drink of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture
into the Cup of his indignation, and that they shall be tormented with fire and
brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb,
and that the smoke of their torment shall ascend for ever and ever, as you
threaten out of Revel. 14.9, etc. This is a harsh sentence; and though it may
affright and terrify those, who for doctrines teach the commandments of men,
and make the Word of God of none effect through their traditions, which is a
wilful, obstinate, presumptuous sin; yet I have great reason to hope that
those who have simply, and ignorantly, and weakly, followed such Teachers, may
find mercy, especially if they shall call to God with David, Who can
understand his errors. Cleanse thou me from my secret faults? Psalm. 19.12, 13.
keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins, let them not have
dominion over me. Then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from the
great offense.

But because this danger lies as you say, in the observation of Traditions, it
will not be amiss to set down that about this point, Dr. Whites Orthodox. cap.
4. p. 3. Sect. 1.2.
which may satisfy any sober man, which because I am not able to do better
then Dr. Frauncis White has done, I shall transcribe the Sum of what he
delivers.

The word Tradition in general signifies any doctrine or observation delivered
from one to another, either by word or writing, Acts 6.14. 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. and
cap. 3.6. 1 Cor. 15.3.4.

The Protestants simply do not deny Tradition; but first we distinguish of
Traditions, and then according to some acceptions of the name we admit thereof,
with a subordination to holy Scripture.

1. First, the Romanists maintain there be doctrinal Traditions, or Traditions
that contain Articles of Faith, and substantial matters of divine worship and
religion, Decret. prim. 4. Sess. Syn. Trident.
not found in the holy Scripture; and that these are pari pietatis affectu ac
reverentia sucipiendae, ac venerandae with Scripture, and to be believed no
less then the prime Articles; such are Purgatory, Transubstantiation,
Invocation of Saints, the Popes infallibility, etc. These, and all other such
Traditions, containing new parts and additions to religion, the Protestants
simply condemn and renounce.

2. But secondly, the name of Tradition in the writings of the Primitive
Doctors and Fathers is taken in three other senses.

First, for external Rights and Ceremonies of decency, order, and outward
profession of religion not found expressly in the holy Scripture, but used as
things adiaphorous, being not of the substance of divine worship; but only
accessory, as the sign of the Cross; and many of those, you in your following
words mention; and these we say may be used, or disused according to the Laws
of every Church, as they serve for aedification, or otherwise.

Secondly, The report of the Primitive Church concerning matter of fact, and
concerning the practice of the Apostles is another Tradition; as that the
Apostles did baptize infants; that they admitted none to the Lords Supper, but
those who were of years to examine themselves; that they ordained such and such
in several Churches to be Bishops; That, that very Canon of Scripture which we
now maintain, was the Canon at that time with many other, which can be best
proved by Tradition. And therefore we willingly admit of these Traditions also
delivered unto us by the Histories and Records of the Church, because such
reports explicate the meaning, or confirm the doctrine of the Scripture.

Thirdly, The sum of Christian faith, as the Creed, and the explication of
Christian doctrine in many principal parts thereof, concerning the Trinity,
Incarnation, descent of Christ into hell, etc. is oftentimes called Tradition,
being received from hand to hand, as the Apostles lively teaching; and such
Tradition found unanimously in the Fathers we admit also, because it gives
light to the doctrine found in Scripture.

But in the admittance of these we require two Cautions.

1. That the holy Scripture be the rule of all Traditions whatsoever thus far,
that they be (...), up on examination conformable to the Scriptures, and every
way subservient to the same.

2. That they have the Testimony of the primitive Church in the prime age
thereof, and descend to our days from the same, by the stream of succession
through ages following, and were received as Apostolic in the Catholic Church.

The Question of Traditions being thus stated unto you, easy it will be to
answer to your two alleag'd Texts of Tradition, Mark 7. Col. 2. For they make
as much to your purpose, as Ecce duo gladij does to confirm the Popes claim to
the Temporal and Spiritual power; or Pasce oves, to uphold his Supremacy; Or
God made two great lights, to prove the Popes power to be above the Emperors,
as much as the Sun exceeds the Moon; or that Parson who would undertake to
prove the Parish must pave the Church, and not he, because it was written in
the Prophet, paveant illi, ego non paveam.

For how does that place of Mark 7.7.9. pertain to the spiritual, historical,
or interpretative Traditions of the Christian Church. It was of the Scribes and
Pharisees of whom our Savior there spoke, and of their Traditions; of washing
of pots and cups, and many such other like things of their Corban. And in their
washings they placed not decency and civility, but made a matter of Religion of
it; and by their Corban they took away the duty of the fifth Commandment. Look
into the place you urge, and tell me whether I say not truth; and this it seems
you saw, and that made you skip over the 8. verse, and never mention the 11.
which if you had done, and weighed, you would not for shame have equaled our
Traditions with theirs; or judged us as superstitious for observing our
Traditions, as they were for theirs. We have a command for the institution of
our Ceremonies; let all be done decently, in order, and to edification; we have
good authority that our Traditions are Apostolical, we observe them in
obedience to the Command, Honor thy father and mother, who have authority in
indifferent things. And therefore your imputation is rash; for we reject no
Commandment of God, by receiving the commands of men. Besides, you know we
never maintained these as (...) Doctrins, which was the Pharisees superstition;
but only as Rites and Ceremonies, not placing Religion, but the decency of
Religion in them.

That other place in the Colossians you understand not; it is a difficult
place; I shall labor to give some light to it. Good. Ant. lib. 1. c. 12.
Some conceive the Apostle in this chapter intends the Essens, who were a
strict Sect among the Jews; and in many passages the Apostle seems directly to
point at them. verse. 16.
Let no man condemn you in meat and drink. Let no man bear rule over you
through humbleness of mind, and worshipping of Angels; why, (...), verse. 18.
why are you subject to such Ordinances? ver. 20. The Apostle uses the word
(...), which the Essens applied to note their Ordinances, Aphorisms,
Constitutions. In the 21. verse. he gives an instance of some, touch not, taste
not, handle not: Now the Junior company of Essens might not touch their
Seniours; and in their diet, their taste was limited to bread, salt, water, and
hysop; which Ordinances they undertook (...), says Philo, a love of wisdom;
but the Apostle concludes, that the observation of this had only (...) a show
of wisdom; this their doctrine was, as Philo says, (...), a kind of
Philosophy received from their Fathers by tradition; and therefore St. Paul
bids Christians beware of it; Beware, least any man spoil you through
Philosophy.

Some other refer these words to some Philosophers who mingled their saecular
Philosophy with the Religion of the Jews; delivered at that time many false
dictates, Estius in loc.
of God, of Angels, of the Son of God, of the eternity of the World, of
purgation of souls, which were partly received from the Platonicks, partly
invented out of their own brains. Of which kind was Simon Magus, from whom
descended the Sect of the Gnostics. Touching this Philosophy, and these
Traditions the Apostle gives his caveat, Beware least, etc.

Zanchy, Aretius, Daven. in loc.
Others, without reflecting upon either Essens, or Gnostics, more simply
expound the words as a Caveat given against all Sophistical Philosophy,
Pharisaical traditions, and all Mosaical Ceremonial Rites. Philosophy the
Apostle here condemns not, as all note upon the place, but as it had vanity and
deceitfulness added to it; for a man may condemn the sophistry and knavery of
any art, that likes the art well enough. The Traditions of men he utterly
dislikes, such as were accompanied with superstition and folly; as were those
of the Pharisees disliked by our Savior, mentioned before. And so also the
Mosaical ceremonies, which may well be called Elementa mundi, as they are Gal.
4.3. and also verse. 9. weak and beggarly rudiments. Elements, such as A. B. C.
for children to begin with, but now by Christ being utterly abolished, Now if
any man say, Touch not that man, he is unclean; taste not that meat, it is
forbidden; handle not that cup, it is defiled; believe him not.

Tertul.
Here then the Apostle gives us a Caveat against three sorts of men, or rather
against their (...), their doctrins, the Philosophers, the Pharisees, the Jews.
The Philosophers were Patriarchae haereticorum; and he means the Gnostics;
vain and deceitful arguments they bring, beware you be not spoiled by them. The
Pharisees are a sort of superstitious hypocrites; they have Traditions taken up
by themselves, which Moses never delivered; beware of them. The Jews walk not
after Christ; their dictates are, that you yet are bound to keep Moses Law;
hearken not unto them when they say unto you, Touch not, taste not, handle not;
subject not your selves to their Ordinances, after the commandments and
doctrines of men, etc.

This is the true intent, scope and sense of St. Paul's words, as the wise and
judicious Interpreters have taught me. And that therefore the word Traditions,
that you here catch at, is but a shadow, in laying hold of it to serve your
turn; you put upon the unlearned a vain parologism, a dicto secundum quid ad
dictum simpliciter; the Pharisaical Traditions are forbidden, therefore all
Traditions; the doctrines of those men, therefore all other doctrines that the
Church shall teach; for which there is not a manifest and express text in
particular.

For let the Question then be proposed, whether it can be proved from these
places, that all Traditions and external Rites brought into the Church by men,
ought to be exploded, ejected, condemned? And I answer, No; partly for that
these texts aim at another matter, partly, because there must be power granted
to the Governors of the Church, to institute rites for order and decency; the
Apostle himself being the Author of it, Let all things be done decently and in
order, 1 Cor. 14.40. Heb. 13.17.
and partly, because we are bound to obey them in all things that are honest.
Austin has left us a good rule about Rites and Ceremonies, which were it
observed, Austin ad Januarium Epist. 118. cap. 22.
would settle much unity and peace in the Church. In his nulla melior
disciplina prudenti Christiano, quam ut eo modo agat quo agit Ecclesia, ad
quamcunque devenerit: quod enim nec contra fidem, nec contra bonos mores
injungitar, indifferenter est habendum. But here three Cautions are to be
observed.

1. That no man prescribe external Rites with that mind, to hope for
justification by them, or remission of sin. For this is Jewish.

2. That these adiaphorous rites be not imposed, as if they laid alike
obligation upon the conscience with the Laws of God: so that a damnable guilt
should be incurred upon the breach of them, although it happen without contempt
of those who are in authority and command, or without the scandal of others.

3. Heed must be taken that they be significative, Dr. Ham. tract. of
superstition a. Sect. 35. ad 43.
few, wholesome; significant, that they be not empty. Few, that they impose no
yoke upon the Disciples necks; and wholesome, that they edify. In obeying and
observing such Ceremonies imposed upon me by a lawful power, I shall never fear
to be damned for rejecting the Commandments of God, and observing the doctrines
of men: nor to incur that (...) with our Savior out of the Prophet Isaiah, in
the Chapter cited by you fastens upon those Pharisaical hypocrites, Mark 7.5.
This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.

SECT. 6. The words of the Letter. Of diverse other things jeerd at by the
Epistler.
IF there were nothing amiss or out of order to be observed in the Parish
meeting houses; if there were never so full freedom from
Communion-book-praying, and from Homily-book-preaching, as well as from
Canon-book-swearing: if all bare-heads were barred out from those places, and
utterly rejected for ever being any spiritual overseers again, before they were
inwardly qualified by Christ's sinne-crucifying and soul-quickning Spirit in a
clens'd conscience, and also outwardly and orderly called by Christ's
Covenant-servants in a cleansed Combinational Church. If there were an unanimous
voting down of all double-reading, I mean that babbling-reading of two
chapters, which is not seconded with the opening and expounding of the same,
being it cannot but be confessed that 'twas such a course as is quite contrary
to what is commanded and commended in the Scriptures of truth, as all do well
know, that are acquainted with what is written, Ezech. 33.2. Nehem. 8.8. Luke
4.16. Act. 13.15. 1 Cor. 14.23.24. If there were no news amongst them, of any
one relick of all the Romish rites, or other humane inventions, as Matrimonial
bands, Marriage Ring, sign of the cross, white surplice, quiristers singing,
funeral Sermons, Idol-sureties of Godfathers and Godmothers, or groundless
application of public or private baptism unto the infants of profane Parents;
and if none but Christ's own faithful friends and followers were admitted to be
fed or physicked at his Supper feast:

Yet the mere sight of a Monarchical put to stand in the stead of a Ministerial
Pulpit, is a strange plea of a strange Apostasy from the commendable practice
of the primitive Christians: Seeing that such Coop is not of a sufficient
capacity to contain at once, any more persons then one: Whereas it is of Moral
equity, and consequently of perpetual observation, that a rightly reformed
Presbyterial Church should have all her Elders, who are engaged by virtue of
their Office to begin and end all the public Ordinances, and to transact all
the open concernments of the City of God, for to stand and sit together in the
face and full view of the whole assembly; and by so much the more, seeing they
are as plainly warranted, and so punctually prescribed as they be to walk, and
to walk according to the pattern showed in the Mount, witness Exodus 25.40. Act.
7.44. Heb. 8.15. And as in all other points, so in this particular concerning
the Elders pulpit, they are tied and limited by their Commission to hold
conformity with what is upon sacred Record, as this is, and that not only
necessarily employed, but eminently expressed in several Scripture expressions:
as Neh. 8.4. Eccles. 12.11. 1 Timothy 4.14. Rev. 4.6. and 5.6. and 19.4.

The Reply.

When I came to consider this place of your letter, I was at a stand; I paused
a while, not knowing what affections to stir in my self; whither of mirth or
mourning; that humor of Democritus, or the contrary of Heracl^tus. I saw I had
reason to make my self merry at your high, profound, rare, admirable conceit:
But yet I had more cause to weep at this heinous and abominable wickedness
committed in the Parish meeting houses. O unheard of villainy! O unsufferable
wrong! an express of the Luciferian pride! The Monarchical Pue is exalted
above the Ministerial Pulpit, it is put in its place, in stands in stead of it;
were there no other, yet this were a strong plea of a strange Apostasy. Quis
audivit talia? such an abomination ought not to be committed in Israel;
Consider of it, take advice and speak your minds. For this my soul shall mourn
in secret. Non feram, non patiar, non sinam. All other injuries and
abominations might have been passed by, in comparison of this: The
Communion-book-praying might have been remitted; The Homily-book-preaching
might have been forgotten; the Canon-book-swearing might have been buried, the
bare-headed Priests, the babbling reading of two Chapters; All the Romish
rites, the humane inventions, the bands of Matrimony, the Ring in Marriage, the
sign of the Cross, that smock of the Whore, the Quiristers cherping, the
sermons at funerals, and the rest of that trumpery might have been forgiven and
pardoned, had it not been for this presumptuous pue, and narrow Coop: For if
there had been nothing amiss or out of order in these Parish meeting houses;
yet the mere sight of a Monarchical Pue, suffered to stand in the stead of a
Ministerial Pulpit, is plea and argument strong enough, that the Parish is
Apostate, not guilty of a small offense, some venial sin or peccadillo; but
fallen from grace, lapsed into that heinous guilt of Apostasy, and degenerated
from the practice of the Primitive Christians. By this the Elders are kept out
from taking the highest place in the Synagogues, by this they are hindered to
sit round about the throne, by this they cannot sit on the right and left hand,
as Mother Zebedee desired for her children in Christ's Kingdom; by this they
are excluded to stand and sit together in the face and full view of the whole
assembly, by which notice might be taken of them for prime and principal men;
and a fearful trembling might fall upon any of the Combination that should
incur their indignation, no otherwise then a Malefactor is terrified at the
sight of his judge. Away then with this same Monarchical pue, this pinfold,
this coop, since it is an obstruction and derogation to the Ministerial Pulpit,
and Elders Bench; it is a Remonstrance of Monarchy, and a Relick of Popery; and
since Monarchy is thrown aside, and Popery with it, hew this also down, and
cast it into the fire: So shall we have these meeting houses reformed and
restored to their primitive constitution, room made for the Elders to sit in
their places, that they may begin and end all the public Ordinances, and
transact all the open concemments of the City of God. This a rare device, and
at after I shall tell you what I think of it; in the Interim I return to
consider of your Ironical paraleipsis, in which you make your self merry with
many particulars; the use of which you scoff at as abominations in the Parish
meeting houses; and the first of these was.

1. The Communion-book-praying.

Touching this I shall only ask you whether you except against the whole or the
parts, Hooker Eccl. pol. lib. 5. Sect. 26.27, 28.
and when I see your exceptions, I shall return my answer. In the mean time I
refer you to Mr. Hooker, and to Dr. Hammonds tract in vindication of the
Liturgy, and view of the Directory, but especially to Dr. Taylours Preface
before his Collection of Offices; least I should draw a line after Apelles.

2. Homily-book-preaching.

St. Chrysostom calls all his Sermons Homilies, and if you look into the
Ancients, those Lectures which they made to the people, especially upon the
Epistles and Gospels, were called Homilies; the word both in Greek and Latin
authors is very ancient. To the word therefore, I see no reason you should
except no more then preaching, which in the Original is (...), that signifies
to proclaim, as a Herald, the Word of God; now whether this be within, or
without book, is not material. The Sheriff reads a Proclamation, what then?
does he not therefore proclaim it? And a man reads a Sermon to the people, and
this materially is the Word of God, such that for the truth of it you dare not
except against; shall you then disavow it barely for the reading? This is a
childish exception, yea, and very dangerous also; Hook. Eccl. pol. lib. 5. page
51.
For then it would necessarily follow, that the vigor and vital efficacy of
Sermons does grow from certain outward accidents, which are not in them, but in
their maker; his virtue, his gesture, his countenance, his zeal, the motion of
his body, and the inflection of his voice, who first utters them as his own,
is that which gives them the form, the very nature, the essense of instruments
available to eternal life. Put case a man cannot read, but desires to have a
Sermon read unto him, of Mr. Cottons, Mr. Buroughs, etc. I would now ask you,
whether any good might come of it or no; if not, to what end are they
published? what merely to publish to the world, that the man is a man of rare
parts, and to no benefit of the Reader? But if this last, in earnest tell me
why that the auditory may not be as much benefited by the Church Homilies read
unto them, as they may be by any private man's works? should you nor I find any
profit by what we read, we might cast away our books.

Had indeed the reading of these Homilies, quite excluded Preaching, you had
had some color to except against them; but the words of the Rubric are these,
If there be no Sermon, then shall follow one of the Homilies already set forth;
So that it presupposes there should be a Sermon; but in case there be not, (as
if you look into the paucity of Ministers able to preach; when that
Constitution was made, it was not possible there should be) then it ordains
Homilies to be read, which only differ from a Sermon in this, that the man has
it not without book. Put case one of your own should in one Church read a
Sermon that is in print; and in another, having committed it to memory, preach
it to the people; would you not say that he did (...) proclaim Gods Word in
both places? Indulge as much to us, and then we will say, he that reads, and
after committing the same homily to memory delivers it without book, Preaches.
In a word, Impartially consider these Homilies, that they are found for
doctrine, plain for the style, composed of the most necessary points of
Religion, and framed to the capacity of the vulgar; so that those Ministers
that were wont to read them, had taken the pains to have learned them without
book, and viva voce have delivered them to the auditory, you had wanted what to
say against them.

3. Canon-Book-swearing.

This exception might have been well spared; First, because the Canons were not
to be sworn too, but subscribed; as was the engagement. Secondly, because the
holy Covenant, and the negative oath were pressed upon us. You must then acquit
yout party for what they did, before you can justly lay the pressure of the
conscience upon us.

4. If all bare heads were barred out from these places, and utterly rejected
for ever, for ever being any spiritual Overseers again, before they were
inwardly qualified by Christ's sinne-crucifying and soul-quickning Spirit in a
cleansed conscience; and also outwardly and orderly called by Christ's
Covenant-servants in a cleansed Combinational Church.

The Reply.

To cover or uncover the head in these places in the time of divine service, is
a Ceremony; and therefore if the observation, or non-observation of Ceremonies
be a superstition, he that uncovereth not his head, may be as superstitious as
he who is bare-headed. The reason is, because (...) which we usually translate
superstition, has (...) a fear in it, which proceeds from an imbecility of
the understanding, which fears where no fear is; is afraid that God will be
displeased if such or such an external act be omitted, or such or such an act
done; when one and the other may be omitted and done, as occasions and
circumstances offer themselves, and God no way displeased. The covering or
uncovering of the head is one of these Ceremonies; and he that thinks he may
not be uncovered out of a fear to offend God, is superstitious, yea, while he
speaks against all Ceremonies, is Ceremonious: And he that thinks upon no
occasion he may cover his head, is Ceremonious also; and yet for his
superstition he has a fairer excuse than the other. For the one does it for
the most part out of contempt and perverseness, and in a disobedience to some
higher power; the other out of a kind of necessity, which his present condition
may put upon him, (and it is a certain rule that charity dispenses with all
Ceremonies.) The one by it, may give occasion to suspect his irreverence; the
worst that can be made of the other, is, that he desires to serve his God with
fear and reverence, as judging himself in his presence, before whom he cannot
be too vile. The one, has no countenance nor color of any Scripture for what
he does; the other looks upon those plain words of the Apostle, Every man
praying or prophesying, having his head covered, dishonours his head: 1 Cor.
11.4.
and thinks he is obliged to it, as indeed he is, till the meaning of the Text
be otherwise cleared to him.

The question then ought to be this, whether a man ought to be covered in the
service of God? If uncovered, why do you jear at our bare-heads? If covered,
why do you not keep your own rule, but sit covered at one part of service, and
uncovered at another? covered when a Chapter is read and expounded; covered all
the time of Sermon, (which yet I hope you will not deny, is a chief part of
Gods service, which if you should deny, I know not how you serve God,) and yet
uncovered again, at the singing of a Psalm, at your extemporarie, prayers
before and after Sermon, at the administration of the Sacraments. Tell me what
privilege you have to dispense with this Ceremony in one part of divine
service more than another, Let it then be but considered who it is that speaks
from heaven unto us; that in voce hominis tuba Dei, that it is God that speaks
by man's mouth, that the message is his, and man only the Ambassador to
deliver it; and then I think no man deserves a scoff, that hears it with a
bare head.

When some of your party were pressed with this argument, at last they came to
this result, Bailey page 122.
that there was a necessity for all men to keep on their hats all the time of
divine actions, more particularly at the time of the Celebration of the
Sacrament. For this act was a right significant to the communicants of their
table-honour and fellowship with Christ; also, that the Minister at the
Celebration must be uncovered, and that in sign of his service to the
Communicants as the Lords much honored children, sitting covered when they eat
of their fathers meat. This irreverence with the reason of it, if you disclaim,
as I hope you do, it lies upon you to show me a reason, why a man may be
irreverent at any other part of Gods worship: which I interpret the covering of
the head out of contempt and obstinacy to be, which guilt you may unadvisedly
draw upon your self, when you impute to us in a scoff bare-heads.

2. These you say should be utterly rejected from being my spiritual Overseers
again.

What will you cast us aside with the shavelings of Rome? not rejected, but
utterly rejected? rejected for a poor Ceremony, that we were bare-headed in
Gods service? never to be made spiritual Overseers again merely for this? This
were a very harsh sentence; but you lenifie it with two exceptions, that of
inward, and an outward calling.

3. Before they were inwardly qualified by Christ's sinne-crucifying and
soul-quickning Spirit in a cleansed conscience.

This your qualification is exceedingly to be desired; O how happy were the
Church, if all the Overseers were quickened by that Spirit, which would
effectually work in them a crucifying of sin, and a new life, that their
conscience were cleansed by the blood of Christ, and a pure faith! that her
Nazarites were purer than snow, whiter than milk, that they were more ruddy in
body than rubies, and that their polishing was as sapphire. But this is rather
to be wished than hoped for; while this world stands, Saul will be among the
Prophets, and Judas among the Disciples. So then you have here put an
impossible talk upon your self and all others, to be assured of an Over-seer
before you receive him, that he is inwardly qualified by Christ's sinne-crucifi
d and soul-quickning Spirit in a cleansed conscience. For this requires a great
deal of more ability in the Rulers of the Church, than ever can be found in any
mortal man: For not to speak of the impossibility of a grounded and certain
persuasion of true grace in the heart of an hypocrite, who has no grace at
all: how is it possible to attain to any grounded certainty of true grace in
the heart of another man? conjectures we may make, and in charity judge it is
so, but this is no evidence of assurance. For the hid man of the heart, and the
new name, are not certainly known to any man, but he that has them. You must
then abate very much of this proposition, before any wise man will be of your
judgment. And if men must not be admitted for Overseers, till you know them to
be thus inwardly qualifyed, nor you nor we shall ever admit any Overseers.
Gifts I grant they all ought to have, before they be admitted into that order;
but such as men may judge of, (...), abilities in learning, outward evidences
of grace witnessed by a holy life; but whether they have (...), gratias gratum
facientes, that must be left to the searcher of all hearts. To us a Bristol
stone may glister like a Diamond, and till we know the contrary, it were folly
to reject it.

4. And also outwardly and ord rly called by Christ's Covenant-servants in a
cleansed Combinational Church.

This is your second restriction, by which you would reject the Parish
Overseers as you call them: the old Ministers. But now see how far it will
take hold of those among your selves.

1. For first, if this outward calling be necessary, then what will become of
your Itinerants, who never pleaded this outward call, but their gifts only.

Secondly, For those old Ministers that turn unto you, and for gain dance
after your pipe, they then must renounce their old orders, and be newly
ordained by you; which were, as if a man that had received his commission from
his Prince, should slight that, and take up another from the people; that I say
not it justifies that old exploded maxim, laid upon Wickleive, Praelatus in
mortali peccato existens desinit esse Praelatus.

Thirdly, Here you would fasten upon us again the old Sophisme, that there is
no outward and orderly calling but by Christ's Covenant-servants in a cleansed
Combinational Church; which you shall make good ad Graecas Calendas.

Fourthly, You say that this outward and orderly calling must be had in a
cleansed Combinational Church. So that if the Combinational Church be not
purifyed and cleansed, what assurance can any man have of his outward calling?
Are the Anabaptist Churches clean? Are the Antinomians clean? Are the
Millenaries clean? Are the Quakers clean? yet all these are Combinational, and
they ordain their Ministers. It seems then that unclean Combinational Churches
both outwardly and orderly called: or else all these have no Pastors. But I
proceed with your words.

5. If there were an unanimous voting down of all double-reading, I mean that
babbling reading of two Chapters, which is not seconded with the opening and
expounding of the same, being that it cannot but be confessed, that it was such
a course as is quite contrary to what is commanded and commended in the
Scriptures of Truth, as all do well know that are acquainted with what is
written, Ezekiel. 33.2. Nehemiah 8.8. Luke 4.16. Acts 13.15. 1 Cor. 14.23, 24.

The Reply.

1. Reading the Scripture publicly was of great use in the Primitive Church,
and to that purpose they had their (...) or public Readers officiated; even
Julian before he became an Apostate, was such a one in the Church of Nicomedia.
Nazianz. (...). Just. Mart. Apol. 2. Tertull. Apol. cap. 39. and lib. 2. ad
uxorem. Chrysostom. hom. 3. de Lazaro.
It was one part of their Liturgy, as you may read in Justin Martyr and in
Tertullian, Commentaria Apostolorum, aut scripta Apostolorum leguntur. We meet
together, and there is Divinarum Scripturarum Commemoratio; and that you be not
mistaken in Tertullians meaning, Ibi fomenta fidei de Scripturarum
interlectione. And here also is double-reading at lest for you, for it was
interlectio. And therefore Chrysostom wishes the people to get them Bibles,
and diligently to read them, (...), as in their Temples; observe that. They
therefore used not to call the giving forth a Text, and preaching upon it the
reading of the Scripture. Now that reading is preaching, that is proclaiming
the will of God, is evident. Moses had in old time, in every City those that
preach him, since be is read in their Synagogues every Sabbath day. Dives
brethren are sent to Moses and the Prophets, and to what end but to read them?
Acts 15.21. Luke 16.
for they were dead, and viva voce could not preach; and had not the reading of
them been a sufficient Sermon to reclaim them, in pub ishing Gods anger to
such loose men, Abraham's counsel had been to little purpose. Further Saint Paul
commands that that Epistle which he wrote to the Colossians be read in the
Church of Laodicea, upon which words Doctor Davenat has this note, Errare eos,
qui ipsam lectionem Scripturarum negant facere ad aedificationem populi in fide
and charitate, Col. 4.16.
nisi accedat eodem tempore en^rratio, and explicatio earundem per
praedicatorem; which he that list may see proved by Master Hooker at large.
Hook. Eccl. Pol. lib. 5. Sect. 22.
For let men extol Sermons as they please, Plus apud me valebit vera ratio,
q^am vulgi opin^o, that has taught me that the Scripture it self any way made
known, is sufficient to make the man of God perfect. Sufficit ad fidei
apprehensionem, assensum, ad fidem ingenerandam, augmentand^m, c nfirmandam;
and to say the contrary is to join with the Papist in their load clamours,
That the Scriptures are obscure and insufficient to salvation.

That there may be babling-reading I deny not, as there may be babbling prayer
and babbling preaching; but then let the Bablers answer for their coldness, and
not the Ordinance be thought the worse of. How other men are affected I know
not; to me a Chapter distinctly read, punctually accented, and harmoniously
tuned, enters and more insensibly surprises my soul, than any Exposition I have
heard upon it. And I rejoice in it, because in the one, I hear methinks God
from heaven immediately speaking unto me; in the other, God only speaking by
his servant. And therefore I have always endeavored to speak to my auditory in
the words of God, and have ever cast by all other phrases and expressions, when
I could serve my self out of the Scriptures.

Yet do not think all this while I am against Expositions. I persuade them, I
like them, I encourage them. But yet I do not think every man fit to be an
Expositour. Grammar teaches the meaning of words, Rhetoric of Tropes and
Figures. Logic judges of the strength and weight of reasons; so that he who
is not skillful in all these Arts, is no fit man to be an Expositour; for
either he will fall short in the language, or not discern betwixt what is
properly, and what is Tropically or figuratively spoken: or else be to seek
upon what medium the conclusion is inferred. Without these instrumental Arts no
man shall be able (...), to divide aright the Word of God.

He that will give forth and maintain a Paradox contrary to the judgment and
practice of the whole Church, had need of mighty and evident arguments to
evince it. And such you have here vented. viz. That reading of Chapters in the
Church that is not seconded which opening and expounding of the same, is quite
contrary to what is commanded and commended. I expect your demonstration to
prove this; do not think you shall gain upon me by such a crafty insinuation as
this is; [being that it cannot but be confessed] when nor I, nor any other
sober man ever confessed any such thing, much less that this course is quite
contrary to what is commanded and commended; when we find no such course
extant upon command; and though we allow the thing to be commendable, yet in
the places by you cited, we find no commendation at all given to it. For they
are bare relations of what was done and no more; and that we do the like may
very well be warranted by them; but that by them there is such a necessity
imposed, that Scripture may never be read except expounded, you shall never
prove: or that not to do it, is quite contrary to what is commanded and
commended. This might serve in answer to all the places you allege; but I
shall more particularly consider them.

You first produce the Prophet, Ezekiel. 33.2. Son of man speak to the children
of Israel, and say unto them, when I bring a Sword upon a Land, if the people
of the Land take a man of their Coasts, and set him for their Watchman, etc.
What syllable do you here find of reading first a piece of Scripture, and then
expounding it? That every Prophet sent by God is a Watchman, that it is his
duty to acquaint them with the message he has received from God, and of the
danger they are in; if they hear it not; and of the danger he is in, if he give
them not warning: thus much might properly be concluded out of this context;
but to your conclusion, I do not discern that this place shows the least
favorable countenance. For I hope such a Watchman as Ezekiel was, a Prophet
might stand upon his Watch and give warning, without reading any parcel of
Scripture before extant, and expounding it to the people. For my part I have
always conceived that the Prophets delivered visions immediately received from
God, and that they were not ordinarily Expositours of Prophesies or Revelations
entrusted to other Prophets. Show this, and it may evince in part what you
intend; In part I say, but not in the whole; for you must prove that they first
read, and that they never read any part of the Scripture to the people, but
that they expounded it; or else you prove nothing.

The next Text you produce, is Nehem. 8.8. The Levites caused the people to
understand the Law, and the people stood in their place, and ver. 9. So they
read the Book in the Law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them
to understand the reading.

I observe first, that in Josiahs time I find the like done, that the book of
the Covenant which was found in the house of the Lord, 2 Kings 23.2.
was read in the ears of all the people, and yet there I read of no Exposition.

Secondly that this in Nehemiah was done presently after their return from the
Captivity, in which time both the Law and sense might be forgotten, and
therefore there might be the more reason for it.

Thirdly, That they read the Law first distinctly, before they gave the sense,
the neglect of which, is that we complain of; for a Text only is taken, and
that preached upon, but the Scripture is seldom read or expounded.

Fourthly, the example is particular, and except you can prove that it was
brought into a rule, ever after to be so done, and never otherwise, from it you
cannot conclude a general, no more then I can out of that practice of Josiah,
where I find it read, and not expounded, conclude that therefore it must be
read and not expounded.

Fifthly, Were we against Expositions, you might well produce this practice of
Nehemiah against us; but we like well that after the Chapter read, there follow
a short Exposition. These two then might well like Abraham and Lot live
together; and why then should there be any wrangling and controversy between
my heard-men and thy heard-m^n about this matter? Press not your necessity,
that it must be so and not otherwise, and we have done.

The third place you allege, is Luke 4.16. where we find that our Savior
read the Text of the Prophet Isaiah, and applied it; and so much liberty shall
be granted to any Minister, if he be able to do it aright. The Text was a
Prophecy, and every Prophecy is obscure, till light by the opening of it be
brought to it. This did our Savior, and this do you, and it shall not
displease. The reading of the Text may be proved from hence, and the
lawfulness of a Commentary or Exposition upon it; but that necessity which you
would enforce, never. This is still to be demonstrated.

The fourth place, is Acts 13.15. Which no way proves what you intend; for
there we thus read, after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, the Rulers
of the Synagogue sent unto them, saying, Ye men and brethren, if you have any
word of exhortation to the people, say on, then Paul stood up -- and said, Men
and brethren.

1. Tremellius and Beza observe upon this place, that first in their Synagogues
there was the reading of the holy books, that is the Law and the Prophets,
which they divided into so many Sections, as there were Sabbaths in the year,
and to every Section out of Moses, applied a Section out of some Prophet, that
was most agreeable unto it. These readings then could not be very short, for
otherwise they could not go through the whole in one year.

2. These readings being ended, then a Master of the Synagogue they had, who
gave liberty to preach. Upon which Aretius notes, that Admonemur hic,
observandum (...) and modestiam in proponenda doctrina, quod non observant
spiritus phanatici qui solent passim discurrere, more furiosorum, and quosvis
caetus interturbare suis clamoribus sine certa vocatione.

3. It appears not here, that Saint Paul preached upon any part of Moses or the
Prophets, that was then read, neither was he moved by the Ruler of the
Synagogue to do it, but only to make an exhortation. So that you can never
conclude from this place that the Scripture may not be read, except expounded.

Your last place is out of 1 Cor. 14.23, 24. which makes less to your purpose
then any of the rest; the words are, If therefore the whole Church be come
together in one place, and all speak with tongues, and there come in those that
are unlearned, and unbelievers, will he not say, that ye are mad? But if all
prophecy, and there come in one that believes no, or one unlearned, he is
convinced of all, he is judged of all.

The Apostle in this Chapter shows some inconveniences that might happen, even
upon that gift which then God bestowed. viz. an ability to speak diverse
languages. That in this verse is, that this their confused ostentation of
tongues might alienate two sorts of people, the weaker Christians, whom he
calls Idiots, and those, who were not yet converted, whom he calls unbeleevers.
For put case, that any of these should come into the Congregation, and hear
them speak confusedly in unknown languages, would he not say you were mad? for
mad men do use to babble that which no man understands; but sober men clear
words, which are intelligible. But in Prophecy now there is no such
inconvenience to be feared, but the quite contrary profit to be expected. For
if it happen that all in the Church Prophecy, that is, out of the Oracles of
God, declare his justice and wrath against sin, his mercy toward the
penitent; shall enlarge themselves about the true worship of God, the obedience
and pious life that ought to be in Christians, of sanctification, of
justification by Christ, of eternal life, a life of joy to the good and
believers; of a life of pain to wicked men and Infidels: These or the like
being heard from your mouths, Infidels and unlearned men will say, God is in
you indeed. i. e. that you never speak so aptly and wisely of such divine
things, but by assistance and motion of Gods Spirit.

This being now the genuine sense of the words, I put it to your self to judge,
whether you can any fair way deduce your conclusion from them. That there was
then such who did instruct the people, and preach unto them all necessary
points of salvation, may easily be collected from hence, and that God bestowed
upon them extraordinary abilities to perform that duty. But that Scripture may
never be read, except expounded, he that can conclude from hence, I shall say,
that he may as quickly gather that an Ape being like a man in something,
therefore he is a man.

The words of the Letter.
IF there were no news amongst them of any Romish Rites or humane inventions,
as Matrimonial Bands, Marriage-Rings, sign of the Cross, white Surplice,
Quiristers singing, Funeral Sermons, Idol-sureties of Godfathers and
Godmothers, etc.

The Reply.
Romish Rites are of two sorts; either such as are used by the Church of Rome,
and were of Ancient use in other Churches; or such as are merely Roman, taken
up and used in the Romish Church, after it began to degenerate and was
corrupted. All those that are of this kind we have exploded, not only because
there might be superstition in them, but also because they were superfluous,
burdonsome, and full of vanity and folly. Those of the first kind, (and such
are those of which you speak) because we have found them of perpetual use in
the Catholic Primitive Church, we yet retain. Hook. Eccl. pol. lib. 4. Sect.
3. ad 10.
Now whether every Ceremony be to be abolished, because it is in use among the
Papists, be pleased to consult with Mr. Hooker, and he will resolve you that it
is not. And indeed if this were not true, we might not kneel and lift up our
hands and eyes at our prayers, nor enter reverently into the house of God, nor
put our hand on the book when we take an oath, nor sit in our Pues in the
Churches when we hear, nor preach upon any portion of Scripture, because the
Papists do so. Evident then it is that Ceremonies are not to be excluded, qua
Romish, but as they have some other vitiousnesse adherent to them.

2. Oh but these are humane constitutions; that may be granted, and yet the
Rite nere the worse, nor the less to be regarded. About this point, read again
Mr. Hookers three first books of Ecclesiastical policy, and he will satisfy
any man that lists not to be contentious. Synod. of New Engl. cap. 1.
The distinction is your own; there are some things essential, and some things
circumstantial in Religion; what is of the essence of it, is immutable, and
must be prescribed by the word; but what is circumstantial is circumscribed
with general limitations, according to the nature of the things themselves and
civil Church custom; so that if there be no error of man concerning their
determination, the determining of them is to be accounted as if it were divine.
It lies now upon you to show where the error lies, and that the prescriber had
not an eye to those general limitations in Scripture, before you cast out these
humane constitutions, and explode them as inventions of men.

But now let us go on, and examine Qui viri, what kind of men these were, who
brought these Rites into the Church; they were no men of yesterday, they were
not any way infected with the Roman leaven. They were the Primitive fathers,
and some of them Apostolical men; men who hazarded their lives for Christ.
These were the Inventers of those Rites you speak of, as I shall now show you
by induction of particulars, being guided by your own thread.

1. Matrimonial Bands.

It Is a Rule of Zanchy, that since there is nothing clearly prescribed about
Matrimonial Rites in the Word of God; Zanch. de sponsalibus. These. 4.
^itus hi petendi sunt ex consuetudinibus Ecclesiasticis, and constitutionibus,
quae nihil cum verbo Dei pugnans contineant. You must show then that in the
publication of these Bands there is somewhat repugnant to the Word of God, or
else this custom may be well retained. And you have no reason at all at this
time to except against them, since you know that there is an Act of Parliament
extant at this time, made by your own party, that before the solemnization of
marriage, the parties names who are to be joined in wed-lock, shall be openly
proclaimed either in the Market, or in the Church three several times. It seems
by this Act, the self-same reason which prevailed with our forefathers,
prevailed with them, viz. that thereby all clandestine marriages should be
prevented; divorces upon pretenses of former Espousals by contract voided, and
the surreptitious stealing away of Orphans and children without the consent of
their Parents, hindered. When therefore you find fault with this custom and
constitution, you find fault with you know not what, and reprehend you know
not whom.

2. Marriage Rings.

If you think this to be a Popish Rite, you are very much deceived. For it was
used before the Romans were Christians, and yet is nere the worse for that
neither. For the Jews though prohibited some, yet were not forbidden to be like
in nothing to the Nations; for that was impossible. Among the Romans the Ring
of marriage was used, Pliny Hist. lib. 33. cap. 1. Tertull. Apol. cap. 6.
and it was first of Iron, and afterward of gold. Whence Tertullian commending
the temperance and modesty of the old Roman Matrons, says, Aurum nulla norat
praeterquam unico digito, quem sponsus oppignorasset pronubo annulo. Among the
Romans jus annuli, right to wear a Ring, belonged not to every man; at first it
was conferred upon men of honor; this then might be one cause of continuing
this custom, that whereas marriage is honorable, the husband by giving the
Ring, showed that he had bestowed honor upon the woman, she every whit as
honorable as he was; ubi ille Cajus, ibi illa Caja. But then the bed must be
undefiled, and that it be so kept, so often as she looks upon her Ring she may
well be admonished; for by this pawn given and received, she pledged her faith
and fidelity to keep her self only to one. This will be never done, except
their love be endless and continue, of which the Ring is an apt symbol, for a
circle knows no end. Whether then we consider the honor done to the woman by
her husband, or that mutual love and fidelity in heart and mind agreed on
betwixt the married couple, this harmless Ceremony needs not be cast aside
with a scoft.

3. The sign of the Cross.

This is a Ceremony at which you are wont to be affrighted, as the Devils of
old. But you must know that this was a Rite used in the Church, many ages
before Popery was heard of. There was a twofold kind of Cross used by them,
either transient or permanent; the transient was made with the motion of the
hand, but left no sign behind. This was of common practice in the Primitive
Church, as appears to any man who has ever read Justin Martyr against Tryphon
the Jew, and his second Apology; and used after Baptism, is evident in
Tertullians Apology, in his book de Corona Mil, and de resur. carnis, in
Cyprian de lapsis, and other fathers. But till Constantine the great carried it
with enriched gold and pearls for his Standard, I read not of a permanent
Cross erected; after his time the erecting of these was frequent in all
Christian Kingdoms; so that the Papists were not the Authors of either, but
abused both. And that the abuse of any thing should take away the use of it,
seems to me unreasonable. We have it in no other esteem than the Ancient
Christians; we carry it in our flags, and on our coin; we glory in it as a
Badge of Christianity, we sign our children with it after Baptism: But to
give the same honor to it as unto Christ; to pray to it, to burn incense
before it, we utterly reject as superstitious errors, and ungodly vanities.
Let the Papists answer for this their (...), as Thomas calls it; we have it in
no other use and honor than what we may justify; and if you are desirous to
see upon what grounds, I refer you to Mr. Hookers Eccl. Pol. lib. 5. Sect. 65.
a Tract that was never yet answered. And to Dr. Mortons defense of the
Ceremonies of the Church of England, because it were overlong and needless to
transcribe them. The sum of which yet I shall be ready to give you, if you
shall require it at my hands.

4. White-Surplice.

To this Ceremony I answer I see not why that vesture should be more excepted
against, than I should that a Minister should preach or officiate with a black
cap on his head, a Cloak, or a Gown; for I know there is Scripture equally to
be alleged for both. But for fuller satisfaction for this I refer you to
Master Hooker! Eccl. Pol. lib. 5. Sect. 29.

5. Quiristers singing.

To this I have answered before:

6. Funeral Sermons.

This is the first time I ever heard any exception against them; that the dead
were decently composed I know, and that the Church carried them to their
graves, (...), Saint Chrysostom has taught me, Chrysostom. Hom. (...). Naz. (...).
and that Constantius was brought from Nicomedia where he died, to
Constantinople where he was buried in that solemn manner. But I never heard
before that it was not lawful to have a Funeral Sermon, in which the virtues of
the man might be proposed as an example to the living, by which also we might
show our love to the party deceased, which nature requires of us: then to do
him that honor that is fit for his person; and lastly to comfort the living
with the hope of the resurrection, to which end, that office appointed for the
burial of the dead especially tended.

For which purpose let any man of a reasonable judgment, consider whether it be
more convenient to bring a dead Corpse in a dumb show to the grave, and cover it
with earth, then to hear those Lessons and Psalms sounded in their ears, that
may put them in mind of their estate and condition both now and hereafter. At
that time our hearts softened with mourning are become more malleable, and the
Lessons then heard and exemplified by the sight of our departed brother, may
make the deeper impression. Say then there were no more but this in it. viz. a
discharge from the imputation of rudeness and incivility (which Christianity
teaches no man) to those bodies which shall have their part in the
resurrection; yet I see no cause why these exiquies should be so cast aside,
reviled, imputed to us; David himself followed the Beire of Abner, and lift up
his voice and wept at the grave of Abner, and the King lamented over Abner and
said, dyed Abner as a fool dies? 2 Samuel 3.31, 32, 33, 34.
etc. where we have not a dumb show, but words of commendation expressed over
the dead. I never conceived that the mourning for Jacob at the threshing floor
of Atad was a silent spectacle; seven dayer it continued, Genesis 50.10, 11
and there they mourned with a great and very sore lamentation, insomuch that
the Canaanites called the place Abel-Mizraim. Now that such mournings may be
accompanied with words, is evident by the Lamentations of Jeremy, which was
composed as it were a Funeral Sermon for the good King Josiah. For Jeremy
lamented for Josiah, 2 Chr. 35.25.
and all the singing men and singing women spoke of Josiah in their
Lamentations to this day, and made them an Ordinance in Israel, and behold they
are written in the Lamentations.

God never ordained that his servants should be laid in their graves with the
burial of an ass. And the fear that some men conceive that we be thought to
pray to or for them, over whom, or near whose Hearse, or toward whom we thus
pray, is a mormo fit to scare children. When it is sufficiently testified even
by the prayers set out to be then read; that we pray not for the dead, but
comfort the living with hope of the resurrection, and expectation of the
consummation of all things.

7. Idol-sureties of Godfathers and Godmothers.

Of the antiquity and benefit of these sureties, Godfathers and Godmothers, I
have said sufficient in my Catechism, page 11. whether I refer you. But now I
wonder why you should call them Idol-sureties; If you had only noted them for
their idleness and carelessenesse, in that they take so little care for the
Religious education of those, for whom the Church accepts them as sureties, I
would not have gainsaid you, but lamented it. But that you make them Idols is
unsufferable; for what is an Idol? it is nothing in the world, a mere invention
and fiction of man's brain set up to be an object of adoration; and were these
brought in for any man to worship? what child was ever encouraged to adore his
Godfathers and Godmothers? But to make the best of it, the calmest meaning of
this odious word can be but this, that many have given these an higher
estimation than they deserve. So you have done to many things, to Preaching, to
Ruling Elders, to your Combinational Church, to your Ministerial Pulpit; and
yet I know it would sound very harsh in your ears, if we should fix the name of
Idol before them. How would you storm to hear of Idol-preaching, Idol-Elders,
Idol-Combinational Church, Idol-Ministerial-Pulpit? And yet there is as much
reason for the one as the other. For if the estimation of any thing beyond that
it ought, will presently make it an Idol, you have made Idols of all these, and
so are equally guilty of Idolatry with us.

8. Or groundless application of public or private Baptism unto the infants
of profane parents: Mr. Matthews.
and if none but Christ's faithful friends and followers were admitted to be fed
or physick'd at his supper feast.

The Reply.
That this popular exception put in as a a bar of applying the Sacraments to
infants of Christians and other persons may be removed, necessary it is that we
fetch our principles farther then at the first view may seem requisite; for we
must look as far as Abraham when God renewed his Covenant with man; the words
are, I will establish my Covenant betwixt me and thee, and thy seed after thee
in their generations for an everlasting Covenant, Genesis 17.7.
to be a God to thee, and to thy seed after thee. That is, whereas other
Nations have their several gods, yet I will be thy God, thou shall have no
other Gods but m^, and I will be a God unto thee; for I will reveal my will
unto thee, according to which thou ought to live, for I will write it in thy
heart, Heb. 8.10, 11. Secondly, I will pardon thy transgressions, and be
merciful to thy unrighteousness and sins, ver. 12. Thirdly, I will give
grace or strength, which though it may not enable thee to live without sinning,
yet such as is sufficient to perform what is necessary under this Covenant,
Romans 10.8. Deuteronomy. 30.11, 14. This Covenant I make with thee, but not with thee
only, but with thy seed. Now can we but know who was this seed, we might easily
discern to whom this Covenant does extend. In the primary sense thereof it was
Christ, Genesis 3.15. Gal. 3.16. For this Covenant was made in Christ, sealed in
his blood, and in him made Yea and Amen, verifyed and ratifyed. Secondly, thy
seed takes in all men whether Jew or Gentile, as Saint Paul evidently proves,
Romans 4. For Abraham had two kind of sons; ex carne, or ex fide, of the flesh,
and under the Law, as the Jews, Romans 4.8, 9.
of faith and under the regiment of the Spirit, as the Gentiles also. For is
this blessing come on the circumcision only, or the uncircumcision also? For
we say, that faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness, and that it was
reckoned so to him when he was in uncircumcision, evident it is, that it
belonged to the uncircumcised, as the Apostle argues.

The Covenant we see, and with whom it is made, Abraham, and with his seed the
Jew, and to all that are a far off, even as many as the Lord our God shall
call, as Saint Peter opens the promise, Acts 2, 39. Now let us see upon what
conditions this Covenant was made with Abraham; that is expressed also, Genesis
17.1. Walk before me and be thou perfect, which is also required of all his
seed, if they mean to have benefit by the Covenant. They then are to walk
before God in faith and obedience as Abraham did, and be perfect, not that
either can be exact and perfect in this life; but it is required by this
Covenant that we become new creatures, renewed in sincere, honest, and faithful
obedience to the whole Gospel. In a word, the condition required of us is
faith, hope, charity, self-denial, repentance, a careful and industrious
husbanding of Gods grace, daily prayer for daily increase, and attending
diligently to the means of grace.

To strengthen the faith of Abraham and his seed in the assurance of what was
promised, and for a memorial of what was to be performed, it pleased God to
have a seal set in his flesh, and in the flesh of his seed for that time, which
was circumcision. To this seal all the males of the Jews had a right, and this
seal was cut into them, yea, and as many Proselytes also; who were content to
become proselytae foederis, Proselytes of the Covenant. The other whom they
called the Proselytes of their gates, they entered them into the Covenant, and
bound them to the observation of the seven Commandments of Noah by a kind of
purification by water, and the blood of oblation, in the same kind as they
admitted their women.

The Covenant is the self-same under the Gospel that then God made with
Abraham, on the same conditions, of the same extent; only it has another seal;
theirs was circumcision, and ours baptism; the cutting of the flesh gave
entrance to them, the washing by water gives an entrance and admission to us.
And about this the question is, whether it be to be withheld from the children
of any who bear the name of Christians? And it is observable how this question
first grew, and what progress it had. At first some good-minded men set it on
foot, being occasioned by the children of professed Pahists living among them
whom they conceived to be Idolatrous, and consequently out of Covenant; this
caused Farel to write to Calvin about it: Calvin Ep. 149.
whose answer to him is this, but not sound; Where both the parents are Popish,
we think it an absurd thing for us to baptize them which are not members of our
body; and since Papists children are such, we see not how it should be lawful
for us to administer Baptism unto them. But sounder by much is that answer of
the Ecclesiastical College of Geneva unto Knox, who scrupled at the same and
grew more rigid, and wrote to them that he held it not only unlawful to baptize
the children of Idolaters, but even Bastards, Ep. 283.
and excommunicate persons till reconciled to the Church. To whom they returned
this sentence, that wheresoever the profession of Christianity has not utterly
perished and been extinct, Ep. 285.
infants are beguiled of their right, if the common seal be denied them, which
conclusion as I will by and by prove, is sound. But I go on, for the mistake
staid not here; for when it came to Mr. Cartwright: Anvil, he beat it broader;
for he asserted that none might receive the Sacrament of Baptism but they
whose Parents, at least the one of them, are by the soundness of their
Religion, and by their virtuous demeanours known to be men of God; Hook. lib.
5. page 155.
and by this rule the children of those they called Heretics, Misbelievers,
and Profane livers also came to be excluded. Next the Brownist took it up, and
conveyed it over to you of the Combinational Church, both imparting Baptism to
very few infants, Burtons vindication page 62.
viz. to those alone, whose immediate Parents are members of their
Congregation. Out of you arise the Anabaptists, and they peremptorily deny the
Baptism of all infants, born to the members of the Combination or to any
other, till they are able to give an account of their faith, and enter into a
Church Covenant for themselves. At last the Shaker comes upon the Stage, and
gives out of his Cup of trembling a vomit to all Ordinances; these are outward
Rites; Baptism, the Eucharist, needless seals to any, old or young, since he
and his company are inwardly sealed by the Spirit.

This was the stratageme of that old Serpent; for had he presented this
bewitching position to the world at first in the last ugly shape it now
appears, he knew that all men would have with honor heard it, therefore he
insinuated it, and caused it to be taken down by certain gulps, steps and
degrees, that the potion might be swallowed, and the poison not at all
perceived.

Now this error, that I call it no worse, in some has been nourished, in that
they have not fully weighed the purport of this distinction of the mystical and
visible body of Christ. This is but one, and we usually call it the Church,
which contains in it two sorts of people, either outward Professors, or true
inward believers. These last belong to the mystical body of Christ, which
therefore is called mystical, because the mystery of their conjunction is
altogether removed from sense; in these their love is sound and sincere, and
comes from a pure heart and a good conscience, and faith unfeigned, and they
(no doubt) do and shall obtain whatsoever was made over by the second Covenant.
Those outward professors, who either before Christ's coming, or since his
appearing in the flesh, have been called by the name of Christians; we call the
visible body, because being Jews or Gentiles they are incorporated into one
body; have but one Lord, whose servants they profess themselves to be; have
one faith, which they all acknowledge; one Baptism, by which they are all
initiated. For although we know the Christian Faith, and allow it, we are then
but entering; entered we are not into this visible Church, till our admittance by
the door of Baptism: and who they are that enter that way, is very well known
even to the eye, whence we usually call these the visible Church, which is not
so to be understood, as if those of the invisible Church, were not visible
Christians also. For both moleties, whether mystical or visible, as touching
their profession, are the object of the eye: easy it is for any man to say,
this man is a Christian, that man a Heathen: But this distinction arises from
the sincerity or unsincerity of the professors, because we are never able to
see and discern who they are that sincerely profess the Truth, therefore we
call these invisible; but because we are easily able to judge of the men who
enter by Baptism, therefore the whole is called a visible Church. In
whomsoever therefore is found the profession of one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, those the Church does acknowledge for her children; and all those
none of hers in whom they are not found: as Jews, Turks, Heathens, etc. Others
for their external profession are Christians, and are of the visible Church of
Christ. And among these there are some who profess the Truth, but not wholly
and entirely, and these are Heretics; some that profess the whole saving
Truth, but not in unity, and these are Schismatics; some that profess the
whole saving Truth in unity, but not in sincerity and sanctity, and these are
hypocrites and profane persons; others that profess the whole saving Truth in
unity and sincerity of a good and sanctified life, and these are true believers
and good Christians.

Yet Christians by external profession those all are; who carry that external
mark I now named, yea, although they be impious Idolaters, wicked Heretics,
Schismatics, Hypocrites, profane persons, and excommunicable, yea, and cast
out for notorious improbity. For they are but so cast out, that they may be
taken again upon their repentance, and that without the setting the seal anew;
which might not be done, if they had been utterly cast off. There is but one
way only, after a man is entered by Baptism, that can make him forfeit his
whole estate in Church society, and that is a general revolt and Apostasy from
his Christian profession, as turning Turk, Jew or Infidel.

All these, except the sincere professors, we deny not, may be the Imps and
Limbs of Satan, even as long as they continue such; is it then possible for the
self-same men to be the Synagogue of Satan, and to be the Church of Jesus
Christ? unto that Church which is his mystical body, it is not possible,
because that body consists of none but true Israelites, true sons of
Abraham, true servants and Saints of God. Howbeit that they be true and real,
and not equivocal Members of the outward visible body, it is very possible,
notwithstanding the unsincerity of their profession, and the wickedness of
their conversation, which is worthily both hateful in the eyes of God himself,
and in the eyes of the sounder part of the visible Church most execrable.

If you doubt of the truth of this, remember the Parables of the Corn Field,
the Net, the ten Virgins, the Barn-floor, the house in which were vessels of
honor and dishonor. And if these satisfy not, then look upon those two plain
Texts, 1 Cor. 5.11, 12. There are scandalous persons enumerated, a Fornicatour,
Covetous, a Drunkard, yet within, that is, within the Church and Covenant, yet
a brother of the visible society for all that; and indeed except he be looked
upon as a brother, and as within, how could he be cast out by excommunication?
for what have we to do to judge those who are without? The other place, is 2 Thessalonians. 3.15. Among whom there was a disorderly person, yet he was not to be
counted as an enemy, not to be esteemed as one out of the Church, an
Unbeliever, an Heathen, but to be admonished as a brother.

For lack of diligent observing this difference, first, betwixt the Church of
God, mystical and visible; then betwixt the visible sound and corrupted,
corrupted sometimes more, sometimes less; Thirdly, in not taking notice of the
latitude of the Covenant which belongs to the visible Church, as a proprium
quarto modo; i. e. as an essential mark, the oversights are not few nor light
that have been committed. To pass by others, you, because Christ's true body is
made up of none but sincere professors, presently conclude, that none but
sincere professors are of Christ's body, which is true of the mystical, but not
of the visible. Then you restrain the Covenant, as if it belonged to none but
the Elect, whereas it belongs to all those to whom God said to Abraham, I will
be to the a God, and thy seed after thee, whether sons ex lege, or ex fide.
Thirdly, whereas the Covenant was made with the Catholic visible Church, you
restrain it to your Combinational; so that they who are not Members of that,
shall have no right to the seals; nor to it, not any other shall they claim any
right at all, who are not regenerate, whereas this distinction observed, would
set you right. We must distinguish betwixt the effectual benefits of Christ,
held forth in the Ordinance, and a right to the external Ordinance. The former
right and privilege belongs only indeed to the regenerate; for they only
effectually to life receive the seals. But the latter to all within the Church,
to all Church Members, for a night they have to the external Ordinance. Or you
may if you please conceive it thus. The Sacrament may be considered in sensu
composito, that is, with the entire fruits and benefits of the Covenant, unto
which truth of grace and faith is necessarily required, and so to the Reprobate
the Sacrament belongs not; or else in sensu diviso, precisely in the Ordinance
it self, abstracted from those graces, and so it is Church Membership alone, or
external Covenant Relation, denominating men, subjects, sons, Saints,
believers, disciples, brethren; Christians, that gives men right unto the seal.
Fifthly, You over-hastily and uncharitably censure all Heretics, Papists,
wicked persons, and excommunicable, or excommunicate to be without the
Covenant; and that therefore if they be Parents of children, the applying of
public or private Baptism to their children is groundless. Which mistake of
yours how great it is, I shall make it farther appear by these evident
arguments.

1. That which is unjust may not be done; but to debar a Christians child
from the seal of the Covenant is unjust; therefore it may not be done. Minor
probatur.

It is unjust to punish the child for the fathers sin, Ezekiel. 18.20. But to
debar from the seal, it is to punish the child for the fathers sin;
therefore to debar a Christians child from the seal of the Covenant is
unjust.

If to the Major it be answered that this is sometimes done, and that the child
suffers for the fathers offense, it may be admitted in a temporal punishment,
but never in a spiritual, of which kind this is, and therefore may not be
inflicted.

2. They who were not to be kept from the seal of the Covenant under the Law
for their fathers iniquity, may not be kept from it for that cause under the
Gospel: But under the Law children were not kept from the seal for their
fathers iniquity; therefore not to be kept from it under the Gospel: and
consequently not to be hindered from Baptism.

The Major of this Syllogism is easily proved, because the Covenant of the New
Testament is said to be better than the Old, Heb. 7.22. and 8.6. But to account
this privilege of the seal to belong only to some Christians children, which
was in common to the Jews, is to make it worse in the New Testament than in the
Old; Calvin institut. lib. 4. cap. 16. Sect 6.
which is injurious to do: Arbitrari Christum adventu suo patris gratiam
imminuisse, aut decurtasse, execrabili blasphemia non vacat. Upon this ground
then to keep a child from Baptism is great injustice. Minor probatur. This
was not done among the Jews; for make the Jewish Parents as bad as you will, a
generation of unbelievers, who knew not God, that tempted him, and grieved his
Holy Spirit in the Wilderness, yet for this, the children were not to be
deprived of the seal for their fathers sin; for Joshua was commanded to
circumcise the children of these Rebels. So again, they came to be worshippers
of the golden Calf, adored the Brazen S rpent, bowed the knees to Baal, Joshua
5.
etc. howbeit they remained the sheep of his flock in the depth of their
disobedience, and those very children they offered unto Moloch, were his sons
and his daughters born to him. Jer. 13.11. Ezekiel. 16.20.
Hic children, because born within the Covenant, of which they yet retained the
seal. Let it be showed that ever the child of any wicked Jew was uncircumcised,
or therefore not admitted to be circumcised, because his father was wicked. And
certainly there is so much strength in the instance of circumcision, Josh. 5.
for this large right of Ordinances from Covenant relation, that it will hold
out against all that can be said against it.

3. Those who have a right to the Covenant, have also a right to the seal. But
Christian children have a right to the Covenant; therefore a right to the seal.

The Major is manifest in reason; for it were a strange thing to say a man had
right to Land, and yet had no right to the evidences and the seals of the
Writings by which that Land was conveyed over unto him. Minor probatur. But
Christian children have a right to the Covenant, be the Parents never so
ungracious, Genesis 17.7. Ishmael circumcised, and Esau. Acts 2.38. To you and to
your seed, among whom were Ananias, Sapphyra, Simon Magus. But thus I prove it
yet more clearly.

Those who are holy have a right to the Covenant. 1 Cor. 7.14.
This is granted. But children of Believing Parents are holy. Therefore, etc.

You can in this Minor except only at two terms, believing and holy, and I
shall justify both. For perhaps you may say Idolatours, profane persons, are
no believers; but you are mistaken; for in the number of believers they are to
be accounted, till they renounce their faith. The denomination of a believer is
as well derived from a right object believed, as from the holiness of the
subject believing. And I have my ground for this out of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
7.14. Where the unbeleeving husband is said to be sanctified by the believing
wife, where believing and unbeleeving and opposite terms; and therefore as by
unbeleeving you are to understand a (...) by a believing wife you are to
understand a Christian, who might (...) guilty for ought you know of some of
those sins for which Saint Paul (...) the Corinthians, and yet because she
was a Professor of Christianity, and within the visible Church, therefore he
says, your children are holy. 2. Holy, which is the other term; which being
not possibly to be understood of inherent holiness, because the child of the
best Saint, at his birth is no more holy than another, there being an equal
guilt of original sin upon both: must be understood of a relative holiness,
that is, as they who stand in relation to the Covenant, into which they are
actually admitted by Baptism; And then again (...) unclean are in Saint Peter's
sense, Acts 10.14. the Gentiles, such who might not be received into the
Church; and then (...), holy, being such as are opposed to it, must necessarily
signify those children who may be admitted. Lastly, if this were not the
importance of that place, there were no privilege imaginable, no sanctity
which could be attributed to the infants of Christians, which could not belong
to the infants of Heathens, which is affirmed of the one, and denied of the
other by the Apostle.

Lastly, They who by their iniquity lost not their right and privilege in the
Covenant, cannot be the occasion that their children lose it. But profane
persons lose not their right, as I proved before, because notwithstanding their
iniquity, they remain still Members of the visible Church; therefore there is
no reason for their sakes, their seed and children should lose their right.
Diverse other reasons I could give you for this, did I not study brevity. Our
application then of Baptism to the children of profane persons, is not
groundless, but has its foundation in that gracious Covenant that God made
with Abraham and his seed, which was extended to the whole Church of Christ,
whither invisible or visible, which last, because it takes in all professors
as well as believers, their seed also no less then the other as they have a
right to the Covenant, so also have they a right to the seals of the Covenant,
may be baptized and admitted to the Lords Supper, whatever you think to the
contrary. To Baptism you would have no children of profane persons admitted,
supposing they have lost their privilege, and to the Supper of the Lord, none
but his faithful friends and followers. For thus you say,

2. If none but Christ's faithful friends and followers were admitted to be fed
and physick'd at his Supper Feast

The Reply.
That all who come to be fed and physick'd at the Lords Supper, were Christ's
faithful friends and followers, is as much desired by us, as can be by you; and
as much endeavored by us, as can be by you. Why is it else that the Church
has prefixed those several exhortations before the Communion, in which the
negligent are checked and excited to their duty, the presumptuous, scandalous
and obstinate sinners presented with their danger and punishment if they
approach unworthily in their sins, all that come exhorted to judge
themselves, to repent them truly of their sins past, and amend their lives;
To have a lively and steadfast faith in Christ our Savior; to be in perfect
charity with all men, and above all things to give humble and hearty thanks to
God the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost, for the redemption of the world, by
the death and passion of his Son, and for the institution and ordination of
the holy mysteries? What rules can you give beyond these? or what cautions can
you prescribe, that if observed, can make men worthy communicants?

All this you will easily grant, but of all this you will have a certain
knowledge before you admit of any, and that knowledge shall be grounded upon
their conjunction with your Combinational Church, and the Covenant then entered,
not with the Covenant God made with Abraham; So that uncharitably you exclude
all those who have right unto the seal by the tenor of Gods Covenant, except
he have a new acquired right arising from your Covenant also. These I know you
mean by Christ's faithful friends and followers, and none but these your
practice shows you would have admitted.

That then the mists may be dispelled, and the mistakes rectifyed, that have
prevailed too far about the admission to, and exclusion from the Lords Table,
necessary it is, that we distinguish between the right which any man has to
this seal, and the use that a man may make of his right, and how he may be
debarred of it.

1. The right that any man has to this or any other Ordinance of God, arises
out of the Covenant of God made with Abraham and his seed, Mr. Humphryes.
that is, with the visible Church; so that every one that is admitted a Member
of the Church visible, has a right to this and all other Ordinances. For it is
Membership alone that gives right, so that though a person be unregenerate, an
infant, distracted, ignorant, or scandalous, if he be a Member of the visible
Church, he has a right to the Ordinance, the external right being the same in
one as in the other.

2. Now in the use of this right, the difference especially lies betwixt us. We
acknowledge that infants and distracted persons may not be admitted to this use
of the seal, the Lords Supper, not for any want of right, as appears invincibly
by the other Sacrament, to the use of which they are admitted, because capable:
But not to this, because of their incapacity natural as in children, accidental
as in mad men. For it is required of every one that comes to the Lords Table,
that he examine his knowledge, repentance, faith, charity, and be able to
discern the Lords Body, which because neither infants nor distracted persons
can do; therefore we debar them justly from the use of their right; No
otherwise then a child though he be heir of all, yet is not to be admitted to
the use of his inheritance, while he is thought fit to be under a Tutour or
Governor. Gal. 4.1, 2.


That which we say of infants and ignorants, the self-same you would have
applied to the unregenerate, ignorant and scandalous, so that none of these
should be admitted to the Sacrament. First, for the unregenerate you have set
your selves a very hard task; for how is it possible for you or any man else
with the judgment of faith to be assured that any man is so? regeneration lies
deeper than the eye of man can discern. If it be but upon the judgment of
charity, then it is but hope and suspicion, and upon that account you may admit
the ignorant and profane also, hoping and charitably presuming, that they have
knowledge and repentance enough; for otherwise they would not presume to
present themselves at this Feast; want of regeneration is then no sufficient
Bar to exclude a man from the Sacrament.

2. But if irregeneration will not do it, yet ignorance may. But here again you
have undertaken another hard task; for I shall here ask you, how much knowledge
is precisely requisite in a Communicant before he be admitted? Saint Paul
requires no more but that he discern the Lords body; know that it is no common
bread, and common wine, but one represents Christ's Body broken, the other his
blood shed for the redemption of the world; and that he examine himself, about
which the Church has set him a plain way in the last answer of the
Chatechismes; And so says the Apostle, let him eat. So much knowledge as this
I see not, but easily may be, and I verily believe is in most Communicants. And
if it were but confused before he came, yet it might be there more distinctly
taught him, by what he there hears, and sees done. The Sacrament through the
Word is a teaching Ordinance; Godw. Ant. lib. 3 cap. 4. Exodus 12.26, 27.
the Novices of the Jews were instructed in the meaning of the Passover, and
some mysteries of their Religion, at that very time they came to eat, the
Pashcal Lamb being fore-appointed for a teaching sign, as well as a memorial.
If any man be found among Christians that are so grossly ignorant, that they
know not so much as I mentioned, or so dull, that they cannot by what is there
done be instructed; let them for me be reckoned among Idiots, and be excluded
with them; but in the mean time I fear me, you will cast aside under the title
of ignorant, many knowing Christians, because they are not come up to the
height of your mysteries; which is both rash and injurious; rash to prejudge
another man's knowledge; and injurious, for that to debar him the use of that
seal which God has commanded every one of the visible Church to take in these
words. Do this, drink ye all of this.

3. As touching the profane and scandalous in the next place, no man can be
more unwilling that they should be admitted then my self. But I shall not allow
every man to be a judge of profanesse and scandal. True it is, that every
sinner approaching this holy Table in his sin and profaness eats unworthily,
and ruins himself. Again, it is true that the Governors of the Church, when
they know any man goes on scandalously and impenitently in any sin, ought to
inflict the Church censures upon him, and withdraw the Sacrament even in
charity to his soul. In respect of the first, the Minister is to do what lies
in him, to dissuade the profane man to abstain, lest that by coming and eating
unworthily he do himself a mischief; and if in prudence he refuse him, I am not
against it. In respect of the second, the Governors are to do their duty, who
alone because the Keys are in their hands, have power to debar men from the
use of their right.

If you shall now ask me who are to be admitted to the participation of Christ's
body? and who are to be debarred? I answer.

Ad hoc Altar, quod nunc in Ecclesia est in terra positum, terrenis oculis
expositum, ad mysteriorum signacula celebranda, multi etiam scelerati possunt
accedere. August. tom. 10. homil. 50. Vide Pelarg. de fruct. panis Eucharist.
page 66.69.

1. All that have right by the Covenant, and are visible Members of Christ's
Body, yea, though they be unregenerate, ignorant, and profane, till such time
as they be convicted, and not only de jure, but de facto, excommunicated. My
reasons are,

1. Because the Apostle commands the Corinths, 1 Cor. 5. Not to keep company
with those Brethren that were Fornicatours, Drunkards, etc. Laying down
expressly this reason of his proceeding; do not we judge those who are within?
so that this not keeping company is intended no otherwise then upon a sentence
or judgment foregoing, passed upon the scandalous person. Before they might keep
company with him, but not after.

2. It seems unreasonable that a punishment should be inflicted on a Person,
before a judgment be passed, Qui omnium pessimi, usque dum Ecclesia sua
sententia pro canibus and porcis habendos declarav^rit, nolim cum illis ut
canibus and porcis agendum. Let^onem, qu^ mortem commeruerit, nullus jure de
vita tollat, usque dum judex and reum de^^^ verit, and sententiam tulerit.

3. Because there are like to follow many slippery and dangerous inconveniences
upon it. Much heart-burning betwixt the Minister and his people, many a private
grudge thus revenged, self-love and spiritual pride in him that is thus
received, a wilful animosity and peevishness in him who is so rejected. Which
Beza wisely foresaw, and thus delivers his judgment; Beza contra Erastum.
Etiamsi suis oculis Minister quempiam viderit aliquid agentem, quod coenae
exclusionem mereatur, jure tamen nec debeat, nec possit nisi vocatum, convictum
legitime denique secundum constitutum in Ecclesia ordinem damnatum, a mensa
Domini cum authoritate prohibere.

4. Because exclusion from the Sacrament is not to be allowed upon those
reasons which are most stood upon. 1. Not because the men are supposed to be
unregenerate. 2. Not from the nature of the Ordinance it self as distinct from
others. 3. Not because you may not give holy things to dogs. 4. Not because
there is a pollution feared, which the pure may contract from the profane. All
these reasons are very weak, and therefore none upon these reasons to be
excluded. I shall say a little to every one of them.

1. The irregenerate conditon in which the receiver may be conceived to be, is
of no validity, as I have formerly proved from the nature of the Covenant made
and sealed to the whole seed, ex carne. I shall only add this, that Christ who
well knew that Judas even at that very time, when he was in full resolution to
betray him, yet admitted him to the Sacrament, and administered it. And could
any man be more carnal and unregenerate? To be unregenerate then is no good
reason.

2. No nor that great reverence which is to be given to the Sacrament, as if
the Sacrament were to be advanced above all other Ordinances and parts of Gods
worship. For though this be tremendum mysterium; yet the same qualities are
required to effectual prayer, hearing of the Word as to the Sacrament; and
therefore the defect thereof should as well exclude a profane man from those,
as from this, which I know you will not say, in that you admit these to your
prayer and Sermon.

3. Much less from that often alleged Text, Give not that which is holy to
dogs, Mat. 7.6.
nor cast your pearls before swine, etc. For holy things are all those things
which are subservient to holy uses; wholesome Scripture Counsels, pious
Conferences, precious sayings, advice, actions, etc. as well as Ordinances;
these no wise man will cast before dogs and swine; But what before no dogs and
swine? i. e. no ignorant and scandalous sinners? No, that cannot be our
Saviors intention, because the word, and wholesome admonition is to be used to
these. But before such dogs and swine that the Text describes, these pearls are
not to be cast, to wit, such as will crample the holy things under their feet,
such which will turn again and rent us, such swine, to whom there is no
necessity that calls upon us to do it. The substance then of our Saviors
counsel is, that in the managing of spiritual things we be prudent, and have
regard to the persons to whom we dispense them; that we forbear when we shall
exasperate them, and gain but contempt to our own hurt; as it is but in vain to
give good counsel, or reprove a man when he is in a passion; a dogged humor to
watch an opportunity does far better.

Now those whom you suppose to be dogs and swine, are of another nature; though
profane and scandalous persons, yet we are sure they are not contumacious,
because they come to us, and desire the Sacrament at our hands; we are sure
they will not turn again upon us, and rent us for that; sure we are, they are
no swine that will trample upon it, neglect, vilipend, despise or reject it,
but so far as we can possibly conjecture, do reverently receive it. And so from
this Text we find no ground why we in prudence, should not administer the
Sacrament unto them; nay, we find much in it that may persuade us unto it. For
say now we withold the Sacrament from them, they in fury, when they hear we
reckon them no better than dogs and swine, may grow dogged and hoggish unto us,
turn upon us and rend us, and trample upon the Sacrament as no pearl. Consider
but what effect the Bulls of Pius Quintus had upon the state of Venice; or
those thunderbolts of the Pope against Henry the eighth, and tell me whether I
say not true; loath I am to say it, but truth compels me; your rigidnesse and
want of charity in registring many good and pious Christians, in the black
brutish book of dogs and hogs, has alienated from you more minds than you will
easily recover.

4. But then after all this, upon the admission of profane and scandalous
persons, there is a pollution to be feared. Whence we are to put in practice
such directions as these; Purge out the old leaven, put away from your selves
that wicked person; avoid, withdraw from them, keep no company with such, no
not to eat. Let him be to thee as an Heathen and a Publican. 1 Cor. 5.7, 13, 9,
11. Matthew. 18.
All these precepts at first sight, seem very favorable for an ejection or not
admission of profane persons; but on a serious view, it will appear that they
are not concluding for what they are brought. For if there be any pollution by
this mixed communion, it must either adhere to the Sacrament, or Admitters, or
Communicants. To the Sacrament it cannot adhere, because that is the savor of
life unto life to every worthy receiver, notwithstanding the supposed pollution
in the receiver; for I hope the Sacramental essence was not polluted, and
consequently an unholy Ceremony to the rest of the Apostles, though Judas was
present at it, and received it with them. To the Admitters this pollution
cannot adhere, because they do but their duty; for they are bound to maintain
every man's right, and further every man in the use of his right, so long as he
is not debarred of it. Now that a moral uncleanness is no bar, is proved
before. The rule is, when an action has evil in its own substance, it is to be
omitted; but when the action of it self is the matter of a precept, and has
evil externally cast upon it by the Agent that does it, here the action is not
to be omitted, but the Agent reformed. I explain my meaning, and apply the rule
thus. This action of Administration of the Sacrament has no evil in it in its
own nature; had it so, it were to be omitted; it is a matter of a precept, and
must therefore be done: Say, that had evil been cast upon it externally by some
unworthiness of the receiver, yet the action is not to be omitted, but the
receiver to be reformed. 3. Neither is this pollution conveyed over to the
Communicants; for all uncleanness that is contracted by another sin, is
either from counsel, assistance, defense or imitation; now what worthy
Communicant is guilty of any of these ways? Did ever any Minister or
Communicant encourage or counsel a scandalous or profane person to come to the
Lords Table in his sin? was he ever any assistant to him in it? did he defend
that it was to be done? nay, the contrary is apparent, as appears in the
Liturgy, where the Minister exhorts, Therefore if any of you be a blasphemer of
God, a hinderer or slanderer of his Word, an Adulterer, or be in malice or
envy, or in any other grievous crime, bewail your sin, and come not to this
holy Table, etc. and in charity he is bound to believe (seeing he cannot search
the heart) that he, who after this admonition comes, is a true penitent.

And therefore from hence there can arise no pollution. It Is possible indeed
evil company may draw to an imitation of sin and so pollute. But if not so,
(for I know no good man will therefore be profane, because a profane man is
admitted to the Sacrament) the very keeping company with them in these sacred
meetings, is far from being a sin. It is only a clear acknowledgment that they
are of the number of the redeemed, whereof yet some are damned; 2 Pet. 2.1.
then that they join with them in the profession of Christianity, which
certainly I may do with all Professors; lastly, a confederating in vow to live
a Christian and sincere life, and that I may lawfully do in the company of them
that are not sincere. And for this practice I conceive we have the Apostles
example among the Corinthians* 1 Cor. 5. 1 Cor. 3.3.
of whom there were fornicatours, incestuous, carnal persons; and yet I read of
the incestuous only excommunicate, with him they might not eat, with the rest
they are not prohibited; from which I conclude that to communicate with such,
is not unlawful in a Christian Church.

And to make this point yet more clear; if to communicate with profane person
be unlawful, because their sinful company would pollute, it is because the sin
is patent or latent; because it is open and notorious say they; but this is a
strange thing that in natura peccati, an open sin should have a stronger
infection in it, than that which is secret; it is as if you should say, that
plague sore will less infect which is hid and kept secret, than that which is
discovered; no no, secret or known, is all one: if per se the sin that is not
consented to, nor imitated, infects another only by the approach; Hypocrisy a
hidden sin, shall as much pollute as any notorious wickedness, and then God
be merciful to all Communicants, since it is not possible but that in the
purest Church they may approach the Lords Table with hypocrites.

The pollution then which is so much feared by admittance of scandalous and
notorious sinners to the Lords Table is no intrinsecal pollution, which cannot
be, while a man's own conscience is not defiled. Nor is it a bare pollution by
evil example, for so the good are not defiled. But a pollution or defilement
there is, which is merely extrinsecal to this business, wherewith the whole
Church and fellowship may be said to be stained, discredited, disgraced by
scandalous and notorious sinners, which was imputed by Celsus a Heathen to
Christian Religion, that it admitted all sorts, Publicans, sinners, Harlots.
That then such spots and blemishes be not suffered, to the disparagement and
danger of the whole body: Christ has provided us a remedy; he has left the
power of the Keys with the Governors of the Church, that they may exclude from
thence all inordinate walkers, and proclaim to all, that Christianity is not a
doctrine of security, licentiousness and impunity to all profane persons and
impenitents, but of strict, precise, and exact purity and holiness, and
therefore when Christ's Name is or may be blasphemed and evil-spoken of for such
Miscreants, to recover her own reputation, and the good name of Christian
Religion, and to warn and admonish others not to incur her displeasure, she
ejects them, and debars them, though not from their right, yet from the use of
their right in the Ordinances.

Which is not done lest the good should be polluted by their presence among the
profane; as they that touched the unclean thing were polluted under the Law,
which is the common error of the proud fastidious Pharisees of all ages, but
for those ends I named, the recovery of the Churches honor, and a fair caveat
to others. And for the execution of this Discipline it is, that all those
former alleged places of the Apostle tend, purge out the old leaven, etc. In
which the Scripture commands excommunication, that is, an exclusion from the
Church and society of the faithful in general, therefore from the Sacrament
also.

If then you shall now ask me who are to be excluded at Christ's Supper Feast? I
answer briefly, 1. None but those whose incapacity is either natural, or moral,
as children, Idiots, distracted persons. 2. Non^ but such who are under the
censures of the Church, and iuridice convicted under two or three Witnesses 3.
All other professors of the visible Church must not be de^^^ered from their
right, nor use of their right by any single Minister, bec^^se the power of the
Keys was not committed to him, but (...) the Governors of the Church; yet we
require in him so much pray, that in prudence, discretion, and charity to the
soul of a scandalous and notorious person, he withdraw the Sacrament from (...)
for a time, till he give in evidence of his amendment. So that you see our
labor is to admit to Christ's Supper Feast, such as in the judgment of charity
we are bound to take for Christ's faithful friends and followers, because we
find no Church conviction to the contrary, nor can, till they renounce their
profession; we deliver it to none but such whom we are persuaded may be fed and
physick'd by it: of which two you may read if you please, at full in my
explanation of the Chatechisme, a page 200. ad page 204.


Thus have I considered of your whole (...), which I might well have passed
over, because you directly impute not these corruptions to the Parochial, but
insinuate them only, which is flily to disprove them. But I was willing to
remove out of your way every straw at which you might stumble: So careful I
have been to reduce you to a right understanding in these things; and if I may
obtain my end, I shall think my pains well bestowed. However I have done what I
could, and I leave the success to God. Your Letter calls upon me to follow
you, and so I am unwillingly drawn; for I find it thus by you written:

The words of the Letter.
YEt the mere sight of a Monarchical Pue to stand in the stead of a Ministerial
Pulpit, is a strong plea of a strange Apostasy from the commendable practice of
the primitive Christians.

Your adversative particle Yet made me start; for I must tell you that I
understand so much in act, that when it follows any long concession, as it does
in this place, it intimates that all things were light that went before, in
comparison of that which follows; he being but little versed in the Art of
Rhetoric, who will grant to his Adversary any thing of which he cannot make
his advantage. This then that you here mention must be a greater abomination
than any one, or indeed all the particulars you before mentioned, or else your
Yet was not considerately placed. What, the justling out a Pulpit, and placing
a Pue instead of it, a greater offense, than admitting profane persons to the
Lords Table? what, this a stronger plea of Apostasy, than the Common service
book? what is it to tithe mint and annise, and cummin, and to let pass the
great and weightier matters of the Law, if this be not it? does God take care
for Oxen? is he pleased or displeased with Pues, with Pulpits, with Elders
seats? No question, it is all one with him, in what part of the Church, or by
whom they are set. It Is the inward man of the heart that he looks upon; as for
these outward accoutrements of his service, he has entrusted to the hands and
heads of discreet men. And methinks you of all others should least insist upon
them, who are so great enemies to all outward worship, or what may be ordained
by men for the decency and order of that worship.

2. Farther, I think you have misplaced your Epithites, and bestowed them on
wrong subjects; for it were far truer to say the Monarchical Pulpit, and the
Ministerial Pue: for whatsoever was done in the Pue, was but merely
Ministerial; but since you have invaded and engrossed the Pulpit, you thence
dictate and dogmatize like the violent Monarch you before named. Thence you
damn whomsoever you please. I have heard this black sentence thence
pronounced, that all the old Clergy are frying in an iron grate in hell; that
they that will not come to hear you, do tread under foot the blood of the Son of
God; and make a mock of him; and thence again you save whom you please, as if
all the Legislative power were in your hands; what you deliver from thence, be
it never so crude and indigested stuff, you call the Gospel of the Kingdom,
the very Word of God. News from Ipswich. Apologista. c. 3.
A man would think you were inclining very far to that opinion of the Apologist
for the Jesuits, who says, jungantur in unum, dies cum nocte, tenebrae cum
luce, calidum cum frigido, sanitas cum morbo, vita cum morte, and erit tum spes
aliqua posse in caput Jesuitae haeresin cadere. I ever took Sermons and so do
still, to be most necessary expositions and applications of the holy Scripture,
and a great ordinary means of saving knowledge, but I cannot think them or the
Preachers of them out of a Pulpit divinely infallible; And it may be observed
too, that no men are more apt to say then they, that all the Fathers were but
men, and might err; and if then they be not transcended the condition of men,
when they are ascended the Pulpit, possible it is that they may err too.

But to proceed, what an Idol (pardon the word, it is from your own shop, when
you call the Liturgy Idol-service, and the sureties in Baptism Idol
Godfathers) have they made of the Pulpit, ever since from thence they dispense
all their Administrations. The child to be baptized by the Minister in the
Pulpit; the Sacrament to be sent by the hand of the Deacon to all the
Congregation out of the Pulpit: The Word and all the prayer then used out of
the Pulpit; and whether the censures be to be pronounced out of the Pulpit,
Bailey page 121.122.
I yet know not. So that if there were any sense at all to be collected out of
this word [Monarchical,] I should rather attribute it to the Pulpit, than to
the Pue, which I am sure was never guilty of any Monarchy.

3. And since we are entered into a comparison of the Pue and Pulpit; I shall
add one consideration more, which I profess to you I do very unwillingly, it
having been known to you and others, that I have been as industrious in the
Pulpit, as any other in the Pue. The Pue and Pulpit are in themselves inanimate
things, wood and stone; no prerogative can accrue to either from them; if there
be any priority, it must be from the actions that were performed from thence.
In the Pue we had the Liturgy of the Church celebrated, in the other the Word
of God explained, and pressed on the conscience for practce by the tongues of
men; if then I would contend for any privilege of either, I should give it to
the Pue, because in that was celebrated cultus ipse, which is the prayers; in
the other is held forth no more but doctrina cultus, a doctrine which teaches
us to worship God; in the one there is exercised only actus imperatus, a
command is only laid upon us, do this; but in the other there is actus
elicitus; for we choose to practice what we have been taught, which how far it
is more acceptable than bare preaching, and teaching, and hearing, read our
Saviors words, Mat. 7.22, 23.

As for Sermons, I hope men do not undertake to prove, that they are as eminent
a part of Gods worship as prayer. If they do, I must less blame the poor
ignorant people, that think when they have heard a Sermon or two, that they
have served God for that day, or that week; nor the generality of those seduced
ones, who place so great piety in hearing, and think so much the more
comfortably of themselves for the number of hours spent in that exercise, which
of late has been made the main Church-businesse, and yet is no more than may
be done by a Heathen or profane person. I shall think him to serve God best,
that devoutly prays most, and comes oftnest, and falls down and kneels, and
worships before the Lord his Maker. It cannot be thought equal, that prayer and
preaching should be so unwarily placed in competition, as that prayer should
lose by the comparison. There may be always need of preaching, but then most
of all, when the Auditory is unchristian. This reason prevailed very much in
the Primitive times, when it was but in vain and unprofitable to go about to
convert the world no otherwise than by our prayers. Yet even in those Primitive
times, which had most cause to call for preaching, we shall find that this
duty was of rarer exercise, and less solemnity than that of prayer, as it may
abundantly be discovered by the Liturgies of both Churches yet extant.
Maimonid. More Neboch. cap. 32. Antioch. Hom. 106.
Maimenides that profound Doctor of the Jews, instituting a comparison betwixt
their sacrifices, and the more substantial services required, instead of all
other, names prayer and Invocation; these, says he, are nearer to Gods first
intention, these necessary at all times, and for every man. With him agrees the
Christian Antiochus, who affirms of prayer, that (...) (...), of a more sublime
condition than any other virtue. And how our Lord stood affected to this, we
may acknowledge by that, where he calls the Church his house of prayer, not
preaching, which took so well in the Elder times, that all their Temples were
called by the name (...), Oratories.

Prove. 15.18, 29
Nay, the Preacher himself, Solomon I mean, is so confident of a just man's
prayer, that it is Gods delight; nay more, he hears, or (...), or (...), he
is obedient, if I may so say to it. And it well may seem to be so; for when all
the preaching of Lot could prevail no otherwise, than to bring vexation to his
righteous soul; the prayers of Abraham might have saved Sodom, if among so
many thousands there might have been found but ten just men.

By this I have said it is not my purpose to detract any thing from preaching,
but considering the age we live in, that we should so far moderate our opinion
of the Pulpit, that we disdain not the Pue, that we beware lest by magnifying
preaching, we bring not discredit and disadvantage upon necessary prayer.

Lastly, whereas you say that this Pue justled out the Pulpit that was erected
by the Primitive Christians; I believe you would be very hard put to it to
prove, that then there was either Pue or Pulpit in any common use among them,
for how could it be, when Temples and Churches were thinly erected? the
greatest part of Christians under the ten bloody persecutions, meeting where
they could, and sometimes in Caves and Grots to serve God. The first Testimony
that looks this way, I read in Cyprian, and yet that will make more for the Pue
than the Pulpit; Cypr. Ep. 34. Pamm. edit.
since to the place of a Reader Cyprian had admitted Celerinus, as he in that
Epistle gives notice to the Clergy and people of Carthage; Hunc illustrem, quid
aliud quam super Pulpitum, id est, super Tribunal Ecclesiae oportebat imponi,
ut loci altioris celsitate subnixus, and plebi universae pro honoris claritate
conspicuus legate praecepta and Evangelium Domini, etc. The Pulpit in this place
he calls the Tribunal of the Church, being a word borrowed from the Roman
custom, who were wont from some higher seat or raised place, jus dicere
Tribubus. To this seat Celerinus was advanced, and yet he was no more but to
read the ten Commandments for ought I know, and the Gospel; for Cyprians
words are restrained, Ut legate praecepta and Evangelium Domini: which office,
if he well performed, then indeed he might be promoted higher; for so it
follows: Viderit, an sit ulterior gradus, ad quem profici in Ecclesia possit.
Nihil est in quo confessor magis fratribus-prosit, quam ut dum Evangelica
lectio de ore ejus auditur, quam ut lectoris fidem quisquis audierit,
invitetur; jungendus in lectione Aurelio fuerat, etc. where you meet with
another Reader, that you have in the less contempt these tail of Readers, as
you have blasted them; nor the Pue out of which they read, for that may be the
Pulpit as you see in Cyprian, and yet the name nere the more profaned.

When these two became distinct you had best enquire, for to me it appears not.
Late I believe both were brought into the Greek Church, Walfridus Strabo de
Rev. Eccl. cap. 6. Germanus in Hist Eccl.
because they have no other word for a Pulpit, but (...), which is pure Latin,
derived ab ambiendo, quia intrantem ambit, and cingit. And it was first of
stone, as are many of our old Pulpits in the Ancientest of our Churches at this
day. But that is not material; You must show that among the Primitive Christians
the Ministerial Pulpit was before the Pue, which for ought I see might be all
one; again, that this Pue after it was brought in, justled out the Pulpit,
which you know among us it did not, for we were contented both should stand
together, and have their several uses. Or say, that all you charge us withal
had been done, the Pue set up in the Pulpits place, will this prove that this
had been a strong plea of a strange Apostasy from the practice of the
Primitive Christians? I have always thought that Apostasy had lain in doctrine
or in manners; in either of these, when men degenerate, they may in some sense
be called Apostates; but if they shall change a Pue into a Pulpit, or a Pulpit
into a Pue, to lay to their charge Apostasy for this, is what I never heard
before, and am confident I shall never hear again. But you go on.

The words of the Letter.
SEeing that such Coope is not of a sufficient capacity to contain at once any
more persons than one.

The Reply.
And this exception lies as strong against your Ministerial Pulpit, where your
Preacher the Cock that crows there, is as much cooped up, as is the Reader in
our Pue; at once I know, you will allow but one Cock in it, and pity it is it
should be of greater capacity to contain more, Apolog. de cato and gallo.
one being sufficient to disturb a house.

The words of the Letter.
WHereas it is of moral equity, and consequently of perpetual observation, that
a rightly, etc.

The Reply.
What Is this I read here? moral equity, and the consequent upon it, perpetual
observation? If you would have studied for an Axiom to undo your own cause,
you could not have found out such another. I wonder why we contend all this
while about Rites, Ceremonies, indifferent things instituted for decency and
order in the Church, where the governors of the Church, as is proved before
out of your New- Englands constitutions, might ordain them to those ends. Now
it is but moral equity that in all lawful things we obey our Superiors, and
consequently of perpetual observation. Talk no more then hereafter of a
Surplice, of Banes, of a Ring, of a Pue, of a Pulpit, and such trifles; for
equity and morality require that they be observed: Arraign us for observation
of Rites and Ceremonies; moral equity is our Tutour, and has taught us to
embrace them. This I have seen to happen to all men that struggle against the
truth, to let fall at unawares some such words which will wound, if not destroy
that cause they seek most to defend. Magna est veritas, and praevalebit.

Mr. Matthews.
THat a rightly Reformed Presbyterial Church should have all her Elders, who
are engaged by virtue of their Office to begin and end all the public
Ordinances, and to transact all the open concernments of the City of God.

The Reply.
These words I understand not well, because I know not your practice; but if it
be consonant to the sound of these lines, I find a very deep engagement lies
upon the Elders; for what, are they ex officio bound to begin and end all the
public Ordinances, to transact all the open concernments of the City of God?
This is a very high charge and a large power; for the Ordinances of the City of
God are the dispensations of the Word, the Administration of the Sacraments,
Imposition of hands, the application of the Power of the Keys, with all the
other accessories and circumstantials to these. Were your words true, then no
Sermon must be begun or ended, no prayer begun or ended, and the like is to be
said of all the rest, nothing of them or about them, begun, transacted or
ended, but by their advice and decision. Of which there is not one syllable
that I believe, and therefore for such a claim, it behoved you to produce a
very fair and clear Charter; for else all those that bear no good will to your
Discipline and Combination, will endite you for incroachment and usurpation of
another right. Which aspersion you will never be able to get off, by telling
us barely on your word, this is the Elders power. Nor by affirming.

The words of the Letter.
THat the Reformed Church should have all her Elders for to stand and sit
together, in the face and full view of the whole Assembly.

The Reply.
I cannot think what you aim at here, except at that place which in the
Ancient Church was appointed for the Presbytery to sit together in. For they
had a place enclosed from all the Laity, where the Lords Table was set, the
Bishops Chair and Presbyters seats being round about it. This place Sozomen
calls (...), the Sacrary, with us the Chancel, which divided the Bishops and
Presbyters from the people. Cyprian would have this granted to Numidicus,
Sozomen lib. 7. cap. 24. Cypr. Ep. 35. Pammel. editionis. Council. Laod. Ca^.
56. Theod. l. 5. c. 18.
Numidicus Presbyter ascribatur Presbyterorum Carthaginensium numero, and
nobiscum sedeat in Cl^ro. The Council of Laodicea calls it (...), by reason it
was somewhat higher than the rest of the Church, the Canon Law Presbyterium.
Into this place when Theodosius the Emperor would have entered to have received
the Communion, Saint Ambrose then busied at divine service, sent him word,
(...). These places were in the Sacraries of the Church, to be entered by those
who were in orders only, where they sat together with the Bishop, there was
not any place then for Lay Elders. And therefore si quid tale forsan vestras
pervenerat aures, you see it makes nothing at all for you, till you will admit
your Lay Elders to be of the Clergy, which I know you abhor. I proceed to your
proofs.

The words of the Letter.
ANd by so much the more seeing they are so plainly warranted, and so
punctually prescribed as they be, to wait, and to walk according to the
pattern prescribed in the Mount, witness Exodus 25.40. Acts 7.44. Heb. 8.5.

The Reply.
Et cui non hic dictus Hylas, there being not any one who pleads for change of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, or that has been discontent with any custom or
Ceremony of the Church, who has not made this Axiom the head Theoreme of
their discourse, and when well it might have gone a mile with them, they have
angered it forcing it to go twain. The Anabaptist to prove his
Antipaedobaptisme, has often in his mouth these words, and every new light
this Oggannition, all must be done according to the pattern in the Mount; and
that we may take the more notice of it, as a firm argument for your Elders
seats and proceedings, you have cited here three Scriptures, one upon the neck
of another for it, all which, as Joseph said of Pharaohs dreams are but one.
The occasion of these words are in Exodus 25. When God gave order to Moses for
the erecting of the Tabernacle, about which God left him not to his own choice,
but commanded him to frame it according to the pattern showed him in the Mount:
This Tabernacle and order Saint Stephen mentions, Acts 7. But Saint Paul Heb.
8.5. opens the mystery and applies it: to wit, that the Tabernacle of Moses was
but a shadow and exemplar of heavenly things, or of that Tabernacle which
Christ had set up for his in heaven. Here then are to be considered three
distinct things, the body it self, the reality, or truth of this shadow, and
that is the true Tabernacle of the Saints in heaven. The (...) or type of it,
that was presented for a pattern to Moses in the Mount, and the exemplar or
picture or copy of it fair drawn by Moses in the Tabernacle, which he is
commanded to frame according to the pattern presented to his eyes, when God was
pleased to call him up to him into the Mountain; which things he also after did.

Now I wonder what you or any body else, can for your purpose collect from
hence. Moses was commanded to make the Tabernacle according to the pattern in
the Mount; therefore the Lay Elders are plainly warranted, and punctually
prescribed to stand and sit together in the face and full view of the Assembly.
A strange thing it is, that out of a particular pattern you should frame a
general rule. For before you shall be ever able to bring this rule home to your
purpose, prove you must that it was thus prescribed in the Mount, which I know
will be a very hard task.

Besides, suppose you extend the rule further, as I know you do, to beat down
that which you ordinarily call will worship, and the inventions of men: Yet so
it will not come home neither, in that the Apostle applies it not to any such
purpose; but only what was done in the Mount, was a shadow of things to come;
the Tabernacle on earth, a representation of our being with God in heaven. And
to stretch it further, is to deal by it as the Cobbler does with his leather,
that tugs it so far with his teeth till it crack again.

Farther yet, if in that sense you intend it, this Text had laid an injunction
upon any, it had certainly tied up the Jews; the pattern in the Mount, must
certainly have restrained them from adding any thing even the least in the
external worship of God, which yet it did not. For in the Church of the Jews it
must be granted that the appointment of the hour for daily sacrifices, the
building of Synagogues throughout the Land to hear the Word of God and pray in,
when they came not up to Jerusalem; the erecting of Pulpits and Chairs to teach
in; the order of Burials and Rites of Marriage; the Musical Instruments
invented by David; the Ordinance for Priests to serve in their courses, with
others of the like nature, being matters appertaining to the Church, yet had
not their pattern from the Mount, nor are any way prescribed in the Law, but
were by the Churches discretion instituted and continued. What, shall we then
think they did hereby add to the Law, and so displease God by what they did?
none yet so hardly persuaded of them; the Truth is that Rule and Canon Law
which is written in all men's hearts, and Saint Paul's reduced into precept, Let
all things be done decently and in order, does clear them from doing any thing
in these and the like, that was amiss; neither do we find that God or any
Prophet ever reproved them for these Accessories taken up without a pattern in
the Mount. Seeing therefore Saint Paul's rule binds by the edicts of nature,
which the Jews observing as yet unwritten, and thereby framing such
Church-Orders as in their Law were not prescribed, are notwithstanding in that
respect unculpable: It follows that many things may be lawfully done in the
Church, so as they be not done against the Scripture, although no Scripture do
command them, but the Church only following the light of reason, judge them in
discretion to be meet.

And in effect, they who first opposed, seemed to grant so much; For this
Cartwright gave forth, that nothing ought to be established in the Church which
is not commanded in the Word, if not by special precepts, 1 Cor. 10.32. 1 Cor.
14.40. 1 Cor. 14.26. Romans 14.6, 7.
yet by general rules; which are nothing scandalous and offensive; All things
in order and seemlinesse; All unto aedification; All to the glory of God. So
then these Rules being observed, all things in the Church may be appointed, not
only not against, but by and according to the Word of God. By this large
concession for ought I see, even that which they oppose may be according to the
pattern in the Mount. And if you had intended utterly to exclude the use of
rectifyed reason and prudence in ordering any thing in Gods house, why did you
but now say that it is of moral equity, and consequently of perpetual
observation, that a rightly Reformed Church should have all her Elders stand
and sit together, in the face and full view of the Assembly; in reason and
prudence, I grant you may find somewhat to persuade it, but search as long as
you will for a pattern in the Mount for it, and it will not be found; for what
you in the following words allege, are but mere colors, as I will make it
plainly appear.

The words of the Letter.
ANd as in all other points, so in this particular concerning the Elders
Pulpit, they are tied and limited by their Commission to hold conformity with
what is upon sacred Record, as this is, and that not only necessarily employed,
but eminently expressed in several Scripture expressions, as Nehem. 8.4.
Eccles. 12.11. 1 Timothy 4.14. Rev. 4.6. and 5.6. and 19.4.

The Reply.
To those Elders you speak of, I find no Commission granted upon sacred
Record, as I have formerly proved. They who have received a Commission, I
grant, are tied and limited to hold conformity with that which is upon Record
in all points; but neither for those nor these, do I find any thing so
eminently expressed about a Pulpit. Oh but it seems this Elders Pulpit is a
matter of great weight and moment, that there should be such several Scripture
expressions about it. And indeed it would make any man wonder that God who gave
an express order in the Mount about the Tabernacle, and also a pattern for it,
should not then have given a special direction for the matter and form of this
Pulpit also, but have left it to the discretion of the Jews to erect it of
their own heads after the captivity; for then is the first time we hear of a
Pulpit of wood, and the sole in all the Scripture.

Nehem. 4.8.
The words Nehem. 8.4. are, And Ezra the Scribe stood on a Pulpit of wood, which
they had made for the purpose, and beside him stood Mattithiah, and Shemath,
and Anajah, and Vehad, and Helkiah, and Maaseiah on his right hand, and on his
left Pedajah, and Mishae, and Malkiah, and Hashum. and Hashbadana, Zechariah,
and Meshullam. The Old Translatour reads thus, Stetit autem Esdras Scriba super
gradum aut turrim ligneam, quam secerat ad loquendum, Ver. 1.
and steterunt juxta eum, etc. Junius and Tremellius thus, Stabat autem Ezra
legis peritus in suggestu ligneo, quem fecerant ad hanc rem, etc. In which
passage I observe many things. First, That this meeting, reading, and
interpreting the Law was in the street that was before the watergate.
Secondly, That here was built for Ezra this Chair of Wood; which whether it
were in strict terms a Pulpit or no, is not apparent, in that the Vulgar reads
it gradus or turris; Tremellius suggestus, and so it might be a Gallery raised
to that end, or a little Turret ascended by steps; for suggestus is locus
editior unde ad populum fit concio, (...). Or if you will needs have it a
Pulpit, that you like it nere the better for that name, Varro. Glossar. Hadri.
Junius. Vitruv.
this was at first locus scenae editior, e quo tibicines and Citharaedi musica
action populum demulcebant. Or as it is in Vitruvius, Podij provectior pars,
seu pergula quaedam. Thirdly, That those who stood about this Pulpit on the
right and left hand, were all of the Tribe of Levi, as is apparent in many
places of this book. Fourthly, That this for ought we know was but once done,
and occasionally by the Jews immediately after the Captivity. Now lay all this
together, and you shall see what it will amount to.

You may be yet to seek for your Elders Pulpit, for ought you know, for all
this place, except you will place them in a little Turret or Gallery; for such
you see it may be. And about it the Levites were placed on the right hand, and
on the left; and I know you will not allow your Elders to be of the Tribe of
Levi. This Pulpit was erected in the street, and will you take it well that
your Consistory be erected there? This was occasional, whereas yours must be;
as you say, of perpetual observation. This was done by the Jews at that time,
and will you take out a Jewish pattern? God forbid the Christians should
imitate the Jews. Remember what for this you before allege against the
National Church. Lastly, this was but a particular case, and ex particulari non
est syllogizari. To collect a necessity of observance for all future ages from
one example of the Jewish Church, is an argument of a very shallow and short
discourse.

The second place you allege, is Ecclesiastes 12.11. Eccl. 12.11.
The words of the Wise are as Goads, and as nails fastened by the Masters of
Assemblies, which are given from one Shepherd. In the reading of which words
you may see our Translatours were at a stand, in that to make up their sense,
they put in the particles, [are, by, which.) Let us see then how others render
them; the Vulgar, Verba sapientum sicut stimuli, and quasi clavi in altum
defixi, quae per Magistrorum consilium data sunt, ab uno pastere; Jun. and
Tremell. thus, Verba sapientum similia aculeis, and similia clavis infixis,
lectissima, tradita a pastore eodem. And they note, that what we read the
Masters of the Assemblies, is in the Hebrew, Domini Collectionum.

First, I must tell you that in this Text I read nere a word of the Elders
Pulpit, and therefore cannot conceive that it is here eminently expressed, no
nor yet necessarily implied neither, in that Domini Collectionum, may have
another sense then you thought of; do but read the Prologue to the book of
Ecclesiasticus, and you may see what it means. The Grandfather to Jesus the
Son of Syrach was a man of great diligence and wisdom among the Hebrews, who
did not only gather the grave and short sentences of wise men that had been
before him, but himself also uttered some of his own, full of much
understanding and wisdom; they that gathered these might well be called Domini
Collectionum, and Junius not to be blamed, when he reads Verba sapientum
lectissima. For every Scribe instructed to the Kingdom of heaven, is like unto
a man that is an Householder, Matthew. 13.52. Isocrat. ad Demon.
which brings forth out of his Treasury things new and old. Isocrates likens
such a man to the Be, which lights upon every flower and gathers honey or wax
from all: so says he, it behooves every man who desires instruction, to leave
unattempted no Authors, but (...), there you have the word, from all places to
collect together profitable Rules, Maxims, Apothegms, Parables, Proverbs,
Sentences, Arguments, etc. For when all is done, all will be too little to amend
the pravity and obliquity of our nature. Now where there is this choice made by
the wise, Hieron. in loc.
then their words will be both stimuli and clavi. Goades they will be in the
side of every slothful man, to quicken and prick him forward to any duty;
pungunt verba, non palpant, they do not flatter and bring asleep, but they
rouse and move every resty soul. And because that men that are up, are of a
flitting nature, and apt to fall back, being too like a deceitful bow, Psalm.
78.57.
whose string being drawn up, if not well fastened, is apt to slip the nock and
relapse: therefore their words also are like to nails, that being driven in
deep, fasten and hold together what is joined by them. This then I take to be
the true meaning of Solomon in this place, that when by the Masters of the
Collections there is a good choice made, then words are of excellent use both
against slothfulness and recidivation; they will goad a Scholar up, that he be
not dull in, and fasten him to, that he fall not back from any duty. And to
that end they were delivered; for they be but tradita, given or committed to
them, and given they were by one and the same Shepherd, Junius in loc. Ambros.
that is, by Christ, whose word alone has been heard in the Church in all
ages. For that saying of Ambrose is most true, Veritas a quocuuque dicitur, a
Spiritu sancto est profecta. He must have Linceus eyes, that can find any
countenance in this Text for Lay Elders, or for their Pulpit. What is it not
possible that no men besides themselves should be Masters of Assemblies? none
Masters of Collections, no wise men's words be goads and nails besides theirs
alone? shall no men be entrusted by this one Shepherd and the Holy Ghost, but
they alone? this I hope they will not arrogate to themselves; and if there may
be a partition made, as there must be, except they will assume to themselves
the Monopoly of all wise words, I see no necessity either by implication or
eminent expression, that your Ruling Elders should be the Masters of the
Assemblies that the Preacher means. And I am sure he could not; for in his
days there were no such heard of. And so not finding their Commission in the
Old Testament, by your direction I will enquire for them and their Pulpit in
the New.

And the first place you send me to, is in the first Epistle to Timothy, cap.
4. ver. 14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by
Prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. This place I
conceive you intended not at all for proof of the Elders Pulpit, because no
Cart-ropes will be strong enough to hale it that way. Only that by it they
should have a Commission to transact all the concernments of the City of God,
and in particular to ordain Church Officers. For I know by the Consistorian
Divines it is drawn that way, though very violently.

This is the sole place in Scripture where the Presbytery is named; and it
seems somewhat strange to me that you should ground and build your foundation
of your Lay-Eldership on a place that has so many sound and sufficient answers
as this has.

That there was a Presbytery in the Apostolical times I have formerly proved,
but that it consisted of Lay Elders it lies upon you to make good, before you
can derive their Commission from this place. Secondly, Jerome, Primasius,
Ambrose and Calvin, tell us that by Presbytery the function is meant, and not
the College, and then the place will stand you in no stead; and that the word
(...) is used for Presbyter, I could show you if I list by more than ten
testimonies of the Greek Fathers and Councels. Thirdly, Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Oecumenius, Theophilact, inform us that Paul by the Presbytery meant the
Bishops; for a mere Presbyter might not impose hands on a Bishop. Neque enim
fas erat, aut licebat, Ambros. in loc. Calv. institut. 4. cap. 3.
ut inferior ordinaret majoreme, nemo enim tribuit quod non accepit. Fourthly,
Saint Paul himself testifyeth that he laid hands on Timothy, which Calvin
strongly presses. Lastly, granted it must be that Timothy was an Evangelist,
which function the Presbytery of no particular Church could give him by your
tenets. This place then being set aside, I find not any other that can carry
so much as a color for the Commission you speak of; and that from this they
can claim no power, I have partly made good here, and more fully before, and
therefore I say the less of it.

One thing only I shall add, that the Latin Fathers expound it abstractly;
viz. to signify the Office of Priesthood, that is, neglect not the grace of
the Presbyterate, that is in thee, by the imposition of hands; and this Erasmus
helps, by making Presbyterii to depend upon gratiam, in regimine; reading it
thus, noli negligere gratiam Presbyterii, quae data est, -- per manuum
impositionem, and such trajections are no new things in Scripture.

To those places you cite out of the Revelation I have answered before, and
showed that they concern not at all your Elders, and therefore I shall not need
to say any more to them.

The words of the Letter.
TO sum up in short the whole sum and substance of what I would show;
Until such time as the Parochial Churches of the Nations become truly
Presbyterial, and so reformed in their essential parts, consisting of visible
Converts, and an explicit Covenant, which are the matter and form of a Church:
witness Jer. 50.5. Ezekiel. 20.37. Isa. 44.3. Acts 2.47. Romans 14.1.2 Cor. 8.5.
and 9.13. And until also they be refined in their integral parts, which are
the Organs and Officers thereof, that as eyes, mouth and hands are to see,
speak and act in their behalf: until they both desire and endeavor to be
endowed first with a Teacher to dispense the word of knowledge and information
to the judgment; Secondly, with a Pastor to dispense the word of wisdom and
exhortation to the will and affections. Thirdly, with a Ruler to dispense the
word of rebuke and admonition to the irregular in life and conversation: And
fourthly, with Deacons and Widows to receive and dispense the weekly
contribution, that is belonging, and also brought to the King of Saints from
his subjects in Covenant toward the maintenance of the Table of the Lord, the
Tables of the Church Elders, and the Tables of such of the fellow members as be
in lack: And all this in obedience to what is enjoined in his revealed will,
namely in Romans 12. 2, 7, 8. and 16.1. 1 Timothy 3.2, 5, 10. and 5.10, 20. Until I
say, that the Parochial Churches be thus qualifyed; can you upon good grounds
expect as to them, either the manifestation of sure mercy, or the enjoyment of
solid peace? knowing that Combinations are properly appertaining to vile and
violent sinne-loving sinners, as it is showed by the Oracles of God, Psalm. 5.5
and 11.5, 6. Rev. 12.10. and 22.15. And that Church-promises and
Church Priviledges as well as Christ's Consolations are peculiarly applicable to
such Covenant-makers with God and men, as through the strength of their surety
are Covenant-keepers with both? which Covenant-making and Covenant-keeping is
expressed and perceived by a regular walking toward them who are without, as
well as them that are within, according to what is written, Isa. 55.3. Gal.
6.16. 1 Timothy 4.8. If you can tell any such tidings as a heavenly promise to
unheavenly persons, or a holy privilege to the souls or seed of unholy
parents, that you would find in your heart to give me some notice thereof, and
to acquaint me with any one of those good grounds of any lively hope, that they
will be everlastingly happy, is the last of these motions, which I make bold
for to leave with you to consider of, and meditate upon. A heavenly motion for
my self.
This motion is my heavenly motion for my self, the granting of which will
engage me, yet further, to be, to remain, and also acknowledge my self.

Your thankful Remembrancer In his nearest Approaches To the Throne of Grace.

From my lodging this 22. of the 8. Month. 1656.

The Reply.
This is the recapitulation of the whole, which I have showed partly not
subject to so harsh a censure, partly built upon a weak foundation, and
therefore I shall need to say the less to it. Yet because I may not leave you
unsatisfied in the least, I shall give you some short animadversions upon this
also.

1. You here set down your whole platform, shaping it into the fashion of a
natural body, which has essential and integral parts; and till the Parochial
be so qualifyed, you afford it no mercy, nor hope of solid peace.

Your constitution of a Church I allow of, both in the essentials and the
integrals; for it is a body, and must be so composed; and when organical, if
perfect, it must be entire. In the General then I shall agree with you, but in
the special assignation of your parts will lie the difference.

For what Church is there of what Sect soever, that does dissent in general
terms from this assigned and necessary constitution, that you may know that it
is no special Character of your Combinational, or as you call it here the
Presbyterial Church? The Brownists, Barrowists, Anabaptists, Presbyters,
Socinians, Episcopal men, will allow you visible men for your matter, a
Covenant for the form, and Church Officers for the integral parts of your
organical body.

And for your matter, the Brownists, Barrowists, Anabaptists, Socinians will
agree with you, that they must be visible Converts, meaning thereby a company
of faithful people, every one whereof in the face of the whole Congregation
has given so clear tokens of true grace and regeneration, as has satisfied
the minds of all. This is to be proved by you; for Episcopal men with the
Presbyters require no more of visible members, than that they profess one
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, as I have proved before; for all that carry the
name of Christians, whether in sincerity or otherwise, they reckon in the
bosom of the Church, as in the type the Ark of Noah there were clean and
unclean Beasts, in the net good and bad fish. Judas among the Apostles, Ananias
and Sapphyra, Simon Magus, Demas, etc. among the baptized.

In your form also the explicit Covenant, the four forenamed will agree with
you; for your doctrine is, that this company must be incorporate by Oath and
Covenant to exercise all the parts of Christian Religion in one place under one
Pastor, to which they wll admit no more people then commodiously may with
their ease convene in one meeting house. This is endeavored to be proved by
you; but how weakly, I shall make it appear, when I come to examine your texts
you allege for it.

The Presbyters, though they like not your engagement, yet came somewhat near
to it in imposing their solemn League and Covenant upon the consciences of many
tender souls, who chose rather to be undone then to yield to their
incroachment; and how pleasing this was to God, you may judge by the success,
which is your own common argument. Now for the Episcopal men, they admit of a
Covenant also; but that is Baptism, which they say is the Sacrament of
Admission into the Visible Church; and this I have proved to be sufficient; and
another Covenant more than needs.

In the enumeration of your integral parts, your Teacher, your Pastor, your
Rulers, your Deacons, your Widows for the general, I know not any man that will
gainsay you, and some of your Texts do well prove it. But in the Misnomer of
these, and their absolute necessity there is not a full agreement. For Mr. Cann
at Amsterdam thought his Church sound enough when in his Church there was but
one Pastor, Bailey page 15.
and could not agree till very lately of any other Officer; and in the year
1645. they lived without an Eldership, as they did before without a Pastor.

And first touching your Teachers and Pastors, I have before showed you that
it is not necessary that they be distinct persons, both the duties being
possible to be performed by one man, as it fell out at Geneva, where Calvin and
Beza, men of great abilities thought they might, and did supply both places
both of Teacher and Pastor; and your reason you here give, and your practice
also confirms me in it. For your Teacher you say must dispense the word of
knowledge and information to the judgment; and the Pastor the word of wisdom
and exhortation to the will and affections: Pray tell me what should hinder
that one and the same man may not teach and inform the judgment, and make wise
to salvation, exhort and move the will and affections in the same hour? Were
it otherwise, you your self preach by a wrong method, who explain and apply,
who raise a Doctrine out of your Text, by which you inform the understanding,
and then labor to apply it, and make it useful to the will and affections of
your Auditors. Tie up your Teacher to these strict terms, and he shall only
study positive Divinity, and your Pastor no Art more than Rhetoric,
especially that part that concerns (...); for he must be his master in that
before he shall work kindly upon the will, and move the affections of men.

Ille movet dictis animos and pectora mulcet. Besides, were these two Offices
so necessary, the Teacher should never stretch himself beyond his tether, but
stint and end when he has given forth and proved his Doctrine, and then your
Pastor should enter, take his Cue, and begin upon what is taught. But why do I
trouble my self in battering this Trivial, since among you it is not strictly
observed? for I dare say it, let a Scrutiny be truly taken, and it will be
found that not in one among ten of your Combinational Churches a man shall meet
with these two distinct Officers, your Teacher and Pastor. As for us, we
dislike them not; and where conveniently they might be had, and maintenance for
them, they were in use, witness the Professors of Divinity in our
Universities, and the Public Lectures and Readers in our Cathedrals; but to
bind every Parochial Church to this, or else it must be defective in an
integral part, is more than ever you will be able to prove, yea, or any man
else.

Next you insist upon your Ruler. And whoever yet denied that Rulers were
necessary in the Church, yea, and for that end (though not the sole) you name.
But none will content you, except they be of your own election and ordination,
none except the Lay Elders; this also must be proved by you. For you know we
had, and assigned others, and upon better grounds then you will be ever able to
disprove.

Your last Officers were Deacons and Widows, whom you make to be Receivers of
the weekly Contributions, and dispensers of it to three uses. In the Primitive
Church such I grant you there were, as is evident out of the Texts you allege,
and that to the last use they employed the collected money: But that any of it
was employed to the two first uses, either for the maintenance of the Table of
the Lord, or for the Tables of the Church Elders, I put you to prove again. And
for this last, I am persuaded it was not, these being likely (if ever there had
been any) as now among you, of the richer and abler sort, and therefore no
reason their Tables should be furnished out of the poor man's box. But if you
will take Elders for the true Presbyters of the Church, such who were to labor
in the Word and Doctrine, I shall easily grant you that they had their
maintenance (till there was other provision made for them) out of these
Collections and Contributions, though not from the Deacons, but the Bishops
appointment. These Deacons and Widows are not in our Church now, and thereupon
infer it wants of its integral parts. No such matter, for these Officers were
but Temporary, taken up according to exigence of those times; for the necessity
being over, the Office was at end. When once Christian Princes, and charitable
men, provided by wholesome Laws away of relief for the poor, and assigned
Officers to that purpose, where Hospitals, Almshouses, Nosecomia, etc. were
erected and endowed to that end, there was no farther use of these Officers;
neither is the Church defective in an integral part, though now it want them,
as I before showed out of Aretius.

You have then taken a long day for obtaining mercy and settlement of peace to
the Church; if neither of these may be enjoyed, until it be reformed and
refined in the essential and integral parts according to your fancy. For what
can she not have her Officers, but of your appointment? no Rulers, except your
Lay Elders? no Members, but such visible Converts as you will be pleased to
admit? Lastly, be bound to her duty by no Oath, but by your explicit Covenant?
upon this you insist, this you labor to prove to the purpose, and as if you
intended to convince any opponent, you here heap Text upon Text out of Old and
New Testament, which I shall now consider how far they make to your purpose.

The first is out of Jerem. 50.5. They shall ask the way to Zion, with their
faces thitherward, saying, Come and let us join our selves to the Lord in a
perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgotten. Saint Peter teaches us that
unstable souls wrest the Scriptures, (...), a speech borrowed from those who
put a man upon a rack, which causes the man to speak what he never meant. And
this is the fault of too too many, who strain the Scriptures to a wrong sense.
Whereas they should first consult the Scriptures, and make them the ground of
their conclusions; they first harbor a strong conceit of the conclusion, and
then seek out Scriptures to confirm it. And this for the most part befalls not
yours alone, but all other wanderers from the Truth; they blot their books and
margents with variety of quotations out of Gods Word, as if by the inspection
only of their Copy this way, they purposed to affright the unlearned Reader or
Hearer into their opinion, who being astonished with the fearful noise of the
Chapter and Verse, (as the Frogs were upon the fall of the Log into the plash
of water) might presently stoop into a veneration of what is taught. Here I
meet with seven places alleged for your explicit Covenant; but I adjure you,
as you will answer it at the great day, whether you are fully persuaded in your
soul and conscience, that either the Prophets or Apostles had an eye to it when
they wrote those words, and what assurance you can give us that this must be
the sense and no other. For if you have not a certainty of faith in this
behalf, you do very ill to produce these Texts, press them upon tender
consciences, and to maintain a Rent, a Schism, a Separation in the Church of
Christ. That which makes me, and should you, suspect your sense of these
places, is, that having consulted with the best and wisest Expositours I have
upon them, I find not one syllable that sounds to that you intend and collect
from thence. What, Masters, are you the sole wise men? were all men blind till
you arose? Besides, it is not long since there was an Oath and a Covenant
eagerly pressed, and then the Covenanters served themselves with these Texts;
then they sounded in our ears these words of Jeremy, Come let us join our
selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgotten. Then
the people were terrifyed with the words of Ezekiel, I will cause you to pass
under the rod, and will bring you into the bond of the Covenant. Then the
Covenant of Moses, of Joshua, of Asa, of Josiah, of Nehemiah, in a word; all
places that mentioned a Covenant, were pressed and urged to attest the
necessity of that Oath. What, is now Gods Word become a ship-mans hose, that it
may be worn on either side? what, Presbyterians and Combinationals justify
their way from the same Texts? this cannot be; for if it serve one, it will not
serve the other; if it serve to prove a National Covenant as that was, it will
never prove a Combinational, since these two are disparata, and admit no
reconciliation, no more then a National and Combinational Church can be one.
One of you it is certain juggle with us, and go about to impose upon us, and the
truth is, you do both so, as shall appear upon farther examination.

A custom it was among the Jews, when they had revolted from God to Idols,
solemnly to renew their first Covenant with him, and to take him to be their
God, renouncing all other, and to be his people, and observe his Laws, which
gave occasion to all the former practices: In Jeremies time for their Idolatry;
especially the Jews were to be carried into Captivity; but the Prophet in this
Chapter and the next foretells the ruin of the Babylonians their severe
Masters, and their return, which when it came to pass, then says he, they
shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, etc. It then cannot be
denied, but this Text must primarily be understood of the Jews, and if ever it
were literally fulfilled, it was when in Nehemiahs days, Nehem. 9.38. and
10.28, 29.
the Princes, Levites, Priests made and wrote, and sealed the Covenant, in
which the people engaged wiih them: and let me tell you, that the Jews in the
principal point ever after kept this Covenant, and so it may well be called
perpetual; for after their return from Babel, though they were divided into
diverse Sects to the corruption of sincere Religion, and were guilty of many
other abominations, yet no man can charge them with the worship of strange
gods. Of the Jews then these words were spoken, and in them verifyed, and
cannot be applied to the Christian Church any other way but by the way of
accommodation. For say I shall allow you that the Jewish Church was the type of
the Christian, then the Christian must be the antitype; and what then will you
gain by it, except the overthrow of your own cause? for the antitype must every
way resemble the type, which in this it will not. For this Covenant was
voluntary, Come* say they let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual
Covenant. You press necessity upon men's consciences; this explicit Covenant
is the essential form of a Combinational Church, so that no Covenant, no Member
of the Church, to which Christ has promised salvation. The Covenant in which
the Jews engaged, was of the whole Nation, yours is of a selected people in a
Nation. They, the whole Corporation of them, notwithstanding this Covenant,
continued to be a National Church, went up to Jerusalem at their solemn Feasts,
separated not into private divisions and subdivisions. You by your Covenant are
enemies to all National Churches, make it a distinctive note, not of true and
sincere worshippers from Idolatours, but of those which profess the same faith
with you from those of your Congregation, that I say not, you have as many
Covenants as there be factions and fractions among you.

That every good Christian daily come up closer to his God, by joining in a
perpetual Covenant, and by renewing his vow made in his Baptism to renounce,
to believe, and obey, I exceedingly approve. But that this cannot be done,
except he enter a new Covenant in your Congregation, or that he is bound to do
it, or can be no Member of a visible Church, I shall never believe; for mark
what will follow upon it. First, there must be a dissolution made of all the
reformed Churches of Christendom, that there may be way made for this new
erection; for the Covenant sealed to their Members in Baptism will not serve
the turn, till they have a new admission and matriculation by this seal and
engagement.

Then again, consider what countenance is hereby given to the whole order of
Roman Votaries, which to me seem very like to so many Combinational Churches,
in that, every order have their particular statutes, to the observation of
which they tie all they take into their societies, and upon the Vow and
Covenant made, they are admitted. Only that in this they are a little more
charitable than you are, that they acknowledge such as are out of their
fraternities for good Christians, and Members of the Catholic Church: But you
judge those who are not of one or other of your Combinations, to be Members of
no Church. And this is all you have gained by your Text of Jeremy. I now come
to that of the Prophet Ezekiel 20.37. where we thus read.

And I will cause you to pass under the rod; and I will bring you into the
Bond of the Covenant. The full scope of this place is at ver. 33. a promise
made to the Jews, that they should be gathered under the Gospel. To this end
God tells them, that I will cause you to pass under the rod, which whether it
signifies a sharp affliction, in which the Jews we know have had their share;
or else a trial by the rod, as a Shepherd does his flock, as was used in
decimation, I cannot say; if thls last, then the sense is, I will reject the
bad, and choose the good, Jun. in. loc. Levit. 27.32.
and will bring you into the Bond of the Covenant; or as Junius reads it, in
exhibitionem foederis, I will impart the Covenant of the Gospel unto you, and
all the blessings and promises of that Covenant, as it is here amplifyed in the
45. ver. Now let any man which is not swaid with prejudice, judge whether any
thing can be picked from hence, that can countenance your assertion. What, is
the Covenant that God has made with his people in the Gospel of no longer
extent than the Combinational Church? Out of this Covenant I know none can be
saved; without your Combinational Covenant I know they may, or else heaven
before you rose would be very empty, and the time since you rose being not
long, you have not sent many thither. Monopolize not then thus the mercies of
God to your selves, and ingrosse not the bounty of the Covenant to your own
Churches, lest you damn all the World besides. I must tell you the Covenant of
God with man will stand, and be made good, were there nere a Combinational
Church in the world; he can cause his people to pass under the rod, and bring
them into the Bond of the Covenant, without conducting them through that new
way of your Combinational Church. This place then makes nothing at all for you,
and it is a plain fallacy to argue a genere ad speciem, by which you collect,
that what is spoken in general of the Covenant, must be understood of your
Covenant, just as if a man should collect est substantia, ergo est corpus.

Your third place is out of Isa. 44.5 One shall say I am the Lords, and another
shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his
hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel. As if all this
could not be done, but within the walls of your meeting houses; As if none
could surname himself an Israelite, or subscribe with his hand Jehovae sum, but
he must enter your Combination. Interpreters have not thus restrained these
words, (I omit many of the Ancients, and make choice of the Moderns) not
Junius, not Piscator, not Sculetus; they unanimously teach, that under the
Gospel every one should subscribe and profess them sons and servants of God,
sons of the Church and Christians, who are called the sons of Jacob and
Abraham, Romans 4.11, 12. and 11.26. Gal. 3.29. and 6.16. and Scultetus so
applies it, Sic hodie omnes reformatae Ecclesiae mente and confessione
adjungimus nos Catholithae ill^ Ecclesiae piorum Jacobitarum and Israelitarum
ubi per orbem sint dispersi. See then what injury you do the Reformed Churches,
Scul^et. in loc.
and how far you are from their judgment. They could be content to be joined to
the Catholic dispersed all the world over; they thought that enough to make
them Israelites; you are more strait laced; they must be no Israelites with
you, no parts of the Church, except they be joined by a Covenant together in
your Combination. But remember in these words of the Prophet there is no
mention at all of a Covenant, and therefore it makes nothing at all to your
purpose. From the Old Testament you come to the New, and the first place you
bring, is, Acts 2.47. And the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be
saved.

Till you have made these two propositions good, that the Church here mentioned
is the Combinational Church; and that this Church was joined together in such a
Covenant as you imagine, I see not to what end you should produce it: when that
is done, you shall receive my answer. In the mean time I shall tell you what you
might well have collected from hence; that ordinarily there is no salvation to
be had out of the Catholic Church, and therefore it is the mercy of God by the
Ministry of the Word, to add daily to it such as shall be saved. These
conclusions are rightly drawn; but to assert, God added to the Church daily
such as should be saved, therefore they that will be saved, must be Members of
a Combinational Church, therefore added by your Formal Covenant, savours
neither of Logique, nor Charity.

Romans 14.1. Him that is weak in the faith receive you, but not to doubtful
disputations. Graec. (...). The Reply.
The farther I go, still the weaker I find your proofs, and I heartily wish
that you would not deceive those who are weak in the faith with such shows,
being those little birds that are over eager to peck at your painted grapes;
such you present here in colors laid over with your own Art; for there was Art
in it in figures to point me to the Chapter and Verse, and not at full to cite
the words, as indeed you have done in all the rest, which had you produced, it
would have at first amazed a Reader to find out your Riddle, or what was to be
found in them (there being no syllable of Church or Covenant) that might be
useful to you in this debate: as it did me, till at last I cast my eye upon
(...), receive him; for than I began to think that that might be it, and that
from it you would conclude, that a man weak in the faith must be received into
the Combinational Church: but that methought could not well be it neither,
since the man about whom the precept is given, is (...), a weak and sickly
Christian; whereas all those that you receive, must be healthy, strong
Christians, no Babes, but Men, all tried and approved for regenerate persons,
Bailey page 134.
such of whom every Member of the Church may be fully satisfied in the truth of
the grace that is in them, Cottons way. page 7.
and the sutablenesse of their spirits with the Spirit of the Church. All this
considered, I could not tell what to make of your allegation, and I was once
resolved to let it pass without any farther examination. But being desirous to
remove every scruple, I thought it best, fully to open the Apostles intent and
meaning in this Chapter, which being cleared, the mist you brought over it
would easily vanish.

Though the Apostle inscribes his Epistle to the Romans, yet among them there
were many natural Jews dispersed thither, who could not be dissuaded easily
from the Mosaical abstinences, but continued their obligation to the Law, even
after they had received the Christian Faith. There were also among these some
who were Proselytae portae, who were bound to observe the seven Commandments of
Noah, but being not circumcised, were not strictly bound to observe the Law of
Moses. Christians both these were in the positive part, acknowledging so much
as was required by the new Articles of the Creed, etc. yet in the negative part
they were not; they held the Judaical Law not to be evacuated, and so weak and
feeble some of these were in the faith, that lest they should offend in eating
forbidden flesh, some would eat no flesh at all, and came to eat nothing but
herbs. About these sick, these weak, Ver. 2.
these scrupulous, these tenderhearted and lesse-instructed Christians, the
Apostle gives these directions. First, that the stronger and healthier, more
orthodox and knowing, do (...), assume and take them to them; First, friendly
to afford them communion, and not to separate from them for this error; next,
to labor to cure their malady, and get them out of their mistake; Thirdly,
that they do not vilify them, (...) ver. 3. set them at naught, as if they
were senseless empty fellows. Lastly, that they be not over contentious, and
hot in disputations with them; for though they err, yet they were not to be
disquieted, but to be informed and tolerated; God has received him: ver. 3.
who then art thou that judge another man's servant? ver. 4. Imitate good then,
and show this weak brother mercy, assume and receive him to friendship and
communion first, then help and cure him from his former defect or disease, and
labor to bring him to perfect growth and health in Christianity. This is the
full scope and intent of the Apostle, that charity be showed to a weak brother.

Now was this Weakling in the Church before the Apostle writ, or was he not? it
were against reason and the purport of the Epistle to say he was without: Chap.
1.7, 13. Ver. 10.14, 21.
the Epistle is written to the Saints at Rome; in this very Chapter he is said
to be in the faith, and five times called a brother. And if he were within, to
what purpose do you urge the reception of him that was received already?
Received then he was to be for instruction, for information, for cure, as you
do, and may do those who are already in the bosom of your Church; and yet I
hope you will not be overhasty to conclude that then he was first received.
When a Mr. bids one of his better Scholars take such or such a Boy to you, and
instruct him perfectly in the meaning of this or that Rule, will you say that
the child was first entered into the School? The case is the self-same, and
therefore you can conclude nothing from this Apostolical direction, and much
the less if you take to consideration the following words, take him not to any
doubtful disputations, take him then to you; but not by vain disputes and
cavils to raise more doubts in his head, but to allay and satisfy those which
are already raised.

But well to grant you more than I need, or ever you can prove, that the man
was to be admitted, and to be received now into the Church; was there no other
way of entrance but your explicit Covenant? this you must prove, or else this
Text will never suit to your purpose, which will then be done, when any of
Anaxogoras Scholars will prove the snow not to be white. But I go on as you
lead me to,

2 Cor. 8.5. And this they did, not as we hoped, but first gave their own
selves to the Lord, and unto us by the will of God. The Reply.
It is of the Macedonians that the Apostle here speaks, and of their ready
mind, and liberal hand to contribute to the necessity of the poor Saints at
Jerusalem; Ver. 3.
From a people in no plentiful condition such a liberality could not be
expected; yet says the Apostle this they did, praying us with much entreaty to
receive the gift, Ver. 4.
and take upon us the fellowship of ministering to the Saints; their Alms, their
Contribution they brought to Saint Paul, and entreated him earnestly to take
the care of it, and find a way to see it disposed of to the Saints
necessities. Now, says the Apostle, such was this their readiness and bounty,
that they gave far more than ever we could have hoped from so indigent a people.

And that you marvail the less at this their liberality, a thing of a greater
price they had than their money, their souls, their bodies, the whole man, and
this they gave also, even themselves; first to the Lord, then to us; to the
Lord, whose due it was, to us, as the Lords servant and Minister; aliter
domino, aliter servo, to the Lord, under whose pover by right we are, Muscul.
in loc.
being our Redeemer and Savior: but to Paul, as the Lords servant and Apostle,
when they yielded themselves to obey, and be lead by his Doctrine. These three
things chiefly may be collected from this place, that fullness of piety
consists in this.

First, that we give our selves to God.

Secondly, that we give and yield our selves to his Ministers, as is the will
of God.

Thirdly, that we love the Brethren, and according to our abilities supply
their necessities. All which was done before the Combinational Church was heard
of, or entering by a Covenant thought of, yea, and perhaps better too; for let
it not displease that I whisper in your ear, that I never heard any great good
report of any of your Combinational Churches for their liberality and bounty to
the poor distressed Saints; it is observed that you are quick-handed with the
Rake, but very slow with the Fork.

But what is it that in this verse you catch at? Is it dederunt scipsos nobis?
It Is an argument of a desperate cause, when men lay hold on any thing that may
but seem to make for them, as you do here, as if you thought that because with
such annotations you carry the Vulgar into a belief, you must have all other
for your followers. There be that can tell you, and make it good, that good
Christians may give themselves to Paul, and be ^bedient and obsequious to his
Ministers, and yet never come within the Walls of your Combinational Churches;
nay, I am bold to say it, the less they come there, the more docible and
ducible they will be; ever since they have came among you, they have taken out
Corabs Lesson.

2 Cor. 9.13. Whiles by the experiment of this Ministration, they glorify God
for your professed subjection unto the Gospel of Christ, and for your liberal
distribution unto them, and unto all men. The Reply.
The end of the example of the Macedonians liberality proposed by the Apostle,
was to stir up the Corinthians to the like beneficence, and it had the hoped
effect, as is evident in the former and this Chapter, of which when the Saints
of Jerusalem should have experiment, they would glorify God; first, for the
Gentiles profession of the Gospel, and their subjection to it; then for their
liberal distribution and charitable benevolence which they bestowed upon their
needy brethren. This is the plain sense of the words.

And he had need to have a very sharp and piercing brain that can fish out any
thing from hence in the favor of a Combinational Church, or an explicit
Covenant. What, can there be no profession of Christianity, or no subjection to
the Gospel, except in such a Church? so you seem to say in your following
words, of which I shall consider hereafter. O poor Grecians, oh miserable
Armenians, Melchits, Russians, Cophties, Aethiopians, that I name not the
Reformed Churches that are not within, and most of them never heard of your
Covenant; for by your Rule they are no Professors of Christ, neither were ever
subject to the Gospel. And in what a damnable condition then they are, let the
world judge.

I must profess ingenuously unto you that when I read these your proofs for
your explicit Covenant, that had I been educated among you, and one of your
Church, it would have made me doubt of your whole plat-forme, when the very
formal cause, which is the main principle that gives essence, being, and
operation unto anything, is built upon so sandy a foundation, a foundation that
is not laid upon any pregnant Text of the sacred Record, but such slender and
far fetched, and forced collections as these are. I beseech you weigh them once
more in the balance of sad reason, and set aside passion, humor, fancy,
prejudice, and overmuch love to that cause you labor to defend, and say if
you can without blushing whether they directly speak out, what you have
produced them to witness. It Is no llight offense to take Gods Name in vain,
but to deliver that for his word which he never spoke nor meant, is a heinous
transgression. You seem to me to have done that here, which you and I and
others were won^ to do in the Schools, when we were young Sophisters; our aim
you know was to press the respondent with an argument, till we had clapped upon
him a Text of Aristotle, which he durst not for shame deny; whether the
Philosopher intended to say that in that place, for which we produced his
words, we never regarded; we thought it enough if we put our Adversary to a
nonplus: And thus you have done here, offered your assertion and backed it
with This is witnessed by God in Jeremy, Ezekiel, Isaiah, Saint Luke, Paul, not
much regarding what was the purpose of the Spirit in those words; sufficient I
suppose you thought it, to say something that might serve the turn for the
present, and nonplus a weak Adversary. But it ought to be Truth for which we
should contend, and not victory, which will never be, till we weigh our words
in the balance of the Sanctuary, and value our Texts by weight, and not by
number. God amend what is amiss; for, Iliacos inter muros peccatur and extra.

Till then, to use your own words, nor you nor we can upon good grounds expect
the manifestation of sure mercy, or the enjoyment of solid peace. You go on.

Knowing that Combinations are properly appertaining to vile and violent
sinne-loving sinners, as is showed by the Oracles of God, Psalm. 5.5 and 11.5,
6. Rev. 14.10. and 22.15. The Reply.
This no man will deny you. And you prove it well out of the Psalms and the
Revelations; but if you will be pleased to consult the places, and view the
Characters by which those vile and violent sinne-loving sinners may be known,
you may with a wet finger pitch upon the men. Only I shall desire you in that
twenty second Chapter of the Revelations to look a little further, and at the
twenty ninth verse you shall read, that if any man shall take away from the
words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the
book of life, and out of the holy City, and from the things that are written in
this book. Tantum veritati obstrepit adulter sensus, Tertull.
quantum corruptor stylus. I say no more, we have enough to tremble at.

And that Church-promises and that Church Priviledges as well as Christ's
Consolations, are pecullarly applicable to such Covenant-makers with God and
men, as through the strength of their surety are Covenant-keepers with both.
The Reply.
This is well observed by you, for there is no reason that any man expect a
comfort or benefit from any promise, or by any privilege, who does not as much
as lies in him, keep the condition of that Covenant upon which the favor was
promised. The privileges we know, and of the promises we are not ignorant; but
if they belong to none but such who have made and kept their Covenant with God
and man, then let them look to it that have kept neither. In the next place,
you show us the way how this may be known.

Which Covenant-making and Covenant-keeping is expressed and perceived by a
regular walking toward them who are without, as well as toward them that are
within, according to what is written, Isa. 55.3. Gal. 6, 16. and 1. Tim. 4.8.
The Reply.
That godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise of the life
that now is, and that which is to come: that as many as walk according to this
Rule shall find peace and mercy, 1 Timothy 4.8. Gal. 6.16.
is evident by these Scriptures, and therefore the Prophet calls, Incline your
ear and come unto me, h^ar, and your souls shall live, Isa. 55.3.
and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of
David. Thus much is here expressed, and you over and above show us how it may
be perceived; even by a regular walking toward them that are without as well
as toward them that are within: which rule of yours, had some had a care and
conscience to walk in, I assure my self those who are counted to be without,
had been better dealt with. For the inhumanity and incivility that some have
found from your Combination has alienated many a man's mind, and as I have been
credibly informed, kept off many a poor Heathen from turning Christian. I could
tell you, if I list, an odd story, but I spare you. You may read it in Dr. S
erres History of France, in the life of Lewis the ninth.

If you can tell any such tidings as a heavenly promise to unheavenly persons,
etc. The Reply.
I, nor any Orthodox or conscientious Minister has or will ever undertake to
bring any such tidings. It Is not unknown to you that I have reduced all the
Articles of the Creed to practice, and drawn into duty the whole Catechism;
without any ifs or ands here is no promise made to an unheavenly person. We
constantly teach that we were therefore delivered from the hands of our
enemies, that we serve God in righteousness and holiness without fear all the
days of our life; you needed not therefore closely by your if, insinuated us
as guilty for teaching false and impious Doctrine. If there be any among you,
that being wolvs in sheeps clothing, send abroad their Diurnals stuffed with
such news, we are not apt to believe them; for heaven is prepared for heavenly
persons. But then again we say, that all those whom you will call heavenly, are
not presently so, because daily experience informs, that they mind too much
the things of the earth: neither are many of those unheavenly, whom you
superciliously cast aside. God be blessed for it, heaven is a large place, and
in it are many Mansions, and they are prepared for more than ever yet were of
your Combination.

Or a holy privilege to the souls or seed of unholy parents, that you would
find in your heart to give me some notice thereof, and to acquaint me with any
of those good grounds of any lively hope, that they shall be everlastingly
happy, is the last of those motions, which I make bold for to leave with you to
consider and meditate upon. The Reply.
Your proposal is disjunctive, and therefore must receive a different answer;
for you cunningly clapped together things that should be separated, there being
great disparity betwixt the souls and the seed of unholy parents. That the
souls of unholy parents shall be everlastingly happy, I know not any man that
is conversant in the Scriptures will dare to affirm, since into heaven no
unclean thing shall enter; and therefore, Revel. 21.27. 1 John 3.3. 2 Cor. 7.1.
he that has this hope purifieth himself, even as he is holy; and to that
purpose those directions and exhortations are, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore
these promises dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness
of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, and Romans
12.1, 2: 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. with infinite places to the same purpose. Do we not
teach the Doctrine of Regeneration, as well as your selves? that a man must be
born again if he will enter into the Kingdom of heaven? and that of this
Doctrine there be two parts, John 3.3. Romans 6.
a death to sin, and a life to righteousness? your demand is therefore very
unreasonable, and I interpret it somewhat like a mock, that I would find in my
heart to give you some notice of that, which you know I do not defend, and
acquaint you with the grounds of that which has no ground, and therefore no
good ground to stand upon. This motion then, as touching this part, might have
been spared, and needs from me no farther consideration and meditation, except
it be to practice it. And to that end, you and all other Christians have need
of it also, if they are desirous to have a lively hope, that they shall be
everlastingly happy.

Now to that other part of this disjunctive, [or the seed of unholy parents]
you by this time know what I will answer, that there is a right and privilege
belonging to the seed, if the parents though wicked, be Professors and Members
of the visible Church. It is but in vain to repeat the grounds upon which I
have formerly defended it, and till I see them made n^ll* I shall defend it
still; and yet not so frowardly and obstinately, but that when I am convinced,
I shall readily yield. You conclude all with these words.

This motion is my heavenly motion for my self, the granting of which will
engage me, yet further, to be, to remain, and also acknowledge my self,

From my lodging this 22. of the 8. Month. 1656.

Your thankful Remembrance^ In his nearest Approaches To the Throne of Grace.

The Reply.
That the motion is for your self, I very much respect it, because I have ever
since I knew you, born unto you much affection, as judging that dislike you
bore first to this my Mother of England, to proceed rather from a mistake in
judgment, than any peevishness, malice or frowardness of will, not from any
carnal or secular end, but from tenderness of heart. But now that you have
added heavenly to it, it quickens me to embrace it the more; for what friend,
what Christian friend, would not lay out himself to help his friend forward in
his way to heaven? It was Cains churlish answer, what am I my brothers keeper?
this is the voice of a Reprobate, not of one guided by the spirit of lenity;
for such a one knows he ows to his brother consilium and auxilium, Bernard.
and that debt I have here paid. If it may any way conduce to that end I intend
it, let God have the honor, whom I have often solicited in my prayers to
assist and direct me in it. All the weakness I take to my self, and shall be
ready to acknowledge and retract it, when discovered. Some passages in it you
must needs pass by, because you begin, and a reviled parent has made a dumb
son speak. If the words seem many, consider how many and several things I had
to answer. In this length, I have studied brevity, and said as little as I
could to every head, and yet not so little, but I hope I have cleared up all
difficulties. If it work not fully to change your judgment, yet I hope it may
have this effect, to make you conceive a little better of our cause then
hitherto you, or rather yours have done, and that it is not without reason,
that we remain what and as we were. Pray let us have your pity, if we may not
partake of your mercy, and think of us yet so charitably, as Luther did of the
Anabaptists of his t me, O quam honesta mente hi miseri errant, it is with a
good meaning these poor souls do mistake, and therefore made a request unto
Frederick Duke of Saxony, that in his Dominion they might be favorably dealt
withal and spared; for that their error exempted, they seemed otherwise very
good men. The infamy that we were wont to be loaded withal, was, that we were
worldlings, time-servers, pleasers of men, not of God; but time has washed off
these aspersions, and showed that we have little regarded the world in
comparison of that we are fully persuaded is truth, and Gods Ordinance. Those
indeed among us who were time-servers, have served the time, and become
servants of men; and if you look with an impartial eye upon the men, you have
little reason to boast of your purchase by them, being for the most part such,
who should not have been continued among us, but have been ejected by us, could
the desires of honest men have prevailed. The better part have been constant,
chose rather to lose all, then not to follow Christ. Nudi nudum. Some pity then
I beg, if it be but for their sake.

You may perhaps except, that in many passages I make use of the Fathers,
Councels, and Church-Records. Pray remember that you began the way, and cited
to my hand Eusebius, Socrates, Evagrius, the book of Martyrs. Secondly,
remember of what the controversy is. It is about the Agends, and practice of
the Church in all ages, and of that how can any man be certifyed but by
Records? he must be held an unreasonable man, who would look to find that in
the Scriptures, no part of which was written in the Apostles days, and could
not therefore relate what was done afterward. If any thing in them can be found
contrary to the Scriptures, by their own open Confession they may be rejected.
But when they tell you plainly what they were taught out of the Scriptures, and
what they find generally believed and practiced through the whole Church, have
they not reason to take it unkindly to be cast aside? If you will examine their
veracities by all those circumstances that are usually considered in taking
men's depositions, you will find them strong on their side. They were gracious
and right honest men, not only believed, but known to be such by all the world.
They are acknowledged on all hands to be so judicious, as would more blemish
ones judgment, than theirs, to call it in question. What they wrote of, were
matters of their own cognizance, art and profession, in which sure they would
have a great care not to be mistaken. Why then should we brand them, (in whom
there was so much ability and good meaning to inform us of truth) with the
imputation of falsehood and ignorance, flattering our selves, that new and
clearer lights shine unto us, and that we know better how to regulate Christ's
Church than they? Their private opinions do not interest our belief; in such
points we are as free as they. But when we find in them an universal
concurrence, and a constant narration of Apostolical constitutions delivered to
Apostolical men, and by them practiced, and so handed over from age to age, we
are deeply obliged to be well persuaded of it, and to embrace it, before any
new invention whatsoever.

Had the dispute been of Articles of Faith, I had forborne this passage, (for
those are of another consideration) but when it is merely of the Discipline of
the Church, and that which depends upon that Discipline, their authorities sway
very much with me, as all credible Authors must in matters of Fact, with all
wise men, without which it is impossible for any man to be informed and
confirmed in any thing that has passed in the world before he was born. I
shall desire you therefore to take this into your consideration, and not to
pass too hasty a censure upon the fathers, nor upon me for producing the
testimonies of those Fathers.

It is now high time for me to beg your pardon, for assuming so much license to
your trouble. To another I would have been more sparing; but to you I have thus
enlarged my self, because I heartily desire your information, at least, that
you may see that though I differ from you, yet it is not out of a stubborn and
perverse mind, nor self-will, as has been imputed to me, but upon such solid
and evident reasons as it will not be easy for you to revel. As I told you at
first, I am not of a contentious humor, nor love not to tug at one end of the
saw, if you or any other take a delight to tug at the other; I am sorry for it.
Far more comfort it were for us (so small is the joy, I take in those strifes)
to labor under the same yoke, Hookers preface.
as men that look for the same eternal reward of our labors, to be joined with
you in the bands of indissoluble love and amity, to live as if our persons
being many, our souls were but one, rather than in such dismembered sort to
spend our few and wretched days in a tedious prosecution of wearisome
contentions, the end whereof, if they have not some speedy end, will be heavy
even on both sides. The numerous company of Shakers, and other Sectaries that
have sprung out of your root, and the harvest the Pope has made by these
divisions, together with the herds of Atheists and profane persons, that as the
Locusts out of the bottomless pit are risen to overspread the Nation, makes
me more than fear what will be the end thereof. The manifest godliness we
glory in, is to find out somewhat, whereby we may judge others to be ungodly.
Each others faults we observe as matters of exprobration, and not of grief, and
then it is no marvail if the witty Atheists stand by and laugh, and warm
themselves at our fire.

I have here brought my bucket to extinguish it, and my earnest motion is to
you to bring another; I know your endeavor may contribute very much to the
cessation of this flame. Lay it to heart, and set it forward what you may, and
the God of peace will reward you for it. I have somewhere read of an answer
that Bishop Ridly then in prison, and condemned to dye, returned to a friend,
being informed that Mr. Knox was discontented with some things in the Liturgy,
which is worthy of Record, and worthy to be well weighed: Alas, says he, that
our brother Knox could not bear with our book of Common Prayer, in matters
against which, although I grant a man of wit and learning as he is, may produce
popular arguments, yet I suppose he cannot be able soundly by the Word of God
to disprove any part thereof. The like say I about the constitution of our
English Church and Discipline, though the wits of discontented men have been
sharpened to find out what to say against it, and their arguments have
prevailed too far on weak judgments, yet I know that no man can be able to
disprove any thing thereof from the Word of God; which as to me it seems, very
far prevailed after that conference at Hampton Court with Dr. Reinolds, who
after lived a very quiet, peaceable and sedentary life, never disturbed the
Church Government in the least, nor dissuaded any man from the embracing of the
Discipline of this Church; it may be his reputation would not suffer him
publicly to recede. And this, let me be bold to tell you so, is a great
Remo^a, that hinders many a learned man to confess his error, and retract. To
which, if that bewitching sin of profit be added, the man is charmed, as is the
Chobber Chobberim, the old Adder, that stops his ears at the voice of the
Charmer, charm he never so wisely.

And yet for all that, I will not despair, but will make a trial whether it be
possible to charm this serpent. Every man that undertakes to execute an office,
must be sure that his calling is justifiable; otherwise, though the work he
does be good, and his intent honest, yet he commits a grievous sin. There is no
office in the Church higher than that of the Minister, the duties he is to
perform are sacred, the administrations holy; he ought then to be fully upon
certain grounds confirmed, that he is called to administer, which can never be
without he derive his power from those to whom God has given a Commission.
That of the people, as I have proved, is a new, a slight, a fallacious
foundation, and for such I shall always account it, till I see it demonstrated
to the contrary. With what comfort then can any man execute his Ministry, who
till his Commission be assured to his conscience upon Scripture principles,
sins very hainously in every action that he does, though done with never so
honest a mind. The punishment of Nadab and Abihu for offering strange fire, of
Vzzah for touching the Ark, of Vzziah for invading the Priests office, ought to
sink very deep into the heads and hearts of such men. Till they can assure me
infallibly that the Power of the Keys is in the people, which I am persuaded
they will never do, I shall never acknowledge their vocation, and therefore
much fear their doom.

This I would have seriously weighed, and God Almighty give the success to it;
then I shall the sooner hope that unity will be restored to the Church, peace
and prosperity to the Nation, Religion will again flourish, and the gates of
Zion shall be built; the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall
lie down with the Kid, and the Calf, Isa. 11.6.
and the young Lion, and the Fa^ling together, and a little Child shall lead
them, and the Cow and the Bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie down
together, 7.
and the Lion shall eat straw like the Ox, 8.
and the suckling Child shall play on the hole of the Asp, and the weaned Child
shall put his hand to the Cockatrices den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in
all my holy Mountain, 9*
for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover
the Sea. Which that it may come to pass, is the hearty prayer of him, who is,

Yours,
D^o Opt. Max. and filio suo Jesu Christo, and Spiritus sancto sit laus,
gloria, honor, in saecula saeculorum. Amen. Janu. 15. 1656.
-- Amphora caepit
Institui, currente rota, nunc uiceus exit.

FINIS.
Books printed or sold by William Leak, at the sign of the Crown in
Fleet Street, between the two Temple Gates.
YOrks Heraldry, Fol. A Bible of a very fair large Roman Letter. 4. Orlando
Furioso. fol. Perkins on the Laws of England. Wilkinsons Office of Sheriffs. 8.
Parsons Law. 8. Mirror of Justice. 8. Topics in the Laws of England. 8.
Delamans use of the Horizontal Quadrant. Wilbeys second Set of Music, 3, 4, 5,
and 6 parts. 4. Corderius in English. 8. Dr. Fulks Meteors, with Observations.
8. Malthus Artificial Fireworks. Nyes Gunnery and Fireworks. Cato Major with
Annotations. Mel Heliconium, by Alex. Ross. 8. Nosce te ipsum, by Sir John
Davis. 8. Animadversions on Lillies Grammar. 8. The History of Vienna and
Paris. 4. The History of Lazarillo de Toroms. Hero and Leander, by George
Chapman, and Chr stopher Marlow. The Posing of the Accidence. Guilliams
Heraldry. fol. Herberts Travels. fol. Man become guilty, by John Francis
Senalt, and Englished by Henry Earl of Monmouth. Aula Lucis, or the house of
Light. Christ's Passion, a Tragedy by the most learned Hugo Grotius.
Mathematical Recreations, with the Horological Dyal, by William Oughtred. 8.
The Garden of Eden, or an accurate description of Flowers and Fruit, now
growing in England, with particular Rules how to advance their nature and
growth, as well in seeds as herbs, as the secret ordering of Trees and Plants,
by Sir Hugh Plat. Knight. Solitary Devotions with man in glory, by the
Archbishop of Canterbury. 12. Exercitatio Scholastica. Book of Martyrs. fol.
Adams on Peter. fol. Willet on Genesis and Exodus. fol. The several opinions of
sundry Antiquaries, viz. Mr. Justice Dodrige, Mr. Ager, Francis Tate, William
Cambden, and Joseph Holland, touching the Antiquity, Power, and Proceeding of
the High Court of Parliament in England. The Idiot in four books; first and
second, of Wisdom; third, of the Mind; fourth, of the experience of the
balance. The Life and Reign of Hen. 8. by the Lord Herbert. fol. France
painted to the life, in four books, the second Edition. Sken de significatione
verborum. 4. The Fort Royal of Holy Scripture, by J. H. the third Edition. 8.
The sum of what is contained in the answer to the first part of the
Admonitory Letter.
THe controversy about the subject of the Keys opened. fol. 1.
Sect. 1.2, 3, 4.
The Author studious of Truth and Peace. fol. 3, 4. The Admonitours
distinction of three Visible Churches improper. fol. 5. Some observations about
the Domestical Church, and some mistakes in the Admonitory rectifyed. fol. 9.
The alleged Texts examined. fol. 10.
Sect. 5.
The words of the Admonitory drawn into Propositions and answered severally.
The Propositions out of the Letter, these. 1. That the Church of the last and
longest constitution was a Presbyterial or Combinational Church; this examined.
fol. 13. 2. That it is the opinion and practice of the Combinational Church to
subject their earthy, erring and unruly will to the heavenly, infallible and
uncontrolable will of Christ. It Is examined what truth may be in this
assertion. fol. 15. 3. That Christ peremptorily wills and enjoins all
Professour^ to be indoctrinated and disciplined by the present Ministry. This
granted. 4. That this prescribed Ministry must consist of Presbyters, and
Teaching and Ruling Elders. This proposition fully examined and refuted. fol.
18. 5. That these Presbyters, Teaching and Ruling Elders must be of the
Professing Members own voluntary Election and regular Ordination. This also
fully examined and refuted. fol. 24. 6. That the Ministerial Office must reach
from Christ's ascension to the dissolution of all things. This granted.

Sect. 6.
An answer to all the Texts produced by the Admonitour, as, Romans 12.7, 8. fol.
31. 1 Cor. 12.28. fol. 33. Ephesians. 4.14. fol. 36. Revel. 4.6. and 5.6. and
19.14. fol. 36, 37.

Sect. 7.
A Paraenetical conclusion. fol. 39. ad finem.
The Sum of the second part. page 46.
THe danger to assert the Church brought to a Sceleton. Sect. 1. fol. 47. The
corruption came not into the Church by such degrees as is supposed in the
Admonitory Letter. Sect. 2. The government of the Church proved to be
Aristocratical. 52. ad 59. A Presbytery with a Bishop the Apostles living. 59,
60. Of Patriarchs, Primates, Metropolitans, Bishops. 63. A little knowledge in
some men an occasion of error. 66, 67.
Sect. 3.
That the Combinational Churches corruption, was not the Cathed^al Churches
generation. 71. Churches at first could not be Combinational. 73. Of the names
of Teacher, Pastor, Ruler, Lord-Bishop, Dean, Chancellor, Surrogate,
Archdeacon. 75. No usurpation for Bishops assembled in Synods and Councils to
excommunicate offenders. 81, 82. This was not contrary to the Orthodox pattern,
Acts 15. 84. To censure any man's person, not the privilege of the Presbyterian
Church. 85, 86. That Alexander of Alexandria began not this usurpation against
Arrius. 88, 89.
Sect. 4.
That the Presbyterial Church in respect of its primitive constitution,
consisted not only of living stones. 91. That the rise of the rottening of the
Church was not its falling from a poor, pure, presbyterial Church, into an
impure, unpolished, parochial Church. 92. Of a Parson, Vicar, Warden, Over-seer
of the Poor, Widow, Midwife. 94. Of Polycarp and Iraeneus. 97.
Sect. 5.
The original of the Provincial Church, the Metropolitan, that this was no
degeneration, nor wisdom of the flesh. 99. The name, office of the Archbishop
not profane and blasphemous, but honorable. 101. Of the subservient names,
Prebend, Surrogate, Vicar General. 102. Of Austin the Monks conversion of
Britane, and Pope Gregory. 105, 106. Of the conversion of Britane to
Christianity. ibid.
Sect. 6.
That there is a National Church, and that this is consonant to Scripture,
reason, experience. 108. That the customs charged upon the National Church
taken up by Jewish imitation, is more than can be proved, or if true, yet not
therefore to be rejected. 116. The five instances examined. 1. National times
and feasts. 120, ad 127. 2. National places, as consecrated meeting houses, etc
ibid. 3. National persons, as universal Preachers, Office-Priests, etc. 132. 4,
National performances, as stinted worship, Choristers, etc. 135. 5. National
payments, as Offerings, Tithes, Mortuaries, etc. 146.

Sect. 7.
The charge is upon the Ecumenical or Roman Church, which concerns not the
Church of England, and therefore let them answer it.
The Sum of the third part. page 149.
A Preamble.
AN ingenuous confession of our just provocation of Gods anger, and a
justification of his proceeding against us, but that Papists and Sectaries
allege non causam pro causa, and the Author hopes that upon our repentance
and amendment, God may return and have mercy on us. 150. ad 153.
Sect. 1.
Of the vile and virulent head the Pope. ibid.
Sect. 2.
Of the British King, called in the Admonitory the violent head of this
National Church. 155, 156. That this National Church was not next in
naughtiness to the Roman. ibid. That the British King was no violent head,
since in his Dominions he was the supreme Governor. And every Superior is in
Church Matters Supreme, by occasion of which the supremacy of all Superiors is
vindicated. 156. ad 161. The Reasons of the Admonitour to prove the British
King a violent head, proved to be very weak. 161. ad 168.
Sect. 3.
Of the Provincial Church, and its haughty horrible head, as the Admonitour is
pleased to call him, the Archbishop. 170. Of the Cathedral Church, and its
head the Lordly Diocesan, blamed by the Admonitour to be an idle and addle
head. 172. The vial of Gods wrath poured on the Cathedral justly, but not
quatenus Cathedral. ibid. Of his Epithites, idle and addle. ibid. The title
lordly Diocesan examined. 173. The Prophecy of Isaiah, 13.19. ill applied. 74.
Of the Parochial Church and its head, the o^de and eldest evil head as he is
called in the Admonitory. 175. ad 178. The Combinational Church a tradition of
men. ibid. What is to be thought of traditions. 180. ad 182.
Sect. 7.
Of diverse other things jeered at in the Admonitory, as, 183. 1. Communion book
praying. 185. 2. Homily book preaching. 186. 3. Canon book swearing. 187. 4.
Covering or uncovering the head in time of divine service. 187. 5. Of outward
calling to be Overseers in a cleansed Combinational Church. 189. 6. Of reading
the Scripture in Churches. 190. 191, 192. 7. Of Romish Rites imputed to us.
194. 8. Of humane constitutions imputed to us, such as are, ibid. 1.
Matrimonial Banes. 195. 2. Marriage Rings. ibid. 3. The sign of the Cross.
196. 4. White Surplice. ibid. 5. Quiristers singing answered before, part 2.
142. 6. Funeral Sermons. 197. 7. Idol-sureties of Godfathers and Godmothers.
198.

The question discussed whether Baptism may be applied to the infants of
profane Christian parents? 202. ad 205. As also whether such, whom our
strait-laced men are pleased to call ignorant and scandalous livers, may be
admitted to the Lords Supper. 205. ad 212. Of the Pue called in the Admonitory
Monarchical, and the Ministerial Pulpit. 212. ad 215. A strange privilege
attributed to the Combinational Elders. viz. That the Elders must stand and sit
together in the face and full view of the whole Assembly. 217. An answer to the
recapitulation of the whole Letter. 224. In the constitution of a Church how
far all parties are agreed, in what they disagree, both in matter and form, and
integral parts. 224. ad 225. That the texts alleged being well examined, prove
not the Covenant required by a Combinational Church. 227. ad 236. A fault on
all hands for misalledging the text. We make no promise of eternal life to
profane persons. The conclusion wholly Apologetical. 238, etc.
Place these Tables before fol. 1.

Callis learned Readings on the Stat. 21. Hen. 8. Chapter 5. of Sewers. The
Rights of the People concerning Impositions, stated in a learned Argument, by a
late eminent Judge of this Nation. An exact Abridgment of the Records in the
Tower of London, from the Reign of K. Edward the second, to K. Richard the
third, of all the Parliaments holden in each Kings Reign, and the several Acts
in every Parliament, by Sir Rob. Cotton, Knight. and Baronet.
PLAYS.
Philaster. The Hollander. The Merchant of Venice. The strange discovery. Maids
Tragedy. King and no King. Othell^ the Moor of Venice. The grateful servant.
The Wedding.
FINIS.

