A WORD TO Mr. VVil. Prynn Esquire AND TWO FOR THE Parliament and Army.

Reproving the one, and justifying the other in their late proceedings.

Presented to the consideration of the Readers of Mr. William Prynns last Book.

LONDON, Printed for T. Brewster, and are to be sold at the West End of Paul's.
164^.

THere was never any age before this, in which writing was so much in fashion,
Scribimus indocti doctique; so as it should seem, there is a certain Letchery
in Scribbling; to which I fear, Mr. William Prynne of Lincolns Inn Esquire, is
not a little given. For how much Paper he has spoiled in this kind, I leave
to the judgment of all men that are not (as he) pretenders only, to learning.
When this disease first took him, he chose to make the Hierarchy his enemies,
afterward the King, the Queen, and all the Court at a time; when neither his
Pen nor sufferings (were he the man he would be thought) could advantage the
godly party. His Books were then as they are now, stuffed with nonsense,
railing, improper Instances misunderstood, and mis-applyed Authorities; only
he was ever most careful of a gingling Title, as unlovely love locks, unhealthy
drinking of healths, etc. And indeed, this may be said for him, His whole Book
is suitable to his Title. For writing these Books, he suffered very much; and
truly (as I think) not altogether undeservedly; for it cannot appear to any
reasonable man, that he brought himself into all his troubles, otherwise then
following his own wicked spirit of contradiction. For the Parliament as soon,
almost, as they were met together, sent for him (then a Prisoner,) they review
all proceedings both in the High Commission Court, and Star Chamber against
him, they vote them illegal, they restore what they can; his Liberty: but
instead of his Ears (they being irrecoverable) he is voted 5000 l.

A man might now without fear of being judged rash, engage himself for this
man's honesty to the Parliament; but as a Dog to his Vomit, he returns to
scribbling, and having caught at the desires of wisemen (who admitted him,
because of his sufferings to their company) fit some years after for
publication, he not being able to hold any longer, untimely acquaints the
people with what they were not then enabled to understand; by which means,
diverse persons staggering betwixt honesty and malignancy, quite fell off; and
many others pretty well inclined to the public, began to waver: and thus
fitted for temptation, soon found an opportunity of departing from us. Thus was
the common enemy furnished with friends, by the folly and letchery of writing of
M. William Prynne, and his companions, and put into a better condition of
rebelling against the Parliament, then otherwise he could have been.

The Wars begun, the Parliament seems something too strong for the King; the
Scots in consideration of a great sum of money, present us with a cheat, which
they call a Covenant, diverse honest men discovering the snare, avoid it. Here Is
an opportunity for the Crop-Eared Lawyer; he sees the Parliament breaking into
faction, and now he lays about him. First, he writes for the Scotch
Ecclefiastick Government in England, and within six weeks (in manner) against
it: The two Factions obtain names of Independent and Presbyterian, (which is
malignant jure divino,) he now calls them by their names, and rayls at them one
after another (till within these twenty months (or thereabouts) he has
contented himself to rayl only on one side.) This humor of his puts me in
mind of a Gentleman that was as nimble with his sword, as this Mr. William
with his Pen. It happened that two set upon one; this blade taking pleasure in
fighting, draws, and takes part with the single man: now they are two to two.
It fell out, that two men, friends to the single man come by, and seeing their
friend engaged, take part with him; the contentious Gentleman seeing that, goes
over to the other side, and making them three to three, fights as eagerly as
before.

Were we so happy, as to close up all breaches, and that all parties were now
resolved into one, this Mr. Prynne would singly oppose the whole Commonwealth,
and rayl, as dogs bark against the Moon.

Should the Apostles come from Heaven, sent thence to institute a Government,
Mr. Prynne would dissent from, and wrangle with them. I cannot therefore choose
but wonder, that he should be so much troubled at his sufferings, especially at
his present imprisonment: since, if he have but so much time as to look into
himself seriously, he must needs find that he can live in no place, nor in any
age, but that he must suffer. For making his Protestation, and Printing it, I
blame him not; for I believe he could not wellavoyd it, his fit thentaking him,
which must have its course; but that he should so much complain of his former
sufferings, is a nonsense (though nonsense be natural to him) that becomes
him not. His business is to write lies in the Name of the Lord, as the Priests
of that Sect Preach. To rayl, to jeer at Saints, being a name, in which he is
uninterested, and misapply Scripture. By these marks (as himself, by his no
Ears) has his style been hitherto known. I shall not advise him against
writing, it being as necessary as meat and drink, a thing without which, he
cannot live. But I would advise his Readers, to read him as they would read or
hear a tale of Oyster women soolding with each other at Billings-Gate.

That his Books can be of no advantage to the people in general, nor
particularly to any person, is most plain in themselves: for he does not only
make one discourse contradict another (which might be excused by his natural
infirmity of being inconstant) but even the same discourse contradict it
self. Besides, his scope is not to inform, but calumniate, to cast dirt in
the face (though if he throw it, it can stick no where long) of some one or
more men; and commonly he picks out the honestest and most faithful persons
too, nay, saviors of the Commonwealth; Witness his Protestation, in which he
endeavors, through the sides of Sir Hardresse Waller, and Colonel Pride, to
wound the whole Army, by whose valor the Commonwealth is safe, and from whom
only a safe and wel-grounded peace may be hoped for, and expected. He
complains in his Protestation, that coming to the House of Commons to
discharge his duty (his spleen he meant) for which reason he bought his
membership twenty pounds cheaper then Thomas Temple, (as Master Harris told
him) He was the sixth of December last stopped on the stairs, near the door of
the Commons House, and that ever since he has been restrained of his liberty,
which he calls a breath of Parliament Privilege. I did intend to have given
Mr. Prynne a particular answer, but because diverse other gentlemen are involved
in the same case with Mr. Prynne, I shall therefore give no other; Then (as
briefly as may be) to show that the Army was necessitated to what they have
done, and that the people could be no other way made safe, lying then upon the
brincks of ruin. The King (to whom the very name of Parliament was always
hateful) having so much discontented all his people, that in Scotland an Army
was raised against him, which he knew not how to oppose (the English looking
upon them as friends, and fellow sufferers) as his last refuge; (finding no
other way to secure himself) calls this Parliament: for which, as soon as
they meet together, they give him humble thanks, they bring him bills, which
he (not daring to deny) signs and assents to, and with such humble reverence
make their addresses to him, as if he were as much better then the best, as he
is worse then the worst of his Ancestors. The King finding how weak adversaries
he had to deal with, conceives new hopes of doing mischief, he tampers with
diverse men in the House of Commons, he corrupts some of the most eminent, as
the Lord George Digby, Sir John Culpepper, with some others, but finding
notwithstanding their Revolt, his party in Parliament not strong enough to
carry on his base designs, he flies to other practizes; he deals first with
the English Army, and that plot discovered, with the Scots, to destroy the
Parliament, and for their reward to take the plunder of London.

This failing, he urges earnestly to disband the Scotch Army only, in which
prevailing, he, against the Counsel of both Houses, in haste takes a journey
into Scotland, there he contrives two plots, the one of which took effect; the
most horrid and bloody that ever any age was witness to, the Irish Massacre,
and Rebellion, acted by his Commission, which was sealed in his own presence,
and sent into Ireland, as is confessed by a Scottish gentleman, in a book called
Truth its manifest.

Having done his worst in Scotland, he returns to London, and is received by
the Citizens in triumph; his hopes are every day more and more confirmed: Some
young gentlemen of the Innes of Court, with a number of dissolute, needy, and
debaucht Soldiers, and men of broken fortunes flock to White Hall.

Thus attended, he enters the House of Commons, and had he found them there, he
had taken away five of their members; the next day he goes into London, and
makes a fair speech, but obtaines no belief; He then goes to Hampton Court,
sends for some Aldermen, whom he endeavors to make his friends, them he
Knighted, and gave order to be sent home so drunk, that their heads aching the
next morning, all but Sir John Gaire, repenting their friendship, never did his
Majesty any service. From thence he goes to Dover with the Queen, whom he
sends into the Low Countries to pawn the Crown Jewels, and then flies into
open Rebellion.

The Parliament (though all his machinations and plots are discovered to them)
seek no way of remedy, but by Petition, (means very unlikely to work upon
his nature) till they were necessitated to take up Arms; and when they are to
declare it to the Kingdom, they cant, and tell them, it is for the defense of
the King and Parliament. Had they had but so much courage, as to have informed
the Common wealth of the Kings guilt, and that his own faults might have been
written in his own forehead, not an evil Council (a thing without body or
soul, an empty name, the old grave men's harmless bugbeare) the King either
had not found so many abettors, or the Parliament had been able in a few
months to have crushed all his forces, and to have brought himself to Justice.

In this canting course they steer the Common wealth, from the beginning of
the year 1642. to the end of 1644. both sides seeming so equally strong, that
(but for the cause) there was scarce any advantage discoverable: The Parliament
new model their Army, and in the mean time treat at Vxbridge. The treaty
ended without success, the new Model goes on; Sir Thomas Fairfax is made
General. The words, For preservation of the Kings person are not inserted in
his Commission, the King is now a common Rebel; we have now an Enemy to fight
with, and see how God blesses us upon it.

They meet no Enemies in the field, but they beat them (not as in the time of
the old General, that fought drawn battles (with no more advantage, then might
occasion a City feast) counting it a victory not to be beaten) they come before
no Town, but they take it in; and in less then eighteenth months reduce all
England and Wales to obedience.

The King thus broken in all places (least the harrast Country should enjoy
the benefit of Peace (which he might then have made) and miserable Ireland
obtain relief) falls again to plotting.

A little before the siege of Oxford, in a disguise, with one or two, he rides
through Norfolk and Suffolk, endeavoring to raise new Commotions; but the
Gentlemen of that Country, taking warning by other men's compositions, that
design came to nothing, so he leaves them, and commits himself to the Scottish
Army. After some money paid, the Scotch, his Countrymen (knowing him too well,
to care for his company, even in their own Land) deliver him up to the
Parliament. They, as men that never stated any quarrel, and could not tell what
to have, if God should give them victory, having him now in their hands, know
not what to do with him, They bring him to Holdenby, and put him into a
condition of making all Knaves that come near him; in a short time he
administered, and sent (by his several Agents) so much poison to the Parliament,
that had it not pleased God to strengthen the hearts and hands of the Army, he
had been a year and a half since restored to his place and power; and by this
time, those few that had survived, had been the unhappy witnesses of a
miserable Land.

For Mr. Denzil Hollis, who was long since touched and infected by the King,
and the disease being contagious, had in time infected diverse of his company,
as Sir William Waller, Sir Philip Stapleton, and many others, (they together
making up a Committee of eleven, besides my Lady Carlisle) plotted and contrived
to restore the King upon his own conditions: To which purpose they consider of
how little the King may offer the Parliament, and how able they should be to
persuade them that those offers were satisfactory; in have they send Letters to
the Queen, and in them their opinions, how the Commonwealth might be cheated;
she returns their Papers, with amendments, which they send to the King; who
(following their advice) sends to the Parliament a Message, the twelf of May,
1647. Which caused all that Petitioning, and all those tumults which followed
immediately after; forcing into the very house of Commons, compelling the
Speaker to put what questions they pleased, and the Houses to vote them.

Upon these just fears (there being no other refuge) the honest Members of each
House fly to the Army, the Army receive them, and marching up to London, reseat
them in their several Houses, and return to quarter, as before, in the
Country, every day drawning further from London, least they might seem to be a
force upon the Parliament.

The Parliament now freed from tumults, and the Heads of that Faction which had
so long hindered Peace, fled into parts beyond the Seas, it was hoped that we
might see an happy end of all our troubles. The Parliament consider of
Conditions of Peace to be sent to the King, and accordingly send them to
Hampton Court; but he refuses them, and in hopes of doing mischief (which is
the groundwork of all his designs) puts on a new disguise, and goes to try
his fortune in the Isle of Wight; whither also they follow him with
Propositions for Peace: But he being vir sanguinum, will have no Peace, unless
such an one, as may put him into a capacity of being heavier upon the people,
then a continued War.

Hereupon, the Parliament Vote no more Addresses to the King; the Army hearing
of their Vote, engage themselves to live and dye in maintaining it.

The eyes of all good men are now upon the Parliament, hoping to see the
Commonwealth settled in a short time. But the Malignants having shaken hands
with the Malignants jure divino, contrive a new War, which begins with
Petitioning, the Counties of Bucks, Surrey, Essex, and Kent, ply the Parliament
with Malignant Petitions. Wales without that formality flies into actual
Rebellion: This occasions the dividing of the Army; to each party of which, it
pleased God to give such victory, as that his own hand was more especially seen
in every one of them.

The Army now wholly employed, the Malignant party of both Houses send diverse
of their Members of the honest party into their several Countries, under
pretense of suppressing Insurrections: And now (being able to Vote what they
list) they call home, and restore to their places in Parliament, Mr. Hollis,
Sir John Clotworthy, and eight more, whom they had not long before expelled the
House, as guilty of high Treason, and other misdemeanors.

Now they may truly be called the Kings two Houses, and as diligently act his
part, as if it were their own; only this misfortune intervened, the Countries
being a little beaten, inclined generally to peace; and the honest Members had
leisure to attend the service of the House (a rub not easily to be removed.)
However they continue their endeavors; and since they can work it no more to
their advantage, they Vote a Personal Treaty with the King in the Isle of Wight.

In this condition was the Parliament, from the beginning of the last
Rebellion, to the coming in of the Army.

In public Affairs, the King had bought the greatest part, in private their
particular Clyents; no Justice could be had at any Committee, nor in the House
it self, without money (except for Malignants of one sort or the other,)
Venalis curia Patrum.

The Writs that were sent into Cornwall, under the Parliaments Seal, for
Election of Burgesses, brought up a great number of Malignants to the House;
for the Gentry of that County (who rule the people as slaves) having engaged in
the Rebellion (and therefore incapable of being chosen) sold places to men
ill-affected, for as much money as they could get. A Gentleman going to Mr.
Harris, and acquainting him with his desires to serve in Parliament, received
this Answer, That he knew not of any Borough that was unprovided; but if any
such there were, it could not now be had for a hundred pounds. To live under
such a supreme power, is such a Tyranny, as never any English man was yet
acquainted with.

And this Parliament must continue till it be dissolved by Act: At the time
when the Act was past for continuing the Parliament, till it should be
dissolved by Act, They had furnished the Kings necessities, they had removed
that War which the King by his injustice had drawn upon the English Nation,
they paid the Army which he had raised, they had contracted several great
public Debts, for which they could have no other security; as also that
grievances should be redrest: they by reason of those troubles which the King
still gave them, not having time sooner to consider of them: Besides, the
Parliament was then honest, fit to reform, which it was not now, at the time
when the Army came into London. If it be a sin in a particular person to
neglect an opportunity of doing good, it is much more a sin in this Army, whom
God has owned so wonderfully in all their Actions, and whom (I am confident)
he has raised to do this work. It is (therefore) ignorance or malice in them,
that publicly write and prate in Pulpits, and at other meetings, That it is a
great Breach of Parliament privilege, to stop the Members going into the House
to discharge their duty: Had it been to discharge their duty to the Countries
and Towns, for which they were elected, they had not been stopped. But Mr.
Prynne, and the rest of his imprisoned friends came with no such intention;
they came to serve the common enemy, and to deserve at his hands the Offices,
and such other things as he has promised them, and would, should he be
inthroned, cheat them of, except he chance to find a knave or two amongst
them, more able to help him in cousening the people, then those fellows whom he
had earlier engaged in that employment. They indeed may live gallantly, and
enjoy every thing but a good conscience; and dying, shall leave their children
a rich inheritance of slavery and thraldom.

For my part, I honor Parliaments so long as they Act in Order to the public
good: But if, like standing pooles, they only gather mudd and filth, I think
it very fit to cleanse them. This trouble the Army has taken upon them, which
if they had not done, this Nations ruin had been unavoidable. Can it be
thought that the King likes the Condition that he is in? or that he took it
kindly to be beaten? or that he has already forgotten his overthrowes? and
that he may in a month or two, being restored to liberty with honor, safety,
and freedom, forget his present imprisonment? Are not his Letters of most
concernment printed by Order of Parliament, to his perpetual dishonor? Votes
past against any more addresses, his wife charged with high Treason, his
revenue seized, etc. Are these such provocations as may be easily forgotten? In
the tenth year of Richard the second, the Duke of Gloucester, uncle to the
King, the Earl of Arundell, the Earl of Warwick, with others raise Arms to
redress grievances (this Army does less, and may do more) they call a
Parliament, (this Army may as lawfully (if it be for the peoples good, and no
other way be found) dissolve a Parliament,) try Delinquents, and bring them to
punishment, (Kindred in either house was no reprieve.) The King after this
seems to forget all; all is kindness betwixt him and those Lords, till the
18th. year of his Reign, when he calls a Parliament, overaweth them with an
Army, enforces them to recall his Charters of pardon, puts his Uncle to death
at Callis, without any form of Trial, beheads Arundell, and banisheth Warwick
into the Isle of Man.

Better things are not to be expected from this King.

FINIS.

