THE Boasting Baptist DISMOVNTED, AND THE BEAST Disarmed and sorely wounded
without any Carnal Weapon.

IN A REPLY TO Some Papers, Written by Jonathan Johnson, of Lincoln, as an
Answer to a Letter, sent him by Martin Mason, concerning some exceptions
against several Truths.

Published by a Faithful Minister, not of the Letter, but of the Everlasting
Gospel.

After the manner of men have I fought with Beasts,

1 Cor. 15.32. The mighty men of Babylon, their might has failed, they became
as women; her Bars are broken: The Daughter of Babylon is like a
Threshing-Floore, it is time to thresh her,

Jer. 51.30.33. You only have I known of all the Families of the earth,
therefore will I punish you for all your iniquities,

Amos 3.2. LONDON; Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the
Black-spread-Eagle near the west end of Paul's, 1656.

The Boasting Baptist dismounted: etc.
Jonathan Johnson,
THOU art grossly mistaken to think thy self garrisoned in Sion, while thou art
thus mewed up in the beastly pinfold of Babylon, and have no better Bul-works
then her muddy Walls, her tottering Towers to defend thee, the mere
Imaginations of thy own brain, humane Inventions, frethy falacies,
Antichristian Consequences, conjured up out of the bottomless pit.

Though thou boastest in thy babbling, and disdainfully tells me of the
weakness and disarmed condition of me, and those I am encamped with, Mark. 5.9.
and that our weapon is but a Bulrush; yet it is not thee, nor thy Fathers
Legion, can make one Soldier in the Camp of the Lord, give one inch of ground
to the liar, or turn his back to the uncircumcised Philistine; and though the
weapons of our warfare be not carnal yet do the wicked receive terrible
wounds, and so do thou, which will make thee gnash thy teeth in secret. 2
Cor. 10.4.
It Is the conquering Power of the Sword of the Spirit which is our Weapon,
(that is no Bulrush, and that shall the Boaster witness when the wrath of the
Lord falls upon him) and by that shall Antichrist be destroyed. Amongst other
things I asked thee, Ephesians. 6.17.
has every one that comes into the world, heard and read the preachings of
Christ and his Apostles as they are transcribed in the Bible? and thou answers,
They have all heard. But must the liar in thee be received for the Oracle of
God? 2 Samuel 16.23.


May not Millions of men and women in the world, who dwell in those parts not
counted Christendom, witness against thee? If an Egyptian Mist had not blinded
thee, thou could not have been thus besotted, as to back thy lie with those
places of the Letter, Matt. 28.19, 20. Mark 16.15. which in effect prove
Christ's command to his Disciples, when they were upon earth, to go and preach
the glad tidings of the Gospel to that Generation they lived in:

The Commission nor the Execution whereof, thou never heard me question; but
what is this to the proof of thy answer to my question? O see thy sottishness
and be ashamed! Remember thou art a Debtor to me for an Answer to those
quaeries; how is the Gospel preached to every creature under heaven, if it he
not by that Principle of Light in the conscience? Does not that which shows sin
and evil in the Conscience, draw the creature out of sin if the creature be
guided by it? And does not that which draws out of sin, lead to christ the
Savior? and is not that the first Principle? Were not these things worth thy
taking notice of? Or, did not that of God in thee convince thee of the truth
herein, but the man of sin in thee would not suffer thee to own the Truth: Yet
when thou writes again, give a plain answer to each particular, in the mean
time, take back this Brat of thy own begetting.

That the Principle of light arising in the conscience; is from that preaching
of Repentance and Faith by the Apostle. So that take away the Letter, and by
this man's Doctrine there would be no Principle of Light arising in the
conscience; Oh the gross darkness of this Babylonian! Shame cover the face of
the liar; Was there not a Principle of Light in the people, who lived before
Moses writ the Letter? Was not Moses upon earth before the preaching of
Repentance and Faith by the Apostles? Nay, do thou not say in the same Paper,
That that sound of accusing or excusing is in all consciences? If it be in all
consciences, (as indeed it is) then it must needs be in the consciences of
millions of people, who never heard the preaching of Repentance and Faith by
the Apostles. Now to thy scornful question, Where have I, or any of those who
run abroad, come, but they have heard the preachings of christ before our
coming? To this I answer, The wrath of the Lord, not his Blessing, Psalm. 1.
Genesis 1.2. 1 Timothy 3.16. Col. 3.11.
is to thee, who sit in the seat of the scornful. Now for the people, they
have all heard the sound of Christ's voice, preaching in their consciences, but
darkness being upon the face of the earth, they knew not the Mystery of
godliness, Christ in them the hope of glory: If thou would own the letter, as
thou pretendest, thou durst not deny christ to be in all, Jew and Greek,
Barbarian, Scithian, bond and free. I own no other Gospel but what the Apostles
preached, nor do we direct the people to any other thing then the Apostle Peter
did, that sure word of Prophecy (the Light in their consciences) unto which
they do well if they take heed: 1 Pet. 1.39. 1 John 1. Rom 1.16.
we only send them to the Seed of the woman, which is the word of God, the
Unction, or Christ within, who is the power of God unto salvation. But the
Letter is not the sure word of Prophecy, the Seed of the Woman, the Unction,
or Christ within, the Word of God, or Gospel, which is the Power of God unto
Salvation. I do appeal to that of God in every man's conscience, if the Seed of
the Serpent, the man of sin, be not within; must not then the Seed of the Woman
be there also? Genesis 3.15.
how shall the Seed of the Woman break the Sepents head, if the Seed of the
Woman be not where the Serpent is? For this Royal Seed of God discovers the
Tempter to the creature in his first motion, if the creature mind to be guided
by this good Seed; Prove. 1.10.
and as he believes in this Son of Gods love, who reveals the man of sin, the
Thief is seen, but not consented to, the Devil being resisted flies away; 1
John 12.
so as many as receive this Royal Seed, this Son of Gods Love, the Light of
Christ Jesus shining in their consciences, by believing therein, from him they
receive power to become the Sons of God; for through faith in Christ Jesus,
shining into the conscience, all things are possible, the heart is thereby
purified, and without Faith it is impossible to please God; no pleasing of God
till the heart be purified, and no purifying of the heart but by Faith in the
Son of God shining into the heart, there convincing the creature of sin in
secret, and then how dare I do this wickedness and sin against my God, Genesis
21.23. He fills heaven and earth with his presence. Col. 1.26.
who is not at a distance? he is not a God afar off, but nigh at hand, even in
the heart, and sees the secrets of the heart: But this is a Mystery to all
carnal minds, it was a Mystery in the days of the Apostles, hid from Ages
and Generations past, but was then, and is now made manifest to his Saints; the
riches of the Glory of this Mystery among the Gentiles, Christ in them the hope
of Glory, hid from the wise and prudent of the world, and revealed unto babes.
No other Christ, no other Word do we preach, but that which the Prophets and
Apostles did bear witness of, that which we have seen with our eyes, and heard
with our ears, 1 John 1. Romans 10.8. Heb. 5.6. John 6.68.
that word which is even in the heart and in the mouth; to this Everlasting
Priest, which has the Word of eternal life, do we exhort the people to be
obedient; and who keep to this Anointing in them, need not that any man teach
them, nor such be seduced by the Serpent.

Thou tells me of confessing the Apostles, saying, This is the Word of Faith
which we preach, and the hearing of that Word of Faith, the light in the
conscience, is the inlet to the Spirit of Promisc; and then thou asks me, if
this be not the same which thou say etc. O shameless man! Do thou not in
that exception of thine to the first Position, cry up the Letter, and say the
hearing and receiving of that is the inlet to the Spirit of Promise, and those
who do not hear and obey that as the Teachings of God; have not his Spirit? and
yet dares thou come thus impudently to bluster against me, and tax me for a
false accuser? but shame shall cover thee, and the hand of the Lord shall find
thee out. Yet be it remembered, that here thou have owned the Light in the
conscience to be the inlet to the Spirit of Promise. Thou bids me, if I can
prove any juggling by thee, do it. Have thou not saved me some labor and done
it thy self? one while owning the Letter to be the inlet to the Spirit of
Promise, and another time owning the Light in the conscience to be the Spirit
of Promise; sometimes calling the Letter the Rule, and sometimes the Spirit for
the Rule. Do thou not say thy Foundation is not built upon Paul or Peter, as
they were men, but upon their preaching the Word of God, and Jesus? Is not thy
Foundation built upon the Letter? do thou not account that for the Word of
God which they preached?

But what is thy meaning to say upon their preaching, the Word of God and Jesus?
Is the Word of God and Jesus two distinct things? Is there any other Word of
God beside Jesus? Rev. 19.13. Romans 1.16.
Is not he called the Word of God? Is not the Word of God believed in, the
Power of God unto salvation? Does thou not believe the Letter to be the Word of
God? yet neither is it, nor thy belief there, the Power of God to save thee
from the beastly sins of lying, pride, paslion, and bitter spiritedness, and
confusion.

Thou makes thy self merry with that expression of mine, That which gave forth
the Leaves town, it is my witness against thee, and all thy deceitful
juglings. Thou Replies, The Printer gave forth the Leaves, and so the Printer,
thou says, is my witness, etc. And then backs that lie with another Brat of
thy own begetting, that neither Printer, nor any thing printed from the voice
of Truth, will witness with me, or be for me. But the tongue of the liar is not
to be believed.

Had I dealt with the deceitfullest Parish Priest in the Nation, could I have
found a more filthy gloss put upon that innocent Expression, ( that which gave
forth the Leaves I own?) Could I have met with less ingenuity in a Pagan
Priest, then is found in this high-flown Pharisee? But friends you may see the
man is put to his shifts, while he is fain to make use of this shushing.

Was it not the pure Spirit of the living God that gave forth the Letter? That,
and no other Spirit do I own, and that is my witness against the lying Spirit,
lording it in thee, Jonathan Iohnsen, who says the Printer gave forth the
Leaves: Shame cover the liar, does not the Printer sell them to the Stationers?
But know this, Alying tongue is an Abomination to the Lord, and the Lake is the
Portion of the liar: Rev. 21.8.

Poor man, how art thou puzzled and tormented, because in my Paper I cry not up
the Letter, but owns Christ alone, who is the Light in the conscience, to be
the inlet to the Spirit of Promise. Why does the Heathen rage, Psalm. 2.1.
and the man imagine such a vain thing, as to think I should own thy Baptism
with water, which thou paintest over with the name of the Baptism of
Repentance, to be the inlet to the Spirit of Promise? These are thy words,
That which is the inlet to the Spirit of Promise into the heart, is the door
and the way; but the Baptism of Repentance, the hearing of Faith preached, or
believing, is the inlet to the Spirit of Promise; therefore the Baptism of
Repentance, and the hearing of Faith preached, and believing, is the inlet to
the Spirit of Promise: So that none, by this man's Doctrine, can have the
Spirit, who bow not to his sprinckling. Tell me, Jonathan, did thou not a
little before, own the Light in the Conscience to be the inlet to the Spirit
of Promise, and call me false accuser for saying thou denyedst it? Matt. 23.32.
Fie Jonathan, lie; will thou needs be a liar whether I will or no? thou art
hastening on apace to fill up the measure of thy iniquities, and then shall the
wrath of the Lord seize upon thee. Judge, O ye wise in heart, if this Babbler be
not a Bond-slave in Babylon; does he not say and unsay? Does he not here place
his Water, and believing in the Letter, in the room of Christ, by making them
the Way, and the Door, or inlet to the Spirit of Promise: whoever are not
spiritually blind, will see the blasphemy of the Beast, for Christ the Light
of the world, is the Door, and the Way, Ioh. 10.9. Ioh. 14.16. and so the
inlet to the Spirit of Promise; and where must the creature look for Christ,
if not within: Is not that the Light of Christ which tells every man and woman
in secret of every sin he does commit, and persuades the creature not to run on
in the evil of his ways: Does not Christ stand at the door and knock: Rev.
3.20.
Is not this door the heart of man: Does he not fill Heaven and Earth with his
presence: Thy Redeemer is in the midst of thee, O Israel. Tell me, Jonathan,
was the hearing of faith, which thou brings in Gal. 3.2. for proof of thy
blasphemy, the hearing of the Prophets, or of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, and
the rest of the Apostles: Or was it not a believing in that Christ which Paul
preached to be in all, Jew and Greek, Barbarian, Scithian, Coll. 3.11.
bond and free; in that Christ who is the Light in all consciences, preaching
there to every man and woman upon earth. And what shall be the condemnation of
all Mankind, Joh. 3.19.
who never heard of the Name of Christ at Jerusalem, if not the Light of Jesus
Christ placed in the Conscience: And wherefore is the Light of Jesus left there
in the heart of every man and woman, if not to lead man and women out of sin
unto holiness: And whether any thing without can redeem a soul from sin, but
that Jesus who is the Light of the world, and shines into the conscience of
every man and woman in the world. When thou writes again, answer those plain
Quaeries, without any Serpentine Evasions, conjuring Consequences, or
Antichristian Falacies.

As for thy second Proof, Acts 2.38. When thou and thy Friends can witness such
a condition as these Convicts could in the four last Verses of that Chapter,
thou says something; till then, let the Babbler be silent and leave his
boasting, for the Baptism of Repentance from dead works, he knows not, so long
as he lives in lying, pride and passion: Besides, Watersprinckling is not once
named there: Does Christ's Baptism consist of outward water; Or, is not his a
Baptism of sufferings, with the Holy Ghost and with Fire: And art thou baptized
with this Baptism, and so much dross of lying, false accusing, pride and
passion, not burnt up in thee. Answer those three quaeries in singleness of
heart, or else let the Serpent in thee be silent. As for thy last proof, 1
Ephesians. 13. What was this Word of Truth, if not Jesus the Word of God, the sure
Word of Prophecy which shined in their dark hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19. 1 Coll. 26.
which they knew not: Was not this the Mystery unto them and all the blind
Gentiles: And was not this, through their Faith therein, the Gospel of their
Salvation: Were they not sealed by that Holy Spirit of Promise, by believing in
this Word of Truth within them, which cannot be corrupted nor removed into a
corner. Answer those quaeries, Jonathan, without any juggling, or else let the
mouth of the liar be stopped, for ever mentioning the Name of the Lord.

Now to the second Position, Thou breaths forth such Fume as comes from the
bottomless Pit, and says I reckon thee among Drunkards, because I say, the
Drunkards make their boast in this belief: If there be falsehood in my words,
Was not the Devil in Peter when Christ said, Get thee behind me Satant
why does not the Serpents wisdom seek to confute them; but the words are true,
and so the Devil's dumb as to such a work; for the righteous Seed of God arises
in thee, judging and condemning thee to be drunk with pride, passion, lying,
wrath, and false accusing, and that makes the Devil in thee rage, he would not
be disquieted; but the man of sin must be tormented.

Read thy figure in the Pharisee; it is seen by the Light who it is that has
two horns like a Lamb, yet speaks like a Dragon, casting forth floods of
Indignation, and Serpentine Accusations upon the simple. Turn to the Light of
God within thee, and that true Prophet, Nathan-like, will tell thee, 2 Samuel
12.7.
Thou art the man.

Ah! Shames thou not with thy false tongue, to tell me I contemn the Faith in
the sufferings of Christ, and thus arrogantly to ask me, How dare I thus
contemptuously speak of my Redeemer. (Thou can not call him thy Redeemer,
till the Serpents head be broken in thee, and the lying Devil cast out of thee)
because in my Paper I writ to this effect.

Thou, and they who feed your selves with the meerfrothy verbal Faith in the
sufferings of the Man Christ Jesus at Jerusalem, and yet wallow in your
wickedness, are not saved or redeemed from your sins. Judge, O ye honest
hearted of the Nation, whether this language be a speaking contemptuously of my
Redeemer, yea or nay: Are they who wallow in their wickedness redeemed from
sin, by saying they believe in the sufferings of Christ at Jerusalem: Then
what is the difference between a Saint and a Sinner: Then what need is there of
purifying the heart. But the children of the Lord know none are redeemed from
sin, but such as do forsake sin, who cease from doing evil, and turn from the
evil of their ways: Is the proud one redeemed from pride while he continues
in that sin; Is he not a servant of sin that lives in sin: Is the choleric
hasty nature subdued, and that man redeemed from passion, while the passionate
Devil has dominion over him: the Lamb of God is meek and lowly, and so are
all his tender Lambs. Now judge, O ye wise in heart, if the Scriptures call not
him who suffered at Jerusalem, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. May I not use
the Language of the Apostle Paul in that place; is it any sin for me to call
him by that Name which he gave himself; Read Ioh. 8.40. But now ye seek to kill
me, a Man that has told you the truth: Yet I did call him the Man Christ
Jesus. Peruse my Paper once again, Jonathan; see if I said not, No other Jesus
do I own, but that Lamb of God which was slain from the beginning of the world;
Did I not say, that I did own and reverence the Spirit of the living God in
him, Col. 29. Psalm. 45.7.
and that the sulness of the Godhead dwelt bodily in him; He was anointed
above his fellows.

Cease then thou slanderer from thy scandalous Accusations, for my Redeemer I
do reverence. Thou tells me in two several places, that I crucify Christ
again; and yet breaks forth into rage because I tell thee, Ye have condemned
and killed the Just and he does not resist you, Jam. 5.6.
He is slain in thee; and asks me, if the Lamb that was slain be not alive for
evermore. In thee he is slain, in his Saints he is alive; but the Heavens which
contain him is a Mystery to thy dark mind: So let the Sot be silent.

I need none of the liars counsel, the false Prophets prating is not worth
listening to; the bold Blasphemer shall be met with for his Blasphemy: Thou bids
me leave those false Luminaries, and turn my feet into the Testimonies of the
true Light. Would thou have me renounce my Redeemer; is this the reverence
thou would have me to do him, to call him a false Luminary, because the
blasphemer terms him so: The Lord rebuke thee, for the delight of my soul is in
the Light of the world, Christ Jesus; would thou have me now that I am washed
to return again to my wallowing in the mire: When thou writes again, if that be
thy meaning, say so man.

The Leopard cannot change his spots, and it is hard for thee to leave thy
lying: Thou says I kill the Scriptures; Yet the Scriptures I own, for they are
serviceable.
can that which is dead be killed; Do not thou in two several places call
the Scriptures a dead Letter; and still runs on in thy lying, saying, I am
forced to run for shelter to those I account my enemies, who knows, thou says,
no other burial with Christ, but burial in water, calling them the chief
Princes of M^shech and Tuball.

As for the men thou means ( viz. those called Dippers) they are of age, let
them answer for themselves; if they be not enemies to the Cross of Jesus
Christ, I shall not count them enemies to me; but how can thou prove that I
run to them for shelter; is it because I speak of thy sprinckling; I never made
any of them my Oracle therein. Thou says, I bid thee prove whether Christ
commanded baptism to his Disciples, yea or nay; and did the Lord require it of
his people to this day: What an abominable lie, besides Nonsense, have thou
vented in two lines: My words are these, Is thy sprintling with water the
baptism of Christ Jesus, yea or nay; Did the Lord command that to his
Disciples, yea or nay; And does the Lord require it of his people to this day.
I did never read nor know of one that pretends to more Piety then thou does,
that ever excelled or equaled thee in thy devilish art of lying; a notable
Servant thou art to thy Master, and sure thou art to receive thy Wages: Rev.
21.8. For the simples sake I shall peruse those Scriptures thy Father sends
thee with to fight for his Kingdom, Matt. 28.19, 20. Act. 2.38.41, 42. but I
find not sprinckling with water there, nor so much as the word water: Nor does
Acts 22.16. make for thy purpose, where it is said, Arise and be baptized and
wash away thy sins, calling on the Name of the Lord: Is sprinckling with water
once mentioned in this place; Or did Ananias bid him be baptized with outward
Water; Or could outward Water wash away Saul's sins: Answer those quaeries
without a lie, if thou can. As for Acts 10.47, 48, is it not clear, the Holy
Ghost was received without outward Water; then where is the necessity of
sprinckling or dipping? Does not thy next, Acts 8.36, 37. intimate that it is
but a thing indifferent, if thou beleevest, says Philip, thou may; as much
as if he had said if thou believes outward water to be necessary to salvation,
thou may be baptized; did he not rather choose to cherish then destroy the
weak faith of the Eunuch The last Proof thou claps in is no better then the
rest, They were all baptized, both men and women, but Water is wanting.
Therefore cease vain Jangler, for without adding to the Letter, these places
are not for thy purpose.

John was a Prophet, therefore his Ministration must end in Christ Jesus, who
is the fulfilling of the Law and the Prophets: Some of the Apostles used
circumcision in the flesh, had they a command from Christ for so doing; or was
it not upon permission? why do thou not as well plead for, and practice the
one as the other? is not their authority of an equal purity, both by
permission, not by precept?

In thy Reply to the 7th. Position, I find thee so puzzled, touchig Perfection,
that thou gives me no Answer to what I sent thee, but would shuffle me off,
bringing Iam. 3.2. But does he plead against Perfection as thou do? does he
not say in the same verse, if any man offend not in words, the same is a
perfect man; the Scriptures were never writ that the Devil by them should
plead for sin. Thou brings in Romans 7.18. where Paul says, I know that in me
(that is in my flesh) dwells no good thing; From hence thou would infer, that
in Paul there dwelt nothing that was good: But will thou say the Holy Ghost is
not good? was not Paul filled with the Holy Ghost? if it were as thou would
infer, then away with Paul's Epistles, and by consequence with the rest of the
Scriptures, for they were all writ from one Spirit. If there was nothing good
in Paul, then Paul must needs be a Seducer of the people: When we were in the
flesh, says Paul (in the unregenerate condition) the motions of sin did work
in our members, to bring forth fruit unto death; but now we are delivered from
the Law, that we should serve in newness of Spirit, not in the oldness of the
Letter: And Romans 8.8, 9. They that are in the Flesh cannot please God, but ye
are not in the Flesh, (yet they were alive upon earth) but in the Spirit. That
of Phil. 3. is to thee a mystery, therefore Babbler be silent, the Tree thou
feeds on is accursed. Thy piece of Lodgick shows what a Pagan thou art, That
which is subject to mortality, loss, and change, and mistakes, is not perfect,
thou says, But man's humane state in it self is subject, etc. therefore man's
humane state is not perfect.

Where do thou read this language of man's humane state in all the Scripture?
Consider of this in the cool of the day; that which is born of the Flesh is
Flesh; but that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, is that subject to
mortality loss and change: that which is born not of blood, nor of the will of
man, but of God, that does not commit sin, that cannot sin, because it is born
of God, 1 Ioh. 3.9.

Now because thou art so silent to what I sent thee concerning Perfection, I
here return thee some few things which my Letter mentions, as to that; Must the
devil have power over thee while thou lives, to make thee his vessel to do his
will and work here on earth, and do thou hope to have Heaven for thy wages
when thou dies? Knows thou not, as the tree falls so it lies, and the wages of
sin is death? And is not the tabernacle of God with men, Rev. 21. Does not the
Lord say, I will dwell in them and walk in them, etc. is not this done upon
earth? Does not the Lord delight to save his people from their sins? Does he
justify and not sanctify his people? does he forgive sins and not give power
over sins? what is the end of the Lords being present with his people and in
his people, but shield them from sin and Satan, and to keep them pure without
spot or wrinckle, who are willing to be guided by him? And when thou writes
again, either confess, or deny the Truth, in thy Answer to those Quaeries.

But why do thou deny that to be the true Spirit, or that to be true Unction
which is not received by the Letter? had not Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the
rest of the holy men of God (who lived before Moses writ the Letter) had not
they, I say, the Spirit of Truth within them? were there not many deceitful
Serpents, filthy spirits, like thine, in their days? and had they any outward
writing given them as an infallible Rule to discover false spirits with? was
not the spirit of God in them the infallible Rule, and sole Touchstone for the
trial of spirits, which were true, which were false? Did Paul and the rest of
the Apostles receive the Spirit of Truth by virtue of hearing, or reading any
writings or books without them?

That which I brought out of 1 John 2. as to the Anointing stands unshaken,
and cannot be removed by all the Brats of Babylon; does not John admonish them
to keep to the Unction within which they had received? does he bid them make
his Epistle their Rule to walk by; or could they have been seduced if they had
kept to the Anointing within, though John's Epistle had not been sent to them?
Answer those quaeries: Yet do I not deny but the Saints in their infancy are
capable of good counsel, and may admit of a leading by the hand, and let him
that is confirmed strengthen his Brethren. Thy carping at the spirits
interpretation of 1 John 4.1, 2, 3. shows the blindness of the Babylonian.

He who can make a good Confession, and give a good account of Christ Jesus in
his own fleshly Tabernacle, he is of God; this Exposition cannot by the
Serpents subtilty be shaken; as for the Pope, both him and thee I do deny,
abominable liars are you both; he is thy brother, though thou bawls against
him, you are both servants to one Master, the man of sin; he denies Christ come
in the flesh of his Saints, and so do thou; therefore Antichrists you both
be; it is but the liar that tells me my Master has not commanded me to judge; he
whom thou boasts came not to judge the world, but to save the world, says in
the next words, He that rejects me and receives not my word, has one that
judges him, and so have thou, for thou rejectest him, he is my witness, and he
came not to bring Peace, 1 Cor. 6.2.
but a Sword to the man of sin whom thou servest.

But if the Saints shall not judge the world, thou must make Paul a liar like
thy self, And does not the Spiritual man judge all things, and he himself is
judged of no man: But since thou art so much against judgment, tell me by what
authority do thou judge me for an Enemy of Righteousness, with a deal of such
like Antichristian Rubbish, which reaches me not; why do thou judge those
people called Dippers, calling them the chief Princes of M^shech and Tuball,
saying, they know no (...) burial of Christ, but burial in water: And by what
Authority do thou judge the Priests of the Nation for Antichristians. Answer
those quaeries when thou writes again.

In one of thy Arguments thou shames not to affirm, that the L^tter under the
name of the words of Christ, is Spirit and life in it self: and in another of
the same metal, (for they both come from one Mint, and have both but one
Father) thou concludes, the Spirit of God in the Apostles, who were Saints, is
the Rule to try, and discovery of false spirits and then falls to thy old vain
of boasting, that this Argument I cannot deny in any part; but indeed the man
is so accustomed to lie, that it is a (...) matter for him to speak true: Say,
Jonathan, when did I deny that the spirit of God in the Apostles while they
lived upon earth, was their Rule for them to try and discover false spirits,
does not my Letter speak the same Language; but did not the spirit of God in
them at their death return to God that gave it them; would thou have me be as
sottith as thy self, to say and unsay, and own their writings to be the spirit
of God: but I have little pleasure to take thus in thy Dunghill, only it is my
desire the weak may not be wooryed by, but beware of such Foxes and Wolves in
sheeps clothing. Thou charges me for a liar, for saying thou owns the Letter to
be the Rule; but one thing is, I need not go far to fetch my proof, thou have
given it under thy own hand in these words, See thy Reply to the 12th. Position.
Therefore the Scriptures are the sure and infallible Rule to try the Spirits
whether they be of God or no; yet for all this, and thy other argument, wherein
thou calls them spirit and life in it self, (under the name of the Words of
Christ) thou calls them twice in this following argument of thine, the dead
Letter; He that desires to be tried by the true Touchstone, the infallible
Rule, the living Principle of God, the Light of Christ in the Saints
consciences, the Spirit of truth, and would not be tried by the dead Letter,
his spirit is of God, he is guided by the spirit of Promise, but Jonathan
Johnson desires to be tried as abovesaid, not by the dead Letter, therefore his
spirit is of God, he is guided by the Spirit of Promise. Thus thy charge is soon
taken of, and the liar found lodging in thy own bosom; how has the Heathen
raged, and cast forth his Floods of indignation against me, for calling the
Declaration a dead Letter, and yet speaks the same several times in this
argument: Did thou not cry up the letter to be the inlet to the spirit of
promise, and bid me leave my false luminary, and yet here owns the light of
Christ in the conscience to be the spirit of truth, surely the man thought he
might say and unsay as he list, and took me to be as very a for as himself, or
else has a very weak memory, and that is very bad for so great a liar as he is:
I did never read grosser contradictions to my knowledge, then have dropped from
the pen of this painted Pagan: And yet for all this folly and confusion, he
must needs give me another rotten reed of Egypt, as it were for a farewell, in
an argument, the substance whereo^ is thus: They who were Master Builders, etc.
must needs be the true Touchstone; but the Apostles were Master Builders, etc.
whom M. M. denies to be tried by, calling their preaching and teachings dead
and lifeless, therefore his spirit is the spirit of error.

What a forgetful, or wilful lying Beast is this; did he not but even now a
little before in his other Argument, say, that he himself desired to be tried
by the light in the Saints consciences, and not by the dead letter, and ye^
taxes me with the spirit of error for the same thing: O blush, and be ashamed!
But for further answer. According to the grace of God which is given unto me as
a wise Master Builder, I have laid the foundation, says Paul, 1 Cor. 3.10.
Col. 3.1^.
He built upon the rock: Other foundation then that is laid can no man lay,
which is Jesus Christ in all, Jew and Greek, Barbarian, Scithian, bond and
free. To this unction within did the Apostles direct the people, and if there
had not been a royal seed of God left in eveey man and woman, to have answered,
owned and received the testimony of the Apostles, they might have wandered all
the world over, and have spent all their lifetime, and not have gained one
convert, but there was a witness for God in all, and that which lay dead, did
at the hearing of the voice of the Son of God live, and the Apostle was sent to
open the blind eye of those Gentiles, who had eyes to see, yet saw not the Lamb
of God the Lord of Glory crucified in them; so that great mystery of Christ in
them the hope of glory, was then to them revealed and made manifest; so here,
that which was the foundation that was the Touchstone, and Christ in all, the
Unction, the Annoynting within was the Foundation of the Apostles, that which
they built upon; therefore the unction, the annoynting within, the light in all
consciences, that is the true Touchstone, and the infallible rule for the trial
of spirits which be true, which be false. Thus I have traced the Serpent in
most of his crooked holes and windings, even almost unto weariness; that which
follows is to you, poor hearts, who are so wedded to your water, that you count
no man a Saint who submits not to your ceremony. Answer me in good earnest, Can
your Diana satisfy a hungry soul? are you not feeding upon that which is not
the bread from heaven? Is it your building the Tombs, or garnishing the
Sepulchers of the righteous with painted expressions, and smooth glosses, that
can make you pass for pure Saints, now the bright morning star is come to
discover you? Is it the putting away the filth of the flesh by washing the body
in outward water; or the answer of a a good conscience toward God, that is
well pleasing unto God? and who can witness the answer of a good conscience
toward God, that is not guided by the light of God in his conscience? and are
you guided by that of God in your consciences, who are not to come to yea and
nay, in your dealings? are you guided by the light of God, and yet dare not use
the language of God and his Saints recorded in the Scriptures? are you guided
by the light of God in your consciences, who yet live in respect of persons,
and be conformable to the vain customs and fashions of the heathen, and are
not yet brought to the brideling of the tongue? Be not angry hereat; for deer
is my love to that of God in you; Ah! how should I rejoice to see you join your
selves to the children of the Lord! ah, seek no longer the living among the
dead! contend no longer about that which brings no contentment to the soul!
Would you see the King of Saints? Lo, he is within you, go not forth: Ah! be
no longer loyterers; Great is the harvest, and the laborers but few; He that
is not with me, is against me; Be no longer in the number of those who forget
God; Fight no longer for that which cannot stand before the Lord; you have too
long idolized your ceremony, and therefore like the brazen Serpent is it broken
in pieces. Paul told the people, He had not shunned to declare unto them all
the counsel of God, but where did he mention Water-Baptisme as a branch
thereof? if it had been of the counsel of God, certainly Paul durst not have
concealed it. Did he not foresee that thing began to be idolized in his days?
did not contentions then arise among the people, some saying, I am of Paul;
another, I of Apollo; some of Cephas, some of Christ? therefore he knowing it
not to be a precept, but a permissive practice, Iaid it aside, and thanked God
that he had baptized none but Crispus and Gaius, and the household of Stephanas;
an infallible sign it was no better than a Ceremony, 1 P^^. 3.21.
had it been a command durst he have discontinued it? nay, does he not plainly
tell the people, he was not sent to baptize, but to preach the Gospel? and does
not Peter speak plain enough to the prudent? does he count Water-Baptisin any
better than a figure, pointing out the substance the answer of a good
conscience. Are figures and shadows to abide or fly away? Which of you (would
you be but truly honest to the light of God in you) durst positively affirm
outward Water to be the Baptism of Christ? Is not his a Baptism of Sufferings?
Be not afraid to take up the daily Cross, but like valiant soldiers, enter the
field, and despise the shame: Be not fearful of Giants in the way, for his yoke
is easy, and his burden light. He that commands, gives power; be you but
willing, and power will not be wanting to level those hills and mountains of
corruption within you. Do but set your hearts to love that Royal Seed of God,
the light of Jesus Christ in your consciences, and that you shall witness to be
power invincible, to resist and quench the fiery darts of the Devil. O come
away, and do no longer stay, left the door of mercy be shut against you.

Martin Mason.


