A blast from the Lord, OR A WARNING TO ENGLAND, By way of Exhortation to take
heed, and not run upon their own destruction; which will be speedily, without
true repentance.

By a Lover of the Truth, and a Prisoner for declaring Truth abroad BEN:
NICHOLSON.

Thus says the Lord, behold I make all things new: Take notice, All things new
2 Cor. 5.17. Rev. 21.5.

For Sions sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalems sake I will not
rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the
salvation thereof as a lamp that burns. Isa. 62.1.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the
Black-spread-Eagle, near the West end of Paul's. 1653.

To the Reader.
Reader,
IF for telling thee the truth I become thine enemy, Gal. 4.16. Pro. 12.17.
I am willing to suffer for the truths sake; If for hating iniquity I become a
prey to the teeth of all ungodly ones, let them make a prey upon me: for such
as I have from the Lord, such will I declare for the children of the Lord's
sakes, that they, if the Lord so please, may look into the secrets of their
hearts, and see how the Lord acts in them for the establishing of his Throne
and Kingdom in righteoustess in the midst of every one his sons and daughters,
the Sion, or City of the living God: and if the Lord so please to bring it home
to those who sit in darkness, that light may spring forth, and the glory of the
Lord may appear among the sons of men, that the dark places of the earth may be
enlightened, and the barren wilderness may become a fruitful land, to bring
forth fruits of righteousness to adorn the Temple of God; that whereas there
has been stinking savours in the land of Canaan, the stinch thereof may be
taken away; and whereas thieves and murderers lodged in the City, now truth and
peace may take place only; and whereas the walls of Sion has been pulled down,
they may now be built again; and whereas Jerusalem has been without
Inhabitants, it may now be inhabited with much joy; and that Joseph which has
been long in prison may come forth and be set up to rule next the King (let him
that has wisdom understand;) and that Daniel may sit in the Kings gates, and
bear rule over all the great men of Babylon, and Joseph over all Egypt: which
shall be at the time of Gods deliverance (though now in prison) bear rule over
all them which were their accusers and persecuters.

A Blast from the Lord. Arise O God and scatter all thy Enemies, Jer. 4.12.
Number. 10.35. Psalm 3.7.
smite them upon the Cheek bone, let none remain: Go on to Judgment, and
destroy every wicked Worker and Evil doer.
O ENGLAND, take warning, Psalm 68.1. to the end. Nah. 3.3, 4.
the Lord is risen, he has drawn out his sharp and glittering Sword, he has
furbushed it, and made it fit for the slaughter, to cut down all things that
stand up in opposition against the pure being of his everlasting Love and
eternal Happiness. Deuteronomy. 32.41.
Rev: 2.16.
Now is the time of the breaking forth of Gods love upon the children of men;
Job 22.28, 29, 30.
of the Son of Righteousness shining in the clear Firmament of Truth in the
hearts of his Sonns and Daughters, which will dispel all the dark clouds and
thick Mists of boisterous storms and darkness, 1 Jo. 2.8, 9, 10.
Isa, 25.6. to end.
even the veil of Ignorance and gross Hypocrisy; the veil of the covering
spread over all Nations, which thou O England live under, even all of you
from the Ancient and honorable, to the false Preachers that deceives the
People with their lies; both Head and tail, Branch and Root: Therefore take
warning, Zep. 3.3. to end.
O ye Cruel and Blood-thirsty Judges, which have changed the Law of God into
your own corrupt wills, and turned the Truth into a Lie, you should have judged
for God, Lam. 4.3. 1 Cor. 19.6, 7.
but you judge to please men; and for Rewards you stand up, taking Hire for
your judgment, putting many to death for Money, and without Money you will do
nothing; 2 Cor. 4.4, 5.
the God of this world, Money, has blinded your eyes, and by taking gifts your
eyes are quite put out, you have no light of God in you, to discern how to do
Justice in any thing; you are all turned aside out of the way of God, every one
to his own way, following the imaginations of your own devilish hearts, Jer.
18.12, 13.
and you hate to be Reformed, behold the Lord is fierce in his anger toward
you, and he will pour down the Vials of his wrath upon your Beastly power, Isa.
40.23. to the end. Dan. 7.
and cause your own Rod to consume you, and will judge you out of your own
mouths; you are the Beast which the Whore rides upon, that painted Whore who
has beguiled this Nation with her enchantments; which has painted her self
with the Prophets, Jezebell-like, 2 Kings 9.30.
Christ, and the Apostles words, but never knew that power and spirit of Life
which they lived in, yet is upheld by you; you defend her by your Beastly wills,
in her Lies, and you uphold her in her false, vicious, and divinations of her
own Brain, and in the filthy smoke of the imaginations of her Hellish heart;
Jer. 14.14. Ezekiel. 13.23.
you protect her; the Horse-Leech has two daughters which cry Give, Hos. 4.18.
give: You Judges that judge for Reward are one, and the Priests that preach
for Hire are another; Behold, the Lord is coming with Thousands, and ten
thousands of his Saints to render vengeance upon all the ungodly, Dan. 7.10.
and to reprove the wicked, and recompense wickedness upon the head of evil
doers, and to convince the World of all their wicked deeds which they have most
maliciously done against him; 1 Samuel 2.9, 10.
all you wicked ones, your downfall is at hand, your sorrow is coming on apace,
now is great Babylon come in remembrance before the Lord, Isa. 10.2. to end
and he will recompense her double upon her Head, for all the evil that she
has committed, and for the wickedness that she has done against the Lord,
shall she receive a full reward; Rev. 18.2: to end.
all Nations have been made drunk with the Wine of her fornications, and she is
drunk with the blood of Saints; therefore shall a Cup of the fierce wrath and
fury of the Lord be given her to drink, and the dreggs thereof shall she drink;
she shall spue and fall, and never rise again: Take heed all ye upholders of
her, Hos. 7.16.
come from under her, seprrate your selves from her, lest you perish with her.

Hear of ye Judges and Nobles of this Nation, take heed you be not found
partakers with this great whore, give over committing adultery with her, she is
a strange women, her feet abides not in the house, she gaddeth abroad to
change her ways, she is barren, her womb cannot be satisfied, she is a grave
where dead men lies, and she like the witch of Endor conjureth them up to
stand before a many Saul's whom the spirit of God reigns not in, 1 Samuel 28.11,
12, 13, 14.
making a trade of raising up of the Apostles, Prophets, and Christ's words,
feeding the poor people (which they have led blind) with apperitions and
falcities of their own corrupted wisdom, not knowing at all the wisdom of God,
nor being made partaker of the power and life which the Apostles, Prophets, and
Jesus Christ lived in, yet they preach forth lies in hypocricy, telling the
people that God, and the Kingdom of God is without them, or in a place in
heaven a great many miles above their heads, making the ignorant people think
that God is as some great man sitting in a Throne in the natural heavens: 1
Kings 8.27.
and thus they either know not, or else are willingly ignorant of, that God
fills heaven and earth, and all things, and that the hea- of heavens cannot
contain him, and that he is Omni present in all places, and that he lives in
himself, and of him all things consists, and in him have their life and being,
to whom belongs all honor and glory and everlasting praises, and to none
else. O ye whose strength upholds this deceitful, lying, and bloodthirsty
whore, take warning; and all you who have loved her, and helped to bear her up,
and that have given your power unto her, now bestirr your selves and discover
her wickedness, hate her and burn her with fire, for this is the decree of God
upon her, Rev. 19.20.
and he has put it into the hearts of those who once loved her, to do so unto
her: Rev. 14.10, 11.
I cannot but take notice how she is already burning, and how the fire of Gods
wrath descends continually down upon her and scorcheth her; Rev. 17.12. to
end.
that I am sure it is the breath of Gods mouth, and the brightness of his
appearance in his Saints that shall wholly destroy, her, this whore the
Antichrist, who make a profession of God and Christ in words; but in power and
practice deny them. Every one who makes a profession of Christ in words, and
denies him in their practices, and keeps not his Commandments, is an Antichrist
(saying lie down and let us go over you) a deceiver which the Lord will cut off
suddenly from amongst his people without speedy repentance: 1 John 4.2, 3.
He is not a Jew who is one outwardly only, but he is a Jew who is one
inwardly; neither is he an Antichrist which is one outwardly only, but he is an
Antichrist which is one inwardly. This is the true Jew and the false Christ, or
Antichrist, which Jew God will call and save; and which Antichrist God will
judge and destroy: A warning to all Antichrists and dissemblers, who profess
much, but practice little; who speak forth the word of God and hear it, but do
it not, and so deceives their own souls; and these are children of the whore of
Babylon, Mat. 21.44.
which the Lovd Jesus will dash in pieces: he is that stone that being fallen
upon will bruise, but on whomsoever it shall fall it will grind them to powder;
and by it shall the whore of Babylon which is made rich by the great company of
her ships, Merchants, and Mariners (that trusted in Egypt) in one day become
dessolate, all her ships shall fail for want of water, her Merchants shall
become poor, Rev. 14.9, 10.
and her Mariners wall be terribly afraid, and shall bewail her, and stand
afarr off when they see the smoke of her burning ascend up toward heaven,
saying, Rev. 18.18.
alas, alas, the great City Babylon, how is thy destruction come upon thee in
one day, (but shall not com near to help her, Ezekiel. 27.29. to end.
thou Babylon art confusion, thou whore which rulest therein is the wisdom of
the flesh, and the brats or children which thou bring forth are pride,
covetousness, lying, swearing, stealing, whoring, anger and revenge, hating
one-another, evil communication, idle talking, and foolish jesting, etc. all
the Priests in England are full of confusion, both in themselves, and one
against another, by the wisdom of the flesh they are set up, Rev. 18.23.
and bear rule: their Merchants are the great men of the earth, and the wise
men thereof their Mariners: the water wherein they have their great traffic,
is the light of the first nature; and their ships their human learning, and
many Books, in which they heap up all their wares to traffic with, and make
sale on; the walls which defend them, are the people living in sin, even all
her children; Read Ezekiel. 8.27.
the Beast which they ride on, are all their followers. Then see what follows,
The Priests of England are part of Babylon, members of the Whore thereof, Ez k.
27.27.
which are maintained by the great men of England, and by the wise men thereof
are helped to steer on their design in the old sea of frothy invention (the
Schools of learning their Ship-Carpenters) their learning and books their
rotten ships: and their preaching out of their human learning and heathenish
Authors books, many lies and foolish histories are their wares which they
counsel people to buy; the wall which defends them, and the Beast which they
ride on, are almost all the men in England, but that of late much of their wall
is fallen off from them.

Then look to it thou Babylon, thou whore in Babylon, you Merchants and
Mariners, the waters and ships with the wares, thy walls, and the Beast which
thou ridest upon, shall all be shortly burnt, dried up, and broken to pieces,
and the glorious Lord God will be unto his people a place of broad Rivers and
streams, wherein shall go no gally with Oars, Psa. 46.4. Isa. 33.21. to the end.
nor gallant ships pass there, but the Lord will be their King and save them,
and their Lawgiver, and he will plead for them, the Saints of God shall need no
stearing by the powers of the world in the light of Nature, or in the waters of
the old frothy sea of the filthy inventions of the natural man, nor need they
any to fight to defend their cause, or plead for them, for the Lord will save,
protect, Dan. 7.27.
defend and deliver them from all their enemies, and will give the rule, the
power and dominion of the world to the Saints of the most High, and they shall
rule in peace and govern in righteousness, and their Kingdom shall be an
everlasting Kingdom, and Christ's Dominion shall endure for ever in them, and of
the rule and government there shall be no end: for when they die, or leave the
visible body, they shall be wholly swallowed up into him who reigned in them,
and so from the time of Christ's first reigning in them, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17
they shall not depart out of his presence, but be ever with the Lord singing
praises and Hallelujahs to the most High, which reigns in his Saints over all
the earth, who is the only King of Saints, the Lord blessed for ever, at whose
presence when he appears, Isa. 45.23, 24, 25. Ier. 30. 5 to 10. Joel 2.6.
Nahum 2.10. Psalm. 114.7.
all the nations of the earth shall tremble, and every knee bow before him, and
all hands shall be weak, the great men of the earth shall tremble, and the
strong men shall bow down to him, and all faces shall gather paleness, fear,
and be exceedingly amazed when the Lord comes to reign in mount Sion and before
his Ancients gloriously sing and rejoice. O ye daughters of Sion, and ye sons
of the Ancients, be exceeding glad, for he-hold your King is coming, and he
will speedily be in his Temple to visit and to inquire how it has been decked
with precious things, and in them will delight; but all the vile and abominable
things he will cast out. The whole creation of man is his Temple, whereof Christ
is the head every member that is corrupt and rotten he will cut off; Christ is
the vine, John 15.1. to the 8.
we are the branches every branch that brings not forth fruit in him, the
Lord will hew down and cast into the fire: M^. 13.3. to 10. Heb. 6.7, 8.
but every branch that brings forth fruit in him, he will purge it that it may
bring forth more fruit: We are the ground, he is the good seed; and all the
ground or earth which brings forth fruit meet for the Lord our Tiller, and
Dresser, shall receive a blessing from God; but that earth which brings forth
thorns, or evil fruit, is rejected, is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be
burned. God made man only to serve and obey him, and every nation, and kingdom,
and people, and particular person that will not serve and obey him, shall be
consumed by the breath of his mouth, and the brightness of his coming which is
near at hand; add woe, woe, woe, to the inhabitants of the earth, for the Devil is
come down to you, and is in great rage in you, because he knows he has but a
short time to reign. All you whose minds are following after the things of
this world, return to the Lord speedily, lest he come upon you at unawares, and
destroy you, and cast you into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. Take heed that you kick not against all warnings, for
suddenly shall these days come upon all that dwell upon the earth; for as it was
in the days of Noah, so shall it be at the coming of the Son of man, they ate,
they drank, they married wives, Matthew. 24.37
and were giving in marriage until the day that Noah entered into the Ark, and
the Flood came and took them all away; Luke 19.27. Isa. 11.15
even so shall it be with this wicked generation at the coming of the Son of
man, who shall utterly destroy all those that would not that he should reign
over them, and burn up all those murderous Cities, even every thing that they
lived in, Rev. 16.12.
all pride, covetousness, lying, swearing, and drunkenness, and what sin soever
was by the world loved and lived in, shall the Son of man take away and burn up
in his people who obey his voice, and keep his sayings, Isal. 51.10, 11
when the Floods of wicked and ungodly men (even all the waters of their
Egyptian sea) shall be dried up, and they not able to steer a ship therein, all
their false faith, or light (which is the waters) the holy Scriptures speaks
on, shall become dry, Isa. 35.12.
that there shall be a way for the Kings of the East (who has by these fierce
waters been kept back) and for the ransomed to pass through, to enter into
their glorious good Land, that they may till it to make it bring forth good
fruit, and abide therein for ever. Then shall the Arm of the Lord awake and put
on strength, he shall wound the Dragon, and dry up the deep seas, that the
ransomed of the Lord may pass over. Thus shall the Redeemed of the Lord return
with joy and songs unto Sion; but the wicked shall mourn for sorrow of heart,
and howl for vexation of spirit. O all ye powers of the earth, God is coming to
overturn, overturn, overturn your power, and give it to him whose right it is:
Jesus Christ shall have the rule and dominion over all Nations, and he alone
shall rule in his Saints, and not by might nor power of man shall we be redeemed,
or shall a reformation be established, says the Lord, but by the Spirit of the
Lord shall we be redeemed and reformation established, and by his Spirit shall we
be redeemed from all our vain conversation and evil practices, which is the
only true Reformation which God delights in: the high and lofty ones Come
down and sit in the dust, humble your selves in the sight of God, that he may
lift you up be afflicted and mourn, Jam. 4.6 to 11
cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye double minded men,
seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near; let the
wicked forsake his evil ways, and the ungodly the immaginations of their own
hearts, and turn every one to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon you; but to
every one who is contentious, and will not obey the truth, 2 These 2.11, 12.
nor return speedily to the Lord, but takes pleasure in unrighteousness, the
indignation and fierce wrath of the Lord shall consume you at unawars. You
Magistrates of England take warning every one of you, turn from your evil ways;
God has a great controversy with you for your living in pride and
covetousness; you put trust in the arm of flesh, you therein go down to Egypt
for help, and for that woe is coming upon you, without you repent speedily: you
live in pleasures and wantonness, you nourish up your selves as in a day of
slaughter, whereby the just one Jesus Christ is killed in you; you spend the
creature (which was given by God to cloth the naked, to feed the hungry) upon
your lusts, Iam. 1.27.
in gorgious apparels, and gold rings, and needless adornings, and instead of
covering the naked, and feeding the hungry, you set out Laws to punish them: my
heart bleeds to think of the hard usage of my poor fellow creatures who have no
abiding; whereas you ought to take those in who want harbor, and to see that
none want maintenance. You wallow your selves in the earths treasure like swine
in the mire, and never consider that the earth is the Lords and the fullness
thereof, and that he has given it to the sons of men in general, Psalm.
115.15.16.
and not to a few lofty ones which Lord it over their brethren: and if a poor
creature steal a horse, ox, or sheep, he is either put to death, or burned in
the hand; but you never consider how many horses, oxen, and sheep you steal
from the Lord, and use them to satisfy your wills and lusts. O you great men
of the earth, it is long of you that there is so many thieves, for you hold the
creation in your hands, Mat. 16.26.
and by all means go about to defraud the poor, more every day then other: it
is but a small advantage for you to gain (and make your selves possessors of
great livings, and lose your souls, as you put them upon the venture; repent
speedily, or else you shall all utterly be consumed; for the great day of the
Lord is coming to call you all to a^ account how you have spent that Talent
which he has given you: have you made your selves rich with the mammon of
unrighteousness, then are you happy; but to the contrary, you have spent it to
the satisfying of the devils lust in you, and shall thereby become miserably
unhappy, and the Prince of darkness which has blinded your eyes by the God of
this world (gold and silver) shall now after the blinding of your eyes, and the
darkning of your hearts, torment and scorch both body and soul for ever,
without unfeigned repentance. you wise in this world, your wisdom is turned to
folly, God has looked down from heaven upon you, Psa. ^4.
and behold you are all turned aside out of the ways of God, every one to his
own ways, following the works of your own hands, and walking in the
imaginations of your own hearts, (I bewail your condition) you keep alive that
which should die; and that which you kill should be kept alive: 1 Io. 3.15.
He that hates his brother is a murderer; but you kill, prison, Isa. 29.31.
and banish the just ones; you make a man an offender for a word, and lay
snares for them that reprove sin in the gates, you condemn Jesus Christ the
just one in you, and keep alive your own wills and lusts, and by the power
thereof rule over your brethren. Blush for shame you Rulers, that you should
know, or profess to know much, and practice so little; you profess to have the
Scriptures for a rule; but you act contrary to them; you profess to be Judges
in the steed of Moses, Isa. 5 22, 23.
but you like the corrupt Judges of Israel, have turned the Law of God into
Customs, and the truth of God into a lie, setting up your own wills instead of
Gods will; and whereas you ought to judge for the Lord in truth and
righteousness, you judge for men, and for men's rewards, you execute what their
wills is, with your own wills upon all offenders; and yet profess your selves to
be Judges under the Gospel, whereas you cannot find one Text in all the new
Testament, will warrant you to do or practice any thing you do, in prosecuting
of your Law, but contrary: therefore because you turn your backs off Christ's
Council, he will make you ashamed of your evil ways, Mat. 5.37. to the end.
and laugh when your fear comes, and you shall be had in derision with those
whom you hated, yea your lovers shall turn their backs on you and laugh at your
folly: Isa. 24.59.8.
thus shall you be cast down, and the Lord shall place in your rooms upright men,
Exodus 18.21.
fearing God, hating covetousness, which shall neither take gifts nor rewards,
nor judge for hire at all; but shall defend the cause of the poor, the widow and
the fatherless, without taking money, they shall judge for the Lord, and of the
Lord shall they receive a reward, Isa. 26.
and no reward of man shall at all be given or taken; Psalm. 85.11, 12, 13.
for the Lord shall surely give wisdom to judge aright (that they need not go to
Schools of lea ning (so called) to learn wisdom of men, Luke 1.33.
and they shall freely communicate righteous judgment to every one who come
before them: Dan. 7.13, 14.
Thus shall the Lord be King in his Saints, Dan. 2.44.
and rule all Nations in righteousness, he shall be judge in his Saints, Dan.
7.9 10.
and shall judge all Nations in truth; he shall be their Lawgiver, Rev. 5.20, 21
to end.
and save them from all their enemies, and make all Nations subject to them:
the Kingdoms of the world shall be given to the Saints of the most high; Dan.
7.18, 22, 26, 27.
it shall be an everlasting Kingdom; and of the dominion, rule, and government
there shall be no end until Jesus Christ have by ruling in them, Mic. 4 2, 3.
Isa. 2.3, 3, 4, etc.
made all his foes his footstool, and subdued all things to himself, then death
shall be swallowed up in victory, 1 Cor. 15.24. and 51.
and Christ shall appear a second time without sin unto salvation unto all that
wait for him, and love his appearing: for unto you that fear the Lord, shall the
Son of righteousness arise with healing in his wings, and shall bind up every
broken soul, H s. 9.28.
and pour in oil, which oil or anointing shall teach those who receive it all
things, and they shall not need that any man teach them, Mal. 4.2, 3.
but as that anointing directs them, Isa. 10.22. to 28
so shall they walk in all things: this is the spirit of the Lord which
directs aright how to walk in all things, Ioh. 2.20, 27.
and they need not the light of the Sun, Rev. 21.1, 2, 3. read all chap.
Moon, or stars to guide them; that is, no help of the natural man to direct
them, for the Lord shall be the light thereof, and the lamb the glory of the
same: and this is new Jerusalem, which comes down from heaven, and the new
heavens, and new earth, wherein dwells righteousness, to the which ere long,
all that fear the Lord in truth, shall be brought, and like a bride made ready
for the bridegroom; but the wicked shall be shut out, for the uncircumcised and
the unclean shall not enter in thither. In the midst of this new Jerusalem runs
pure streams, as clear as Crystal, these are the streams of righteousness
which shall run down our streets like mighty rivers, which shall sweep away as
with the besome of Gods wrath: (the love of God to the Saints, is fury to the
wicked,) All the ungodly powers of the earth, and destroy every evil doer:
repent, Mar. 13.36.
for at unawares shall this day come upon you, Read Isa. 29.
and happy shall all they be who are found working in the Lords vinyard, for
suddenly shall that day come, Isa. 30.31 and chapter
yea like a thief in the night to all that put the Lord afar off: Take warning,
47.10, 11.
for the Lord will finish his work upon Mount Sion, and finish his work, his
strang^ work upon the earth, and cut it short in righteousness He that has
ears to hear let him hear, Ier. 51.6. to 14
and he that reads let him consider, for the words hereof are true, Mal. 3.1.
and the time short: Repent, repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand, and ye
that fear the Lord, rejoice, for he is risen, and will come speedily to his
Temple.

All you Town Clarks in England, Ier, 50.28.
or parish(ing) prophets, your downfall is at hand, Isa. 5.20. read all the
chap.
and God has bid me forewarn you, and cry out against your ungodly and wicked
practices, blasphemous and beastly worship, you put bitter for sweet, and sweet
for bitter; you call evil good, and good evil, which God abhors; you put light
for darkness, darkness is by you called light; and thus you deceive and delude
poor souls into error, by your vain immaginary minds; and by the fancy and
brats of your brain, you draw away three parts of England after you (the stars
to the earth) you have nothing of God in you; but what you preach, Io 4.5. to
28.
you like the woman of Samaria, have a rope, and water-pots, to draw out water
of wels which others dug: your rope is the learning you get at Oxford and
Cambridg; and your water-pots is your wisdom, with which you draw water out of
wels which others dug: (is not this so?) do you not tell all who have
received the testimony of Jesus Christ in the spirit of truth, that they have
nothing to draw with? and the well is deep? that is, you want Learning, and the
Scriptures are deep mysteries: but let one tell you the waters that they drink
is a wellspring of life living in them, Io. 4.7. to 27.
and to all that daink thereof, then you say, What art thou greater then our
forefathers who gave us the Scriptures? and they were made partakers of the
blessings spoken in them: Whence have thou this new light and thoughts? O ye
false worshipers, stand con^ending against Jesus Christ by telling him of
outward worships; but never considers the words of Jesus Christ, which says,
the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth, for he
seeks such to worship him: and no outward worship was accepted by him, nor
the Temple at Jerusalem, which was far better then the Idol Temples of our
days. Thus you cover your selves with fair words as with fig leaves, Mic. 7.2,
3, 4.
glorious outsides, but within full of filthiness; no fruit nor performances is
found in or among you; you commit evil with both hands; but how to do well you
know not: O you blind guides, how dare you profess your selves to be the
Ministers of Jesus Christ, and never yet knew him? neither dare you trust him
for your wages; is he so little credited by you that you dare not believe him?
he says, cast your care upon me, and I will care for you. Do you take him to
be your Master, and will you not trust him for your Wages; for shame give over
pretending serving of him, 1 Pet. 5.7. Mat. 20.10. Isa. 56 9 to end
for he has Servants, whole thousands, which dare trust him, and will labor
in his vineyard, and ask him nothing, but freely be content with his Penny. O
you greedy Dogs, idle Dogs, and dumb Dogs, which will not bark without one put
into your mouths, and lies down to bark in your Parishes, where every one looks
for gain from your Quarters; how do you conjure up your dead Doctrines, dead
Reasons, and dead Uses; nay, and more then that, 1 Samuel 28.15.
you like the Witch of Endor, conjure up the dead bodies of the Prophets and
Apostles out of the Letter, which is Death, making the Letter to stand before a
many deceitful Saul's, whom the Spirit of the Lord rules not in, not knowing
the living power of them who gave them forth; nor have you the Spirit to
administer by, but death in you raises up death to speak to death; all is
Death, and to death you shall speedily be brought by the Spirit of the Lord,
who shall by the Breath of his mouth, 2 Thef. 2.3, 10 11
and the brightness of his coming destroy all which opposes the true light of
God, as you Parish(ing) Ministers do, by your seeking to put to silence all
who have not the mark of the Beast in their Right hands, or in their Foreheads;
none but themselves must buy or sell (Trade in) Spiritual things: But take
warning, God is coming to burn, that great Whore whereof you Priests of England
are members; and shall one member be burnt, and not the other suffer.

Howl and weep you proud ones of the Earth, Rev. 16.19. chapter 17.16, 17, 18. chapter
18.
for your Mother Babylon is falling, is falling, and all her Children shall
taste of her plagues, and great is the fall thereof, for God has put it into
the hearts of the Powers of the Earth, to hate the Whore, and to burn her with
Fire; the Battle of the Lord of Hosts goes on apace, Rev. 19.11. to end.
and he will cut down every son of Babylon, and dash all her Brats against the
stones, (every Truth of God is a stone, which dashes in pieces all Babylons
children) both Bond and free, Male and female, Young and old, that stands up in
opposition against the great God, shall be cut off. Rev. 12.12. Chap. 18.5, 6.
and 20. ver.
Rejoice O ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for the Lord is coming to avenge the
blood of his Saints upon that great Whore, which has made her self drunk with
the blood of Saints: not by might nor power of men, but by my Spirit says the
Lord God shall ye be redeemed from out of the hands of them that hate you. O
you Just and upright Ones, lift up your Heads, your Redemption is at hand, even
at the Door.

All people in England take warning, Rev. 17.18. and 19. chapter
the Lord is coming to pour out the Vials of his wrath upon the Whore that
prostrates her self to all that pass by (as the Ministers of England do, and
to plague the Beast, the Majesty which she rides upon, and which she is upheld
by: Yea, and all the people which are at one with her, (without a speedy
departing out of her) shall taste of her plagues; Come out of (...) for my
people, says the Lord God, separate you^se^ves from among them; touch no one
(...) thing, and I will receive you: It is nothing to be s^parate from the
inwar^ Worship of Babylon, and yet inwardly be full of uncleanness; Therefore
all you which live in sin, High and low, Rich and poor, Bond and free, Male
and female, take warning, and repent speedily, and turn every one of you from
your evil ways, lest the Lord come upon you at unawares, and cast you into
utter darkness; f^^ behold the Lord is risen, he is good fo^th Conquering and
to Conquer all his Enemies, and happy are all those who trust in him; for how
his wrath is kindled in his breast, and it shall burn as a Fire, Psalm. 2.12.
and devour all the wicked on the world; yea, all the ungodly shall be as
stubble, and the fire of the Lord shall burn them all up, and leave them
neither Root nor Branch:

Now the Sinners in Sion shall be afraid, and all the hypocrites hope shall
perish, Isa. 13.9. to end. James 5.1, 2, 3
because of the fierce wrath of the Lord against the wicked in heart. Howl all
Rich men in the Earth; for the rust of your Gold and Silver shall bear witness
against you, because you have not honored the Lord God with the increase of
your Flocks, the Fruits of your Corn, and the Overplus of your Moneys, but have
spent them upon your Lusts, and consumed them by pride, banqueting, rioting
and drunkenness. Now the Lord is, coming to require an account how you have
spent all his treasure, for the Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof,
and not yours, O ye wicked ones; and he is coming to require his Corn, Hos.
2.9.
his Wine, his Oil, his Wool, and his F^^^, and to know how you have spent
them; whether you have bestowed them on those the Lord commanded you; Zec. 7.9,
10. Isa. 58.6. to end.
to see if you have fed the hungry, clothed the naked, relieved the oppressed;
have you let the Prisoners go free then have you made yourselves rich with the
Mammon of unrighteousness, Ezekiel. 18.7, 8.
and ye shall be received into everlasting habitation, and rule as Kings among
the Saints of the most high God, Mat. 25.24, 25, 26.
whose Kingdom shall be an everlasting Kingdom, and whose truth shall endure
throughout all generations. Hear O ye just and upright ones, the Lord is going
to destroy all ungodly ones, and to cut off from the earth all wicked workers,
and to place in their rooms just men, and to set up in the earth the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, which shall reign in his Saints, which is the stone cut out of
the mountain, Dan. 2.44.
that shall smite the great Image from off his seat, and break all the powers
of the earth to pieces, (and though that power of legs and thighs be the
strongest power (which now reigns in England) that breaks in pieces, and
bruiseth all things therein; yet this stone cut out of the mountain without
hands, (as it has broken in pieces all the rest of the Image in England) shall
break in pieces this breaker, this strong part of the Image, and shall reign
over it; Read Dan. 2.
and the other part or power of this Image which is to reign, the Feet, it
shall be so weak and divided in it self, that its time shall be very short; and
that by reason of its being divided in it self it shall stand but a little: And
I am sure it shall speedily begin. Call it what Government you will, in his
days shall the great God of heaven and earth set up a Kingdom which shall never
be destroyed. And this is the stone cut out of the moun ain without hands
(Jesus Christ in his Saints) which shall bruise and break in pieces all powers
of the world: Ier. 23.6. to end.
In his days shall Israel be saved, and Judah shall dwell safely. This is the
name wherewith he shall be called, The Lord our righteousness: and in this
Mount shall the Lord make unto all people a feast of fat things, of marrow and
of much fatness, of good wine, of wine on the lees well refined; and in this
Mount will the Lord God destroy all things that shall offend, and he will rent
and take away the vail of the covering spread over all Nations, and he will
shine through all clouds and darkness, and will rent the vail of the Temple,
and shake the Foundations of the earth, the gross darkness which the world
lives in, and by their dark lanthornes (the Priests of England) are lead blind
by, and are bewitched from the truth, and trust in lying words. Ier. 7.3. to 9.
The Temple of the Lord, or the Church of the Lord, calling a house of stone,
the Church or Temple of God; but the Temple of God are these, if you thoroughly
amend your ways: (Take notice) Amend your ways, and do that which is justice
and right betwixt man and man: If you relieve the oppressed, fatherless, poor
and widows, and deal your bread to the hungry, cover the naked with a garment,
and take off every yoke and burden, relieve the captives, and let your
prisoners go free, then shall your light shine clear, and break forth as at
noonday; Isa. 61.4. to end.
you shall be called the habitation of the Lord, the repairer of the breaches,
and the builder of the old wastes, for men to dwell in; then shall the Lord take
delight in you, and dwell with you for ever.

The veil of the Temple is the dark ministry which lives, and leads others
to live in gross hypocricie, which clothes Jesus Christ with the filthy,
unclean, rotten rags of their own righteousness. Their fair glosses and false
interpretations of Jesus Christ, Ezekiel. 32.2:
the Prophets and Apostles words, which darkens the pure light by which they
were guided, and thus they muddy the clear waters, Ez 34.18, 19.
and drink up the sweet waters, and trouble the rest with their feet, their
unjust paths treading down the good pastures which they do not eat up, which
all the Saints of God have ever eaten on, and drunken of, and shall do unto the
end of the world, yea and for ever lie down safely, Psalm. 11.4, 7.
against all the powers of hell and death: and the rule and Kingdom of the Lord
Jesus in his Saints, Psalm. 82.5. to end.
shall overturn and overcome, and rule over all Nations in peace, and in
righteousness shall the Kingdom be established in their hands, and they shall
have peace for ever; and all powers of the earth, Psalm. 18.15.
or the foundations whereon the whole world stands, all the Magistrates of
the world shall be shaken; the pillars whereon the earthly worshippers
worships, Exe. 13.14, 15. Isa. 24.17. to end.
and carnal Ordinances stands on, which must not only shake, but be made
empty, and turned up-side-down, and left without a man, and without an
Inhabitant, and none shall dwell therein for ever, This is Babylons fall, and
Jesus Christ his rise, for it is only Jesus Christ that shall by the breath of
this mou^h, and the brightness of his coming destroy him, even Antichrist, who
with all powers and lying wonders, have deceived the Nations of the whole
earth, etc. now is the time near at hand, wherein all the spears of the world
shall be beat into pruning hooks, and their Swords into plowshares; Nation shall
not rise up against Nation, Isa. 2.4.
neither shall they learn War any more, there shall be nothing but peace
within our borders, and plenty within our palaces; there shall be no sorrow nor
sighing at all, Ier. 31.12. Isa. 25.8. Rev. 21.4.
for all tears shall be wiped away from all eyes, and joy and gladness, and
fullness of rejoicing shall be the reign of Sions King in the midst of all his
people. Thus shall great Babylon which is com into remembrance before the Lord,
be cast down, and never rise again, and Sion, which has lain waste shall be
inhabited, and never destroyed any more for ever; neither shall come up thither
the ravenous Beasts and Birds of prey, nor any Wolferous eye shall ever see the
beauty of Sion, the perfect City of the living God, whose praise shall spread
throughout the whole Earth; neither shall any thing that is polluted or unclean
come in thither, Rev. 21.27.
yet the Gates thereof shall not be shut at all.

They that have ears to hear let them hear; But Babylon shall be the place of
darkness, for nightbirds and Scriechow's, for the wild beasts to lie down in,
Isa. 13.9. to end. and 34.8. to end
and for the birds of prey to make their nests in, and for the Satyrs to dance
in. Thus shall that great Whore, the woman lapt in an Ephod, the Talent of lead,
Zac. 5 5 to end.
be cast into the midst of the Sea with great force, for strong is the Lord of
Hosts which has determined her utter destruction, and she shall never rise
again, she shall be carried into her own land (Forge fullness) and set upon her
Basse (misery) and there shall abide for ever and ever. Thus farewell all
wickedness, and welcome Truth and Righteousness, for thou shall live for ever,
and rule over all thine enemies. So shall it be, even so be it, Amen.

FINIS.
A Postscript to the Reader.
Reader,
THat thou may know what is here spoken is no more but what the Scriptures
bears witness to, (I have taken a little care for the edifying of them that
desire to know truth, and that by the mouth of two witnesses it may be
established) I have set down the Scriptures in the margent of this little
volumn, which bear witness to what is in it declared: therefore search the
Scriptures, and see whether those things be not so or no, and take warning,
lest thou perish with the disobedient.

Farewell. Benjamin Nicholson.

FINIS.

