A FIGURE of the True and Spiritual TABERNACLE, According to the inward Temple
or House of God in the Spirit.

Whereunto is added the Eight Virtues or Godlynesses.

Set forth by H. N. and by him perused, and more evidently declared.

The Temple of God was opened in heaven, and the Ark of his Testament was seen
in his Temple, Apoca. 12.

Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he shall dwell with them: and
they shall be his people: And he God himself with them, shall be their God,
Apo. 21. 1 Cor. 3. 2 Cor. 6.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread Eagle at the West end
of Paul's, 1655.

The Preface.
SEeing now that God has extended his mercy on us, and through his grace Exodus
25. Eze. 40.41, 42.43, 44. Apoc 21.22.
revealed and made known unto us in our Spirit, his true Tabernacle or Temple
(wherein his Holy God-service is uprightly ministered according to the truth.)

Therefore are we become occasioned or moved, even out of Love, to witness our
Figure forth writingly Ex. 25.31. Eze. 43. Act. 7. c. Heb. 8. a.
in Letters, this present Figure, or Pre-figuration of the same Tabernacle or
Temple of God, together with his true services in the Spirit (namely in the
forefront, in the holy, and in the most holy) before all lovers of the truth,
and of the true God-service, and to set it forth under the obedience of the
Love.

2. The bearing of which true being or form in the Spirit; is Ex. 29. c. Jer.
23. a. 30. b. 31. d. Eze. 36.37.
that which God regards, and requires of the man. For even therefore
(namely) to the setting up of this same true God-service in the Spirit, under
the obedience of the Love, has God the Father, through his benign or hearty
Love, revealed or declared in Mat. 13. b Ephesians. 3. a. Col 1. c.
heaven, his true Sanctuary or Tabernacle unto us, as also the forefront, the
holy and the most holy of the same: And granted to discern and understand the
mystery or secretness thereof, and also chosen us to the ministration of the
same; under the obedience of the Love; to the end that now in this last time
Isa 2. a. 60, 61, 62. Jer. 31 33. Eze. 36 37. Joel 2.3. b. Mich 4. a. Zach. 8
a. Act. 2.
the truth or verity of the same Tabernacle of God should always and for
evermore be ministered among the children of men, under the obedience of the
Love, to a consecrating or sanctifying of the forefront, and of the holy, and
to the setting up again, or restoring of the Dan 9.
daily offering which has ceased for a long time, for which cause likewise,
the forefront and the holy, has been so utterly ruined, or laid wast with
abominations among the children of men.

3. Which consecrating or sanctifying of the forefront, and of the holy; as
also the setting up of the daily offering, and of the true God-service among
the children of men, comes to pass altogether to Ephesians 1 a.
the laud and praise of the glory of God, and to the salvation or blessing of
the children of men, namely to those men which are good of will, also believe
on the Love, submit them humbly to the requiring of the service of Love, and so
have a lust to the establishing the Promises of God the Father.

Take it to heart.
To the Reader. Unto the single-minded ones, whose love is agreeable with us,
in one spirit of the Love, be health and peace.
ALthough, ye dearly beloved, that our intent and purpose was to make but a
small preamble or prologue before the beginning of the Glass of righteousness,
yet is it now notwithstanding fallen out otherwise. For the Prologue is grown
to be more then we our selves meant it should. But yet the labor bestowed
therein, has not been tedious unto us. 1. Cor. 13. a.
For the Love makes all painful travel and labor easy, and her service is
not tedious, neither does she think any time too long, wherein she may further
the good.

2. Therefore is our hope also, that it is all come to pass for the best, and
shall likewise be looked into by every one for a very profitable labor unto
edification: in as much doubtless, as it is all serviceable to the inducing or
guiding in of men to the holy understanding of the Glass of Righteousness and
to the Love.

3. Also I did not purpose to let this Figure of the true and spiritual
Tabernacle, go forth with the Glass of righteousness, but to set it forth with
other writings after the publication or going forth of the same said Glass.

4. But for as much as we have seen into or perceived, that it was very
needful, profitable, and serviceable to publish or set forth the same Figure,
to give thereby an intelligence or understanding of the inward spiritual
Tabernacle, and to be a furtherance of the man's salvation; Therefore could we
not through the inclination of the Love, conceal or keep back the same any
longer; But have for the Loves sake unto the Righteousness, placed the same to
stand next after the introduction, to the holy understanding of the Glass of
Righteousness: And next before the beginning of the book of the said Glass, by
which occasion the Prologue is become so much the larger.

5. Yet is our hope notwithstanding, that neither the good willing Reader, nor
any one else, will stumble or take offense at the muchness or plenty of writing
that is used before the beginning of the Book; but rejoice them so much the
more therein, and take a greater pleasure and liking therein, then if we had
left out the same. For it is doubtless a more plain declaring or opening of
that forenamed Book, entitled the Glass of Righteousness.

6. It is true, that it does not accord or suit very well to make large
Preambles, or large Prologues. Howbeit we have least esteemed of the Clarkly
form of congruity or artificial sutableness: But have much rather had our
respect bent unto that which is serviceable unto the good, and to the holy
understanding, whereby to reveal the Ephesians. 1. b. 1 a. 3. a. Col. 1. c.
riches of the mysteries of God the Father, extending to salvation, and to
testify 2 Pet. 1. b. 1 Ioh. 1 a.
that which we have seen with our eyes, and heard with our ears.

7. But although now that we do not utter forth or write the same, according to
the artificial skill, or Clarkly cunning of manly wit; Nor yet with painted or
flowred words, or garnished speech of the renowned, wise, or famous Clarks: But
even with a plain and mother or common style or form: Yet is notwithstanding
our request, that the Readers, or Hearers of the same our writing, would not
take offense thereat: and so in any such respect, despise or make less account
of our labor, because it is plain, and not practiced or set forth according to
the skill of Art; But that they would become all of one mind with us in the
Love, to the end that every one might likewise through the Love, be partaker
with us of the Grace and mercy, which God is now extending on us little and
poor ones, through his Love.

8. For unto us does God reveal the health and life of our salvation out of his
heavenly being, and has called and chosen us thereunto, because that we should
be his ministers in his Love, to the e^d to reveal even so through us under the
service of obedience in the Love, his secret mysteries according to the Law,
according to the Prophesying of the Prophets, and according to the Godly Word
of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

9. Act. 2. b.
All which former services, have to a unity under the Love, Prophesied on this
time and service of Love, for that the glory of God might be great in the last
time through the Love: And so the Peace become prepared on earth according to
the Promises.

10. Therefore let no man have his regard bent either to the method, or
artificial skilfulness, or yet to the unskilfulness of Art; But unto that
whereunto our service of the gracious Word extends, (namely to the Love) and
to let every one become assembled with us, into one Spirit of the lovely being,
under the obedience of the Love, that the service of Love may to an unity of
peace, be spread abroad over all the world.

11. For that cause, O ye single-minded, good, willing ones, to the
righteousness apply you all, with a good will and an humble heart to the Love
and her service: And Act. 2 d.
permit your selves to be baptized or washed in the name of the Love, to the
forgiveness of your sins, that ye may even so be renewed, refreshed and
reformed through the Love and her service. Suffer not in any wise Math. 18. a.
Io. 3. a.
the deceitful slights, nor the wicked thoughts to have any dwelling place in
you; But through the service of Love, and of the gracious Word, become you
turned about to the obedient and little children, that the Love may be planted
in you with meekness.

12. Unto this same service of Love, see that ye become all agreeably minded:
For it shall all perish and consume away to nothing, namely all manner of
knowledge and God-services, which are come or risen up, before this day or
light of the Love. 1 Cor. 13 b.
But the Love shall not perish, nor yet cease, but their service shall continue
for ever.

13. Whosoever likewise do not assemble them under the love, they shall be
scattered abroad. For the Love is the Light of the world: Ioh. 8. b.
whosoever follows after her, walks not in darkness.

14. The Love is the gracious word of the Lord, or Ioh. 6. f.
bread of Life, which is come unto us out of heaven. For the Love is
essentially the very true good, 1 Timothy 1. a.
the head-sum of the commandment, Col. 3. b.
and the bond of perfection.

15. Through which Love, the secret Treasures of God the Father, Ephesians. 1. b. 2.
a. b.
and the abundant Riches of his spiritual and heavenly goods be revealed.

16. Whosoever then does not apply himself to the Love: but refuses her, or
despises her service, and is grown self-wise or self-minded against the same,
by means of his aspiring or lofty knowledge, such a one remains a Bastard,
or a Stranger from the inheritance of God, and cannot also inherit the Riches
of Christ.

17. But the children of Love, are the upright heirs of God. For they are of a
good nature and disposition, namely Col. 3. a.
meek-minded, loving and peaceable.

18. Even such be all those likewise, which do with humble hearts submit them
under the Love, and are obedient to the requiring of her service.

19. And though they be laden with many sins, 1 Ioh. 1.
yet are their sins forgiven them, and blotted out through the Love, and in
their repentance for their sins, they walk with a good conscience, both before
God and men.

20. Behold such is the service or office of the Love. The Almighty God
vouchsafe to enable and strengthen us thereunto through his Love. Amen.

THE FIGURE Of the true and Spiritual Tabernacle of God: Witnessed and Figured
forth by H. N. according to the true being or form of the inward Temple or
House of God, and that in every respect according to thar form, even as the
very essence or being thereof was by the holy Spirit of the Lord revealed and
declared unto him out of the heavenly Truth.
The first Chapter.
FOrasmuch as my inclination had a long time stood bent toward the service of
Love: And that I had longed even with a fervent desire, that the true
God-service might once flourish out of the Love (namely to the peace and
salvation of all people, and to a true declaring of the spiritual Tabernacle of
God, in the holy of his holy ones.) Therefore became the true Tabernacle or Lev.
26.26. b 2 Cor. 6 b. Apoc 21. a.
habitation of God by grace out of the Love of God the Father, revealed unto me
in the Spirit, through Gods heavenly revelation, to the end that I should
consider of or note therein the true God-service, which serves to the blessing
of the earth, and to the peace and salvation of all people.

2. In the which I at the first, thought not upon the noting or marking of any
thing else, but only of the most holy and most pure being, Ex 26 d. 40. a b. c.
Heb. 9. a
the mercy seat, and the Ark of the Covenant, together with the manifold
glorious riches, and sumptuous garnishing. All which I beheld in their pure and
perfect beauty.

3. Through which Revelation proceeding out of the heavenly being, I rejoiced
me far beyond measure: But there came not into my remembrance, so presently at
the first to consider or note, the holy and his daily offering or God service,
and the fore front, nor yet the service of the Levites and Priests.

4. But when I once remembered the holy of the same Tabernacle, and his service
of the holy offering, extending to the forgiveness of sins: then turned I my
self to the same, for to behold the daily offering for God-service ministered
therein, because I might see, and also understand the daily offering in the
holy, and the Altar, whereon the debt-offering, sin-offering, and
death-offering is offered and burnt to a forgiveness of sins.

5. I also noted the forefront: the which is a difference Eze. 44. a. b.
betwixt the holy of the Tabernacle of God, and the unholy of the uncircumcised
heathen-ship.

6. In which forefront, the Levites and Priests in their service, and in their
requiring of the righteousness, are to Ex. 27 c Lev. ^. b Number. 16. b Eze. 43,
44,
prepare the daily offering, betwixt the holy and the unholy, betwixt the
circumcised and the uncircumcised, whereby the Believers might have a free
entrance into the God-service used in the holy, for to offer up holy offerings,
such as are delightful unto God.

7. Now then did I also call to mind, the Levites and the Priests, Joel 1. b:
2. b.
which ought to have their daily God-service, for the assisting of the little
and weak ones, betwixt the forefront and the Altar of the self-making offering
in the holy, for to reveal and make known unto the Believers, the free entrance
into the holy, and in the same service, daily to inform or train up the people
which give over them selves thereunto, with the word of the holy understanding,
till that the service of God in the holy, be in that sort in full and due
manner executed or performed, namely that the death-offering, as well as the
sin offering, be quite and clean burnt or consumed, upon the Altar, in the holy.

8. Through which service and accomplishment of the death offering in the holy,
Matthew 27 Mark 15.
the vail that is before the most holy departs away, or is put off. Into
which most holy, only the High Priest does Exo 30. Lev. 16. Heb 9 10. b.
enter, and reveals the mercy Seat, the everlasting forgiveness of sins, and
does cleanse it all in the holy, through his blood of the New Testament. The
which is the Love, the flood of the everlasting life, and the eternal daylight
of the cleerness of God, and also the uncovering of the face of Christ.

9. Behold when as I now bent my self to consider hereon, and began advisedly
to look into the same, then found I, that both the holy and the forefront,
were utterly laid Psalm. 74.79. a. Eze. 5.22, 23, 24.
wast, and despised and trodden under foot, by the heathen or uncircumcised
ones, and the Altar appointed for the service of a daily Dan. 7, 8, 9.4. Esd.
10. 1 Mac. 2, 3, 4. Romans 11. a.
offering in the holy, was altogether defiled.

10. I also beheld, that the holy City of Jerusalem lay Isa. 64 c. Lam 1.2 a.
broken down and destroyed, Sion as a widow, or like one forsaken, and Israe^
dispersed and captivated among al^ people, and that the Psalm 79. a. Lam. 5 a.
strangers inhabited Isreal's inheritance, the lands lying about Jerusalem. And
in the holy place I saw nothing but Dan. 9.11. c. Math. 24. b.
abomination of desolation.

11. The Dan. 11, 12. 4 Esd. 10. c.
daily offering had also ceased a long time, for which cause likewise there was
no daily God-service in the holy.

12. Moreover I saw not in the forefront, nor yet in the holy, any 3. King.
19. b. Romans 11. a.
Levites, or yet Priests, for to Minister the office, to the preparing of the
offering, betwixt the forefront and the Altar.

13. For which cause sake of the abomination of desolation, I saw no free
entrance into the holy, for to offer the sin offering in the holy. And so by
that occasion there chanced likewise no forgiveness of sins.

14. When I now beheld, that all these holy things were thus grown to ruin, or
laid wast: Lam. 1, 2, 3. Dan. 8. 4 Esd. 10.
it grieved me sore, and I lamented greatly for the Sanctuary of the holy
offering, (namely, the holy with his holy and safe-making service) the which
the heathen or the uncircumcised Psalm. 79. a Lam. 5 a.
that were come into the Lands heritage, had utterly polluted and laid wast.

15. Which heathen or uncircumcised ones, have not also in any true manner
understood the holy God-service of Israel: Howbeit seeing they have presumed to
busy themselves about the same, also enterprised and taken it upon them, so
have they even everywhere polluted and made it desolate with Eze. 28. Dan. 9.
abominations: And for that cause did I lament most chiefly, the holy and his
daily offering.

16. In that now I did most of all lament the holy of the Tabernacle of God,
and his holy and safe-making service, it was doubtless therefore, namely,
because I perceived that the same holy was so utterly laid wast, that there was
no true offering or service of the holy, or safe-making offering used therein,
and for that the arrogancy Ezekiel 44. a
of the heathen or uncircumcised ones, had with their iniquity and abominations
gotten the upper hand in the same, and had destroyed it all, laid it desolate
or waste, which desolation and abominations of the uncircumcised did so
exceedingly trouble and grieve me, that I could not pacify my self in my
bewailing and lamenting that came over me touching this abomination of
desolation. For I saw that there could no reconciliation nor forgiveness of
sins come to pass, but through the daily offering or God-service in the holy;
and the sin did still daily augment or grow to a great increase or multiplying.

17. Because of this abomination of desolation, and for that the daily offering
was ceased by reason of the sins 4 Esd. 14, 15 Math. 4. b.
which had so abundantly increased: And also for that I saw no end or going
under of the sin, therefore became I, even through great grief of heart, crying
out unto God and said,

18. O Lord, Lord, when will thou according to thy promises gather together
again, and be gracious unto thy people Israel, and bring them unto their Rest?
And when shall I beseech thee, thy holy Mat. 2. b
Tabernacle be consecrated and cleansed from the abomination of desolation?

19. For seeing now that the holy and the forefront of thy Tabernacle is thus
utterly laid waste: Also that thy daily offering has ceased for a time, and
that into those places the Dan. 9. b
abominations of desolation are come or entered (where through likewise, the
iniquity is grown exceeding great and abundant) so goes it therefore doubtless
very evil and lamentable with thy people.

20. Forasmuch as Jerusalem lies waste, or overthrown, Sion sits as a
widow, or as one forsaken. And that thy holy Temple has not his declaring or
clearness upon the Mount Sion within Jerasalem, therefore does not thy
salvation O God, appear or shine thereout. The sin also is not put off or done
away, Isa. 19. c. Romans 11. c.
nor the ungodlyness debarred or put away from Jews.

21. For that cause likewise, there comes to pass no Heb. 9 b
forgiveness of sins there, nor yet any cleansing of the spotted conscience;
for the belief or faith Act 15 b Romans 8. a.
whereby one is justified from the sin, is Jer. 7 c.
taken away from the earth: And the iniquity increases more and more, even
unto the very worst, 4 Esd. 14. b. 15. a. Math. 24. b
for it has gotten the upper hand: And we find no refreshing or shaking in our
souls.

The second Chapter.
THe whilst I thus beheld this state of desolation, and pitied the same so
exceedingly, and lamented there over before the most high, so heard I a mighty
3 King 19. Act. 1. a.
sound or noise proceeding out of heaven, and it rushed like a tempestuous
wind, with great force over the earth, in such wise that the earth was afraid,
and quaked by reason thereof. And many which lay and slept under the earth Ez.
37. Dan. 12. b. 4 Esd. 3. d. Ioh. 5. c. 1 Cor. 15. f. 1 These. 4. l.
awaked, some to everlasting life, some to perpetual contempt and reproach.

2. Now I marvelled greatly at this vision and said, O God, how Isa. 17. a Romans
11.
wonderful and incomprehensible are thy works before all understanding of the
flesh!

3. Behold this miraculous work^ come to pass among us upon earth; because that
the Prophecy should be fulfilled Dan. 12.
that was said unto Daniel the Prophet in times past, come to pass in these
last times.

4. And I looked and behold Daniel who (according to the word of the Lord) had
rested a long time, even until this same last time, Dan. 12.
stood up and appeared and came unto me, in his part and office, for to keep
and execute the judgment against the abominations of desolation which were
grown up on the earth. And the Prophesies which (according to the word of the
Lord) had remained Da. 12. b.
sealed to all unto this last time, were opened, and their mysteries revealed
in clearness.

5. And through this Revelation and opening or declaring of the Prophesies, I
was greatly afraid. For inasmuch as I saw no righteousness of God to have the
upper hand upon the earth. But that the iniquity, did 4 Esd. 14, 15. a. Math.
24.
lord or bear rule generally, and Reigned on the earth, therefore was greatly
perplexed, and altogether feeble and comfortless in my self, fearing least that
I should perish with all the ungodly of the wicked world, for the manifold
iniquities cause, which I beheld so to abound over the whole earth.

6. For through the opening of the Prophesies that were sealed too, there was
revealed unto me, that all those that dwelt upon earth, were departed away or
estranged Psa. 14. a Romans 3. b.
from the living God and his truth. And moreover before the Isa. 29. b.
opening of the Prophesies that were sealed up, no man upon earth, how prudent
or wise soever he was, had any understanding in God, nor yet had learned or
understood any of Gods holy knowledge.

7. This same seemed before me very terrible, yea even to be a very horrible
thing to look into, because that the misunderstanding, or the ignorance
touching the Being of God, and the ungodlyness had so multiplied it self upon
earth; therefore was I very exceedingly afraid, and became mavelous
faint-hearted and strengthless; And I continued lamenting greatly over the
same, and grew likewise altogether comfortless in my self.

8. Now in the time while I was grown thus utterly void of comfort in my
lamentation that I made, because of the great wrong that I saw upon the earth,
so did there appear in my sight Dan. 8, 9, 10.
the Angel Gabriel, and he came unto me, but he continued not with me still in
my sight.

9. But so long as he was with me, and that I beheld him, I was comforted by
him; but when he departed from me, and that I saw him not, then had I no rest,
peace, or comfort in my soul: Also no people on earth could comfort me, saving
only Gabriel.

10. For when he came unto me and talked with me, I was of good cheer. And if
Gabriel had not strengthened or comforted me, then could I not have remained
alive. For there was showed unto me, both fearful and wonderful things: the
like whereof I had never seen or heard before.

11. For the dead arose out of Eze. 37. Math. 27.
the grave, and lived. And the ungodly made manifest their own condemnation
through their unrighteousness wherein they had lived unrighteously, and they
descended into the Apo. 9. a 20. b.
bottomless pit to their condemnation for evermore.

12. I beheld the misery of the ungodly, but I could have no compassion to the
extending of any remorse or pity toward them, Apo. 18. c
but rather rejoiced me for their infelicity and condemnations cause. For they
were well worthy Ap 16 a
of the same, because of their wickedness.

13. I also rejoiced me greatly 1 Cor. 15. c. Apo. 20. a.
in the Resurrection of the righteous, because I saw they rose up so gloriously
from death, and went into the everlasting life: And for that their domination
was with God and the Lamb; for I saw that they were both worthy of that, and
likewise to Reign upon the earth.

14. With these Righteous ones, after that they were risen, have I spoken, and
eaten and drunk with them; Dan. 12. b Sapl. 3. a. Math. 13. c.
their bodies glistred like the clearness of the Sun: And they have spoken
secret things with me, namely of the mysticalness of God, of the Kingdom of
heaven, of the true resurrection of the Godly men, of their joy in the
everlasting life: And of the purging of the earth in the judgment of the
dreadful Almighty God which comes over all ungodly Jude 1.
Being or nature.

15. The which Almighty God has more made up him self, and coming over the
earth, he comes Mal 3. a.
with righteousness (like as the same God has spoken thereof by his servants
the Prophets in times past) for to save his people, to the end that those which
are worthy of the Life, might live for evermore, and so may reign everlastingly
upon Apoc. 5.16, 18, 19, 20.
the earth in all love: Also for to damn those in the everlasting death which
are not his people: who for their wickedness cause are worthy of damnation and
of death; To the end they may no longer reign upon the earth, with their
unrighteousness: But that they might be banished or put away from the earth,
and damned and buried in the hell, and that the bottomless Pit may even so with
them be shut up, and their condemnation to endure for ever and ever.

The third Chapter.
WHen as I now beheld, such a calamity of the deadly or damnable estate,
hanging over the children of men for their sins cause: and that such a dreadful
judgment Heb. 10. c
of the Fires vehement cruelty, was coming unto them, to a suppression of the
enemies of God: And that such an unfortunate state of misery (the which the
Lord has also let me see, taste and feel) hung over their heads; Then was I
sore grieved and afflicted in my heart, in such sort that I became exceedingly
dismayed or uncased, and could well have vouchsafed, that there had been no man
upon the earth, because of the woe and grief which I saw coming over them for
their sins cause.

2. But that which did most of all grieve my heart, was this, that I perceived
that all those that were born upon earth out of blood, are out of their earthly
birth, inclined to Genesis 6.8. d. Psalm. 51 a.
nothing else but iniquity: and with their unrighteousness are minded to
destruction. That their last is bent to nothing else but unto error; that they
also are utterly ignorant in all Godly things: and that they therefore (if they
become not in their understanding recovered, through the Love and her service,
or renewed Ioh. 3. a Romans 12. c Ephesians. 4. c.
or born again in their Spirit) cannot escape the severe Judgment of God.

3. When I thus beheld the same according to the truth, that it was so utterly
unknown unto all people of the earth, and that they did every one follow after
the self wisdom of the flesh to their condemnation, then was I much more
grieved in my mind, and I bowed down my self before the Majesty of God who is
in heaven and said;

4. O Lord God of heaven, Thou that art a God of the living, full of Grace and
all goodness, and have Sapi. 1. b.
created all, whatsoever is any thing, because it should be, and that it might
go well with the same: Seeing now thou have made up thy self for to judge the
Act. 17 d
circuit of the earth with righteousness; so be therefore gracious I beseech
thee, to Job 14. b. Psalm. 138. a.
the work of thine own hands, to the end there may now in the last time, some
souls remain over upon the earth, and that Isa. 10. c. Rom 9. c.
the remnant O God might be saved

5. Show O God, thy mercy upon us, through thy bountiful Love Remember also
that we all of us, out of our earthly births are Psa. 14. a. Romans 3. b.
an ignorant people, void of understanding, and by nature are clean
contrary-minded unto thy wisdom, and declining therefrom: And have no lust or
affection toward thy information, nor any pleasure in the word of thy
servants, which present or hold forth thy salvation unto us, under the
obedience of thy Love, but we do all out of our earthly birth stand affected
toward our selves, and do most gladly give ear to our selves and our own
wisdom of the flesh, which flows of our self minded and fleshly heart.

6. That is verily the sin and the rebelliousness or resistance committed
against thee O God, by all spirits of unregenerated men, and the contraryness
against thee of all selfwise and good-thinking Scripture-learned ones.

7. Therefore O God rebuke and nurture us with thy Law or Ordinance, and with
the Doctrine of thy Commandments, and humble our hearts to the obeying of thy
holy gracious Word and service of Love, that we may be reformed of our wicked
or contrary nature, and become understanding acco^ding to the Law or Doctrine
of thy Commandments whereby we may O God accomplish thy will.

8. Rebuke Psalm 6.38. a. Ier. 10. c.
us not in thy wrath, and chasten us not in thy displeasure: but shake out the
same over the ungodly, which are always O God against thee, and like or allow
not of thee.

9. Destroy us not so utterly all alike, that the the great horror of
desolation come not over us all to our destruction, but that there may yet a
remnant find Grace before thee; And that they (even like as in the former time
Genesis 6, 7, 8.
of Noah) may now also in these last perilous times, remain preserved.

The fourth Chapter.
BEhold the whilst I still lamented on this fashion, the Angel Gabriel
appeared unto me again, whom I had in my sight before, and he strengthened my
mind: For I was grown almost past recoverie, by reason of my feebleness and
faintheartedness.

2. Then when my heart was a little refreshed, then was it said unto me: Arise,
and be of good cheer; for thou have found grace before God the most highst, to
declare his salvation to the children of men, and also for to witness under the
obedience of the Love, 4 Glass. 33.
unto the people upon the earth, the true God-service which God regards, to
the end that all those which believe on the Love, and submit themselves
thereunder, may be saved, and that those likewise which refuse the same, also
withstand the Love, and allow not of her service, may justly receive their
judgment unto condemnation.

3. Therefore turn now thy face again to the true remnant, namely to the Love,
which is the most holy, which is kept and remained over, in heaven for an
everlasting reconcilement, touching the sins of those people which convert and
submit them under the Love: The true most holy, through which most holy of the
living Tabernacle of God, (namely, in his service ministered under the obedience
of Love) the holy and the forefront shall Dan. 8. b
be consecrated and cleansed again, the daily offering in the holy erected, Isa
44.60, 61, 62, 65, 66. Ier. 33.30, 31, 33. Bar. 5. Eze. 36.37.
Jerusalem builded and Sion comforted.

4. The whole Israel shall likewise find Grace before the Lord, and obtain the
salvation also come again to his Land of inheritance and rest, and the
salvation shall be made manifest unto all people; To the end that the whole
world might not be accursed, like as Sodom and Gomorah; Is. 1.10. c Romans 9. c.
but that there might yet a remnant be saved, and remain preserved, even as the
Lord has spoken in times past.

5. When as now I had understood these things, I rejoiced me greatly, and my
heart became glad, through the bountiful and entire love of God the Father,
touching his great grace and mercy, to be showed in the last time. Because his
rebuke and chastisement endures Psalm. 30. a Isa. 54. a. 4 Mic. 7. b
but for a season, which comes to an end: And for that his love, grace and
mercy continues for ever. And in that Deuteronomy. 4. d
he forgets not his Covenant which Ge. 12.13 17.22, 26.
he has made with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, for to gather, and to set up
through his Love, his chosen people, Israel like as in times past, he has
promised and assured unto their Fathers, by Luke 1. g
the mouth of his holy Prophets.

6. With that I turned my face again to the most holy, and behold that same
remained undefiled and was not Ier. 17. b, Lam. 5. b
brought in desolation. For Isreal's God who is a God of life, had hidden the
same in heaven. And the heathen or uncircumcised, which are captivated with
manifold ignorances and errors, have not been therein at all; for Isa. 52. a
Eze. 44. a
no uncircumcised one can come or enter into the same sanctuary, nor behold his
beauty, but it is reserved and kept in store for the Lords people Israel.

7. Yea the same costly Treasures, the Riches of God, the most precious and
most pure beauty has God kept for Israel, to their salvation and Isa 60, 61.
Ier. 31, 33. Eze. 36, 37.
joy in the last times, to the end to reveal the salvation of life, Act. 12, a
out of the heavenly being or essential estate.

8. In which most holy there are likewise remained over all the precious riches
of God the Father, the unspeakable Treasure, which far surmounteth all manner
of garnishing of beauty, namely Exo 25. c Romans 3. c Heb. 5 a
the mercy seat prepared with the fine Gold; (which Seat continues standing
for ever unmovable) moreover the Ex. 25, 26. Apo. 12 a.
Ark of witness, wherein the Law of the Lord lies, even as he Deuteronomy. 9. b.
has written the same with his own Finger, (which continues for ever
unbroken, unchangeable) And the Ex. 16. a Psalm. 68. Sapi 16. c Ioh. 6. d.
heavenly bread of life, even as God himself has given the same from heaven
unto his people to a satisfying their hunger, the which does not consume or
wast away, but remains ever uncorruptible for evermore, for a witness unto
posterities that their forefathers were fed out of heaven with the same bread:
There are yet in the same most holy, the manifold costly vessels, of the most
holy riches, every one of the most fine Gold. All these were still remained
over, in their perfect beauty, and not one of them was polluted or defiled.

9. But this sumptuous garnishing and all these riches of the Godly heavenly
beauty, have been hidden a long time, for the wickedness cause of the
uncircumcised, and they must also (inasmuch as the iniquity grew on, even till
4 Esd. 5, a 14. b. 15. a. Math. 24. b
she was come to her full height, and had gotten the upper hand) necessarily
remain hidden, because they should in the more beauteous and glorious manner
come to light and be revealed again, in the last time, namely when the iniquity
of the uncircumcised is even to her utter ending approached or come near at
hand.

10. Which iniquity shall now fall and perish, through the revealing of these
heavenly beauties; for God will with his Arm or strength, and with the Arm of
his Saints, and with all his sumptuous garnish, get the upper hand.

11. Wherewith he also shows the just judgment of his Justice or
righteousness. For Ier. 30.
the ungodly shall no more bear the dominion. And all whatsoever submits not
it self under the Love, nor stands serviceable thereunto, shall be rooted
out, that they corrupt none, or mar the earrh, any more.

12. But the Love shall flourish 1 Cor. 15
everlastingly in her service, because that the Lords people Israel, which he
himself has chosen for his Deuteronomy. 4. c 32. a Isa. 19. c Ier. 51. c.
own heritage, as likewise all good willing ones, which stand submitted under
the obedience of the Love, may be comforted: and so may behold everlastingly,
the goodness or loving kindness of God his Father extended through his love:
which bountiful goodness, the God of life has foreseen to accomplish upon his
people, even as he in times past has spoken the same by Moses his servant, and
by the mouth of his holy Prophets.

The fifth Chapter.
ALthough now that the Levites, the Priests, the Prophets or Preachers, and
also the people are all fallen or estranged from the true God-service, and that
the daily offering has ceased for a long time, and the holy of the Tabernacle
of God layn utterly waste, with abominations of desolation, yet Ier 17. b Lam.
5 b
is the most holy notwithstanding remained over pure and unspotted, and the
high Priest Heb. 5 b 7. b 8 a 9 c
which continues a Priest for ever, is also found faithful and true, for he
has still remained steadfast, in his mercy seat in the most holy.

2. They are all shrunk away Psa. 14. a 53. a. Romans 3. b.
and changed themselves, there is not one remained standing, or righteous, but
are all turned away, either to the right or to the left side, and many by
reason of their ignorance, have born the strange yoakes of the beautified God
services.

3. But this everlasting Priest remains steadfast like a stony Rock, whose
feat endures from Psa. 45. a Heb. 1. a.
everlasting to everlasting, as a perpetual Savior, to an eternal curing or
reconcilement, for the sins of his people; for his God has anointed him to be
an high Priest and a true Mediator betwixt God and man, and to He. 7.8. a 9. a.
b. c.
be an everlasting Minister, of the spiritual and heavenly goodness, to the end
he might save the poor and miserable man, who through sins or offenses lies be
wrapped in the death, and to make him alive through him: and to set him up
again Rom 8. b
out of the death.

4. In which spiritual and heavenly service, ministered under the obedience of
the Love, the holy becomes consecrated again by the same high Priest, namely 1
Pet. 1^^ Heb. 9 b.
the sprinkling of his own blood for an everlasting Testament, and so it is all
washed and sanctified or cleansed through his blood.

5, That verily is the Gospel of the Kingdom of God and Christ, and the New
Testament, Mar. 16. b Apo. 14. a.
that same was also published in times past, for an everlasting forgiveness of
sins unto all those that believe thereon.

6. Behold this high Priest is the life everlasting, which was with the Father
of life in the beginning, and is revealed unto us in the heaven, (namely in the
bosom of his Father) and we Ioh. 1. b.
do behold his glory, even a glory as the only born Son of the Father, full of
grace and truth.

7. We do witness also, that he is the true Messiah, or Christ, which was
preached in the World in times past, and likewise published of him in his
coming, Isa. 9 a. Luke 1. d.
that he should be a King or Prince over the house of Jacob for ever: of whose
Kingdom also there shall be no end.

8. He is a Savior to all people that believe on him: And the Act. 4.10. c.
salvation is, or comes only by him, and by none other, neither in heaven, nor
yet upon the earth; for he is Romans 8 10. Isa. 13. a. b. 1 Pet. 2. c.
the end or the accomplishment of the Law, upon whom all the Prophets of God
have witnessed from the beginning of the world, and he comes in glory like as
is written of him.

9. He it is Is. 13. a. b 1 Per. 2. c.
which suffers for our sins cause in the holy, and bears our sins, and so
has like Ioh. 10. b
a faithful Shepherd, given over himself in the same holy to be an offering for
the sin, whereby 1 Pe. 4. a
to draw and arm us to the same mind, and so we to offer up our sins through
the daily offering in the holy, and to burn the same upon his holy Altar; The
which is his cross or patience in the holy.

10. So even thus does Christ through himself (namely through Romans 9. a Ephesians. 2.
a. Col. 1 c. 2. b.
the incorporating us into his death of the Cross) prepare the life and peace
for us, making us free, and washing Heb. 10. c.
us from the evil conscience. And so we obtain through him in that manner, a
free entrance into the holy, for to accomplish the God-service in the holy, and
to inherit the abundant riches of God the Father, and the everlasting life: The
which comes unto us plentifully, and appears in cleerness, if that we for
our parts, do Mat. 16. c Luke 9.14. c
daily take up our Cross with Christ, follow after him in the holy, and so
become Romans 6 a
baptized in his death, Romans 4.5.8. a.
to be an offering for the sin, whereby to be Col. 2. b.
justified from the sin, through Faith, and that merely by Grace, and not by
Works.

11. Behold such a manner of offering, and daily God-service in the holy, is no
doubt very convenient for us to use and perform. For so then, namely in the
performance of the daily offering or God-service in the holy, there appears
or comes to us in the spirit, the spiritual high Priest or Christ, according
to the Spirit, who is not of this earth, neither of flesh and blood, but of the
heavenly Godhead; and the same high Heb. 7, 8, 9, 10.
Priest, is also very needful for us, because he is faithful, and remains for
ever.

12. Whose service or high Priests office, is not outward according to the
manner of the foregoing service of the Elders, administered among the
unregenerate or unrenwed men, as in the letter, and with the letter, or with
speakable words, but his service comes to pass in the new birth of the inward
spiritual and heavenly man. Heb. 7, 8, 9, 10.
with the ministration of the spiritual and heavenly goods, according to the
spiritual and heavenly Priest-office,

13. And to that end, (namely to bring men to the new birth of the inward
spiritual heavenly man) have the outward ministrations of the Elders, the
foregoing with the man, Gal 3. c. 4, 5 a
under the which, he to the training up of him in all good nurture and order,
is kept and taught, even unto the new birth in Jesus Christ: through the which,
he does then likewise live, and walk in Luke 1. g.
all upright righteousness, both inwardly before God, and outwardly among men:
and to such an upright Ioh. 3. a. Titus 3. b.
birth, or the outward services or administrations of the Godly testimonies of
the holy Spirit of Love, a foregoing office, or 2 Co. 3. a
light unto the man, which witnesses, declares and holds forth the
godliness unto him as in a Glass. And so then the man, if he believe the
requiring of the foregoing service, and desire to stand obedient thereunto,
becomes prepared thereby to the same godliness, and taught to the Kingdom of
heaven. And that is the same ministration, which Gal 3 c 4. a. Heb. 7. b.
reaches to the spiritual and true being in Jesus Christ. And it is the
upright Priests office, of the Elders of the holy understanding, which in its
office or service, has the foregoing to the Ioh. 3. a. 1 Cor. 4. b. Gal. 4. b.
new birth in Jesus Christ, as is already said; which services are all
witnesses and directions, unto the very true and spiritual office in the
Spirit: And although the same services, being ministered in the letter, and
through the letter or serviceable word, do bring 2 Co. 3. b
a great illumination, and clearness, unto the unilluminated ones, yet are
those same for all that no more but a serviceable shadow, proceeding from the
spiritual and heavenly service of the great glory and cleerness of Christ, in
the inward being and form.

14. For Christ according to the Spirit has Heb. 3.8.9. a.
an higher function, or office, or a more excellent service, and a greater
ligh^ or clearness, then has all flesh and blood, writing, letters, or
speakable words. For he is a Minister, or an high Priest in the Spirit, Heb. 8
a. 9. a. b. c.
as a Minister of the spiritual and heavenly goods, as is before said. For he
himself is the Heb 1. a.
right heir, in all the riches of God his eternal and Almighty Father.

15. Behold this high Priest is spirit and life, the true Isa. 9. a*
King and a faithful Lord, a peaceable prince: And not this or that without us:
But he Act. 17. c
is in us all which believe on him according to the truth: And we all which
abide steadfast in the faith, have the life through him, who is neither
unfaithful, nor falling away like unto a man. For he does not shrink nor fall
away either from us, or from his Father, but through the Love Mat. 28. c Ioh.
14 b.
continues with us, and with his Father for ever.

16. Also he is not changeable, in his office or ministration, like as are the
children of men: who do one while setup one thing for an obedience, or for a
God-service, and that altogether without the service of Christ and his Love;
and then again some other thing, which directs not to the true life of
Christ, nor unto the upright being of his Love.

17. But his service, will, and commandment, is both now presently, and at all
times, like as it was in the beginning, and it shall so remain unchangeable for
evermore. For his Commandment, Will, and Precept, is Da. 6.10 Math 22. d Ioh 15
b. 1 Timothy 1. a
nothing else but the love and the life of godliness: And that is the old
commandment from the beginning: Ioh. 2. a
And it is the new commandment, as being for to come, or for to be made
manifest in this same last time, in the obedience of the requiring of the
service of Love.

18. Therefore seeing now that this high Priest, which is invisible, but yet is
known in the spirit, has such an unchangeable commandment or service among us,
in the ministration of the service of his Love: So stands he likewise firm
and immovable toward us in the same service, to an everlasting reconcilement
for our sins, as a true 1 Timothy 2 a Heb. 9. b
mediator betwixt God and us.

19. He himself also is partaker with us in suffering, touching Heb. 2. b 5. a.
our griefs, and purges us in his service of Love, through himself, and
through none other, or any other services.

20. Therefore has God likewise sworn unto him, Psa. 100. Heb. 7. c.
and it shall not repent him) that he shall continue a Priest for ever. They
Psa. 102. Isa. 51. a. Heb. 1. b
shall all become old, and become changed like a garment. But Psalm. 45 Heb. 1.
a.
his seat (as is aforesaid) endures and continues from everlasting to
everlasting: it is very true.

The sixth Chapter.
FOrasmuch now as that that God which dwells in the heavens, is through his
bountiful Love, a revealing of the holy things unto us, out of an heavenly
revelation in his service of Love; therefore have we the more assured
confidence on the same service of Love: which very true service is now in the
last time come unto us for to minister, to a blessing and salvation of those
men, which are good of will, to the end that they should all assemble them
thereto. For the love in her service, is the Mat. 24. Luke 17. d.
bait or prey whereunto the Eagles shall resort and assemble, and that to a
unity in one band of the Love.

2. For it shall now, whatsoever in the Love loves the peace and the
righteousness, assemble or come to the service of the Love, and concordably
incline them unto the same; for it is unpossible that it should bide back: but
that in those days it shall all (namely, all whatsoever loves righteousness,
and has intended peace and love) join it self to one, and not refuse to have
or use the unity in the Love with us.

3. Seeing that all my longing stands toward the same, therefore has my
heart seldom any rest, by reason of my longing toward the same and for that
the godly Bait (namely the right and true service of Love) might have his
ministration and declaring everywhere, whereby all Eagles, which hunger and
thirist thereafter, might assemble them thereto. For thereunto doubtless, shall
all those which love or stand affected unto righteousness, become assembled and
comprehended, or knit in one Band of the Love with us.

4. They shall also give themselves thereunto good-willingly, if they do but
hear of such an assembling, and unity in the Love, and that see into, know and
Credit the same, let them be wheresoever they are, or whosoever they be,
whether the Jews, Christians or Mahometans, heathen or of what generations,
nations, sects, factions, or religions soever they be; they shall all mutually,
for the righteousness and peaces cause, submit themselves with us under the
Love. Because that they might every one be incorporated to the upright To. 11. b
stock of life, to the laud and Ephesians. 1. b.
praise of the glory of the living God.

5 Which glory of God, God has prepared for himself now in the last time in
the service of his love, to the spreading abroad of his great name, Mal. 1. b
for that his holy name may be known and magnified universally.

6. Before, or in the presence of which service of Love, Psalm. 31. b
all blasphemous tongues must become dumb, all wickedness grow ashamed, and all
pride submit it self, to the end that all that fears God, loves his Promises
and hops thereon, may allow of or consent unto the office or service of Love,
and assemble them to the Concord of our commonalty.

7. For the service of love only shall flourish, under the which likewise all
understanding shall to an obeying of the requiring of the said service of Love,
give it self 2 Cor. 10. a.
captive to an unity of peace, and to an incorporating unto the virtues in all
Love.

8. Through which discerning, of the upright and true se vice, and of the
assembling of the upright hearts to the same, I have figured forth, or
witnessed with these present writings and testimonies, the true Tabernacle of
God, and his services ministered under the obedience of the Love of Jesus
Christ, according to the life, (even as the same is by Gods grace revealed unto
me) because that we might all of us, according to the spirit come to that Romans
12. a
one manner of God-service of Luke 1. g.
upright righteousness, which God ^egardeth: also that all people which
according to the spirit are Ephesians. 2 4.
strangers and ignorant touching the true God and his service, might look into
the same, also come to 1 Timothy 2 a.
the knowledge of the truth, and be converted to the Love and her service,
whereby to walk in all love, Ephesians. 4. a.
as children of peace, and as peaceable brethren.

9. But not in misnurter and disorderliness, according to the manner of the
uncircumcised heathen, nor in contention through self-wisdom, or
Scripture-learnedness, nor yet in disputing concerning the circumcision or
baptism, but in all discreetness and orderlyness of the upright life, according
to the true circumcision, Ier. 4 a Romans 2. c Phil 3. a Col. 2. b.
which comes to pass in the heart (the which is in laying away of the sin in
the flesh) and according to the true baptism of the Math. 3. b Romans 6. a Col.
2. b.
holy Ghost, which comes to pass in the spirit, in a new life, of the true
mind, full of all Love.

10. Therefore respect now well the upright Judgment in your hearts. For all
hearts shall now in this last time Luke 2. d
become manifest.

11. There shall also be found but one manner of heathen-ship, foreskin or
uncircumcision. And all hearts of the heathen or uncircumcised, being without
Jerusalem, and Gods sanctuary, and without the commonalty of Israel, or of
Christ, (let them then hold what God-services they will) shall through the
foreskin of the sinful flesh, appear manifestly to be uncircumcised, and to
stand captivated with the disobedient knowledge Isa. 52. a Eze. 44 b
. Of such uncircumcised ones there shall not one come into the sanctuary.

12. In like manner, there shall also be found but one manner of circumcision,
Baptism, Isa. 56. a Eze. 37. c. Ioh. 10. b
and house of Israel or Christ; and all the Saints or holy ones of God, that
are of the house of Israel or Christ, shall walk under the obedience of the
Love, and have their fellowship with us within Jerusalem, the Apo. 21. a
holy City of God from heaven.

13. And the same likewise shall be one manner of Tabernacle of God, or house
of the Lord, wherein Gods light, Apo. 21. c Isa. 60.
yea he himself shines as a light and cleerness unto his people Israel,
because that they all may even free without anguish, and without fear walk
peaceably in his light.

14. From whose hearts Isa. 25 a 2 Cor. 3 b
the foreskin of the sinful flesh, and of the disobedient darknesses shall be
put away; for the light that arises over Jerusalem, according to the promises,
Is. 60 a. c
shall shine about them all. Whereunto likewise all people that have a lust to
Isreal's God, and to his Law, statutes and rights, Isa. 2. a 11. b. 13. c. Mich.
4. a Zach. 8 c.
shall be assembled, and offer or bring unto the glorious God in his holy
Tabernacle, oblations and gifts, Is 5, 6. a Ier. 33. c Eze. 20 a Mal. 1 b. 3.
c. Rom 12. a
which are acceptable unto him, according to the same manner, like as in times
past, God has showed and commanded the same unto Moses his servant.

15. Which holy Tabernacle of God with his forefront, holy, and most holy,
together with his God-services, of the Levitical Priests and sacrifices, and
the service of the high Priests office, God has in times past, set forth
figuratively unto the people of Israel by Ex. 25, 26, 27* 35, 40.
the service of Moses and Aaron, or figured forth the same as shadows of the
true being or substance of the spiritual or heavenly goods, which were revealed
or showed unto Moses, to the end Exo. 19, 20 a. Deuteronomy. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Psalm. 50. b. Jer. 7. c. Zach. 7. a. b.
that they should never more forget the being of the same, but continually
remember it, and in the obedience of the commandments and ordinances of the
Lord, should wax zealous, and proceed on after the same.

The seventh Chapter.
BUT when the people of Israel did cleave or incline with their hearts wholly
to the Figures, Images or shadows, and accepted and used the same for the
upright God-service it self, in such sort as though God required the Images or
shadows, and that they were not chiefly and above all inclined to the upright
being of Christ it self, which yet notwithstanding God requires thereby
(wherein also the Figures, Images and Shadows do point) therefore has God
liked or allowed of none of their services, Psalm 50, 51. b. Isa. 1. b. 59. c.
66. a. Ier. 6.7. c. Mic. 6. a Zach. 7. a Mal. 1. a
neither have they likewise pleased him, but have rather been unto him a
loathsomness, and an utter misliking.

2. Therefore has God also had no lust or pleasure unto such people, because
they served the Images and Figures, and not their Lord their God only according
to the truth, like as it stands commanded in the Law of the Lord, and is
required by the Figures.

3. Which abuse toward the Images and Shadows, God has oftentimes rebuked,
and witnessed unto them by the mouth of his holy Prophets, Eze. 14. a Zac. 14. a
that they should turn them unto the Lord their God, from those same Images,
and those their abominations, whom they served with the delight of their
hearts, against the requiring of the Law.

4. Even thus has God many times, by his servants the Prophets, required the
fruits of the Law, and the outward form and observation thereof, which many
could not distinct or divide asunder.

5. But seeing they were bewitched with the Images and Figures, and blinded by
them, through their ignorance (which blindness was the uncircumcision of the
heart) so have they by that occasion looked into, or esteemed the services of
the Images or Figures to be Gods requiring, or to be the true God-service it
self, and have accounted Gods Prophets, that pointed upon the very truth, or
verity it self which was required, to 3 Ki. 22. c Ier. 8. a. 20: a 26. b. 32. a*
be false, and many times have put them 2 Par. 29. c. Math. 23. d
to death.

6. Although they supposed themselves now to be Gods servants, or to use and
maintain the true God-service: yet were they notwithstanding in that their
false use, the very right Idol-services, observing the God-services falsely.

7. Even so goes it likewise with all those which look into, or esteem the
outward God-services, or the outward obedience, for the true being or real
substance it self, also do adminster the same in that manner, and so go on
therewith, and do not through those same, or by their means turn them in the
Spirit unto Almighty God.

8. Seeing now that the God of life does not require the Images, Shadows, or
Figures by the Law, but that which is the living, being or substance it self;
therefore has he also at the last, out of the grace of his Love, which
continues for ever, revealed Act 2. a
the true being through his Christ, unto his people Israel, like as the same
was required by the Law, and by the Images, Figures, and Shadows, showing
clearly and plainly thereby what is his will, even as he had in times past,
through the services and his Prophets both required it, and also as being to
come, promised the same. In which time of the heavenly Revelation, and of the
spiritual birth or generation of God, according to the Spirit, many in Israel
rejoiced them.

9. Seeing now, that the resurrection of the dead was come to the house of
Israel, as that God raised up unto them his Christ, Act. 2 d. 3. b 10. c. 13. d
1 Cor. 15.
as the firstling risen from death, therefore did many in those days hope upon
the comfort of Israel, or Act. 1.
their restoring and setting up, even as God had fore-spoken the same by his
Prophet Ezekiel. 37.
Ezekiel.

10. But the God of their Fathers, who forsakes not his people Israel, neither
forgets the same Covenant that Deuteronomy. 4. Luke 1. g.
he made with their Fathers, has preserved or kept in his own secretness the
time of his wonderful Works, and the mercy toward the dead of the house of
Israel.

11. For in those days many in Israel understood not the wonderful Works of
God, nor yet the Grace toward salvation, that was opened or come unto them;
But they became blinded, or estranged from the same and knew or understood not
in what manner the restoring or setting up of Israel was to come to pass; For
God had stayed or reserved the same restoring, because he would in the last
time, through the same, make Mal. 1. a
his holy name known, glorious, and renowned among all the heathen, or people,
according to the Promises, and so to Isa. 11. b Luke 2. d
reveal to his people Israel his Love, the Banner of true Righteousness.

The eighth Chapter.
FOR which cause sake, the grace of salvation, which was opened or come unto
them from out of God, and the Ioh. 1. a 1 Ioh. 1. a
light and life, which was the Father, and which was revealed in Israel for a
Christ of God, was published, or preached unto all people, for a witness of the
resurrection of the dead, and for a Gospel, or a joyful Message of the Kingdom.
And moreover the Kingdom of the God of heaven became manifest in Israel, and
was witnessed both among them, and at Jerusalem: as namely that that which they
heard and saw, whenas the fiftieth day was fulfilled, were the wonderful Works
of God, whereof Joel the Prophet had spoken before, Joel 2. c Act. 2.
and it shall come to pass says God in the last days, when the end of the
Luke 21.
suppression of Jerusalem is come, and the fullness of the heathen is come in or
performed, Isa 59. c Romans 17.
because that all Israel in that sort become saved, according to the Promises.

2. Wherein God now shows, that he is not forgetful of his Covenant as he
has Genesis 12, 13, 15, 17, 21, 22.
made the same with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and that he is a God of Abraham,
and the God of his seed for evermore; Through whom he has in times past made
known his holy name, and will also in the last time make it known therethrough,
according to the Promises. And they shall effectually perceive that Deuteronomy. 3. d
Isa. 43, 44, 45, 48.
he the God of Israel is only the Lord, and that besides him there is no God
more and that all heathen that fear not the same God, nor yet do learn to keep
his Laws, Statutes, and Ri^es, are an ignorant people, without understanding,
even as hitherto it has appeared, among many multitudes of people or heathen,
who through their own wisdom (how ingenious and through-lighted or clear of
understanding soever they have been) have 1 Cor. 1. b.
not known or understood Gods holy wisdom.

3. Therefore has it pleased God to Isa. 29. 1 Cor. 1. b
shame the world in her wisdom to incompass or go beyond all chosen religions,
in their self-framed holiness, and to save his people through himself, because
he would establish them all in his Love, to become a Temple for his holy
dwelling: In the which 1 Cor 3. Heb. 1. a
God does behold his best beloved whom he has always loved from the
beginning; namely the very 2 Cor. 4. Col. 1. b
like being of his Godhead, the which the God of life has formed in the man
from the beginning.

4. But alas this same is unknown unto many, or they are by reason Genesis 3. a.
of their fall and estranging from God, so covered with the darknesses, that
they cannot, according to the spirit of the inward man, behold the being, or
real form of their God. But when as the man, through the hearing and believing
of the gracious word turns him in the spirit 2 Cor. 3. b. 4. a
unto God, then becomes the foreskin of his flesh, or the covering of the sin
put off from his heart. For Ioh. 4 b 8. c. 14. a.
God is a Spirit, a Light, or a Life, and is not otherwise known and beheld,
but in his own spirit, light and life.

5. Now when the man turns him (as aforesaid) thereunto, under the obedience
of his gracious Word, and service of Love, the same like being comes unto him
in the spirit; then Ephesians. 5. b
is the Image of God raised up in him, and awakened unto him in the spirit.

6. That same verily is the life, whereof the Kingly Prophet David has spoken
in time past, where he says, Psa. 17. b
I will behold thy face in righteousness, I will be satisfied when thine Image
awaketh.

7. When the man turns himself in the spirit, Eze 18 d. Joel 2. b.
unto God, as also humbles himself with all his heart, to the holy and
gracious Word, and is good of will to the obeying of the requiring of his
service of Love, then appears to him the difference between the Lev. 10. b
Eze. 44. c
holy and unholy.

8. Now when the man turns himself away from the unholy of the uncircumcised
hearts, and turns him obediently to the holy, or to Gods sanctuary of all
God-fearing and circumcised hearts, and wholly gives himself to enter into the
same, and that so Pro. 1. a Eccl. 1. b. 2. a
the fear of the highest God gets a shape in him; then does the right departing
out from all heathenishness, and the entrance into the forefront of the true
Tabernacle of God come to pass even there with the same man. For he goes out
of the uncircumcision into the circumcision of the Ier. 4 a
foreskin of his heart: and receives in that sort, through the service of the
holy and gracious Word, Gods Covenant of circumcision in the flesh.

9. In which service of the holy and gracious Word, ministered in the fear of
God, the foreskin or covering of the darknesses wherewith all heathen are
covered or grown uncircumcised, The true forefront of the holy and true
Tabernacle of God, is the turning unto God in the fear of God, and so through
the service of the holy and gracious word, to separate ones self from all
heathenish misnurture, or to turn away or circumcise ones heart from all
wickedness, which forefront in his service, is the upright circumcision, which
makes the right difference between the holy and unholy, and betwixt the
circumcised ones, the Lords people, and the uncircumcised, or heathen.
is Isa. 25. 2 Cor. 3.
put off. The which is the laying away of the 2 Pet. 2.4. a. Heb. 12. a
sin in the flesh, whereby to show due obedience, according to the Law of the
Lord, namely to fear God uprightly, to desire the good with fervency of heart,
and to circumcise or purge the heart, and all whatsoever is manly. The which is
Romans 2. Phil. 3. Col. 2. b
the true circumcision that God regards

10. Finally that same is the forefront of the true Tabernacle of God: and the
right difference Lev. 10. b Eze. 44.
betwixt the circumcised, and the uncircumcised heathen. Betwixt those that
fear God, and are good of will, and those that fear not God, and are evil of
will, and Jer. 7. c. 11. a. 13, 18.
so live according to the sensuality or self-mindedness of their own desires,
or according to all manner of light-mindedness; as that are without rule,
loose, unbridled, or wild of heart, and do neither love nor obtain any wisdom,
nor any holy knowledge; whose hearts take hold of nothing else but all manner
of filthiness.

11. But through the fear Prove. 1. a Eccl. 1. c. 2. a
of God, by means of the circumcision of the heart, through the good will, the
man comes to the godly wisdom, and holy knowledge, and so the fear of God
drives him to turn away Romans 8. a
from the sin. And then proceeding forward, even to the holy he becomes
justified from the sin through the Faith, in the daily taking Lu. 9 14. c
up of his Cross, in like suffering with Christ, till unto To. 6. a. 8. b.
the death of the sin, which is the daily offering in the holy.

12. But now when the man is turned Eccl. 2. a
unto God with a good will, in Godly fear, and under the obedience of the Love
is coupled or joined to a Commonalty of the Saints of God, then is he departed
out of the heathenship, and has at that time his conversation or fellowship
with the administration and discipline of the holy Word, ministered betwixt the
forefront and the Altar of the holy offering, till that his offering and gift
be (through Faith) begun or taken in hand, in the holy for a burnt offering;
through which burning of the offering upon the holy Altar of the Lord Jesus
Christ in the holy, Isa. 57. b Ephesians. 2. b
the Peace betwixt the man and God the Father is prepared.

The ninth Chapter.
BUT for as much as this true God-service in the holy, is not yet (according to
the inward man in the spirit) known unto every one, nor understood according to
the truth, and we do find many young and little ones of understanding, many
feeble and weak ones, and many uncertain consciences: all which notwithstanding
do stand bent and well-minded, with a good will toward the Love, and toward
the holy understanding. So is therefore the life of righteousness evidently
witnessed unto them out of the service of Love, which testimonies of the truth,
are likewise administered unto them through Doctrines, speakable words, or with
writing, (namely, unto those that have turned from the heathenship, and so
endeavor them to the obeying of the word and his service, and which do fear
God) with which service, there is required of them, the obedience to the Love
of the Father, Gal 3. c 4. a. Heb. 7. b.
to a sustaining of them, whereout some better thing is yet to be hoped for.

2. That same is verily the daily God-service, which is well pleasing unto the
Lord, and the upright Ceremonies, which be ministered before the Lord, unto the
God-fearing hearts, by the Ministers of the holy word.

3. Which Ministers with the same service of the gracious and holy word, is the
Levitical Priests office, wherethrough the slain-offering is prepared before
Jer. 33. b
the Lord, among the little-ones, and sinners, who bear sorrow and grief for
the sins cause; also the burnt-offering is begun, and daily used, and the meat
offering likewise kindled and offered up.

4. Which service likewise of the Levitical Priests office always stands or
continues before the Lord, in the service of his Love, as a mutual assistance
and strengthening for the little or weak ones: and that altogether in the Love
to the serviceableness of the Congregations, for the sins of the ignorant.

5. Which service of the Levitical Priests office, God would not have required,
if the man had not fallen into the sin, but had still walked uprightly in the
light of God.

6. But forasmuch as it has not gone so with the man, therefore has God, even
of necessity, added the same service unto his promises, for to inform therewith
the unilluminated ones, the infirm, weak, and young ones, or little ones of
understanding, who do yet oftentimes sin, and are of little growth in Faith,
and so to assist and serve them therewith for a certain time, betwixt the
forefront and the Altar, for an entrance unto them in the holy, and to bring
unto the high or great God of heaven, Psa. 11. d Isa 56 a Mal. 1. b Romans 11. a
such an offering as is delightful unto him.

7 Even thus become they all converted or turned away from the sin, and
succored or trained up under the service of the Love, to the Luke 1. g Ephesians. 1.
a
knowledge of the upright life of the Just, to the end, that they may all
become one, even as of one mind Ioh. 17 c
in the Love.

8. Now when one does know the same life, according to such an upright service
and nature of the Love, and is grown believing toward the same, then is there
revealed and brought in the spirit unto the Believers, the boldness to enter
into the holy, for to accomplish the service of God, and his requiring in the
holy, like as God is requiring the same accomplishment by the Law and the
Prophets, and by the service of the Elders in the holy understanding, which
accomplishment in the holy, is our offering in the offering of Christ, through
his He. 9. b.c
blood, which prepares for us a new and living way.

9, Behold that is the true God-service, through Christ in the holy, which is
now by Gods grace opened and brought unto us, to the end to set up the
righteousness in the same through Faith, which is required by the Law and
Ordinance of the Lord. For whatsoever is Rom 8. a
unpossible for the Law to do through works, that same is accomplished in
Christ through Faith: whereby Christ is in that manner the accomplishment of
the Law: and erecteth the upright righteousness among his Believers, and
establishes them in the same.

10. Therefore Christ is no breaker, but a fulfiller of the Law: for Mat. 3. b
Christ came not to make void, or break the Law and the Prophets, but to
perform them, because the righteousness that is of value before God, may be
made manifest through his light, to an everlasting establishment of the
promises of God made unto the Fathers, whereby to wash and cleanse the man from
his spotted or Heb. 9. b
evil conscience, that he might laud God with peace and joy.

11. But this daily God-service betwixt the front and the Altar in the holy
which is prepared and ministered by the service of the holy and gracious Word,
and by the Priests office out of Levy, or by the Elders in the holy
understanding, is the service which God has added to his Romans 4. b 5. c. 7. a.
Promises made unto Abraham, to a strengthening of the belief extending to the
Promises; Because the man should with a good courage in the good and godly life
of righteousness, among the Elders in the holy understanding, Ephesians. 1. b 1 Pet.
2. a
grow up therein to an establishing of the Promises of God the Father.

12. In such manner doubtless is the same service of the holy Word, which is
administered by the Elders in the holy understanding under the obedience of the
Love, very profitable and furthersome for the good-willingness, the while they
Gal. 4. a.
are yet little or young in the godly understanding: And for those that like
unto children, stand simply submitted under the Love, to the end that no man
should err, through any ignorance, nor tie his heart to the imagination of his
own spirit, but only have regard unto the service of Love, to the obeying his
requiring until that the daily God-service in the holy be begun with him, and
have his full course with him; Also till the true 2 Pet. 2. b
light come unto him, and the day likewise appear from on high, or as a
cleerness of the morning star arise in his heart, and that the everlasting Ioh.
1. a
life be come unto him in the spirit, according to the truth, and have 2 Cor.
4. Gal. 4. b
a shape in him, as a Kingdom of God or of Christ, which is the upright being,
or real form it self, full of all Love.

13. Till unto this same day (namely till that the light of life, as a true
being, an upright righteousness, be come unto the man) does the daily
God-service for the sins cause endure in the holy; so long also 1 Co. 3. b
remains the vail before the most holy, namely till the holy be performed, or
ministered in his full course of ministration, with upright daily oblations,
which are acceptable unto God.

14. But this daily offering, or gift which the man is Debtor to offer, in the
holy, or that wherein God has a pleasure, is not alone the outward; for God
has Ps. 40.50.
never willed nor required the same without the good will of the heart.

15. Therefore it is a spiritual offering, proceeding out of Psalm. 11. c Isa.
57.66.
a lowly and humble heart, and the beginning of the same upright offering
sounds even thus, in every man that is good-willing toward God, and toward
his righteousness,

16. O God I come, and have a lust to Psa. 40. a Heb. 10. a
do thy will.

17. Now when the man finds himself thus minded, and desires to enter into
the service of Love, and his requiring, in this sort is his heart prepared and
altogether become willing to Mat. 16. c Luk 9.14. c
take up his Cross, and obediently to follow after the 1 Pet. 2. c
crucified and killed Jesus Christ, in the belief, under the obedience of his
love, till unto his death, (even the death of the Cross) Romans 6. Col. 2. b.
and to be baptized into the same death, whereby to enter even so into the
life, out of the deadly sin, Ioh. 3. a Romans 6.8. b 2 Cor. 4.
through the second birth, from death. Wherethrough he is likewise made free,
The true holy, of the holy and true Tabernacle of God, is the belief tending to
the mortifying of the sin, in the after following of Christ, till unto the
second birth from the death, (the which is the willing obedience of the belief)
which holy and his service, or obedience in the belief, wherein the death of
the sin comes to pass, is the very true holy, and the right difference between
the most holy and the forefront.
or delivered from all choosing of this or that according to his own will or
pleasure, saying with his whole heart;

18. O GOD, Act. 9 a
WHAT will thou have me to do?

19. Behold in such a mind, intent or inclination to the obedience of the
belief, and to continue Eccl. 2. a Math. 24. ^
steadfast therein till unto the death, and to the new birth from the death,
consists the man's conversion to his God: and he becomes so clean turned
about from his selfness, that he is like unto Mat. 18. a 1 Pet. 2. a
a new born babe, that has no manner of self-wisdom or self-willedness, but
that lives only that life that is given and brought unto him by God. In such a
manner is the man meet also to come into the Kingdom Ioh. 3 a
of God, to enter thereinto.

20. But behold, with such a heart and mind comes the man unto the Deuteronomy. 6.10.
b. 1 King. 15.
true obedience, which God regards: And so through Faith he goes out of all
deadly corruption or perdition, and comes into the life of his God, in the
everlasting immortality, in all Love: and is filled with all fullness of the
holy Ghost, Romans 8. b
and inherriteth with Christ, all the treasures and riches of God, and of Isa.
33. a Col. 2. a
the spiritual and heavenly goods: Those verily are the promises of God the
Father through Jesus Christ, to the blessing of all the generations of the
earth.

21. By this means, as is said, the man comes again to his soundness, and to
his Ioh. 8. d
precious freedom, whereunto Genesis 1. c Sap. 2. c Eccles. 17. a
God has created him from the beginning: as being unbound, or untyed from all
vain and unprofitable things.

The tenth Chapter.
NOW when as the service of the offering in the holy has once had his full
course, with such a good will as is aforesaid: and the debt-offering,
sin-offering, and death-offering, is all through the like-suffering of Christ,
accomplished on the Altar, through the belief; then Isa. 25 a Math. 27. 2 Cor.
3. b
does the vail, as opening asunder, divide it self from before the most holy:
and so there is then discovered in the most holy, the mercy-seat, the Ark of
witness, and the heavenly bread, with many costly treasures pertaining to the
most holy Sanctuary; and all that sanctified likewise that is in the holy, with
the He. 9, 10.
sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ the high Priest, for an everlasting
forgiveness of sins.

2. That verily is the New Testament of the grace of God, touching the sins of
the people, even as God has promised the same to the house of Israel, and to
the house of Judah, for a steadfast and continuing Testament.

3. This high Priest over the house of God, is the old ancient one in the holy
and godly understanding, and is the Col. 1.
first born of all creatures, Romans 6 a Phil. 2. a
who was slain with the death of the Cross, and has suffered in the holy, for
the sins cause: and is 1 Cor. 15. c Col. 1. b
as the firstling risen from the death, where-through he has prepared the
everlasting life for all his Believers, which follow after him in the holy Mat
16. c Rom 6. a 1 Pet. 2.
till unto the death of his Cross.

4. He himself verily is the Light and Life that is everlasting, which was Ioh.
1. a Psalm. 210 a
with the Father from the beginning, and is at the right hand of the Heb. 1. a
Almighty, in the heavenly being or estate, who also as high Priest, enters
into the most holy, makes alive his believers, from Romans 8. b 1 Cor. 15. b
Ephesians. 2. a. b Col. 1.2 b
the death and Eze. 36. c Isa. 44. a Joel 2. c Act. 2. b
pours forth the holy spirit of his love abundantly over them, The true, most
holy of the holy and true Tabernacle of God, is the Love, the everlasting life,
and the perfection, from which most holy in his service (that is in the making
alive from the death, in the pouring out of the holy Ghost, and in ministering
of the spiritual and heavenly good) the vale is put away, whereby to inherit
the everlasting life of God in his cleerness, in the same service ministered
under the obedience of the Love of the holy Ghost, which most holy in his
service, makes right difference betwixt the living and the dead; for in that
same service does the resurrection of the righteous life from the death, come
to pass or is wrought; and that is the joy of life, proceeding out of the
heavenly being in the Kingdom of God the Father, with Christ in the everlasting
life.
to an everlasting blessing; and that is the perfection of all that which goes
before, and the most holy of the true Tabernacle of God and Christ.

5. This high Priest in the most holy, (namely in the Love, the everlasting
life, and the perfection) is a King Psa. 110. Heb. 5. a. b. c 7. c. 8. a
and Priest for ever, according to the order of Melchizedeck, as an everlasting
Savior unto to his people to their eternal reconciliation with God the Father,
and he himself does through himself, herit them, or make them heirs in the
everlasting life; and that is the establishing of the true Testament, which
continues firm for ever before God the Father.

6. For through the light of the same Testament, is Gods Law, Ordinance, or
Doctrine, Psa. 40. a Isa. 51. a Ier. 31. d Heb. 8.10.
planted in the hearts of the Believers: and given unto them in their minds:
And God remembers no more of all their former sins, and that is the
establishing of the promises of God the Father and of the belief of Jesus
Christ.

7. Among those children of the New Testament, or holy Gospel, the vail is Isa.
25. a 2 Cor 3. b
put away from the most holy, and the precious garnishings of the spiritual and
heavenly goods, declared and brought unto them, as an everlasting heritage of
God and Christ: and they (namely) the children of the New Testament, be taught
in that sort to the Kingdom of God, and made heirs in the everlasting life, To.
12. b Ephesians 4. a Col. 3. b 1 Pet. 3 a
and have nor use any thing but Love, Peace and Unity one with other, and a
good conscience in Jesus Christ through the holy Ghost, the Love of God the
Father, which God Romans 5. a Tit. 3. b
has poured abundantly into their hearts.

8. Behold Apo. 12 a
that is the true Jerusalem, which descended from heaven, and also the most
holy of the true Tabernacle of God, which is prepared of God from everlasting,
and which by Gods grace is come unto us in this same last time: In the which
Sion is established, Isa. 2. a Mich. 4. a
out of the which the Law and the word of the Lord proceeds: Isa. 1 c Zach.
8. c
And unto the which all people, which have a lust toward God, shall assemble
them, and rejoice them therein, according to the Promises: For it is the
Fountain of life full of all virtues, and the undisturbable Dan. 2.
Kingdom full of all Love, peace and godliness, wherein that song Apo. 19. a
Allelu-jah, is sung for an everlasting song of laud unto God.

9 Behold this Kingdom full of all pure beauty, full of light and life, and
full of all delightfulness and riches of God the Father and of Christ, has
been long hidden and unknown for the sins cause of the people, by reason of
which sin, the children of men have not beheld this glorious cleerness, neither
can they endure the beholding of the same delightful cleerness.

10 Because now of this blindness of the darkness which has covered the earth
and because of the unwillingness of the manly generation: therefore has the
eter. rich bountiful God been forced to reserve or keep secret, all those
things in the holy and heavenly being: Ephesians. 1. b
which riches of God the Father, are now notwithstanding coming unto all good
willing ones, which love the peace for an everlasting heritage, according to
the Promises.

11. With which beauty of the heavenly riches of God, God is now in the last
time a drawing of us all unto him, to wit all we which are good-willing toward
him and his righteousness, and which for the peaces cause do submit our selves
under the Love, whereby to make known unto us through his Love, and through the
declaring of his heavenly riches, his holy will, to an health to the earth, and
to the honor and glory of God: and verily now in the last times, to a joy and
peace, in all love; to the end to prepare in that manner, under the obedience
of the Love an everlasting peace upon earth, according to the Promises.

12. Therefore Deu. 32. a
rejoice you ye heavens and earth, which hope upon God: For behold Isa. 62.
the salvation of God is now come that it may be revealed, to the Psa. 112. a
Ephesians. 1. b Heb. 1. b
renewing of all things that are waxen old: for Isa. 61 66 2 Pet. 3 b Apo 21. a
the new heaven, and the new earth, wherein righteousness dwells, and which
perpetually continue before God, upon which men have waited according to the
Promises, do now come with triumph in glory.

13. In which very same time, Isa 28. a
the Lord will be a lovely crown and glorious garland unto his people that
remain over: and a spirit of equity unto those that set in Judgment, and a
strength unto those which come again from the battle to the gates.

14. Even thus verily in those days shall God perform all good toward Israel,
and establish among them, all what he has promised and covenanted to them in
times past, by the mouth of his Prophets.

15. For the chastisement executed for the sins cause over the Lords people,
and over the miserable and comfortless ones, over Isa. 54. a
whom all tempests do happen or come, shall cease: and they shall revive all
beauty, peace and delightfulness, and be Psalm. 45 a 1 Ioh. 2 c
anointed with the oil or ointment of joy; for the Scripture, the Law, and the
Prophets shall be fulfilled and not broken: and it shall come to pass over the
world, and also over the Lords people, even as it is written thereof: The Lord
grant us mercy and lead us into his ways, Amen.

The eleventh Chapter.
HEre have we figured forth unto you, ye dearly beloved, a certain circle: In
the which we have described unto you in writing, and figuratively set forth,
both the way of the heathenship, or of the uncircumcised ones, Mat. 7. b Luke
13. c
which leads or reaches to the everlasting death and condemnation, (whose
death, being or estate, is the strange being, before or in the sight of the
Lords people Israel) As also contrary wise, the simple and plain way, 4 Esd. 7
a Math. 7.
of the good-willing hearts to the righteousness, which leads to the entrance
of the true Tabernacle of God in the spirit, and reaches to the everlasting
life.

man standing on globe with snakes protruding from sphere (...)

Cursing Blessing

The Inward Man

Through ye righteousness of ye life is ye man simple, of heart humbled to ye
wisdom vnd^^ s^^^^^ng to ye upright virtue (...) ^atient in the ^^p^ to ye
godlyness ^^^k minded and faithful and comes also with ye fear peace ^ joy and
to God and to ^^^v^nly (...) everlasting

The forth go^ng in the heathenis^ impurity brings the man to ye six of Death

The forth go^ng in the fear of God and ye Obedi^ to ye ordinance of ye lord
(...) brings ye man to the Righteousness of the Life

The sin of death brings ye man into all Ignorance hipocrisy (...) falsehood
and into all chosen holiness according to ye pleasure of ye (...) and is
therein ^ratefull bitter and cruel and also, dispaireth and so ^o ma^^ to ye
destructionable calamity and to the devil hell and Condemnation



Psalm. 4 a
2. If the man now have by Gods grace, gotten a good will to enter into the
upright way, directing to the everlasting life then must he with his heart, Isa
51 b 2 Cor 6 b Apo. 18 a
depart out of the heathenship or uncircumcision, and out of the straying being
or nature, yea from all what is not any being of God, also separate himself
from the darkness, and turn him Isa 55. a Ier 18.25. a 35. b Ezekiel 18 d. Joel 2.
b
to the Lord his God, namely to the God of life the Ioh 1.
true light, full of light and life, who has created both him and all what is
an thing, Luke 1.2. b. c.
likewise fear the same living God; and circumcise his heart from Deu. 10. b.
30 a
all manner of darkness, namely from all abominations of desolation, which do
separate the man from the living God.

3. See or anoint your eyes with eye salve, that ye may see, Deu 1^. b. Ier.
4. a
circumcise your selves, or put away the foreskin of your hearts, and continue
not stiff-necked, for that ye may rightly understand and know the true life,
which is a life unto you, and may live therein.

4. For even therefore, because that the life might now in the same day,
through our Deu 30. b Eccles. 25. a
most holy servlce of the Love, be understood from the death, and the light
known from the darkness; So have we out of the Love to the righteousness,
described and figuratively set forth, even in the most evident manner, here in
the same Circle, both these ways, both of death and of the life, and all the
ends whereunto each one has his passage or course. The which the inward man
enters into, or lives there, whether it Exo. 18. Romans 6.8. a
be then the deadly sins, extending to the eternal death, or else the
righteousness to the everlasting life.

5. Hereunto next adjoining, follows the Figurative description or
declaration of the inward Tabernacle of God, according to the spirit, after the
which we do treat at length in large manner of both these natures, which do
bring in either the death or the life; and we have likewise signified or marked
out by writing, the names both of the confused and of the Godly being or
nature. Take it to heart, for it yields to every one of us, either the death
or the life.

The twelfth Chapter.
THE true forefront of the house of God, or of the true Tabernacle Deu. 10. c
Eccles. 1.26.
is the fear of the living God, serving to a turning away from the sin, and
from all heathenish foolishness. Through whose service, and through the
obedience of the requiring thereof, the man becomes circumcised in his heart,
in Heb. 12. a 1 Pet. 24. a
the laying away of the sin in the flesh, and to the obtaining of the knowledge
of the truth of God, enters into the way of peace.

heart Fear God

The Way to the Truth In this same service of the holy and gracious word under
the Obedience of the Love in the fear of God comes to pass in the heart and
mind the upright repentance of the man to the living God and so walking in the
fears of God he is circumcized of heart and is turned away from all the
bewiching of the heathenish being that he may not be bewitched or taken with
any destruction but be prepared to the entrance into the Sanctuary of God. Jer:
4. Eezek: 4.4: wherefore repent you with all your heart in the spirit and fear
the Everlasting invisible God which is the bgining to come to the Wisdom or
the first entrance of the true Tabernacle or house of God in the spirit.
Whereof God himself is the Workman Turn ye not therefore from the lord in
your heart nether trust in men nor take flesh for your Arm or Strength and so
inherit the Cursing



2. For the same circumcision of the Phi. 3. a Col. 2 b
heart, is the true circumcision which comes to pass in the spirit, and not in
the letter, whose praise is not of man, but of God, Romans 2. c.

3. Therefore Ier. 4 a
circumcise the foreskin of your hearts, and be not hence forth stiffnecked any
longer, Deuteronomy. 10.8.

4. Plough Eze. 10. b
upon the new, and sow not among the thorns; circumcise you unto the Lord, and
put away the foreskin of your hearts ye men of Judah, and ye people at
Jerusalem, Jer. 4. a.

5. There shall none Isa. 52. Joel. 3.
come into the Lords sanctuary that has an uncircumcised heart, and an
uncircumcised flesh Eze. 44. b.

6. Therefore shall the Lord thy God circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy
seed, Deu. 10. c Math. 22.
that thou may love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, that thou may live. Deuteronomy. 30.

7. If thou Deu. 10 c Isa. 19 b
wilt turn thee O Israel, then turn uno me, says the Lord; and if thou will
put away Jer. 15. b Zach 1. a Mal. 3. a
thine abominations from before my face, then shall thou not be driven out, but
then shall thou without hypocrisy, swear rightly and holily, (as true as the
Lord lives) and the heathen shall be blessed in him, and make their boast of
him, Ier. 4. a.

8. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God Mat. 4 b Luke 4. a
him shall thou serve, him shall thou cleave unto or depend upon, and swear by
his name, he is thy praise and thy God: Deuteronomy. 6. a. 10. b

9. Behold the Heaven, and the Heaven of all Heavens, and the earth, and all
what is therein, that Psalm 24. a Ier. 27 a
is the Lords your God, O Israel and Judah, Deuteronomy. 4. d
yet has he had notwithstanding a lust only to your Fathers, and loved them,
and chosen their seed after them, namely you above all people, Deuteronomy. 10 b.

10. O all ye people, fear the same God, for he is that God which has created
Genesis 1. a Ioh. 1. a
all whatsoever is any thing; for truly all heathenish bewitching is nothing
but foolishness: Their wisdom and Laws are mere error, Isa. 44. a Ier. 10. a
their Gods and God-services are vain and unprofitable.

11. Therefore there is no God but Isreal's God, whose God-services, Wisdom,
Ordinances, Statutes and Rights are alone upright, holy, and true, Deuteronomy. 4. a.

12. Happy is he that has the same God to be Psa. 33. b 144. b
his God, or which seeks him with all his heart, Deuteronomy. 4. c. 30. a. Ier. 29.
b. Sap. 1. a.

The thirteenth Chapter.
THE true holy of the house of God or of the true Tabernacle is Romans 5. a
the belief of Christ unto Justification: through whose service, and the
obedience unto the requiring thereof, the man if he have a lust with all his
heart, Psa. 40. a Heb. 10. a
to do the Lords will, becomes Justified from the sin. Also the way of his
course of walking, prepared Isa. 40 a 57. b.
to be an even path before the Lord. And the truth of God extending to the
everlasting life revealed unto him in the spirit.

heart Belief

The Truth to the Ev^rlasting Life In the service of the holy and gracious word
Under the Obedience of the true belief is the man in the spirit of his heart in
Jesus Christ justified from ye Sin and brought to the everlasting life
Therefore bear patience and upright fruits of repentance The Kingdom of
heaven is nigh Mat: 3 a Luke 3 a Behold so cries the Voice in the Wilderness
of the Man's heart The which cries prepare the way of the lord make strait his
paths Esaias. 40. Behold the word that thou should believe is nigh thee even
in thy mouth and in thine heart that thou might do it* Deutri: 30 and that
is the word of belief which formerly has been preached in the World through
Christ to Salvation and Obedience of the Belief Romans 10. And is now preached
under the Obedience of the Love



2. Behold the Lord sends forth his Mal. 3. a Math. 11. b
Angel or Messenger, who in his service prepares the way Math. 4 a Luk 1. b
before him, and he goes before, in the spirit or power of Elias, that he may
turn the hearts of the Fathers to the children, and the heart of the children
to their Fathers, and the unbelievers to the prudence of the just, whereby to
prepare an upright people for the Lord.

3. How delightful are the feet of the ^o 10 b
messengers that publish the peace from the mountains, preach a good Message,
and reveal the salvation? Isa. 51. Nahum 2.

4. Leave off from the evil, and learn to do good: labor after that which is
right and help the oppressed, Isa. 1. b.

5. Let the ungodly leave off from his ways Eze. 18 33. b.
and the evil doer from his imaginations, and turn him to the Lord, so shall he
be merciful unto him, Isa. 55. a.

6. Let every one turn him away from his wicked ways, and amend his being or
life, and so do that which is right, Ier. 7. a.

7. If the ungodly will turn him from all the sins that he has done, etc. Then
shall he live and not dye; for the Lord desires not the Eze. 33. b Sap. 1. b
death of a sinner, but much rather that he should turn him and live, Eze. 18.
d.

8. Repent now and amend you, that your sins may be put out, Act. 3. b.

9. Lay away from you now, 1 Pet. 1. b 4. a.
according to the former walking the old man, which destroys through the lust
of error, To. 12. a
and renew you in the spirit of your mind, and put ye on the new man which is
formed like unto God, in upright righteousness and holiness, Ephesians. 4. c.

10. But before all things, take hold of the Shield of Faith, with the which we
may quench out all the fiery darts of the wicked enemy, Ephesians. 6. b.

11. Hold fast what thou have, that no man bereave or take away thy Crown from
thee, Apo. 3. b.

12. Whosoever continues steadfast unto the end, he shall be saved, Math. 24.
b.

13. The Messenger or voice of the Angel, which cries in the heart, Prepare
sa. 40. a
the way of the Lord, is the serviceable ministration of the gracious word of
the Lord, which the Lord wills to be ministered unto the man before Act. 3.17.
c.
his revealing of his great day. By which means in the grace and mercy of the
Lord. Romans 10.
the belief, that very true holy, and the Heb. 10 b
boldness to enter into the same, is prepared to serve the man to an
accomplishing of the service in the said holy: whereby the true foregoing
service might likewise be ministered unto the Believers in their conversion unto
God, and in their doing Math. 3.
upright fruits of repentance. Also to kill Rom 6. a Col. 2. b
and bury the same, under the obedience of the belief. And through the
baptising or washing Romans 6. a Col. 1 b
in the death of Christ, to justify the believing man from the sin.

14. And so then after that, in fulfilling or accomplishing the same foregoing
service, comes the Mat. 19. c Ioh. 3. b
new birth from the death, through the anointing by our Savior, who does
quite and clean take away or blot out the Heb 9.
sins of his people: and so in his spiritual office or heavenly ministration,
serves them Heb. 8.
with the spiritual and heavenly goods, and leads them into the everlasting
life, and so brings the perfection unto them, or sets up the same in them,
and as Heb. 7, 8, 9.
a chief Priest, declares his Isa. 27. a Math. 27.
highest salvation unto them, in the most holy, (namely in the Love, which is
the Holy Ghost) where through the vail betwixt the holy and the most holy, and
Isa. 59. a Ephesians. 2. b Col. 2. a
the portion betwixt God and the man departs away, and of two Ephesians. 2. b.
is made one, to wit the man and God.

15. That verily is the everlasting Romans 3. a 2 Cor. 5. c Col. 1. b Ioh. 2. a
4. b
reconcilement of the man before his God: and so he comes again to the seat of
grace, and into the true light of the 2 Cor. 3. b. 4. a
clear shining of God, and into the everlasting life, with thanksgiving and
jo^; the which is the Isa. 60. a Apo. 21. a
true rising of the light and life out of the high heaven in the spirit.

The fourteenth Chapter.
THE true vale before the most holy of the true Sanctuary of the Tabernacle of
God, Heb 10. c
is the flesh of Christ, the which is before the cleerness of his uncovered
naked being or substance, and before his spiritual and heavenly goods, and Mat.
27. 2 Cor 3. b
it departs away therefrom, or opens it self asunder, when the foregoing
service in the Heb 9 c
holy is accomplished.

2. For the vail before the most holy cleerness of the Godly being of Jesus
Christ, and before his spiritual and heavenly goods, departs not away from
before the cleerness of the most holy Heb. 7, 8, 9.10.
unless that the former God service in the holy, have first his full course:
the which is the accomplishment of the daily God-service in the holy; in the
Mat. 16. Luke 9. c
taking up of our Cross, in the willing obedience to the belief, for to
continue therein obediently, till Mat. 10.2^.
unto the end, that is till unto the Romans 6. a Phil. 2. b.
death of the Cross.

3. Which death of the Cross of Christ, and to be implanted or incorporated
into Christ, with the same like death, and so Romans 6. a Col. 2. b.
baptized or washed into his death, is verily the Math. 28. Mar. 16 b
upright Baptism unto salvation, wherein the man is rightly baptized or washed,
according to the truth of the holy Scriptures; and so then Romans 6. a
out of the same death regenerate Ioh. 3. b
or born again, as a new Creature in Jesus Christ.

4. For that the same Tit. 3 b 1 Pet. 3. c
baptism is the right font of regeneration, serving to the washing away of the
sin, wherethrough the believing man, who does with Christ according to the
flesh, lay away, mortify and Romans 6. a Col. 2. c. 3. a
bury the sin in the flesh, is made alive again with Christ; and also according
to the spirit, in upright Luk 14. Ephesians. 1. a. 4. b
righteousness and holiness, and so through the second birth, from the death,
or the resurrection of Christ, he becomes holy and altogether renewed in the
spirit of his inward mind, and the Act. 2. b.
holy Ghost poured upon him, in whom Christ also with the cleerness of his
Godly being gets 2 Cor. 4. a Gal. 4. a
a shape or form.

banner in front of stage By the high priest Jesus Christ the new and living
way is prepared for us through the ^imple yt is to say his flesh Heb 10


5. And that same verily, is 1 Co. 13. b. 2 Cor. 3. b
the cleerness of the true being, and of the holy spirit of Jesus Christ, where
through one beholds and inheriteth in the spirit the Love in her virtuous
nature, that most holy, as likewise the fullness of the riches of God the
Father, in the heavenly being or essential form.

6. Behold and consider, that is the true Ioh. 11. c
resurrection from the death according to the Scripture, Ioh. 17. a
through the which the living God of heaven and his Christ is known according
to the Spirit and Truth.

7, It is true, the 1 Cor. 15. c.
same is sown in the mortality, and it rises up in the immortality: And God
gives it a body after his own pleasure, and that of the seed of his own body.

8. See that is the everlasting life, against the death. And the Eze. 13. b 1
Cor. 15. f Heb. 2. b
conquest or victory against the Hell, and against all the enemies of the life,
whereby all those that follow after Christ, have or possess that life, and Ioh.
10. b
that in fullness.

9. That is verily the Heb. 3.4. a.
Rest of life, which God has reserved or kept, and is left in store for the
children of God, as a perpetual inheritance in the last time, according to the
Promises.

The fifteenth Chapter.
THE true most holy of the inward Tabernacle or Sanctuary of God, is the Love;
for that Romans 13. Col. 3. b
is the perfection, Romans 6. a
the incorporating into God in the spirit, the Ioh. 17.
everlasting life, Col. 2. b
and the fullness of all the riches of God.

2. If one now be not Ioh. 1. a
born anew, then can he not see the Kingdom of God, Ioh. 3.

3. Therefore if there be a new 1 Pet. 2. a Gal. 6. c
creature in Christ, then is the old Isa. 43. c Apo. 21.
perished or worn out; behold it is all become new, but that altogether of God,
who Col. 1. b
has reconciled us with himself through Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5.

4. The Lord our Almighty God has gotten Apo 12.
the Kingdom; let us rejoice and be glad, and give Ioh. 9.
him the honor: for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his bride has made
her ready, and it is granted unto her to cloth her self with white glistering
silk, and the silk is the Justification of the Saints, Apo. 19.

5. The Members or Commonalty of the body of Christ in the love, which are Act.
2. Rom 8. b Ephesians. 1.4. c
sealed with Christ, in the true being, through the spirit of Love, is Apo. 21.
a living Tabernacle of God, wherein God lives and works: In the which the
forefront, the holy and the most holy, is revealed or made known according to
the spirit.

6. In which true Tabernacle of God also the Deuteronomy. 32.
song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb is sung, and it
sounds even thus.

heart (...) EM^ANVEL

God and Man
Love

The everlasting life and ye perfection in the service of ye holy, gracious
word under the obedien^ of ye Love God with ye man is united, and ye man with
ye God head (namely in ye everlasting mind and being and all with God (...)
christ it is of one being with ye man, and all what is manly be it the being
will and mind and is then minded with ye God head, and so it is all one God, and
ye man one being one will, one thought or spirit, one heart and one everlasting
life. Behold here the tabernacle of God is in men, and he shall live in them
and they shall be his people and h^e himself shall be with them for he is their
God Apoca: 21: the Kingdom of God shall not cvm with outward show, men shall
not say Behold here or there it is for behold the Kingdom of God is inwardly in
you Luke: 17: this says the Truth of God, who loves me he shall keep my
words and my father shall love him and we shall come to him and make an
habitation in him John: 14:



7. Great and wonderful are thy Works Lord, Ier. 10. a
thou Almighty God; righteous and true are thy ways thou King of Saints; Lord,
who should not fear thee, and praise thy name? for thou only Levit. 19.
art holy, Apo. 15.

8. Consider now, how that the man's knowledge is but 1 Cor. 13
a peicework, or a thing unperfect, the which among those that do yet remain
divided or as broken off is also divided, or as a thing broken off from the
incorporating to the Love, the very perfect being or substance: In like manner
is also the prophesying: yet are they both, namely the knowledge and the
prophesying, serviceable unto the man in the foregoing service, before the
true being; and do witness unto him, Mat. 13. b Luke 8. a
as in a secret word, the cleerness of the Love or of the true being

9. Unto which true being, the knowledge and the prophesying do point in the
service of the holy word; as that the same is coming to the Believers in
uncovered cleerness of God, whereby they 2 Cor. 10 3. b.
may behold the same, from face to face, and to continue heirs therein with all
the Saints of God for evermore.

10. And that is the Love, the true being and the perfection of all the riches
of God, where Christ the spiritual and heavenly high Priest, is a Minister unto
us, in Heb 8, 9, b
those same spiritual and heavenly goods. For To. 11. b
of him, through him, and in him, are all things, to whom be praise for
evermore, Amen.

11. Now at the end of the ministration of the former Tabernacle, when as the
same perfection 1 Cor. 13. b
comes unto us or appears Isa. 60. 2 Pet. 1 c
as a daylight from on high: then does also the peice-work or that which is in
part as likewise the childish understanding touching the Godly things cease, or
leave off with us; for the being of the man, 1 Cor. 15. b Ephesians. 4. b
or the old age in the manly understanding of the new birth in Jesus Christ,
lays off or puts away the childish comprehending; it is very true.

The sixteenth Chapter.
TO the end now that all understandings might be satisfied, and that the Books
of the mystery, (namely the discerning into the being of God, or the holy of
his Saints, and the discerning into the Devils being, or the abomination of
desolation of his wicked members) might Apo. 5. a
not still continue shut: Therefore will we, out of an inclination to the Love,
discover, show, or witness out of that sight which we have in the truth, so
much as we can, and perceive to be profitable, the beings and properties of
them both, whereby we may also reveal the secret treasure of the Devil, Apo. 9
12, 13, 16, 17.
and the Dragon, or the Beast of the bottomless Pit, that false Prophet which
has seduced the whole world, and made her drunken with his unchastity, so to
disclose or display in evident manner before the eyes of all people, that false
and ungodly nature. And nakedly or apparently to show, wherein he has covered
or hid himself hitherto in the world, with deceit and falsehood; And with what
manner of form or property of his wicked members, he has dwelt in the hearts
and minds of men.

2. Wherethrough the man has in so diverse manners committed whoredom and
Adultery Ier. 2. d 3. a. Eze. 16. c Eze. 4.5. a
against his God, and so through the bewitching of his mind, wit, and thoughts,
has served the Ap. 9.13, 14, 16, 17.
beast of the bottomless pit, honored the Devil, and worshipped the Dragon,
even in that place, where he should Deuteronomy. 4.6. b Mat. 4 b.
serve and honor his God only; by reason whereof, it is grown everywhere full
of abominations of desolation: the which Mat. 24. b 2 These. 20.
has gotten and possesses the holy place, like as the Prophet Daniel ^an. 9. c
has spoken thereof, with which horrible fashion or monstrous disposition of
the enemies of God, the whole world is governed, Apo. 14. a 18. a. b
and therein are all heathen drowned or overwhelmed.

3. Even thus has the wicked corrupt nature, who labors to destroy it all,
a long time held forth his own book, or his own wisdom, as a book of life or
consolation before the man, for a delight or pleasure unto him, and has taken
him captive, or bound him under the same, which book are the bands of the
Devil, and the 1 Pet. 2. a Apo. 20 a
chains of darkness.

4. Therefore is the Lamb killed Apo. 5.13. a. b
from the beginning, and thrust out of his Kingdom, and the strangers have
possessed his Psa 78 a
heritage with unrighteousness: laid his Kingdom wast with their abominations:
trodden down the living book of the Lamb with feet: not willing or allowing
that the man should look into, read or live the same.

5. See in that manner is the man's upright understanding, of the truth stolen
away from him, and he is turned into a corrupt or false understanding and into
a lying being or estate: and the strangers who through their falshod have
possessed the heritage of the Lamb, have also comforted the man, with a vain
and false comfort: because that the book of the Lamb might always continue
shut, and the seals thereof never to be opened; Apo 5 a
for when as his seals be once opened, Apo. 6. b 20. b
then comes forth the Judgment according to the truth.

6. Now when the seals of the book of the Lamb be opened, and that the same
book is read, then become the names of the Saints manifest, which are written
in the Book of the Lamb: and through the Lamb, and the Saints illumination or
brightness, there becomes likewise seen and known the great and manifold
deceit of the wicked enemy, that Adversary unto God.

7. Through which light of the Lamb, the enemy of God must lose and leave the
seat of his possession: even thus is then his peace taken away from the earth;
and he himself as a destroyer rejected on the earth, for to be destroyed, which
has eretimes corrupted and destroyed the earth.

8. Therethrough now comes the killing upon earth, and the murdering among
all ungodly ones, in such sort that through their impugning or resistance
against the Lamb, their punishment comes over themselves, and they fall to be
many dead bodies upon the earth.

9. See in such manner do then the Kingdoms Apo. 12 a
of the world become the Lords, and his Christ's, who shall reign for ever and
ever: before whom all Elders or wisdoms do fall down, and worship him which
lives for ever and ever: witnessing and saying unto him, Apo 4. b
Lord, thou art worthy to receive praise, honor and power; for thou have
created every thing; and for thine own sake, they have their being, and were
created.

10. For seeing now, that Gods Judgment is ^oh. 8. b
acccording to the truth, and not according to the judgment of men, therefore
do we find very truly, according to the truth, That Gods secret mind and
judgment is far different from the mind and judgment of men.

11. Therefore it is in no wise possible for any man to know, 1 Cor. 2. b
or understand the truth, except that he should first of all be or stand
grounded therein according to the spirit: and that the truth as a light of
life, repugning or striving against his lies, were risen up unto him in his
obeying of the requiring of the service of Love: For in that sort do we attain
to know the truth from the lie, the life from the death, and the sin from the
righteousness: Because that we should rightly or according to the truth, hate
or reject that which is worthy to be hated or rejected; and according to the
truth in like manner love that which is worthy to be loved: And so then might
with a good understanding, come to Ephesians. 4 b
the knowledge of the right commonalty of Saints, whose names are written in
the Apo. 5.20, 21. b
living Book of the Lamb.

12. Which Book of the Lamb, the mysticalness of God shall not always remain
shut, but his seals shall be opened, and the book being full of writing both
without and within, shall likewise be read to a comfort of life, and to a
perpetual Godlyness, unto all those whose names are written in the Book of the
Lamb, whose bodies are killed even like unto the Lamb: and Apo. 6. b
their blood cries vengeance in the height, upon those that dwell upon the
earth, unto whom the recompense thereof shall be made by God and the Lamb.

13. For although the Lamb be killed, yet shall he notwithstanding condemn the
living ungodly ones, and raise up those that are his Eze 37. b Dan. 12 b Ioh 5.
c 1 Cor. 15. f
from the death out of the grave, and make them Lordly and glorious with
himself over all his enemies, namely through his righteous judgment, to the
Mat. 25. c 2 Pet. 3 b
condemnation of all ungodly ones, to the end that they may be rooted out, and
Apo. 18 a
that it may be recompensed again even as they have done unto the Saints of God.

14. Even thus now from henceforth be reputed for a praise or an advancement,
unto all that are his, whereby to keep the judgment against every one which
has brought forth ungodlyness, judged Gods truth falsely, and showed no
repentance; and to exhalt and garnish his Saints above all what is upon the
earth: for Apo 5 b 1 Pet 1. b
the Lamb has bought them with his blood, out of all generations, people, and
nations: He has made them Kings and Priests unto God, and they shall reign
upon the earth, and triumph in joy everlastingly with the Lamb; for they shall
live for ever, and not dye any more.

15. And that same is the everlasting life, which was preached in the world in
times past, to the end that men should believe on the same; And which also
comes unto us in the last time, in the resurrection of the righteous dead ones.

The seventeenth Chap.
THerefore give ear, O all ye that live upon the earth, consider of the words
of wisdom, ye children of men. For the life, to the end that ye may live, is
now published unto you likewise as well as unto the people Genesis 6.18, 19. Exo.
3, 4. Deuteronomy. 3.
in times past, because that ye may show repentance, assemble you with us, to
the mercy seat of the love of Jesus Christ, and enter Heb. 3.4. a.
into the rest which is reserved for the children of God, inasmuch as the
entrance into the rest of the Lord, and of his children or Saints of Jesus
Christ, comes to pass and is to be enjoyed now in the last time according to
the Promises.

2. Therefore give ear attentively, that ye may once understand whereunto ye
are created; and turn you to the same, if ye will remain preserved, and not
bide lost for ever.

3. Apply your hearts unto the good, that ye may live, and not be buried in
hell everlastlngly Psa 55. Apo. 21, 22.
with the ungodly.

4. Show upright fruits of repentance, that ye may serve the Deuteronomy. 6. b
Lord your God only, and walk in all love like children of peace. And halt no
longer, neither 3 Kin. 18.
on the one side nor on the other.

5. For although that ye which covet after knowledge, do daily read many
Scriptures or writings, whereout ye do also gather some sentences, or get a
certain kind of knowledge therethrough, wherein ye think to rejoice your
selves: Yet is not the same the life for all that; for it is neither the
Scripture, nor yet the knowledge thereof, 1 Cor. 8.
that makes us righteous, but the life of Jesus Christ, wrought through the
belief or faith.

6. For that same life is Deuteronomy. 30. Romans 10.
the word of God the Father, and the very true light, wherein we stand
grounded, or whereon we are set for to believe the same, because that we should
live, and not Deuteronomy. 5. Prove. 4 c
turn or shrink therefrom with our mind, wits, memory or thoughts, neither to
the right side nor to the left.

7. If so be now that ye stand not minded hereunto, as in tending to live in
the Love, and to stand upright therein: to what end then do ye assemble
together; and to what end do ye read the Scriptures? For if ye read the
Scripture only for the knowledge sake, and rest unbelieving unto the life
whereof the 1 Ioh. 5.
Scripture witnesses, then do ye 3 Kl. 18.
halt on both sides, and break the bond of wedlock, and go a whoring with that
which is not the life, namely that ye cleave unto that which ye neither are
grounded in, nor created unto by God, neither yet called through Jesus Christ,
nor also through his service of Love, ministered now in the last time.

8. But if ye will perform the Scriptures counsel, then follow the Scriptures
counsel, Turn you to the life and to his service of Love; And in the obedience
of the requiring of the life of Jesus Christ, and of his service of Love,
behold in the spirit your own being or estate; And consider there inwardly in
your selves, whether that your memory, wits, senses, and thoughts, do in all
their course or proceedings, stand minded to the true life of Jesus Christ, and
not run out after this or after that, for to go a whoring after that which is
not the life it self; and also whether that they being without the life, are
bound or tied unto any other thing that is not the life: And likewise whether
they have or gather all their knowledge, wisdom and understanding only out of
the l fe of Jesus Christ, and out of his love, and so do neither know, discern
or understand any thing without the Life, and without his upright Love. For
behold to such a concord has God joined together the thoughts and the life.

9. This doubtless was the life of the man in Genesis 1. b Joh. 1. a
the beginning, for that the man should live in peace and joy, and in all
upright Love; and should not know nor take on any thing without the same, but
live only therein and not dye.

10. If so be now that the man knew nothing without the same forementioned
life, nor took on any thing besides the same whereon to tie his heart, wits,
and thoughts or understanding: Then should he know, taste, and feel nothing
else but all good. Also walk in all Love, Concord and Peace, and so have Genesis
1.2. b
the whole earth in subjection under him: and govern uprightly to the life, all
whatsoever is upon the earth, according to the commandment or word of the Lord.

11. For that same is the life, and the freedom of the manly generation, for
the which many creatures do sigh and long there-after; which upright freedom of
the children of God, does now come unto us, according to the Promises, because
that all manly creatures might assemble them with us to the same: rejoice them
with Godly joy in the same, and live in all truth and upright righteousness.

12. Behold the same was unto the man in the beginning Gen 2. a Phil. 3. b 4
Esd. 8. f Apoc. 2. a
a Tree of life, in the middst of the Paradise of the Lord, for that he should
live, and that Sapl. 1. b
it should go well with all that which God had created.

13. But now when the man would know the good and the evil, and had eaten of
the same tree, then Genesis 3 a
tasted he both the life and the death, the which God had forbidden him,
because he should not eat, nor taste of any other thing, but of the good (that
is of the life) and not feel any evil or death: but should live unto his God in
the life, for that Sap. 1. b
it might go well both with himself, and also with all what God had created.

14. Whatsoever now therefore is taken on besides the same good or life whereon
we do witness, that is the evil, the death, or the destruction, the which God
has not willed that it should be upon the earth, for that the man might stand
perfected from all evil and destruction.

15. But now has the man through that same, prepared to himself the driving
forth out of the Paradise of God, and caused the peace to cease upon the earth:
also brought himself, and all what is upon the earth, into Genesis 3. b
much calamity and misery; and is utterly estranged from the way directing to
the Tree of life, and so is taken captive in all kind of deadly and damnable
fruits.

16. That verily is the knowledge of the good and evil, which he himself has
taken on: and Dan. 9. Math. 24. 2 These 2.
it is the confused abomination which stands in the holy place, whereout all
violence, calamity and grief is come upon the earth.

17. If the man now will Ezekiel 14. a
turn himself away from all the abominations of the wicked world, and humble
him rightly under the Love and her service, then shall he likewise through the
administration of the holy word of the Lord, and his requiring, have his regard
unto the inward upright life, whereon the word points, (for that is Gods
living being or substance it self) and he shall also according to the requiring
of the word, try or examine himself diligently in his inwardness, whether he
can perceive, yet still remaining there, any ungodly or deadly being, which is
not the life, or that serves not the life unto the life, but which Ephesians. 4. b
is minded to destruction through the lusts of error.

18. So long then as the destruction, besides th preservation of the life, is
looked neto, or esteemed of by the man: and that likewise the death besides the
life, the evil besides the good, and the bondage besides the freedom, is known,
tasted and felt: so shall the man in his obedience to the requiring of the word
of the Lord, daily Mat. 10. d 16. c Mark. 8. Luk 9 14.
take up his Cross on him, with the life die the death or the evil, and bury
the same according to the word of the Lord, and so shall he by means of
following the life in his like behavior or To. 6. a Phil 3. b
death of the Cross, become planted into the same good life, who suffers the
death of the Cross by the evil.

19. Out of which dying of the death, or of the evil (which death has brought
the death unto the life, and has had the dominion over the same) the life
rises up again, and comes gloriously in Lordly manner, against all his
enemies.

20. Even thus now, through the rising up, or resurrection of the upright life,
out of the second birth from the death the man also is raised up To. 6. a
from the death, (or born again out of the death) for that he might live, and
not dye any more.

21. Upon which resurrection of the dead, according to the Scripture, all
Believers of the life do likewise hope and long thereafter; for the life shall
swallow up Eze. 13. 1 Cor. 15.
the death in victory, in all his Believers, which be incorporated or planted
into him, and so bring his enemy under him according to the Promises.

22. For all what is not the true life, that is against the true life: and
whatsoever is against the true life, that is the death and the enmity unto the
true life, is also an enemy unto God, and to the Lamb; which enmity is minded
neither according to the true being or nature of God, nor of the Lamb, nor yet
according to the upright righteousness of the true life; which true being of
God and of the Lamb, together with the upright righteousness of the true life,
ye may behold in the endless Apo. 5.20. b
book of the Lamb, which is full of writing, both without and within written
with the finger of God: and it is the everlasting life, whereon we do witness.

The eighteenth Chapter.
THen when as thou, O thou precious man, have looked into both these Natures,
Books and writings inwardly according to the spirit, namely the straying being
of the wicked world, and the good being of God from eternity: which good being
is the Apo. 20, 21. b
book of the Lamb, written by the God of life: besides the which, the straying
being which destroys through the lusts of error is come in place, and written
by the Devil (the Father of death) So judge then with the truth, which of them
it is, that ought to have the superiority or pre-eminence in us: for the od of
life vouchsafes unto us nothing else but all God, life, love, and peace.

2. Therefore let us be agreeably minded with the same good being of God, and
Love the good being: for wherefore do ye receive and take unto you the
destruction? and why will ye in perditional manner perish in misery and in
unrestfulness* O ye children of men, turn you to the Deu. 30. c
life with humble hearts, and in like manner to the Love that ye may live.

3. Awake up I pray thee, O thou precious man; for behold death and life, Deuteronomy
3. b Eccles. 15. c Ier. 21. a
evil and good, destruction and preservation, damnation and salvation; the old
wicked world in the which all wickedness dwells: and the Isa. 61. b 1 Pet. 3.
b Apo. 21. a
new good world in the which all love, peace and righteousness dwells, is
held forth or presented unto thee, and figured out before thine eyes: therefore
choose or incline thou now unto that which thou see or know to be Gods
righteousness, extending to the laud and praise of his glory; and apply thy
self to live only the same, that Deuteronomy. 6. a o. b Math. 4.
thou may serve and live unto the Lord thy God only.

4. If so be now therefore that any one do look into or esteem the being of the
Devil, the treasury of iniquity, Sap. 2 4.14. b Romans 1. c 2. a.
and the form or fashion of the wicked world, to be an upright life, tending to
the praise and glory of God: and if it be the same whereunto God has created
the man, to have that reign over him, then let him incline and stick unto it,
and serve the same only: and let him separate himself from all what is contrary
thereunto, and accompany him with those that are of one mind with the iniquity,
or with the wicked world, that he may bear or receive either his salvation or
condemnation, with those that are his own members, which are agreeably-minded
with each other, and let him 2 King. 18. c
halt no longer on both sides, nor feign nor dissemble before the upright Love
which is held forth and proffered unto him.

5. But if now any man do look into or esteem the Being of God, or Treasure of
virtue, to be the salvation of men, tending to the land and praise of the godly
glory, and so understands or perceives that Genesis 2. c Sap. 2. c Eccles. 17. a
God has created the man to that end that the same should reign over him: So
let him then likewise submit himself obediently under the Love, and incline or
cleave wholly to the same good being, even with a fervent good will, that he
may serve the same only, Deuteronomy. 6. a 10. b. 30. a
and live only unto the eternal God.

6. For to that purpose is the service of the word, both by writing and by
speech, under the obedience of the Love administered unto men, to assist them to
the life of God, and to the eternal truth, because they should live in the same
truth and life, as in a Treasure of virtue: and that altogether in a lively
meek minded being or nature; but not to the end to catch, to snare, nor to
bring any one into bondage therewith, or to 2 Cor. 1. c 1 Pet. 1. a
reign over his faith; O no, but in him free or at liberty, to yield to the
obedience of the Love, and to the Luke 1. g Ephesians. 1. a
righteousness of Faith, because the righteousness of Faith which God esteems
of, might by that means be set up in the belief under the obedience of the
Love. And that the peace might appear upon the earth according to the Promises.

7. For that cause, to the end that the life of the eternal truth might be
manifest, and that the man's understanding might be planted into the same life,
therefore do we through our service of the holy word, as by an inclination of
the Love, take 2 Cor. 10. a
captive all understandings under the obedience of the Love.

8. To that end (namely for the Love and the good life's sake) shall men also
hear and believe the service of the holy and gracious word, administered under
the Love. But with their spirits they Isa 53. 2 Cor. 6. b
shall depart out of the evil, or that which is perditionable, and enter into
the virtue of the life.

9. For the outward writings or speakable words, which be testified or
ministered unto the man, out of the inclination of the Love to do him service
and stretch to the incorporating of him into the virtuous nature, are all
figurings forth of the upright righteousness and godly word, who in their
service do go before the man, and guide him to the living book of the Lamb,
which lies hidden in Apo. 12. a
the Ark of witness, namely within our hearts and consciences; for there
inwardly in the spirit, is the life of God formed, or written according to the
truth.

10. And that same life of God is the Apo. 5. a
book which John saw in his Revelation, which was full of writing both without
and within, and which also was shut or made fast with seven seals, for which
books sake John wept, because there was none found worthy, neither in heaven
nor upon the earth, to open, to read, nor to look into the same book.

11. Howbeit in the midst among the Elders or wise, there stood a Lamb in
manner as though it was killed: and he took the book unto him, and all
prophesies testified of him with triumph and joy, saying, Thou Apo. 5. d
art worthy to receive the book, and to open his seals: for thou being killed,
have bought us with thy blood.

12. John has also heard a voice of many Angels, Dan. 7. b Apo. 5. b
whose number is many thousands of thousands, saying with a mighty great voice,
the the Lamb that was killed, is worthy to receive power, riches, wisdom,
strength, honor, praise, and blessing.

13. Behold this living book of the Lamb, is a book of spirit and life, and 2
Cor. 3. a
not a book of the sinful flesh and death; for it is the Ephesians. 5. c Apo. 14.
commonalty of the Lamb in the spirit.

14. Which Lamb is the living being of God it self; the which was driven to
Isa. 53. b 1 Pet. 2. a
suffer: and the book of life occasioned to be shut Apo. 5. a
with seven seals, because of the great Dragon, which is the Apo. 12.
murderly beast, namely the self wisdom of the flesh, unto Dan. 7. Apo 11.13. a
whom power has been permitted to kill the Saints of God; but the same power
is now even in the uttermost or last time, Apo. 17.19, 20. b
taken away from her; for God shows his power and dominion against the same,
in the restoring or setting up again of his Saints, Eze. 37. Dan. 12. Apo. 2.
whom he raises from the death.

15. Verily now it shall no longer prevail with the Dragon, how murderly soever
the beast be, neither shall her Kingdom which is full of abominations prosper
any longer: for her Apo. 18.
sins are ascended up, even unto heaven; and now shall her descending or fall
be even into the bottomless pit.

16. For the self-wisdom, or self-mind of the flesh, which has exalted her
self very high, against the Lamb, even as though she were Gods wisdom, Apo.
5.13. b
has killed the Lamb from the beginning of the world and likewise his members
the Apo. 6.12 b 16. a
innocent guiltless blood, and so for a time has gotten the upper hand upon
the earth; but now must she fall and go under: whereas contrariwise the Saints
of God shall Apo.
reign for ever according to the Promises.

The ninteenth Chapter.
Seeing now that the Saints of God have Apo 6.12, 13, 16.
suffered with the Lamb for a certain time, and have been killed upon the
earth, therefore is the book of the beast most loved and read everywhere, and
Apo. 17. b 18. a
men have lived according thereto; but forasmuch as it is all now made
manifest, through the 1 Cor. 4. a
light or day of the Lord, so becomes the book of the Apo. 18, 19, 20.
beast to be found a false book, full of deceit and subtle falsehood, whereunto
also all false men, all wicked hearts of the Scripture-learned ones, and all
false setters forth, and preferrers of religion, have their lust and affection
bent.

2. For of all the names of her felfness or private holiness, and of all her
false hearts and Scripture-learned ones, together with all the nature of the
heathenish distraughtness who do every one even jointly with each other, serve
and worship the beast; there is not Apo. 13.17. a. 20, 21. b
one written in the living book of the Lamb; for the names of the people that
serve and worship the beast, (whereby the Dragon has had the dominion) are 2
Pet. 2.
all names of darkness, and of the good thinking wise, and disobedient ones,
and are all likewise 1 Ti. 4 a
spirits of error, as being all one, and of one manner of substance, according
to one manner of nature.

3. That same verily is the cord or chain of darkness, or the band of the
Devil, wherein all good thinking wise ones, and false hearts which do neither
fear the living God of Israel, nor stand obedient to his requiring, are
captived or caught, bewitched therewith, tied thereunto, and 2 Pet. 2. a. b.
Apo. 20. b
led with the same, even into Hell; the which is the everlasting death and
damnation: from the which God has willed that the man should keep himself, and
serve only the living God; that Eze 18. d
he might not dye, but that it might everlastingly go well with him, and that
he might live.

4. The names of the people of the evil and wicked world, The wicked world with
her servants and fellow-companions.
who are written in the book of the Dragon, that murderly beast, are these,
envy, division, contention or discord, high-mindedness or pride, subtilty,
deceit, craftiness, unquietness, cruelty, arrogance, disorderlyness,
masterfulness, mischieveously disposed violence, honor or vainglory,
stubbornness, resistance unto Gods nature in all disobedience, wrathfulness,
presumptuous boldness, churlishness, bitterness, maliciousness, commotion or
uproar, treachery, striving, fighting, persecuting, lying, war or battle,
vexing or troubling, cursing, swearing, destroying, spoiling, oppressing,
killing, murdering, dishonest dealing, unreasonableness or injustice, gluttony,
unchastity, who^edom, adultery, knavery, buggery, thievery, unprofitable
searching, high vain boasting, ambition, dissembling, hypocrisy,
Sectuarishness, framed or chosen holiness, idolatry, false God services, false
Laws, blasphemy, self-wisdom, swelling in mind, curiousness, self-mindedness,
unadvisedness, men's commandments, giving credit to the imaginations of the good
thinking in the spirit, unbelief to the gracious word of the Lord, despair,
doubtfulness, accusing, ignorance, bondage of the heart to something without
the nature or being of God, vain comfort, slothfulness, men's fear,
covetousness, niggardlyness, undiscreetness, scoffing, or mocking, dis-favour,
self-Love.

5. There is yet moreover Rom 1. d 1 Pet. 2. a
backbiting or evil reporting of others, whereby to make them seem odious and
contemptible before the people, and to cause themselves to be had in favor and
well-liked of.

6. Behold, such a nature has the partial Back b ter, who does yet oftentimes
for all that, greatly bewitch the people with his abominations, as with a show
of holiness: which witchcraft is full of foolishness, and is an unprofitable
delusion, even like as are all vain games also, table-playing maskings or
mummeries, etc. and are also unedifying, even like as are all manner Ephesians. 5 a
of rude, light behavior, disorderly toying, and unseemly jesting: all which
likewise are names of the people of the wicked world; furthermore there is also
death, darkness, false spirits, devil, hell and condemnation, etc.

7. These and such like are the abominations before God, and the pernicious
mischief, to a destruction over the children of men; and for one to yield or
apply his heart hereunto, is the falling off, and the turning away from God.

8. That is finally the perverse and wicked nature, Deuteronomy. 32. a. c.
which has corrupted every thing, and stolen from the man, and quite defaced in
him the mind of his God, and corrupted his understanding, through the affection
born to the knowledge of good and evil; by which manner the noble understanding
of man is become bewitched with the abundant lying being, in such sort that the
man can very little understand Deuteronomy, 32. Isa. 44. Ier. 5.8. a
or comprehend; for it enters too too little into the consideration of his
heart, for to come rightly to the conversion, or turning again to his God; for
be continues even generally, cleaving fast, and depending with his heart upon
one thing or other that is not God; because he does not quite and clean forsake
the Idols and their services, nor thrust nor chase them out of the Temple of
his inward mind: But stands affected either to this or to that, according to
the imagination of his own understanding: and so serves the God-service, or
God himself falsely.

9. That same is it verily which God has oftentimes rebuked by the mouth of
his Prophets, Isa 1 b 28. b. 29. 57. b. 58. a. 59. a. b. Ier 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
Eze. 5, 6. Amos 1. b Mich. 6. a
because that the people of Israel, (when they would seem to turn them, and to
use God-services) did always incline their hearts toward one thing or another
that was not God: and served that which God never commanded or required.

10. Therefore has God also in times past, witnessed unto them by the Prophet
Jeremiah, (which mind of God remains perpetually; for thus says the Lord as
an everlasting continuing word,)

11. O Israel, Ier. 4 a.
if thou will turn thee, then turn thee unto me, says the Lord: And if thou will put away thy abominations from before my face, then shall thou not be cast
out: At that time shall thou swear uprightly, and holily without hypocrisy,
(as true as the Lord lives) and the heathen shall be blessed in the Lord, and
make their boast of him.

The twentieth Chapter.
BUT if any one now should determine in his heart, to turn him unto God, to
cleave unto the Love, and to enter into the Kingdom of God; and yet for all
that does with his will, hold his heart tied unto any thing of all the
abominations above named, he doubtless cannot come to the Kingdom of God, nor
be perfectly incorporated to the being of the righteous spirit, and of the
Love, neither yet can his name be written Apo. 5. b
in the living book of the Lamb, with the commonalty of the Love, which Book is
in the right hand of him* that lives from everlasting to everlasting; which
commonalty of the Love (whose names are written in the living book of the Lamb)
is very lovely, delightful and peaceable, and with them also is our fellowship,
through the Love of God the Father, and by reason of his mercy showed on us.

2. And with the same commonalty, all those likewise have their fellowship,
which do humble themselves with us, under the Love and her service: and through
the service of Love, do hear, believe, and stand obedient to the holy Doctrine
and godly information, (whereby to become understanding through the wisdom and
holy knowledge thereof) and so do entirely love, exercise and assist the same
service of Love, for that it might be spread abroad generally among many.

3 Howbeit, not according to every ones self-mindedness, or drift of his own
mind, as in a Love toward himself, according to his own proper knowledge, Deu
12. a
or good-thinking, but to come to one manner of obedience, under the true Love
of God the Father; and that altogether to an Ephesians. 1. a
unity in the peace; also not with any division of heart, but for to become of
one mind with each other through the Love: to the end Isa. 57. b Luke 10. a
that the peace, in that sort might be prepared, concordable upon the earth,
under the obedience of the Love, according to the Promises, and that all our
names might be written in the book of the Lamb: and that we might be partakers
of the being or nature of the same commonalty of Saints, whose names are
written in that same Book, and might have our fellowship with the Lamb and his
Saints.

4. Unto which Book of life, and his holy writings, we do humble our selves
under the Love and her requiring, and so do learn of the Love the true
humility, and Math. 11. c
meekness of heart, according to the wisdom of all those whose names are
written in the living book of the Lamb, in as much as their wisdom only is
delightful unto the God of life.

The new good world, with her servants and fellow-companions.
5. For in that same Book of the Lamb, (whereunto all our hope and longing
stands) that it might even with fervent affection and good-willingness of
heart be looked into and be read by many, there is written and found therein,
Gal. 5. c Ephesians. 4 a Col. 3. b 1 Pet. 3. b
Love, peace, joy, Gods will or Law, heavenly truth, faith, righteousness,
meekness, gentelness, friendlyness, long suffering, patience, fear of the
highest God, understanding and wisdom.

6. All these forementioned Saints have a lust even with whole heart for to
procure and prepare all those which love the good life, and the everlasting
truth, unto the Love, for that they might every one become assembled together
under the Love; and it might even so both inwardly and outwardly go well with
all people which live under the Love, and that altogether in unpartial love.

7. Which upright commonalty of Saints, is not inclined to reign over one
another, but to stand serviceable one toward another; and also toward all
those which submit themselves with them under the obedience of the Love,
because that the holy understanding, and the knowledge of every good exercise,
might as Ephesians. 2. c 1 Pet. 2. a
a perfect good building, come to light, or be made manifest under the
obedience of the love.

8. Behold such a nature and upright service of unpartial love, have all those,
whose names are written in the living book of the Lamb: which service
stretches not to a renting and scattering, like as the false services,
according to the nature of the hearts of the self-love, do stretch and have
their drift thereunto, who do serve and live only unto themselves, in a private
mind of self-love. O no; for the children of the upright Love do neither rend
nor scatter, but gather together.

9. Also they seek not 1 Cor. 10. c
their self-ness, but much rather that every one might be nourished and fed out
of the Love and her service, for to become a commodable Kingdom of the Love,
and that the one may serve the other to that effect; for that is might go well
with every one, and that altogether in the Love, and in the peace of Jesus
Christ.

10. Furthermore there is written in the same book of the Lamb
foresightfulness, quietness, natural equity, lowlyness of heart, constancy, 2
Pet. 1 a
discreetness, measurableness, orderlyness, contentedness, open-heartedness,
simplicity, justness or uprightness, good-willingness, Mat. 5. a 1 Timothy 1. a
purity of heart, clean conscience, honesty, civility or modesty, obedience,
concord, stedfastness, kind-heartedness, Phil. 4. a
helpfulness, serviceableness to the virtue, peaceable conversation, Gods
praise, laud, glory, eternal life, and heavenly delightfulness, etc.

11. Now for to have our fellowship with the same commonalty of the upright
Saints of God, Ge. 1.2. b
thereunto doubtless was the man created from the beginning, because that such
a precious excellency, and such a Kingly Crown of delightful beauty should have
the dominion over him.

12. For those same and all they which are like unto them of nature and
disposition, their names verily are every one written in the living Book of the
Lamb, who do neither worship, honor, or serve the Apo. 13. a
Dragon, or the high-minded beast: for the name of the most high God is written
upon them, which God only they do Apo. 7. b. 21, 22. a
serve, honor, and worship from everlasting to everlasting: they stand all
likewise as lights of life, in the beholding of God their Father.

13. Behold that same holy people of God or Christ, (or such like) is the Isa.
64. a
house of Israel, Ephesians. 2. b.
the Citizen-ship of Jerusalem, and the family of Love, and they are every one
likewise the true Isa. 66. b
children of Sion, where the God of life has his holy Tabernacle, in whom Lev.
16. 2 Cor. 6. b
he dwells, lives, and walks: And they shall be the Lords people for ever
and ever. And he himself, God with them will be their God, and Apo. 21. a
wipe away all tears from their eyes, and will put away Isa. 61. a
their contempt from them; they shall also serve the strange nations no more,
but only the Lord their God.

14. They have doubtless been constrained a long time to suffer with the Lamb,
for the wickedness and ignorances cause of the people, but now Baruch 5. b
does the Lord bring them again with joy, that they may rejoice them in the
holy Israel, even as it beseems the children of light to do, who do rejoice
them only in their God.

15. This verily is the blessing, which was published and affirmed unto all
generations of the earth, according to the Promises; for that they might be all
saved, through the Love of God the Father: which blessing and salvation they do
all now obtain, if they do believe the word of truth, and stand good of will,
and humble them under the Love and her service.

The one and twentieth Chapter.
BEhold and consider ye dearly beloved, both these forms, natures or beings,
which are here figured or set forth unto you, before your eyes, even according
to the life: namely the Isa. 1 a Apo. 9.12.13. a.
murderly seed of the high-minded beast, or the names of the people that are
her members, which do reign in the perditionable world, which is full of
blood-guiltyness of the innocents; and also the names of the people of Israel,
or house of Love, the high commendable seed of the Apo. 7. a. b 14, 15, 19. a
benignity or loving kindness of the Lamb; the which has even hitherto, Apo. 6
b.
kept and born the patience with the Lamb because of the wicked.

2. Verily the house of Israel, or the commonalty of the Love, the elected
Saints of God, do follow after Christ their King, even To. 6. a. c
unto their death, and also to the life: for they do in like manner bear the
cross of the Lamb, and therein keep the word of his patience: They likewise,
even according to the obedience of the Lamb, do show a faithful obedience,
Phil. 2 a
till unto the death; (namely unto the death of the Cross) whereby to obtain
the dominion with the Lamb over the sin, death, hell, condemnation, and the
world, to the end they might in like manner, through the Lamb, and the death of
his cross, keep the victory against 1 Cor. 15. f
all their enemies.

3. With which Saints of the lovely and upright being, the Isa. 60, 61, 62. 2
Pet. 3. b
now coming or new world, shall also be inhabited in a perfect delight of God,
in all Love, in Ephesians. 4 a
unity of peace, and in upright righteousness and holiness which God esteems
of: But the ungodly shall perish or wear away out of the Land of the living,
for that the Land may be inhabited in rest and peace, and with triumph and joy
for evermore, to the laud and praise of the glory of God according to the
Promises.

4. Therefore O all ye people, look now into both these forms, natures and
beings: and choose either the one or the other of them, whom ye will incline
unto, whether it be Deuteronomy. 30. Ier. 21. a Eccles. 15.
the death or the life, the Devil or God, the old wicked world, or the new
upright world, and then cleave only to the same, to the end that ye may sever
your selves accordingly, and so express thereby with whom ye do hold or stand
agreeably minded, or what ye do love, 3 Kin. 18.
and halt no longer on both sides.

5. If therefore you will incline or cleave to the Lamb, or that ye look into
or esteem his being to become a godly being, then love the same with a single
and humble heart, standing submitted to the Love, and so depart out of the
death, into the life: put your trust in God, in your proceeding on to the same
life, Ioh. 5. c Romans 6.8. b
and stand firm in the hope of your salvation.

6. But if ye be yet young or weak and unable for to live in the good, or if ye
be yet over-mastered by the evil, against your will, for God is both reasonable
and courteous: and if the man be of a good will, then does God require no more,
but that the man will still remain steadfast in the same good will: for unto
such a good willing man, does he Phil. 1.2. b
bring his power and strength, for that the man should with the same obtain
through Faith, and that in a suffering manner, the righteousness against the
sin.

7. Therefore possess your souls with Luke 21. c
patience, rest believing, and continue in the hope; and ye shall assuredly, in
the patience evidently perceive, that the evil waxes weak, and that your soul
shall be sound or whole.

8. Show or let it always appear what ye love; namely the good or the evil,
for look what one hunteth after, that he catches: and whatsoever one loves,
of that he is willing to hear some speech or tidings, and he is desirous also
to be with the same for no man would willingly be separated from his best
beloved: therefore judge your own selves now, and look rightly into your selves
according to the truth, to note what ye love, and with what ye would willingly
be, and have your fellowship, namely Psalm. 8. b
with the good being of God, or with the pernicious and naughty Being of the
wicked and deceitful world.

9. If now therefore ye love and stand inclined unto the good being: Psa.
34.13. d Amos 5 b
then forsake the evil or ungodly being and separate your selves quite and
clean with all your will, Isa. 52. 2 Cor. 6. Apo. 18.
from the evil or iniquity, departing out of the same, from day to day, and be
patient in the hope, till that all the ungodly being do go under and perish, or
consume to nothing in you.

10. This is our Cross, which Math. 10. d. 16. c Luk 9.14
we ought daily to take up, in the belief: And so in that manner to follow
after the virtue of the godlyness: Also to love the wisdom and the Information,
and not reject the chastisement Prove. 3 b Heb. 12. a
or correction of the Lord, that meets with us, the whilst our hearts are
yet captivated with the sin and Ephesians. 4. b
blindness.

11. Behold even such (according as of mere Love we have testified herein) is
the right way to the God of life, and to his righteousness, from the which
Psalm. 14. Sap. 5. Romans 2. b
the man is departed and estranged: In which way the man being in his
estranging from his God, is by Ephesians. 2. a
Gods grace called and bidden to come again unto his God, through the belief or
confidence in God, touching the salvation; to the end he should according to
the truth, know his God in the life, and so might worship Deuteronomy. 4. a 10. b
Math. 4. c
and serve him only, which Psa. 14 b Acts 14. Apo. 14.
has made heaven and earth, the Sea and the water Fountains: through whose
power the elements be moved; and out of whom the upright wisdom of the wise,
the true light of the illuminated ones, and the resurrection of the righteous
life springs, which God is also the perfection, the Love, Ioh. 17. c 1 Ioh.
4. b
or the true being or essential power it self, unto whom only appertains all
praise, laud, honor for evermore, Amen.

Take it to heart.
A PRAYER OF H. N. Even as he has prayed the same unto Almighty God, through
the holy spirit of love, according to the estate and representation of the
fallen man, corrupt and earthly weak man.
O God who live for ever, thou which in times past wast a comfort to the
sorrowful in their affliction, laid on them through the dominion of the violent
power of Pharaoh, and did Exo. 3. 12, 13, 14. Psa. 78. b. f
lead thy people out of the power of his afflictions, delivering them from the
hand of those that cruelly reigned over them: and did show, how that thou
were a Judge over thy flock, which thou had chosen to thy self: making known
unto them Ex. 20.34. Deuteronomy. 5.10.30.
what thy will was: and did set up among them the banner of righteousness;
(namely Ex 35.40.
the Tabernacle of thy Sanctuary) and made thy holy habitation amongst them,
and did not suffer them to want any thing, according as thou had said unto
their Fathers, and promised unto them by the mouth of thy holy Prophets.

2. And unto the heathen which knew not thy holy name, thou Isa. 11 13. To. 9
11.15.
have also in times past showed thy mercy, according to the Covenant of thy
holy Promises, which thou had made with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

3. Now therefore O God comfort, comfort us likewise in our miseries, for thy
Isa. 38. b
holy names sake: for when thou make up thy self to reign over thine enemies,
then must they all be afraid, and bow down themselves before the Authority and
power of thy Almightyness.

4. But we O God are well worthy of thy chastisement Deu. 27.28. Dan. 9.
for our sins cause; for in all these thy former works, proceeded out of the
entire or hearty mercifulness of thy love borne toward us, we have showed our
selves to be an unthankful people, declining from thy word of life, and like an
ungodly people, have estranged our selves from thy truth, walking in error,
Romans 1. c
according to the mind of our own delight, and been ignorant in that thing thy
will requires.

5. But now O Lord which art the God of all the world, Psalm. 106. Ier. 14. Lam
3. Dan. 9.
we acknowledge and confess our own offenses, and also the falling away of our
Fathers and seeking daily for thy ways, we do enquire what thy will is.

6. Wherefore O God, remember now thy mercy, like as in times past, and thy
Covenant which thou have made with thy people in times past, and turn thee
again unto us, that thou may be known among all people, as an eternal true
God of life and of righteousness.

7. O how often is my heart grieved because that there is neither Hos 4.
faithfulness nor love, or at least wise very little anywhere to be found, and
for that the righteousness is so utterly turned back Isa. 59. b
or refused in all places

8. Oh what a number of diseased Isa. 1. a
and wounded ones are there, and how many are there that do now mourn, yea
suffer grief and wofulness or anguish, because 4 Esd. 5.14, 15. Math 24. b.
the iniquity reigns so exceedingly, and for that the number of the upright
and faithful ones are so few.

9. Oh how long shall my soul rest in longing after that whereunto my heart
has a lust, and whereunto it is drawn or inflamed with fervent affection.

10. Oh where abides now the Is 60, 61. Mal. 4. a
rising up of thy glory, O thou pure love of God the Father, wherein all peace,
truth, faithfulness and righteousness stands comprehended.

11. I have seen thee afar off, and also near by, Cant. 4.5.
thou have peirced me through with the bright beams of thy upright
righteousness, and amiable delightfulness: but my soul suffers so much the
more grief, for my spirit cannot be satisfied, so long as thou only have not
the upper hand or dominion over us: and that we do not with our mind approach
or draw near unto thee essentially, nor become incorporated wholly, or in every
part unto thy being and substance.

12. For we find by experience, that without thee, O pure Love, there is no
bread of satisfying, Isa 41.45 Ier. 14. a
nor any water of refreshing; because all delectable sweetness is contained in
thee.

13. In thee is milk and honey, wine and Hos. 2. Joel 2.
oil, also riches, joy and life.

14. In thee are likewise Isa. 33. Ephesians. 3. Col. 2.
all treasures of wisdom, the holy knowledge of the secretness of God, and the
mystery of the Christ of God: for Christ is at thy right hand, as a living
salvation, for all those that come unto thee.

15. Whosoever also seeks Christ without thee, Joh. 7. d
he shall not find him; and whosoever has not thee, he has neither Law of
righteousness, nor yet Christ.

16. Therefore art thou likewise O Love, the Ioh. 13, 14, 15. 1 Timothy 1. 1 Ioh.
4.
band of perfection, wherein all salvation consists, and the last sign or
token of the true righteousness wherein all Gods Prophets have witnessed.

17. Also no man comes Ioh. 6.9.
unto Christ, except thou draw him, for thou O Love art the fountain of all
virtue.

18. But who are those that love thee? thou allurest all men doubtless; but who
yields himself to be drawn by thee? thou Apo 3. c
knockest daily, but who lets thee in? Prove 1. c Isa. 65, 66. a
thou call indeed, but who hears thee? thou say,

19. Come hither to this Isa. 55.
water, all ye that are thirsty, ye which have no money, come buy both wine and
milk; Come buy, that ye may have to eat of free-cost, and not for money nor
ware. Wherefore bestow ye your money for that which feeds not? and your
labor for that which any way satisfies not? Hearken unto me, so shall ye eat
of the best, and your soul shall have a delight in the fatness or plenty;
incline your ears hitherward, and come unto me, hearken, so shall your soul be
healed.

20. O God who thinks upon this, that thy Promises are that we should be
assembled unto thee in the Love, Ioh. 17.
whereby to know thee as a true God, which lives everlastingly.

21. For thou O God art a God that love the very best of the fruits of the
field, and Exodus 13.34. Le. 1, 2, 3. Deuteronomy. 12.14.
have a delight unto the fat of the Sheep and Lambs, as it is a burnt-offering
unto thee of a sweet Savor, upon thy Psalm. 43. Isa. 56.
holy Altar in thy Tabernacle of thy dwelling, which thou have chosen unto thy
self, 2 Par. 6. a. 7. b
in thy holy City Jerusalem.

22. But thou Isa. 57.65
despisest all oblations offered in Foreign Lands, as likewise all God-services
upon their mountains and upon all their hills and high places.

23. Thou also rejectest Amos 5.
all songs of praise, used under their trees, and under all their green eaves.

24. Thou abhorrest all presumptuous arrogance of the flesh: they do all
displease thee, which seek thee through their own doings, to the end to be at
one with thee, and yet have no regard unto thy Promises.

25. Their God-service is Isa. 16.43 Amos 5. Hos. 5.6.
an abomination unto thee: their self-Sanctification (although the flesh
appeaseth it self therewith) does altogether stink before thee.

26. Unto their Sabboths, Holy Days, or self-made rest-dayes, thou have no
desire or liking.

27. Their prayer also comes not before thine ears, Prove. 11 Isa. 1.59. Mich 3
4 Esd. 3.
as that it pleases thee any whit at all. For it is all filthy before thee, if
they seek thee without thy Promises: For they seek not thee O God, but
themselves, and how to please themselves.

28. Their ways that they walk, lead not unto thee: But they run apace toward
Hell, and have a lust unto error.

29. There is nothing among them, but manly fear, and snaring of the heart with
captivated consciences, according to the old custom of the vain heathen, which,
O God, knew not thy ways; but upon their own wisdom and self-made ways, they
Isa. 3. b
are proud and very bold.

30. Therefore is not likewise Isa 59. b
the right knowledge of their sin among them, as to account the same for sin;
that they might turn them unto thee, because they know not O God of thy peace,
nor understand rightly any thing thereof.

31. Thy rebuke and chastionable information, have they not rightly felt,
neither also rightly taken heed to the same, nor yet understood what thou
intendest therein, and requirest therewith; therefore doubtless the right fear
of God is not before their eyes, like as the fear of men is, for to please them.

O God plant thy Psalm. 40. Isa. 51. Jer. 31. d
Law in their hearts, as a Glass or a clear light unto their inwardness; then
shall they rightly know their sin; Romans 7. d
how or in what manner she is sin, to the end that sin may make up her self,
and show in what form she is the fruits of death, or the deadly being (the
which she estrangteh the man from the living Godhead) for that the sin thereby
may be consumed 1 Co. 15. f
(for thy Law is an encountering or enveighing power against the sin) and then
shall they know and understand whom they ought to fear, and cleave unto.

33. For when as thy Law O God, grows up in us, in our earthly and weak
manhood, and requires thy righteousness of us, then are we burdened and
grieved, wherethrough we grow to discern our fall from thee, and the Psalm. 51. a
great abundance of our sins, and that likewise it is all sin, wherein we are
conceived, and wherein we have lived.

34. Yea that which in times past we supposed to be good, is now found to be
mere wickedness and sin: by reason whereof our souls become humbled before
thee, for to obtain mercy from thee out of thy abundant grace: Even then also
do we confess, what we are according to our earthly manhood, (namely, Genesis 2. b
Eccl. 10 17. b
dust, earth and ashes) and that we of our selves being without the effect or
estate of thy Love, are altogether Ps. 14.53 a Rom 3. b
ignorant and lying, and utterly estranged from thy righteousness: And so with
lowly hearts, by reason of the depth of our necessity or extremity for the sins
cause, we become then O God rightly turned unto thee, whereby through the
drawing or allurement of thy Love to come again unto thee.

35. By means of which humiliation, or abasing of our selves, we through thy
grace and mercy become endowed by thee with the most holy belief, through the
which we be then likewise baptized or washed in the Rom 6 Gal. 3. Col 2.
death of Christ, and do stand firm in the hope, to the obtaining of the health
of our souls, and so through the belief, ministered under the obedience of thy
Love, we become made Romans 8. a.
free from the Law of sin and death, by the spirit of thy Law which makes
alive in Jesus Christ.

36. Oh how far is the man departed and estranged from the upright knowledge of
this wisdom of God.

37. O God, that my heart might rent open it self, and might cry unto thee with
a forcible courage; And that thou would hearken to my voice, and would
vouchsafe to look down toward us with thy merciful eyes; and take compassion
of our misery, deformity and fall, and over the blindness of our errors, and
would in chastionable manner draw us unto thee, that we might rightly
convert or come again and live in thee: For we are doubtless, fallen,
estranged, and strayed very deep, and far from thee and thy Christ, we have
mingled our selves with the strangers, and walked in many errors.

38. O God, let us in every part see into our Job 13. Psa. 14. Isa. 59.
transgressing, and make known unto us the lyingness of our hearts against thee.

39. For many do say, It is very good, whereas doubtless it is mere evil: And
they say moreover out of the blindness and ignorance of their hearts, Behold
Ier. 8 a Math. 24. b
here is the holy Scripture, we have the right or the truth, the being of God,
and the holy Ghost: And also the mind and sense of the wisdom, for to
understand the same; we have the true belief in Christ, and are the Lords
people. O God they speak lies before thine ears, and understand not the counsel
of thy wisdom, but are children of the fall or transgression; among whom there
is neither being of God, nature of thy love, nor belief of thy Christ; but only
a vain and false boasting, whereby they seduce both themselves and others more;
for they oppress the little ones and the poor, and resist thy holy service of
Love; therefore one may easily find many masters and vaunters, but very few
servants, and yet 1 Cor. 4. b
many fewer Fathers in the Office of the Love.

40. Oh that many of them saw their vain wisdom, whereon they boast so highly;
and that they knew their misery; then would they also out of mere necessity cry
Psa. 130. a
unto God for his grace, that they might come again to the life of Godlyness.

41. Now O Lord and God be mindful of us, extend thy mercy over us, Tob. 3. a
and revenge thee not on us, for our sins cause.

42. Remember not Psa. 79. a
O God our offenses and ignorance, but remember Ps. 103 b
we are dust, and remaining without thy being, are nothing Genesis 3. Eccl. 10. b
17. d
but earth and ashes; for all our beauty, or self-chosen wisdom or
righteousness, Isa. 40 a. 1 Pet. 1. c
must wither away like unto the flowers or grass of the field; And all
whatsoever is not of thy being, must be consumed and brought to nothing in
Eccl. 1. a
the Furnace of humiliation or abasing, wherein our trial comes to pass; but
thy righteousness, word, will and Psa. 33. a 119. 2. Isa. 40.4. b
wisdom continues for ever.

43. O Lord thou Almighty God, which art the Father, procreator or begetter of
all generations, show thy mercy upon thine own handiwork, namely on those that
labor daily to do thy will.

44. Open unto us with thy light, Psa. 13. a
the eyes of our spirit, and show thy grace on us, we blind people, who yet
notwithstanding have eyes: unstop unto us with thy understanding the ears of
our inwardness, even of us deaf people, who yet notwithstanding have ears: to
Isa. 6. Math. 13. Acts 28.
the end that we may rightly hear thy word, believe the same, and understand
and obey it according to thy truth: and turn about or 4 Kin. 22 Eze. 11.18.36
mollify the hardness of our hearts, with thy meekness, that we may humbly and
obediently, with all good-willingness, turn us rightly unto thee, and to the
Love of Christ and be saved: And may Ioh. 17. c
also become one with thy holy word, like as thou thy self O God, art one with
the same: wheteby the Number. 14. c
world may become full of thy glory, and that thy Christ may appear and bear
sway over all, in all, and with all, and that we all may be one in thee: and
may Ioh. 17. b
know in the truth that thou only art a very true God: for to that end, because
the world should know and understand the same, have thou sent thy Christ.

45. Now O God, strengthen thereunto, the office of thy Love, for that all
those which hope on thee, and love thy righteousness, may be drawn into one
Col. 3. b
band of Love, and that thou might be the head over us all, as a God and
King over all power and Lordship: and that we all from Ier. 31. Heb. 8. b
the least even unto the greatest may know and acknowledge thee, according to
the Promises.

46. Therefore is likewise our flight for refuge O God only unto thee, and unto
the requiring of thy service of Love, whereby to find grace at thy hands, that
thou may reign over us: and for Par. 36.
that cause do we daily bow the knees of our hearts before thee, and pray and
make supplication unto thee in the spirit; O God be thou gracious and merciful
unto us.

47. Be thou our Shepherd, King, and Prince, and remember Lord thy Covenant,
and Isa. 64. a b
Sanctuary that has a long time lain waft and been spoiled.

48. Awake O Lord Psa. 35. c
with thy spirit over us; for all the comfort of man is vain, Psalm. 62.118.146.
a Ier. 17. a
all confidence and stay on Princes is nothing in it self: Isa. 4. b
the Prophets seduce and deceive, Ier. 5.8.23, 27, 29.
the Seers do fail in the right: the worldly wise and Scripture-learned do
preach lies: The Priests do deal with false God-services, the Judges give
Sentence even as the Princes do require it, Isa. 1. c Ier. 5. Eze. 22. Ioh. 3.
the world is replenished with traytorie; the common people do deal with crafty
deceipts: unto the poor and miserable people there happens wrong and violence
everywhere: and the Lands are full of innocent blood-guiltyness.

49. Therefore look down, O God, look down, and sanctify thy great name, and
teach us thy Law, Statutes and Rights, that they may all know that they be but
men: and that thou O Lord art God only unto whom also 1 Timothy 1. b
all honor, praise and laud, does only belong and appertain.

50. Wherefore should the Psalm. 50.47.
heathen still blaspheme thy Sanctuary? and why should our enemies, with the
Arrogance of their minds, and vain persuasions, say that thou O God art with
them, and minded according to their will? boasting themselves in arrogance,
that their ingenious wit and prudence shall keep the upper hand or prevail.

51. O God, have not thou from the beginning foreseen thy Christ to be a head
Ephesians 1.3. b
and Father, over all, and in all: and elected him thereunto before the
foundation of the world was laid? yea to that end also thou Ioh. 3. d
have loved him, Mat. 11. c Luke 10. c
and given him all what is thine, for that Isa. 9. a Luke 1. d
he might possess the seat of his Father David, and be a King over the house of
Jacob for evermore.

52. Is not he also ordained to be a restoring to the house of Israel, To. 15. a
whereby to establish the Promises made to their Fathers? has not he likewise
called and bidden the heathen thereunto? Isa. 57. Luke 2. Ephesians. 2. b
Is not the peace published through Christ? Has not he in holiness of heart,
loved faithfulness Psa. 81. Hos. 2. c
and truth? has not he also taught Mat. 11.18. a
humility, and meekness of heart? Have not his Messengers preached and
published the Love to 1 Co. 13. a Col. 3. b
be a bond of perfection? But oh where is all this! where shall men find the
same?

53. O God, prepare the hearts of the people unto lowlyness, that they may
stand submitted to the Love in all humility, and may love the coming Matthew.
24.25. d 1 Cor. 1 a
of thy Christ in his glory; by whom the Tit. 2. b Acts 17. d
universal earth shall be judged with righteousness, who likewise shall disturb
or trouble all authority and power, and bring it under his obedience, and then
resign or yield up the 1 Cor. 12. c
Kingdom, all power and dominion unto thee O Almighty God, that thou may be
all in all.

54. O God put this into the hearts of all Governors or Magistrates, to look
into and consider of: and illuminate all Kings, Princes, Lords, and Potentates
or Rulers, with thy godly wisdom, that they may fear thy holy name, stand
submitted to thy Love and her service, and turn them away from all violence and
abuse: And that the world may to thy praise, be inhabited in the Love and in
all truth, and all men become turned unto thee, Exo 18.33. Math 3. Luke 3 a
in true repentance for their sins: and the horrible plagues of ungodlyness,
which are Apo. 18. a
come over the world for the sins cause, might cease.

55. O God let us now find grace before thine eyes, like as in times past, the
Ioh 3. b
City of Nineveh did, on the which thou shewedst mercy, that we do not all
perish, 4 Esd. 2 2 Pet 2. a
like unto Sodom and Gomorrah: for our sins, are become many, and grown to be 3
Esd. 8. b
abundant, even beyond all measure.

56. O Lord and God, O heavenly Father, give ear I beseech thee to the crying
of the poor, Psa. 25.27.86. b
and lead us in thy ways, gather us together on thy paths, and unite our
hearts into Col. 3. b
one band of Love, Ioh. 17. c
as one in all, and all in one, with love, equity and righteousness; and
cleanse our Psa. 51. b Eze. 36.
minds from all ungodly being or nature, and destroy or break in sunder, Psa.
1.33.
all ungodly counsel, that iniquity may not reign for ever.

57. For, wherefore should the darkness possess thine inheritance; and still
unhallow and lay wast thy holy place, Temple, or Tabernacle? Should the house
of the Devil also still be builded, and thy house and holy city continue waste,
and ruinated more and more?

58. O God, behold how that the Isa. 64. c
dwelling of thy Sanctuary, lies overthrown and destroyed, for in thy Temple
Lam. 4. Matthew. 24. a Luke 19. c
there is not one stone that remains standing one upon another, but are all
broken and scattered from each other; and upon the holy place of thy Sanctuary
are now the Dan. 9. Matthew. 24. Mark. 13. b
abominations of desolation reigning.

59. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou City of Peace, of the great and mighty King,
how art thou grown Lam. 1, 2, 3, 4.
now to suppression and contempt, when shall thou yet, O thou holy City, be
repaired or Isa. 58. c 61. a
builded up again to an everlasting stability, and receive thy peaceable
children of Israel into thy dwelling!

60. O Sion, thou hill of pure Beauty, when shall thy contempt, as also the
Heathens de^iding thee have an end! And when shall thou, O forsaken one, be
comforted again, to Isa. 49.5^, 66.
the end that thou which have a long time been unfruitful, might become
fruitful again: and that thy dried up breasts might give forth their milk again;
Isa. 61. ^^
that Kings might suck thy breasts, the Counsel Lords learn thy peace, thy
children dwell at Jerusalem, and rejoice their in thee O Sion!

61. But when as I now O Jerusalem and Sion, do think upon thy contempt and
suppression, then does my soul suffer La. 1.2. c
great sorrow and grief for thy sake; and mine eyes gush over with tears, for
very pity and compassion sake toward thee, that thou have so long time layn
wast and suppressed.

62. But when I think upon the Promises, touching thy restoring, and upon Isa.
54.60, 61, 62.
the garnishing of beauty, which is coming unto thee O Jersusalem and Sion, in
holiness and righteousness; and that thy children shall be taught by the Ier
31. d Ioh. 6. a
Lord, then does my soul refresh or comfort her self a little.

63. For the Law shall Isa. 2. a Mich. 4. a
proceed out of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem; He shall come
from thence, which shall turn away Isa. 59. Romans 11. Joel 2, 3.
ungodlyness from Jacob, that the children of Jacob may have their dwelling at
Jerusalem for ever, according to the Promises.

64. For the Lords Election is at Jerusalem, Psa. 78.87. Isa. 2. Mich. 4.
and even there upon the Hill of Sion has God foreseen him an holy house,
which shall be exalted above all hills or high places, because that his name
may still be worshipped there, and that Isa. 56. a Mal. 1.3 a
his offering may always and for evermore be offered there: for his house
which he has chosen to himself, is Mat 21. b
a house of Prayer and of holy offering.

65. An upright mind toward thee, in our inwardness, Psa. 34.51. Isa. 57.66.
A contrite heart, and a lowly spirit, shall not thou O God despise: For thou will enter into the same, also make thy Ioh. 14. c
dwelling even there, and sanctify thy name from generation to generation, for
evermore, it is very true.

Take it to heart.

Charitas extorsit per H. N.

FINIS.
Of the Eight VERTVES OR Godlynesses, whereout all Virtues or Godlynesses do
proceed or spring.
1. MY beloved, Here have I out of the Love of our Lord Jesus Christ, witnessed
and set forth unto you eight Virtues or Godlynesses, and possess or endow you
therewithal, or leave the same ^^ and for you, as a good Testament to a
perpetual Memorial o^ Remembrance. Deuteronomy. 30.31.


2. For that cause is also my exhortation heartily unto you all, that ye would
continually with diligence give your endeavor to ensue or follow after the same
eight Virtues or Godlynesses, and to exercise your selves therein obediently,
and even so according to the requiring of the holy and gracious word of the
holy Spirit of the Love of Jesus Christ, Psalm. 83. Ephesians 4. Col. 3.
proceed and grow forth from the one Virtue or Godlyness unto another: For out
of the same eight Virtues or Godlynesses proceeds or springs all upright
righteousness, love and peace.

3. For that cause let all your exercise be for to live and and walk in the
same going forth from the one Virtue or Godlyness into another, Deuteronomy. 4.30, 31.
Psalm, 83.
till unto the perfectest.

4. The first Virtue or the beginning of the same eight Virtues or Godlynesses,
is the Lust, Pleasure or the Will of the Lord.

5. For which Lusts cause, 1 Cor. 13.1.
or Will of the Lord because the same might obtain an essential shape in you)
ye shall altogether forsake, Math. 16. Mark. 8.
hate and leave all your own lusts, pleasures and will, and give over your
selves wholly to the Lust or Will of the Lord, Luke 9:14. Ioh. 12. Math. 26.39.
Mark. 14.36. Luke 22.42,
and to the Elders or dayed-ones in the same, for to live and walk obediently,
only according to the Lords Lust or Will, according to the Ordinance of the
Elders or dayed-ones in the same, for to live and walk obediently only
according to the Lords lust or will, according to the Ordinance of the Elders
or dayed-ones in the same.

6. When ye now are well exercised in the same first Virtue or Godlyness, so
shall ye then proceed in the next Virtue or Godlyness.

7. Which next Virtue or Godlyness is the holy Law or requisite Ordinance of
the Lord, because that ye might love the Lord your God in his Law or Ordinance
with all your hearts and thoughts, and your neighbor as your self.

8. For which Laws cause, or Ordinance of the Lord, Ioh. 10.50. Math. 22.37.
(because the same might obtain a being-like shape in you) ye shall altogether
forsake, Mark. 12.30. Romans 13.8.
hate and leave your own selves and your own Law or Ordinance, and all your
Love to the same and to your own selves, Iam. 2.8. Deuteronomy. 10. Deuteronomy. 4.
and even so altogether give over your selves to the Law or Ordinance of the
Lord, as to his Love, and to the Law of your neighbor, and to the Elders or
dayed-ones in the same Law or Ordinance of the Lord, for to live and walk
obediently, only in the Law or Ordinance of the Lord and in his Love, as also
the Love of your neighbor, and in the ordinance of the Elders or dayed-ones in
the same.

9. When ye now are well exercised in this same second Virtue or Godlyness, so
shall ye then proceed in the third Virtue or Godlyness.

10. Which Virtue or Godlyness is then Righteousness of God, Col. 2.
or the members of the body of our Lord Jesus Christ.

11. For which righteousness sake of God or body of our Lord Jesus Christ, Col.
2.
because that ye might be incorporated as fellow members of the same
righteousness of God or body of our Lord Jesus Christ, Amos:
might obtain even to a being-like shape in you, Ephesians. 1.4, 5.
ye shall altogether forsake your selves, and all your own or chosen
righteousness or holiness, Ioh. 6.
which ye have without the righteousness and co-defied holiness of God, or
without the body of Jesus Christ, and hate and leave the same, Romans 14.
and even so altogether give over your selves to the righteousness of God, or
body of our Lord Jesus Christ, Col. 2.
and to the Elders or dayed-ones in the same body of Jesus Christ or
righteousness of God, Isa. 45.
for to live and walk obediently only in the Equity, and upright righteousness
and holiness of the righteousness of God, Ephesians. 4.
or body of Jesus Christ, and in the Ordinances of the Elders or dayed-ones in
the same.

12. When ye now are incorporated to this same 3. Virtue or Godlyness, and well
exercised in the same, Isa. 45.
then shall ye proceed in the fourth Virtue r Godlyness.

13. Which fourth Virtue or Godlyness, is the Lordlyness or Dominion of God, or
essentially to Lord with God.

14. For the which Lordlyness cause of God (for that the same might obtain a
being-like shape in you, Genesis 32.
and ye to Lord with God and his righteousness essentially or being-like) ye
shall altogether forsake, hate and leave your own Lordlyness, or to Lord alone
without God, Isa. 45. Pro. 25.
with your selves, or with the ungodly and corrupt world, and even so
altogether give over your selves to Gods Lordlyness, and to the Elders and
dayed-ones in the same, or to those which Lord with God, for to live and walk
obediently only in the Lordlyness with God, Isa. 25.
according to the Ordinance of the Elders or dayed-ones in the same, to all
preservation or safe-walking, and to all peace on the earth.

15. When ye now are well exercised in this same fourth Virtue or Godlyness,
then shall ye proceed to the fifth Virtue or Godlyness.

16. Which fifth Virtue or Godlyness is the stool of Gods Majesty, Heb. 1.4.
or the possessing of the high sovereign God head.

17. For the Stools cause of Gods Majesty (for that ye might be assembled to
the same, Apo. 21. Ioh. 14. Luke 14.
and that likewise the high worthy Godhead might essentially obtain his
possessing everlasting dwelling in you) ye shall altogether forsake, hate and
leave all your own possessing, Math. 19. Heb. 2.4. Psalm. 10.3.
and all your own regarding of your Majesty or high worthyness, and so
altogether give over your selves to the Stool of Gods Majesty, and to the
Elders or dayed-ones in the same, for to live and walk obediently and in all
submission only in the possessing or inhabiting of the living and high worthy
Godhead, the Stool of Gods Majesty, and in the Ordinance of the Elders or
dayed-ones in the same, Ephesians. 4.
to all concord of peaceable life, of Gods peaceable Kingdom on the Earth,
because that the same peace with the peaceable Kingdom of God, Col. 3.
and the Stool of the same Majesty, might be enlarged on the Earth, Heb. 2.
and be observed to all peace and Love, and even so to remain everlastingly
upon the earth, and keep the pre-eminence or over-hand, Isa. 9.59.
under the obedience of the Love.

18. When ye now are well exercised in this fame fifth Virtue or Godlyness,
Dan. 2.7.
then shall ye proceed in the sixth Virtue or Godlyness.

19. Which sixth Virtue or Godlyness, is Gods Vision of the peace of the
Perfection.

20. For which Visions cause of God, of the Peace, and of the Perfection (for
that ye might be comprehended in the same cleerness rightly and according to
truth, and become consubstantiated therewith, Apo. 21.
and that the same Vision of God might likewise obtain a being-like shape in
you) ye shall altogether forsake, hate, Luke 14.
and leave all your own Vision of peace, or all your Visions wherewith ye out
of the flesh, and out of the earthly and natural, Ioh. 9.
or bloody being, have perceived, or looked into your own peace and perfection
according to the flesh, or after the creaturely manner, and shall in the same
Vision become altogether blind, and even so give over your selves altogether to
Gods Vision of the Peace and of the Perfection, and to the Elders or dayed-ones
in the same, for to live and walk obediently only in Gods Vision of the Peace
and Perfection, and in the Ordinance of the Elders to dress, maintain, and
govern all things that are on the Earth, in his right being estate or
Ordinance, to an universal peace and upright Righteousness upon the earth.

Genesis 2.
21. When ye now are well exercised in this same sixth Virtue or Godlyness, then
shall ye proceed in the seventh Virtue or Godlyness.

Psalm. 44.
22. Which seventh Virtue or Godlyness is the Anointed of God, which proceeds
from the Living God, with the anointing of the joyful Oil or comforting of the
Holy Ghost, Heb. 2.
and with all peaceableness of the heart and mind.

23. For which anointed ones cause of God (for that ye to an upright
peaceableness of your hearts and minds might become consubstantiated, Psalm. 44.
Heb. 1.
or of one being with the same, and with his anointing of the joyful Oil, or of
the Holy Ghost, and that he himself with his holy and godly anointing might
obtain a shape in you) ye shall altogether forsake and leave your selves and
all your own anointing or opinionated peaceableness, and your Joy or
Comforting of your heart and mind, wherein ye do live to a peaceableness of
your selves and to your own rest according to the flesh, Isa. 61
and become in all the same altogether dead, Apo. 21.
and even to give over your selves altogether to the anointed ones of God, and
to the Elders or dayed-ones in the same, Luke 14.
for to live and walk obediently, only in the anointed ones of God, and in the
Ordinance of the Elders or dayed ones in the same, Romans 6.
to all fruitfulness in the upright righteousness and Godlyness upon the earth.
Psalm. 83.


24. When ye now are well exercised in this same seventh Virtue or Godlyness
then shall, ye proceed in the eighth Virtue or Godlyness, the Perfection of all
Virtues or Godlyness) and so go forth in the same. Acts 17.


25. Which eighth Virtue or Godlyness is the new Life of the true life of God
the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Ioh. 5.
which is full of all Virtues or Godlyness, full of all Love, Grace and Wisdom,
full of all power of God, all spiritual goods, and full of all heavenly
fairness, 1 Cor. 15.
and that same wherewith God keeps his righteous Judgment over the whole
world, Apo. 14* 21, 22.
for to Judge the same with righteousness, and wherein all mortified
righteousness or godly believers of Jesus Christ rise up with their bodies
gloriously, and with everlasting Joy and Christian-like triumph live and dwell
everlastingly in the same, with minds and understandings of pure hearts.

Math. 7.13, 15, 16.
26. For which lives cause of the true mind of the everlasting and perfect
Godhead (because that the same might obtain a being-like shape in you, Ioh. 12.
and ye become of one being with the same, and be preserved in the righteous
Judgment of God) ye shall altogether forsake, Ioh. 3.
hate, and leave all your own life, with all that same which is engendered, or
brought forth in you to a life according to the flesh, Romans 6.
or is appeared or risen up unto you in your knowledge; or that which you your
selves have procured and adopted, or taken on before the Regeneration, or
before the renewing of your spirits and minds in the new life of the true mind
of God, to a life, Luke 14. Ioh. 12.
until that the same be altogether dead; mortified and buried with you, and
even so altogether give over your selves to the new life of the true mind of
the everlasting and perfect Godhead and to the eldest or manlyest Elder in the
same, for to live and walk even so obediently in all Love, Romans 6.
only in the new life of the true mind of the everlasting and perfect
Godhead, and in the Ordinance of the Eldest or dayedstones in the same, and
even so to inherit in the perfection of all Virtues or Godlyness, with
everlasting joy, and Christian-like Triumph in the heavenly being, as also the
everlasting life. O that it might thus come to pass even so.

Every one Ponder it deeply in his heart.
FINIS.

