A RELATION OF THE GREAT Victories and Successes of the Garrison of Plymouth,
since the last Account, given you in the Continuation of the true Narration,
May 10.

Truly Expressed from thence in two several Letters, the one from Leivetenant
Collonell Martin, Commander in Chief there, to a Friend of his in LONDON.

fleur-de-lis

The other by a Captain there, to a worthy Minister of this CITY.

LONDON, Printed by T. P. and are to be sold at the Marigold in Paul's
Churchyard. June 4th. 1644.

A Letter written from Plymouth, by Leivetenant Collonell Martin, Commander in
chief there, to a Friend of his in LONDON: Wherein is Expressed several
Victories lately obtained in those Parts, by the the PARLIAMENTS forces.
SIR;
AMong all my friends in London, I cannot at present only salute you as well to
mind you of your minding us, whom and whose condition I presume you connot
forget; As likewise to inform you of what great things the God of power and
mercy has lately done for us of this place, even since the time you left us. I
believe you have heard though not from me, of our beating the Enemy at St.
Budiex, since which time in diverse small skirmishes betwixt our Horse and
theirs, we have put them to the worst, and taken prisoners.

On Saturday last in the morning, I drew forth 1000. Foot, and about 100.
Horse; with these we marched toward Trenmans Jumpe, but in regard the maine
strength of the Enemy lay at Plympton, least they might fall on our rear, I
commanded 400. Musketeeres with 25. Horse to make good the several ways about
Compton with the rest of Horse and Foot we drew up at Hoptons work, from
whence the parties were issued forth; First 145. Musketteeres, under the
command of Captain Hals, who with the help of the Horse fell upon and carried
the Enemies Guard at the Jumpe, before any of the rest which I commanded to
second them; where come up they took the whole Guard not one man escaped,
which were Threescore and twelve men, and about Fifty Horse, Dragoones and
Troopers; with these they retreated, and a little above Knockins Hole were
charged in the Rear by two Troops of the Enemies Horse, which advanced from
Warlie H^use, but were by the speedy and resolute facing of our men quickly
broken, routed, and pursued above a mile. Here were added to our prisonees 17.
and as many Horse. There were taken about 100. Arms, Commanders and Officers,
none save two Lievetenants one Cornet, and one Corporal of Horse. With these
we returned, having lost only one man killed by his own Musket some others
hurt. Yesterday I sent Captain Hayne with 300. Musketeeres over the water to
Mount Edgcombe, the particulars of the service will be too tedious. They landed
under the Warren, upon which the Enemy left all their Ordnance, which were but
two Sacats, and one Demycullvering: When the passage was open, I went over my
self, with 20. Horse, set a Gaurd upon Mount Edgcombe, and by this time
Captain Duttue who was commanded to march to Maker Church who had beaten the
Enemy there, who indevored to possess the place before him, from thence he
followed the Enemy to Milbrooke, which was presently yielded before my self
was able to come up, the Enemy pretended a parley whilst their Soldiers got
clear of the Town, yet we recovered two Colors and three hundred Arms,
three Barrells of Powder, there was only one piece of Ordnance which he
brought not off, being possessed of the Town, I sent Captain Chafin to view a
great work which they had upon Jusworth point, but before his coming the
enemy had left it with six pieces of Ordance, there I set a strong Guard till
the water should come in, whereby we might carry away the Gunnes with the
Cattle which the Soldiers had taken: From thence I marched to Cawson, having
appointed Captain Hayne to attempt the Enemies work there, the strength of
which I then knew not, when I came I found him parlying with the work, which
was forthwith delivered up, in it were but three pieces of Ordnance but an
impregnable piece we had not taken then to bring away there Guns* some of them I
caused to be dismounted, there being two others in another little work; but
by this time I thought fit to return to the Guard at Mount Edgcombe and sent
the dispersed Soldiers there being now with me not above forty foot and ten
Horse, after this by the Importunity of some I consented to make trial of the
strength of the House, which we did, and fired the Banqueting House, but
could not enter, whilst we were thus employed, on the other side the enemy
draws up near a thousand Horse and foot against our works, but were beaten
back, mean while a strong party of Horse were sent about by Salt Ash, from
whence they took the Garrison Soldiers, and with great have came toward
Milbrooke and fell into the work at Jusworth when our Boats which had taken
in the Ordnance, Men, and plunder were not half muket short off the shore, I
was informed of their coming, and considering the strength of the House and
the fewness and weariness of my men and Horses, I commanded their retreat
which we made in very good order, when the enemy had got the top of the Hills.
I believe we brought over fifty good horses, I could not yet take an exact
account of them, near 200. sheep, with a 100. Oxen, Kine and young Cattle,
prisoners we took not above ten, besides some Country men which I have since
freed, nine pieces of Ordnance, diverse of our own men which were kept
prisoners in Milbrooke were now delivered, we lost at the House one
Lieutenant, three common Soldiers, all which were such as had no calling
there. Thus have I given you account of the goodness of the Almighty toward
us, I hope these are but beginning of greater mercies: Men from all parts come
in to us daily, had we but money to pay them; you can hardly immagine the
greatness of our streights for want of it, pray Sir as you tender the welfare
of this place, solieite earnestly for a supply for us, we should not want men
could we but afford them ordinary encouragement.

Sir I am your ready friend. ROBERT MARTIN.
Plymouth May 16. 1644.
A TRVE COPY OF A Letter written from Plymouth, May, 16. by a Captain there, to
a worthy Minister of this City
SIR,
SINCE my last unto You, it has pleased God to bless our endeavors, and to
give us some victories over our Enemies; which I shall here give you a certain
Relation of.

On the 11th, of this instant May, we sallied out into the Enemies Quarters at
the Jumpe, where they had a guard of Horse and foo^e, they being near 80. All
which were killed and taken by our men, with the loosse of one man only on our
side. We killed an Irish Commander that would take no quarter after we had
gotten the work, and the rest we brought away prisoners with their arms: The
Enemy then having his alarm in other quarters, gathered together, and
followed our men as they retreated: but our men were armed with such
resolution, as that they thought it dishonorable for them to come off without
opposing them also, which they did with good success. We killed 6. or 7. of
them, and took 17. prisoners: In all that day we took 88. prisoners, besides
those that were slain, were 60. Horse and about 100. men's arms.

On the 15th. of this instant, we steered our course another way, and fell over
on th Cornish-side, where it pleased God to give us wonderful success: We
landed our men not far from Mount Edgcombe, where they kept their guards, but
upon our first onsett they forsook their guards, and left their guns, and
betook themselves to the House, we leaving a party to keep play with the
House, drew away a good party further into the Country. We first marched to a
place called Maker, where in the Church we had a barrel of Gunpowder, and
took some few men, but the rest fled away, some to Milbrooke, and some to
Causan-fort; We leaving another party to make good the Church to secure our
retreat, matched forward to Milbrooke, where they had a Garrison of about 250.
all which fled, and so without opposition of any but the Town, which for fear
of plundring yielded upon quarter, we took in it 7. great Guns, and many
Arms, 3 barrells of powder, many great shot, which we having sent away
marched to Causan and summoned their Fort, which yielded also upon composition,
where we had five pieces of Ordnance, and one barrel and half of powder, and
some great shot. We could not bring off our Gu^s from Causan, for fear of the
Enemy, being on our backs. Then leaving Causan we returned to Mount Edgcombe,
and summoned the House, but they would not yield, whereupon we stormed it,
took the Outhouses, and burnt them and the banqueting house, but the
Main-hous being built in such a form and with stone, was not fiered. The night
drawing on, and the Enemy being on our backs we retreated, bringing over with
us 50. Horse, 100 head of Cattle, and near 200. Sheep, and 3. pieces of
Ordnance from under Mount Edgcombe, that played upon the Boats which passed up
to Sone-house, we took 12. in all and brought them away. We took this day
about 200. men's arms.

Lieutenant Colonel Martin has for the present the sole command of the
Garrison and carries things very sweetly, to the content of all honest men. I
am persuaded had he not been here, we had been in a very sad condition.

We are extremely necessitated for want of Money, pray do your utmost to
procure some for us.

Postscrip.
We Issued out of the Town one Wedensday the 22. of May, toward Warly House 4.
mile out of the Town, where we took 50. Horse and retreated with the loss of
6. men, and upon our retreat their Horse pursued us. Which being discovered a
party of our Horse faced about to encounter with them, and fell in pell-mell
amongst them, and took 6. Horse and men with their complete Arms, the Enemy
then perceiving our men to be no way daunted, but rather joyful; and to
persist, with courage, they returned again to their Quarters, that we could
not see one in 4. miles about, but at Plympton, where we hope ere long to find
them. -- Added by one who was an eye witness of it, being now in London.

FINIS.

