A CORRECTOR Of the ANSWERER To the Speech out of Doors.

IVSTIFYING THE Worthy Speech of Master THOMAS CHALONER a faithful Member of
the Parliament of England.

EDINBURGH. As truly Printed by Evan Tyler printer to the Kings most excellent
Majesty, as were the Scottish papers. Anno. 1646.

A CORRECTOR OF THE ANSWERER TO the speech out of doors.
Justifying the worthy Speech of Mr. THOMAS CHALONER a faithful Member of the
Parliament of England.
Courtly Sir:
YOu are much mistaken: the answer you make to your own questions do not
satisfy; there are indeed that ask who you are, and what you mean, and they
conclude you to be one that was an earwitnesse of that worthy gentleman's
speech, else, what means that parenthesis in the 12. line, of the second page,
of your paper, and the rather because you seemed to be bitten by the Dog that
is not worth the whisling after, and make an out-crie upon it; but deal as
clearly as you can; is it not an ill Dog that is not worth the whisling
after? Or is there any but children madmen or worse, that take care for such
as byte, destroy, do mischief, or foul the house? As for the debate at the
Comoedie in Oxford, concerning the fittest place for the Kings Throne, the
determination whereof was so difficult, that some thought it best to erect none
at all; it is a very instructive passage, and may teach to purpose, though your
grand Master will give you small thanks for declaring thereof without doors,
if a just application be made thereof, what thanks you deserve, you shall be
sure of; shall you not?

You say you are one that has adhered to the Parliament all along, (it were
well if all alike) from the beginning of the war; quantum mutatis ab illo?
what a thousand pitties, it is your name was forgotten; had you only affixed
that to your paper, every man would have recounted the great service you have
done: were you a shamed of your name? or were you not? You know it is not fair
to answer a thing that has a name, without a name.

You say you have served the Parliament faithfully in their lowest condition;
it was pity you had not goodness sufficient to hold out to the end; but it
seems you did (as some others) about the time of Branfords-Skirmish,
dis-relish the exigent; and though you faced not quite about to Oxford, yet you
faced to Kingston, and have looked on ever since, and sometime have cast an eye
as far as Vxbridge, have you not?

Nay, you are a Champion for the Parliament, Resolving to be still for them in
that which is just and right, against any Person or Nation in the World: Latet
anguis in herba
By any means make your name public, there may be uses for you that you
cannot imagine; but stay a little, may you not carry two faces under one hood?
Who do you intend shall be judge of what is right and just in this your
resolution? Believe it, by your writing; good men fear, that either your
understanding is very erroneous, or your conscience very dead or corrupt and
then, if you will be judge your self; the Parliament were better to be without
your service and resolution; and indeed for all your boasting, it is thought you
have been and are but a back-friend, that you row one way and look another;
which in plain English (if not in Scotch) is to play the disembling hypocrite,
is it not?

You mightily over value your own art and Sophistry, and as much under value
the judgments of others; if you imagine your delusion is not espied by every
common capacity: you write not in defense of the Scotch papers but of the
honor of the Parliament: Oh that Englands Parliament were advised of Joabs
treachery, who while he says art thou in health my Brother, and salutes it
with a pretended Kiss, sheds out the very bowels of it on the ground. 2
Samuel 20, 10. either be what thou seem, or seem what thou art; this
sneaking in the head and biting by the heel, manifests a Serpent, and that the
poison of aspes is under your tongue: if there were no more; this large
Machivilian preface of yours (if well weighed) would sufficiently declare.

You presume not to examine or at all to intermeddle with any thing spoken
within those walls; is that true? But how comes that passage without doors to
escape your examen, which is placed immediately before the Argument page the
third, of Mr. Chaloners Speech; can you give an account of your silence
therein? your descanting upon the other parts of the speech, and passing over
that passage in silence, gives just ground to think that your most politic
observation could not reach to defend your checks from collusion, and eminent
receding from their Covenant therein.

If you write not in defense of the Scotch papers; what means then your strong
conceited syllogism? If your juggling be not palpable to your self, you have
indeed lost your judgment; but it is rather to be feared you have sold both
judgment and conscience for worldly respects.

You cannot but know, what may be, and what has been said and maintained too,
of contrivances and contracts, conducing to the Kings address to the Scots, so
much is avoucht, believed, and commonly discourst of, as dissolves the knot in
your argument, the Covenant it self being first cut in the midst with a dudgion
dagger, whether the English would or no: assure your self, the foundation of
your syllogism ought to have been the Kings voluntary uninvited, uncontracted
going to the Scots: If you will have it of any force with the People, for most
men do confidently believe, there was all the parts of a real bargain in the
business, and must have more then the Scots word, or the Embass^dors faith, or
the Kings Oath to prove the contrary, and then what becomes of the weight you
lay upon the Covenant, Treaty, or Law of the Nation^^

But admitly our syllogism held good in all parts, and that the King were his
own man a midst the Scots, what is the issue? why then say you His person is
not to be disposed of but by joint consent of both Nations? Well; be it so,
nevertheless both Nations are bound to agree in what is just; Duramentum non
est vinculum iniquitatis
neither Covenant nor Treaty, nor Law of Nations, can bind in any thing that in
it self is evil and sinful; concerning the Kings person then; should both
Nations consider what in justice is to be done? In the first place, would they
not consider what the King had done both before the War and since the War?
Would they not consider what the proper difference is between a King and a
Tyrant, and finding the latter caracter upon him, how then ought they to
dispose of his Person? What punishment would appear sufficient for Himself?
What would become of his posterity, Justice impartially being agreed upon by
both Nations? And if they should not propose justice as their end in this His
case, that has so general an influence upon all Nations, they shall certainly
perish.

Shall a poor indigent wretched, inconsiderate man suffer death and forfeit
the wel-being of his posterity, for a particular offense, against a particular
Law? and shall He and His escape scot-free that for sixteen years without
intermission brake the Law, turned the government up-side down, Nulled
Parlements, and when craft and cruelty would not suffice, raised a most
unnatural War against this Parliament, intermixing the most devilish plots
that ever were to destroy both Parliament and City, murdering and destroying
the most Religious and peaceable People in all places and never by all
entreaties, Treatyes, Covenants [ and indulgence in all these] could be drawn
to give over his violent and inhumane courses, till necessity enforced, and
then by a most unparaleld contrivance to entangle this Nation more then ever?
What can the true servants of the most just God say unto such a Person, but as
thy sword has made so many thousand thousands of women childlesse, so shall thy
Mother be childlesse amongst women?

That our records might instruct posterity, with such a memento as this, and
Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal: Your toy's of evil
Council, and the King can do no wrong, would not serve Agags turn, nor
Adonibezeck, nor the five Kings that Joshua hung up: who all might have pleaded
evil Council and the like; but before just Judges such things are vanities,
for they know God will not so be mocked. And if both Nations do justly; thus
they ought to dispose of this Kings Person; and then there is an end of this
controversy.

That our English Parliament inclines to such a disposition, appears by voting
of his Person to Warwick Castle; but the Scots agree not to this vote; but fall
to an evident Treaty on His behalf, and not only for his immunity (which with
what conscience they can do their death-beads will tell them, and the blood of
the slain) but for a necessity of restoring Him to his greatness and honor;
to justify which their doings; their and our Covenant with the most just God,
is by them insisted on; to compel us to the same injustice, if this be not the
highest mockery that ever was offered unto God: what is? Yet this is that you
glory to maintain in them: accounting of all the miseries of this Nation, but
as a hunting match or horse-race: But you and they, and their King whom they
now ^^alke with all; will one day find that wilful murders must have another
reckning; maugre all King craft, Clergy-craft, and Court-craft in the world.

But if it were agreed, they had a joint and equal interest in the Person of
the King: and that they should differ about disposing of him: the Parliament of
England justly resolving to punish him, and the Parliament of Scotland
resolving to restore him to his honor and Authority: admit the Parliament of
England should understand that they were no ways bound to preserve his Person,
further then they found his Person in the defense of the true Protestant
Religion, the liberties of the People, and privilige of Parliament, as the
Covenant does manifestly imply (and could be justly taken in no other sense)
but if they found him in the opposition of all those, and in the violent
prosecution of all kind of tyrany, oppression and cruelty, are they not plainly
bound by the same Covenant to bring him to condign punishment, as the chief
of all delinquents? can the death of Straford, Canterbury or any of the rest be
justified, if he escape that set them on work, and has infinitely transcended
them in Treasons against the Commonwealth?

If the Parliament of Scotland should persist in their interpretation of the
Covenant, that they understood the preservation of the Kings Person, His
Authority and power to be always consistent with the preservation of Religion
and the liberties of the People; it will appear an enforced construction,
because sinful: did you lift up your hand to the most-high God to bring
delinquents to condign punishme^? and can you keep your Covenant if he escape
scot-free, who in point of all this blood and cruelty was aminenter causa sine
qua non: it could not be just to defend His Person in the opposition and
destruction of true Religion, and the liberties of the People, but to destroy
Him as any other, nay as the King and the chief Captain of the destroyers,
and this the People takle of freely one with other, and the contrary being but
the fruit of art and sophistry, serves to no other purpose, but to exasperate
them against whosoever uses those delusions, abhominating that the lives of so
many precious men, and the ruin of so many honest families should be set at so
cheap a rate: the manifold sorrows of their hearts, and their being often
deceived, has opened their understandings that they now see plainly through
all those foldings and doublings; (...) they are but hated that use them.

But to the point; admit the two Parliaments should thus differ, what then
becomes of your much labored syllogism? You see the dispute is begun already:
Sir, can you resolve who shall be judge of this controvercy? if you can propose
none: as certainly you cannot, what then? must Scotl^nds resolution be a Law
too England? Your face indeed; looks some what that way, and so do the
Scotch-pepers too, but why so^ if the negative voice so much pleaded for by the
friends of prerogative, shall now be re-assum'd by the Scots, in this dispute,
it will render the Parliament more incapable of preserving the Kingdom now
then ever, and while you pretend to avoid perjury, you would enforce the
Parliament upon an inevitable slavery.

If England and Scotland be truly measured, England is by far the greater and
much more populous: and in all societies the Major part is conclusive, or they
can never come to any determination: and then Englands resolution in this
cause, ought rather to conclude Scotland: if Scotland thinks this not
reasonable; what then? must there be a strife about the Person; why then strove
they not who shall be most forward to bring him to justice? fiat justitiam and
ruan^ coeli.
Why is there such a coil about his honor and power, that has sought the
ruin of all?

Sir, what say you to that saying in the speech, page the 13, the King having
put himself freely into their hands, they cannot with honor deliver him (well,
let them warm the Snake as long as England did, and they may hap to be yet as
well requited) but what man that has the use of reason, believes the King cast
himself freely upon them but upon preassurance of protection; therefore talk
not any longer of honor, it is but a mere trick, and it is discovered to
their shame; it is not denied but they may have great use of him in many
respects, to make advantages upon this Nation: but they are unjust, and will
never prosper, when they have done all they can, they will find many of those
they think they have sufficiently deluded and perverted, that yet will never be
alienated from our English Parliament, nor be wanting to make good their Votes
and resolutions, and also their interpretations.

There are no great ^^^er of your perfidious temper that employ your English
parts and abilities, to plead for deceit and Tyrany, and basely to inthrall
your native Country; what has provoked you to so great a wickedness: or are
you by some notorious practices become so obnoxious, that you cannot think
your self safe if justice be prosecuted impartially: Do you fear it will at
last arrive at you? it can be no other, if so, yet be advised, repent, and make
amends, add not evil to evil, lest to escape the Pan you leap into the Fire:
with the just you may find mercy, happily your evil is over and past hurting,
and will never be remembered: if you cast your self on strangers they know
wherefore you do it; and when you have dontheir work, will cast you off,
loving the work but abhominating the instrument: besides, your labor falls
upon a knowing People, and makes no impression: when judicious men read your
inference upon the Covenant, defending therein the affirmations in the Scots
papers touching the Kings Person and after read over that breife passage of M.
Chaloners speech: all that you have said comes to nothing, and you and your
Master are great loosers, so unadvisedly occasioning the receiving of that
worthy and effectual passage. which in due thankfulness to that faithful
judicious and true lover of his Country, shall be here recited word for word;
deserving indeed to be engraven in Marble, and to remain in the Commons House
to all posterity.

They say says he; meaning the Scots papers) that by virtue of the Covenant
they are obliged to defend his Person and Authority. What his Authority is in
Scotland themselves best know; but you only are to judge of is in England,
since being not (...) to thy power on Earth, there is no power under Heaven can
judge you. The Covenant ties you to maintain in the first place the Rights of
Parliament, and the liberties of the Kingdom; and in the second place the
Kings Person and Authority; and that only in defense of the former, and not
otherwise. And whereas they expect the King should be received by you with
honor safety, and freedom, I beseech you Sir, consider whether (as the case
now stands) his Reception with Honor can stand with the Honor of the
Kingdom, whether his safety be not incompatible with the safety of the Common
wealth, and whether his freedom be not inconsistant with the freedom of the
People.

I pray (Sir) take heed lest that bringing him in with Honor you do not
dishonor your self, and question the very justice of all your Actions; be
wray that in receiving him with safety you do not thereby endanger and hazard
the Commonwealth, be advised, lest in bringing him home with freedom, you do
not thereby lead the people of England in thraldom,

I pray (Sir) first settle the honor, safety and freedom of the
Commonwealth, and then the honor, safety, and freedom of the King, so far as
the latter may stand with the former, and no otherwise.

Wherefore I shall conclude with my humble desire that you would adheare to your
former Vote, that is, that the King be disposed of as both Houses of Parliament
shall think fitting; and that you enter into no Treaty neither with the King
or your Brethren of Scotland, lest otherwise thereby you retard the going home
of their Army out of England.

Sir, by what you have written, it will appear what your meaning is, you do
but flatter your self your Conscience, will be too strong for you, and condemn
you wheresoever you are, it will aflict you in your private, and distract you
in your public occasions, in the end death comes, and what will be the fruit
of those things whereof you will be then ashamed, when Mr. Chaloner that true
friend to the people shall have peace in the clear discharge of his trust, and
be for ever beloved af all good men; both in Parliament and Commonwealth.

You are justly attended with the common unhappiness of hypocrites, which is
to over act, and thereby to discover themselves most, when they intend most to
hide themselves: so fares it with you in the beginning progress and end of
your discourse: being professedly for the honor of the Parliament, when
nothing was ever written more manifestly to the dishonor thereof, yet that in
the close of all you might be thought to be a friend, you sing this song to the
tune of the old Letany, from the plots both of sectaries and Malignants good
Lord deliver us.

But Sir, are you sure you are no Sectary? It is much to be feared you are,
then is risen up of late a sect called the Scotch paper sect, a very dangerous
sect, a sect that has plots and design, and tricks and contrivances, are not
you a principal member of this new sect? It is most evident you are, it is not
supposed you are zealously of any other sect or Religion what ever you
profess, your papers acquit you from all suspicion thereof: for most of th^^^
that are called sectaries, are true lovers of Englands interest, and have a
care to admit none but honest men into their fellowships, and their plots are
to preserve with their lives and estates, those just liberties of this Nation,
and privileges of Parliament: whereof you and such as you are, are making an
uncleanly conveyance, and felling for some vile and unworthy respects, and
bless: your selves from those plots of sectaries.

But why, shame you to be thought a Malignant, you know and it is evident you
are one: and it is pretty well in fashion, and if you would openly profess it,
it would grow in favor: it is nothing but your taking and pleading for the
Covenant that distinguish^^ you; and that is now a days as much as nothing;
what is it, so long as you are your own in ^rpre^^^^ besides, you see it is the
most likely to bring in the King your head, come, it had been ill for you and
He and all the Malignants in England, if it had not been for the Covenant, and
therefore press it all you can, that it may upon penalty be taken by all men
throughout the Nation: for certainly all the Malignants will take it and then
they shall no longer be called malignants, but Covenanters, and if any scruple
it, it will be those sectaries that have subdued the King your Master and all
his forces, (except before excepted) and let those be called malignants: and
then if it were not for this Parliament, ye Covenanters would have a merry
world once again: and might take another course to answer such speeches as Mr.
Chaloners: you remember what was done in the third year of this King: those
were brave courses, and you long to see them again, do you not? Indeed you
have cause, for if Gentlemen of his ability in the House (as God be blessed
there are very many) do but put forth their parts hence forward as he has
done, all your art and sophistry will compass nothing but your own shame and
ruin which is the Just reward of your Treachery, and most perfidious breach of
the trust you have undertaken.

FINIS.

