Ex otio Negotium. OR, MARTIAL HIS EPIGRAMS Translated. With Sundry Poems and
Fancies, By R. Fletcher.

-- vivere Chartae
Incipiant, Cineri gloria sera venit.
Mar. lib. 1. Epig. 26. LONDON, Printed by T. Mabb, for William Shears* and are
to be sold at the Bible in Bedford street in Covent Garden, 1656.

M. VALERIUS MARSHAL.

Anno Aetatis suae 51.

To* Vaughan sculpsit


To the Reader.
Courteous Reader
I Here present thee with the scatterd Papers of my Youth: which if they want
that seriousness and solemn thoughts which become the ticklish stage of so
catching a world, let me beseech thy pardon: had I sacrificed to thy view a
volume beyond exception: it had Anticipated thy Clemency, and left thee no
occasion to have exercised thy goodness. But I am not of that number that
dares Challenge the sharpe-sighted Censure of the times; and conceive their
Papers as their persons beyond fault or defection. If I have not rendered the
accute fancy of my most ingenious Author in its pure and genuine dress, as his
own Pen has deliverd him in; ascribe the fail to my weakness, not my will.
And for those abortive births slippd from my brain which can carry neither
worth nor weight in the scale of this pregnant age, so fraught and furnished
with variety of gallant Pieces and performances of the choicest of writers,
give me leave to flurn at them, as the poor excrescencies of Nature, which
rather blemish than adorn the structure of a well-composed body. But least I
tire thy patience with a tedious Apolligie, like the Pulpit-cuffers of the age,
which breath their Audience at every accent either a sleep or out of doors; I
will no longer detain thee in the Porch and Preface of the Work: If my looser
minutes shall either please or profit thee, I have my end: If not, I have my
desire, may I be thought worthy to be acknowledged

Thy Friend and Servant R. Fletcher.

A Table of the Poems and Fancies in this Book.
THe Publipue Faith Page 129. A Lent on Lettany composed for a confiding
Brother for the benefit and edification of the Faithful Ones. p. 131 The
Second Part p. 135 A Hue and Cry after the Reformation p. 137 A Committee p.
138 On the happy Memmory of Alderman Hoyl that hanged himself p. 141 On
Clarinda Praying p. 142 On Clarinda Singing p. 145 Platonic Love p. 147 A Sigh
p. 149 Love's Farewell p. 151 Christmas Day; or the shuttle of an inspyred
Weaver, bolted against the Order of the Church for its Solemnity p. 154 Good
Friday p. 156 Easter Day p. 157 Holy Thursday p. 159 Whitesunday p. 161 A short
Ejaculation upon that truly worthy Patron of the Law, Sr John Bridgman p. 164
Obsequies on that right Reverend Father in God John Prideaux late Bishop of
Worcester p. 166 On the death of his Royal Majesty Charles late King of England
p. 171 An Epitaph on the same p. 173 A Survey of the World p. 174 An Old Man
Courting a Young Girl p. 177 An Epitaph on his deceased Friend p. 182 Mount
Ida, or beautie's Contest p. 183 Upon a Fly that flew into a Ladies eye, and
there lay buried in a Tear. p. 185. Obsequies to the Memory of the truly Noble
right Valiant and right Honorable Spencer Earl of Northampton, Slain at Hopton
Field in Staffordshire in the beginning of this Civil War p. 186 The London
Lady p. 190 The Times p. 194 The Model of the New Religion p. 202 Content p.
204 May Day p. 208 An Epigram to Doulas p. 211 An Epigram on the people of
England p. 212 An Elegy upon my dear little Friend Mr. I. F. who dyed the same
morning he was born Decm. the 10. 1654. p. 213 A short Reflection on the
Creation of the World p. 217. My Kingdom is not of this world p. 221 Come unto
me all ye that labor and are heavy laden p. 222 A Sing-song on Clarinda's
Wedding p. 226 On the much to be Lamented Death of that gallant Antiquarie, and
great Master both of Law and Learning, John Seldom Esquire p. 231 Upon the
Death of John Seldom Esquire p. 235 Upon the incomparable Learned John Seldom
p. 239 Upon the Death of John Seldom p. 240 Degenerate Love and Choice p. 242 A
Dialogue between two water Nymphs Thamesis and Sabrina p. 247 To my honored
Friend Mr. T. C. that asked m^ how I liked his Mistress being an old Widow p.
254 The Engagement Stated p. 257
MARTIAL: Lib. I. Epig.
Ad Catonem.
WHen thou did know the merry Feast
Of jocund Flora was at best,
Our solemn sports* how loosely free,
And debonair e the vulgar be,
Strict Cato, why did thou intrude
Into the seated multitude?
Was it thy frolic here alone
Only to enter and be gone?
Ad Lectorem Epig. 2.
This whom thou readst is he by thee required,
Martial, through all the world famed and desired,
For sharpest Books of Epigrams, on whom
(Ingenious Reader) living, without Tomb,
Thou have bestowed that high and glorious wreath,
Which seldom Poets after death receive.
Ad Librum suum, Epig. 4.
Among the Stationers thou had rather be
(My little Book) though my shelf's void for thee,
Alas! thou know not Madam Rome's disdain,
Great Mars his sons are of a pregnant brain,
Gybes no where are more free: young men and old,
And Boys their Nose up in derision hold,
Whiles thou shall hear thy praise, and kisses have,
Thou shall be tossed from the bosom to the Grave.
But thou for fear thou feel'st thy Masters hand,
And thy loose sports should by his reed be scanned,
(Lascivious Book) thou seek'st to mount abroad,
Go, fly, but home were yet thy safer road.
Ad Caesarem, Epig. 5.
If by chance (Caesar) thou take up my Books,
Lord of the world put by thy morning looks:
Thy greatest tryumphs have admitted mirth,
Nor need'st thou blush to give my fancy birth,
With what aspect thou smilest on Thymele,
Or mimicall Latinus, read thou me.
Innocent sports, strict censure may peruse,
My life is modest though my lines be loose.
Ad Decianum Epig. 9.
Because thou follow'st so in thy intents
Great ^hrasea's, and brave Cato's presidents,
That thou may be secure: nor runn'st thybrest
Naked on drawn Swords in a frantic jest,
(Decian) thou do what I would have thee do:
I like not him, who to redeem, or woe
An empty fame by 's easy blood is raised,
Give me the man that lives and yet is praised.
De Gemello and Maronilla. Epig. 11.
Gemellus seeks old Maronill to wed,
Desires it much, is instant, prays, and fees,
Is she so fair? Nought's more ill favored:
What then provokes? O she does cough and wheeze.
De Arria and Paeto. Epig. 14.
When Arria to her Paeto gave the sword,
Which she in her own bowels first had gored,
Trust me quoth she, that wound I made, do'nt grieve.
But that does Paetus which thou meanest to give.
Ad Julium. 16. Epig.
O thou to me amongst my chief friends in mind.
(Julius) if ancient faith, and ties ought bind,
The sixtith Consul present is to thee,
And yet thy life knows small felicity.
Thou do not well defer thus to deny,
And call that only thine that is past by:
Cares, and chainpd toils expect thee, joys nere stay,
But fleeting take their leave, and fly away;
These with spread arms and with eaeh hand embrace,
They often slide from our bosoms secret'st place.
Credit me it is not wise, I Will live to stay
To morrow's lif's too late, live thou to day.
In Aeliam. Epig. 20.
Aelia just four teeth had, if I told right,
One Cough ejected two, another two:
Now she may Cough securely day and night
There Is nothing left for the third Cough to do.
De Porsena and Mucio Scaevola. Epig. 22.
When the right hand mistaken in the guard
Seeking to assault the king; in fell reward
Threw it self in the holy flames to dye,
Such Cruel wonders the good enemy
Could not sustain, but by command anon
Snatchd from the flames injoyns him to be gone;
That hand which Mucius in contempt was bold
To burn, King Porsena could not behold:
The failing hand the greater glory found,
Had it not erred, it had been less renowned.
Ad Cottam Epig. 24.
Cotta th'invitest none, but such with thee
Are bathed, and baths provide thee company:
I wondered long how I escaped thy call:
But now I see my naked truth spoiled all.
Ad Sabidum Epig. 33.
I do not love the (Sabidus),
Nor can I tell thee why:
Only my humor happens thus,
I do not fancy thee.
De Gellia, Epig. 34.
Gellia nere mourns her fathers loss
Whiles no one's by to see,
But yet her soon commanded tears
Flow in society:
'To weep for praise is but a feigned moan,
'He grieves most truly that does grieve alone*
Ad Lesbiam, Epig. 35.
Lesbia thou sin'st still with an unpimp'd door,
And open, and nere cloak'st thy pleasure ore,
Thy peepers more than active friends delight,
Nor are thy joys in kind if out of sight:
But yet the common wench with veil and key
Strives to expel the witness far away*
No chinck does in a Brothel-house appear,
Of vulgar Strumpets learn this modest care,
Stews hide this filthiness: but Lesbia see
If this my censure seem too hard to be?
I do'nt forbid thee to employ thy prime,
But to be taken Lesbia, there is the crime.
Ad Fidentinum, Epig. 39.
That Book thou read'st is ours, my Fidentine,
But now thou readst so ill, it is surely thine.
Ad Lividum, Epig. 41.
Thou that look sour, and readst unwillingly,
May the envy all men! no man envy thee!
De Porcia Epig. 43.
When Porcia heard her husband Brutus fate,
And grief pursued subtracted arms to take,
Know ye not yet death cannot be denied?
Quoth she, this proof enough my father tried
This said, she drank the burning Coals in ire,
Go now vexatious Crowd your sword retire.
Ad Hedylam Epig. 47.
When thou say I hasten to it,
Do it if thou meanst to do it;
Hedyla, delayed desire
Soon languishes and does expire.
Command me to expect, then I
Withheld shall run more speedily,
But Hedyla if thou do have,
Tell me that I not come too fast.
Ad Fuscum Epig. 55.
If any room (my Fuscus) yet there be
Void in thy Love; for here and there we see
Thy friends abound, one place I do implore,
Nor me reject because unknown before,
Thy antientest familiars were as new,
When first thy parts their apt affection drew,
O let my later love this boon obtain,
To be embraced in the elder strain.
Ad Frontonem, Epig. 56.
Would know thy Marcus wish here in a word?
(Fronto) thou great renown of Gown and Sword,
It Is to be master of a little Field,
His own, course pleasures him such pleasures yield.
Every man courts the walks of Spartan stone,
And wearies his how dey' simply till noone:
He that enjoyes his happy grove and land,
Before whose fire the loaded Nets spread stand,
And leaping fish hangs with a trembling line,
Drawing sweet honey from red casks for wine?
Whose fat made spreads his Table with three legs,
And whose unpurchased embers roast his eggs,
May he hate me that hates this life or this,
And live imployd in City Offices.
Ad Flaccum, Epig. 58
My Flaccus, if thou needs would crave
What wench I would, and would not have?
I loath the too too easy field
A like with her that nere will yield.
A moderation I embrace,
And most approve the middle place,
I fancy none that wring my gutts,
Nor her that in enjoying gluts.
De Laevina Epig. 63.
Laevina Chaste as Sabines were of old
Whose face looked stricter than her husbands, could,
Whiles she permits her self refreshed to be
Often in the baths held in communit ie,
She fell on fire, embraced a lad, and burned,
Chaste she came there, but too much chasd returned.
Ad Somnum Epig. 72.
Naevia six Cupps Justina seven Comprize,
Lycas five, Lyde four* and Ida three,
Each man his love by healths arithmatize,
If none appear, then Sleep come thou to me
Ad Fidentinum Epig. 73.
Fidentine do thou think and seek to be
A Poet by my verse in thievery?
So Aegle with her bought and Indian bone
may seem to have a sound mouth of her own.
So painted-faced Lycoris may seem white,
Though black as Moors veild in a nat' rall night.
For that same cause that thou art Poet called,
Thou may be said bush-haird when thou art bald.
Ad Caecilianum Epig. 74.
Scarce on in all the City would embrace
Thy proffered wife (Caecilian) free to have:
But now she guarded, and locked up: apace
Thy custom comes. O thou art a witty knave!
Ad Flaccum Epig. 77.
Flaccus thou greatest of my cares to me,
The heir of old Antenors family!
Out with these Muses songs, and company,
No Girl among them will bring ought to thee.
What seekst of Phoebus? it is Minerva's chest
Is full, she is wise and hoards up all the rest.
What can poor Bacchus wreaths give? Pallas tree
Weighs down her boughs with superfluity.
Helicon has no more but springs, and bays,
The harps of Goddesses and empty praise.
With the Sacred Fountains what have thou to do?
The Roman Courts more rich, and nearer too.
There the chink gingles, but about our chayr
And pulpits, Kisses only fill the Air.
De Manneia's Epig. 84.
A puppie licks Manneia's lips, the sense
I grant, a dog may kis. -- sir reverence.
De Quicinali Epig. 85.
Sly Quicinalis cares not much to wed,
Yet would partake the offspring of the bed,
But yet what trick? what custom is it he uses?
Most certain he his chamber-maids abuses.
So stocks his house and feilds: how truly he
Is called the Father of his family?
De Novio Microspico Epig. 87.
Novius my neighbor is, and he
From out my windows reached may be,
Who will not envy me? and say
I Am happy all hours of the day?
Who may, enjoy a friend so near?
But he is as far from me, as where
Terentian guards Syene's wall,
Nor can I feast with him at all,
Nor is it granted once to me
To hear him, or at least to see,
Nor in this City one throughout
Lives me more near, or more remote.
Well he or I must further move,
Who so would Novius neighbor prove:
And verily his Inmate be,
Must never Novius mean to see.
Ad Bassam tribadem Epig. 91.
Cause amongst males thou nere was seen to be
Nor as unchaste no fable feigned thee,
But all thy offices discharged were
By thy own sex, no man intruding there,
I grant thou seem'dst Lucretia to our eye,
But (o mistake!) Bassa the art out ont, fie.
Two Twatts commit the fact, and dare it can,
Whiles a prodigious lust supplies the man,
The have made a riddle worth the Thebane guile,
Where no man is, adultery bred the while.
Ad Naevolum Causidicum Epig. 98.
Still in a crowd of noise thy voice is heard,
And think thy self a Lawyer for thy table,
On this account each man that wears a beard
May be as wise: lo all men peace! now pratle.
Ad Calenum avarum Epig. 100.
Thou scarce had twenty sesterties in all,
Yet wast so bountiful, and liberal,
So richly neat (Calenus) that all we
Thy friends did wish thee much more great to be,
Jove heard our prayers, and what we then desired,
And ere seven months (I think) were full expired
Four funerals bequeathd thee such a sum:
But, thou as if no Legacies had come,
But rather had bin robbed, grewst so in care,
So basely hard, that our more sumptuous fare
That in a year thou do provide one time
Costs thee no more then the offal of thy coin:
And we thy seven old friends are by thee thought
Worth but a lead half pound if to be bought,
What mischief shall we wish that is worthy thee?
Even a thousand times more rich to be!
If this shall happen which we pray it might,
Wretched Calenus thou will starve outright.
Ad Scoevolam Epig. 104.
Scaevola not as yet dubbd Knight he prays
For one ten thousand pounds his stock to raise,
How largely would he live! how happily!
The easy gods smiled and vouchsafed it free.
Upon this b^on his coat was much more bare*
His Cloak far worse, his shoos thrice clouted are,
His olives were of seven years vintage standding,
One Table serves two meals by his commanding:
The course dreggs ofred wine are his chief drink,
His pease and wench scarce cost one doit I think,
Let us appeal to Law, thou cheating Bore,
Live, or else to the gods their goods restore.
Ad Lucium Julium Epig. 108.
Most famous Julius thou say often to me,
Thou Art idle, write things for eternity:
Give me such boons I cry, such as of old
Horace and Virgil from their Patron hold,
I Will strive to raise my cares beyond times date,
And snatch my name from fire's consuming hate,
The Ox on barren fields his yoke wiln't bear,
A fast soil tyres, but yet the labor's dear.
Ad Velocem Epig. 111.
Velox complains my Epigrams are long,
whiles he writes none: he fings a shorter song
Lib. 2.
Epig. 3.
SExtus ows naught, nor fears his quarter day,
It Is true: he ows most truly that can pay.
Ad Decianum, Epig. 5.
Let me not live (my Decian) if the day
And the whole night I would not with thee stay,
But there are two miles that divide our home,
Which are made four to me when I back come.
Thou Art often abroad: when not, thou art often denied,
Or with thy causes, or thy self employed.
But yet to see thee two miles I will go;
But not to see thee, four don't please me so.
De Selio, Epig. 11.
(Rufus) if an inquiry's made
Why Selius walks so late and sad?
Why his dull looks seem to employ
Some dismal chance and malady?
Why his foul nose hangs ore his chest?
And pulls his hair, and beats his breast.
He moans no loss of friend, or brother,
His one son's well, and so's the other,
And may they live! his wife's in health,
His servants safe, and bags of wealth,
His Husbandman and Bailiffe too,
Have near purloyn'd ought of his due,
What then is the cause that thus he blubberd?
Why Selius sups at his own Cup-board.
In Posthumum, Epig. 12.
What Is this that myrrh does still smell in thy kisse's,
And that with thee no other odor is?
It Is doubt (my Posthumus) he that does smell
So sweetly always, smells not very well.
In Hermum, Epig. 15.
Hermus because thou give thy Cup to none:
It i^ not proudly, but humanely done.
De Paulo, Epig. 20.
Paulus buys verse, recites, and owns them all,
For what thou buy'st, thou may thine truly call.
In Posthumum, Epig. 21.
Posthumus kisses some must have,
And some salute his fist:
Thy hand good Posthumus I crave,
If I may choose my list.
De eodem, Epig. 22*
O Phoebus and ye sisters nine,
What shall I do with you?
Behold that merry Muse of mine
Her Poet will undo.
Posthumus late was wont to kiss
With half lips, which I loath,
But now my plague redoubled is,
He kisses me with both.
In Candidum, Epig. 24.
If thy cross fortune send thee some sad fate,
I must persist thy pale and squallid mate.
If from thy Country thou must banished be.
Through seas and rocks I still must follow thee.
If riches come, will they be free to many?
Will thou give part? it is much; will thou give any?
It Is crosses makes thee mine: when they are gone,
Candidus will be happy then alone.
Ad Gallam, Epig. 25.
Galla dares promise, but makes good no ty,
If thou still failest? I prithee once deny.
Ad Bithynicum, Epig. 26.
Cause Nevia coughs, and grieves, breaths thick and short,
And drops her spittle on her breast in sport:
Do think thy self her heir made presently?
The art out, thy Naevia flatters, will not dye.
In Cajum Epig. 30.
Twice twenty sesterties I once besought,
Which were they given could not much be thought,
Cause 'twas my happy and my ancient friend
I askd, whose cofferd treasures knew no end?
He answered: follow suits, thou may buy land:
I ask no Counsel Cajus, cross my hand.
In Caecilianum Epig. 37.
What Is here and there thou do purloyn,
A pregnat sow's papps, a hoggs chine,
A woodcock, commons for two men,
A whole Jack, half a Barble, then
A Lamprey's side, a Pullet's thigh,
A Stock-dove boyld in pottage by:
When these are hid in greasy clout,
And to thy Boy deliverd out
To be brought to thy home: we sit
An idle crowd without a bit.
Restore the feast if any shame there be,
To morrow I have not invited thee.
In Linum Epig. 38.
Linus do ask what my field yields to me?
Even this profit, that I nere see thee.
De eodem
Linus gives purple and rich scarlet gowns
To his notorious and adult'rous woman:
If thou would give what her degree becoms?
A loose coat would more fitly stock her common.
In Candidum Epig. 43.
These are thy (...) these are they
(Candidus) which thou soundst out night and day.
Thy gown is washd in the Calabrian spring,
Or of those flocks their fleece to Parma bring.
But mine as one that passed the bulls horns, stares,
Or which would scarce be owned by the first hairs,
Agenor's son's ^^^et country sends thee coats,
Thou can not sell my scarlet for three groats.
Thou hangst with Indian teeth thy Libian rings,
My beechen table's propd with earthen things
Thy gold-tipd plates rich barbles do bedight
My dish is red with self-look'd Aconite.
Thy boys may with the Ilian lad compare,
My hands my Ganymedes most duly are.
Of this thy wealth thou naught bestowest on us
Thy friends: yet cry'st out (...) Candidus.
In Sextum Epig. 44.
Whether I Have bought a freeze coat or a boy,
For three or four times double the pound Troy,
Forthwith the us're^ Sextus, which ye know
To be my ancient neighbour-friend in show,
In care, least I should borrow of him, fears
And whispers to himself, but by my ears,
I to Secundus owe seven thousand pounds,
To Phoebus four, eleven Philetus sounds;
Whiles I have not one farthing in my chest:
O my conceited friend's ingenious jest!
Sextus it is hard to give a flat denial,
When thou art askd: much more before the trial.
In Maximum (...)
Maximus would be free? it is false, thou wilt not,
But if thou would indeed, hence take the plot;
Thou shall: if thou can choose to sup abroad:
Or if small wine thy thirst can quench or load:
If thou can scorn poor Cinna's bravery,
And with our homely gown contented be,
If thy lust may be calmd for half a sowse,
And entering can stoop to thy low-roofd house:
If thou this power of self and mind can bring,
Thou shall live freer then the Parthian king.
Ad Gallum de ejus uxore Epig. 56.
In Lybia thy wife they stigmatize
With the foul crime of too much avarice.
But they are lies they tell: she is not wont
To take, but give for scouring of her --.
In Zoilum Epig. 58.
Zoilus well cloathd, derides my threadbare gown,
It Is true it is threadbare Zoilus, but my own.
In Taurum Epig. 64.
While now thou wilt Lawyer be, now Rhetorician,
And know not to make forth thy wishd condition,
Peleus, and Priam's, Nestor's age slips by,
And it was grown too late for thee to try;
Begin: three Rhetoricians dyed one year!
Ifthou have any skill or stomach here?
If Schools dislike? Courts swarm with the old trade,
And Marsya's self a Lawyer may be made.
Fie, out with this delay: how long shall we
Expect? whiles doubting, nothing thou will be.
In Saletanum Epig. 65.
Why do we see old Saletan so sad?
Is the cause light? thou say his wife is dead.
O the grand crime of fate! o the sad chance!
Is Secundilla dead? that did advance
A thousand sesterties in dowry to thee?
O would this hap had near came to undo thee!
De Fannio Epig. 80.
When Fannius should have escaped his Foe,
His own hands stopped his breath:
And was it not madness I would know,
By dying to 'scape death;
In Mamercum Epig. 88.
Thou naught recit'st, and yet would be
Thought Poet on that score:
Be what thou will Mamercus free,
So thou will speak no more.
Ad Quinctilianum Epig. 90.
O thou great master of the youth of Rome
Quinctilian, the glory of the gown!
Pardon though poor, nor struck in years, I have
To live, since no man strives to live too fast:
Let him delay that is Fathers rents would raise,
And fill his house with shapes of ancient days,
Me fire, and houses please smoakd with their steame,
A native sallet, and a living stream,
A bondman serves my turn, an unlearnd wife,
A night with sleep, a day without all strife.
Lib. 3.
Epig. 9.
CInna writes verses against me it is said,
He writes not, whose bad verse no man
does read.
In Candidum Epig. 26.
Candidus has alone fine farms, gold, coin,
Myrrh, and drinks Caecuba and Massick wine*
Has the sole wisdom, and the only wit,
Enjoyes the world alone and all in it.
But has he all alone? that I deny:
His wife with ours is in community,
Ad Gargilianum Epig. 30.
No money's paid, yet gratis eat'st my cheer,
But when at Rome (Gargilian) what do there?
Whence have thou house-rent? or whence a coat?
How can thou pay thy wench? whence have a groat?
Though with much reason thou art said to live,
Yet how thou do it none can reason give.
Ad Rufinum Epig. 31.
I grant thy large spread fields yield much to thee
And to thy City houses great farms be,
The debtors to thy chest are numerous,
And golden tables furnish out thy house:
Yet do not scorn, such as inferior be;
Since other men have greater wealth then thee.
In Matriniam Epig. 32.
Matrinia asks if I can love
A woman that is old:
And such a one I do approve,
But thou art dead and cold.
I can embrace old Hecub's itch,
Or Niobe all one;
But not till she is turned to a bitch,
The other to a stone.
Qualem puellam velit Epig. 33.
I Would rather have the gentile lass,
But if she be denyd?
The Libertine shall freely pass,
And with my fancy side.
The handmaid which excels them both,
Comes in the latest place:
If that she have in very troth,
But an ingenious face?
In Pollam Epig. 42.
Cause Polla thou do strive so fine
With paint to smooth thy wrinckled groin,
Thou daubst thy belly, not thy lips to me,
And peradventure in simplicity
The smaller fault lies open freely still,
That which is hid is thought the greater ill.
In Lentinum Epig. 43.
Lentinus Counterfeits his youth
With Periwigs I trow,
But art thou changd so soon in truth,
From a Swan to a Crow?
Thou can not all the world deceive,
Proserpine knows thee gray:
And she will make bold without your leave,
To take your Cap away.
Ad Ligurinum Epig. 45.
Whether sacred Phoebus fled (my Ligurine)
Thyestes feast? I Know not; we fly thine:
Though that thy Table's rich and nobly spread,
Yet thy sole talk knocks all th'enjoyment dead.
I care not for thy Barbles, Turbots, Plase,
Thy Oysters, nor thy Mushrooms, hold thy peace.
Ad Tongilianum Epig. 52.
Thy house two hundred pounds (Tongilian) cost,
Which by a frequent chance of fire was lost:
Thy Brief rose ten times more: let me require
Was It not thy plot to set thy house on fire?
Ad Chloen Epig. 53.
I could not freely want thine eyes,
Thy praised neck, and hands, and thighs,
Thy paps, thy giblets, and thy hips,
And least I should quite tire my lips
Thy several parts to mind to call
Chloe in short I Would want thee all.
In Gelliam Epig. 55.
Where ere thou comm'st we think Cosmus goes by,
As from crackd viols spices cast their smell:
I care not for thy foreign frippery,
For at this charge my dog shall smell as well.
In Cinnam Epig. 61.
What ere thou askdst (Cinna) it is naught said by thee:
If it be nothing? nothing I deny thee.
In Cotilum. Epig. 63.
Cotilus thou art called a pretty man,
I hear, but tell, what is that pretty than?
He Is pretty, that in order curles his hair,
Or smells all baulm or Cinnamon most rare.
That Nile's loose songs, or Gaditane does sing,
And into various modes his arms does swing.
He that in crowds of females wastes the day,
And in their ears has somewhat still to say,
That reads; then writes new letters here and there,
And nicely leanes not on his neighbor's chair:
That knows whom each man loves, that runs through feasts,
Blazons Nirpinus great Grandfathers crests.
What say? is this thy pretty man? this tool?
He then that is pretty's but a fribling fool.
Ad Lauferam. Epig. 72.
Thou dare be naught, yet wilt not bathe wtih me,
I know no guilt to ground thy jealousy.
Either thy ragged breasts hang ugly down,
Or being naked, fearst to show thy own,
Else thy torn groin, gapes with a monstrous slit,
Or foam prodigious thing hangs over it;
If none of these? thou art a beauteous tool,
If true? thou have a worse fault, thou art a fool.
In Lupercum Epig. 75.
Lupercus now thy -- has left to stand,
Yet thou striv'st madly him up to command.
But scallions and lose rochets naught prevail,
And heightning meats in operation fayl;
Thy wealth begins thy pure cheeks to defile,
So venery provoked lives but awhile.
Who can admire enough, the wonder's such,
That thy not standing stands thee in so much?
Ad Apicium Epig. 80.
Apicius nere complains, does no man wrong,
Yet the voice goes, he has a filthy tongue.
In Tongilionem Epig. 84.
What does thy Strumpet say Tongilion?
I do not mean thy wench, what then? thy tongue.
De Galla Epig. 90.
My Galla will, and will not buss,
My fancy never could;
By willing and not willing thus,
Suppose what Galla would.
In Vetustillam Epig. 93.
Thou Vetustill have lived three hundred years,
Have but four teeth in all, and but three hairs,
A grashoper's thin waist, an emet's thigh,
A brow more wrinkled then old wives gowns be,
Dugs like the webs of spiders, and if Nile
Should with thy chops compare her Crocodile,
His jaws would seem but straight: the frogs that be
Bred at Ravenna croke better then thee,
The Adrian gnats sing sweeter, birds of night
Blinded in morning beams equal thy sight,
Thou smellst all hee-goat, have a rump as fine
As the extreme end, of a lean duck's chine:
The bony tout out-vyes the old Cinnick quite,
When she the bath-man with extinguished light
Admits among the bustuary sluts,
When August brings a winter to thy guts,
Nor yet can thaw thee with a pestilence,
After two hundred deaths, dare thou commence
Bride still? and seek a husband in thy dust
To raise an itch? what though he harrow must
A stone? who will call thee wife, or ought that is so?
Whom thy last mate, called grandam long ago:
And if thou askst thy carkase scratchd to be,
Lame Coricles shall make thy bed for thee;
He that alone becomes thy bridal cheer,
The burner of dead bodies best can bear
A taper at thy nuptials, torches can
Best enter at the Salli-port of man.
In Naevolum Epig. 95.
Naevolus nere salutes first, but replies,
Which the taught crow, himself seldom denies.
Why do expect this from me Naevolus?
Since thou art not more great nor good then us?
Both Caesar's have rewarded my due praise,
And me to the priv'ledg of three sons did raise,
I Am read by every mouth, known through the town,
And before death receive my quick renown,
And this is worth your note I Am Tribune too,
And sit where that Oceanus caps you;
How many by great Caesar's grant are made
Free denizons because by me it was prayed?
The number far exceeds thy family,
But thou art buggred Naevolus, feedst high,
Now now thou over-comst me sheere, thus, thus,
Thou art my betters, Salve Naevolus.
Ad Cerdonem Epig. 99.
Why art offended (Cerdo) with my book?
Thy life, and not thy person's by me struck,
Then suffer harmless-wit, why is it not due
For me to sport? when stabbing's free to you?
Lib. 4.
De Natali Domitiani Epig. 1.
THis is great Caesar's day, and far above
That wherein I Would produced mighty Jove.
May thou come long! and and Nestor's years fulfill,
And with this, or a better face, shine still.
May he adore his Sea-god in rich gold,
And let his hands great Jove's tree still infold!
May he enjoy the Serpent-ages long,
Such as Terentus consecrates in song!
It Is much we ask, ye Gods, but to us due,
And since it is Caesar, what is much to you?
Ad Faustinum Epig. 10.
Whiles that thy book is new and rough, and fears
To have its undryed page took by the ears,
Go boy, present this small gift to my friend*
He that deserves my toys at the first end:
Run, but yet let the sponge accompany
The book, for it becomes each gift from me.
Faustinus it is not many blots we say,
Can mend my merry flashes, one blot may.
In Thaidem Epig. 12.
Thais denies no man: If no shame thence spring?
Yet let this shame thee, to deny no-thing.
De Nuptiis Pudentis and Claudiae Epig. 13.
Strange, Claudia's married to a friend of mine,
O Hymen be thou ready with thy Pine!
Thus the rare Cinnamons with the Spicknard join:
And the Thesean sweets, with massick wine.
Nor bettor do the Elm and Vine embra ce,
Nor the Lote tree affect the fenny place.
Nor yet the Myrtles more
Love and desire the shore.
Let a perpetual peace surround thy bed,
And may their loves with equal fire be fed!
May she so love him old, that to him she,
Though old indeed, may not seem so to be.
De Selio Epig. 21.
Selius affirnes there are no gods,
And that the heavens are void:
And well he proves what he avers,
Whiles he lives undestroyd.
De Cleopatra Epig. 22.
The virgin danger passed, the Bride enraged,
Sweet Cleopatra to be disengaged
And, scarce mine arms dives in the baths most clear:
But the kind waters soon betrayed her there,
For though thus hid her glories did appear,
Like to soft Lillies in a crystal grave,
Or Roses closed in Gemms no cover have;
With that I dived, and cropd the struggling kisses,
Ye glittering streams forbad the other blisses.
Ad Fabianum Epig. 24.
Lycoris kills up all his wives apace,
I would he had my wife in the same chase!
Ad Hyppodamum, Epig. 31.
Cause thou desire to be read and named
So in my books, as by it to be famed,
Let me not live the thing much pleases me,
And in my lines I would insert thee free,
But that thy name is so averse to all
The Muses, which thy Mother did thee call,
Which nor Melpom'ne, nor Poly'mnia may
Nor sweet Calliope with Phoebus say.
Adopt thee then some grateful name to us,
How wretchedly this sounds? Hyppodamus?
De Ape electro inclusa, Epig. 32.
Shining and yet shut up in the amber drop,
The Be as closed in its own wax did lie,
Of all her labors reaping this the crop:
It Is credible she fancied thus to dye.
Ad Gallum, Epig. 38.
Galla deny: love's glutted if the joy
At first do not seem coy:
But Galla yet take care least you deny
Too long, and fancy die.
Ad Colinum, Epig. 54.
O thou to whom it is free to wear Jov's Tree,
And with his first leaves honored to be,
If thou art wise, enjoy thy days repast,
Colinus think the present still the last:
The fatal Sisters grant no wished delay
To any, but observe the destined day.
Were* thou more rich than Crispus, constanter
Then ^hrasea's self, more free than Melior,
Lachesis adds no tow, the spindles be
Unwound, the thred's cut by one of three.
In Gargillianum, Epig. 56.
Cause thou bestow'st vast gifts on aged men,
And widows struck in years, Gargilian,
Would have me call thee bountiful for this?
Nothing's more base than thou, naught more vile is.
Which may thy gifts thine ambuscadoes call,
So the false hooks indulge the fishes fall,
So the sly bayt traps silly beasts and all,
Know thou not how to give? how to be free?
I Will teach thee then Gargilian: give to me.
De vipera electro inclusa, Epig. 59.
Whiles up the Viper climbes the weeping boughs,
The amber drop the struggling beast ore flows,
Wondering to see himself in rich dew found,
The freezing gemm enclosed him quickly round.
Boast not then Cleopatra of thy Tomb
Since a Snake lies in a more noble room.
De Curiatio, Epig. 60.
Ardea in the solstice we desire,
And baths the Cleonaean Star does heat,
Bur Curiatius death condemns their sweat,
Since in those praised streams he did expire,
'No place excludes the fates: when death shall come,
'Sardinia is in the midst of Rome.
Ad Quinctum, Epig. 72.
Quinctus requires I should give him my books:
I have them not, at Tryphon's he may speed:
Shall I buy toys (quoth he) with sober looks?
And verse? l'me not so mad: nor I indeed.
In Zoilum invidum, Epig. 77.
I never askd the gods for gold,
Content with mean things, and my own,
Now povety let me be bold
I ask thee pardon to be gone.
But what is the cause of this vote for pelf;
I would see Zoilus hanging of himself.
In Varum, Epig. 78.
Varus did lately me to supper call,
The furniture was rich, the Feast but small:
The Table's spread with plate, not meat: they put
Much to accost the eyes, naught for the gut.
We came to feast our bellies, not our eyes:
Pray take away your gold, give us some Pyes.
In Afrum, Epig. 79.
Now that the sixtieth harvest thou have known,
And that thy face with snow is overgrown
Thou runn'st through all the City, every seat,
And bringst thine Ave in a toylsome sweat,
Nor can a man salute a Tribune free,
There Is never a Consul can be rid of thee.
To Caesar's House thou walkst ten times a day*
And talkst of nothing less than Courtiers gay,
(Afer) it is bad in Boys that go to School,
Nought's more absurd than an old meddling fool.
De Bassa, Epig. 88.
Thy Bassa's used to place a child up by her,
And calls it her delight her pretty pinck:
Yet loves no child, which thou may more admire,
What then is the cause? why, Bassa's wont to stinck.
Lib. 5.
Ad Lectores. Epig. 2.
Ye Matrons, Boys, and Vigins neat,
To you my Page I dedicate,
Thou whom more shameless sports delight,
And naked pleasant wit, invite.
Thy fancy to my four first books:
This fifth shall sport with Caesar's looks.
Which great Domitian may be bold,
Before his Goddess to unfold.
Ad Vulcanum. Epig. 7.
As ruins renovate the Assyrian nests,
When twice five ages the sols bird has spent:
So Rome her old decrepitness digests,
Dressed in the visage of her president.
Now (Vulcan,) I beseech forget and spare
Our grief, we are Mars and Venus progeny:
So thy loose wife shall pass the Lemnian snare,
And in chaste love affect thee patiently.
Ad Regulum de fama Poetarum. Epig. 10.
What Is this? that fame to living men's denyd.
And Readers their own Lines seldom affect?
(Regulus) these are tricks of envious pride,
The present still for old things to reject.
So most ingrate we seek old Pompey's shades,
And praise the tottered fane of Catulus.
While Maro lived, Ennius whole Rome invades
And Homer's age laughd him rediculous.
Crowned Menander seldom heard a shout,
Corinna her own Naso knew alone,
O my small books nere hasten to go out,
If praise come after death I Will not go on.
In Calistratum. Epig. 13.
Calistratus I do confess
I have been poor, and am no less,
But not obscurely base as yet,
Nor a Knight of the lowest seat.
But through the world I Am freely read,
And as I pass here is he it is said,
What dust and ashes give to some,
My life affords without a Tomb.
But thy house leans on stately props,
Thy chests enclose great silver crops,
Rich Aegypts glebes thy household keep,
And Parma sheare thy numerous sheep.
Thus what we are we both may see,
But what I am thou can not be,
What thou art each plebeian may
With thy estate be any day.
In Gelliam, Epig. 17.
Whiles Gellia cried up her Forefathers House,
And our low Knighthood valued not a lowse,
While's she denied all under the Broad Key,
A Basket-bearer swept her quite away.
De Crispo, Epig. 33.
Crispus by will no doit of all his pelf
Gave to his wife: whom then? even to himself.
In Caussidicum, Epig. 34.
A Lawyer's said unknown my Book to flout,
But woe be to thee, if I find thee out.
De Erotio, Epig. 35.
Ye Parents Fronto and Flaccilla here
To you I do commend my Girl, my Dear,
Least pale Erotion tremble at the shades,
And the fowl Dog of Hell's prodigious heads,
Her age fullfilling just six winters was,
Had she but known so many days to pass.
Amongst you old Patrons may she sport and play,
And with her lisping tongue my name often say.
May the smooth turf her soft bones hide, and be
O Earth as light to her as she to thee!
Quod datur non perire, Epig. 43.
A Thief may break thy Chests, and steal thy gold,
A fire consume thy Fathers House of old,
Debtors detain thy use and principal,
Thy sown seed bring thee no increase at all:
A crafty Harlot may thy Steward plunder,
Thy Ships and goods the rageing Seas sinck under:
'What's on thy friends bestowed is above fate:
'Thy gifts thou still shall have inviolate.
De Thaide and Lecania. Epig. 44.
Thais her teeth are black and naught,
Lecania's white are grown,
But what is the reason; these are bought,
The other wears her own.
De Philone, Epig. 48.
Philo nere sups at home he swears: it is true,
For not invited crib must want his due.
Ad Labienum, Epig. 50.
When (Labiene) by chance I thee did see
Sitting alone, I thought thou had bin three.
The number of thy baldness me deceivd,
For here and there thy hairs I then retreivd*
Which a boy's head will hardly well become,
Upon thy crown lies a large vacant room,
A floor wherein no hair's observed to be.
Yet this December's error yields to thee,
That when the Emp'ror keeps his solemn day,
Thou carry'st three shares of his alms away.
Geryon I suppose was such a one,
But when thou see Phillippus Porch, begone*
If Hercules shall spy thee the art undone.
In Posthumum, Epig. 53.
What thou conferr'st on me I do
Remember, and shall think on too.
Why therefore do I hold my tongue?
Cause (Posthumus) thou nere have done.
As often as I go to treat
Of these thy gifts to them I meet,
It Is presently replied, forbear,
He whisperd it into my ear.
Two men some things cannot do well,
One person may suffice to tell,
And do this work: if it may please
That I shall speak, then hold thy peace.
For prithee Posthumus believe
Though that thy gifts are great to give,
'All thanks must perish, and are lost
'When Authors their own actions boast.
Ad Bassum, Epig. 54.
My Bassus why? why do thou write
Thyestes Feast? Medea's flight?
What have to do with Niobe?
Or Troys remains Andromache?
Deucalion's feat's a theme more fit,
Or Phaethon's to share thy wit.
Ad Lupum, Epig. 57.
Lupus is careful, and of me does crave
To know what Master for his Son to have?
I give thee warning all Grammarians shun,
And Rhetoricians too: then out upon
Tullie's and Virgill's barren books and name,
Leave old Tutilius to enjoy his fame.
If he makes verse? expel the Poet straight,
But if he fancy Arts of richer weight,
Let him turn Fiddler, or a Minstrel be,
But if he is dull of ingenuitie?
Make him a noble public City Crier,
Or famous Architect that works by squire.
Ad Posthumum Epig. 59.
To morrow Posthumus, to morrow still
Thou say thou wilt live: but Posthumus when will
That morrow come? how far? where to be found?
Is It in the Parthian, or Armenian ground?
Or can that morrow Priam's age out-boast?
Or Nestor's? tell what will that morrow cost?
Thou Wilt live to morrow? this days life's too late,
He Is wise that lived before the present date.
Ad Detractorem, Epig. 91.
Though thou do bark against me still
With bitter yelpings of ill will,
That fame shall sure thee be denied
In my books to be notified,
Though it is desired of old by thee
Through the world to be read with me.
For why should men know thou have bin?
Obscurely perish in thy sin.
Yet peradventure there may be
In this great City two or three
A dogs skin that would dain to gnaw,
That scab my nails shall never claw.
In Marianum, Epig. 92.
Who is that Crispulus? (my Marian)
That sticks so to thy wife? what is he man?
I know not what that prattles in her ear?
And leans with his right elboe on her chair?
Through all whose fingers her light ring doe^ run?
Whose smoother legs no rough hair grows upon?
Reply'st thou not? he is one thou do confess
That does solicit thy wife's business.
A sharp observant lad, that wears the Proctor
Locked in his looks, more strict than an old Doctor?
How worthy thou deserve stage buffets thus?
Or to succeed old blind Panniclus?
Crispulus do thy wife's work? he does none;
It Is not thy wife's he does, but it is thy own.
Ad suos ministros, Epig. 65.
Callistus fill four cups of muscadine,
And in cool snow my boy dissolve the wine.
Let my moist hair grow rich with perfume sweats,
And tire my brows with rose-bud coronets.
The royal tombs commands us live: since they
Teach that the very gods themselves decay.
Id Pontilianum, Epig. 67.
Pontilian nere salutes till after me:
So his farwell will everlasting be.
De origin Bacchi, 73.
He that affirms Jove, Bacchus mother, may
Prove Semele his Father the same way.
Ad Theodorem, Epig. 74.
Why I nere give my books to thee
Desiring, and beseeching me,
Do wonder Theodore? the cause is clear,
That thine to me may not appear.
De Pompeio, Epig. 75.
Great Pompey's Sons Europe and Asia both
Interr, Lybia himself, if any does?
What wonder through the world to see him slain;
So great a fall one field could not contain.
Ad Quinctum, Epig. 76.
(Quinctus) why Laelia married is to thee?
It Is only once legitimate to be.
Ad Cinnam, Epig. 77.
Often drinking poison prepared Mithridate,
No venom could his brains intoxicate:
So Cinna by bad meals so fixd does grow,
Hunger cannot prevail to starve him now.
Ad Aemilianum, Epig. 76.
If thou art poor Aemilian?
Thou shall be ever so.
For no man now their presents can
But on the rich bestow.
Lib. 6.
Adulatorium Caesarem, Epig. 4.
MOst Mighty Caesar, King of kings, to whom
Rome owes so many tryumphs yet to come,
So many Temples growing and restored,
So many Spectacles, gods, Cities: Lord
She yet in debt to thee does more remain,
That she by thee is once made chaste again.
De Thelesina, Epig. 7.
(Faustinus) from the hour the Julian Law
Revived, and chastity began to draw
By public Edict into every House,
Scarce thirty days have passed,
Since Thelesine was askd,
And ten times over has bin made a Spouse.
She that does wed so often, weds not at all:
But rather her we may more truly call
A mere legitimate Adulteress:
A simple arrant wench offends me less
De Fabulla, Epig. 12.
Fabulla swears
Those new bought hairs
Paulus now by her worn,
Are all her own,
Most truly shown;
Prithee is she for sworn?
If thou deny,
So cannot I.
Ad Priscum de Salonino, Epig. 18.
Salonine lies interred in Spanish ground,
A sweeter shade nere passed the Stygian sound.
But it is a sin
To mourn for him.
For since (my Priscus) thou surviving art,
He lives yet in his more beloved part.
Ad Posthumum Causidicum, Epig. 19.
No action of battery,
Of murder, or of poison, I
Pursue: but of three Kids bereft
I do accuse my Neighbor's theft.
The Judge requires how I it know:
Thou tell the Apulian overthrow,
The Pontick war, and perjury
Of H^^nibal's rash cruelty,
Scylla and Marius, Mutius wrath,
With open mouth, and spead arms both.
Now Posthumus I prithee tell
At last where I my Kids may smell.
In Proculinam, Epig. 22.
Because thou joynst (my Proculine)
In Marriage with thy Concubine,
One that most palpably before
Did only love thee as a Whore,
Least that the Law thee should distress,
Thou do not Marry but confess.
In Lesbiam, Epig. 23.
Lesbia thou seemst my Thomas to command,
As 'twere a finger at thy will to stand:
Which though thou temp'st with flattering hands and voice,
Thy cross grained face still countermands thy choice.
Epitaphium Glauciae, Epig. 28.
The free born Boy of Melior
Which being dead, whole Rome mournd for,
His dearest Patron's short delight,
(Glaucias) interred in endless night
Under this marble Tomb does ly,
The great Flaminian road hard by,
Of modest life, and purely chaste
Accutely witty, and sweet faced,
Just twice six Harvests he passd by
Scarcely disroab'd of infancy,
O Traveller that these do moan
May thou nere weep such of thine own!
De eodem, Epig. 29.
No Slave of a Plebeian House or kind,
But a Lad worthy his Lord's love to find,
Glaucia my Meliar's manumitted Boy
Scarce capable his gifts yet to enjoy,
This boon with life and form he did partake,
None looked more lovely, none more sweetly spoke.
'Things too much doted on live short: and such
Thouwouldst love long, let them not please too much.
In Paetum, Epig. 30.
If thou had sent me presently
Six sesterties, when first to me
Thou saydst (my Paetus) take, I give,
I Would owed there ten score as I live.
But now to do it with this delay
When seven or nine months slipd away,
Would have me tell thee what I think?
Paetus the have clearly lost thy chinck.
De Morte, Othonis, Epig. 32.
Whiles yet Bellona doubts the warlike doom,
And softer Otho might have overcome,
He stops the costly charge of blood in War,
And by his sword falls his own murderer.
He lived a Cato, more than Caesar too,
Yet dying, how like Otho he did do?
Ad Diadumenum, Epig. 34.
Seal me squeezed kisses (Diadumene)
How many? count the Billows of the Sea,
Or spread Cockles on the Aegaean shore,
Or wandering Bees in the Cecropian store,
Or the hands and voices in the Theater
When Rome salutes her sudden Emperor:
I slight how many courted Lesbia gave
Catullus: he that numbers, few would have.
In Carinum, Epig. 37.
Medall so fine,
Short breech'd (Carine)
No vain superfluous relics have,
Yet itchest from the head to the wast!
O wretch what pain
Do thou sustain?
I'have no place for it,
Yet love the sport?
In Lygdum and Lectoriam, Epig. 45.
You Have played, enough, lascivious cronies wed,
No lust is lawful but in marriage bed,
Is this love chaste? Lygdus and Lectore join?
She Will prove a worse wife, than a Concubine.
In Pomponiam, Epig. 48.
Cause the long robe applaudes thine eloquence,
It Is not thy self, thy supper strikes the sense.
De Thelesino, Epig. 50
Whiles Thelesine embraced his chaste friends still.
His gown was short and threadbare, cold and mean,
But since he served foul Gamesters and obscaene
Now he buys Fields, Plate, Tables at his will.
Would thou grow rich Bithinicus? live vain:
Pure kisses will yield none, or little gain.
Ad Luperlum, Epig. 51.
Cause thou do feast so often without me
Luperlus, I have found a plague for thee.
Though thou do importune, and send, and call,
I Will show a seeming anger over all.
And when thou say, what will thou? do in sum
What will I do? I am resolved to come.
Epitaphium Pant^gathi, Epig. 52.
Here lies interrd cropped in his youthful years
Pantagathus, his Masters joy, and tears.
Learnd with a flying touch to trim loose hairs.
And shave the brisly cheek that roughly stares,
O earth lie pleasing! and light on him stand,
Thou can not be more light then was his hand.
In Phaebum, Epig. 57.
Phoebus belyes with Oil his fained hairs,
And ore his scalp a painted border wears:
Thou needst no Barber to corect thy pate,
Phoebus a spung would better do the feat.
In Invidum, Epig. 61.
Rome praises, loves, and sings my merry leaves,
Me every bosom, every hand receives.
One blushes, one grows pale, and one disdains,
One stands amazd, one hates me for my pains:
This was my great desire, my wishd increas,
Now now my verses, now my verses please.
Ad Marianum, Epig. 63.
Thou know thy self entrapd, and art aware
How coveteous he was that laid the snare.
And (Marian) needs must know his second care;
Yet notwithstanding do make him thine heir,
And headily would have him to succeed
Thee in thy goods and lands by thy last Deed.
It Is true he sent rich gifts, but laid in wire,
And can the Fish their murderer desire?
Or will he (Marian) truly weep for thee?
To have true tears, reverse thy Legac^e.
De praecone Pu^llam vendente, Epig. 66.
Gaellian the Crier brought a Lass
To market, of small fame to pass,
Such as in Baudy-houses sat:
Whiles she stood long at a small rate,
He to approve her sound and good
Drew her near to him as she stood,
And kissd her three or four times ore
But would thou know what fruit these bore?
Why he that bad six hundred pieces for her
Upon this score did utterly abhor her.
Ad Pannicum de Gellia uxore, Epig. 67.
Pannicus do desire to know
Why thy Gellia keeps I trow
Eunuchs only with her still?
It Is thy cunning Gellia's will,
To have the secret active sport,
Yet feel no throws nor anguish for it.
Ad Martianum, Epig. 70.
Cotta has livd full sixty years and more,
And yet (my Martian) never felt the sore
Affliction of a Fever one short 'bout;
Thence though unchastly holds his finger out
Against Alcontis, Dacus, Symmachus,
But if our years were well computed thus,
And what sharp Fevers have took from us, what
Languishing grief, and sickness, we are not
Less then divided from the happier day,
We are but Boys in years and yet seem gray.
He that conceives (my Martian) Priam's age,
Or Nestor's to be long on the worlds stage,
Is much deceived, much out: for I thee tell
To be, is not called life, but to be well*
De Cilice Fure, Epig. 72.
Cilix a knave of noted theft,
Resolved to rob a Garden by:
But there was naught (Fabullus) left
But a huge Marble-dyetie.
Yet least his empty hand should miss its prey,
Cilix presumed to steal the god away.
Ad Lupum, Epig. 79.
How? Sad and rich? Beware least fortune catch
Thee Lupus, then she will call thee thanklesse wretch.
In mortem Rufi Camonii Epig. 85.
In the absence (Rufus) my sixth Book is out,
But thou her Reader she does sadly doubt,
Base Capadocia by a fate unjust
Gives to thy friends thy bones, to thee thy dust.
Widdowd Bononia bathe friend in tears,
While that Aemilia thy griefs echo bears,
How Pious? but how short lived did he fall?
Five bare Olimpiads he had seen in all.
Rufus thou that wast wont to bear in mind
Out sports, and them in memory to find
Accept this sad verse which I send,
As the sweet incense of thy absent friend.
De Thaide, Epig. 93.
Thais smells as ill as does a Fullers vate
That long has steepd, broke in the street of late:
The tired Goats not more rank, the breath and breech
Of Lions, nor stripd Dogs-skins in a ditch;
Nor adle egg that putrefying lies,
Nor pot of rotten fish that stinking dies.
That she may change this plague for some sweet scent,
Naked and often she does the Baths frequent,
And shines with Oil, lies in sharp fennel hid,
Or in bean meal twice or thrice covered.
When safe by thousand slights her self she thinks,
When all is done, Thais still all Thais stinks.
Lib. 7.
De reditu Domitiani, Epig. 7.
NOw sport, if ere, ye Muses with my vein,
From the north world the god returns again.
December first brings forth the peoples vote,
It Is just we cry, He comes, with open throat.
Blessed in thy chance, from Janus share the day
Since what he would give, thou give to us, our joy.
Let the crowned Soldier play his solemn sport,
While he attends the bays invested Court
It Is right (great Caesar) our light jokes to hear,
Since that thy Triumph them does love and bear.
De Casselio, Epig. 8.
When sixty years Casselius has lived meet,
He Is witty: when will he be called discreet?
Ad Faustinum, Epig. 11.
(Faustinus) to let Caesar read my book
With that same face he on my spots does look.
As my Page hurts no one it justly hates,
I like no glory gained at blushrng rates.
What does it profit me? if others whet
Their spleen in my style? and Jambiques sweat?
And in my name their viprous poison vent?
Which cannot brook the day? or orient?
We blameless sport. Thou know it well, I swear
By Helicon, and every Genius there;
And by thy ears as dieties to me,
Reader, I Am from inhumane envy free.
Ad Regulum, Epig. 15.
I have no money (Regulus) at home,
Only thy gifts to sell, will thou buy some?
In Gallum, Epig. 17.
When the have a face of which no woman may
And body without blur, have ought to say,
Why suitors thee so seldom do repeat
And seek, do wonder Galla? the fault's great,
As often as thou and I in the work joynd,
Thy lips were silent, but thou prat'st behind.
Heavens grant that thou would speak, but bridle that,
I Am angry with thy tatling Twit com Twat.
I Would rather hear thee fart: for Symmachus
Says that is a means of laughter unto us.
But who can smile to hear the foolish smack
Of thy loose Toul? and when it gives a crack
Whose mind and mettle will not fall? at least
Speak something that may usher in a jest
Of thy C -- 's noise: but if thou art so mute,
Articulately learn thence to dispute.
De natali Lucani, ad Pollam, Epig. 20
This is the day known by its mighty birth
Which Lucane gave to thee, and to the Earth
O cruel Prince! more cursd in no decree,
This at least was not lawful unto thee.
In Malum Poetam. Epig. 24.
When thou do write sweet Epigrams always,
Which look more smooth than painted features may,
Without one grane of salt, or dropp of gall,
Omad man would thou have them read at al?
Meat does not please without it is vinegar,
Nor faces which in mirth nere wrinckled are,
Give luscious Figs and Pomes to Boys: but mine
That please, are Figs that relish Salt and Wine.
In Caeliam, Epig. 29.
To Parthians, Germans, Dacians thou art spread,
In Cappidocians and Cilicians bed.
From Memphis comes a whipster unto thee,
And a Black Indian from the red Sea;
Nor do thou fly the circumcised Jew,
Nor can the Muscovite once pass by you;
Why being a Roman less do do thus? tell,
Is It cause no Roman-knack can please so well?
De Caelio, Epig. 38.
When various walks, and days in wandering on,
And pride, and great men's salutation,
Caelius could not endure, and bear about,
He feigned himself tormented with the gout,
Which while he strove to personate too much,
In a laborious gate upon his crutch,
Binding, and 'noynting his sound feet: O see
How much the care and curiosity,
And Art of feigned grief, did work and please!
Caelius has left dissembling his disease.
Ad Licinium Suram, Epig. 46.
Licinius! thou crown of learned men!
Whose tongue brought back our Grandfathers again,
Thou art restored, but with how great a fate?
Returned almost from the eternal gate,
Our wishes now had loss'd their fear: secure
Our tears did weep thy loss as passed all cure.
But yet the King of death could not sustain
Our grief, and sent the fates their threads again.
Thou know what moan thy false death moved for thee,
Enjoy thy self in thy posterity.
Live as thine own surviver, hug thy joy:
A life returned will never loose a day.
De Annio, Epig. 47.
Annius two hundred Tables has I think,
And for those Tables Boys to fill him drink.
The platters fly,
And charges run about most fluently.
Rich men take to your selves these Feasts and stir,
I care not for your walking supper Sir.
In umbrem, Epig. 52.
The five days presents which were given to thee
In the Saturnal Feasts thou sendst to me.
Twelve threefoot Tables, and seven tooth pickers,
A Sponge, a Napkin, and a Cup with ears,
Two Pecks of Beans, of Olives one small twig,
A bottle of course Spanish Wine to swig.
Small Syrian Figs with musty damsins came,
And a huge cask of Lybian figs o'th same:
Thy gifts were worth scarce five shillings in all,
Which to me saild on thy eight Syrians tall.
With how much ease might thou have sent in short
Me five pounds by thy Boy and nere sweat fort.
De Caecilianum, Epig. 58.
Without a Bore Caecilan near does feast,
(Titus) Caecilan has a pretty guest.
In Cinnamum, Epig. 63.
Thou wast a Barber through the City known,
Though by thy Mistress raised to the gown,
Of Knighthood (Cinnamus) when thou shall fly
The judgment of the Court to Sicily,
What Art shall then sustain thy useless age?
How will thy Fugitive rest foot the stage?
Thou can not be Grammarian, Rhetorician,
Fencer, nor Cinick on any condition*
Nor yet a Stoic, nor can sell thy tongue
Or thy applause in the Sicilian throng:
What then (my Cinnamus) does yet remain?
Why thou must even turn shaver once again.
In Gargilanum, Epig. 64.
Full twenty years (Gargilian) thou have lost
In one suit in three Courts to thy great cost.
O mad and wretched! that in strifes do run
Through twenty years, and may be overcome?
De Labieno, Epig. 65.
Fabius left Labian heir to all his store:
Yet Labian says that he deserved more.
Ad Maximum, Epig. 72.
Thou have a house on the Aventine hill,
Another where Dianan's worshipped still,
In the Patrician street more of them stand,
Hence thou beholdst within thine eyes command
The widdowed Cybells, thence Vesta with all,
There either Jove eathed in the Capital.
Where shall I meet thee? tell, where wilt appear.
'He dwells just no where, that dwells every where.
In anum deformem, Epig. 74.
Would thou be wimbled gratis when thou art
A wrinkled wretch deformd in every part?
O it is a thing more than ridiculous:
To take a man's full sum, and not pay Use?
Ad Philomusum, 75. Epig.
Cause great ones carry thee themselves to please
To Feasts, to Galleries, and Spectacles,
And Coach thee up and down, and bathe with thee
As often as thou jump'st in their company:
Nere hug thy self for this, or look proud for it,
Thou Art not beloved, but only make them sport.
In Tuccam, Epig. 76.
Tucca most earnestly does look,
I should present him with my Book:
But that I will not: For I smell
My Book he will not read, but sell.
Ad Lausam, Epig. 80.
(Lausus) just thirty Epigrams in all,
My volume thou most truly bad may call:
But if beside so many good there be,
The Book is good enough then credit me.
De Eutrapelo, Epig. 82.
While that the Barber went to trim
And shave Lupercus chops and chin,
He was so tedious on the face
Another beard grew in the place.
Ad Sabellum, Epig. 84.
Cause thou do pen Tetrasticks clean and sweet
And some few pretty disticks with smooth feet,
I praise but not admire:
It Is easy to acquire
Short modest Epigrams that pretty look,
But it is hard and tough* to write a book.
In Sextum, Epig. 85.
Sextus was wont me to his feasts to call,
When I was scarce made known to him at a^^
What have I done so late? so sudenly?
That I his old companion am passed by?
After so many pledges, many years?
But I perceive the cause: no gift appea^
Of beaten silver from me, no light coat
No cloak, fee, or negotiating groat.
Sextus invites his gifts, but not his friends*
Then cries his servants bones shall make amends.
Epitaphium Vrbici Pueri, Epig. 95.
My Parents grief I here lie in this Tomb,
Who had my birth and name from mighty Rome:
Six months I wanted of three years to me,
When my life's thread was cut by destiny.
What favor shall age, tongue, or beauty have?
Thou that readst this shed some tears on my grave.
So he that thou would have thy self survive,
Shall longer then decrepit Nestor live.
De Milone, Epig. 101.
Milo is not at home, but traveled out,
His fields ly barren, but his wife does sprout:
But why's his land so bare? his wife so full?
His land has none, his wife has many a pull.
Lib. 8.
Ad Librum suum, Epig. 1.
THou that art entering the tryumphant Court,
Learn with a blushing grace more chaste to sport.
Stripped Venus hence: this is not thy book,
Great Caesar's goddess come, and on me look.
Ad Caesarem Domitianum, Epig. 4.
How great a concourse of the world does bring
Their I o? and make prayers for their king?
But this is not alone a humane joy,
Caesar, the gods themselves keep Holy Day.
In Cinnam, Epig. 7.
Cinna is this to plead? and wisely say
Only nine words in ten hours of the day?
But with a mighty voice thou cravest for thee
The hourglass twice two times reversed to be,
Cinna, how great's thy taciturnitie!
Ad Quinctum, Epig. 9.
Nine ounces blear-eyed Hylas would have paid
Now dusk he tenders half thy debt delayed:
Take his next offer: gain's occasion's short,
If he prove blind, thou will have nothing for it.
De Basso, Epig. 10.
Bassus bought cloaks of the best Tyrian die,
Forbear ten thousand pieces, gaind thereby:
But was his bargain so good cheap you will say?
He took it upon trust, or stole't away.
Ad Priscum, Epig. 12.
Do ask why I Would not marry a rich wife?
I Will not be subject in that double strife.
Let matrons to their heads inferior be
Else man and wife have no equality.
De Cinna, Epig. 19.
Cinna would seem to need,
And so he does indeed.
Ad Luciferum, Epig. 21.
Phosphor produce the day: why do delay
Our joys? lo, Caesar comes, produce the day.
Rome begs it. What slow Chariot carries thee?
What sign? that thy sweet rays retarded be?
Take Cyllaron from the Ledaean Star,
Castor himself will lend his Horse for war,
Why do rein in the forward eager Sun?
Apollo's Courser with their harness on,
Aurora waits: but yet the spangled night
Will not give room to the more glorious light,
Diana longs to see the Ausonian king,
Come Caesar, though in night, thy presence bring:
For though the Stars their revolution stay,
Thee coming we shall never want a day.
Ad Caesarem Domitianum, Epig. 24.
If I in fear chance to petition thee,
If I Am not impudent, vouchsafe it me.
If thou wilt not grant, daign to be askd in love,
Incense and Prayers never offended Jove.
'He that an Image frames in gold or stone,
'Makes not a god, he that kneels, makes it one.
In Oppianum, Epig. 25.
Oppiane thou only once did come to see
Me very sick: I Will oftener visit thee.
Ad Gaurum, Epig. 27.
Gaurus he that does gifts bestow
On thee both rich and old,
If thou art wise thou needs must know
He Would have thee dead and cold.
In pessimos Conjuges, Epig. 35.
When that ye are so like in life
An extreme wicked man and wife,
I wonder how you live in strife.
Ad Priapum, Epig. 40.
No Guardian of a Garden, or vine bud,
But (my Priapus) of a mighty wood,
From whence thou art born, and again born may be,
I charge thee keep all thievish hands from me.
Preserve thy Masters grove for firing too,
For if that fail, we shall find wood in you.
Ad Faustinum, Epig. 41.
Sad Athenagoras us no presents sent
Which in the winter he did still present:
I Will see (Faustinus) if he be so sad,
I Am sure he me has truly sorry made.
Ad Cestum Puerum, Epig. 46.
How sweet's thy virtue, and thy shape to us?
Cestus my Boy, chaste as Hippolitus!
Diana's self may teach, and swim with thee,
More wished then Phrygus by old Cybele.
Thou may succeed Ganymede in his place,
And unsuspected Smug the Thund'rer's face.
O happy she shall climb thy tender bed!
And make thee man first for a maiden head!
In vary se tondentem, Epig. 47.
Part of thy hair is shorn, part shaved to thee,
Part pulled: who will think it but one head to be.
De Aspro, Epig. 49.
Blind Asper loves a lass that beauteous is,
Yet as it seems he loves more than he sees.
Ad Caesarem Domitianum, Epig. 54.
Though thou give great boons often, and wilt give more
O King of Kings, and thy self's Conqueror!
The people love thee not cause they partake
Thy Blessings: But thy Blessings for thy sake.
Ad Flaccum, Epig. 56.
When to our age times may subscribe of yore,
And Rome's increased great with her Emperor,
Do wonder Maro's fancy wanting is?
And none sound wars like that brave Trump of his?
Let patrons (Flaccus) Poets soon will be,
Thy Country shall yield Virgil unto thee.
When near Cremona Tytirus did weep
His wretched acres, and loss'd flock of sheep
The royal Tuscan smiled: Fell poverty
Repulsed, and by command away to fly:
Bad him be rich, and best of Poets be,
And cried my sweet Alexis love with me.
He that most amiable did waiting stand
Filling black falerne wine with snowy hand,
And tasted cups gave to his rosy lip,
Which might solicit Jove himself to sip.
Course Galatea from the Poet drops,
And Sunburned Thestilis in harvest crops.
Forthwith he fancied Rome, arms, and the Prince:
Which the poor Gnat mournd but a moment since.
What should I quote the Vari? Marsi? and
The glorious names of Poets rich in land?
Which to recfunt would be a tedious pain?
Shall I then be thy Virgil, if again
Thou will Maecenas bounty show to me?
I Will not thy Virgil, but thy Marsus be.
De Picente, Epig. 57.
Old Picens had three teeth which from him come
As he sat coughing hard over his Tomb:
Which fragments he took up into his breast
Dropd from his mouth: Then laid his bones to rest.
Least that his Heir should not them safely s^e
Interred: He did himself the courtesy.
Ad Entellum, Epig. 68.
Oh that the famed Alcinous garden sees
May well prefer (Entellus) thine to his.
Least nipping winter pierce the purpl^ grapes,
And on the Vines smart Frosts commit their rapes.
Thy vintage in a gem enclosed lies,
And the Grape covered, not hid from our eyes.
So female shapes shine through their Tifanie,
And Pibbles in the waters numbered be,
What would not nature free, to wit, impart?
When winter's made an Autumn by thy art.
In Vacerram, Epig. 69.
Thou only do admire old Poets past,
And praisest none but such have writ their last:
Hence I beseech (Vacerra) pardon me,
It Is not worth perishing to humor thee.
Ad Liberum amicum, Epig. 77.
(Liber) thy friends sweet care! worthy to be
Crowned with Rose-buds to all eternity!
Art wise? still let thy hair with unguents flow!
While flowery garlands compass in thy brow!
May thy clear glass with falerne wine black prove!
And thy soft bed grow warm with softer love!
A life thus led, though in its youth resigned,
Is made much longer than it was designed.
In Fabullum, Epig. 79.
When wrinckled Beldames thy familiars be,
Or filthy Bauds, or worse if ought you see,
When these compagnions thou do lead along
Through every Feast with thee, and walk, and throng,
(Fabulla) thus compared we needs must say
The art handsome and do bear the bell away.
Lib. 9.
Ad Domitianum, Epig. 4.
IF thou should challenge what is due to thee
From heaven, and its creditor would be;
If public sale should be cried through the sphaeres,
And the gods sell all to satisfy arrears,
Atlas will banq'rrupt prove, nor one ounce be
Reserved for Jupiter to treat with thee.
What can thou for the Capitol receive?
Or for the honor of the Laurel-wreath?
Or what will Juno give thee for her shrine?
Pallas I pass, she waits on thee and thine.
Alcides, Phoebus, Pollux I slip by
And Flavia's Temple neighboring on the sky.
Caesar thou must forbear, and trust the heaven:
Jove's Chest has not enough to make all even.
In Aeschylum, Epig. 5.
When for two guilders Galla thou might swive,
And more then so if thou it double give:
Aeschylus why did she take ten of thee?
The feate's not worth it: what? the secrecy.
In Paullam, Epig. 6.
Paulla thou very fain would Priscus wed,
I wonder not, it is witty so to do:
But Priscus will not meddle with thy bed,
And therein he is full as witty too.
In amicum Caenipetam, Epig. 15.
Do think this man whom thy Feast makes thy friend
A heart of faithful friendship can pretend?
He loves thy brawn thy oysters, but not thee,
Let me sup so, he shall be friend to me.
In Afrum, Epig. 26.
As often as we thy Hyllus do behold
Filling thy wine, thy brows do seem to scold,
What crime is it, I would know to view thy Boy?
We look upon the gods, the stars, the day,
Shall I fling back as when a Gorgon lies
Steeped in the cup? and hide my face and eyes?
Great Hercules was feirce in cruelty
Yet we might see his pretty Hylas free:
Nor would great Jove have ought in wrath to say
If Mercury with Ganimede did play.
(Afer) if then we must not view thy loose
Soft ministers that serve thee in thy house,
Invite such men as Phineas to be
Thy guests or Oedipus that nere could see.
Epitaphium Latini, Epig. 29.
The stage his sweet renown, the fame
Of plays, Latinus known by name,
I here lie seized in deaths cold night,
Thy great applause, thy delight.
I that could make strict Cato be
My joy'd spectator, and at me
The Curii and Fabricii smile
And loose their gravity the while.
But yet my life nere bore away*
Ought from the theater or play,
I only there did act my part
Not out of nature, but by art.
Nor could I to great Caesar be
Grateful without my vanity.
Yet Deifi'd Domitian might
See that my inward parts were right.
But ye may call me at your will
A Parasite of Phoebus still,
While Rome may know me raised above
Into the family of Jove.
Qualem velit amicam, Epig. 33.
I love a Less that is apt, and plain does go,
And with my Boy has had a bout or t^o.
And her that twopence makes her mine all ore,
And being one can tugg with*half a Score,
She that asks pay, and in bigg strains does ball,
Let her be drudg to thickskinn'd Burdigal.
In Ponticum. Epig. 42.
(Ponticus) Cause thou never does swive,
But some by-lusts contentment give,
And thy more conscious hands supply
The service of thy venery:
Do think that this is no offense?
(Believe it) it is damned excellence
Is of so foul and high a weight
Thou can not reach it in conceit.
Horace but once did do the feat
That he three glorious twins might get,
Mars and chaste Ilia once did join
That Rome's great founders they might coin.
All had been loss'd, had either's list,
Spent his foul pleasure in his fist.
When thus then thou shall tempted be
Think that Dame nature cries to thee,
That which thy fingers do destroy
O Ponticus it is a Boy.
In Gaurum. Epig. 51.
Gaurus approves my wit but slenderly,
Cause I write verse that please for brevity.
But he in twenty volumes drives a trade
Of Priam's wars. O he is a mighty blade!
We give an Elegant young pregnant birth,
He makes a dirty Giant all of earth.
In Mamurram. Epig. 60.
Mamurra, long and much stalked up and down
The stalls, where all the goods are sold in Rome,
Beholds the boys, and with them feeds his eyes,
Nere prostitute from their first cottages,
Such whom the Cages kept in secrecy,
Close from my cronies and the peoples eye,
Thence full, he calls for the round tables down,
And to have the high placed Ivory open shown,
And measuring the Tortoise beds thrice ore,
As too small for his Cypress groaned sore.
Then smells if purely Corinth the brass scent,
And Delian statues give him no content.
Complains the crystalls mixed with Courser glass.
Marks myrrhine Cupps, and ten aside does place,
Cheapens old baskets and if any were
Wrought cups by noble Mentur's cunning there,
And numbers the green Em'ralds laid in gold,
Or any from the ears that take their hold,
Then seeks true gems in table boards most nice.
And of rich precious Jaspers asks the price.
Tired and departing when the eleventh hour come,
He bought two farthing cupps, and carr'd them home.
In Aeschylum, Epig. 68.
I enjoyd a buxsom lass all night with me,
Which none could overcome in venerie.
Thousand ways tired, I askd that childish thing,
Which she did grant at the first motioning,
Blushing and laughing I a worse besought,
Which she most loose vouchsafed as quick as thought.
Yet she was pure, but if she deal with you
She Will not be so, and thou shall pay dear too.
In Caecilianum, Epig. 71.
O times! o manners! Tully cried of old
When Cat^line his cursed plot did unfold,
When Caesar and great Pompey took the field,
And civil war with blood the ground did guild.
Why do thou cry o times, o manners now?
What does displease (Caecilian) what cramps you?
There Is not contest of Princes, no swords rage*
But peace and gladness all the world assuage*
It Is not our guilt makes the times bad to thee,
'Thy own (Caecilian) force them such to be.
In Sutorem, Epig. 74.
O thou whose teeth were wont to reach old hides,
And gnaw base rotten soles with dirty sides,
Thou have thy Patron's lands now in the grave,
In which I vex that thou a crib should have,
And drunk do break the christals with burn wine,
And frigst thy late Lord's Boy as he were th^ne.
With letters my sad Parents fooled me,
O learning, what have I to do with thee?
Thalia burn thy Books, and thy quills too*
If Cobblers get such boons from an old shoe.
De effigy Camoni, Epig. 77.
This which you see is my Camonus face,
Such his young looks, such his first beauty was*
Thy countenance grew stronger twice ten years
Till a beard cream'd his cheeks with downy hairs.
The offered Purple once his shoulders spread,
But one of the three Sisters wished him dead,
And thence his hast'ned thread of life did cut,
Which to his Father in a sad Urne put
Came from his absent pile: but least alone
This Picture should present his beauty gone,
His Image yet more sweetly drawn shall be
In never dying papers writ by me.
De Gellia, Epig. 81.
An old rich wife starved Gellius bare and poor
D^d wed: So she crammed him and he crammed her.
Ad Auctum, Epig. 82.
My readers and my hearers like my Books,
But a quaint Poet says the are not done clear:
I care not much for pleasing of the Cooks,
If that my guests affect my slender cheer.
In Munnam, Epig. 83.
The Astrologer foretold of thee,
That thou should perish suddenly;
Nor (Munna) do I think he told a lie;
For thou for fear least there should be
Ought left for thy posterity,
Have wasted all thy wealth in luxury,
Thy brace of millions in one year was spent,
Was not this perishing incontinent?
Ad Rufum, Epig. 89.
While thou did seek mylove, thou senst me some
Presents, but now thou have it no gifts come.
That thou may hold me (Rufus) still be free
Least the ill fed Bore break from his fra^^^ and fly.
Domitiano Adulatorium, Epig. 92.
If that a diverse invitation came
At once in Jove's and in great Caesar's name,
Though that the Stars were near, Rome more remote,
The gods in answer should have this my vote,
Go seek an other that Jove's guest would be,
My Jupiter on Earth has fett'red me.
Lib. 10.
Liber ad Lectorem, Epig. 1.
IF I seem of a tedious length to thee,
Read but a few, I will a manual be,
M^ Page in three or four short lines shall cease,
(...) me as brief as may thy fancy please.
Ad eundem, Epig. 2.
My tenth Book's care once hast'ned from my hand
Is now revoked again to be new scanned,
Part has been public, but they new smoothed are,
O favor both, the last's the greater share.
Reader, these riches when Rome gave to me,
She said no greater we can give to thee.
By these thou shall escape oblivion,
And live in thy best part when thou art gone.
The Fig Tree may Messala's Marble wear,
And base Mule-drivers Crispus Statues jeare,
No theft can papers hurt, no age thrust by,
These Monuments alone can never dye.
In maledicum Poetam, Epig. 5.
Who so by impious verse in all the Town
Scandals the Senators or Matrons gown,
Which rather ought be worshipped: Let him be
Bannish'd through all the seats of beggerie.
And let him from the Dogs bespeak their meat*
Be his December long, his winter wet,
Let his shut Vault prolong the frost most sad,
And let him cry such happy that are dead
On hellish-bedsteads carried to their grave,
And when his last threads their fulfilling have,
And the slow day shall come, o let him see
Himself the strife of Dogs, and his limbs be
The prey of ravenous Birds, nor let his pains
End in the simple crack of his heart's veins,
But feeling the strict doom of Aeacus,
One while let him relieve old Sisyphus,
Then scortch in Tantalus his dry desire,
And all the fables of the Poets tire,
And when the truth the Furies shall demand,
May his false conscience cry this was the hand.
De Paulla, Epig. 8.
Paulla thou needs would marry me
When thou art old and tough:
I cannot: yet I Would venture thee
Were thou but old enough.
In Calliodorem, Epig. 11.
(Calliodore) there is no other talk with thee
But Theseus and Perithous: And would be
Conceived like Pylades. But let me dye
If thou deserve to hold a Mallet by
To Pylades, or feed Perithous Swine,
Yet thou say thou have served some friends of thine
With twice five Millions, and a Coat thrice wore,
What? as if sweet Orestes gave no more
At any time to his dear friend? why he
That gives much, not all, does more deny.
Ad Crispum, Epig. 14.
Crispus thou say thou art best friend to me,
But how you will make it good I ask let us see?
When I desired ten pieces, 'twas denied,
Though that thy Chest could not thy coin bestride,
When did thou send me one peck of bean meal?
When thou did reap thy fields by fruitful Nile?
In winter frosts when did a short Coat come?
Or one half pound of silver in a sum?
I see not how thou my familiar art,
But that before me thou art wont to fart.
In Cajum* Epig. 16.
(Cajus) if promises be all thy gifts,
I Will overcome thee in thy bounteous shifts.
Take all the sturian Digs in Spanish fields,
And all the Ore that golden Tagus yields,
What ere the Indian finds in the Sea weed,
And what the Phaenix in her Nest has hid,
Take all great Tyros cloth of richest die,
Take all men have: O how thy gifts do fly!
De M. Antonio, Epig. 23.
Happy Antonius in a pleasant age
Has seen fifteen Olympiads on Earth's stage:
Looks back on his passed days and safer years
With joy, nor at his near grave shrinks or fears.
No day's ingrate or sad to think upon,
Nor does he blush to mention any gone,
A good man doubles his life's date: For he
Lives twice, that can his age with comfort see.
In Calliodorum, Epig. 31.
Thou for three hund'red pence thy man did sell,
(Callidore) that thou might but once sup well.
Nor did that neither: For afour pound fish
Was the crown of thy feast, and thy chief dish,
Pase wretch this is not fish we justly can
Exclaim, it is man, thou do devour a man.
De Imagine M. Antonio ad Caeditianum, Epig. 32.
This draught adorned with Rose-buds which you see,
Whose Picture is it (Caeditian) ask'st thou me?
Such was Mark Antoni in his prime years,
When old such was his unchanged look and hairs,
O would that Art his mind and parts could draw,
A fairer portraicture earth never saw!
In Lesbiam, Epig. 39.
Lesbia why do thou swear
That thou wast born that year
When Brutus was made Consul? it is a lie.
Thy Mother brought thee forth her womb
When Numa reigned first in Rome,
And so again thou do the truth deny.
For thy long dated ages seem to say
Thou wast produced from Prometheus clay.
Ad Philerotem, Epig. 43.
Thy seventh wife now lies buried in the field,
Thy ground more gain than any man's does yield.
Ad Julium Martialem, Epig. 47.
Most pleasant Martial these are they
That make the happyer life and day,
Means not sweat for, but resigned,
Fire without end, fields still in kind,
No strife, no office, inward peace,
Free strength, a body sans disease,
A prudent plainness, equal friends,
Cheap Cates, not scraped from the world's ends,
A night not drowned, but free from care,
Sheets never sad, and yet chaste are,
Sleep that makes short the shades of night,
Art such thou would be, if there might
A choice be offered, nor do fear
Nor wish thy last days exit here.
Epitaphium nobilis Matronae, Epig. 63.
Behold these little Marble stones
Which veil not to those mighty ones
Of Caesar, nor the Carian pride:
Terentus twice my life has tried,
And it was sincere to my last end.
Five Boys great Juno did me sen d,
And just as many Girls as those
Whose hands my dying eyes did close.
And this rare glory happened more to me,
One prick was privy to my chastity.
Epitaphium vetulae. Epig. 67.
Here Pyrrha's Daughter, Nestor's Mother in Law,
Whom youthful Noibe in gray hairs saw,
Whom old Laertes did his Beldame name,
Great Priam's Nurse, Thyestes wive's grandam,
Surviver to all nine lived Dawes are gone,
Old ^lotia with her bald Melanthion
Lies itching here at last under this stone.
De Phillide, Epig. 81.
Two men betimes came Phillida to swive,
And strove which of them first the feat should do,
She promised both, to both her self to give,
Did it, one stole her gown, the other her shoe.
Ad Caecilianum, Epig. 84.
Do wonder Afer cannot sleep? do see
What a sweet faced companion has he?
In Ligellam, Epig. 90.
Why do thou reach thy Merkin now half dust?
Why do provoke the ashes of thy lust?
Girls such lasciviousness does best beseem,
For thou art passed old woman in esteem.
That trick (Ligella) suites not, credit me,
With Hecuba, but young Andromache.
Thou err'st, if this a C -- thou dare to call
To which no Prick does now belong at all,
If thou cann'st blush Ligella, be afear'd
To pull a deceased Lion by the beard.
De Numa, Epig. 97.
While they the Funeral charge prepare
Which in the paper piles placed are,
And Numa's weeping wife now buys
Sweet perfumes for his Obsequies,
His Grave and Beer being ready made,
And one to wash his body dead,
And me left Heir by his own Pen,
Pox on him! he grew well again.
Lib. 11.
Ad Lectores, Epig. 2.
SAd looks, and rigid Cato's stricter brow,
And course Fabricius Daughter from the plough,
Disguised pride, manners by rule put on,
And what we are not in the dark, begone.
My verses Io Saturnalia cry,
And (Nerva) under thee it is liberty.
De suis Libellis, Epig. 4.
My lines are not alone delighted here,
Nor do I spend them on the idle ear,
But by the sour Centurion they are lost
Under his ensigns in the Getick frost.
And Brittain's said my verse to sing: But what
Can thence accrue? my purse never hears of that.
What never dying Papers could I write?
And glorious wars in a rich strain Indite!
Should Heaven Augustus once again revive,
And Rome to me a sweet Maecenas give!
Ad Romam, Epig. 7.
In Sythe-crown'd Saturn's Feasts, wherein
The box of Dice does reign as King,
All-cover'd Rome thou do permit
Me now to sport my fluent wit,
So I suppose, for thou did smile,
Thence we are not forbid the while.
Ye pallid cares far hence begone,
I Will speak what ere I think upon,
Sans any studied delay,
So fill me out three cups my Boy,
Such as Pithagoras did give
To Nero when he here did live,
But (Dindymus) fill faster too,
For sober I can nothing do.
When I am drunck up to the height
Full fifteen Poets seize me straight.
Now give me kisses, such as were
Catullus his and if they are
So numerous as his are said to be,
I will Catullus Sparrow give to thee.
Epitaphium Paridis, Epig. 14.
Thou that beat'st the Flaminian way
Pass not this Noble Tomb but stay,
Here Rome's delight, and Nile's salt treasure,
Art, Graces, Sport, and sweetest Pleasure,
The grief and glory of the Stage,
And all the Cupids of the Age,
And all the Venusses lie here
Interred in Paris Sepulcher.
De Libro suo, Epig. 16.
I have such papers that grim Cato's wife
May read, and strictest Sabines in their life.
I will this Book should laugh throughout and jest,
And be more wicked than are all the rest,
And sweat with wine, and with rich unguents flow,
And sport with Boys, and with the wenches too;
Nor by Periphrasis describe that thing
That common Parent whence we all do spring;
Which Sacred Numa once a Prick did call.
Yet still suppose these verses Saturnal.
(O my Apollinaris) this my book
Has no dissembled manners, no feigned look.
Ad Lupum, Epig. 19.
(Lupus) thou gave a Farm in Rome to me,
A larger through my loop-hole I can see,
But can thou this a Living call or prove?
Which one poor sprig of Rue shades like a Grove?
Which one sly Grashopper's wing hides all ore?
And which an Ant can in a day devour?
Which with a Rose-leaf may be crowned,
In which a larger herb cannot be found
Than a small Pepper-blade that is newly sprung?
In which a Cucumer cannot lie along?
Nor Serpent safely dwell unless half seen?
The Garden scarce a Cancker-worm can dine,
The wood consumed it starves a single Moth,
A Mole's my laborer and Plough-man both,
A Mushroom cannot blow in it, nor a Rush
Smile, nor sweet Violets their heads forth push.
A Mouse lays wast the bounds by the Farmer more
Is feared than was the Caladonia^ Bore.
The Herbage in a Swallow's foot at best
Is carried at a burden to her Nest.
Nor can Priapus when he is but half manned
Without a prick or sickle in it stand.
The gathered Crop will scarce a Snails house fill,
The Vintage may be housed in a Nut-shell.
(Lupus) thou err'dst but in a Praedium, prandium.
single letter,
For when thou gave me this thou had done better
To have invited me -- to dine with thee.
In Gallam, Epig. 20.
Galla do ask why thee I will not take
In marriage bonds to join with me?
Thou art too eloquent I see.
My Prick does often a Solaecisme make.
In Paediconem masturbantem, Epig. 23.
Cause thou do kiss thy Boys soft lips with thy
Rough chin, and with stripped Ganimede do lie,
Who does deny thee this? it is well. At least
Frig not thy self with thy lascivious fist,
This in light toys more than the Prick offends,
Their fingers hasten and the man up sends,
Hence Goatish rancknesse, sudden hairs, a beard
Springs forth to wondering Mothers much admired.
Nor do they please by day when in the Bath
They wash their skins. Nature divided has
The males: Half to the Girls born to be shown,
The other half to men: Use then thy own.
In Silam, Epig. 24.
Sila's prepared to marry me
On any score what ere it be.
But I shall put by Sila still;
Be the condition what it will.
Yet when she needs would fasten hold
Give me cried I in ready gold
Ten hundred thousand sesterties
In dowry: For what can be less?
Nor will I swive thee though it be
Our very first nights jollitie.
Nor shall my Couch or Pallat lie
In common both to thee and I.
And when my Handmaid I embrace
Thou shall not dare to make a face.
But if thine too I do command
She shall be sent me out of hand.
My wanton Boy my lips most sweet
Shall smack though thou art by to see it.
It makes no matters whether he
My Boy or else thy Eunuch be.
And when thou do to supper come
Thou shall sit in a distant room:
That my Mantle take no smutch
From thy courser garments touch.
And when thy kisses I receive
It shall be seldom and with leave.
Not as a wife, but cold as she
That may my rivel'd Grandame be.
If thou can bear such things as these,
And naught refuse that I shall please;
Sila thou suddenly shall find
A man to satisfy thy mind.
Ad Phillidem, Epig. 30.
When thou beginst to raise
By thy old hand and ways
My languishing desire to force it come
Phillis I Am tortured with thy active thumb.
For when thou call'st me thy
Dear life, thy pretty eye,
Me thinks I scarcely am wound up by thee
In ten hours to the height of Venerie.
Thou know not the true flattery:
Say but once thou will give to me
A hundred thousand sesterties in hand,
So many Acres of Campanian land,
A House, and Boys, and Wine that is old,
Tables, and Cups bordered with gold:
No fingers then will needful be to thee,
Thus Phillis rub me up, thus tickle me.
In Nestorem, Epig. 33.
When thou have neither Coat, nor Fire, nor Bed
That Is eat with Worms, nor Mat with Sedg patched up,
Nor Boy, nor Man, nor Maid, nor infant head,
Nor Lock with thee, nor Key, nor Dog, nor Cup.
Yet thou affectest to be called and seem
Poor, and to have a popular esteem.
Thou lie: Thou soothst thy self with vanity,
(Nester) this is not want, but beggary.
Ad Fabullam, Epig. 36.
Fabullus when thou do invite
Three hundred Strangers to my sight,
Do wonder? and complain? and chide?
When thus unknown accompanied?
Though called I do not forthwith wait on thee?
Me thinks I sup alone, and am not free.
In Vxorem, Epig. 44.
Caught with my Boys, at me my wife the Froe
Scolds, and cries out she has an ars-hole too.
How often has Juno thus reproved loose Jove?
Yet he with Ganimede does act his love.
Hercules bent his Boy, layd-by his Bow,
Though Megara had hanches too we know.
Phoebus was tortured by the flying Wench,
Yet the Oebalian Lad those flames did quench.
Though much denied Briseis from him lay
Achilles with Patroclus yet did play.
Give not male names then to such things as thine,
But think thou have two Twats o wife of mine.
Ad senem Orbum, Epig. 45.
The art blind, and rich and under Brutus bore,
And do thou think true friendship now to have?
It Is true: But such thou had when young and poor,
He that comes now, desires thee in thy Grave.
In Phillida, Epig. 50.
There Is not an hour thou do not plunder me
When thou perceiv'st me mad with love of thee,
Phillis thou thiev'st with such calliditie.
One while thy cheating Maid weeps for the loss
Of some rich Gem, Earing, or Looking-glass,
Which from her hand or ear did slip or pass.
Then the Silk-gowns are stolen away she will fain.
To be recovered at my charge and pain,
Or else some Sweet-box must be filled again.
Another while there is an appetite
To a rich Jug of falerne wine that is right
To expiate the terrors of the night*
Another while a great Jack I must buy,
Or else a two pound Barble: some sweet she
Bespeaks a supper at thy cost with thee.
Blush then at last, and Phillis let there be
A just respect of truth and equity,
I grudg thee nothing: Naught deny to me.
In Cheraemonem, Epig. 57.
Stoic Cheraemon cause that thou
Can cry up death I know not how
Thou would have me this thy fortitude admire:
Some broken Pitcher bred in thee
This seeming piece of gallantrie,
Or else some frozen Chimney without Fire;
A noysom Worm, or Coverlid,
Or Side-piece of thy naked Bed,
Or a short Coat worn by thee day and night,
O what a mighty Man thou wilt seem
That can the Dregs of sower red Wine,
And thatch, and poor course black bread dare to slight!
But yet suppose thy Couch should be
Stuffed with Leuconick wool for thee,
And Purple Vallions should thy Bed attire,
And that thy Boy with thee should sleep,
Which filled rich Wine with rosy lip
And set thy love-inflamed guests on fire?
O how would thou then wish to see
Thrice Nestor's years fullfill'd in thee?
And not a minute of a day loss'd have?
To slight a life in misery
Is nothing: But he that can be
Contentedly distressed is truly brave.
De Lesbia, Epig. 63.
Lesbia swears she does never gratis sport,
It Is true: For when she is swived she pays well for it.
In Vacerram, Epig. 67.
The art both a Pick-thank, and Detractor,
A cunning Cheater, and a Factor,
A Lick-twat, and a Fencer too,
I wonder much (Vacerra) how now?
With all these trades thou can want money
In Maronem, Epig. 68.
Maro you will give me nothing while you live
But after death you cry then then you will give:
If thou art not indeed turned arrant Ass,
Thou know what I desire to come to pass.
De Laeda, Epig. 72.
Laeda complained to her old man that she
Was choked up in her womb, and swived must be.
But weeps and whines her health's not so much worth,
And rather choose to dye than thus hold forth.
The poor Man begs her live, her youth run on*
And what he could not suffers to be done.
Hence male Physicians come, and female fly,
Up goes her heels: O mighty remedy!
Ad Paetum, Epig. 77.
Paetus thou took'st ten sesterties from me
Cause Bucco loosed two hundred due to thee,
May others crimes I pray nere hurt me! when
Two hundred thou can loose, why not my ten?
Ad Paetum, Epig. 80.
By ten of clock cause we came but a mile
We are accused of tedious sloth the while:
It Is not the way's, nor mine, the fault's in thee
Paetus, that sent'st thy drowsy Mules for me.
De Spadone and Seen, Epig. 82.
An Eunuch and an old man strove to lie
With Aegle, but twixt both she still lay dry,
One wanted means the other strength to frig,
So either's labor itbh'd without a Jig.
To Venus then for them and her she groans,
To give the one his youth, the other his stones.
Ad Sosibianum, Epig. 84.
Sosibian no man dwells with thee
Under thy roof gratis or free,
Unless he is rich or in an Orphans state,
No House is let out at a dearer rate.
In Parthenopaeum, Epig. 87.
That thy Doctor may assuage
Thy Jaws whose cough does seem to rage
Daily (Parthenopaeus) he
Commands that they shall give to thee
Life-honny, Kernels, and sweet Cakes,
That every Boy unbidden takes.
But day by day thy cough grows more on thee,
This is no cough (I fear) it is Gluttony.
Epitaphium Canaces, Epig. 92.
Sweet Canace lies buried in this Tomb,
On whom the seventh Winter just has come.
O mischief! Traveler why do have to weep?
We must not mourn life shortness now a sleep
This kind of death was worse than death: Her face
The Pox consumed, and spoiled its tender grace,
Those cruel plagues her kisses eat and have,
Nor were her lips brought whole to the black Grave.
If the hard Fates could not admit of stay,
Me thinks they might have come some milder way,
But death made have her pretty tongue to seize,
Least her sweet wo^ds should meet the Destinies.
In Zoilum, Epig. 93.
Zoilus he lied that called thee vicious Elf,
Thou art not vicious, but Vice it self.
De Theodoro, Epig. 94.
A fire consumed the Poet's trump^rie:
Apollo can this please the nine and thee?
O the great crime of Heaven! o sad disaster!
Because the House was burnt and not the Master!
In Thelesillam, Epig. 98.
I can swive four times in a night: But thee
Once in four years I cannot occupy.
Ad Flaccum, Epig. 101
Flaccus I would not have a Wench so thin
Whose arms my little Rings can compass in.
Whose buttock bones would shave, and knee prick harsh,
That wears the Saws in her loins, Spears in her arss.
Nor would I one that is of a thousand weight,
I Would have some flesh but not all glory fat,
In Lydiam, Epig. 103.
Lydia he lied not that reported has
Thou have a handsome skin but not a face,
It Is so whiles silent, and whiles mute you lie,
Like Pictures wrought in Wax or Tapestry.
But when thou speakst thy skin its grace does loose,
And no tongue more than thine does thee abuse.
Beware least the Officer thee hear and take,
It Is monstrous when an Image goes to speak.
Ad Sophronium, Epig. 104.
The have so much shamefastness and honesty
I wonder how a Father thou could be.
In Vxorem, Epig. 105.
Sweet heart begone: Or use our ways with us,
I am no Curious, Numa, Tatius.
Nights spent in pleasant Cups best please my sense,
Thou to drink water cann'st rise and dispense.
Thou joy'st in darkness, I by light to sport,
Or else by day to loose my Breeches for it.
Swathes or Coats cover thee, or obscure stuff,
No Wench to me can lie displayed enough.
Such kisses please like Doves that are a billing,
Thou smackst me like thy Grandam so unwilling,
Nor toward the work do voice or motion bring,
Nor hand: But make it as some Offering.
The Phrygian Boys in secret spent their Seed
As often as Hector's wife rid on his Steed,
Whiles her Sire slept, Penelope though chaste
Was wont to play her hand below her wast.
Thou Wilt not be buggerd: Although Gracchus wife
Pompey's and others did it without strife.
And when the Boy not present was it is said
To fill Wine: Juno was Jove's Ganimede.
If gravity by day does thee delight,
Lucretia be: I Will have thee Lais by night.
Ad Lectorem, Epig. 109.
Though thou may justly vex at this long Book,
Yet for some further distichs thou do look,
But Lupus for his use does call,
And School-boyes for their dinner ball,
Then let me go: Thou holdst thy peace: but tell
(Reader) do thou dissemble too? farwell.
Lib. 12.
De Ligeia, Epig. 7.
IF by thy hairs thy age be to be told,
Ligeia by thy crown the art three years old.
De Africano, Epig. 10.
African has a thousand pound in store,
Yet he desires, and hunts, and rakes for more:
Fortune has overmuch bestowed on some;
But plenary content to none does come.
In Posthumum Epig. 12.
Whiles in loose Cups thou top'st the night away,
Then thou will promise any thing to do,
But nothing wilt perform on the next day,
Pray (Posthumus) drink in the morning too.
Ad Auctum, Epig. 13.
Anger's a kind of gain that rich men know:
It costs them less to hate then to bestow.
Adulatorium Caesari, Epig. 15.
Whatever shined in the Parrhasian Hall
Is to our eyes and to our gods given all,
Jupiter stands and wonders to behold
Himself in Scythian flames of sparckling gold;
Great Caesar's pleasant pride, and vast expense.
These Cups may suit with Jove's magnificence,
Such as may well become the Phrygian Boy,
Now all with Jove are rich and clad with joy.
It shames it shames me to confess of yore
How all of us with Jove were very poor.
In Lentinum, Epig. 17.
Lentinus why do thou complain and groan
That all this while thine Ague is not gone?
He Is carried in a Chair, and bathed with thee,
Eats Mushrooms, Oysters, Sow's paps, and Brawn free,
Often fox'd with Setine, often with Falerne Wine,
Nor Caecube drinks without its Snow to join,
Lies compassed in with Rose-buds, black with sweets,
In a rich purple Bed, soft Down, fine Sheets.
When he does live so well so brave with thee,
Would have thy Ague to poor Dama fly?
In Thelesinum, Epig. 25.
When money without pledge I ask of thee,
I have it not thou soon replyst to me.
Yet thou the same man if my field or land
Will but pass for me, have it out of hand.
When to thy friend thou will not credit give,
Thou cann'st my little hills and trees believe.
Lo, thou art to be banished: Come field prithee,
Would have me now? No, let my field go with thee.
Ad Julium Martialem, Epig. 34.
Julius 'twas four and thirty year,
That thou and I together were.
Sweeter days were mixed with sour,
But yet the pleasanter were more.
And if we should divide the time
with a diverse colored line,
The white would over-vie the black.
If thou would shun the bitter smack,
And stinging tortures of the mind,
No man to thee too much bind,
Or too much in thy friend believe:
Thou shall joy less, and less shall grieve.
In Pontilianum, Epig. 40.
When thou do lie, I seemingly believe,
When thou repeatst bad verse, my praise I give,
When thou do sing (Pontilian) I sing out,
And when thou do carouse, I drink about,
When thou do fart, I grunt too in conceit,
And when thou playst at Chesse, I am still beat.
Yet thou do give nothing: dead, you cry
I shall be heir: I care not, prithee dye.
In Tuccam, Epig. 41.
It Is not sufficient that thou drunk have been,
But thou desire so to be called and seen.
Ad ^haebum, Epig. 45.
Thou that with Leather cap have covered
The naked Temples of thy hair st^ippd head,
How elegantly did he sport and plod,
(Phoebus) that verified thy head was shod.
In habentem varios Mores, Epig. 47.
Thou the same man hard, soft, sweet, bitter art,
Nor can I live with thee, nor yet apart.
In Lautum Invitatorem, Epig. 48.
If Brawn and Mushrooms thou servst up as vile,
As though I wished them not, know it is my will.
If thou conceiv'st me wealthy, and would be
My Heir for five bare Oysters, farwell thee.
But yet thy supper's rich, most rich, yet there
To day, to morrow, straight naught will appear,
That thy unhappy Maide's base broom know may,
Or Dog, or house of Office by the way.
Of Ba^bles, Hares, and Sow's paps this the end,
A pale sulpherous look, and gowty friend.
Domitian's Feast's not so much worth to me,
Nor Jove's, nor can the high Priest's junckets be.
Upon this score should Jove bring Nectar here,
It were as dead Wine, or Crab-vineger.
Some other guests go seek Sir to your meat,
Whom the vast kingdoms of thy cheer may cheat.
My friend to some short Steaks may me invite,
I like that Supper which I can requite.
In habentem amaenas aedes, Epig. 50.
Thou have bay Groves, plain, and high Cypress Trees,
And Baths for more than one man's privacies.
Thy lofty Porch on hundred Pillars joins,
And the spurned Onix under thy feet shines.
The flying hoofs the dusty race rejoice,
And falls of water each where make a noise,
Thy Courts stretch wide: But yet no place we smell
To sup, or sleep. How well thou do not dwell!
De Fabullo, Epig. 51.
Why (Aullus) do thou wonder that
Fabullus is so often snapt by deceit?
I Will give thee satisfaction straight,
A good man's still an undergraduate.
Ad Semproniam, Epig. 52.
He that his brows decked with the Muses crown
Whose voice to guilty men no less was known
Sempronia here thy Rufus, here is laid.
Whose dust even with thy love still drives a trade,
Amongst the blessed shades thy story he does bear,
And Helen's self thy rape admires to hear,
Thou better from thy spoyler did return,
She though redeemed did after Troy still burn.
Menalaus laughs and hears the Ilian loves,
Thy rape old Paris guilt forgives, removes.
And when thee those blessed mansions shall re ceive,
No shade greater acquaintance there shall have.
Proserpine loves although she cannot see
Such rapes, that love shall make her kind to thee.
In Avarum, Epig. 53.
When thou have so much coin and wealth with thee
That seldom Citizens or Fathers see.
Yet are not liberal, but thy heaps hangst ore
Like the great Dragon, whom the Bards of yore
Feigned to be keeper of the Scythian Grove,
But the base cause of this thy Muck-worm love,
Thou brag'st and do pretend thy Son to be:
Why do delude us with this foolerie
As though we Blocks or Idiots had bin?
Thou wast a Father ever to this sin.
In Zoilum, Epig. 54.
Red haird, black faced, club-footed, and blear-eyed,
Zoilus it is much if thou art good beside.
In Polycarmum, Epig. 56
Thou ten times in a year art sick or more.
This is not thine (my friend) but it is our sore.
No sooner well but for thy gifts do call.
Blush: Prithee once be sick for good and all.
Ad suum Natalem, Epig. 60.
Dear son of Mars, wherein I first did see
Great Phoebus rosie-glittering Dietie.
If Country worship, and green Altars may
Displease, cause I at Rome observed thy day?
Pardon, if there thy Calends slighted be,
And on my Birthday if I would live free.
De Ligurra, Epig. 62.
Ligurra thou do fear that I
Verses, and quick sharp Poetry
Would spend upon thee, and desire to be
Thought worthy of that fear conceived on me,
But thou in vain do tremble and desire,
On Bulls the Lybian Lions their strength tire,
But are not troublesome to Butter flies:
Seek then, if thou do wish thy name should rise,
Some poor Pot-poet of the sooty Vault,
That with a course Coal, or some putrid Chaulk
Writes verses, which are read upon Closestooles,
Thy head shall nere be raised with my tools.
De Phillede, Epig. 66.
When beauteous Phillis to me all the night,
Had gave her ^elf in all garbes of delight,
And in the morning I began to sound
What gift were best, of Cosmus sweets a pound,
Or Niceros his Unguents, or of fine
Rich Spanish Wool eight pound, or Caesar's coin
Ten yellow boys: My neck embraced she,
And with as long a kiss alluring me
As marriages of Doves are making up,
Phillis desired naught else but a merry Cup.
Ad Clientes, Epig. 69.
Thou early Client that did cause me fly
The City, some ambitious Courts imply,
I am no Lawyer, nor ordaind for strife,
But slow, and old, and of a quiet life.
Rest, and sweet sleep delight me: Which great Rome
Denied: If I must watch here too, I Will come*
Ad Cautullum, Epig. 74.
I am thy Heir Cautullus, thou have said it,
But I will not believe it till I read it.
De Callistrato, Epig. 82.
Least that Callistratus should not
Praise worthy men, he praises all:
He that thinks no one has a blot,
Whom can he then a good man call?
De Vmbro, Epig. 83.
In winter time and Saturn's holy days
Vmber when poor did me present always
With finest Wheat: but now with courser grain,
For now he is rich, and made a man of gain.
Ad Charinum, Epig. 91.
Charinus cause thou bind'st thy head with wool,
It Is not thy ears that grieve: It Is thy ball'd skull.
De Marone, Epig. 92.
Maro a Vow did make but something loud
For an old Friend, by a feirce A gue bowed;
That if this sickness spared him from the Grave,
Great Jove a grateful Sacrifice should have.
The Doctors promised certain health: O now
Maro makes Vows to escape the former Vow.
Ad Priscum, Epig. 95.
Priscus thou often do ask what I would be
If I were rich and raised to Potencie.
Can any man his future soul declare?
Suppose thou were a Lion: How would stare?
In Tuccam, Epig. 96.
I penned an Epod: Thou beganst to write?
Therefore I ceased, least thine with mine unite.
My Muse to Tragic fancies soard her strain,
Thou strov'st to fit the buskin to thy brain.
Thence then I touched the Harp with learned skill,
With new ambition thou pursu'dst me still.
I Satyrs dared: Thou more exact would be,
I played light Elegee's, thou ecchod'st me;
What could be less? I Epigrams did frame:
And here thou soughtst to rob me of my fame.
Say what thou will not: Blush all things to be:
And what thou will not, Tucca leave to me.
In Bassum, Epig. 99.
When thou a wife so youthful have,
So rich, so noble, wise, and chaste,
That the most wicked Goat that is
A better cannot wish for his.
Thou spendst thy strength with Boys (we see)
Which thy wife's dowry bought for thee,
So to his Mistress thy Prick comes
Tired, thus redeemed with mighty sums.
Nor will he stand though tempted by
The voyce's or thumbs flattery.
Blush then, or let the Law unfold it,
(Bassus) this is not thine, the have sold it.
Ad Mattum, Epig. 102.
He that denies himself at home
When thou do knock to see,
Do thou not know his meaning in it?
He is a sleep to thee.
Ad Milonem, Epig. 103.
Thou Art wont to sell clothes, incense, precious stone,
Cloaks, pepper, silver, bought away the are gone:
Thy wife's a better chaffer: Though often sold
She never does forsake thee, or loose hold.
Libell. Spect.
Epig. 1.
IN silence Nile thy miracles conceal
Nor let great Babylon her cost reveal,
May the soft gloryes of Diana's fane
Sinck with the Cuckold-god that hornd Jove's name.
Nor let the Carian People boast so high
Their hanging Monuments twixt earth and sky.
Whiles Caesar's single Piece confines alone
Fame and the world to one encomion.
In Opera publica Caesaris, Spect. Epig. 2.
Here where that high Coloss the Stars surveys,
And lofty engines swell up in the ways
The envied Courts of Nero shined: And one
One only house this City filld alone.
Here where the Amphitheatres vast Pile
Is now erected were his Pools ere while.
Where we admire the Baths that running gift
The proud Field from poor men their dwellings shrift.
Where Claudia's Walk extends its ample shade
Was the extreme part of his Palace made.
Rome's to it self returned, And by thee they
Though once thine Caesar, are the Peoples joy.
De Gentium confluxu and congratulatione, Epig. 3.
What Nation's so remote or barbarous
That has not some spectator here with us?
The Thracian High-shooe from Mount Haemus comes,
And Russians that in blood pick up their crumbs,
He that sips the first streams of sudden Nile
And he that in the utmost Sea does toil.
The Arabian and Sabaeans hither beat,
And moist Cilicians in their unguents sweat.
The Germans with their hair curld in a ring
And the otherwise crisp'd Moors their presence bring.
The voice sounds diverse, but the votes agree
When Rome's true Father thou art said to be.
Ad Caesarem quod expulerit delatores, Epig. 4.
An envious crew to pleasant rest and peace
Which wretched wealth still studied to in^^^ase
Are to the Getes exiled: Nor could the sand
Receive the guilty Vagabonds on land.
So now the Teazers have
That bannishment they gave.
The Pick-thank's bannish'd the Ausonian gate,
The life's of Princes from their gifts take date.
De Daedalo, Epig. 8.
Now Daedalus thou thus art torn
By the Lucanian Bear,
How do thou with thy waxen wings
Again to cut the Air?
De sue quae ex vulnere peperit, Epig. 13.
Peir^d with a deadly Dart the wounded Mother
At one time loosed one life and gave another.
How sure the levelled Steel the right hand throws!
This was Lucin^'s arm I do suppose.
Diana's double power she did sustain,
When the Parents was deliverd and yet slain.
De Orpheo, Epig. 21.
What Thrace on Orpheus Stage was said to see
Caesar the Sand exhibits here to thee.
The Rocks have crept, and the strange Wood did move,
Such as was once believd the Hisperian Grove.
A mingled troop of all wild Beasts were there,
And ore the Bard a cloud of Birds in the air.
But he lay torn by the ungrateful Bear
As it came feigned thence so it was true here.
De Prisco and vero Gladiatoribus, Epig. 29.
When Priscus and Verus did enter the field
And their valor proved equal and neither would yield,
The people besought that they parted might be
But Caesar the law of Arms would satisfy.
The Law was to cuff it out at fingers end,
Thence cherishing Cups and gifts he often did send,
A conclusion at last this equal strife found,
They both box'd alike, and both fell to the ground.
Caesar to both gave rods, both did reward
Such guerdons their virtue found that fought so hard
This thing has happ'd (Caesar) to no Prince but thee,
When two men contended both victors should be.
The Public Faith.
STand off my Masters: It Is your pence a piece,
Jason, Medea, and the golden Fleece;
What side the line good Sir? Tigris? or Po?
Lybia? Japan? Whisk? or Tradinktido?
St. Kits? St. Omer? or St. Margaret 's Bay?
Presto begone? or come aloft? what way?
Doublets? or Knap? the Cog? low Dice? or high?
By all the hard names in the Letany,
Bell, book and candle, and the Pope's great toe
I conjure thy account: Devil say no.
Nay since I must untruss, gallants look to it
Keep ^our prodigious distance, forty foot,
This is that Beast of eyes in the Revelations,
The Basilisk has twisted up three Nations.
Ponteus Hixius doxius, full of tricks,
The Lottery of the vulgar lunaticks.
The Knapsack of the State, the thing you wish,
Magog and Gog stewd in a Chaffendish.
A bag of spoons and whistles, wherein men
May whistle when they see their Plate again.
Thus far his Infancy: His riper age
Requires a more misterious folio page.
Now that time speaks him perfect, and it is pity
To dandle him longer in a close Committee,
The elf dares peep abroad, the pretty fool
Can wag without a truckling standing-stoole;
Revenge his Mother's in famy, and swear
He Is the fair offspring of one half-score year;
The Heir of the House and hopes, the cry
And wonder of the People's misery.
It Is true, while as a Puppie it could play
For Thimbles, any thing to pass the day.
But now the Cub can count, arithmatize,
Clinck Masenello with the Duke of Guise;
Sign^ for an Irish purchase, and traduce
The Synod from their Doctrine to their Use.
Give its Dam suck, and by a hidden way
Drink up arreares a tergo mantica.
An everlasting Bale, Hell in Trunk-hose,
Uncased, the Divel's Don Quixot in prose.
The Beast and the false Prophet twined together,
The squint-eyed emblem of all sorts of weather.
The refuse of that Chaos of the earth
Able to give the world a second birth.
Afric avaunt: Thy trifling monsters glance
But Sheeps*eyed to this Penal Ignorance.
That all the prodigies brought forth before
Are but Dame Natures blush left on the score.
This strings the Bakers dozen, christens all
The cross-legd hours of time since Adam's fall.
The publipue faith? why it is a word of kin.
A Nephew that dares Cozen any sin.
A term of Art, great Behemoth's younger Brother,
Old Machiavel, and half a thousand other.
Which when subscribed writes Legion, names on Truss,
Abaddon, Beelzebub, and Incubus.
All the Vice Royes of darkness, every spell
And Fiend wrapped in a short Trissillable.
But I fore-stall the show. Enter and see,
Salute the Door, your Exit shall be free.
In brief it is called Religions ease, or loss,
For no one's sufferd here to bear his cross.
A Lenten Letany.
Composed for a confiding Brother, for the benefit and edification of the
faithful Ones.
FRom villainy dressed in the doublet of zeal,
Fom three Kingdoms baked in one commonweal,
From a gleek of Lord Keepers of one poor Seal libera nos, etc.
From a Chancery-writ, and a whip and a bell,
From a Justice of Peace that never could spell,
From Colonel P. and the Vicar of Hell Libera nos, etc.
From Neat's feet without socks and threepenny Pyes,
From a new sprung light that will put out ones eyes,
From Goldsmiths Hall, the Devil and Excize Libera nos, etc.
From two hours talk without one word of sense,
From liberty still in the future tense,
From a Parliament long-wasted conscience, Libera nos, etc.
From a Coppid crown-Tenent prickd up by a Brother,
From damnable members and fits of the Mother,
From ears like Oysters that grin at each other, Libera nos, etc.
From a Preacher in buff, and a quarter-staff steeple,
From the unlimited sovereign power of the People,
From a Kingdom that crawls on its knees like a Creeple, Libera nos, etc.
From a vinegar Priest on a Crab-tree stock,
From a foddering of prayer four hours by the Clock,
From a holy Sister with a pitiful Smock. Libera nos, etc.
From a hunger-starved Sequestrators maw,
From Revelations and Visions that never man saw,
From Religion without either Gospel or Law, Libera nos, etc.
From the Nick and Froth of a penny pothouse,
From the Fidle and Cross, and a great Scotch-Louse,
From Committees that chop up a man like a Mouse. Libera nos, etc.
From broken shins and the blood of a Martyr*
From the titles of Lords and Knights of the Garrer,
From the teeth of Mad-dogs and a Countrymans quarter. Libera nos, etc.
From the Public Faith and an egg and butter,
From the Irish purchases and all their clutter,
From O mega's nose when he fettles to sputter, Libera nos, etc.
From the zeal of old Harry locked up with a Whore
From waiting with plaints at the Parliament door,
From the death of a King without why or wherefore, Libera nos, etc.
From the French disease and the Puritan fry,
From such as nere swear but devoutly can lie,
From cutting of capers full three story high, Libera nos, etc.
From painted glass and Idolatrous cringes,
From a Presbyters Oath that turns upon hinges,
From Westminster Jews with Levitical fringes, Libera nos etc.
From all that is said, and a thousand times more,
From a Saint and his charity to the Poor,
From the plagues that are kept for a Rebel in store. Libera nos, etc.
The second part.
THat if it may please thee to assist
Our Agitators and heir list,
And Hemp them with a gentle twist* Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to suppose
Our actions are as good as those
That gull the people through the nose, Quaesumus te, etc.
That it my please thee here to enter
And fix the rumbling of our center,
For we live all at peradventure, Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to unite
The flesh and bones unto the sprite,
Else faith and literature good night. Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee o that we
May each man know his Pedigree,
And save that plague of Heraldrie, Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee in each Shire,
Cities of refuge Lord to rear
That failing Brethren may know where, Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to abhor us,
Or any such dear favor for us
That thus have wrought thy peoples sorrows, Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to embrace
Our days of thanks and fasting face,
For robing of thy holy place. Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to adjourn
The day of judgment* least we burn,
For lo it is not for our turn, Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to admit
A close Commitee there to sit,
No devil to a humane wit, Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to dispense
A little for convenience,
Or let us play upon the sense, Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee to embalm
The Saints in Robin wis^om's Psalm,
And make them musical and calm. Quaesumus te, etc.
That it may please thee since it is doubt
Satan cannot throw Satan out,
Unite us and the Highland ^out. quaesumus te, etc.
A Hue and Cry after the Reformation.
WHen Temples lie like battered Quarrs,
Rich in their ruined Sepulchers,
When Saints forsake their painted glass
To meet their worship as they pass,
When Altars grow luxurious with the dye
Of humane blood,
Is this the flood
Of Christianity?
When Kings are cup-boarded likc cheese,
Sights to be seen for pence a piece,
When Dyadems like brokers tire
Are custom'd relics set to hire
When Soverainty and Scepters loose their names
Streamed into words
Carved out by swords
Are these refining flames?
When subjects and Religion stir
Like Meteors in the Metaphor,
When zealous hinting and the yawn
Excize our Miniver and Lawn*
When blue digressions fill the troubled air
And the Pulpit's let
To every Set
That will usurp the chair?
Call ye me this the night's farewell
When our noon day's as dark as Hell?
How can we less than term such lights
Ecclesiastic Heteroclites?
Bold sons of Adam when in fire you crawle
Thus high to be
Perched on the tree
Remember but the fall.
Was it the glory of a King
To make him great by suffering?
Was there no way to build God's House
But rendering of it infamous?
If this be then the merry ghostly trade?
To work in gall?
Pray take it all
Good brother of the blade.
Call it no more the Reformation
According to the new translation,
Why will you wrack the common brain
With words of an unwonted strain?
As plunder? or a phrase in senses cleft?
When things more nigh
May well supply
And call it down right theft.
Here all the Schoolmen and Divines
Consent, and swear the naked lines
Want no expounding or contest,
Or Bellarmine to break a jest.
Since then the Heroes of the pen with me
Nere scrue the sense
With difference,
We all agree agree.
A Committee.
CAst Knaves my Masters, fortune guide the chance,
No packing I beseech you, no by-glance
To mingle pairs, but fairly shake the bag,
Cheats in their sphaeres like subtle spirits wag.
Or if you please the Cards run as they will,
There is no choice in sin and doing ill.
Then happy man by's dole, luck makes the ods,
He acts most high that best out-dares the gods.
These are that Raw-bon'd Herd of Pharoahs Kine
Which eat up all your fatlings, yet look lean.
These are the after-claps of bloody showers
Which like the Scots come for your good and yours
The gleaners of the field, where, if a man
Escape the sword that milder drying pan,
He leaps into the fire, cramping claws
Of such can speak no English but the cause.
Under that foggy term, that Inquisition,
Y' are wracked at all adventures On suspicion.
No matter what is the crime, a good estate's
Dilinquency enough to ground their hate.
Nor shall calm innocence so escape, as not
To be made guilty, or at least so thought.
And if the spirit once inform, beware,
The flesh and world but renegadoes are.
Thus once concluded, out the Teazers run
All in full cry and speed till Wat's undone.
So that a poor Dilinqu^nt fleeced and torn
Seems like a man that is creeping through a horn.
Finds a smooth entrance, wide and fit, but when
He Is squeezed and forced up through the smaler end,
He looks as gaunt and prin, as he that spent
A tedious twelve years in an eager Lent.
Or bodies at the Resurection are
On wing, just rarifying into air.
The Emblem of a man, the pitied Case
And shape of some sad being once that was.
The Type of flesh and blood, the skeleton
And superficies of a thing that is gone.
The winter quarter of a life, the tinder
And body of a corpse squeezed to a cinder
When no more tortures can be thought upon
Mercy shall flow into oblivion.
Mercyful Hell! thy Judges are but three,
Ours multiform, and in plurality.
Thy calmer censures flow without recall,
And in one doom souls see their final all.
We travel with expectance: Sufferings here
Are but the earnests of a second fear.
Thy pains and plagues are infinite, it is true
Ours are not only infinite but new.
So that the dread of what is to come exceeds
The anguish of that part already bleeds.
This only difference swells twixt us and you,
Hell has the kinder Devils of the two.
On the happy Memory of Alderman Hoyle that hanged himself.
ALL ^aile fair fruit! may every crab-tre^ bear
Such blosoms, and so lovely every year!
Call ye me this the slip? marry it is well,
Zacheus slipped to Heaven, the Thief to Hell,
But if the Saints thus give's the slip, it is need
To look about us to preserve the breed.
The are of the running game, and thus to post
In nooses blancks the reckning with their Host.
Here Is more than Trussum cordum I suppose
That knit this knot, guilt seldom singly goes.
A wounded soul close coupled with the sense
Of sin pays home its proper recompense.
But hark you Sir, if have can grant the time?
See you the danger yet what it is to climb
^n Kings prerogatives? things beyond just
When Law seems bribed to doom them must be trussed.
But o I smell your plot strong through your hose,
It Was but to cheat the Hang- man of your clothes,
Else your more active hands had fairly stayed
The leisure of a Psalm: Judas has prayed.
But later crimes cannot admit the pause,
They run upon effects more than the cause.
Yet let me ask one question, why alone?
One member of a corporation?
It Is clear amongst Divines, bodies and souls
As jointly active, so their judgment rowles
Concordant in the sentence; why not so
In earthly sufferings? States attended go.
But I perceive the knack: Old women say
And be it approved, each dog should have his day.
Hence sweep the Almanac: Lilly make room,
And blanks enough for the new Saints to come,
All in Red letters: as their faults have bin
Scarlet, so limb their Anniverse of sin.
And to their childrens credits and their wives
Be it still said they leap fair for their lives.
On Clarinda Praying.
AS when the early Lark, waked by the tears
Of sweet Aurora blushing through the sphaers
Mounts on her silver wings, and towers the skies
To offer up her morning Sacrifice
To her great Diety the Sun: and sings
The Anthems of her joy to court the springs:
So here Clarinda rescued from the night
Of soul-contracting slumber, takes her flight
Into the azure heavens, and prevents
The vulgar sullying of the elements
By a most holy have, and stoops to fly
To the great Master of requests on high.
No sooner was she bended on her knees
But lo a cloud of Angels simpathize,
And strive to catch her prayers and convey
Her sacred breathings ore the Milky-way.
Pardon me (Reader) if I here aver
That holy contestation bred by her
Amongst those Hierarchies Caelestial
Almost engaged them to a Second Fall.
But such was the sweet plenty, such the flood
Of her rich soul, each Angel had his load:
Some charged with a sigh, some with a tear,
Each one was busied though not burd'ned there.
Yet blessed Saint why why such streams of brine?
Sure 'twas for others, for no sin of thine?
Those crystal beads perhaps dropped for my
Or else in pious charity for the Times?
Those sacred gales of grief sufficient be crimes,
To waft whole worlds into eternity.
No need of Sails or Pilot there was here,
They knew the channel to the heavenly ear,
Only the officious Seraphims to woo
A greater glory would be meddling too
O had but Sodom found in her sad state
So dear! so prevalent an advocate!
The brimstone of her Judgments had not burned,
But all her fire had into incense turned.
Or had these Noah's drunken world forerun,
The Ark had kept the woods, nor had the Sun
Bin shut up: But the floud-gates of the deep
Had lulled themselves in a perpetual sleep.
Smell't you the Phaenix when she dying lies
Raising her issue from her obsequies?
Embalmed in her own ashes? so divine
So precious was the perfume of each line
Sailed through the rubie Portal of her lips,
And now ore the caelestial Ocean trips.
Saw you a pearl closed in an amber womb?
Glowing and sparkling through its courser tomb?
So radiantly transparent shined her soul,
Which she in Holy blasphemy termed foul,
And therefore challenged tears to wash that hue
And stain of owned guilt she never knew.
O Adam had thou lived thus long to be
Made happy in thy late posterity?
Thou might have seen that Innocence again
Which thy too slippery hands could not retain!
Thus thus she clasped her God with pious zeal,
With melting Rhetoric, till he vowed to heal
The wounds in Sion: For in her there were
No objects for the balm of one poor tear.
But least the general works of Providence
Should ravished stop their courses in suspense:
In pity to the whole Creation, she
Grew silent, least their destiny should be
Scored on her harmless piety. O so
Though yet with much regret she let him go.
On Clarinda Singing.
AS when the Swan, that warbling Prophetess
Of her approaching death, begins to ghess
The fatal minute near, summons up all
The raptures of her soul to guild her fall,
Wracking her throat into variety
Of different Diapazon^ sweet as hie,
Then sings her Fpicedium to that night
Of darkness whence she never more takes flight.
So my Clarinda sporting with her rare
Harmonious Organs filled the ravished Air
With soul-transporting notes, as though she meant
To breathe the world into astonishment.
Had the bright Lady of the floods bin by
She had bin silently content to die,
Finding her self so rivall'd in each strain,
But that Clarinda lives to sing again.
If ever Artist wrought so high a key
To steal a man even from himself a way,
And wind him up to heaven in a dream
Not knowing how, or when, or whence he came?
So slipped my soul: But thanks dear Sovereign
Thou pull'dst me safely down to thee again.
Had Thracian Orpheus with his feathered Quire,
And Rendezvous of brute bin present here
The wondering Bard had suffered with the rest,
Winged amazement, or at least turned beast.
So winningly did she dissolve the sense
In thousand labyrinths of joy, from whence
The captived soul could no more hope to see
Releasment than time in eternity.
But that that voice exhaled it from its earth
Proved merciful, and gave it second birth.
With holy reverence let me dare to say
Angels thus cloathe their Halelujah.
Thus Mercury to reach Jove's maiden prize
Charmed all the guards and rounds of Argus eyes.
Thus Philomel to drown the chirping wood,
Melts all her sugard forces to a flood.
Thus heaven's high consort blessed the breaking day
When the sweet Baby in a manger lay.
The Wisemen, had they heard this sacred strain,
Had ventured to have offered once again,
Though neither spice nor myrrh: What then I pray?
Even moping gravely to have loss'd their way.
For that great constellation of her light
Had sunck their lanthorn star in endless night.
But yet how sweetly had they strayed? when she
Makes it no less than heaven where ere she be?
O had you seen how the small birds did creep,
And dance from bough to bough! then stand and peep
Through the green lattice of the trees, to see
The instrument of that rich harmony!
And how the active grass there carpeted
Contended which should first thrust up its head,
And wake the enammel'd circle of the Bower
To hasten forth each pretty drooping flower,
That in a radiant Coronet they might meet
To weave gay buskins for Clarinda's feet!
It Would puzle a strong fancy here to prove
Which did exceed their envy or their love.
But I shall range no further in dispute,
The way to speak her worth is to be mute.
For when that voice closed her angelick song,
To paraphrase would prove a double wrong.
Platonique Love.
Begone fantastic whimsey, hence begone.
I slight thy dreams, I Am no Camelion.
Nor can I feed on Ayry smoaky blisses,
Or bayt my strong desire with smiles and kisses,
Old Tantalus as well may surfeit on
The flying streams by contemplation.
Give me a minute's heaven with my love,
Where I may roll in pleasures far above
The idle fancy of the soul's embrace,
Where my swift hand may ravish all the grace
Of beauties wardrop, where the longing Bride
May feast her fill, yet nere be satisfied.
Blaspheme not Love with any other name
Than an enjoyment kindled from the flame
Of panting breasts, mixed in a sweet desire
Of something more than barely to admire.
'Though sighs and signs may make the pulses beat,
'Action's the bellows that preserve the heat.
If all content were placed in the eye,
And thoughts comprised the whole felicity?
Pictures might court each other, and exchange
Their white-lime looks, woe hard, and yet seem strange,
'No, Love requires a quick and home embrace.
'Nor can it dwell for ever on the face.
'What ever glories Nature's tender care
'Compiles to make a piece divinely rare,
'Th'are but the sweet allurements of the eye
'Fix'd on a stage to catch the standers by.
'Or like rich Signs exposed to open sight
'To tempt the Traveller to stay all night.
Yield then (my chaste Clarinda) once to see
The sweet Maeander of Love's liberty.
And seal thy thoughts a grant to understand
The welcome pleasures of a wife well manned.
For all the sweets mistaken in a kiss
Are but the empty circumstance of this.
So shall a full content wipe out the score
Of all our sorrows that have pas^'d before.
Not a sad sigh shall escape unsatisfied
Which in its master's passion wept and dyed.
But like a Sea made subject to our Oars
We Will hoise up Sail and touch the wished Shoares.
A Sigh.
FLY thou pretty active part
To the Mistress of my heart,
Show her how the tedious night
Sadly wastes without delight,
How my waking soul devides
The silent day twixt ebbs and tides
Of hope and fear: How Love in me
Knows no measure or degree.
Tell her all my feigned dreams
Of her enjoyment, which in gleames
Of wished bliss I seemed to see
But waking proved a fallacy;
Contrived by death to kill a Swain
More than half already slain.
Tell her all my secret fears,
What a length's in seven years,
And that my grief well understood
Is worse by far than widdow-hood.
How to see and not partake
Is but dying for her sake.
Tell her more than I dare say,
Yet can think as well as they
That feel the freedom of that heat
Which I in contemplation beat.
And let her know Love more delights
In action than in appetites.
Tell her burial and a wife
Untouched, are both things without life.
And that too many heats and cold
Will make the best complexion old.
And when poor beauty's past its prime
The rest is but asleeping time.
Tell her all those heights and graces
Which are built in female faces
Like the Orbs without their motions
Are but glorious pittyed notions.
And in short without deceit
Love cannot for ever wait.
Pray her, pray her quickly yield,
Venus joy's to loose the field,
And in fettered twines to lie
Working through love's Mystery.
Where in thousand winding ways
She can twist the lover's maze.
Where with pleasing loss and pain
Ladies clip and to it again,
Mixing fresh with flames half gone,
Joys first felt then thought upon.
Tell her if she this deny
Love only fed with air must die.
Ask her whether groans and charms
Midnight walks and folded arms
Be all she meant when first she slew
My silly heart at second view?
And if a life be spent in wooing
Where Is the time reserved for doing?
Now little sigh if she at last
Chide and check thee with a cast
Of angry looks, like one that comes
To kindle love in sullen Tombs?
Return to me my pretty dear,
And I will hide thee in a tear.
Love's Farewell.
FOnd Love adieu, I loath thy tyranny.
Strive now no more to kill me with an eye,
Or that we call
Thy pastime, but our thrall.
I see thy cruelty, and moan the days
My fettered heart lay doting on thy praise.
If an unconstant look be all the grace
Attends the pleasure of thy wanton chase?
I Am none of thine
Nor will adore thy shrine.
I prize the freedom of a single hour
More than the sugared tortures of thy power.
If floods of brinish tears be all thy drink?
And the whole man confined to gaze and think?
If groans and sighs
Be still thy sacrifice?
I Will rather quench the flames of my desire,
Then at thine Altar languish and expire.
No, I supposed thy gilded baytes to be
As real blisses as they seemed to me*
But now I find
They captivate the mind,
And slave the soul to endless proofs of joy,
Which in the end are pills but to destroy.
Wound me no more: I Am tired with daily dying,
Refrain thy dull delays and bitter trying
Of my sad heart
Slain by the dart
If this be all my crop of hopes and fears?
My love my God shall have, my sins my tears.
Free me this once, and when I come to be
The prisoner of a second misery.
Bring all thy chains
And wracks of horrid pains,
I Will willingly embrace the dreadful chance,
And court my death as a deliverance.
Whisper no more there is faith in womankinde,
Or any fixed thought to strike me blind.
When each new face
Their fickle vows unlace.
And each strange object that attempts their eye,
Bribes all their sense into variety.
Give me a heart of such a sollid frame
Breathes above changes, and is still the same.
I like no wits
That flow by antique fits.
Nor such a whiffling love whose wandering fire
Is guided by a weathercock desire.
Give me a Mistress whose diviner mind
Speaks her descended of the heavenly kind,
Whose gloryes are
No borrowed tinsel ware,
Let her be ice to all the world, but such
As wax to me that melts upon the touch.
Call not that chastity that is proud disdain,
Nor plead them honest that in show refrain,
Lust has that trick,
And stews such Rhetoric,
Only to raise the standard of their price,
And steal a verteous paint by seeming nice.
No, I abhor those poor religious blindes,
Which aim to sequester our eyes and minds,
Love has no mask,
Nor can it frown or ask,
But in a sweet consent moves every way
With its dear object like the Sun and day.
No, either love me still or not at all,
I like no passions that can rise and fall,
No humors please
In this concealed disease,
But if my Mistress strive to catch my will,
The Laurel is attained by standing still.
Once more I tempt thy pity (Dearest Love)
And if these tears can no compassion move,
I Will scorn thee more
Than I have loved before.
And stanck up the salt Conducts of mine eyes
To watch thy shame, and weep mine obsequies.
Christmas Day; Or the Shutle of an inspired Weaver bolted against the Order of
the Church for its Solemnity.
CHrist-mass? give me my beads: The word implies
A plot, by its ingredients Beef and Pyes.
A feast Apocryphal, a popish rite
Kneaded in dough (beloved) in the night.
The night (beloved) that is as much to say
(By late translations) not in the day.
An annual dark-lanthorn Jubilee,
Catesby and Vaulx baked in conspiracy,
The Hierarchy of Rome, the Triple Crown
Confessed in Triangles, then swallowed down,
With spanish Sack? The eighty eight Armado
Newly presented in an Ovenado.
O Calvin! now my Cause upon thee fixes,
Were ere such dregs mixed with Genevae sixes?
The cloistered steaks with salt and pepper lie
Like Nuns with patches in a Monastrie.
Profaneness in a Conclave? nay much more
Idolatry in crust! Babylon's Whore
Raked from the grave, and baked by hanches, then
Served up in coffins to unholy men
Defiled with superstition, like the Gentiles
Of old, that worshipped Onions* Roots and Lentiles!
Did ever John of Leyden prophecy
Of such an Antichrist as pudding-pye?
Beloved it is a thing when it appears
Enough to set the Saints all by the ears
In solving of the text, a doubtful sin
Reformed Churches nere consented in.
But hold (my Brethren) while I preach and pray
Me thinks the Manna melts and wastes away,
I am a man as all you are, have read
Of Peter's sheet, how he devoutly fed
Without exception, therefore to dispense
A little with the worm of conscience.
And bend unto the creature, I profess,
Zeal and a Pie may join both in a mess.
The dearest sons may err, then why a sinner
May I not eat? since HVGH eat three to dinner?
Good Friday.
WHat sable Cypress maskes the glorious Sun?
Rivalls the world? and robs us of our Noon?
What Ague cramps the earth? whereas time fled?
Why groan the graves? is nature vanished?
Or must y shrivelled heavens in one dread fire
Roll up in flames? then languish and expire?
Some horrid change approaches, some sad guise,
Nature, or else the God of nature dies?
Here Is more than man in this, more than mankind,
Death's in pursuance, or the world resigned,
No common passion strikes mine eye, no fate
Less than the whole's extinction, or debate.
Angels stand trembling and amazed, the spears
Cease their blessed harmony, and turn all tears
Wrapped in a dreadful hush! so highly more
Is man's redemption than his birth before!
To raise a world from nothing, and divide
Dull bodies from the thin and rarefied
Speaks God in every close: But to renew
Those ruined attomes when confusion threw
The whole into a lumpish mass again,
This makes the lovely wonder sovereign.
To mould a man in clay, then quicken that
Dead body with a soul cooperate,
Argues a Real Presence: But when sin
Has soyl'd that heavenly stamp, and chained it in
The fetters of damnation, to restore
That life in death transcends the love before.
O then behold and see if ever pain
Or anguish matched that sorrow! when the slain
Of God bleeds on the Cross? when heaven descends
In blood, to make man and the heavens friends?
Nay more, when man lay doomed eternally,
To answer his own wrath, even God could dye!
And smile upon those Wounds, that Spear, that Grave,
Which our rebellions merited and gave!
This love exceeds all height: yet I confess
'Twas God that did it, how could it be less?
Easter Day.
HOw all the guard relieved? the Romans fled?
Those Basilisks that seeing conquered?
Heaven back my faith! what glorious Ap^arition
Shines in the vault? what angel like condition
Of Soldiers do I see? surely my fear
Trebles the object, it is the Gardener.
Flow out my tears: The have stolen the Lord away,
Come view the place whereas his body lay*
But yet behold the napkin, and the clothes
Wrapped by themselves! in vain you take your Oaths
Hard hearted Jews. For o he is risen and gone
Why stand you gazing? what do you dote upon?
Peace be unto you. O now I hear his voice,
Run Peter that thy spirit may rejoice.
A greater Star than that out of the East
Which led the Wisemen rises in my breast.
See where he rides in triumph! hell and death
Dragged at his chariot wheells, the powers beneath
Made grovelling Captives, all their trophies bring
Slaves to the laurels of the glorious King.
Nay sin and the dull grave make up the crowd
Though base, yet all prisoners at war allowd.
Ride on brave Prince of Souls, enlarge thy
It Is thy own work alone to kill and raise,
Dying to vanquish death and by thy fall bays
To be the Resurrection of us all.
Flow hither all believers, ye that sow
In tears, and in a veil but darkly know,
Stretch hither the distrustful hand and feel
The impressions of the nails and barbed steel.
But yet forbear, his word must be attended
Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended.
However feast your eyes, behold the Star
Of Jacob, Israel's deliverer.
This boon to begging Moses he would not give,
But now frail man may See his God and live.
Here Is ecstasy of joy enough, that when
Our sins conspired with ungodly men
To crucify the Lord of life, and kill
His innocence by our doing ill,
He yet survives the gall of bitterness,
Nor was his soul forsaken in distress,
But having led Captivity in chains
He burst the bonds of death, and lives, and reigns,
And this revives our souls there is yet again
A Monarchy beyond the reach of men.
Holy Thursday.
AS when the glorious Sun veiled and disguised
(As by the shadows of the night surprised)
Disrobes his sable dress, and reasumes
The beauty of its splendour from the Tombs
And vaults of darkness, mounts the dapled skies
And guilds the heavenly wardrop as he flies:
So here the Majesty of God concealed
Under a mortal mantle, unreveal'd
Till the predestined day of its disclose,
Sublimed its earth, and in full luster rose,
Joy'd with the shouts of Angels, and the quire
Of Cherubims made happyer to admire.
Me thinks I hear the arched spears resound
The Paeans of the Saints, and give them round
The tyres of heaven, like claps of thunder rolled
From pole to pole, and doubled as they fould.
Such a diffusive glory, that we see
Each Saint triumphant in his victory.
But is he gone for ever from our eyes?
Will he no more return? shall we not rise?
Or must that cloud that closed him from our sight
Stand a partition wall between the light
Of his eternal day and our dull shades?
O that is a horror kills as it invades!
No: There Is a hope yet left, a sure record
Of mercy undeniable, his Word.
Nay more* his faithful Promise: I Will not leave
You comfortless. And can the Lord deceive?
See there his hand and seal: And if you please
T^admit the voice of Angels to increase
An Infant faith? As you have seen him go
So he shall come again: Believe it so.
Rejoice then (o my soul) that as thou art
Rescued from death, and glorified in part,
So thy Redeemer lives, and that he is gone
Hence to prepare thy heavenly mansion.
And when the trembling hearts of them that slew
And peirct his precious body quake to view
The terror of his glorious return,
When time shall be no more, the heavens burn,
Earth crumble into ashes, and the dead
Waked by the Archangles voice dissepulcred,
And catchd up in the clouds, thy greater bliss
Shall meet thy sweet Redeemer with a kiss,
And with their eyes his glittering court survey
In all the garb of that tryumphant day.
Yet so demean thy self in this his dear
And pitied absence as if present here.
That at his second coming, Sans all grudg
He may return thy Savior as thy Judge.
Whitsunday.
WHat strange noise strikes mine ear? what sudden sound?
As though the rolling winds were all unbound
And met at once, by one joint fury hurld
To overturn the hinges of the world?
This Scaene fore*runs some dreadful Act to come,
Some greater wonder issuing from the womb
Of Providence than what has passed our eye?
Sure there is no second Son of God to dye?
Nor summons to the dead once more to rise
And scare the bloody City's Sacrifice?
Nor does the cheerful Sun dance through the spears
As though he meant to fetch his last carrears?
Time's not so near its Exit? nor the fall
And conflagration of this circled Ball?
But yet behold a fire! most contrary
To its own nature posting from on high!
Kindling a sad suspicion, cleft in rays
As though designed to catch all sorts of ways!
Sure it is no wanton flame, such whifling Lights
Quench with the night-mark of tempestuous nights,
Not daring to attempt the daye's bright eye
To judge their non-existent frippery.
No, this descends more stayed, reached from above,
'O it is the very God of peace and love!
But how so strange divided? can there be
Twelve parts like Tribes couched in the dietie?
That it appears multipartite? in the dress
Of Cloven Tongues? what tongue can this express?
Yet though it seems in Sections to appear
Most like the soul It Is wholly every where.
The Spirit's omnipresent, nor can be
Confined to number, measure, or degree.
But why in fire? and such myrac'lous flame?
Fixed on a stay, yet not consume the same?
Are men like Moses bush? can bodies burn
Insensible? and not to ashes turn?
The wonder's great! but not so deep as high.
'Nature must needs leave work, when God stands by.
Descend on me Great God! but in such fire
May not consume, but kindle my desire.
Descend on me in flames! but such as move
Winged by the inspiration of the Dove.
Descend in Cloven Tongues! such as dispense
No double meanings in a single sense.
Hence all you wild pretenders, you that blaze
Like Meteors lapp'd in zeal, and dance the maze
Of nonconformity in antique fits,
Yea even from your selves curss'd Heretics;
Light not your frighted censors here: no Quaker,
Frisker, Baboon, or Antinomian shaker
Must fire his brand from hence, the Spirit claims
No holder-forth that dwells on second aims;
But Comes to reprove the worlds Judaick press
Of Sin, of Judgment, and of Righteousness.
No strange fanatic spark that gaping flies
And leaves its Audience skared with ecstasies.
No Skipper in divinity, no Hinter,
No radled Cardinal, no dreaming minter
Of words and faces, no Quire of the Brisle,
No squib, no squeaker of the puny grisle
Approach this glory: For the beauteous Sun
Admits no maskers till the day be done.
No Chemical St. Martins pass the Test
Till the pure Oare's exild, or gone to rest.
Shine out bright God, dispel these smoaky foggs
Of schism and heresy that smears and clogs
The chariot of thy Gospel, that truth may
Break forth in its own gloss and proper ray.
That the Blue-apron'd Crackers of the times.
Those wilde-fire Rockets, whose ambition climbes
To wound the world with broils, set all on fire,
And sink a glorious Church through base desire,
May dwindle to their bulks, and there indite
Long small-drink Anthems of the Saints good night.
While it contents the boys to nod at last
November and my Ld. Mayors day are past.
A short Ejaculation Upon that truly worthy Patron of the Law Sr. John Bridgman
Knight. and Lord Chief Justice of Chester and the Marshes of Wales deceased.
SHall all the Tribes of Israel thirty days
Mourn for the death of Moses? and so raise
Their doubled cries to heaven, and bemoan
The Light of Jacob in a Tomb unknown.
And Bridgman set obscurely? can the Sun
Withdraw its radiant splendour at high noon,
And the whole world not stand amazed to see
Their glory swallowed in eternity?
Can the bright soul of Justice mount the skies
And we not fear a Deluge from our eyes?
Such was thy sad departure, such thy flight
Into the spangled heavens, that the night
Of a more sad despair has seized our beams,
And left us nothing but our brackish streams
To offer at thy shrine: And in those showers
We state the day, and steep the slow-paced hours.
Hence let the Law be canonized no better
Than a mere corpse of words, a bare dead letter,
In thee the life departed: In thy dust
Lies raked the hand and sense of right and just.
What yet survives, or rather what presents
It Is seeming face clothed in thine ornaments,
It Is but Elias Mantle (though unknown)
Dropped to work wonder, but the Prophet's gone.
Piae Memoriae Doctiss. Reveren dissimique in Christo Patris, Johannis Prideaux
quam novissime Wigoriae Episcopi, harumque tristissime lacrymarum Patroni nec
non defuncti.
BVsta struant alii, lacrymisque altar refundant,
Quorum tristitia fata pianda cadunt.
Talia praecurant cineres monumenta pusilli,
Queis melos and tumulum fama gemenda petit.
Hic neque pyramidum, nec inertis monstra colossi
Poscuntur, subito corruitura die.
Gloria securi confidentissima Caeli
Non vocat haec stellis astra minora suis.
Sic tuus ascendit currus, dign^ssime Praesul,
Terreni miserans futile honoris onus.
Sed vae Zodiaco nostro, vae (Phaebe) trementi,
Ortus enim patriae lux tenebraeque fuit.
In te floruimus, tecum decerpimur omnes
Et Pater and gnati: Molliter ossa cubent.
Parva tegant tenues and aperti funera fletus,
Tanta ruunt superis damna silenda metu.
Obsequies On that right Reverend Father in God John Prideaux late Bishop of
Worcester deceased.
IF by the fall of Luminaries we
May safely ghuess the world's Catastrophe?
The signs are all fulfilled, the Tokens flown,
(That scarce a man has any of his own)
Only the Jews conversion some doubt bred,
But that is confuted now the Doctor's dead.
Great Atlas of Religion! since thy fate
Proclaims our loss too soon, our tears too late,
Where shall the bleeding Church a Champion
To grasp with Heresy? Or to maintain
Her conflict with the Devil? For the ods gain
Runs bias'd six to four against the Gods.
Hell lists amain, nay and the engagement flies
With winged Zeal through all the Sectaries,
That should she soundly into question fall,
We were within a Vote of none at all.
But can this hap upon a single death?
Yes: For thou were the treasure of our breath.
That pious Arch whereon the building stood
Which broke, the whole's devolved into a flood
An inundation that ore-bears the banks
And bounds of all religion: If some stancks
Show their emergent heads? Like Set^'s famed stone
The are monuments of thy devotion gone!
No wonder then the rambling Spirits stray
In thee the body fell, and slipped away.
Hence '^is the Pulpit swells with exhalations.
Intricate nonsense traveled from all Nations,
Notions refined to doubts, and maxims squeezed
With tedious hick-ups till the sense grows freez'd.
If ought shall chance to drop we may call good,
It Is thy distinction makes it understood.
Thy glorious Sun made ours a perfect day,
Our influence took its being from thy ray.
Thine was that Gedeon's fleece* when all stood dry,
Pearl'd with caelestial dew showered from on high.
But now thy night is come our shades are spread,
And living here we move among the dead.
Perhaps an Ignis fatuus now and then
Starts up in holes, stincks and goes out again.
Such Kicksee winsee flames show but how dear
Thy great Ligh^'s resurrection would be here.
A Brother with five loaves and two small fishes,
A table book of sighs, and looks, and wishes,
Sta^tles religion more at one strong doubt,
Than what they mean when as the candle's
But I profane thy ashes (gracious soul)
Thy spirit flew too high to truss these foul out.
Gnostick opinions. Thou desired'st to meet,
Such tenants that dust stand upon their feet,
And beard the Truth with as intens'd a zeal
As Saints upon a fast night quilt a meal.
Rome never trembled till thy peircing eye
Darted her through, and crushed the mystery.
Thy Revelations made St. John's complete,
Babylon fell indeed, but 'twas thy sweat
And oil performed the work: to what we see
Foretold in misty types, broke forth in thee.
Some shallow lines were drawn, and sconces made
By smatterers in the Arts, to drive a trade
Of words between us, but that proved no more
Than threats in cowing feathers to give ore.
Thy fancy laid the Siedg that wrought her fall,
Thy batteries commanded round the wall:
Not a poor loop-hole error could sneak by,
No not the Abbess to the Friery,
Though her disguise as close and subtly good
As when she wore the Monk's hose for a hood.
And if perhaps their French or Spanish wine
Had filled them full of beads and Bellarmine,
That they durst salley, or attempt a guard,
O! how thy busy brain would beat and ward?
Rally? and reinforce? rout? and relieve?
Double reserves? And then an onset give
Like marshalled thunder backed with flames of fire?
Storms mixed with storms? Passion with globes of ire?
Yet so well disciplined that judgment still
Swayed, and not rash Commissionated will.
No, words in thee knew order, time, and place,
The instant of a charge, or when to face;
When to pursue advantage, where to halt,
When to draw off, and where to re-assault.
Such sure commands streamed from thee, that 'twas one
With thee to vanquish as to look upon.
So that thy ruined Foes grovelling confess
Thy conquests were their fate and happiness.
Nor was it all thy business here to war
With foreign forces: But thy active star
Could course a homebred mist, a native sin,
And show its guilt's degrees how, and wherein;
Then sentence and expel it: Thus thy sun
An everlastingstage in labor run;
So that its motion to the eye of man
Waved still in a complete Meridian.
But these a^e but fair comments of our loss,
The glory of a Chruch now on the Cross:
The transcript of that beauty once we had
Whiles with the luster of thy presence clad.
But thou art gone (Brave Soul) and with thee all
The gallantry of Arts Polemical.
Nothing remains as ^r^mitive but talk,
And that our Priests again in Leather walk.
A Flying ministry of horse and foot,
Things that can start a text but nere come to it.
Teazers of doctrines, which in long-fleev'd prose
Run down a Sermon all upon the nose.
These like dull glowworms twinckle in the night,
The frighted Land-skips of an absent light.
But thy rich flame's withdrawn, heaven caught thee hence,
Thy glories were grown ripe for recompense:
And therefore to prevent our weak essaies
The art crowned an Angel with caelesti^l Bays.
And there thy ravished Soul meets field and fire,
Beauties enough to fill its strong desire.
The contemplation of a present God,
Perfections in the womb, the very road
And Essensies of virtues as they be
Streming and mixing in Eternity.
Whiles we possess our souls ^ut in a veyle,
Live earth confined, catch heaven by retaile,
Such a dark-lanthorn age, such jealous days,
Men tread on Snakes, sleep in Bataliaes,
Walk like Confessors, hear, but must not say
What ^ bold world dares act, and what it may.
Yet here all votes, Commons and Lords agree,
The Crosier fell in Laud, the Church in thee.
On the death of his Royal Majesty Charles late King of England etc.
WHat went you out to see? a dying King?
Nay more, I fear an Angel suffering.
But what went you to see? A Prophet slain?
Nay that and more, a martyrd Sovereign.
Peace to that sacred dust! Great Sir our fears
Have left us nothing but obedient tears
To court your hearse; and in those pious floods
We live, the poor remainder of our goods.
Accept us in these later obsequies
The unplundred riches of our hearts and eyes,
For in these faithful streams and emanations
W' are subjects still beyond all Sequestrations.
Here we cry more than Conquerours: malice
Murder estates, but hearts will still obey.
These as your glory's yet above the reach may
Of such whose purple lines confusion preach.
And now (Dear Sir) vouchsafe us to admire
With envey your arrival, and that Quire
Of Cherubims and Angels that supplied
Our duties at your tryumphs: where you ride
With full caelestial Ioes, and Ovations
Rich as the conquest of three ruined Nations.
But 'twas the heavenly plot that snath d you hence,
To crown your soul with that magnificence
And bounden rights of honor, that poor earth
Could only wish and strangle in the birth.
Such pitied emulation stopped the blush
Of our ambitious shame, nonsuited us.
For where souls act beyond mortallity
Heaven only can perform that Jubilee.
We wrestle then no more, but bless your day
And mourn the anguish of our sad delay:
That since we cannot add, we yet stay here
Fettred in clay: Yet longing to appear
Spectators of your bliss, that being shown
Once more, you may embrace us as your own.
Where never envy shall devide us more,
Nor City tumults, nor the worlds uproar.
But an eternal hush, a quiet peace
As without end, so still in the increase
Shall lull humanity a sleep, and bring
Us equal subjects to the heavenly King.
Till when I Will turn Recusant, and forswear
All Calvin, for there is Purgatory here.
An Epitaph.
STay Passenger: Behold and see
The widdowed grave of Majesty.
Why tremblest thou? Here Is that will make
Al^ but our stupid souls to shake.
Here lies entombed the sacred dust
Of Peace and Piety, Right and Just.
The blood (O startest not thou to hear?)
Of a King, 'twixt hope and fear
Shedd, and hurried hence to be
The miracle of misery.
Add the ills that Rome can boast.
Shrift the world in every coast,
Mix the fire of earth and seas
With humane spleen and practices,
To puny the records of time,
By one grand Gygantick crime,
Then swell it bigger till it squeeze
The globe to crooked hams and knees,
Here Is that shall make it seem to be
But modest Christianity.
The Lawgiver, amongst his own*
Sentenced by a Law unknown.
Voted Monarchy to death
By the course Plebeian breath.
The Sovereign of all command
Suffering by a Common hand.
A Prince to make the o^ium more
Offered at his very door.
The head cut off, o death to see it!
In obedience to the feet.
And that by Justice you must know,
If you have faith to think it so.
We Will stir no further then this sacred Clay,
But let it slumber till the Judgment day.
Of all the Kings on earth, it is not denied,
Here lies the first that for Religion died.
A Survey of the World.
THe World's a gilded trifle, and the state
Of sublunary bliss adulterate.
Fame but an empty sound* a painted noise,
A wonder that nere looks beyond nine days.
Honor the tennis-ball of fortune: Though
Men wade to it in blood and overthrow;
Which like a box of dice uneven dance
Sometimes it is one's, sometimes another's chance.
Wealth but the hugged consumption of that heart
That travailes Sea and Land for his own smart.
Pleasure a courtly madness, a conceit
That smiles and tickles without worth or weight
Whose scattered reckoning when it is to be paid
Is but repentance lavishly in-layd.
The world, fame, honor, wealth, and pleasure then
Are the fair wrack and Gemonies of men.
Ask but thy Carnal heart if thou should be
Sole Monarch of the worlds great family,
If with the Macedonian Youth there would
Not be a corner still reserved that could
Another earth contain? If so? What is
That poor insatiate thing she may call bliss?
Question the laden Gallantry asleep
What profit now their Laurels in the deep
Of death's oblivion? What their Triumph was
More than the moment it did prance and pass?
If then applause move by the vulgar cry,
Fame's but a glorious uncertainty.
Awake Sejanus, Strafford, Buckingham,
Charge the fond favorites of greatest name,
What faith is in a Prince's smile, what joy
In the high and Grand Concilio le Roy?
Nay Caesar's self, that marched his Honour*s through
The bowels of all Kingdoms, made them bow
Low to the stirrup of his will and vote,
What safety to their Master's life they brought?
When in the Senate in his highest pride
By two and thirty wounds he fell and dyed?
If Height be then most subjected to fate?
'Honour's the dayspring of a greater hate.
Now ask the Groveling soul that makes his gold
His Idol, his Diana, what a cold
Account of happiness can here arise
From that ingluvious surfeit of his eyes?
How the whole man's inslaved to a lean dearth
Of all enjoyment for a little earth?
How like Prometheus he does still repair
His growing heart to feed the Vultur care.
Or like a Spider's envious designs
Drawing the threads of death from her own loins.
Torturing his entrails with thoughts of to morrow,
To keep that mass with grief he gained with sorrow.
If to the clincking pastime in his ears
He add the Orphans cries and widows tears
The musick's far from sweet, and if you sound him
Truly, they leave him sadder than they found him.
Now touch the Dallying Gallant, he that lies
Angling for babies in his Mistress eyes,
Thinks there is no heaven like a bale of dyce
Six Horses and a Coach with a device.
A cast of Lacquyes, and a Lady-bird,
An Oath in fashion, and a gilded Sword,
Can smoke Tobacco with a face in frame,
And speak perhaps a line of sense to the same,
Can sleep a Sabboath over in his bed,
Or if his play book's there will stoop to read,
Can kiss its hand, and congey a la mode,
And when the night's approaching bolt abroad,
Unless his Honor's worship's rent's not come;
So he falls sick, and swears the Carrier home.
Else if his rare devotion swell so high
To waste an hour-glasse on divinity,
It Is but to make the church his stage, thereby
To blaze the Tailor in his ribaldry.
Ask but the Jay when his distress shall fall
Like an armed man upon him, where are all
The rose-buds of his youth? those atick toys
Wherein he sported out his precious days?
What comfort he collects from Hawk or Hound?
Or if amongst his looser hours, he found
One of a thousand to redeem that time
Perished and lost for ever in his prime?
Or if he dreamed of an eternal bliss?
He Will swear God damn him he nere thought of this.
But like the Epicure adored the day
That shined, rose up to eat, and drink, and play.
Knows that his body was but dust, and dye
It once must, so have mercy, and God b'wy.
Thus having traverss'd the fond world in brief,
The lust of the eyes, the flesh, and pride of life,
Unbiased and impartially, we see
It Is lighter in the scale than vanity.
What then remains? But that we still should strive
Not to be born to dye, but dye to live.
An old Man Courting a young Girl.
COme beauteous Nymph, can thou embrace
An aged, wise, majestic grace
To mingle with thy youthful flames?
And make thy glories stayed? The Dames
Of looser gesture blush to see
Thy Lillies clothed with gravitie?
Thy happier choice? thy gentle Vine
With a sober Elm entwine?
Seal fair Nymph that lovely tie
Shall speak thy honor loud and high.
Nym: Cease Grandsire Lover, and forbear
To court me with thy Sepulcher,
Thy chill December and my May,
Thy Evening and my Break of Day
Can brook no mixture, no condition,
But stand in perfect opposition.
Nor can my active heart embrace
A shivering Ague in love's chase.
Only perhaps the luky tie
May make thy forked fortune high.

Man: If fretted roofs, and beds of down,
And the wonder of the Town,
Bended knees, and costly fare,
Richest dainties without care,
May temptatious motives be
Here they all attend on thee,
And to raise thy bliss the more,
Swell thy Truncks with precious O^e,
The glittering entrails of the East
To varnish and perfume thy Nest.

Nym. I question not Sage Sir but she
That weds your grave obliquitie,
Your Tizick, Rhewms, and Soldans face
Shall meet with Fretted Roofs apace,
I fancy not your bended knees
Least bowing you can sprightly rise,
Your gold too when you leave to woo
Will quickly become Precious too.
And dainty Cates without delight,
May glut the day but starve the night.
For when thou boasts the Beds of bliss,
The man, the man still wanting is.

Man. Nay gentle Nymph think not my fire
So quenched, but that the strong desire
Of love can wake it, and create
New action to cooperate.
The sparks of youth are not so gone,
But I -- ay marry that I can.
Come smack me then me pretty dear,
Taste what a lively change is here.
Why fly'st thou me? --

Nym. -- ice ice begone,
Clasp me not with thy Frozen Zone.
That pale aspect would best become
The sad complexion of a Tomb.
Think not thy Churchyard look shall moove
My spring to be thy Winter's Stove
If at the Resurrection we
Shall chance to marry, call on me
By that time I perhaps may ghuess
How to bathe and how to dress
Thy weeping legs and simpathise
With perished lungs and wopper eyes;
And think thy touchy passion wit,
Love disdain and flatter it;
And 'midst this costive punishment
Raise a politic content.
But whiles the Solstice of my years
Glories in its highest spears,
Deem not, I will daign to be
The Vassal of infirmity.
The skreen of phlegmatic old age,
Decayed Methusalem his page.
No, give me lively pleasures, such
Melt the fancy in the touch;
Raise the appetite, and more,
Satisfy it ore and ore.
Then from the ashes of those fires
Kindle fresh and new desires.
So Cyprus be the Scaene: Above
Venus and the God of love,
Knitting true-love-knots in one
Merry happy Union.
Whiles their feath'red team appears
Doves and Sparrows in their gears
Fluttering ore the jovial-frie
Sporting in love's Comaedie.

Man. Hold hasty soul, beauty's a flower
That may perish in an hour,
No disease but can disgrace
The trifling blossoms of a face,
And nip the heights of those fond toys
That now are doted on with praise.
The noon-glory of the Sun
To the shades of night must come.
May, for all her gilded prime
Has its weak and withering time.
Not a bud that owes its birth
From the teeming-mother earth
But excells the fading dress
Of a woman's loveliness.
For when flowers vanish here
They may spring another year.
But frail beauty when it is gone
Finds no resurrection.
Scorn me then coy Nymph no more,
Fly no higher, do not soar,
Those pretty rubies of thy lips
Once must know a pale Eclipse.
And that plump alluring skin
Will be furrowed deeply in.
And those curled locks so bright
Time will all besnow with white.
Not a glory, not a glance,
But must suffer change and chance.
Then, though now you will not contact
With me in the marriage Act,
Yet perforce choose, choose you whether
You and I shall Lie together.

An Epitaph on his deceased Friend.
HEre lies the ruined Cabinet
Of a rich soul more highly set.
The dross and refuse of a mind
Too glorious to be here confined.
Earth for a while bespake his stay
Only to bait and so away:
So that what here he doted on
Was merely accommodation.
Not that his active soul could be
At home, but in eternity.
Yet while he blessed us with the rays
Of his short continued days,
Each minute had its weight of worth,
Each pregnant hour some Star brought forth.
So whiles he traveled here beneath
He lived, when others only breathe.
For not a sand of time slipped by
Without its action sweet as high.
So good, so peacable, so blessed,
Angels alone can speak the rest.
Mount Ida, or, Beauties Contest.
THree regent Goddesses they fell at odds,
As they sat close in council with the gods,
Whose beauty did excel? And thence they crave
A moderator of the strife to have,
But least the partial heavens could not decide
The grudg, they stoop to Mortals to be tried.
Mantled in clouds then gently down they fall
Upon Mount Ida to appease the brall,
Where Priam's lovely Boy sporting did keep
His Fathers lambs and snowy flocks of sheep,
His lilly hand was soon ordained to be
The harmless Vmpire of the fond decree.
To him, to him they gave the Golden Ball,
O happy goddess upon whom it fall!
But more unhappy Shepeard, was it not pittv
Thou did not send it at a close Committee?
There, there thou had surpassed what did befall,
Thou might have crowned One, yet pleased All.
First then Imperious Juno did display
Her coronet of glories to the Boy,
And ranged her stars up in an arched ring
Of height and majesty most flourishing,
Then wealth and honor at his foot did lay
To be esteemed the Lady of the day.
Next Pallas that brave Heroina came,
The thundering Queen of action, war and fame,
Dressed in her glittering arms, wherewith she lays
Worlds wast, and new ones from their dust can raise,
These, these she tenders him, advanced to be,
With all the wreaths of wit and gall antrie.
Last Venus breaks forth of her golden rays,
With thousand Cupids crowned, ten thousand Boys,
Sparkling through every quadrant of her eyes,
Which made her beauty in full glory rise:
Then smiling vowed so to sublime his parts
To make him the great Conqueror of hearts.
Thus poor distracted Par^s all on fire
Stood trembling deep in doubt what to desire,
The sweet temptations pleaded hard for all,
Each theater of beauty seemed to call
For the bright prize: but he amazed he
Could not determine which, which, which was she
At last the Cyprian Girl so struck him bli^de
In all the faculties of soul and mind,
That he poor captived wretch without delay
Could not forbear his frailty to betray,
But maugre honor, wisdom, all above*
He ran and kissed and crowned the Queen of Love.
Pallas and Juno then in high disdain
Took snuff and posted up to heaven again*
As to a high Court of appeal, to be
Revenged on men for this indignity.
'Hence then it happens that the Ball was lost
''Tis two to one but love is always crossed.
Upon a Fly that flew into a Lady's eye, and there lay buried in a tear.
POor envious Soul! what could thou see
^n that bright Orb of purity?
That active globe? That twinkling sphere
Of beauty to be meddling there?
Or did thou foolishly mistake
The glowing morn in that daybreak?
Or was it thy pride to mount so high
Only to kiss the Sun and dye?
Or did thou think to rival all
Don Phaethon and his great fall?
And in a richer Sea of brine
Drown Icarus again in thine?
It Was bravely aimed, and which is more
The have sunck the fable ore and ore.
For in this single death of thee
The have banqurrupt all Antiquity.
O had the fair Aegiptian Queen
Thy glorious monument out seen,
How had she spared what time forbids
The needless tottering Pyramids!
And in an emulative chafe
Have begged thy shrine her Epitaph?
Where, when her aged marble must
Resign her honor to the dust,
Thou might have canonized her
Deceased Time's Executor?
To ripp up all the western bed
Of spices where Sol lays his head,
To squeeze the Phaenix and her Nest
In one perfume that may write Best,
Then blend the gall'rie of the skies
With her Seraglio of eyes,
TO embalm a name, and raise a Tomb
The miracle of all to come,
Then, then compare it: Here Is a Gemm
A Pearl must shame and pity them.
An amber drop, distlled by
The sparkling Limbeck of an eye,
Shall dazzle all the short essaies
Of rubbish worth, and shallow praise.
We strive not then to prize that tear
Since we have naught to poise it here.
The world's too light. Hence, hence we cry
The world, the world's not worth a Fly.
Obsequies To the memory of the truly Noble, right Valiant and right Honorable
Spencer Earl of Northampton Slain at Hopton Field in Saffordshire in the
beginning of this Civil War.
What? The whole world in silence?
Not a tear
In tune through all the speechless Hemisphaere?
Has grief so seized and seared mankind in all
The convoyes of Intellegence? No fall
But those of Waters heard? No Elegies
But such as whine through the organs of our eyes?
Can Pompey fall again? And no Pen say
Here lies the Roman Liberty in clay?
Or can his blood Boe-die the Egiptian Sand,
And the black crime do less than ^ann the land?
And make the Region instead of a verse
And tomb his sable Epitaph and Hearse?
So here Northampton that brave Hero fell
Tryumphant Roman thy pure parallel,
The blush and glory of his Age: Who dyed
In all points happy, but the Weak^^ side.
Only to foreign parts he did not roam,
The kind Egiptians met him nearer home.
Both, and such, Causes, that the world confess
There Is naught to plead against them but Success.
Malignant Loyalty! a glorious fame
And sin, for which God never found a name.
Which had it escaped the Rubric of these times
Had still continued among Holy Crimes.
A Text on which we find no gloss at all
But in the Alcorn of Goldsmiths Hall!
Now (Great Adolphus) give me leave to stir
The ashes of thy Urne, and Sepulcher;
And branch the flowers of the Sweadish glory
As rivall'd to the life in our sad story:
Yet not impair thy plumes, by adding more
To suit that splendour from a neighbor shore^
Nor deem thy honor less thus matched to be,
If Compton dyed to grasping Victory.
An active soul in gallant fury hurled
To club with all the worthies of the world.
Blind, envious, piping Fortune! what could be
The tottering ground of this thy treachery?
To stop the balance of that brave Carrear
Was both at once thy miracle and fear?
Was It not a pannick dread surpised thy soul
Of being made servile to his high control?
Blush and confess poor Caitiff-godess! so
We Will quit his in thy ^eall overthrow.
And Death, thou worm! thou pale Assassinate!
Thou sneaking hireling of revenge and hate,
Did not thou feel an Earthquake in thy bones?
Such as rends Rocks and their foundations?
No Tirtian shivering, but an Ague fit
Which with a burning Fever shall commit
The world to ashes? when thou stolest creptst under
That Helmet which durst dare Jove and his thunder
But since the bays he reached at grew not here,
Like a wise soldier, and a Cavalier,
He left his coveteous enemy at bay,
Rifling the carriage of his flesh and clay:
While his rich soul pursued the greater game
Of Honor to the skies, there fixed his name.
I shall not therefore vex the Orbs to trace
Thy sacred footsteps in that hallowed place.
Nor start a feigned Star, and swear it thine,
Then stretch the Constellation to thy line.
Like a Welsh Gentleman that tacks his kin
To all Coats in the country he lives in.
Nor yet, to raise thy Flaming Crest, shall I
Knock for the wandering Planets in the sky:
Perhaps some broken beauty of stale doubt,
To comment on her face has hired them out*
Let fame, and thy brave race thy Statue live,
The world can never such another give.
Whiles each soul sighs at the sad thought of thee
There fell a Province of Nobility.
A fall, had Zeal but husbanded its throat,
That sunck the House of Lords, and saved the Vote.
They only state mute Titles in their gears,
He singly represented all the Peers.
One, had the enemy imployd their Smeck,
Those Ring-worms of the Church, to beg a neck
With Claudius, to metropolize all worth,
Rome, and what ere the Suburb world brought forth,
In him the sword did glut its ravening eye,
The rest that kicked up were the smaler Frye.
Sparks only of that fire in him deceased,
Nyfles that cracked and vanished north and west.
He lead the Royal war in such a dye,
In that dire entrance of the Tragedy,
The sense (Great Charles) no longer to prorogue,
None but thy self could speak the Epilogue.
The London Lady.
GEntly my Muse! it is but a tender piece,
A paradox of Fumes and Ambergreece.
A cobweb-tinder at a touch takes fire,
The tumbling wherligig of blind desire.
Vulcan's Pandora in a crystal shrine,
Or the old Inn faced with a new painted sign.
The spotted voyder of the Term: In short
Chemical nature phisick'd into Art.
But hold rude Satyr, here is a Hector comes,
A Cod-pe^ce Captain that with her shares sums,
One claims a Jointure in her sins, the foil
That puts her off, like the old man ere while
That with a dagger Cloak, and ho-boy gapes
And squeeks for company for the Jack an Apes.
This is the feirce St. George, fo^e runs the wagon,
And, if occasion be, shall kill the Dragon.
Don Mars the great assendant on the road
When Thomass's teem begins to jog abroad.
The hinter at each turn of Coven Garden,
The Club pickearer, the robust Church warden
Of Lincolne's Inn back corner, where he angles
For Cloaks and Hats, and the small gam eentangles
This is the City Usher straid to enter
The small drink country squires of the first venture,
And dubs them bach'lor-Knight of the black Jugg,
Man's them into an oath, and the French shrugg,
Makes them fine graduates in smock impudence,
And gelds them of their puny mothers sense.
So that when two terms more, and forty pound
Reads them acquainted all Gomorrha round,
Down to their wondering friends at last they range,
With breeding just enough to speak them strange,
And drown a younger brother in a look
Kick a poor Lacquey, and berogue the Cook,
Top a small cry of Tennants that dare stir
In no phrase now, but save your Worship Sir.
But to return: By this my Lady's up,
Has swom the Ocean of the Cawdle Cup,
Conversed with every washing, every ground,
And Fucus in the Cabinet's to be found,
Has laid the fixed complexion for the day,
Her breech rings high Change and she must away.
Now down the Channel toward the Strand she glides,
Flinging her nimble glances on both sides,
Like the death-darting Cockatrice that slye
Close Enginere that murders through the eye.
The first that is tickled with her rumbling wheels
Is the old Statesman, that in slippers reels,
He wire-drawes up his jaws, and snufs and grins,
And sighing smacks, but for my aged shins,
My Conclave of diseases, I would board
Your lofty Galley: Thus I served my Lord --.
But mum for that, his strength will scarce supply
His back to the Belcone, so god b'wy.
By this she has surveyed the golden Globe,
And finding no temptation to disrobe,
To Durham New Old Stable on she packs,
Where having wine'd and breathed the what d' ye lacks,
Rusled and bounced a turn or two in ire,
She mounts the Coach like Phaethon all on fire,
Fit for the impressions of all sorts of evil,
And whirles up tow'^ds the Lawyers and the Devil.
There Ployden in his laced Ruff starched on edg
Peeps like an Adder through a quickset hedge,
And brings his stale demur to stop the course
Of her proceedings with her yoke of horse;
Then falls to handling of the case, and so
Shows her the posture of her overthrow,
But yet for all his Law and double Fees
She Will bring him to join issue on his knees:
And make him pay for expedition too,
Thus the gray fox acts his green sins anew.
And well he scapes if all his Norman sense
Can save the burning of his Evidence.
But out at last she is hudled in the dark,
Manned like a Lady Client by the Clerk.
And so the nimble youngster at the parting
Extorts a smack perhaps before the Carting.
Down Fleet Street next she rowls with powderd crest,
To spring clip'd-half-crowns in the Cuekow's nest
For now the Heroes of the yard have shut
Their shops, and loll upon their bulks to put
The Ladies to the squeek, if so perhaps
Their mistress can spare them from their laps.
Not far she waves and sails before she clings
With the young tribe for pendents, lace and rings,
But there poor totterd Madam, though to late,
She meets the topsi-turvey of her state,
For the calmed Boys* ^aving ^ought left to pay,
A^^ forced ^o pawn her, and so run away.
On this the dreadful Drawer soon appears,
Like her ill G^^^us about her ears,
With a long bill of Items that affright
Worse than a skull of Halberds in the night.
For now the Jay's compelled to untruss all
The tackling upon tick from every stall,
Each sharing Broker of her borrowed dress
Seems to do penance in her nakedness.
For not a Lady of the noble game
But is composed at least of all Long-lane:
An Animal together blowed and made,
And up'd of all the shreds of every Trade.
Thus purely now her self, homewards she packs,
Exciz'd in all the Dialects of her knacks:
Squeezed to the utmost thread, and latest grain,
Like Meteors tossed to their first grit again.
A lane, a lane, she comes, summed down to naught,
But shame and a thin under petticoat.
But least I should pursue her to the quick,
I pass: The chase lies now too near the nick
In pity Satyr then thy lash let fall:
He knows her best that scans her not at all.
And though thou seemst discourteous not to save her,
No matter, when thou leave there is one will have her.
The Times.
TO speak in wet-shod eyes, and drowned looks,
Sad broken accents, and a vein that brooks
No spirit, life, or vigor, were to own
The crush and triumph of affliction;
And creeping with Themistocles to be
The pale-faced pensioners of our enemy.
No, it is the glory of the soul to rise
By falls, and at re-bound to pierce the skies.
Like a brave Courser standing on the sand
Of some high-working Fretum, views a land
Smiling with sweets upon the distant side,
Garnished in all her gay imbroidred pride, woods,
Larded with springs, and fringed with curled
Impatient, bounces, in the capring floods,
Big with a nobler fury than that stream a way
Of shallow violence he meets in them;
Thence armed with scorn and courage ploughs
Through the impostum'd billows of the Sea;
And makes the grumbling surges slaves to oar
And waft him safely to the further shore:
Where landed, in a sovereign disdain
He turns back, and surveys the foaming main,
Whiles the subjected waters flowing reel
Ambitious yet to wash the victor's heel.
In such a noble equipage should we
Embrace the encounter of our misery.
Not like a field of corn, that hangs the head
For every tempest, every petty dread*
Crosses were the best Christians arms: and we
That hope a wished Canaan once to see
Must not expect a carpet way alone
Without a red sea of affliction.
Then cast the dice: Let Us foord old Rubicon,
Caesar it is thine, man is but once undone.
Tread softly though, least Scylla's ghost awake,
And us in the roll of his Proscriptions take.
Rome is revived, and the Triumvirate
In the black Island are once more a state;
The City tree mbles: There Is no third to shield
If once Augustus to Antonius yield
Law shall not shelter Cicero, the robe
The Senate: Proud success admits no probe
Of Justice to correct or quare the fate
That bears down all as illegitimate;
For whatsoere it lists to overthrow,
It either finds it, or else makes it so.
Thus Tyranny's a stately Palace, where
Ambition sweats to climb and nustle there;
But when it is enterd, what hopes then remain?
There is no salliport to come out again.
For mischief must roll on, and gliding grow
Like little rivulets that gently flow
From their first bubling springs, but still increase
And swell their channel as they mend their pace;
Till in a glorious tide of villainy
They overrun the bancks, and posting fly
Like the bellowing waves in tumults, till they can
Display themselves in a full Ocean.
And if blind rage shall chance to miss its way
Brings stock enough alone to make a Sea.
Thus treble treasons are secured and drowned
By louder crimes of deeper mouth and sound.
And high attempts swallow a puny plot
As Canons over-whelme the smaler shot.
Whiles the deaf senseless world inured a while
(Like the Catadupi at the fall of Nile)
To the feirce tumbling wonder, think it none
Thus custom hallows irreligion.
And strokes the patient beast till he admit
The now-grown-light and necessary Bitt.
But whether do I ramble? Gauled times
Cannot endure a smart hand ore their crimes.
Distracted age? What dialect or fashion
Shall I assume? To pass the approbation
Of thy censorious Synod; which now sit
High Areopagites to destroy all wit?
I cannot say I say that I am one
Of the Church of Ely-house, or Abington,
Nor of those precious spirits that can deal
The pomgranets of grace at every meal.
No zealous Hemp-dresser yet dipped me in
The Laver of adoption from my sin.
But yet if inspiration, or a tale
Of a long-wasted six hours length prevail*
A smooth certificate from the sister-hood,
Or to be termed holy before good,
Religious malice, or a faith 'thout works
Other then may proclaim us Jews or Turks.
If these, these hint at any thing? Then, then
Whoop my dispairing Hope come back again.
For since the inundation of grace,
All honesty's under water, or in chase.
But it is the old worlds dot age* thereupon
We feed on dreams, imagination,
Humors, and cross-graind passions which now reign
In the decaying elements of the brain.
It Is hard to coin new fancies, when there be
So few that launch out in discovery.
Nay Arts are so far from being cherished*
There Is scarce a College but has lost its Head,
And almost all its Members: O sad wound!
Where never an Artery could be judged sound!
To what a hight is Vice now towred? When we
Dare not miscall it an Obliquitie?
So confident, and carrying such an awe,
That it subscribes it self no less than Law?
If this be reformation then? The great
Account pursued with so much blood and sweat?
In what black lines shall our sad story be
Delivered over to posterity?
With what a dash and scar shall we be read?
How has Dame Nature in us suffered?
Who of all Centuries the first age are
That sunck the World for want of due repair?
When first we issued out in cries and tears,
(Those salt presages of our future years)
He ad-long we dropped into a quiet calm,
Times crowned with rosy garlands, spice and balm;
Where first a glorious Church and mother came,
Embraced us in her arms, gave us a name
By which we live, and an indulgent breast
Flowing with stream to an eternal rest.
Thus ravished the poor Soul could not ghuesse even
Which was more kind to her yet, earth, or heaven.
O^ rather wrapped in a pious doubt
Of ^eaven, whether she were in or out.
N^xt the Great Father of our Country brings
His blessing too, (even the Best of Kings)
Safe and well grownded Laws to guard our peace,
And nurse our virtues in their just increase;
Like a pure spring from whom all graces come,
Whose bounty made it double Christendom.
Such and so sweet were those Halcyon Days
That rose upon us in our Infant rays;
Such a composed State we breathed under,
We only heard of Jove, nere felt his thunder*
Terrors were then as strange, as love now grown,
Wrong and revenge lived quietly at home.
The sole contention that we understood
Was a rare strife and war in doing good.
Now let us reflect upon our gratfulness,
How we have added, or (o) made it less,
What are the improvements? what our progress, where
Those handsome acts that say that some men were?
He that to ancient wreaths can bring no more
From his own worth, dies banq'rupt, on the score.
For Father's Crests are crowned in the Son,
And glory spreads by propagation.
Now virtue shield me! where shall I begin?
To what a labyrinth am I now slipped in?
What shall we answer them? or what deny?
What prove? Or rather whether shall we fly?
When the poor widdow'd Church shall ask us where
Are all her honors? and that filial care
We owed so sweet a Parent as the Spouse
Of Christ, which here vouchsafed to own a house?
Where are her Boanerges? and those rare
Brave sons of consolation? Which did bear
The Ark before our Israel, and dispense
The heavenly Manna with such diligence?
In them the prim'tive Motto's come to pass,
Aut mortui sunt, aut docent literas.
Blessed Virgin we can only say we have
Thy Prophets Tombs among us, and their grave.
And here and there a man in colors paint
That by thy ruins grew a mighty Saint.
Next Caesar some accounts are due to thee,
But those in blood already written be.
So loud and lasting, in such monstrous shapes,
So wide the never to be closed wound gapes;
All ages yet to come with shivering shall
Recite the fearful pres'dent of thy fall.
Hence we confute thy tenent Solomon,
Under the Sun a new thing has been done,
A thing before all pattern, all pretense
Of rule or copy: Such a strange offense,
Of such original extract, that it bears
Date only from the Eden of our years.
Laconian Agis! we have read thy fate,
The violence of the Spartan love and hate.
How Pagans trembled at the thought of thee,
And fled the horror of thy tragedy.
Thyestes cruel feast, and how the Sun
Shrunk in his golden beams that sight to shun.
The bosoms of all Kingdoms open lie,
Plain and emergent to the inquiring eye.
But when we glance upon our native home,
As the black Center to whom all points come,
We rest amazed, and silently admire
How far beyond all spleen ours did aspire.
All that we dare assert is but a cry
Of an exchanged peace for Liberty.
A secret term by inspiration known,
A mist that brooks no demonstration,
Unless we dive into our purses, where
We quickly find Our Freedom purely dear.
But why exclaim you thus? may some men say,
Against the times? when equal night and day
Keep their just course? the seasons still the same?
As sweet as when from the first hand they came?
The influence of the Stars benign and free,
As at first Peep up in their infancy?
It Is not those standing motions that devide
The space of years, nor the swift hours that glide
Those little particles of age, that come
In thronging Items that make up the Sum,
That Is here intended: But our crying crimes*
Our monsters that abominate the times.
It Is we that make the Metonymie good
By being bad. Which like a troubled flood
Nothing produce but slimy mire and dirt,
And impudence that makes shame malepert.
To travel further in these wounds that lie
Rankling, though seeming closed, were to deny
Rest to an ore-watch'd world, and force fresh tears
From stench'd eyes, new alarmed by old fears.
Which if they thus shall heal and stop, they be
The first that ere were cured by Lethargy.
This only Axiom from ill Times increase
I gather, There Is a time to hold ones peace.
The Model of the new Religion.
WHoop! Mr. Vickar in your flying frock!
What news at Babel now? how stands the Cock?
When wags the flood? no Ephimerides?
Naught but conf^unding of the languages?
No more of the Saints arrival? or the chance
Of three pipes two pence and an ordinance?
How many Queere-religio^s? clear your throat,
May a man have a peny-worth? four a groat?
Or do the Iuncto leap at truss a fail?
Three Tenants clap while five hang on the tail?
No Querpo model? never a knack or wile?
To preach for spoons and whistles? cross or pile?
No hints of truth on foot? no sparks of grace?
No late sprung light? to dance the wild-goose chase?
No Spiritual Dragoons that take their flames
From the inspiration of the city Dames?
No crumbs of comfort to relieve our cry?
No new dealt mince-meat of divinity?
Come let us project: By the great late Eclipse
We justly fear a famine of the lips.
For sprats are rose an Omer for a sowse,
Which gripes the co^clave of the lower House.
Let Us therefore vote a close humiliation
For opening the sealed eyes of this blind Nation,
That they may see confessingly and swear
They have not seen at all this fourteen year.
And for the splints and spavins too, it is said
All the joints have the Riffcage, since the head
Swelld so prodigious and exciz'd the parts
From all allegiance, but in tears and hearts.
But zealous Sr. what say to a touch at prayer?
How Quops the spirit? In what garb or air?
With Souse erect, or pendent, winks, or haws?
Sniveling? or the extention of the jaws?
Devotion has its mode: Dear Sir hold forth,
Learning's a venture of the second worth.
For since the people's rise and its sad fall
We are inspired from much to none at all.
Brother adiue! I see you are closely girt,
A costive Dover gives the Saints the squirt.
Hence (Reader) all our flying news contracts
Like the State's Fleet from the Seas into acts.
But where is the model all this while you will say?
It Is like the Reformation run away.
On Brittanicus his leap three story high, and his escape from London.
PAul from Damascus in a basket slides
Craned by the faithful Brethren down the sides
Of their embattel'd walls: Britanicus
As loath to trust the Brethrens God with us.
Slides too, but yet more desperate, and yet thrives
In his descent, needs must the Devil drives.
Their cause was both the same, and herein meet,
Only their fall was not with equal feet,
Which makes the case Iambick: Thus we see
How much news falls short of Divinity.
Truth was their crying crime: One takes the night,
The other the advantage of the New sprung Light
Mo mantle his escape: How different be
The Pristin and the Modern Policy?
Have Ages their Antipodes? Yet still
Close in the Propagation of ill?
Hence flows this use and doctrine from the thump
I last sustained (beloved) Good wits may Jump.
Content.
FAir stranger! winged maid, where do thou rest
Thy snowy locks at noon? Or on what breast
Of spices slumber ore the sullen night?
Or waking whether do thou take thy flight?
Shall I go seek some melanchollick grove?
The silent theater of despair and love?
There court the Bitterne and the Pelican
Those Aerie Antipodes to the tents of man?
Or sitting by some pretty prattling spring
Hear hoarse Nyctimene her dirges sing?
Whiles the rough Satyrs dance Corantoes too
The chattring Sembriefs of her Woo hoo, hoo?
Or shall I trace some ice-bound wilderness
Among the caverns of abstruse recess?
Where never prying Sun, nor blushing Day
Could steal a glimps, or intersqueeze a ray?
If not within this solitary Cell,
O whether must I post? Where do thou dwell?
Shall I let loose the reins of blind desire?
And surfeit every ravening sense? Give fire
To any train? And tire voluptuousness
In all her soft varieties of excess?
And make each day a history of sin?
Drink the A la mort Sun down and up again?
Improve my crimes to such a roaring score,
That when I dye, where others go before
In whining venial streams, and quarto pages,
My floods may rise in folio, sinck all ages?
Or shall I bathe my self in widows tears?
And build my name in the curse of them and theirs?
Shipwreck whole nature to craw out a purse
With the molten cinders of the universe?
Belch naught but ruin? and the horrid cries
Of fire and sword? and swim in drowned eyes?
Make lanes to crowns and scepters through the heart's veins
Of Justice, Law, Right, Church and Sovereigns?
No, no, I trace thee not in this dark way
Of death, this scarlet streaked Aceldama.
Shall I then to the house of mourning go?
Where the Salt-peeter Vuates overflow
With fresh supplies of grief? Fresh tides of brine?
Or traverse the wide world in every line?
Walk through the bowels of each realm and state
Simpling for rules of policy to create
Strange forms of government of new molds and wastes
Like a french Kickshaw of a thousand tastes?
Or shall I dive into the secrecy
Of Nature? Where the most retired does lie?
O^ shall I waste the taper of my soul
In scrutinies, where neither Northern-pole
Nor Southern-constellation darts a light
To constitute a latitude or height?
Or shall I float into the watery pale
Wan kingdom of the Moon? and there set sail
For all the Orbs? and keep high holiday
With the Nectar-tipling-Gods in th'milky-way?
Swell Bacchus tripes with a tun of lusty Sack?
And lay the Plump Squire flat upon his back?
O no, these revels are too short, too sour,
Too sad, hugged and repented in an hour.
Shall I then plough the seas to foreign soils?
And rake the pregnant Indies for hid spoils?
Or with the Anchorite abhor the eye
Of heaven, and banish all society.
Live in, and out the world? and pass my days
In treading out some strange misterious maze?
Taste every humane sweet? lilly and rose?
With all the sharp guard that about them grows?
Climb where despair would tremble to set foot?
Spring new impossibles and force way to it?
Make the whole globe a shop of Chemistry
To melt down all her attomes, and descry
That small Iota, that last pitied grain
Which the gulled sons of men pursue in vain?
Or shall I grasp those meteors, fame, and praise?
Which breath by th'charity of the vulgar voice?
Pile honor upon honor till it crack
The Atlas of my pride, and break its back?
Hold fancy, hold! for whether will thou bear
My sunburned hope to loss? It Is, it is not here.
Soar then (My Soul) above the arched round
Of these poor spangled blisses: Here Is no ground
To fix the sacred foot of pure Content,
Her mansion's in a higher element.
Have thou perceived the sweetness of a groan?
Or tried the wings of contemplation?
Or have thou found the balm of tears that press
Like amber in the dregs of bitterness?
Or have thou felt that secret joy that flows
Against the tide of common over-throws?
Or have thou known the dawnings of a God
Upon thee, when his love is shed abroad?
Or have thou heard the sacred harmony
Of a calm Conscience ecchoing in thee
*A Requiem from above? A sealed peace
Beyond the power of hell, sin, or decease?
Or have thou tasted that communion
Between a reconciled God and Man?
That holy intercourse? Those precious smiles
Dissolved in holy whisprings between whiles?
Here, here is the steps lead to her blessed abode;
Her chair of state is in the throne of God.
May Day.
COme Gallants, why so dull? What muddy cloud
Dwells on the eyebrows of the day? Why shroud
Ye up your selves in the furled sails of night,
And tossing lie at Hull? Hark how delight
Knocks with her silver wings at every sense?
And great Apollo Laureal does Commence?
Up it is the golden Jubilee of the year,
The Stars are all withdrawn from each glad Sphere
Within the tyring-rooms of heaven, unless
Some few that peep to spy our happiness
Whiles Phoebus tugging up Olympus craw
Smoaks his bright Teem along on the Gram Paw
Hark how the songsters of the shady plain
Close up their Anthems in a melting strain!
See where the glittring Nimphs whirl it away
In Checkling Caravans as blyth as May;
And the Crystal sweating flowers droop their heads
In blushing shame to call you slug-a beds.
Waste but a glance upon Hide-park, and swear
All Argus eyes are falln, and fixed there.
The dapled lawns with Ladies shine and glow,
Whiles bubling mounts with springs of Nectar flow;
And each kind Turtle sits and bills his Dove
Dike Venus and Adonis lapp'd in love.
Hark how Amyntas in melodious loud
Shrill raptures tunes his horn-pipe! whiles a crowd
Of snow-white milk-maids crowned with garlands gay
Trip it to the soft measure of his Lay.
And fields with curds and cream like greencheese lie,
This now or never is the Gallaxie.
If the facetious Gods ere taken were
With mortal beauties and disguised, it is here.
See how they mix societies, and toss
The tumbling ball into a willing loss,
That the twining Ladies on their necks might take
The doubled kisses which they first did stake.
Those pretty earnests of a maidenhead
Those sugared seals of love, types of the bed,
Which to confirm the sweet conveiance more
They throng in thousand times ten thousand score
Such heavenly surfets, as they sporting lie,
Thus catch they from each others lipp and eye.
The game at best, the girls May rould must be,
Where Croyden and Mopsa, he and she
Each happy pair make one Hermophrodite,
And tumbling bounce together, black and white,
Where had you seen the chance, you had not known
Whose show had lovelier bin Madam's or Joan.
Then crown the bowl let every conduit run
Canary, till we lodge the reeling Sun.
Tap every joy, let not a pearl be spilt,
Till we have set the ringing world a tilt.
And sacrifice Arabia Faelix in
One bone fire, one incense offering.
It Is Sack, it is Sack that drowns the thorny cares
Which hedge the pillow, and abridg our years,
The quickening Anima Mundi that creates
Life in dejection, and out dares the Fates,
Makes man look big on danger, and out swell
The fury of that thrall that threatens Hell.
Chirp round my Boys: let each soul take its sipp,
Who knows what falls between the cup and lip?
What can a voluntary pale look bring
Or a deep sigh to lessen suffering?
Has mischief any piety or regard?
The foyl of misery is a breast prepared.
Hence then with folded arms, ecclipsed eyes,
And low imprisoned groans, meek cowardice.
Urge not with oars death that in full sail comes,
Nor walk in forestal'd blacks to that dark tombs.
But rather then the eternal jaws shall gape,
Gallop with Curtius down the gallant hap.
Mean time here is that shall make our shackles light,
And charm the dismal terrors walk by night,
It Is this that chears the drooping soul* revives
The benumbed captive c^a^p'd in his cold gyves.
Kingdoms and Cottages, the Mill and Throne
Sack the Grand Leveller commands alone.
It Is Sack that rocks the boiling brain to rest,
Confirms the aged hams, and warms the breast
Of gallantry to action, runs half share
And metal with the buff-fac'd Sons of war.
It Is wit, 'is art, it is strength, it is all and more;
Then looss the flood gates Georg, we will pay or score.
An Epig. to Doulus.
DOulus advanced upon a goodly Steed,
Came mounting ore the plain in very deed,
Whereat the people cring'd and bowed the knee,
In honor of my Lord's rich Liverie.
Hence swell not Doulus, nor erect thy crest,
It Was for the Goddess sake we capp'd the beast.
An Epig. on the people of England.
Sweating and chafing hot Ardelio cries
A Boat a Boat, else farwell all the prize.
But having once set foot upon the deep
Hotspur Ardelio fell fast a sleep.
So we, on fire with zealous discontent,
Called out a Parliament, a Parliament.
Which being obtained at last, what did they do?
Even squeez the wool-packs, and lie snorting too.
Another.
Erittain a lovely Orchard seemed to be
Furnished with nature's choice variety,
Temptatious golden fruit of every sort,
The Hesperian Garden fanned from fein'd report,
Great boys and small together in we brake,
No matter what disdained Priapus spoke,
Up, up we lift the great Boys in the trees,
Hoping a common share to sympathize:
But they no sooner there neglected straight
The shoulders that so raised them to this height;
And fell to stuffing of their own bags first,
And as their treasure grew, so did their thirst.
Whiles we in lean expectance gaping stand
For one shake from their charitable hand.
But all in vain the dropsy of desire
So scortch'd them, three Realms could not quench the fire.
Be wise then in ynur Ale bold youths: for fear
The Gardner catch us as Moss caught his Mare.
An Elegy Upon my dear little friend M. I: F. Who dyed the same morning he was
born. December. 10. 1654.
COme all ye widdowed Muses, and put on
Your veils, and mourn in a full Helicon.
Press every doleful string to bear a part
In the sad harmony of a broken heart.
Bring all your sacred springs as sweet supplies
To feed the swelling ocean of mine eyes.
Be dumb ye Sons of mirth, let not a joy
Pry through the smalest crannie of the day:
But let an awful silence seize the soul
Of universal motion, whiles we towl
Love's passing Bell, and ring a loud to all
Little Adonis and his mighty fall.
Malignant Heaven! can there be envy there
Where never gall nor sequestration were?
Is It possible that in so pure a shrine
So consecrate, so holy, so divine
As thy blessed mansions, there can dwell a grain
Or attome of black malice or disdain?
That for to boast thy riches to poor men
Could drop a pearl and snatch it up again?
First scrue us to an Ecstasy of bliss
Then dash us by an Antipe'ristasis?
Punnish a moment's ravishing happiness
With such a furious glut of sharp distress?
Could light and darkness be so twined together
In such close webs of bitter chang of weather,
Just parted by a single subtle thread
No sooner to be judged a live but dead?
Could wit and fate no less a torment find?
Would the had not bin so cruel, or so kind!
Blessed Babe! why could not thy friends many tears
Invite thine innocent stay for a few years?
Or at the least why did thou them bereave
Of the short comfort of a longer leave?
How can that drown the anguish of thy birth
For joy a man was born upon the earth?
When the Midwife only could arrive to this
To reach thee to thy first and latest kiss?
How loaded with ingratitude did thou part
From thy twice traveling Mother in one smart?
First pained for thy remiss and slow delay,
Now thrown for thy abortive have away?
But yet I wrangle not with heavens decree*
The have only posted ore that misery,
Through which we beat the hoof sad Seventy Years
To the last Act of life, in hopes and fears,
Midst a perverse world, and a shipwrack'd-age
Of Truth and Worth, and draw late off the Stage.
To lay more weight or pressure upon thee
Twere envy to thy sudden victory.
Thou only wak'dst into the world, and then
Shut'st up in holy discontent again.
Thy chaste unspoted soul just lighted on
The floor and perch of our low Horison,
But quickly finding the mistake, that here
Was not her Center, nor her Hemisphaere,
She made a point, and darted back most nice
Like lightening to her element in a trice.
The Thracian Dranst which with joy interr
Their Dead, and sport about their Sepulcher,
But mourn still at their birth, to think upon
Those choking cares of earth are coming on,
May here preach rules of piety to my grief,
In bad times doubting what is best death or life
Crowned Saint indeed thou might have staid.
A mournful Student in our history,
Have read a world of sad looks in each page to be
And passage of a sore distracted age,
And then discussed the causes how and why,
Which to repeat renews the extremity;
So have entailed thy guiltless tears to ours
Now swelled to floods by long continued showers.
But thou have wrought that haven in a breath,
For which we sweat and tug our selves to death*
Thou met'st no tempest of assault to stay
Thy fleeting bark in full sail all the way.
Wee're clogd with thousand Remoraes, men of war
That cross the rode, through which with many a scar
And foil we militant Christians do co^mence,
And at the last take heaven by violence.
Such was thy sudden how-dee and farewell,
Such thy return the Angels scarce could tell
Thy miss, But that thy feast was drawing on
Of the Son of God's high Genethliacon,
Where all the holy Hosts appear to sing
Solemn Te Deum's to the glorious King.
Hence flows thy sweet excuse of have: Then since
Our loss was thy enjoyment of thy Prince,
The Annual attendance on his Day
To fill the heavens with Haleluiah.
Yet grant us so much of the court, to be
Envious a while at thy felicity,
That thou so young a favorite should partake
Those smiles for which we so much cringing make.
And reach that height of honor in a glance,
For which we toil through Law and Ordinance.
I chide thee then no longer Happy Soul,
Farewell, farewell! since man cannot control
The hand of Providence. May thine ashes lie
Soft, till I meet thee in eternity!
Where we shall part no more, nor death devide
My griefs and their sweet object, but a tide
Of endless joy shall satisfaction make
For this poor stream of brine shed for thy sake.
A short reflection on the creation of the World.
WHen as this circling Globe of Seas and Earth
Snugg'd in her night-clothes, and had neither birth
Nor motion, but a lumpish Caos stood,
An immaterial mass of slimy mud,
A confused pre- existent nothing, where
It Is blasphemy to say as yet things were.
The great Eternal Being thought it good
His Spirit here should move upon the flood.
Hence bloomed the early and the infant light
From out the swathe-bands of eternal night,
Which now furled up in sooty curls gives back
And place to Time to date its Almanac.
Whiles Midwife-Nature fits the Vacuum
For the concealed impressions yet to come.
This glimmering splendour in its course begun
Christ'ned three days before there was a Sun.
Thus things with things in miz'd confusion hurled
Lift up their eyelids, and Thus waked the World.
Nor was it yet broad day to any sight,
For time walked as it were by candlelight.
The East had not yet gilded bin by those
Bright sparks by which she now most Orient grows.
When as the mutt'ring Elements took their place
And Centers as their several nature was,
The active fire first clipped the azure Round,
To which the grosser air became a bound,
Each in his proper Orb was stayed and pent flood
Environed bv a solid Firmament.
This was the time when the rendevouzing
Disbodying from the earth upon heaps stood,
And N^ptune ore that raging bulk of brine
Advanced his Mace and ^cepter tridentine.
Whiles the dry land peepp'd up out of the froth
Like a short Common^ in a sea of brotn;
Spangled with f^uits and flowers, herbs and grass,
And this the teeming world's First up-rise was.
Not long this beauty had in twilight lay
But God made lights to sunder night and day;
And deck the checkred palace of the skies
With thousand Coronets of twinkling eyes
Which by their rule and aspects in their spears,
Should be for signs and seasons, month s and
And now if ever there was harmony years.
Amongst those blessed motions up on high,
It Was in this instant, when in joint consent
They danced this mask about the Firmament,
And placed that heavenly round which ore and ore
Must be renewed till time shall be no more.
Next those rich bodies of the Sun and Moon,
Like the High Constables of the watch, for noon
And night, drew forth in glory, whence created
It Is much more safe admired than debated.
Thus the Surveyors of the world took birth,
And this was The good morrow of the Earth.
There wanted nothing now, trees, herbs, nor plants,
Nor sweets, but a few wild inhabitants,
Fish and the reptile creature; winged Quires
Of downy Organists for to tune their Lyres,
And fill the breaking air with Rapsodies
Of chirping emulation to the skies.
Thus the self generative streams brought forth
The Amphibious brood of water and of earth.
The shady woods now range with ecchoing strains
Of shrill melodious notes; whose pretty chains
Tie up the ears of things in silent love
As 'twere a glimpse of heaven dropped from above.
Next came the silver harnass'd scaley fry
Capring upon the deep, to give supply
To every pretty winding brook, which now
With tatling springs and living plenty flow.
Thus Nature peeped out in her morning dress
Though not arrived to a full readiness.
And now the sixth day of God's labor dawnes,
Whenas the blowing meads and tufted lawns
Are stocked with lowing beasts of every kind,
The bleating snowy sheep, and fruitful hind,
All creatures of all sorts for game and food,
Which by the vote of heaven were very good.
The little world and complement of all
Was only absent, for whose sake they call
The Grand Consilio of the gods to make
Man, which of earth and heaven should partake
God's Image and the globe's Epitome
Must in one structure both united be.
Hence then the low and lofty Steward came
To head the Collonies, and gave things a name
Even Adam that prime moving dust, that small
And great Vicegerent of the God of all.
Thus the world walked abroad rich as the sun,
And God's work ended where Man's work begun.
Now that we have surveyed this tumbling Ball
How and whence made, take a short touch on al.
And first of that great mercy, that prime cause
From which all causes spring and take their Laws
It Was merely The eternal will and Love
Of God revealed in time that did him move
To raise an universe of beauty, where
Was neither form nor mediate matter there.
And thence he framed not man first as the sum
And supreme piece of all that was to come,
But brought him to a Furnished World, complete
In all proportions, bad him take and eat,
Subdue and have dominion, reign, command,
And supervize the wonders of his hand.
The only homage he sought on his part
Was but the service of an upright heart,
A pure obedience and a station in
That innocence which yet had known no sin.
But why in just six days God and no more
Completed up this building and this store
May some men ask? Was it a type of the
Fixed Crisis of the world's Catastrophe?
Which the old Rabbis of the Jews suppose
After six thousand years shall have its close?
When all flesh shall an endless Sabbath keep
While sin and time and death are lulled a sleep?
I dare not fathom these deep mysteries
Concealed even from the very Angels eyes.
As the beginning of all things hid lay
In the Almighty bosom, where no ray
Could pry into its purpose: So we now
May gh^ess the end as undiscovered, how
Or when, lies lapp'd up in the obscure decree
And secret cabinet of the dietie.
This only we dare say we know, as light
Began, so fire shall be the world's good night.
Thus having through this glorious week's work pressed
Where God left labor I presume to rest.
John chap. 18. ver. 36. My Kingdom is not of this World.
TRue blessed Savior, true! thy Kingdom's not
Of this world. For we cannot find a spot
Of thy Crown Land, where Geometry may stay
Her reeling compass to move any way
In demonstration of that circling Round
That may define the enclosure Holy ground:
But since thy Church grew Stately and fell down,
The lands are all confiscate from the Crown.
Conntrey freez Elders have thy Flesh hooks bin
To shrive the Levites Pot and all within.
And never conscious of thy pious rule
Leave poor Elias to the charity of the foul.
Or like the Indian Astomi, to smell
His way to life, or live by miracle.
Thus Sion's wasted, and thy Prophets slain:
And Godliness has proov'd the only Gain.
Math. chap. 11 ver. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden
etc.
MOst great and glorious God! how sweet, how free
Is thy kind invitation! but ay me
The clogs of sin
So rein me in
And black shame mixed with guilt restrains my will
From all designs but doing ill,
So that I tremble to approach thy throne,
And tread the Courts of the most Holy One.
But yet thy Call's so powerfully good,
So pressing, that it is death if once withstood.
Nor is it less
To tempt thy Holiness.
In this extreme this straight what shall I do?
I Would come, but be accepted too:
But o my loud-tongu'd sins so fill the air
They Will bar up heaven against my cry and prayer.
Yet wherefore should I doubt? It Is not the call
Of Cherubims, or ought Angelical;
It Is he, it is he
That in that ecstasy
Of fear to sincking Peter reached his hand
And snatched him from the grave to land;
Jehovah, he that tryes the reins, and sees
Our wounds and moanes, our deep infirmities.
Shall I then with poor Adam strive to hide
My nakedness with leaves? Or slip a side?
O no, he spies my way
By night as by noon day:
Darkness cannot exclude him, nor the shade
Of Hell from what his hands have made;
He knows our thoughts eve^ long before they were,
And when those lips bid come, can there be fear?
But o it is said he is a Consuming fire!
But o it is sure he now lays by his ire:
He thunders out
With trumpets shout
No Judgment from mount Sinai: But a still
Soft voice of love and free good will.
He that appeared then in a warlike dress,
Seeks now the stray sheep in the Wilderness.
Put off thy terrors then Great God, and I
Shall humbly prostrate at thy footstool lie;
And there bemoan
With many a groan
And bitter tear my sinful sins to thee,
To thee alone can pardon me.
O shut not up thy mercy in disdain,
Nor yet remember my old sins again!
Impute not my youth's guilt unto my charge?
But thou that offer'st Rest, set me at large
Even from this death,
And hell beneath
That gapes with open jaws to swallow all
That on thee do neglect to call;
And hardened in their sins thy spirit grieve
By a contempt and wilful hate to live.
But ere thou co^m'st blessed God to pass me by
First hide me from thy sin-abhorring eye,
That I may stand
Like Moses covered with thy hand
Close in the cilft of Christ's wounds, in the dress
And garment of his Righteousness,
And on me through his satisfaction look,
That on his score my sad transgressions took.
Receive me then, but with that kind regret
The good old man his prodigal child met,
Who as't appears
Divided betwixt joy and tears
Ran and embraced, and kissed his drooping Son,
In all points now undone,
But that rich treasure of a Father's love
Which nere could be exhausted, nor remove.
Such bowels of compassion Lord put on!
Such pregnant yernings of affection!
Then hear my cry,
And heal my malady.
Though I have sinned yet Christ has satisfied.
O Judge not, for it is he that dyed.
But hear the voice of his still streaming gore
Which calls to thee for mercy more and more.
Prevent not then thy Angels joy in me
To see a sinner reconciled to thee!
Nor let thy love
So barren prove,
Or loose its end for which thou sent'st it here,
Even my salvation now so near.
What pleasure in my blood Lord ca^ there be?
Or will the chambers of death honor thee?
Thy call is not a summons to the Bar
Of Justice, but a throne where mercies are
Like flowing balm
To mitigate and calm
The tumult of a rageing conscience;
Whose pricking bitter ecchoing sense
Holds out a flag of death, whose motto runs
No hope, no peace, no such rebellious Sons.
But Lord thy sweeter promise is the ground
We lean and build upon; can thou be found
Less than thy self?
A ship-destroying shelf?
No, though an Angel from thine Altar swear
My sins unpardonable are,
My crimes so great cannot forgiven be,
Yet Lord I come, yet Lord I trust in thee.
O then accept my Heavy laden Soul
Crushed with the burden of her sins, so foul
She dares not brook
Once up to look;
But drowned in tears presumes to come on board,
And for this once to take thy word;
If I at last prove ship-wrack'd for my pain
I Will never venture soul more so again.
A Sing-song on Clarinda's Wedding
NOw that Love's Holiday is come,
And Madg the Maid has swept the room
And trimmed her spit and pot,
A wake my merry Muse, and sing
The Revells, and that other thing
That must not be forgot.
As the gray morning dawned, it is sed
Clarinda broke out of her bed
Like Cynthia in her pride:
Where all the Maiden Lights that were
Comprised w ithin our Hemisphaere
Attended at her side.
But wot you then with much a do
They dressed the Bride from top to toe
And brought her from her chamber.
Decked in her robes and garments gay
More sumptuous than the live-long-day
Or Stars enshrined in Amber.
The sparkling bullose of her eyes
Like two ecclipsed Suns did rise
Beneath her crystal brow.
To show like those strange accidents
Some sudden changable events
Were like to hap below.
Her cheeks bestreak'd with white and red
Like pretty tell-tales of the bed
Presaged the blustering night
With his encricling arms and shade
Resolved to swallow and invade
And skreen her virgin light.
Her lips those threads of scarlet dye,
Wherein Love's charms and quiver lie,
Legions of sweets did crown;
Which smilingly did seem to say
O crop me, crop me whiles you may,
A non the are not mine own.
Her Breasts those melting Alps of snow
On whose fair hills in open show
The God of Love lay napping;
Like swelling Buts of lively Wine
Upon their ivory stells did shine
To wait the lucky tapping.
Her waste that slender type of man
Was but a small and single span*
Yet I dare safely swear
He that whole thousands has in fee
Would forfeit all, so he might be
Lord of the Manor there.
But now before I pass the line
Pray Reader give me leave to dine,
And pause here in the middle;
The Bridegroom and the Parson knock,
With all the Hymeneall flock,
The Plum-cake and the Fidle.
When as the Priest Clarinda sees,
He stared as't had bin half his fees
To gaze upon her face:
And if the spirit did not move
His continence was far above
Each sinner in the place.
With mickle stir he joined their hands,
And hamp'red them in marriage bands
As fast as fast might be,
Where still me thinks, me thinks I hear
That secret sigh in every ear,
Once love remember me!
Which done the Cook he knocked amain
And up the dishes in a train
Come smoking two and two*
With that they wiped their mouths and sat,
Some fell to quaffing, some to prate,
Ay marry and welcome too
In pay'^s they thus impaled the meat
Roger and Marget, and Thomas and Kate,
Rafe and Bess, Andrew and Maudlin,
And Valentine eke with Sybell so sweet,
Whose cheeks on each side of her snuffers did meet
As round and as plump as a codling.
When at the last they had fetched their freez,
And mired their stomachs quite up to y^ knees
In claret for and good cheer,
Then, then began the merry din,
For as it was thought they were all on the pin,
O what kissing and clipping was there!
But as luck would have it the Parson said grace,
And to frisking and dancing they shuffled apace,
Each Lad took his Lass by the fist,
And when he had squeezed her, and gaum'd, her until
The fat of her face ran down like a mill
He tolled for the rest of the grist.
In sweat and in dust having wasted the day,
They entered upon the last act of the play,
The Bride to her bed was conveyed,
Where knee deep each hand fell down to the ground
And in seeking the Garter much pleasure was found,
'Twould have made a man's arm have strayed
This clutter ore Clarinda lay
Half bedded, like the peeping day
Behind Olimpus cap;
Whiles at her head each twittring Girl
The fatal stocking quick did whirle
To know the lucky hap.
The Bridegroom in at last did rustle,
All dissap-pointed in the bustle
The Maidens had shaved his breeches;
But let him not complain, it is well
In such a storm, I can you tell
He save'd his other stitches.
And now he bounc'd into the bed,
Even just as if a man had said
Fair Lady have at all;
Where twisted, at the hug they lay,
Like Venus and the sprightly Boy,
O who would fear the fall?
Thus both with love's sweet tapers fired,
And thousand balmy kisses tired,
They could nor wait the rest,
But out the folk and candles fled,
And to it they went; but what they did
There lies the cream of the jest.
On the much to be lamented Death of that gallant Antiquary and great Master
both of Law and Learning, John Seldom Esquire.
Epicedium Elegiacum.
THus sets the Olimpian Regent of the day
Laden with honor; after a full survey
Of the deep works of nature, to return
With greater luster from his watery urne.
Thus leans the aged Cedar to the rage
Of tempests, which the grove for many an age
Has graced, yet yields to be tra^spa^lted thence
TO adorn the nobler Palace of his Prince.
Thus droops the world, after a smiling May
And June of pride into a withering day,
And hoary winter season, to appear
More lovely in the buds of a fresh year.
Then boast not Time in the eclipsed light
Of Selden's lower orbs, whiles the high flight
Of his enthroned Soul looks down on thee
With scorn, as an ungrateful enemy.
For in his death thou sport'st with thy own dust,
Whiles with his ashes thy poor glories rust.
Mention no more thy Acts of old, nor those
Grand ruins rich in thy proud overthrowes;
In him the have lost thy Titles and thy name,
Who dyed the Register of time and fame.
He was that brave Recorder of the world,
When age and mischief had conspired and hurled
Vast kingdo^s into shattered heaps; who could
Redeem them from their vaults of dust and mould.
Then raise a monument of honor to
That restored life, which death could nere undo.
Such was the fall of this Tenth worthy then,
This Magazine of earth and heaven, and men,
He, whereas others to their ashes creep,
(Those common elements of all that sleep;)
Dissolved like some huge Vatican from on high
Whose every limb became a Library.
As therefore in the works of Nature they
Which are most ripe are nearest to decay:
So here this neighboring Pyramid on the sky
Drew nearest heaven when furthest from the eye.
And now thy Mare Clausum's true indeed,
The rode's blocked up to the many reined steed,
Which to each point of the world's compass reels,
And tacks her glad discoveries to her keels.
Let then the traveling Mariner in the deep
Of the Reserves of reason go to sleep;
Since the grave Pole Star of the groaping sky
Has suffered shipwreck in mortallity.
He that would praise thee well through all thy parts
Must ransack all the languages and arts*
Drain nature to the last scruple to discry
How far thou went in her Anatomy.
Then climb from orb to orb, and gather there
The pure Elixar of each star and sphere,
Which in thy life did club their influence
With thy rich flames as one Intelligence;
Then raise a blazing comet to thy name,
As a devoted Taper to thy Fame,
To live the pitied shadow of that day
And glorious Noon which with thee drew away.
When Common People dye, it is but a sight
Whose grief and dole's digested in a night.
But when such brawny sinews of a state
As thee break loose; it is like a clock whose weight
Being slipped a side all motion's at a stand:
Such sorrows do not wet but Drown a land.
Could we with that brave Macedonian Spark
Offer whole towns and kingdoms to the Ark
Of a lost friend now floating in our eyes,
And make more worlds in this grief sympathize,
It Were but due thanks for that high sovereignty
Ore many nations we enjoyed in thee
To languish any longer at thy shrine,
Melting the sacred sisters into brine
In a salt Hecatomb of tears, 'twould be
But a weak, faint and pale discovery
Of those few artires of life they have
Since the last mortal stab given in thy Grave.
Such was the public universal wound
That the whole bod' of Law and learning found
In thy preposterous and most sad decease,
There Is none can probe the grief, or state that case.
In short, we lost so many Tongues in thee
There Is scarce one left to mourn thine obsequie.
Those shallow issues which now from us rise
Steal through the speechless conduits of our eyes,
Which turning Water Poets tumble forth
Insilent eloquence to bemoan thy worth.
Such deep impressions has thy farewell left
In every bosom, every secret cleft
Of each particular soul, instead of verse
We live thy doleful Epitaph and Hearse.
And what the mournful Prophet sighed of old
Seems now broke forth, as of these times foretold.
Each face shall gather blackness, for in thee
Thus gone, w' are shut up in obscurity.
Such borrowed dependence had our light
Upon thy sun, thy evening was our night.
But since there is no perfection here, thy glass
To become gold indeed translated was.
Thy furnished soul being filled with all that could
Be here extracted from the grosser mould
Of earth's Idea, in a brave disdain
Drew to its proper Center, that vast Main
Of truth and knowledge* great Jehovah, he
That Is all in all to all eternity.
Where now I leave thee 'midst a glorious throng
Of Saints; but hope to see thee ere't be long.
Upon the death of John Seldom Esquire.
NOw thou art dead, Vnequall'd Sir, thy fall
Confounds no less than England's funeral;
For when the soul departs that gave her breath,
We are but loathed carkases in thy death.
Thus Pompey's Trunck found on the Egyptian sand
Rome straight pronounced her time was at a stand.
So when a fair aged Oak does downward move
We count not one Tree's loss, but the whole Grove.
As air and water when once useless grown
One by too much drouth, one b*infection,
The City and Kingdom both deplore that loss:
And we entitle't one man's private cross.
O that Pythagoras doctrine might obtain,
(Old souls to inform new bodies have again)
Th^n would the world less sense of sorrow have,
Naught but to life a backdoor were thy Grave!
And like the Phoenix dy'dst in balmy spice,
That thence thou might into new glories rise.
But this we hope not for, and it is thy praise
Alone and Solomon 's, (None such in your days.)
Learned Maimonides hence improved his fame,
That none since Moses, such a Moses came.
Joseph's perfections had out-shin'd far more,
If Julius Scaliger had not writ before.
Thou like Melchizedeck knewst no peer nor
Rich only with thy own true estimate.
Witness those matchless volumes that can tell mate,
The world how vast a soul did in thee dwell.
So fraught with such a Mine of knowledge, we
Might think thee well a living Library.
Not like our Time-enthusiasts, who disclose
In scurrile Pens, that they can rave in prose,
And in such narrow hoops the conscience pent,
As man nere durst, nor God for laws ere meant.
Nay souls of men with such high reins keep in,
That to be reasonable is counted sin.
No, in such seasoned Judgment flowd thy Pen,
We thence might learn what temper became men.
Thou nor to Sects, nor to parties writt'st (and it is
But just to point thee singular in this.)
But wiht unwearied pain dispensed thy store,
What all past ages thought and said before.
Arabians, Persians, Hebrews, Greeks and all
The Sun in'ts circuit dines or sups withal
Thee in their several Idioms court, and bring
Their commonwealths of learning to their King
As tribute. Seldom had thou flourished than
When Jew and Greek, Creet and Arabian
What each in varied Dialects said, could tell,
Thy acquired pains had lamed the miracle.
Thy fruitful Tongues might far as day have run,
To language Countries to the posting Sun:
The western Climes might have bin told by thee
All that the Indian voic'd, Antiquity.
Nor is that all, for numerous speech affords,
Without good conduct, but a Mart of words.
A bunch of keys men prize not wealth, but letts,
Where skill comes short to unlock the cabinets.
A magazine of sounds in most we see
Serve but to stuss and perfect Pedantrie.
Thy copiousness of Tongues finds matter hence,
It lets in matter that conveyes new sense.
And rat'st thy painted words embroideries,
But as they usher strange discoveries.
That East Idolatry yet had lurked it is ods
But for thy subject of the Syrian gods.
The world had still in ignorance bin held
How great she was, had Seldom not revealed
Those pompous Attributes, Titles of renown
Which King, Prince, Emperor challenged as their own.
Earls and Marquesses, Dukes and all degrees
Hence found them bounds fixed for precedencies.
A structure so elaborate it would ask
Europe's joint labor to out-goe the task.
The Law of Nations amongst the Hebrews taught,
And Nature's dictates where could we have sought
But from that labored Piece is published forth
To leave the world a Legacy of thy worth.
I name not others thy choice rarities,
The Hebrew Priests, defense of British Seas,
Arundles marbles, and the Hebrew wife,
Thy Sanhedrims Tripartite, Edmer's life,
With other choice which I not reckon here,
Least so the hidden embers I should stir
Of rancor gone in some, who measure test
Not by their judgment, but their interst.
Such as wit-bound themselves can faintly spare
To stab with censures, other choicest care.
Such suburb-wits their shackled judgments bind
To reach the bark, and dwell upon the rind.
When 'twas thy excellence to pursue ye chase,
Till there was left to scruple no more place.
So long Alcides thought his work unsped,
As he to Hydra left or tail or head.
Thy Plummet sinks into the deep stsound,
Still plunging onward till it find the ground.
What worn inscriptions did from dust relieve?
And from time's shipwreck did restore to live?
Custom, or Manners, Ensign, Form, or Rite*
What is it thy teeming brain not brought to light?
Now thou have traveled through the world's wide coast,
And left no creek, nor path, nor Seas uncrost,
And nature's utmost boundaries have known,
It Was time thou tookst the period of ^hine own.
That so thy wakeful soul dismantled hence
Might meet fresh objects for Intelligence
The Grecian Hero thus when he went through
As far as bounds, wished he had more to do.
So through feirce seas the angry keel is hurled
To look out passage to another world.
J. V. M. A. J. C. Oxon.
Upon the incomparable Learned John Seldom.
TWere wrong to thy great name on thee to write,
Who like the Sun shines best with thy own light.
Clocks that are made to imitate the Sun
Seldom run right and true in motion*
With heaven's great torch; whose course is regular*
And tells us our best acts erroneous are.
Our praise, when best impov'd, is at this stay
As our faint twilight's to the bright midday.
All we can speak comes so far short of thee
As does of nature our Philosophy.
In thine own sphere thrice glorious star then shine;
Since all our light is but a beam from thine.
The spotless ray originally springs
From the great mass of light, more splendour brings*
Than when through ayre's dark Medium it reflects,
Where not so pure a beam the sun projects.
So the first shade some glasses do present
More vigor has than to the next is lent.
Thus Pictures from their excellence do fall
The further off from their Original.
Upon the death of John Seldom.
PRaise that is worthy thee who would rehearse
Must dare beyond the skill of art, or verse.
Twere sawciness here least flattery for to use,
Where to the nine the aid of a tenth Muse
Is all too little to proclaim thy worth,
Who art no comet blazing seldom forth,
But a new Star, us mortals for to tell
Thou were from heaven sent a miracle.
Since then none may presume to reach thy fire,
We may be thought no trespassers to admire.
Thus when we view stars that are far above
It Is no crime such (if not to catch) to love.
Let others speak thy richness by whole sale
Twill us suffice to mention by retayle.
It Was but the least among thy lasting pains
To purge our Laws from errors, and the stains
That long had dwelt on them to wash away,
By Duried Fleta's resurrection day.
Time's ruind monuments, records out of date
And rolls which ages past exposed to fate,
Thou with such wondrous artifice did revive;
It Was not recovery, but new life did give.
As if those caracters year'd to dust and death
Had re-instated with new soul and breath.
And though on living men it is seldom seen
That men contemporarie pass a due esteem*
But when the carcass is dissolved to dust
Envy gives then what to the dead is just*
Yet was it said of Seldom, none beside,
That he was stamped authentic ere he died*
For it is Truth's voice, at Bar when thou stoods^
Thy self was cited for Authority.
I want both pen and utterance to declare by
How great a Master shin'st, how singular
In the deep insight of the Common Laws,
There Is n'one make scruple to give thee the Bays.
And when 'midst throng of business did a rise
Some sturdy doubts, unfathomed misteri^s.
Unto the Hive Statists would soon repair,
Who best of Statists did deserve the chair.
Laws that were foreign were so much thy own,
They were not more unto their natives known.
Civil and Canon knew'st all Kingdoms ore,
Yea all that ages past did know before.
As if the Sun and thou tried Masterie,
Whether more Countries did, or Kingdoms see;
Joint tenants of the world, for both have gone
Thy daily circle, both annual have run,
Phoebus aimed not more secrecies to know
Than our great Seldom made his Title to.
More I could say the grandiure of your praise
Swells like a torrent on, nor can I raise
A Mound against it. Let this Eulogie
Serve for inscription then, that were each eye
Turned to a Sun the round world to survey
We should despair to find, Seldom like thee;
Like Caesar's Amphitheatre never was
Is an Hyperbole that Poets pass.
But we shall keep on modest bounds of fame,
To say like thee nere sprung there such a frame.
Degenerate Love and Choice.
MAd Heretic forbear to say or swear
That there is such a Meteor as love here.
It Is true; when Adam in that perf^ct state
Of life, first went on wooing for a Mate,
It Was pure affection that his soul did catch
And love conjoined with God made the best match.
Virtue, not portion was the aim he sought,
For Eve had scarce a smock to her back it is thought.
But when once Love and Adam were exiled
Eden, Love soard to heaven, and man grew wild.
And as his knowledge and that nobler light
He first received, were musled up in night,
Then Avarice and ambition seized the heart
And faculties depraved in every part*
Hence 'twas he tugged and traveled to restore
That blessed eternity he lost before.
As though when he fell mortal, God had hid
The Tree of life in earth, which he forbid.
Hence, hence he gripped at lands, and moths, and
And a large name deep written in that dust.
Thus the blind sons of men, as real heirs rust,
Of his corruptions, drew their father's cares
And guilt in with their first breath, which sublime
And are intens'd in the decays of time.
Thus matches took the High Cross, and of old
That golden age became an age of gold.
Hagling relations did their issues join,
Not to make Good, but to exalt the Line;
And horse-course of their children at a rate
Ordained by them, not by the hands of fate.
And therefore Phillip's Ass laden with Oar
Shallsooner take Olynthe, than of yore
Those royal Macedonians, whose high parts
Lost their esteem against such sordid hearts.
If the fine thing with fancies ribboned,
And the gay tuft of feathers on his head,
(That perfect emblem of its empty brain)
Come rumbling with a Coach and dagled train
Of snapha^ce-vouchers; can just smack its hand,
And call to read the catalogue of his land;
Run, hold and keep: For this, this, this is he,
That storms, and takes and routs where ere he be.
To this Diana straight the Ephesians bow:
Or; squeez the wax; no matter where, nor how*
So the revenue and the joynture's great;
It Is never queston'd whether by Escheat,
Theft, or Disseisin, or the Orphan's tears
It were extorted and grew basely theirs.
But like the Israelites in the Devil's behalf.
Forsake God to adore the goodly Calf.
Then for that pretty trifle, that sweet fool,
Just weaned from's bread and butter and the school;
Cracknuts and Hobbihorse, and the quaint Jackdaw,
To wear a thing with a plush Scabberd -- law;
Whose Father's low-roof'd late-hatch'd Scutcheon can
Scarce speak him Saped into a gentlemam.
Though at his great expense his arms took
Last circuit from y^ Herauld's poor estate.
Like a feirce Country Alehouse that renues date
His License every Sessions, and so brewes.
But this swayes not the balance: He has it
That Is Virtue, Gallantry, and Worth, and Wit,
All trussed up in a bag, and more yet to it,
For he that buye^ him has the Pigg to boot.
And though he cannot speak sense, let it go,
He offers at it, or else means it so.
His worship's will was good. If he incline
To any vice, as Swearing, Whores, or Wine;
It Is Courage, Youth's fling, or a merry Cup,
Such imperfections soon are sodred up.
If otherwise a clown; it is modesty.
Or simply lavish, it is good nature. We
Have vizards of all sizes, small or large,
If's greatness please but to be at the charge*
Thus Riches which were made man's slave to be,
Have robbed him of his native soveraigntie.
And captive beauties, like fair Barks long lost,
Are put to sale by the Candle, who gives most.
Whiles Love and Honor languish at the door,
Most glorious pitied fancies, praised and poor.
But here ye grovelling Muck-worms, ye that build
Like Ants in Mole-hills; and tie field to field;
Which varying God's decree, by joining hands,
Instead of marrying Children, wed your lands.
It Is true, you may pretend a busied care
In the advance and Tilting of an Heir:
And plausibly too; were the structure laid
Upon a noble bottom; humble, stayed,
Religious grace and worth met and combined
With the active vigor of a gallant mind;
This were a pure co^nexion, sweet with good,
A heightning and refining of the blood.
But the hog-trough wordlings from these measures flirt,
They love a great name though it is made of dirt;
To which the children are the forced Seals and Signs
Of ship-wrack'd free will in their Fathers loins.
The liberty of choice is quite flung by
With a Proviso of new property.
That primitive capacity of love
Which the all-seeing diety from a bove
Had placed in the sweet cabinet of the breast
Is now expuls'd by man, and dispossessed.
Upon which breach Lust made an entrance there
Which spreads its wide infection every where.
Come Worlding let me undeceive thee now.
If man's grand welfare hangs upon the plough;
Or if there be eternity in pelf
And earth, that is as mortal as thy self;
Then thou have grasped to purpose. But if not,
The end of wealth's mistaken in thy plot.
Where much is given, much required shall be.
Not what was left to thy posterity;
Or the by-issues of thy younger years;
But how and when thou stop'dst the widows tears
With timely charity; and reliev'dst the poor
With ready morsels frost-bound at thy door.
These are the works and friends shall follow thee,
The ^est shall live thy shame or infamy.
Nor would I have thy offspring cast away
Upon each roving wit, that shall essay
Thy hopeful lovely viands, with pretense
Of some blind far-hence-travell'd eminence.
Nor that unrighteous Mammon swells thy chest
And thee, let looss on every straggling guest.
But there is a mean in judgment, a mid course,
A difference betwixt a Man and's Horse.
A fair distinction, were not we too nice,
To moderate disdain and Market price.
Forestal not then the world, but let all live*
Some come to sell by weight, and some to give,
Love never measured by the Acre stood,
If we ^oll fairly, then the bargain's good.
A Dialogue between two water Nymphs Thamesis and Sabrina.
THa. Ho! all ye sister-streams that governed be.
By great Diana's watery diety.
Ye silver Nymphs that gliding sport and play,
And kis your flowery bancks, and flowing stray
In lofty murmurs, o come sit you here,
And lend my swelling grief a voice or tear.

Sab. What poor afflicted Soul with mournful cries
And sobs awakes my long benighted eyes?
What hapless maid of her first love bereaved
Bemoans her friend in death's black arms received?
Perhaps some pining Votress in the dark
Bedews a Lover's tomb with tears; hark! hark!

Tha. Ah me forlorn! ah me forsaken maid!
Where is my lovelines and honor strayd?
Those glories dwelt upon me? and those swans
That sung my name beyond proud Ganges sands,
And filled both Indies with the wide renown
Of my spread fame? Now tossed now tumbled down?

Sab. I thought my crimson streams had buried all
The bitter land-flouds of a Kingdoms thrall.
But lo! a louder echo living is,
A flood of yet continued miseries.
A tide of woe at last has found a tongue
To bear a sad part in my doleful song:
Speak wretched Maid, whence art? --

Tha. -- it is I, it is I,
Poor Thamesis out of my ruins cry,
Gravelled with sorrow and scortch'd up with heat
Of war, struck deaf with drums, who was the seat
Of peace and plenty, now the rouling map
Of violence and tyranous mishap.

Sab. Alas fair Princess! were there left in me
A Creek reserved from grief to pity thee,
With what swift have should I divert the course
Of my salt waves to mixed their scattered force
With that vast body of thy tears? And close
My springs with thine to make a sea of woes?

Tha. Can there be such a monster that dares own
It Is small undoing when my mischief's shown?
O can there be proportion 'twixt the drops
Of private ills, and the full plenteous crops
And buckets of mine anguish? O forbear!
I drank those showers whereof thy storms skirts were.

Sab. We grant (Great Lady of the Isles) that thy
Tumultuous tumors were that pluresie
That caused the opening of our veins. Thy head
Distempered, we grew soon imbodied
In the same gulf and ocean of thy pain,
Languishing rivulets of thee the maine.
But if the surges of thy bosom have
Dug for thy beauty an untimely grave:
If thy rash waters have so run thee in
The winding gyres and streights of suffering;
Thank thy Augean filthiness for these,
Thy Hydra which has slain thy Hercules.

Tha. It Is true Sabrina I have acted right
The fable of that Horse; who needs would fight
The Heart: But finding straight himself to be
Too weak for his Pallizadoed enemy;
He begs the man to ride him, and became
His slave, to gain an empty victor's name.

Sab. No, rather I suppose the have verefi'd
The story of the Frogs, that to Jove cried
To have a King. He heard their prayers it is said
And flung them down a Beam to be their head.
But they disliked with peace, again did call,
On which he sent a Stork that eat them all.
So thou that kick'st at quiet kings, have gained
A conquest, which now rides thee double rein'd.
Thou, thou that shrunk'st at puny Subsidies
Art eased at length with Taxes and Excize;
Have only changed the names of things* y^ Hague
For Amsterdam, the Meazles for the Plague.

Tha. Crush not Sabrina now my smarting sores,
But let the offering of my crumbled Towers,
And rubbish Palaces appease thy feirce
Censure: For lo I speak but in my hearse.
This issue of my breath's a parting groan:
Add not affliction to affliction.

Sab. Nor has that burden lighted all on thee
Alone sweet Nymph, but Humber, Trent and Dee,
Medway, and my poor channel had their share
In the crimson streams of a most bloody war.
If by the shore the Public Father died
It Was not long since the Son here slipped a side?
Saved by a miracle of Providence,
The finger of the Gods, that caught him hence
From out the jaws of death, to make him more
Than that fight gained could seal him conqueror.
But least I lessen thy deserts, o take
The glory of our ruin for thy sake.

Tha. It Was I indeed was that main spring of all
That set the judgments moving, which did fall,
And in each quarter of the land did roam,
But now again are justly traveled home
Through my own bowels. O my pride and purse
Were both at once the Countrie's and my curse.
Fullness of bread, and wantoness, that brat
Of sweet abused peace, in me begat
A nicety of palate, a desire
Of novelties, and set^ing all on fire,
Which flame once kindled, I was forced to be and well
The Fuel of my own calamity.

Sab. And rightly, since thou wast the womb
From whence those Spirits rose, to be their Hell.
The high throne of that many headed Beast
Popular Sovereignty: A snaky nest
And Synagogue of Asps, which share the sweat
Of three tame Nations tied up from their meat.

Tha. What the^ Sabrina rests yet to be done?
But that we shun with shame and fly the sun,
Suffering a willing winter to congeal
Our drops to crystal, which we will mildly deal
In softer showers of pious tears again
Till we have purged a scarlet Kingdoms stain.

The Myrtle Grove.
JUst as the reeling Sun came sliding down
Among the Moors and Tethys in a Gown
Of seagreen watcher fettled to embrace
Her great Apollo from his circled race,
And the streaked heavens did themselves digest
Into a larger Iris, to invest
And cano pie the illustrious lovely pair
In a Diaphanous Robe of costly air:
Clarinda rose amidst the Myrtle Grove,
Like the Queen Mother of the stars above.
But that Clarinda's was no borrowed Light,
Nor could it, where she was be deemd a night.
Such was the natural glories she put on
They owed no being to reflection.
Whiles the inspired Musicians of the wood,
Ravished at the new day, powered out a flood
Of quavering melody in honied strains
To court the glittering Diety of the plains.
Those pretty flowery beds of sweets that now
Had closed their heads up in an amber dew
Of tears, to mourn the drowsy Sun's good night,
Warmed with a nobler ardor sprung up right*
And threw the mantles of dull sleep aside
In a displaid and meritorious pride,
To strew with rich perfumes her balmy way,
Which grew more fragrant by her active ray.
Thus sweetly wooed Clarinda laid her down
On a cur^'d quilt of roses, fondly grown
Proud of their own oppression, whiles they may
Kiss the dear burden which upon them lay.
Then skreen'd with harmony, she stretched a long
Upon her Damask Couch, where a bright throng
Of Graces hovered ore the firmament
Of her pure orbs drawn to a full extent.
Whiles a soft gale of wanton wind that blew
Did sport her willing glories into view.
But I poor dazzled I, not daring here
TO attempt the splendour of each naked sphere,
Stood peeping through the Optics of the shade,
Which to my sight a kind reflection made.
Her eyes half shut up in their crystal case
Stood twinkling Sentinels upon her face;
Or else to take the prospect of those fields
Of beauty which that flowing Tempe yields.
Her coral lips ten thousand smiles enthroned,
Like clustred grapes which for a vintage groaned.
The Ivory palace of her stately neck
Clothed with majestic aw, did seem to check
The looser pastime of her gamesome hair,
Which in wild rings ran trick about the air.
Her amorous breasts swelled to a lovely rise
Of dripping plenty a twinn'd Paradise
Of milk and honey, exhaled my roving eye
Into a soul-ensnaring ecstasy.
And had I not recoiled without delay
I there had wandered in the milky way*
Her belly like the Ace of Clubs, so white,
So black, the struting pillow of delight,
So fired the catching tinder of my s^nse,
That I no longer Student could commence,
But straight weighed anchor and tacked up the sail
To the main yard, waiting a stiffer gale
To pass me through those ticklish streights of Man
Into the full Mediterranean.
At last I plunged into the Elysian charms,
Fast claspp'd b^ the arched Zodiac of her arms
Those closer clings of love, where I pertaked
Strong hopes of bliss; but so, o so I waked!
To my honored friend Mr. T. C. that asked me how I liked his Mistress being
an old widow.
BUt prithee first how long have bin
Lost in this sad estate of sin?
That the mild Gout, or Pox, or worse
Serves not to expiate thy curse?
Some Pestilence else may be thou ght upon,
And not such absolute damnation.
Are rocks and halters grown so dear
That there is no perishing but here?
Do no Committee yet survive
Those cheaper Gregory's of men alive?
If thou will needs to Sea, o must it be
In an old Gall^asse of sixty three?
A snail-crawl'd botom? A gray Bark
That stood at Font for Noah's Ark?
Whose wrinkled Poop in figures furled
Describes he^ travels round the world?
A Nut, which when the have cracked and fumbled ore
Thou Wilt find the Squiril has bin there before?
Then raise the Siedge from falling on*
That old dismantled garrison.
Rash Lover speak what pleasure has
Thy Spring in such an Aftermath?
Who, were she to the best advantage spread,
Is but the dull husk of a maiden head.
How can thou then delight the sense
In beautie's preterperfectense?
And dote upon that freestone face
Which wears but the records of grace?
Whose antic Monast'ry brags but a Chest
Of venerable Relics at the best?
O can there such a famine be
Of piping hot virginity,
That thou art forced to slur and cheat
Thy stomach with the broken meat?
Why he that wooes a Widow does no more
Then court that Quagmire where one sunk before.
Fie* prize not then those Arras Looks
Sullied and thumb'd like Town Hall Books!
I like thy fancy well to have
Its misery so near its Grave.
And it is a general shrift that most men use,
But yet it is tedious waiting dead men's shoes.
If 'twere thy plot I do confess
For to make Mummee of her grease,
Or swop her to the Paper Mill,
This were extracting good from ill.
But if thou wed'st on any worse condition,
Thou Wilt prove Delinquent for thy Superstition.
But prithee hold, let me advise,
Perhaps she is rich and seems a prize,
New chalked* new rigged, a stately Friggot,
But yet she is tapp'd at lower spiggot.
Yet if no medicine for thy grief be found,
There Is small ods Tom 'twixt being hanged or drowned.
The Engagement Stated.
Begone Expositor: The Text is plain
No Church, no Lord, no Law, no Sovereign.
Away with mental reservations, and
Senses of Oaths in files out-vy the Strand.
Here Is hell trussed in a thimble, in a brea^h,
Dares face the hazard of the second death.
The Saints are grown Laconians, and can twist
Perjury up in pills like Leyden grist,
But hold precize Deponents: Though the heat
Of Zeal in Cataracts digests such meat,
My cold concoction shrinks, and my advance
Drives slowly to approach your Ordinance.
The signe's in Cancer, and the Zodiac turns
Leonick, rolled in curls while Terra burns.
What though your fancies are sublimed to reach
Those fatal reins? Success and will can teach
But rash divinity. A sad renown
Where one man fell to see a million drown.
When neither Arts nor Arms can serve to fight
And rest a Title from its law and right,
Must malice piece the Trangum? and make clear
The scruple? Else we will resolve to swear?
Nay out swear all that we have sworn before
And make good lesser crimes by acting more,
And more sublime? This, this extends the Line
And shames the puny soul of Cataline.
On this account all those whose fortune's crossed,
And want estates, may turn Knights of the Post.
Vaulx we out vy'd thee, since thy plot fell lame,
We found a closer Cellar for the same,
Piling the fatal Powder in our mouths
Which in an Oath discharged blew up the House.
Maugre Mounteagle, asps not thoroughly slain
Their poison in an age may live again.
Good Demas cuff your Bear, then let us see
The mystery of your iniquity.
May a man course a cur? And freely box
The Question? Or the formal paradox?
But as in Physic so in this device
This querk of policy the point is nice.
For he that in this model means to thrive,
Must first subscribe to the preparative.
Like Witches compacts countermarch his faith,
And soak up all what ere the Spirit says:
Then seal and sign. Scylla threw three bars short,
He had a sword indeed, but no Text for it.
Old Rome lament thy infancy in sin,
We perfect what thou trembled'st to begin
Blush then to see thy self out done. But all
The world may grieve it is epidemical.
Heaven frowns indeed. But what makes hell enraged?
Sweet Pluto be at peace, we have Engaged.
FINIS.

