NO INTEREST Beyond the PRINCIPAL OR, The Court CAMISADO. By Reduction of
Government to its primitive end and Integrity,

Romans 13. 4. The Ruler is the Minister of God to thee for good.

ALSO, NEVVES from SCOTLAND: OR, The REASONS Examined of the War THREATENED.

May. 1. 1648.
Imprimatur,

Gilb. Mabbott.

LONDON, Printed for H. Beck, and are to be sold in the Old Bayley. 1648.

No Interest beyond the Principal. OR, The Court Camisado.
IN the case of divorce, when it was put to Christ by the Pharisees to know his
opinions in it, he being neither Scribe nor Pharisee, Mat. 19. of no sect nor
faction, one that drive no design but Gods; and that came to fulfill the law,
not to destroy it, sends those great doctors to School, to the primitive end
and institution of marriage, as it came immediately from God, in innocence,
when, and where all things were very good, as he that will taste water purely
must do it at the fountain. But they not satisfied with this solution by way
of justification, urge an old statute Law of Moses, which by its antiquity,
authority, and usage might (as they thought) v. 7) plead right of prescription
for that masculine privilege of putting away their wives. But Christ tells
them, that Plant never grew in innocence, God grafted no such Sience in the
stock of created nature, it was a mushroome that grew out of nature corrupted.
Moses (says he) bacause of the hardness of your hearts, suffered you to put
away your wives, but from the beginning it was not so, as who say. It was
indeed a politic law of concession, but policy must not annull divinity,
neither reason of state, not laws municipal must crossewh^t with right reason,
or the principles of entire nature. Therefore I, who am come to enlighten your
judgments, and reform your manners (Gospell-properties) tell you again that
whatever your lusts and exorbitancies might occasion Moses to do, or enact, by
way of connivance or permission, that does not justify the practice (though
never so old, and generally received) to be lawful, but rather show it to be
unlawful, because that permission varies from the first position or standard
given by God himself, the prime legislator, whither this case if rightly stated
and argued must be reduced for solution, no authority binding above his, nor no
law against his, though seemingly never so specious.

A clear demonstration, which is the best way to answer questions and work
reformations in matters of Government. Not to be misled by words of Art,
civil superstition, or formal pretenses, to the violation of the laws of
God, nature, or reason. It is true that Government (as marriage) is of God, but
it is as true that governors (as persons marrying) are of men, and that the
great Interest (which word is now the only Idol that men sal down and worship)
of both Government and Governors is the glory of God, and the good of mankind:
The end of the institution is the only interest of the thing instituted, and
consequently the Mea^e-wand or Standard by which it is to be regulated and
reduced, though as old as Moses, when God gives opportunity, and time brings
truth to light. In this age of ours, Kings plead for prerogative, flowers of
the Crown, and right of Sovereignty, as they and their flatterers call it. And
even Parliament-priviledge is made use of by prerogative members, for promoting
the arbitrary interest of the Crown; thus is authority wire-drawn, as if
Governors rather then the Governed, were the end of Government, and Government
it self is rather made a personal Interest, then a public utility. Yea,
Laws, nay Oaths, are thus made use of to captive and ensnare men, by
prerogative glosses, as if it were in the power of men, who are the sons of
reason to swear themselves into beasts, and to abjure their very nature, and
that by virtue of an ordinance of God, which Government is. What confidence can
Kings have in people by such ties as being ex natura rei unlawful, do untie
themselves, and which are both unlawful to be taken, and when taken unlawful
to be kept. Such glosses as Court Parasites, put upon laws allegiance tending
to make Kings absolute, and their power as well negative, as positive, and
their duty mere matters of pleasure, and acts of will, in the way neither to
render Kings safe, nor their people happy.

The Popery of an implicit faith and blind obedience, will not, cannot last
always; which because it is so much countenanced by Episcopacy (that rag of
Rome) therefore thence is that maxim. No Bishops, no King, implying that when
ever the vail of ignorance and blind obedience was done away by abolishing of
Bishops, and the peoples eyes were opened by divinity, and reason to see
themselves misled by pretense of authority from a right understanding of the
nature of government, they will never endure to be slaves instead of freemen,
subjects to governors instead of government, and to serve their interests who
are their Ministers and Gods merely for their good, having their being (in
office and authority) by, for, nor to no other end or purpose. For as the Pope
is afraid of nothing so much as the translating the word into popular languages
for fear of betraying his juggling tricks in divinity, so nor Kings and
Royallists then that the Laws of the Land should be Englished, I mean not so
much in language, as in sense and reason (though there is no good reason why
English eyes should look through French spectacles, except it be to see to lose
our way to liberty and property as they have done) but for English Laws to
speak Prerogative, is worse then to speak French, some Commentators are
better Courtiers then Lawyers, who should be men of reason, and not so
discredit the Law (the honor of their profession) as to force it against
reason to advance the will of a man above the reason of a State, and the
original end of government it self. Therefore its time to be no longer fooled
with State terms of Interest, Jewels, and Flowers of the Crown, or the old
overworne word of Prerogative, for what is this but first to set up a golden
image, and then to fall down and worship it. I am not against Kings nor their
Crowns, its the abuse, and only that that I abominate, which has as much
blindfolded the people of Christendom, as the Popes supremacy has the Princes
thereof, whose eyes yet shall be opened to see their error, and to withdraw
their necks out of his Ecclesiastical yoke, and so its hoped shall the
peoples (specially Englishmen) in things Civil; to know, as their obedience to
authority, so good authority in reason, justice, and equity, for that their
obedience; for so men act like men, else like beasts, which only are subjected
to will, which yet is not the least part of that bondage of corruption the
creation groans and travels in pain under, Romans 8. 20, 21, 22. being
unwillingly made subject to that vanity, in hope and earnest expectation to be
delivered: and shall we be so vain, specially when a price is new put into our
hands, as willingly to take up that yoke which the creature, though senseless
and irrational, unwillingly bears, in hope of being infranchised of it at the
last, accounting even annihilation better then subordination to the inordinate
will of fallen mankind. Old errors are so much cried up under new lights, as
that old truths will scarce be believed against custom in error: Kings they
will not, but tell you its against their interest not to be arbitrary, and the
people they dare not believe it if the Princes do not, though neither to 'ne
nor to 'ther, but must needs grant that ab initio non fuit sic, its consonant
neither to the nature, nor the end of government; and consequently not of
Sovereignty, which only so far is sovereigne as it is preservative.
Therefore the Law says (of al men) the King can do no wrong, has less power
to do wrong, because greater obligation to do right then any man else; nay he
is so far from having power to do wrong, that he is neither to do it, nor
suffer it to be done by any inferior powers, but to see that justice and
protection according to Law be administered to all by the Ministers thereof,
whereof he is the chief.

But the nature, of man even in innocence (though not by it) lusts after an
exorbitant superiority, for when God had made him Lord over all but the
forbidden fruit, he thought himself no King over the creature whilst the
Creator limited his power, though but in one, and therefore he resolves either
to win the horse, or lose the saddle, gain that, or lose all. So Kings, be
their power never so great to do, yet except they may also have power to
undo, negative as well as positive, power to deny, as well as to grant, and
undo as well as do, they are unsatisfied, and stick not in effect to
affirm, that except you grant them Tyranny, you oppose Monarchy. Wherein yet
they do themselves no right, nor those that flatter them into such principles:
for when people see they cannot grant safe and lawful premises, but with
hazard of sophistical and prevaricate conclusions to be inferred thereupon,
it makes them fearful to grant any thing, lest they lose all, an Inch given,
makes an Ell taken. As if commissions, etc. for honour-sake go in the Kings
name, then the Court consequence is, they are the act, not his Laws; then the
next result is, they are ad placitum, and not quamdiu been se gesserint,
Prerogative is so procreant that no womb is barren to the third or fourth
generation, but every inference is productive of another. So let him have the
honor to confirm and assert Laws; then the next remove is, you must allow him
the use of his reason, and the next to that, therefore a negative as well as an
affirmative voice: grant-freewill, and falling from Grace will follow. Suppose
him the fountain of honor; then, he retorts, I may confer it on whom I
please, and for what cause, for vice as well as virtue. I may make George
Villiers and his virtuous mother, Duke and Countess of Buckingham, and
court-minions Privy-councellours, nay aliens of the Scotch Nation, (whose
native state interest by vicinity, is against ours) Peers and Parliamentmen in
England. Therefore lay the foundation upon the rock, not in the sands: make
out that position in plain English, That the King can do no wrong, nor the
Crown neither, by declaring that neither legally nor illegally by abused law,
or power above law, it neither is, nor ought to be in their power to do so, and
provide accordingly, let legal and regal be but one and the same, as in
sound, so in a safe and sound sense, univocall terms: and sovereignty made
sovereign by preferring the Coronation Oath, with a right understanding; Magna
Charta purged of superstition; and the Petition of Right well backed with
Propositions, to be principal flowers of the Crown before it be worn again
in England, and that by a penal law: for if it be lawful for a private man or
particular subject to implead his Prince by law upon a particular wrong, much
more for the State, or people in general to implead him by arms, or proceed
against him in case of a general wrong, when theirs, neither Law nor Judge,
but salus popoli to determine betwixt them. And therefore Trajan both wisely
and worthily, when he delivered the sword to the Praetor, bid him use it for
him whilst he ruled well, and against him, when ill.

Let Kings have as much honor, freedom, and safety in the way of righteousness
as becomes men of their place, the contrary whereof is dishonor, slavery and
danger both to Prince and people: Let the people know that his name is of no
more use in commissions and statutes, then his Image and superscription upon
coin, the one arguing no more propriety or title in him then the other, the
honor of both his is and that for publik advantage, not disadvantage, he can
no more suspend the one, then the other, or destitute his people either of laws
or their lawful execution, then of money and trade. Gospel timeshould make our
Kings better Christians, then to desire such Catholic authority, when they
see, hear, and read the evil effects that do, and cannot but attend it, both
to him that is in authority by way of temptation, and those that are under
authority by way of ruin and destruction. Giants of old, those men-monsters
begotten of Gods displeasure, and inordinate concupiscence, what effects had
their exorbitancy of strength but to make them men of exorbitant minds? proud
and cruel, rebellious toward God, and tyrannous over men. A reasonable size
best befits a reasonable man, too much power of any kind makes a man a monster,
and hazzards him to do monstrous things. Nimrod was the first we read of, that
by invasion and oppression of public right and liberty affected a Babell
Kingdom Government beyond rule, and to be absolute on earth as God is in
heaven, therefore was he called The mighty hunter before the Lord, Genesis 10. 8,
9, 10. And every one after him that hunted inordinatly after power, as he did,
was proverbially called as he was, another Nimrod, or (as we now say) Nimrod
the second, Nimrod the third, the mighty hunter etc. deriving both his name and
style, as the brand of his presumption, and unlawful ambition or usurpation.
The account that Kings are to make for the talents that are lawfully conferred
upon them is great enough, and need not be increased by the talents themselves
unlawfully usurped. Abused power makes men on earth, the most unlike to God in
heaven of any thing, therefore unlimitted authority is uncompatible to a
creature, and able to make a man a devil. Angels in heaven as well as Adam in
paradise, fell by free will and freewill power, and how then think we can
Commonwealths stand by it, specially in one man? That King that makes
conscience of his place and people, will rather think his power too much then
too little, considering he must answer for no more then he has, and with Moses
be content to depart of his spirit to lessen his charge for his own ease, and
their benefit; and if he do not, then a little is too much, for power without
conscience is like a horse without a bridle, ready to hurry the rider into
ruin, and overrun all that stands in his way. Nor will a conscientious King
purchase power over his people against their wills, with the loss of their
blood, his greater care will be to use that well he has, and not to make his
successors absolute, that his Subjects may be slaves, nor conquer whom he
should protect, he will as well remember that he is the father of his Country,
as of his next Heir, who yet is but his successor, and the Kingdoms Heir, the
Crown and Kingdom being an incorporate body, for he cannot dis-inherit him,
though the people may, and upon mis-government depose him, as in case of
adultery married people may divorce, the knot that ties them together, being
broken asunder: his care should be rather to leave rules to his Son to govern
well, then power to govern ill: and himself to dye desired, as good Josiah did,
rather then when he is dead, to be styled of happy memory, because of his
unhappy Reign. Would Kings be more Religious, they would be less ambitious,
and see reason for it; yea, believe themselves as well in debt to their people,
as their people to them, owing both mutual love and duty, striving rather to
deserve obedience then to enforce it, and entituling themselves to their
peoples Allegiance rather by their administrations then commands, themselves
inviolably keeping the Oath of good Government, that so they may not give their
people the least color of liberty, to break the^e of dutiful Allegiance,
and knowing how dangerous a thing (...) a Printe is both in the sad consequence
of ill example, and the wosull effects of divine justice, so frequently
inflicted on the people either for or by occasion of the Princes sins.

What reason can be given why all other Governors and Magistrates are to rule
for the public good, and only Kings for their own greatning? No inferior
authority has a negative power to suspend justice or protection so far as he
is to administer it by his place, the King himself can derive no such power to
any, and if he cannot derive it, then he has it not inherent in himself, for
the Sovereigns power is principally to empower others. Magis and Minus make no
essential difference; Betwixt the King and a Constable there is difference of
power in point of proportion, but not in specie or kind, it is of the same
kind, and to the self-same end, one has not power for, and the other against.
Or what reason can be shown, why the King ought to have a negative arbitrary
power? is it because Kings are more infallible, and unerring then other men? we
have not found it so. Or what good reason can be shown that de facto he has
it? Has any known law of the Land conferred it on him, or is it merely by
usurpation? has he taken it because the people durst not deny it, as former
Kings have done Forrest-Lands, and then made the people undo them by
forrest-Laws: why then, prescription in wrong, entitles no man to right,
especially Kings, whose office is neither to do, nor suffer to be done, any
wrong to the body whereof they are the head. Or is it as some affirm, because
the King is supreme? for say they, seeing arbitrary power must be somewhere,
therefore it is fittest to be in the supreme Magistrate. To this I Answer, That
arbitrary Legislative power is in the supreme Magistracy or Government, not
Governor; the Parliament, not the King; for the people being a numerous
dispersed multitude, and so not fit always to be together, to see to the
execution of their own Laws, do therefore meet occasionally in an aggregate
body, for the consultive, and creative part of Laws, and constitutions, that so
they may be such as are most fit, and do best suit with the nature of the
place and people; and then leave them for the executive part principally to the
care of the King, with other ordained Ministers, as being better executed by a
few then a many, and better consulted and made by a many then a few; and
therefore has he the honor of Sword and Scepter, and for that cause were good
Kings in former times wont to go their progresses, as Judges do their
circuits, not to make hunting-matches, and horse-races, nor yet to give Laws,
but to inquire and countenance the execution of justice, and preservation of
peace, according to law, and punish the violators

And as Kings, so all other Governments and governors, their Interest is
neither contrary to, nor diverse from the public good, their chief end is
their chief interest, neither power, privilege, nor liberty to consult,
debate, or conclude, belongs to any (and to them least that are entrusted most)
but what has proximity with, is reductive to, and acted for, it; therefore
those Parliament Men whose principles and transactions vary from that pole,
they are the most destructive members to Parliament-interest, that drive a
Court design with public employment, for Prerogative and Privilege run the
same danger, the apparent abuse of same brings all into question; potius unus
quam unitas, better then throw out some rotten Apples, then spoil the whole
hoard; be not tenderer of your members then they are true to their trust, if
the Common wealth see some made examples, the punishment of a few, will
preserve the reputation of the whole, that the body is sound, though some
members be rotten: God made not man for himself, the interest of the creature,
is the service of his Creator, and therefore our rise was our fall, the raising
of our interest, was the ruin of us all. He that being chosen and entrusted
with arbitrary power, will therefore use it arbitrarily, is Adams own child, and
after his likeness. If it be objected, that the King pretends the public
interest in those things which by absolute power he claims and entitles
himself unto, as the Militia, and negative voice; that they are for the better
protecting and rule of his people, and the Royal party in Parliament,
forsooth, urge Liberty of conscience, for liberty of speech, Cum Privilegio, to
betray their trust. To these I Answer, first Jointly: That it is an easy
matter to put a bait upon a hook, and no hard thing to catch Gudgins with it,
but for my part I will never trust him, nor them, by the By, that err in the
main. Secondly, Severally, And first for the Kings claim and pretenses (which
the effects have proved barely to be such) in reason he can neither desire it,
if he know himself to be but man, nor his people grant it, to his, and their
apparent ruin. Only blind Cupid is fit to stand a top of the wheel of Fortune,
none that have eyes in their heads would desire so slippery a place, when they
see they so much over top themselves that their hands cannot manage what is
under their feet, but they must needs turn round to their own ruin. But if
seeing they see not, and will venture their necks to have their wills, yet
there is no reason the people should build Babel to bring confusion upon
themselves. Wisdom is, to pursue a right end by right means, consequently, not
to expect good government from a corrupt will, endowed with Arbitrary power.
What has bin the ruin of Empire, so much as Empire? Kings have lived to repent
their power, and people much more.

And Secondly, for his party in the Parliament Privilege in their hands is as
bad as prerogative in his, they having no more right of power to abuse that,
then he this. Whoever represents a County or Corporation is entrusted by a part
of member of the Commonwealth for the good of the whole, and is in the (...)
of an Ambassador or Commissioner to negotiate in a joint body with the States
General, for the State in general. For by the Laws of Embassy, State agents
(though Plenipotentiaties) are not to betray them they treat for, their power
is neither intended, nor ought to be interpreted to the prejudice but profit of
them that employ them. The Feffee for the Feffor. Liberty and privilege are
allowed to Parliaments, to transact the liberty, property, and safety of the
people, and he that goes retrograde to those, what place or part of the
Commonwealth soever he serve for, by right of community ought to be rejected
by the rest that serve for, and are entrusted with the whole.

In a word, words by tract of time degenerate like men. Tirannus once was taken
in the better part, when Kings were better common-wealthsmen, and that they and
their people were joint purchasers, trading abroad and not at home, for
preeminence. So was the word Interest, whilst it was of public cognizance, and
all Qu. Elizabeth's days kept it self sober by drinking English Be^re till it
was made drunk with F^^tiniack, and the King and his Courtiers by use upon use
and interest upon interest had almost swallowed up all, the peoples Principal.
And Reason it self run hazard to have her eyes put out, that Prapria que
maribus, which was wont to be the common name for all men, it begun to be
wholly engrossed at Court, entailed upon the crown and begged for a Monopoly,
insomuch as there was almost no Reason left but Reason of State, within the
compass of a cabinet council, all else was either brutish or rebel on, nor
no state but that of the King and his Royal consort, the one Scatch, the other
French. When public Interest is impropriated ex officia, to private and
personal purposes, then cease the name and nature of a Governor by
deviating from the primitive end and institution of government, ordained by God
and Nature; and consequently love, loyalty, obedience, duty: for what oblieges
these? not greatness without goodness, for then the devil might challenge them at
our hands, who by Scripture is styled principalities and powers, yea, the
Prince of this world. Authority (whatever the kind or species of it be) whilst
it points right to the pole, and retains the virtue of the Lord-stone, where
with it was first touched, its safe to sale by it, but if either through
corruption, or injury of time, it make standing variations at wrong points,
then it must either be new touched, or quite changed else contrary to
intention, when first sea-saile, you will make a wrong voyage, and fall amongst
enemies instead of friends; or a destructive, and be cast amongst rock; and
sands instead of known Seas.

NEWS from SCOTLAND OR Their reasons examined of the WAR threatened.
THe Scots would feign make war upon England, but they are to seek for a why
and a wherefore; and are ready to fall together by the ears amongst themselves
what shall be the cause of the quarrel (yet keep us in continual alarm to
the loss of Ireland) for the world must have a blind. But be the reason never
so politic, Religion must be the overture; which the Scotch dangerous
Committee not being wise enough to reconcile, Traquire who of late was first in
their exception, and now in acceptance) was called to council to help at a
dead lift, being for michiavillian policy another Strafford.

One part of them say the Sectaries (meaning the Army) have broken the
Covenant, which they never took.) But if breach of Covenant be a cause of
quarrel, the Scots need not go so far to fight, they have Covenant
breakers nearer hand at home; is it possible that such pretenders to piety
should see a moat in their brothers eye so far off, and overlooke the beam
that is in their own, streyne at a gnat, and swallow a camel, threaten war to
England, for they themselves know not what; one while saying the Covenant is
broken, and another while that it is endangered; and the whilst cocker up their
own Commissioners with an omne been, in their palpable Covenant-breaches and
Apostacies. But it seems they must fall out with us, to keep them friends
amongst themselves; though if they had eyes in their heads, they might see Gods
hand in creating such fewds at home, to prevent the mischief they would bring
abroad.

But wherein have the Army broken the Covenant? why principally for not being
Presbyterians, for that in pretense with some, and reality with others, is made
the chief, if not the only hinge that the Covenant winds and turns upon,
though the word Presbitery is not so much as once named in the Covenant, a weak
foundation then to build a war upon; but to strengthen it, they say the Army
have refused orders for their disbanding, and forced orders for their standing
(though the Parliament of England never told them so) but they forget what
their Army did when it was sent to but to disband their supernumeraries, which
they flatly refused, and forcibly kept them a foot spite of the Parliament, and
to the despite of the poor Country, that groaned under so heavy a burden of so
heavy a body; and by the same force kept Carlisle and Newcastle, whether the
Parliament would or no (by what clause in the Covenant or Treaty, is not known
to this day) and the King of England too, in England, till they thought good to
part with him, and that notwithstanding all authority, reason or right to the
contrary But the true reason why the Army (whose greatest fault in their
faithfulness) is such an eye sore, it is because by their means principally
their strong party in England is much weakened, those fine designs of a joint
interest, legislative propriety, and the Kings coming to London in freedom,
honor, and safety, and other such like, have been shrewdly disappointed, by
demolishing their eleven pillars, and line of communication at once. If the
Parliament of England and their Army, were as mischievously disposed as they
would render them, and did believe breach of Covenant, cause of quarrel, they
would never sit still, and suffer such retrogradation as is daily, and
declaratively acted in Scotland, from the Kingdoms, to the Kings Cause and
Party, covenanted and fought against; nor their Committee of danger to denounce
war as they do: having a visible power on foot, to spoil their councels
before they can bring them to maturity, and to fetch back what they carried
hence, and those English Malignants and Incendiaries that went hence, which
contrary to Covenant they refuse to deliver.

Brotherly love and charity covers a multitude of faults, and does not cry
every failer for a breach of Covenant on neither side (no more than every
discontent is a breach of wed-locke) especially touching things of
non-concernment and a Covenant so large, comprehensive, and subject in many
things, to various acceptations by its manner of penning. David in the 44.
Psalm shows what God counts breach of Covenant, when he says, verse. 17, 18.
We have not dealt falsely in thy Covenant: our heart is not turned back. Now
whether in this sense the Lord Louden or the Lord Fairfax, the Scotch Papers
and Practices, or the Parliaments declarations and long sufferings have broken
Covenant, let God and the World judge. As the Covenant warrants not breaking so
nor fighting for breaking (much less a supposed one, and that in our own form
and interest) God is witness as of the Covenant so of the breach, and it
properly belongs to him, not man to punish, save in their several places,
vocations and interests, those are the words of the Covenant, whereby the
Scottish judicature, may and ought to question their own Scotch
Covenant-breakers, but by no means to stretch their line over Tweed, and to
make themselves work in another Harvest, to punish us and not themselves, for
things concerning us, not them. But it seems when the Covenant was first made
in Scotl. it was then resolved it should be broke in England, and that
whatsoever was acted cross to their designs, especially of joint interest,
should be the breach of it, else they will never bring in such far fetched
unconcerning things into the account, as they do. When they have done justice
in Scotland, upon their apostalized Covenanters, Malignants, and Incendiaries,
we in England will thank them for their prayors and friendly animadversions in
what they can justly task us or probably suspect us, of what kind, but not
till then, nor further then that. For by the Covenant the supreme judicatories
of both Kingdoms respectively have only power to punish. Another party are
angry and threaten war because we will not receive the King upon their
terms, and let them exercise a legislative power (so furiously driven on)
here in England, for which they also urge the Covenant (that Scotch Magna
Charta) which because they made it, therefore they conceive they cannot break
it, assuming a legislative power not only in, but over poor England by virtue
of it, for that they that are the makers, must it seems be interpreters, and
thus the Covenant which was intended by us unto liberty, was meant and is made
use of by them unto our bondage; and the King his very party and cause
Covenanted for, that was Covenanted and fought against, Monstrum horrendum. An
ounce of Scottish confidence is more worth than a pound of English honesty. Thus
Traquier himself is become a Covenanter: Such gamesters will never lose, what
game soever they play at, that can play fast and loose, and make any thing of
every thing; and from the words, mutual advice and consent mentioned in the
eigth Article of the Treaty entitle themselves to a joint interest. and us to
breach of Covenant and Treaty; whereas those words imply only thus much, that
as the war was managed by a joint engagement against a common enemy to both
Nations, so that it should not be ended by a peace transacted or treated by one
Nation alone, without the privity and consent of the other, that so neither of
their interests might be damnified. Not that both of them should be confounded.
The rare contradictions that their Papers, and Practices hold forth; sometimes
the King must not come to London till he have given security and satisfaction,
then again be must come without either; sometimes propositions and no personal
treaty, othertimes a personal treaty and no propositions; which now are
impositions; sometimes the King must take the Covenant, otherwhile if be come
not to the length of our desires, in so doing, we must be content; sometimes
they tell the King upon his refusing the Propositions both Kingdoms will be
constrained (for their mutual safety) to agree and settle Religion and Peace
without him; and then upon turn of the tide they tell us we must wait till God
change his heart: For the safety of the Kingdom the Army must be Disbanded,
and the King invested in the Militia, or it in him. Sure Janus is Propitious to
these ambidexers, else they could never so bewitch wise men as well as fools
with their Sorceries as they do, and with the Preshyterian Eele-hooke draw the
City and Assembly after them, and that not only in England, but in Scotland
also, where (they say) they have deluded the well-meaning Clergy, who are
consented to join with those Covenant-breakers in a war against us, provided
it be for Covenant Breaking. The little good that we have got, by the great
cvills that we have undergon, God justly may, and it may be will punish us for
it, but they for their dissembling shall not escape, hypocrisy and falsehood is
as hateful to God as to man. I doubt not but the issue will prove it so,
according to their own prayer or form of thanksgiving upon their deliverance
from the French by the aid of the English, in these words -- Suffer us never O
Lord to fall to that Ingratitude, and detestable unthankefullnes, that we shall
seek the destruction and death of those, whom thou have made Instruments to
deliver us from the tyranny of merciless strangers. Dissipate thou the
counsels of such, as deceitfully travel to stir the hearts of the
inhabitants of either Realm against the other let their malicious practices be
their own confusion. -- But that which I admire is, that they should join and
unite in Scotland, to get England, (though with hazard of their own) and that
we will not do the like to keep it, are we so stout stomacked, and our
malice so implacable, that we will rather lose a good land than shake hands and
be friends amongst our selves. I mean not the Malignant Cavaliers (those
excrements of Englishmen) of whom I dare prophecy they shall never hurt any
but themselves, nor do much more harm (though they may often attempt it) then
break glass windows, and write libellous pamphlets) but the misunderstanding
City and Clergy, who do well to oppose error, so be that they themselves err
not fundamentally in doing so, and cause the loss of all, or hazard it, who
have small cause to think, they that are for the King will be for Presbytery. I
am no Independent (save as to the Scots) but an Englishman, were all of us so,
true to English principles, and interest, as the Scots are to theirs, they
durst never set foot upon English ground in a warlike way. See we not how it
has been their constant practice and endeavor to set England on fire, that
they might come in by the light of it, and shall we by our differences pave
them a way, and open them a two leaved door to enter in at, and march into the
bowels of our Kingdom by, have we fought for the freedom of ourselves and
posterity, and saved it as a brand out of the fire, to be cheated out of it at
the last? What made this Kingdom be so often conquered, from the Romans to
the Normans, but domesticke differences, and shall it now be our fate to become
conquerable by those we our selves have so often conquered, through disunion.

Believe not their overtures, be they never so specious, Thei'le tell you
thei'le not join with Malignants and Cavaliers (as the King and the Earl of
Newcastle gave out they would not join with Papists) whereas they do not only
already receive the^ and join with them, but themselves are such, faced quit
about to the King and his cause, whereof they have given these good signs
amongst others, they have received Commission from him to make Malignant
Knights and Lords, that sit in their Parliament, and to gratify the King again
have retorted Traquier and employed him as a confiding man, in Embassy to the
King in the Isle of Wight believing the King will give more credit to him that
has been true to his principles, then to them that are false to theirs

FINIS.

