AN INTRODUCTION TO The holy Understanding of the Glass of RIGHTEOUSNESS.
Wherein are uttered many notable admonitions and exhortations to the good Life:
Also sundry discreet warnings to beware of destruction, and of
wrong-conceiving, and misunderstanding or censuring of any Sentences.

Set forth by H. N. and by him perused anew, and expressed more plainly.

Pro. 1. Who so is wise, he will be counseled, to the end he may understand
the parables, and their interpretations; also the doctrine of the wise, and
their dark sayings.

Pro. 4. He will be guided in the strait path [to the holy understanding] that
(when he goes) the way be not tedious unto him, and when he runs, that he
do not stumble.

LONDON, Printed for George Whittington, at the blue Anchor, near the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. 1649.

The Counsel of the Wisdom.
STrive not so for the death, by your error, and wrestle not so for the
destruction, through the work of your hands: For God has not made the death
nor destruction, neither rejoices he in the destruction of the living; for he
created all things, that they should have their being: likewise he made all
people of the earth, that it should go well with them, and that there should be
no destruction in them, and that moreover the Kingdom of hell should not be on
the earth; for righteousness is everlasting and immortal, but
unrighteousness is the procuring of death, Sap. 1.

Go not in the path of the ungodly, and walk not in the way of the wicked; let
it pass, and go not therein, turn from it and pass by, etc. keep thine heart
with all diligence, for thereout goes the life: put away from thee a froward
mouth, and let reproaching lips be far from thee, Psalm. 1. Prove. 4.

Who so (among you) is wise and expert, let him show by his good conversation,
his works and fruits in the meekness of wisdom, etc. for where envy and strife
is, there is sedition, and every evil work; but the wisdom which comes from
above, or out of the height, is first, chaste: after that peaceable, modest,
constant, gentle, full of mercy, and good works or fruits: For righteousness is
sown in peace by them that maintain peace, Jam. 3.

Be ye all like-minded, pitiful, brotherly, merciful, friendly; recompense not
evil with evil, nor rebuke with rebuke; but contrariwise bless: and know that
ye are thereto called, even that ye should inherit the blessing, 1 Pet. 3.

But above all things, put on the love; for the love is the band of perfection:
And the peace of God keep the preeminence in your hearts, Col. 3.

AN INTRODUCTION TO The holy Understanding of the Glass of Righteousness.
CHAP. I.
1. Amidst the variety of opinions, H. N. is granted to see, and appointed to
show unto all men, which is the elect and holy Congregation. 7. And the same he
affirms (as an eyewitness) to be with the Family of Love. 10. Without which
all man's work is but a bondage. 11. And where it is not, there is all error,
and misery. 13. The cause of error. 14. Which is not without the foretelling
of God. 16. Neither can it, nor any man's fault frustrate Gods promises. 20. An
Exhortation to rest upon the promises of God, and to prove our selves, whereby
to amend our selves, and to win others. 27. For God will now manifest his own
work of the Love. 30. And unto that his Grace, the holy Minister persuades to
be obedient.

FOrasmuch as we now find sundry sorts of communalties, Religion-urgers,
Tongues, and Peoples, and that (with different Religions, God services,
conceivings, and understandings) each labors to defend his own cause to be
the very best; (by means whereof, the whole world is every where Infra. 4.
in great division and discord, and all against one another:) And whilst that I
H. N. (concerning the divisions and discords, and other causes which I find to
be among them in great reviling, strife, and hatred) am impartial toward them
all, and do contend with none of them: and that 1 Timothy 1.
mercy is (now in these dangerous times) extended on me from the highest God
[namely, through the manifestation of his upright Righteousness;] therefore
could I not hide the understanding of the upright Righteousness (by Gods
grace) Ephesians. 3. Col. 1. 2 Timothy 1.
revealed unto me.

2. For the most holiest being [which is the upright righteousness and
holiness it self; and wherein the true Saints of God and Christ do live, and
are comprehended] is (out of Gods heavenly Revelation, and his grace) Mat. 11.
Romans 16. Ephesians. 1.3. Col. 1. 2 Timothy 1.
revealed unto me through the love of God the Father, for to witness the same
again, and (out of the inclination of love) to declare it unto the people on
earth, to the end all mouths might be stopped, all understandings satisfied,
all hearts well affected to the Righteousness contented, and all strife ended,
so to draw all people to the peace, and to the unity of heart in Jesu Christ,
under the obedience of the love, the most holiest God service: and that they
might so be lead to the holy understanding of the Glass of Righteousness.

3. Under which most holiest God service, we witness and set forth the
wonderful Acts of God, which are revealed and manifested unto us in these last
days, according to the Isa. 44.60.61.62.65.66. Jer. 23.30.33. Ezekiel. 36 7.
Joel. 2. Act. 1.
foretelling of the Prophets.

4. Wherefore seeing that the Providence of God, and all what he in former
times has spoken, by the mouth of his holy Prophets, cannot fail nor lie: and
that moreover he cannot Joh. 14.
leave his people like Orphans God does now, according to his promises,
manifest and make known (by his righteous judgment in this last day of the
love) which is his Elect and holy Congregation.

5. For (to the intent there may be an end of contending) he himself, as the
true glorious God, who is Joh. 11.
the Resurrection and the Life, reveals his Saints out of his bosom, where
(since the time they Esa. 26. 1 These. 4.
fell asleep) they have rested until this day of the love, because they should
now in these last times, in the Resurrection of the Righteous) be manifested 1
Cor. 15. 1 These. 4.
with Christ in glory, to 2. These. 1.6.
a righteous judgment of God on the earth.

6. Inasmuch then as this righteous judgment of God has his manifestation in
us, now in the end of the world, through the 2 Timothy 1. Act 1.
appearing of the glorious coming of Jesu Christ; and will break through and
appear (to Righteousness on the earth) over all the world, according to the
Scripture, therefore are we also (out of the same judgment of God) to speak,
and to write of the upright communalty of the Saints of God and Christ, and to
witness, and declare the same on the earth, to the end that she likewise may
be manifested to the world, and the world may know that she is worthy to
inhabit the earth, and that the will of God, the everlasting Father, may be
done Mat. 6. Lu. 11.2.
on the earth as it is in heaven.

7. Therefore behold that which we with our Joh. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 1 John 1.
eyes do see. The right communalty of the Saints of God and Christ, is of one
mind with us, and we with her (as of one accord with each other) stand under
the lov^, obediently subject unto her requiring; and the love is to us all, a
Col. 3.
band of perfection, to an heritable peace for evermore.

8. Wherefore the right of service of love, is among us the little ones and
chosen of God (in as much as we bring into the world, the Esa. 43.65.66. Ephesians.
1. 1 Pet. 3. 1 Cor. 13.
renewing of life in Jesu Christ through the same) and it shall never cease,
but have his course among us for eevermore, for God is with us, he brings
unto us (in the obeying of the requiring of the same service of love) his
blessing and increase, for a fruitfulness to his service of love.

9. And the holy spirit of love shows likewise his power and effect among us,
namely, that God himself is the Lord, and the Manifester and Worker of his Work
(in the service of his love) among us, the communalty of his holy ones. For he
(as a God of Life) does now through us, and his service of love, reveal and
bring to light Esa. 33. Amos 9. Mic. 7. Act. 15.
his building (the holy City Jerusalem) prepared by Heb. 12. Apo. 21.
him (for an holy adorning well-pleasing unto him) even as a bride is trimmed
for delighting of her husband.

10. Without this building of the Lord, and without our holy communalty of God
and Christ, and without this blessing or increase, out of the power of the
Almighty, and without this our most holiest God service of the love, and of the
gracious word appeared unto us according to the promises, Esa. 44.45.46.47.
Jer. 10.
truly all the man's work, and all his God services, Wisdom, and Doctrine, are
nothing else but a very blinding of the heart, or a tying and bewitching of the
senses and thoughts, how skillful, 1 Cor. 1.
how learned in the Scriptures or Languages, how eloquent, how wise, or how
glorious and rich of spirit, soever the man can be.

11. Where God therefore does not buy us his chosen holiness, execute his
office of the Love according to his promises; or where men have no regard unto
his promises, according to the foretelling of the Prophets, neither do
endeavor to the obeying of the love: and whilst the man goes on no otherwise,
but according to his own mind, or after the instigation of his own spirit,
Esa. 8.
there comes the man into nothing but sorrow, and into erring blindness and
miseries, whereby many do either become faint-hearted and Esa. 13.
hopeless, or else find themselves as vain, and Esa. 59. Sap. 5.
without understanding, as aforetimes they were; whereof in the end arises
(among them that are without understanding) a bondage unto men, under men's
imaginations. Likewise, diverse sorts of chosen Holinesses, bewitching of the
heart Col. 2. 2 These. 2. 2 Timothy 3.4.
and strong errors; whereof (alas) there are now every where to be found many,
and many sorts among the children of men.

12. Oh, how do many err, and fail in their opinion and vain conceiving, and
how do many turn them from us, whilst they walk Esa. 53.
their own way, and have no right regard to the promises of God, nor to the
service of his love! and therefore understand not the requiring thereof.

13. But this does the gloriousness of their knowledge cause, deceiving them
in their disobedience. Nevertheless, (because of the Shine Col. 2.
of the spiritual humbleness, which they behold by it) they suppose that it
cannot possibly beguile nor deceive them, and so they go on, some in a vain
conceited knowledge, and some in a chosen holiness, which God has never
required nor willed.

14. Many others forsake all Religions and Ceremonial services, and even Gods
promises also, [insomuch that they give no credit to God in his promises, nor
yet expect his Salvation, in such manner as he aforetimes (through his
Prophets) has so spoken and promised the same] and so cleaving to the world,
or to their own imagination, they wax distrustful of God, because (in many)
they have found the word of unregenerate men, and their own word also to be
lying, not considering nor understanding, that the Scripture and Prophecies
(given forth of God aforetimes) must thus be fulfilled, upon all unregenerate
and opinionish or vaine-conceited men: Yea it shall now all be fulfilled,
Evil, and Good, and Strife, and Peace, Lies, and Truth, Destruction, and
Salvation, in such sort as it is written thereof. It is the Lords Testimony: He
himself has by the mouth o^ his holy Prophets fore-spoken that it shall so
come to pass: and his will it is, that now in this last time it shall all be
fulfilled, Romans 9.
then who is he that can let it?

15 For in the rising up of unregenerate men, w^^h their deceivings,
imaginations, and lies (and that in show of the name of the Lord) Lev. 10. Number.
16. Deuteronomy. 13.18. Esa. 33.34.35.42.43. etc. Jer. 4.5 6.7.8.23.26.27.28.29.30.
etc. Mat 24. 2 Timothy 3. 2 Pet. 2.3. Jude 1.
to contention, confusion, blindness, and ^rrupting of the Gentiles or People,
there is the Scripture, and the Prophets as w^ll fulfilled, as in the setting
up of Israel ^o a Salvation of the People of the Lord or so it was foretold to
come to pass, and it is written thereof. Read Moses and t^^ Prophets, together
with the testimonies of Jesu Christ, and of his Apostles, and there shall ye
find the same manifoldly declared.

16. For albeit that many vaine-conceited men and unsent Prophets or Preachers,
have been found lying, and might yet daily be found so, or that we (through any
ignorance) do any way misdemeane our selves; yet shall God in his promises, and
in the mouth of his Prophets be found true.

17. He will Genesis 17.22.
never forget his Covenant which he has made with Abraham and his seed; but in
due time will remember his Covenant, and show, that he is the God of Abraham,
and a God of his seed, for evermore.

18. In whom or through whom, he has heretofore made his name notable, and
glorious among all people; and will yet again through the same, make his name
great and glorious in the last time, showing therein, that the God of Israel is
only the Lord, Israel his chosen people, that his purpose and wisdom is
steadfast, and that the world by her wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.2.
knows not the wisdom of God.

19. Therefore it has pleased God also that his elect people should 1 Cor. 3.
circumvent the world in her wisdom, and to save the world (if they believe
God) in Jesus Christ 1 Cor. 1.
by a foolish preaching, to the end, they may know that Gods foolishness in
his people, is wiser then all the wisdom of this world; and hereby it is
manifest and apparent unto us, that Gods promises abide firm and unmovable
for ever, and that in his holy and gracious Word they are fulfilled and
established, howsoever the requiring of the obedience thereof be foolishness
to all the selfe-wise.

20. Hereon [that is to say, on the promises of God, Luke 2.
and upon the consolation of Israel] ought we to trust, hope, and long, even as
the seed of Jacob (which is scattered among all Heathen) does also hope
thereon, and long thereafter.

21. And though many unsent Preachers be (before the coming of Jesus) risen up,
Mat. 24. Luke 21. 2 Timothy 3.4. 2 Pet. 2.3.
who have falsely boasted of Christ, yet let us notwithstanding remember, that
it was so prophesied of before, and that the Scripture makes mention of such
things; therefore reproach none, seeing it falls out to us all Romans 8.
for the best.

22. For, if we find any to be false, deceitful, unwise, or lying, yea
resistant against our most holiest Service of the Love, that same is for a
stirring up of us, and for a serious examining of our selves, whereby to prove
whether we also might find such evil or iniquity in our selves, or not; and
whether likewise we our selves do with humble hearts, Gal. 6.
endeavor us after the good, as all upright Christians ought to do: therefore
let us judge none, but so much the more circumspectly look to our selves, that
no man Romans 2.
judge another, and forget to judge himself.

23. Now when the man perceives his own evil, falsehood, and lying, and
bears his judgment therein, then let him seek (according to the doctrine and
requiring of the gracious Word and his Service) to find grace at Gods hand, and
abiding firm in the hope of salvation, let him be renewed in the holy and
gracious Word, under the obedience of the Love, and so (out of love) endeavor
to draw another to the same grace also, then shall he Mat. 7. Luke 6.
judge nor condemn none: Behold, this is the Heb. 5.
true Schoole-rule of Christian Doctrine, according to the nature and requiring
of the Service of Love.

24. If now any man be a Christian, or boasts himself, that he is
illuminated, and has his fellowship with the Lord Jesus, let him then 1. Joh.
1.
have also a Christian nature; and stand subject with us under the obedience of
the love of Jesus Christ.

25. But if he be not so, to wit, that he has no Christian nature, nor Exodus
33. Deuteronomy. 4. Joh. 1.5. 1 John 4.
has not yet seen the Lord Jesus, nor stands subject under the love, then
can he not assuredly be illuminated, neither be any Christian in the sight of
God, nor yet have any fellowship with Christ.

26. Then if his fellowship be not with Christ, and his love, he ought not to
vaunt himself as yet for a Christian: but if he submit himself with us, under
the obedience of the love of Jesus Christ, and so ground himself on the
promises of Genesis 17.22.
God, and on the Esa. 2.44.60. Jer. 23.29.31. Ezekiel. 36.37. Joel. 2.
foreshewings of the Prophets and Act. 2.17. 1 Cor. 15. Phil. 3. 1 These. 1.
Tit. 2.
Apostles of Christ, and believes God, that he is true in his promises, he may
then (as a Learner and Disciple of Christ) speak 1 Pet. 3.
of the hope that he has in Jesus Christ: but he may not judge another, much
less Gods Saints and Ministers.

27. For God will now in the last time, (when the man with all his deceivings,
false judgings, and working of lies is Esa. 10.
run to an end) himself appear through his love, and manifest both himself and
his true judgment, by his Elect Saints, and bring unto his chosen, who are
falsely censured of all the false hearts, and vain-conceited wise of the
letter-learned, his Exo. 20. Esa. 58.66.
everlasting Sabbath day, that they once have Esa. 56. Apo. 14.
rest that hope in him, in whom shall be found no falsehood, strife, nor guile;
but continual thanksgiving, Apo. 7.
for the wonderful works of the great grace of God.

28. Hereon let us also hope and long, and endeavor that our fellowship might
be with the love (that in no case we Romans 13 Ephesians. 5.
rest, nor sleep in the sin) and so Ephesians. 6. Phil. 4.
in the Spirit, sigh and pray night and day unto God, Abac. 2. Heb. 10.
until that come, which shall come, and until the godliness, which is
grounded in the Love, do appear unto us.

29. Which godliness I do perfectly witness and declare (out of the
inclination of love) in the Glass of Righteousness, and do likewise show with
full instruction, the upright stock of life, whereunto tends the way of the
upright communaltie, or believers of Christ, and whereunto mankind was of God
Genesis 1. Sap. 2. Eccl. 17.
created, and by Christ called, to live therein: upon which upright stock of
life, and lovely being in the peace, they do all hope and have a longing which
love, equity and righteousness, to the end that all those, who have a desire
to God and his Righteousness, might be comprehended Col. 3.
in the band of love (wherein the upright stock of life, and Gods
Righteousness, is to be obtained and inherited) for to inhabit the Psalm. 37.
Prove. 2. Esa. 60. 2 Pet. 3.
world agreeably, Romans 15. Phil. 4.
peaceably, and quietly (with one like mind to the love) in righteousness and
in all love, according to the promises: and that the world in like manner might
[with humble heart] give good ear to the upright understanding, to the obeying
of the truth of the spirit, to the end that the service of love, might every
where have his course, without any hindrance; and that the godliness might be
understood, and Psalm. 98. Lu. 1.
known, to the land and praise Ephesians. 1.
of the glory of God, and to an everlasting Thanksgiving for his bountiful
grace shevved on us, to wit, that he has caused us to see, and made known
unto us, what Romans 12. Ephesians. 5. 1 These. 4.
his will is, and what manner righteousness he requires of us.

30. If God therefore has such a favor and inclination toward us, that
through the administration of his gracious Word under the obedience of the love
of Jesu Christ, he reaches us the hand, and pulls us to himself out of the
desolation Heb. 2.
and captivity of the devil, into his glorious freedom, to the end we should
be his inheritance in his love; then let us (for our parts) look to it, that we
2 Cor. 6 Heb. 12.
refuse not the same grace, nor separate our hearts therefrom, Psalm. 95. Heb.
3.4.
nor harden them thereagainst; but be subject to his love, and love him, and
bear good will toward him again.

31. For he has showed his tender love Joh. 3. Rom 5.
and ardent affection upon us first, wakening us Ezekiel. 37 Ephesians. 2.
in the Spirit out of the sleep and death of sin, unto his Service of Love,
which reaches to the everlasting life, that we should walk in Luke 1.
righteousness and holiness before him in all love.

32. Lo, out of such a disposition of heart and mind, my writing is, and unto
this is all my longing, that (if the Lord would vouchsafe it) I might in the
truth any where upon earth, find any communalty which might in that manner be
comprehended in the Service of the Love, or were inclined thereunto; and that
such grace might befall us, as to have fellowship one with another.

33. For in the service of the love, and in the virtuous disposition and good
nature, it is all comprehended what God from the beginning and always, has
willed and required of the man; wherefore the Law and the Service of the
Prophets and Apostles, Mat. 22. Luke 10. Gal. 5. 2 Timothy 1.
are fulfilled in the Love: for to the righteousness of the Love all of them
have their Service, and even all their office and ministration, is to the love,
that so in the last time, the Love ( Col. 3.
the true perfection) might abide 1 Cor. 13
in her Service for evermore.

CHAP. II.
1. The Love never fails. 3. The Law and the Prophets are not abolished by
the belief. 6. But when the Love is come, and men are established in her, then
(and not before) is the Service of the Law ceased. 9. The time is come, that
the wellminded people shall join to the Love, and find nouriture in her Service.
11. According as the Prophets have foretold. In which time the houses of
Israel and Judah shall be gathered into one, and the Gentiles also be joined
into them. 14. H. N 's. mild and peaceable service hereunto, yet without
flattery. 21. He exhorts to make this holy life (which by this Service is set
forth) our pattern of righteous living, putting away evil thoughts, and
reproaching lips. 26. The vengeance of the wicked world, in the last time.

FOr though the Prophecies cease, and the knowledge leaves off, yet the love
never 1 Cor. 12
fails; for the prophesying is in part, and has his Prophecy: and the
knowing is in part, and has his knowledge, and they do all cease in the love.
In like manner, the Law also has her Doctrine, out of which (in the end) the 1 Timothy 1
love is required.

2. When the perfection therefore comes, that we be established in the love,
then is the Law, the prophesying, and the knowledge fulfilled, and
accomplished, or then is the obedience showed in the same Commandment and
doctrine of God, and not before.

3. To the intent therefore, that the odience, which avails before God,
should be set up, the Romans 10 Gal. 2.3.4
belief was published to salvation, through the service of the holy word of the
Apostles of Christ: howbeit, not to break, nor to set aside the Law of Moses,
and the Prophets, neither the obedience thereunto, Mat. 5. Romans 3.
but to establish and to fulfill them.

4. Therefore many do utterly mistake and fail in their imagination, Mat. 22.
because they understand not the Scripture, and because they think (before the
Love of Gal. 4.
Christ has any form in them) that the law and the Prophets be fulfilled, and
that they are not bound to be obedient to the Law.

5. O beloved, consider once rightly (I. pray you) how, and in what manner, or
in what upright fruits of righteousness, the Law and the Prophets are
fulfilled. For behold, must not the Law require of us Romans 3.8 Gal. 2.3.
the upright Righteousness, and besides, remain (from one Generation of men to
another) in her service and degree for ever? And do not the Prophets prophecy
thereunto, or have not the Prophecies and preachings their service to that
purpose, even to make the upright fruits of the Law known? and must not we then
in like manner, through the belief (in the knowledge of the Righteousness)
pass on obediently toward the same, to our Salvation, that so (through the
belief) we might bring forth the fruits of the upright Righteousness of God,
which are required by the Law, and be made the children of the new Testament,
through Jesus Christ in his blood, Romans 3.8. Col. 1.2. Heb. 9.
whereby we might be justified from the fin, and so live with each other in all
love.

6. Now when we are Ephesians. 3. Col. 2.
established in the love, the foregoing services [namely of the Law and
Prophets] have then the first time fulfilled their office with us, and their
requiring does also with us then 1 Cor. 13.
cease, and they have with us, their rest and form in the love, and so then
have we peace Ephesians. 2.
with God, and likewise love and peace among each other. It is true.

7. Verily, that same, when it appears and is present, is the true being
which is perfect. And therefore the love is the highest good, Deuteronomy. 10. Mat.
22. Romans 13. Gal. 5.
the fulfilling of the Law, and the 1 Timothy 1.
principal scope of the belief.

8. For though a man could speak even as with Angels tongues, or had such
faith, 1 Cor. 13.
that he could move mountains out of their places; and though he wrought
wonders and signs, or were endevved with such knowledge, that he could open
and declare all mysteries, and discover all secret treasures: or that he gave
all his goods to the poor, or did out of a religious humble service Col. 2.
show a certain obedience; or as a servant were every ones Minister, or (by
means of persecution) Mat. 10.23.
fled from Land, to Land, and from City, to City: yea though he yielded his
body to be killed, or gave it over to be burnt, yet truly, all these cannot
profit the man to Salvation, nor to the well pleasing of God, 1 Cor. 13.
if he have not the love; for without the love they are all of no value:
wherefore let not men without the love give any respect unto them, as if they
were any thing, much less hold of them; for they do all cease in the love.

9. Therefore the time comes, [yea, it is come already] that it shall come to
pass, that all Religions, all that are good of will, and every understanding,
conceiving, and knowledge, shall be brought in under the obedience of the love,
to the uniforme building of Jerusalem, Esa. 33. Ephesians. 2. Apo. 21.
or house of God, Romans 12 Ephesians. 4.
and body of the communalty of Christ, and every understanding shall willingly
yield it self captive under the obedience of the love, Act. 2.3.4.5. etc.
according as it came to pass in the Service of the communalty of the Apostles
of Christ, under the obedience of the belief, inasmuch as the service of the
communalty in the love, is not less then it: for in the communalty of the love
Christ is personally with the Father at his right hand, in whom is the
forgiveness of sins.

10. Whosoever therefore hops in Christ, and whosoever is infirm, feeble, or
weak, and is Mat. 5.9 11.
hungry or thirsty after the righteousness, he obtains his nouriture and
strengthening out of the love; yea, every one that is fallen or is broken, Esa.
61. Ezck. 34.
or is strayed and separated from the true God and his Christ, shall through
the love and her service (if he convert and humble himself, and be well-affected
to the love) be restored, and brought to right again; and therefore grow ye up,
and through the love, Ephesians. 4. 1 These. 3. 2 These. 1.
become manly in Jesu Christ.

11. Behold, unto this Service of Love have all the Prophets of God, and
Apostles of Christ borne witness in the Word of Truth and Life, and therein
likewise is restored all Acts 3.
what God has spoken by the mouth of his Prophets, from the beginning of the
world.

12. For all the doctrine of God, the Law, and the Prophets, the Images,
Figures, and Ceremonies, do witness of this time of grace, concerning the
restoring of the man in the Love, [which is the gracious Word promised in the
last time;] in which Love, the House of Israel and the house of Judah ( Jer.
29.33. Romans 11
which now are dissolved, and scattered abroad among the Gentiles) shall be
established.

13. They shall thenceforth be no more divided into two Kingdoms, Ezekiel. 37 Dan.
2.
but be gathered into one, and be set up in the love; the multitude also of the
Gentiles shall join themselves unto them, Esa. 2. Mic. 4. Zach. 8.
to serve the God of Jacob, that they may learn his will, walk in his streets,
among the Citizens of Israel, and so all that love the righteousness be one
Joh. 17.
in the one living God, let them be who they are, and of what generations,
peoples, or Religions, soever they may be, as Christians, Jews, Mahometists,
and Heathen, or dispersed people; for all those which love the righteousness,
and submit them obediently under the gracious Word of the Lord, and his service
of Love, Act. 10.
are acceptable to God, and shall (all through the Word of Truth) be renewed in
the love, to observe one manner Statutes, and Ordinances of the God of Israel,
according to the promises.

14. Now seeing my service is in all peaceablenesse (under the obedience of the
Love) inclined to the same, therefore also my writing is neither against nor
with any Nations, Peoples, or Congregations, that boast themselves to be of God
or Christ, [so as either to reproach, or to praise any of them.] but do set
forth (through the grace of God the Father, which is given unto me) the plain
evidence of the upright communalty of God and Christ, according to my sight of
the true being.

15. Moreover I do not set my self, either to contend against one, or against
another, or to revile, reproach, or censure any man in his error or failing,
because he should endeavor him to repentance: O no, that is not our service of
the love. For verily, we have all grievously sinned; Esa. 59. Romans 3.
yea we have all erred like the blind, there has truly none continued in his
estate, no not one.

16. Oh man! who art thou then, or why take thou so upon thee, that thou Romans
2.
judge another, and justifiest thy self? for we are all void of the grace of
God, which we receive and obtain, if we be of good Lu. 2. Phil. 2.
will, and do turn us unto God, and be vvell-minded to the love, from the
heart.

17. And for this cause, I do not oppose my self against any sorts of people
or Religions, either for to judge them to destroying, suppressing, or rooting
out, or else to strive or to contend against them, but do out of the mercy,
(which through the love of God the Father) is shevved on me, desire to dravv
unto Unity, all those that love the Righteousness, under the obedience of the
love, and to manifest unto them the upright righteousness, to the end they
might all Mat. 3. Acts 2.3
show repentance for their sins, and be saved, and that they with us, and we
with them, might inherit in the love, the true peace of Jesu Christ, and the
unity of heart, and that the true Ephesians. 2.4 Col. 3.
peace of Jesu Christ might be prepared on earth.

18. For in all this our most holiest Godservice of the love, I have from my
heart a pleasure in all them that love the love, and peace, and are minded to
concord and righteousness of heart, or do endeavor thereafter, neither desire
I to bear any thing in mind to the worst, which any man through unbelief,
has done or spoken against us.

19. Furthermore, seeing true belief Ephesians. 2.
is the gift of God, and that we are not Romans 3.5 Gal. 2. Ephesians. 2
saved out of our selves, but out of Gods grace, through the faith of Jesu
Christ, therefore can I not in any wise oppose my self against any, either
against the Popedom or Catholic Church, or against any temporal Rulers,
against Jews or Gentiles, or against any institutions of Religion; for we are
are all called in Christ to salvation and peace, that we should all in the last
time be John 17. Ephesians. 4.
of one mind under the obedience of the love.

20. Now because I do not set my self resistingly or reproachingly against
any, shall I then fawn and flatter, as to write any thing for any man's favor,
to please men? that be far from me, but rather, I declare uprightly [even as it
is through Gods heavenly Revelation manifested and granted me to see] the thing
that right is, and that avails in the sight of God, and ought to have his
passage among all men.

21. Lo, this [O ye well-willers of the righteousnesse] is now out of the
inclination of love [as far as we may, and as God permits unto us] painted
out and pourtrayed before you, according to the life thereof, as a president or
pattern of the righteousness.

22. Let every one therefore once glass himself in the Glass of
Righteousness, according to the truth, and look upon the thing which is right;
let him put away from him all evil thoughts, together with his deceitful
tongue, Psa. 34.
and let reproaching lips be far from him, and so seek peace, and zealously
labor for it.

23. For if any man be innocent, or do endeavor so to be, and if he have right
on his side, or do carry his matters uprightly, then will such a one by his
righteousness agree with us in one mind, according to the nature of the love,
even as we affect the love, and endeavor to the peace.

24. If on the other side, he be not so, then may he there (if he be not
partially minded) have knowledge of his error, whereby he may turn him to the
love, and live; for the inclination to be upright of heart in the love, or to
inherit the love, is Cant. 8. Mar. 22. 1 Cor. 12.13.
truly, that is the most best virtue, and passes all Religions, and
like-resembled God-services; it does likewise far excel all self-chosen
spiritual humility and holiness.

25. Such kind of hearts, as are inclined to love and peace, and have set their
minds on the most best virtue to inherit it, I suppose there are some at least
among all sorts of people; and albeit many of them do seek God the eternal
Father, and his righteousness Esa. 58.9.
ignorantly, being yet ignorant of the truth, and bewitched in their hearts
with spiritual appearances, Col. 2.
and vain wisdoms, whereunder their understandings and consciences are still
held captive, yet nevertheless in their obedience to the requiring of the
service of love, Esa. 25.
the covering wherewith many people or heathen are yet covered and bewitched,
shall be taken away from their hearts, that those which love the good might
cleave to it, with free and unbound consciences, and be comprehended in the
band of love.

26. To that end [that is to say, for the peace and unities cause] is mine
inclination to the service of the Saints that are called to the love, and the
service of my exhortations is to those that hope and long after it, to wit,
that they would all have regard unto the Service of the Love, to the intent
that all we, who have any pleasure, will, or desire to the good, might (through
the same Service) prepare our hearts thereunto, for to be joined in all love to
the good, in humbleness of heart, and so might avoid the plagues of the
ungodly, Apo. 18.
and not be made partakers of those plagues, which (as a Luke 21.
snare) shall catch the blood-guilty, the wicked, and all the malicious in the
last time, and they shall not be able to escape the vengeance of God.

CHAP. III.
1. An admonition to observe the time, and to fly the abominations of the
wicked world. 14. He hops that many believe the promises of restoring, and
exhorts all not to look back, as the greatest part in former times did; but
to take their unbelief for instruction.

SEeing now [dearly beloved] that we see, hear, and mark evidently, that the
blind wicked world is wholly minded to error, hunteth for Sap. 1.
corruption, and destruction, and hastes to fall into the plagues of the
ungodly, to her own perdition, which all malicious ones, together with such as
are strayed and departed from the upright life, do take pleasure with, and are
blinded in, and do daily increase in blasphemy, Romans 1. Ephesians. 4.
wicked imaginations, false judgments, malice, and own conceitednesse of
self-chosen wisdom: therefore let every one now with carnest love to the good
take heed to his time, that is to say, that he hate, die from, and forsake all
that which the erring world increases in, and follows after.

2. And let us increase daily in the spirit of the upright being, and Col. 1. 1
Pet. 2.
grow up in the true life of godliness, [namely, as many as (out of a good
purpose) have turned them to the virtue of truth, and (in obedience) given over
themselves to the word of the Lord and his service of love; for the
righteousness sake] that none [through his carelessenesse, or delight in
vvorldly desires] be Heb. 3.4.
disappointed of the rest of godliness, which rest of godliness and of the
upright life has ceased, but has been reserved, for an everlasting
inheritance for the children of God in the last days, according to the
promises.

3. Now for to enter into this rest, let every one have the eyes of his
spirit, and the ears of his heart, and understanding earnestly attent to
regard the time of his calling thereunto.

4. Let no man look back to the vain and wicked being of the ungodliness,
which Lu. 9.17. Phil. 3.
he leaves, forsakes, and dies from: neither let any man think to turn again
(with his heart to the world [that is to say, to her abominations of iniquity,
or to her vain being of wantonnesse] for behold the days of her desolations be
at hand, and are now already come at the door.

5. Oh fly Esa. 48. Jer. 51. Apo. 18.
from the ungodliness of the world with all your hearts, and from the
wickedness of her abommations. Look not back after her deadly poison, and be
not therewith made unbelieving to think, that the world shall not be punished
for her abominations.

6. O! consider I pray you, how can a man that has any understanding or
knowledge of righteousness, take pleasure in the world? are not the sins of
this last wicked world become out of measure abominable? are they not much more
abominable and horrible, then the sins of the former wicked world, Genesis 6.7.
in the time of Noe, and of the Cities of Sodoma and Gomerra, Genesis 18.19. 2
Pet. 2.
in the time of Lot? If God then punished them so terribly and severely, how
much more will he punish these, who do far pass the other in wickedness?

7. Oh children, keep your hearts separated from her, fear God and love his
righteousness, that ye be not taken in the snares of the wicked, nor plagued
with the reward of their errors.

8. Take an example by Genesis 19. Lu. 17.
Lots wife: and remember the saying of our Lord Jesu Christ which he spoke,
when ye shall see the abomination of desolation (spoken of by the Prophet
Daniel) standing in the holy place; who so reads it, let him consider it.
Read Dan. 9. Mat. 24. Lu. 21.

9. Therefore (O all ye that love equity and righteousness) watch and pray;
the sight of the destruction is ascended on high, the Esa. 5.60. 4 Esd 14.
darkness overwhelmeth the earth, her Esa. 28.29.56.
inhabitants are drunken and sleepy, the Sun of righteousness gives little
shine among them, Esa. 13.14. Ezekiel. 32. Joel. 2.3. Sap. 5.
the Moon of Understanding (which was wont to be a clearness to the darkness)
is utterly darkened with them, and for bright shining, gives them but little
light; for almost all of them begin to grope, Esa. 59.
as if they were blind, by means of the thickness of the darknesses which
have environed the earth, therefore is the woe of miseries, and the infelicity
of unbelieving men, come hard by, even at the door.

10. Whosoever therefore rejoices him with the unbelieving wicked world, and
Jer. 6.8. Ezekiel. 13.
promises or pronounces happiness, peace, and prosperity unto her or to her
Adherents, the same man speaks lies, who so boasts him of grace, and yet
abides in his ungodly being, he blasphemeth God in his righteous judgment,
Esa. 52. Ezekiel. 36. Romans 2.
and (with blasphemy) dishonoreth his holy Name. For God, is a God that loves
Righteousness, and hates all (yea all) Psalm. 5. Prove. 3.
ungodly being.

11. He is holy, Lev. 19. 1 Pet. 1.
and will have us to be holy also, and that we (to the laud and praise of his
glory should 1 Cor. 15. Ephesians. 4. Col. 3.
carry or bear his image and like being, and not the image of the devil, nor
the vain being of the world, wherein we do mock and reproach him.

12. We are called through Jesus Christ and his service of love, unto God, and
his upright Righteousness, Joh. 15. Phil. 1.
because we should bring forth the fruits of God, and not to the devil,
through the Antichrist the devils child, by whom we join to the world, Sap.
1.2. Joh. 8. 1 John 3.
and bring forth the fruits of the devil, whose end or recompense is the
everlasting condemnation, Mat. 25. Heb. 10. 2 Pet. 3.
and the judgment of the raging fire, which comes upon the wicked world, and
all wretched men that despise the Salvation of God, and believe not, that we
ought to live the righteousness of God, with whole heart, soul, and body.

13. Now this passed over, I hope there are yet many good of will, and contrite
of heart, which have a desire to do the will of the Lord, and which do
steadfastly believe Gods promises, and hope thereon; and Romans 8. 1 Cor. 1. Tit.
2. 1 Pet. 1.
so with patience, wait for the coming of Jesu Christ, to their justifying and
delivering from their sins, Luke 11.
whereby they might serve God without fear all their life long, in such
holiness and righteousness, as are pleasing unto him.

14. Hereunto we are to have regard, to the intent Gods promises may be to our
salvation, Mat. 5. Romans 2.
and not to a rigorous judgment on us, as they are threatened to be to the
ungodly.

15. If any man therefore count the everlasting God true in his promises, let
him not look back on that which is past, Luke 9. Phil. 3.
but have regard to that which is to come, and believe God that he will not
neglect, but openly show his Salvation.

16. He will remember his holy Covenant, and Esa. 40.42.60.61.62. Jer. 23
31.33. Ezekiel. 36.37.
be gracious unto his people, and set them up again, according as he has
spoken it heretofore Luke 1.
by the mouth of his holy Prophets.

17. Let no man reckon these things vain, or as though nothing shall come or
grow of them, that he be not entangled by his blindness, as it came to pass
heretofore with many, when the Lord would punish the ungodly.

18. At which time, always the most part of people were blinded, Genesis
6.7.18.19. Esa. 6. Sap. 2.
and had no regard hereunto, before it fell upon them, in such sort, that they
could no way escape the vengeance of the wrath of God.

19. Which punishment, God (in sundry sorts) caused to come upon the ungodly,
and are all set before us, for example, 1 Cor. 10.
that we being mindful of the things to come, should exercise our selves in
the most holiest belief of godliness, to the end we might Heb. 5.
find grace before God, and so be preserved from the plagues of the ungodly,
Lu. 21.
and from the terrible malediction, and horrible end of the last wicked world.

20. Which plagues Dan. 12. Mat. 24.
shall be diverse and more horrible then aforetime, because the time is
otherwise, as being much wickeder, and more manifoldly 4. Esd. 14. Mat. 24.
increased in wickedness.

21. For behold, it was another time, and a different punishment upon the
maliciousness of men, when the Lord Genesis 11.
confounded, and scattered the workmen at Babel (after which time of
punishment, Abraham Genesis 12.
found grace before the Lord) then that time was, when the Lord Genesis 6.7. 2
Pet. 2.
punished the world with the flood, before which time of that punishment, Noe
with his family, found grace (to be a Remnant) before the Lord.

22. In like manner it was also another time and punishment, upon Sodoma and
Gomorra, Genesis 19. 2 Pet. 2.
when Lot (the righteous) was lead out thence, and found grace before God, to
his preservation.

23. Furthermore, consider the different punishments also of Jerusalem and her
Inheritants, how that God punished them for their sins cause, Vide Libros Reg.
Proph. in locis plurimis.
nevertheless, they always which were upright of heart, and turned them from
the iniquity, found grace before God.

24. Now, all this aforegoing being set behind, and having regard unto that
which is to come, let every one turn him to the Lord, the God of Israel, who
has made heaven and earth, Jer. 18.25.35. Ezekiel. 14.18. 4 Esd. 14.
and put away the abominations of idolatrous fantasies far from his heart,
and so amend his course of life.

25. Let every one love the good out of his whole heart, mind, and thoughts,
and take heed of the perversity of the wicked world, wherein all impiety and
the most horrible abominations do bear sway, Mat. 11. Lu. 10.11.
whose plagues and punishments shall now in the last time, be (out of measure)
much more horrible then any aforementioned, according to the Scripture.

26. Wherefore let every one labor for an upright heart before God and toward
his neighbor, Esa. 55. Jer. 29. Heb. 5.
and seek of the Lord, to find grace in his sight, whereby to inherit now in
this day, the bountiful mercy of God in the preservation of the righteous,
that he perish not in the blind errors of the abominable and wicked world.

CHAP. IIII.
1. He wills the wise to regard, how the unbelievers do proceed in the evil:
2. and the Lovers of Righteousness in the good. 6. It is now no time to
sleep. 8. But to labor for an upright heart. 11. It is wisdom to buy the
good things, whiles they are best cheap. 13. The World esteems not the true
Virtues. 15. The Belief. 17. Hope, 20. and Love. 22. But the God fearing wise
are to take the more heed, that their Lamps be not without oil. 26. The world
contendeth for the knowledge, more then for the godliness it self. 29. Many
that know not the man's fall from God, will yet speak much of Repentance, etc.
31. but it is all unprofitable. 33. H. N. found no upright people of the Lord:
yet all contended to the Lords Communalty, and defaced others. 41. Cruel
persecutions. 47. By means of contentions many turned from their zeal, whom
he lamenteth.

OYe wise, who (according to the word of Dan. 7.9.12.
Daniel, do regard this, and understand the same, lift now up Luke 21.
your heads, behold Mat. 24. Luke 21.
and consider, for whiles the children of unbelief (which are minded to error)
do love the darknesses more then the light, believe the lies, through their
ignorance, rather then the truth: cleave rather to the world and her error,
then to God and his Righteousness; and do more incline to the conceiving of
their own cogitations (out of the mind of their flesh) then to the Salvation
in the Spirit: Therefore do they also follow after the same: and estrange
their hearts (the longer the more) from the truth, and from the light of life
and Godliness: where through they are now 2 Pet. 2.
shut in with bands of darkness: withholding and sheltering themselves with
their desire, lust, and will, under the works, of iniquity: where out they
gather unto themselves, Romans 2.
a treasure Joh. 3.
of wickedness, for a terrible judgment of Esa. 66. Judith. 16. Eccl. 7. 2
Pet. 3.
the violence of the fire of the last plagues, which now do come over the
wicked world, and over all malicious unhappy men.

2. But in the mean time, whiles now the ungodly increase in the worst, the
lovers of righteousness do contrary-wise increase in the good, be they, who or
wheresoever they be, Romans 6. Col. 3.
they die from the evil, and grow up in the good, so as they increase daily
more and more in the life of godliness.

3. They depart from the ungodly nature, and do pass into the nature of God
and Christ, Romans 8.
and all in the spirit, according to the spirit or mind of the love, and of the
requiring of her obedience, for to live the righteousness which God esteems,
and has promised.

4. These have their sustaining (under the obedience of the love) in the works
of righteousness, and do wait with patience, Romans 8. Heb. 10.
for the promise which God to-fore has made, by the mouth Esa. 44.60.62. Jer.
23.31.33. Ezekiel. 36.37.
of his holy Prophets, and to believe God that he is true, and keeps his
Covenant which he has made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, (yea, the living
God of Jsrael performs his promises on Romans 9. Gal. 3. Heb. 2.
the Seed of Abraham, even as he has sworn unto their Fathers, and shows
thereby that he is their God, and the God of their seed for evermore.)

5. Hereon do they trust, and toward this do they pass forth in the spirit,
through the illumination 2 Pet. 1.
of the upright being, which stands before them in the sight of their hearts,
to a continual joy and consolation of all godly men.

6. Behold the risings of both these up, [to wit, of the godliness, and of the
ungodlinesse] shall in their time be made known, and in two kinds of people
Romans 2. 2 These. 1.
become manifest, that is to say, the godliness, in the well-willers of the
righteousness, and the ungodliness, in the malicious. Let every one that
loves the righteousness, take now heed to his time; and let him Romans 13. Ephesians.
5.
not sleep, whiles it is time to wake.

7. Let no man lie still upon his old Couch, in the darkness, when the day
comes on, and the light shines bright and clear (wherethrough men may see
and perceive plainly, how to obtain the riches of the good, that the darknesses
cover him not, nor the abominations of ungodliness overwhelm him, and that he
be not like the erring ignorant world, or the vain conceited wise of the
letter-learned, who do boast much of vvisdome, knowledge, and righteousness;
and yet are far from the 1. Cor. 1.3.
wisdom of God, and from the righteousness Romans 10.
that God esteems.

8. Therefore labor for an upright heart in the love, that in those days,
when the refreshing Act. 3.
comes from the face of God, to the preservation of the righteous, and when
all ungodly being bestirreth and prepares it self to destroying, you may be
preserved from the horrible plagues of the ungodly.

9. For Gods righteous judgment shall not be such, as that any man shall be
able to hide or to cover himself before it, but it shall disclose and 1 Cor. 4.
lay open the counsel of every ones heart, whether they be well-willers unto
him or not, and the righteous shall Pro. 17. Zach. 13. Sap. 3. Eccl. 2.
through the fire or furnace of humility be purged, cleansed, and purified,
even as the fine gold, in the furnace of the Goldsmith.

10. Behold, this is showed unto you, out of the inclination of love, therefore
be warned before it come to pass, Mat. 24. Luke 21. 1 Pet. 5.
vvatch and pray, cleave to the good, love vvisdome and instruction, and love
the light, to the virtue of life, that the Joh. 8.12.
sleep and darknesses take you not.

11. Use wisdom now ye wise, and you that have understanding Mat. 35.
get ye now oil in your vessels, Esa. 55.
it is to be had for naught, which the world in general, together with the
unwise, and such as are without understanding Esa. 5. 4 Esd. Heb. 20.
do utterly contemn, esteem vile, and despise; yea tread under their feet.

12. If therefore any among you be wise and has understanding, let him esteem
of this oil 1 John 2.
or anointing of Salvation, so much the better and the more worth, for it is
spoken for a Proverb: When any ware or Merchandise is at lowest value, then
will men pass most for it. For then there is greatest vantage and gain to be
made and gotten by it.

13. Therefore consider now the time, ye that have understanding; what is there
now (I pray you) of smaller value, or what is there less accounted of, then
the upright virtue, and the godly vvisdome, out of the love? Esa. 59. 4 Esd. 14.
for the truth is fallen in the street.

14. She is imprisoned, Mat. 25.
who visits or goes unto her? she is naked, who does cloth her? she is
hungry, who feeds her? she is thirsty, and who gives her to drink? truly
not the erring world: but rash crucifieth, Esa. 53. Ier. 20. Sap. 2.
and treads her under foot, and gives her bitterness Psalm. 69.
and gall to drink, and lets her lie altogether in prison, and comes not
once at her.

15. The belief blossometh, 4 Esd. 6.
her buds are shot forth, but who looks for her fruits, who believes that
ever they shall come forth, and give a svveet taste, when they have gotten the
heat of the Summer, and are become ripe or full grown?

16. Therefore pluck not the unripe fruit (to eat) before the time, until it
be through ripe, else shall your teeth Ezekiel. 18.
be dulled or set on edge, and your mouth be made unrelishable, and unlikeing
of the fruit, but who has regard hereunto, or who has knowledge of this
time?

17. The hope Romans 5.
remains firm in the Patience, and profereth her treasure of Jam. 5.
patience (bountifully) to every one, that no man might be ashamed, but in due
time, rejoice with her.

18. But the hasty people, that will not tarry the due season, but in the
vvinter will reap and gather the fruit, and seek for it on the Sabbath, or
Mat. 24. Mat. 13.1. Gal. 12.
in the barren vvinter, they think not on the treasure of hope.

19. Therefore let us pray for patience, that (in the time of heaviness) we
may stand fast in hope, and Lu. 21. 2 Cor. 6. Col. 1. Heb. 10. Jam. 1.
unto patience commit our souls; but this (I know well) the world in general
is not minded unto: for by her, this treasure and riches of God is contemned,
despised and rejected.

20. The love, which has all these (the truth, belief, and hope, clasped in
her arms) is inclined to nourish all things with the milk of her concord, which
flows abundantly out of her breasts, for to unite her self with those (to a
concord in the love) whom she imbraceth in the truth, and in the belief and
hope: and with all those likewise which love equity and righteousness.

21. Lo, This is the Christian oil, and holy unction, and this Mat. 11. Lu. 20.
1 Cor. 1.2.3.
neither the world, nor her wise, or letter-learned can away with, neither do
they esteem the precious treasure of God, as being for them much too base, for
there is no pride nor arrogance to be found in it, nor any disputation about
the knowledge, nor any wisdom of the Philosophers.

22. But ye that fear God, and love the upright judgment sincerely, Esa. 1.
Jer. 18.25.35. Ezekiel. 14.
put away the bewitching of your hearts, and labor for the oil of the true
virtues.

23. Do not sleep, slumber, nor go to rest or be sluggish, before you have
first filled your vessels or Lamps with the oil of the spiritual and holy
understanding.

24. For in time of the midnight, ( Sap. 18.
when the darknesses have covered the world, and every one rests in his
sleep) she shall then through the voice of the Brute, and noise of the sound
of the last Trumpet, Esa. 9.60. 2 Pet. 2.
shine in the darkness, as a light, and be esteemed very precious and of great
value, among all that are wise; for unto the wise, she shall be for an entrance
to the everlasting joy, at that time, there shall none among the wise have too
much, nor yet any of them lack any thing.

25. Who so now is wise and well-affected, let him not (like the unwise
Virgins) give himself to the sleep or rest, with Mat. 25.
empty vessels or lamps that have no oil in them: for then verily he shall
find himself deceived, as the foolish and unwise Virgins were.

26. Therefore, ye beloved (you I mean, that have any sight of the Peace, or
affection to the good) consider once I pray you, of this present time, how the
world, together with her wise and learned stands in many contendings and
divisions, and all for the knowledges cause and esteem, not above all things
the virtue of godliness in Jesu Christ, the which thing (I mean to love any
thing above the virtue of godliness) is nothing else but an unknown erring
darkness, and a being of the fall, which the world will not know nor believe,
because she sees it not, but walks in Esa. 59.
the darknesses, like the dead, and is also without the light and life which is
of God.

27. Wherefore seeing they know not the fall or separation from their God,
therefore can they not (though they would never so feign) turn them rightly
unto him; the which Esaias bewailed in the blind people, when he noted men's fall
and separation from their God, saying,

28. We Esa. 59.
are in darkness like the dead, we roar all as bears, and mourn like doves,
when we look for equity it is not any where; for health, so is it far from
us; for our transgressions are too many before thee, and our sins answer
against us: for we must needs confess our transgressions, and know our
misdeeds, to wit, our trespassing and lying against the Lord, and our fall or
separation from our God, etc.

29. In like manner seeing unto me now in this perilous time, it is
indifferently well known, that many (albeit they boast them of God) do not yet
know the man's trespassing, and lying against the Lord, nor the fall or
separation from their God; and do nevertheless speak much of repentance, and
converting unto God: therefore do I also truly note, that in such a state
(whilst this is unknown to the man) neither the man's repentance for sin,
neither Esa. 55.
his conversion to God, neither his praying, is Iam. 4.
at all performed aright.

10. But this the man will not understand; but in the separation from his God,
he will judge of divine things, erect righteousness, and preach and teach the
equity, such as in his separation from God, he conceives for right, as if it
were very righteousness: he will also fast and pray, as though his matter
(which he intends to himself) were upright before God, saying, dear Father,
dear Master, thou Physician of our souls, vouchsafe to help us, and defend us,
and so supposes that God will not suffer him to come to shame.

31. But what avails it? all such shall find themselves in darkness, as the
dead, and mourn like the doves, till that they perceive their transgressing,
and their sins answer against themselves, and so their trespassing and lying
against the Lord be made known unto them, and the off-fallen being from our God.

32. Then shall they say, and confess, we have looked for equity, and to that
purpose have preached and taught, if happily it might any where break through
or come forth: Esa. 59.
howbeit, when we look about every way after it, it is no where to be found,
and our righteousness vanishes in it self as a shadow, and consumes it
self like smoke in the air, and the salvation is far from us; for we see
nothing before us but sorrow and desolation.

33. Now whilst that such things floted unto me, before the eyes of my spirit,
and that I saw the sundry blindnesses of men, whereunder they lay bound with
ignorance, through the falling away from their God, (which fall 2 These. 2
when I saw it was so deep, and so utterly unknown, that the children of men
were by means of it unwittingly enclosed and covered therein, with many
grievous darknesses) I could not find that there were any of all the children
of men, that were the upright people of the Lord, or such as walked in the true
light and upright love of Christ, or had continued in the truth of God.

34. Wherefore I found no confidence in my self, that any of all the children
of men had been rightly turned unto God and his Christ, again, or that Gods
holy Ministry and Service of Love, through his true Christ (according to the
promises) had had passage among any.

35. But rather I have found at this present time, among the children of men,
sundry kinds of boasting, much brawling, contending, wrangling, and discord,
concerning God and Christ; which contention and discord came principally
hereof, that every particular faction would in their blindness, and off-fallen
being or separation from Christ, and without the true light of the love of Jesu
Christ, be the people of God, and communalty of Christ, and make others
contemptible and odious.

36. For when of the one side it was said, we are the holy Church, the
Congregation of Christ, Mat. 24. Mark. 13. Luke 17.
it was answered on the other side, nay, we are it, and ye are Antichristians,
a Congregation of the Devil, and of the unbelief.

37. Again, it was further said by some others, behold, this is it which God
requires, we have the right use of the Ceremonies, we are Gods people, the
holy Israel, and have the true faith of Christ; whereunto also it was said
again to the contrary by others, nay, ye are heretics, deceivers, and
murderers of souls: and thus every one stood for his Religion, out of
contention against others, and not out of love to the unity of heart with each
other.

38. In these sundry sorts of debate and discord, every particular faction was
by their consorts and adherents, esteemed holy, and all other to be erring,
blind: the ones Teacher to be of the Devil, or out of the bottomless pit, the
others again to be a spirit of Belial.

39. After such a manner have I found many of them, and they were yet all
Christians, as themselves said: whereby there arose up Mat. 24.
great contention, hatred, and envy among many, and all about Christ, in such
sort, that diverse of them contended for that, which they themselves knew not,
even as the blind do, that strive about the judging of a thing, whether it be
white or black, whilst yet themselves cannot discern the colors of the
same; but because men say unto them, this is white, therefore they say so too,
not having at all any sight of it.

40. In like sort there were many also, unto whom men said, there is a God,
Ephesians. 4.
and a Christ, or they read themselves so, and thereout assumed the saying unto
themselves, and took it upon them, that they conceived and understood the same
very rightly, and that so they knew God and Christ well. But seeing in the
truth, they knew not that which they spoke of God and Christ, Ephesians. 4.
and that they had not the form of God or Christ in them, and for that cause
could not discern the same; therefore doubtless they contended thereof like
the blind.

41. Among which sundry strifes and dissentions, some also labored (by strong
persecution) to reproach, revile, pursue, and root out or kill others that were
not of one understanding with them, for the confession of their God, and for
their beliefs cause; which persecution very many did suffer. Briefly, there
has been every where so sore betraying among many, Mat. 24.
that they have delivered up to the persecution and slaughter even one another
of themselves.

42. But of all these sundry factions, my conceiving was, that they which
suffered persecution for righteousness sake, and for conscience, which they
had toward God and his righteousness, were nearest unto the truth;
nevertheless, the one condemned and blasphemed the other, so well they that
were persecuted, as those which were the persecutors: and upon many came fear
and anguish, with much perplexity and distress of heart, and great sorrow (for
lack of understanding) overwhelmed many of the children of men, in such sort,
that they came to great misery.

43. There arose also many sorts of Sectaries with several Laws, Doctrines,
Ordinances and Institutions, Jer. 8. n. 25. Ezekiel. 13.
every of which would maintain his own to be Gods requiring and appointment,
Supra. 1.
and the consciences of men were (to obedience) drawn to the same, and bound
therein, and every one loved and earnestly affected his own.

44. I espied likewise many offenses, and many abuses, with sundry erroneous
misunderstandings, among the children of men, by means whereof I was often in
heaviness, because I was not joined with men, in the upright form of godly
living, and because they erred so ignorantly every where.

45. And so in all this (because many of them gave so high respect to their
own wisdom) I tried and examined their understandings, and therein earnestly
noting and observing whereon the wisdom of many men was grounded, I found and
perceived, that they which were best spoken, and could over-bear or stop the
mouth of others, with hidden reasons or subtle arguments, and words of
Scripture, those were in their own opinion, the stoutest and valiantest men.

46. Who so moreover, could in such sort (as it is said) out-brave, catch, or
entrap others, and knew how to propound and defend their own ground in
godliest and amplest manner, those were esteemed of their accomplices for the
wisest, and on them stood all their wisdoms grounded.

47. Yet found I amongst them all many well-willing hearts, that had a zeal to
the good, but because of the misunderstanding which was found among many, and
wherewith they were driven into much ignorance, and they perceiving the same,
therefore ( Mat. 24.
with many of them) even the same zeal was waxen cold, and that is lamentable,
specially because in their zeal, they had not turned them uprightly to the
ways and doctrines of the holy Fathers.

CHAP. V.
1. H. N. and others with him were much grieved for the blindness of people.
5. But the Lord comforted him. 6. He has set forth many writings, and newly
written them for a Glass of Righteousness. 15. Which he exhorts us to
consider of, and thereunto to conform our selves, and to draw others. 19. Not
blaspheming, if any thing therein seem contrary to the truth. 20. He requires
to cast away our self-knowledge, and to regard the balance of equity, and to
set the truth free as God is free. 22. With whom she is co-essentiall. 23. God
is the God both of Jews and Gentiles. 24. From whom to be separated is death,
but to be joined unto him, is life and salvation. 28. Gods being is the life,
bread, and communion of Christ's body, which the Disciples did eat of. 33. The
same became flesh, and was distributed also to the Gentiles, and the same shall
likewise be given in the last days, according to Gods Promises, and not after
the inventions of men.

BUt in the mean time whilst I considered and scanned all this (inasmuch as I
labored for that which is right) I found my self oftentimes, through
consideration of the man's weakness, and of his ignorant zeal to the
righteousness and truth, in great anguish of heart, and in l^ke manner there
were others more in the same case with me.

2. And I was sorry for the people, because many of them had so ignorant a
zeal, and were bewitched with so many sorts of blindness, and vain
imaginations, and I was often times very unquiet in my mind, because I could not
know any of the children of men, whom I might believe, or account for the
people of God, such as stood in the stock of the righteousness of Abraham, or
did Phil. 1.
preach Christ, out of the nature of the love.

3. For I grew suspicious, jealous, and distrustful of all flesh, yea, of my
self also; for in my humane disposition after the flesh, I found often times no
power at all, to enter into the Romans 7.
virtue of righteousness, in any such sort, as by Gods heavenly Revelation
(which came unto me from God in the Spirit) I had observed the same.

4. Howbeit many of the children of men looked not into the virtue of the
righteousness, according to the truth; but were bewitched in their
understanding and thoughts, bearing a zeal unto that which was not of God, and
which did nothing further them to the righteousness: and therein was my humane
understanding afore-times somewhat distressed, whilst I sought the
righteousness among the children of men, where it was not to be found.

5. But the Lord (out of his grace) has showed much mercy on me, and through
his heavenly revelation, and manifesting of his truth, has enlightened my
understanding, and pulled my spirit unto him; his goodness leads me, and his
Spirit vouchsafes to strengthen me in the Service of Love, that I may declare
unto the man that which is most profitable for him to live in, to the
establishing of the Word, which God afore-times has spoken out of his truth,
and according as he has promised Luke 1.
by the mouth of his holy Prophets, to the blessing and salvation of all people.

6. Then forasmuch as I have seen the misery of men, and do know the contrary
nature to God, and that moreover, the good being of God, and the salvation of
men is out of Gods grace, appeared unto me in my sight; therefore have I set
forth certain writings out of the same knowledge of the good being, and of the
salvation of men, (so far as in my understanding I could reach unto the same,
and as the Lord revealed unto me) that the man's bewitched understanding and
thoughts might be made known unto him, and so he might regard Phil. 4.
what were right and reasonable, and what were meet and profitable.

7. And those writings (according to the appointment of God, and testimony of
his holy Word) we have now renewed afresh in the land of the living, and so
through the true light of the godly wisdom, and of the holy Spirit of Love,
expressed them more plainly, and written them again with the assistance of the
principal Elders and Ministers of the holy Word in the Family of Love.

8. Which writings (that every one both small and great of understanding, might
be satisfied, and none have any occasion to blaspheme the truth, but that they
might all be minded to 2 Cor. 1. Ephesians. 4.
the unity of heart in the love) we have (out of the loves inclination) placed
together with clear distinction, and compiled them to a Glass of
righteousness, to the end men might the more easily (in their understanding)
comprehend and mark the reason of our hope, for to cheer up thereby the mind of
man to the good, and out of the inclination of love) to refresh and strengthen
him with good courage, to draw him to a right discerning of the upright
wisdom; and for that he should then be zealous with good understanding, and
labor for that, which continues for ever.

9. All that same (so far as we disc^^n it, and as God has permitted unto us)
we show and declare with full instruction (in this Introduction to the holy
understanding of the Glass of Righteousness, and principally in the book it
self) setting down, wherein the man ought to stand comprehended, whence the
happiness of our life comes unto us, what manner of one the upright 1 Cor. 12.
Congregation of Christ is, and how that the ministration, and service of the
holy word, 1 Cor. 13.
ought to have passage out of love.

10. For this is the service of the gracious word, Jer. 29.
promised in the last time, to wit, that all those who have any longing after
the love and concord, or do hope thereon, should be stirred up to the same, to
the intent, that all they which seek Christ, might with one consent cleave to
the love and her service, and walk in all love, for that is the peace Ephesians. 2.
prepared for us by Christ, if so be we have any desire to the love, and to the
true peace.

11. And thereunto, even for the unities sake in the love, is my service to all
lovers of the truth, that the destruction of heart might once cease, that every
one might have the love before his eyes, that the service of the love and word
of truth, might have passage without hindrance, and that so all sentences which
bear witness to the truth, might according to the truth be judged impartially.

12. True it is, that my spirit is well disposed hereunto [even that the
bewitching of many men's hearts might be done away, and the calling of the
Gentiles rightly be discerned and understood, according to the truth] to the
end all matters appertaining to the righteousness, might out of love, be
discerned and understood impartially, (with an unbewitched spirit, and an
unbound heart, according to the truth, but inasmuch as I find little upright
judgment among the children of men, as having much more inclination Jer.
7.11.13.18.
to their own sense, and to their own Romans 10.
righteousness, then to the truth and righteousness which God accepts, also
a more inclination to their own self-chosen communalty, then to the unity of
heart, in the service of love, therefore is my heart many times not satisfied
nor contented with the judgment of men.

13. For I find apparently by experience that the man is in his judgment
altogether partially minded in every respect, and sets his affection to
this, or to that, which tends not to concord, but much rather to strife, and
has very little respect to the love, whereby he might out of the love, have
regard to the truth of the sovereign good impartially, but [commonly] he will
have the same bound, or tied to one thing or another, wherewith she is not of
one being, whereas the truth is free, and in her upright being, abides
undivided for ever, Genesis 1. Pro. 6. Sap. 9.
whereby also every thing was made, and whereby all elementish things have
their right ministration, and she shrinketh away from none.

14. But if we have regard unto her, then shall the true understanding
[through the raising up of the image or like being of God in us] be discovered
unto us, and the meaning of the knowledges be unlocked, to wit, after what sort
God is the Esa. 9.
Lord, King, Savior, and Prince of us all, namely, of those that are upright
of heart, and do join themselves to his love, and her service.

15. Therefore, O ye upright hearts, which have the true sight of the good
being of God or Christ, and do well discern and understand the promises of
God, and do moreover sincerely love the upright righteousness from his heart,
judge the matter your selves, Joh. 7.
with rightful judgment, and understand the meaning aright.

16. Consider deeply, the godly testimonies of our writings, which (out of the
inclination of love, we have set forth, and pointed out for a Glass of
Righteousness, and endeavor you thereunto (even to obtain the same upright
righteousness) obediently, and then to administer the same unto every one of
them also, that love the truth and righteousness, to the intent the
righteousness and life, may out of love, be be administaed according to the
truth unto all people, to their Salvation.

17. Thus let every one pass on to the same upright life, which is set forth
therein, and reach one another the hand, to the Ephesians. 4.
unity of heart in the love, and glass your selves daily in the Glass of
Righteousness, and be you cleansed of the spots of unrighteousness, whereby
with pure hearts you may inherit the same life in the Love.

18. And whom you know to have any desire to the beautifulness of virtue, and
to the unity of heart with us, under the obedience of the Love, unto them deny
not the same Glass also; and so in all things love ye the fairness of virtue,
and of the pure Love.

19. But if any man thinks that there is any thing set forth in the Glass of
Righteousness, which is not suitable with the truth, or whereon Moses, the
Prophets, and the Apostles of Christ have not witnessed, or that should not
tend to the Love, let him there stay himself, and not blaspheme, but rather
ask the meaning, and so tarry his time 1 Cor. 4
till a further inlightning, that he may discern it all by the true light of
the eternal truth, as agreeably minded with the love, whereunto we bear
witness.

20. Wherefore (O ye dearly beloved) look to your selves, and destroy not your
selves through your own knowledge; for our service of love is for a furtherance
unto you all, to a distinguishing between the truth and lies, to the end, that
every vain conceit, and every bewitched imagination might be taken out of the
hearts of men, and the good seed of life Mat. 13. Luk 8.
obtain his fruitfulness in us, to all laud, honor, and praise of the
Almighty, and to all love and concord amongst each other, and that all
together, to one manner, congregation, Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 2.4.
house, temple, or tabernacle of the one unseparated Spirit of Christ, and to a
life of blessedness unto all people.

21. Now if any man be thus minded with us, and be comprehended with us in the
judgment of the truth, and in the love impartially, or if he have any desire
to judge uprightly, or would feign be knit in one consent with us in the love,
whereby he might judge uprightly, according to the truth, let him then in like
manner with us, have respect unto the Esa. 28.
balance of equity, and set or hold himself with us, according to the stock
of the upright love and truth, impartial under the obedience of the Love, and
so also with us, set the the truth free, not as tied hereto, or thereto,
wherewith she is not of one being, forasmuch as the true God Jesus Christ, and
the holy Ghost is so untied also.

22. For the true being of the eternal truth, is a free majesty of the high
Godhead, an Sap. 7. Heb. 1.
everlasting steadfast power, life and mightiness; likewise the same true being
comprehends all that is in heaven, in earth, and under the earth, and is not
it self comprehended either of this or of that, wherewith it is not
co-essential, neither is it tied thereunto; for it is, and remains an
everlasting, living, and free unclosed up fountain of wisdom, wherewith we all
ought to be of one being, and to live therein.

23. Lo, this is our sight concerning the life, which we do freely declare even
without partiality; as also that God is a living, everlasting, and undivided
God, and that he is not only a God of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles,
that is to say, a Act. 10. Romans 10. Gal. 3. Ephesians. 4.
God of all people that love his righteousness, that join themselves to his
love, and her Service, and that have a desire to do his will.

24. But to be separated from the same highest God, and from his love and her
Service, is the middle wall, the sin and the darkness Esa. 50. Ephesians. 2.
between God and the man, and it makes manifest and known, that the same
sin is the fall and destruction of the inward manhood from his God; whereout
also all wickedness and the sundry sorts of dissension and discord are come
into the world: But to know the same, and to be incorporated again with God,
under the obedience of the love, is the salvation, and brings into us again
the unity of heart in the peace.

25. Behold the same God of whom we bear witness, and which brings unto us
the true salvation and peace out of his love, and out of the obedience to the
requiring of her service is the only God of life, whose hand has made all
that is, he is the true being, wherein the spirit of men ought to be
incorporated and grounded; and we bear record that he even the same God is only
the Lord, who also was in times past praised of the righteous, in Israel, Psalm.
118. Esa. 28. 1 Pet. 2.
as the rock of their salvation.

26. Whilst then the people of Israel afore-times were grounded upon the same
only God, they served no Idols, neither did they choose any thing for Gods
besides their God, nor yet tied themselves to any other thing, but did
celebrate, and glorify the same living God, as the King, Lord, and God of all
the world, and declared his righteousness as the word of life, Deuteronomy. 30 Romans
10.
and showed the same unto the man, and called him thereunto, that all knees
might bow themselves before the same God, Esa. 45. Phil. 2.
and that all hearts of men might fear, honor, and only serve him.

27. Now where the word of life (to Gods glory and men's salvation) was
heretofore thus ministered, Act. 2.3 4.5. etc.
and God then gave his blessing and increase for a fruitfulness of his Word
through the belief, there was also the same Word ministered out of Love by the
Ministers thereof, namely to the believers, for their strengthening and growing
up in the Word; and in like manner they held forth the same Word of life
according to his worthiness unto the little, young, and weak ones, to cheer up
their hearts thereunto and to confirm them in the holy being of the same Word,
that such an holy being of God might have Gal. 4.
a sure form in them, and all people might with their tongues, laud and praise
God.

28. Behold, this same holy being of God, is the true life of the holy Ghost,
which heretofore God wrought among his people Israel, and likewise Joel 2. Acts
2.
among the Gentiles that feared his name; and the same is promised afterward to
be given in the Esa. 2.3.9.25.32.35. etc.
last days.

29. This same being of God is indeed the right food of the soul, and bread of
life, and is Ioh. 6.
descended unto us from heaven for a life to the man, and was heretofore 1 Cor.
10 11.
broken and distributed to the people of Israel and Dicsples of Christ, to feed
on in their souls.

30. And this same bread which they brake, fed on, or eat, 1 Cor. 10
is the Communion of the Body of Christ, which Christ is Ephesians. 1.4.5.
the Head, Lord, and Master of his Congreation, saving Mat. 1.
and redeeming his people from their sins, and the cup whereof they drank, 1
Cor. 10
is the Communion of the blood of Christ.

31. This same bread which was given unto them, is the true meat offering of
Christ, namely, his body; Mat. 26. Mat. 14. Luke 22. 1 Cor. 11.
and this cup which was powered forth unto them is the true shedding of his
blood, the which is the out-flowing of the holy Word or Spirit of Christ, upon
all believers of Christ, to everlasting life.

32. Even thus did the Disciples of Jesu Christ eat of his flesh, and drink of
his blood, to the forgiveness of their sins unto him, [namely to Christ] for
an incorporating, and unto them [namely to the believers of Christ] for a life:
and so then had they their fellowship 1 John 1.
with the same Christ, and with his Father, and were flesh 1 Cor. 12.
of his flesh, and bone of his bones.

33. Behold that same bread or body of Christ, is the word that became flesh,
Joh. 1.
and it dwelt amongst them, and they saw 2 Pet. 1. 1 John 1.
his glory, as a glory of the only born Son of the Father full of grace and
truth.

34. And that same is the new Testament, Jer. 31. Heb. 8.10.
which God (in those days) made and appointed with his people, Act. 2. Tit. 3.
and he powered out his spirit plenteously on them, Apo. 12.
and did let them see his Ark in the heaven, sent down his holy Jerusalem unto
them, Apo. 21.
and showed them the Temple of his holy dwelling ( Act. 7.17.
which is not made with men's hands, but which he had prepared for himself)
according as he promised to the house of Israel and to the house of Juda, and
the same is published to the Gentiles, for a joyful message.

35. The same bread, which was sent down unto them from heaven, was heretofore
broken, and distributed also to the Gentiles, as it is now unto us, there was
also 1 Cor. 11.
powered forth unto them, of the cup of Christ: and God did likewise shed sorth
the same spirit of Christ, Act. 10.11.13.
upon the Gentiles, and (through the belief) justified their hearts from the
sin, for a Esa. 2.42.56.60.61.66. Jer. 23.33. Joel. 2. Zach. 2.8.13.
serting up of the banner of righteousness unto them, according as God had
avouched and promised the same to the Gentiles aforetimes, by the mouth of his
Prophets.

36. Lo, such things does God work, through his ministration of the holy
Ghost, and it is the true service in the obedience of the love, and in this
very sort my sight is, that it shall come to pass in the last days, when God
sets up again the house of Israel according to his promises, and not
according to any humane Ordinance or invention, which the man brings forth
out of his witty dexterity, or knowledge, or out of his letter-learned wisdom,
wherewith the ignorant ones (who understand not Gods promises) are taken
captive or tied, and with the bondage of heart through men's doctrine and
wisdom, carried into a made holiness, and fed therewith, but not unto the
word of life, or shedding forth of the Holy Ghost from the living father; the
most highest, nor yet fed with it.

37. O no [ye deerly beloved] God Esa. 42.
gives not that honor unto any creature. It is also no man's work nor power,
through man's invention, but the work and power of the Lord, through his
gracious word, in the service of his love, that so they might all according to
the promises, Esa. 54. Joh. 6.
be taught of God, and all know him, from Jer. 31.
the least to the greatest.

CHAP. VI.
1. The service of the love, being Gods work by the illuminate elders. 2. Is of
few believed, yet is it certainly the truth. 3. Nevertheless, he permits it
to be judged of all upright hearts. 6. But with caution, that none judge of
envy, but faithfully out of love. 16. The worthiness of the true wisdom. 25.
For lack whereof, the course of the world is marred. 26. Of the false wisdom,
28. and of the true. 30. The end of the false wisdom is come. 32. How to come
to the true wisdom.

BUt this service out of the love, and this administration of the true bread or
living word, where it is appeared out of the true God, is administered among the
unlightned, by the Elders and illuminated men in the family of the love of Jesu
Christ, ^o Esa. 40.42.61. Jer. 1.20. Mat. 28. Mar. 16.
prepare and make meet the unlight^ed, for to receive the true light of Christ
and the gifts of his holy Spirit, yea the same ministration, is even Gods
Ordinance, where 1 Cor. 3.
God is the worker, but not else, and then the illuminated man [who is grown up
under the obedience of the love, Ephesians. 4.
to the old age of the holy understanding, or of the man Christ] Joh. 15 Act.
1.2.
is a witness and serviceable instrument thereof, but the blessing or increase
[which is the spirit of the living Word] 1 Cor. 3.
must God give, through which righteous spirit, or spirit of promise, Act. 15.
1 Cor. 6.
God justifies our hearts from the sin, through the belief.

2. Lo, hereof have I written heretofore, and do now still bear witness to the
same, but who believes the truth? or who has any regard unto Gods promises,
to wait [with long sufferance, and with a firm confidence in God] for such
things to come, and [in the obedience to the requiring of the service of love]
to hope for them? and my conceiving in the truth, and mine understanding, is
even yet no otherwise, neither can I otherwise discern, but that God will thus
[in his time] bring forth his work, to an everlasting peaceable living in the
love, according to his promises.

3. Notwithstanding, if it be not so, as I [through the holy spirit of the love
of Jesu Christ] do according to the life describe it, or that Gods working
[according to his promises] be not in such wise promised, also that such a life
of peace as we bear record of, should not be to come, or that men should not
[under the obedience of the love] hope for it, according to the promises; Let
any man give judgment of it, according to the truth, for every one that loves
righteousness, he intends doubtless the Salvation, after his best meaning.

4. But if on the other side [O all ye which observe these things] the Lord
has opened the door of understanding unto you, or has Ephesians. 1.
enlightened your understanding, and that ye conceive that we have set forth and
described the life of righteousness, and the service which leads thereunto,
according to the truth, then verify the same, to the unity of heart in the
love, and to one understanding of the true belief in Jesu Christ, one with
another, and so Eccl. 6.
then give your selves obediently to the same service of love, and to our
communion of the living God, in one faith, and in one familiarity 1 Pet. 1.
of upright brotherly love, to the end the true belief, and the right obedience
of the love, may among us all which love the righteousness, 4 Esd. 6.
grow and blossom [in all concord] in a sure hope to Gods promises, and that
the righteous in the love, may become many.

5. Else if you think, that we have conceived of the truth amiss, or if in any
point it be too slenderly set forth, then give testimony thereof with a meek
spirit, and so help forward the unity of heart, in the obedience of the love,
and think no evil of it, neither blaspheme it, for in such a sort we stand
pliable to examine the truth, whereby [out of love] we may cleave thereunto;
and so receive the explanation of the truth, in that wherein we know it not
aright, for the wisdom of the truth in a gentle and meek spirit Pro. 3.8. Sap.
7.
is the most precioust treasure, that a man can find.

6. But one that covers himself in his evil conceiving, and thereby thinks
to be wise, and one which has a tongue that slandereth, and an heart which is
envious or wrath against any, he is not to be commended. Moreover an arrogant
heart, which with contempt of another, has a pleasure, in his own
understanding, or which stands partial in the testimony of the truth, or an
heart that turns it self away from the concord of the service of love, and
cleaves to the vain conceited flesh and blood, and takes part therewith, that
same can in no wise judge rightly.

7. Therefore judge with faithfulness and truth, and not with favor or
disfavour, nor yet with reviling or despite, least any man judge out of such a
disposition, as they aforetimes did, that were the confederates of the
High Priest, and smote the mouth of the wisdom on his face, Joh. 18.
saying with arrogant minds and malicious hearts, will thou answer the
High Priest so?

8. Behold howsoever it be meet, and Gods Ordinance that men should learn the
Law, Mal. 2.
out of the mouth of the Priests, and the wisdom Eccl. 6.8.
of the Elders, or principallest of understanding, yet is such dealing an
unreasonablenesse, and against the Law, also against the wisdom, and against
the love which God requires.

9. Wheresoever therefore men deal after that manner, or with such partiality,
(though it seems to be some righteousness, holiness, or wisdom) there deem
we not, the true High Priest, nor any Elders of the holy understanding, nor yet
the Law of the Lord, nor wisdom of God to be.

10. Therefore ought men to stand impartial with the heart in Gods upright
being, and so to set forth the Salvation, out of the love and her service, for
many seek it ignorantly, and through lack of wisdom, they go into ways, where
it is not to be found.

11. But if any man love the salvation and wisdom from his heart, let him
submit himself to the love and her service, and so then in obeying of the
requiring of the service of love, let him be familiar, Col. 3. 1 Pet. 3.
brotherly, kind-hearted, chaste, meek, gentle, sober, patient, or long
suffering, lowly of heart, and friendly, for that is a blessedness Jam. 3.
and wisdom, which is not earthly of the earth or of men, but only of God,
the fountain of grace, full of all wisdom, and he distributeth her unto every
one, that fears, seeks, and loves him, for there is none only wise, nor
only good, Mat. 19 Luke 18.
but God, who only is the Lord, and the everlasting wisdom it self.

12. Therefore speaks the mouth of the wisdom, and says, Mat. 18.
where two or three of you be gathered together in my Name, there am I amongst
you, and in the midst of you, Deuteronomy. 17.19. Mat. 18. Joh. 8.
for in the mouth of two or three witnesses, all matters shall be judged, and
be rightly known out of the true wisdom.

13. But not of such, as (with subtilty of the knowledge, do enquire daily
thereafter of another, or with wittiness and reason do search or sound deeply
for it, whereby to discern the matters of understanding, touching things
divine, out of the knowledge. O no! but Esa. 57.66. Sap. 1.6. Mat. 11. 13. 1
Cor. 2.
of those that are lowly of heart, and have not studied nor searched for any
knowledge, Bccl. 6. 1 Pet. 1.5.
but (with a desire) do humble their hearts to the obeying of the requiring of
the holy word, and his service of love, for to do the will of the Lord.

14. Lo, such are upright wise-ones, and lovers of wisdom, upon whom also the
wisdom arises, as a light, whose judgments agree in one understanding, and
do tend or reach to one upright being.

15. O God, that the hearts of men were yet once rightly humbled before thee,
and thy service of love, and were partakers of thy holy wisdom, that so they
might live in thee.

16. O holy Romans 11.
bottomless depth of the everlasting godly wisdom, who can sufficiently
praise thy virtue?

17. Thou surmountest Sap. 7.
all humane understanding; therefore can no man compass nor enclose thee, for
thou abidest for ever with the Godhead essentially.

18. In thee is Sap. 7.
the holy Ghost, and the perfection.

19. Through thee is the earth grounded, Psalm. 33. Pro. 8.
the heavens are made through thee, and without thee, Joh. 8.
there is nothing made that is any thing.

20. Thou art Joh. 8.9.
the light of the world, the way of the righteous, Joh. 14.
the truth of God, Genesis 2. Prove. 3. 4 Esd. 8. Apo. 2.
and a tree of life.

21. Thou refreshest all them that are burdened and laden, if they do but come
unto thee, Mat. 11.
for thy yoke is easy, and thy burden light to bear.

22. Thou distributest forth knowledge and understanding, Prove. 8. Sap. 6.
whereby the Lands are preserved, and wherethrough the people are protected.

23. But he that forsakes thee, and loves thee not, comes into misery and
destruction.

24. Oh that they all had tasted a little of the wisdom of God, then would
there be no strife or dissension.

25. Wherefore do the Lands perish, and wherefore come the people into so much
vvofulnesse and misery? wherefore comes the desolation, the division, and the
abomination over the world? wherefore does the man believe the lying, rather
then 2 These. 2.
the truth? wherefore is the man bewitched with vain God-services, and wrapped
with so many sorts of vain imaginations? wherefore do men come into such
false freedom, and looseness of heart, that they will in no wise be obedient
to the requiring of Gods truth, and of his service of Love, and so draw away
others, from the first entrance of the Christian life? wherefore do certain
come also into such intanglement of heart, as that they give over themselves
therein to a bondage, and not to a deliverance from the sin, under the
obedience of the love? why do the people strive, and use craft and violence one
against another? why are Esa. 1. Jer. 5. Ezekiel. 22. Mal. 3.
not the simple ones rescued or defended; why is there no righteousness, Hos.
4.
faithfulness, truth, nor love to be found? wherefore do dissensions,
holiness, dissimulation, hatred, wrath, jangling, slander, battle, war,
Mat 24. 2 Timothy 3.
betraying, and all deceiveablenesse, reign among the children of men? but
because there is no wisdom Jam. 1.
of God, nor any equity or righteousness loved, out of impartial love, but
every one walks and lives Jer 7.^1.
in his self-mindednesse, every where.

26. We find indeed some men, that imagine and seek their wisdom, in the
knowledge of all things, thinking that the garnished speech of knowledge, the
utterance of flowred words, and to have a golden tongue is the wisdom, but
many are beguiled, and have been seduced thereby.

27. For that same, and to labor for such things, or to have regard thereunto,
is not the wisdom which God requires of us; for he desires not that the man
should toil or trouble himself therewith, howsoever the reason through his
presumptuous imagination, searches most of all after it, contrary to Gods
appointment.

28. But this Gdoth od require, lowliness of heart to Mich. 6.
bow unto him, and his Ordinance, and to have a desire and a delight to do his
will, and to be obedient to the requiring of his love.

29. That truly is a wisdom of understanding, which brings forth the peace
in righteousness, and which Sap. 9.
Solomon prayed for.

30. But forasmuch now as the man does not rightly labor for this upright
wisdom, nor yet from the heart desires such things, and that now every
understanding has in the knovuledge, out of the first born Adam, corrupted his
way toward the wisdom, as all flesh did, Genesis 6.
in the time of Noe, in such sort, that one can now find few, that have any
understanding or knowledge of the upright wisdom, therefore is also the end of
the knowledge, and of all the wisdom of the flesh, come before the Lord.

31. For out of the knowledge and wisdom of the flesh, are grievous errors
come into the world, to a great misery, affliction, sorrow, and heaviness over
the children of men, for the 4 Esd. 14. Mat. 24.
wickedness has the upper hand, and her end, or the ripeness of her harvest
4 Esd. 4.
shall be out of measure horrible, it shall assuredly come so to pass,
whether it be believed or not.

32. Wherefore hear and understand, ye deerly beloved, if so be we love the
upright wisdom, and desire to obtain, or to inherit the same, then may we
not seek nor desire to inherit her, in the knowledge of our corrupt
understanding, nor yet take upon us in the same, any judgment of ^he light,
for in our corrupt understanding, and whilst we are yet Ephesians. 4.
estranged from God, or are not wholly incorporated into his Christ, according
to the inner man, so long does God require of us, no wisdom nor judgment of
the light, but 1 Pet. 1.
the obedience of his word, and service of love, which leads us to the
wisdom, and to the light of the divine clearness.

33. For that cause, it is before all things most needful for us, that we
first come to the knowledge of our selves, through the service of the holy word
under the obedience of the love, Esa. 59.
and have sorrovv for our estranging from the upright being, Mat. 3. Luke 3.
Act. 2.3.
and so show repentance and amendment for the sin, which has brought forth
unto us in our members, the Romans 5.
death or the dying away from God, and so (in long sufferance) hope and comfort
our selves, on the avouching of the promises, concerning the coming of the
living word from on high, Rem. 12. Ephesians. 4.
to a renewing of our spirit and mind, and to a restoring of all, Act. 3.
that God has spoken through the mouth of all his holy Prophets, to the end
that (with single hearts) we might obediently be incorporated 2 Pet. 1.
into the nature of God, or of his Christ, who is the true light, the upright
wisdom, and the life of our salvation it self, and so know and livingly feel
the form of Christ, Gal. 2.3.4.
not without us, but in us, and 1 Cor. 15.
carry or bear the Image of the Almighty God, whereunto the man was created
from the beginning.

34. Behold to inherit that same true being, of God and Christ in our
inwardnesse, is the upright wisdom, Jam. 3.
which is humble, meek, gentle, and friendly, in which the true light also is
known and inherited, and whereout men judge uprightly.

35. To this wisdom is our calling, and thereunto are we bidden, through the
service of the doctrines and writings of the Apostles of Christ 1 Pet. 1. 1 John 1.
who have published in the world, such a life as is everlasting.

36. If then we believe in Christ, so as the Scripture says, then shall not
the upright wisdom remain separated from us, but have her form in us, and Joh.
4.7.
flow from our body, as a river of living waters.

37. But now is this upright wisdom, Mat. 11. 1 Cor. 1.2.
hidden or unknown before all flesh, also before the devil, before the world,
and before all her wise and letter-learned ones.

38. Also, she is not to be learned in any schools, through any study in the
knowledges, not found by any manner tongues or languages; but she rises as a
light, upon those, who in the Doctrine of Wisdom, and of her service of Love,
are low and humble of heart, Esa. 57.66.
poor of Spirit, willing to the good, Sap. 1.7.
and not subject to the lustfulnesse of the sin.

39. Therefore speaks the mouth of the Wisdom, saying, Mat. 11.
I thank thee, O Father of heaven and earth, that thou have hidden this same
from the wise and learned in the Letter, and have made it known to the little
and lowly.

40. Yea, it has always so pleased the Father to make the lowly contrite
hearts, partakers of the gifts of his holy wisdom.

CHAP. VII.
2. In the off-fallen estate, there is none truly wise, though many boast. 3.
The Glass of Righteousness is set forth to try every ones cause by it. 8.
Though the Author be moved at the misunderstanding of others: 9. Yet would he
not have men to think, that his own humane ways had been always right. 11.
But through the Lords mercy he has been enlightened. 12. Which illumination and
gifts he respected not, in regard of the Love. 13. And exhorts all others to
despise their gifts likewise, in respect thereof. 19. He bewaileth men's
uncertain knowledge. 22. Yea, even of them that are fore-goers unto others.
25. How to walk in the Service of the Love. 29. The written word is not the
word it self. 31. Yet men's misunderstanding perceives it not. 39. But God can
reveal the difference.

INasmuch as I now have perceived the fall or estranging of men from this holy
wisdom, and what a wicked nature, and crafty heart they have, or in what
spiritual bewitching they stand, that account themselves for wise, and yet are
strangers to the godly wisdom, which is according to the Love, and the
requiring of her Service; therefore could I not give credit unto any of them as
true wise ones, or upright Christians, although they boasted them of Gods
wisdom, or gave our themselves for a Christian Congregation.

2. For through mistrustfulnesse the fear of my heart was, that the
Christianity was not so good or upright among the Children of men, as they made
boast of, or that it might yet not be for all that the right Christianity, or
that her Ministration was not yet proceeded out of the right stock of the Love.

3. Whilst then that they were yet unknown unto me in such sort, that I could
credit no man for his boasting, fair speaking, nor profoundnesse, or deep
knowledge: and that out of Gods grace, and his heavenly revelation, there was
granted me to see the good being of the Christianity, and that the same stood
before me in the sight of my spirit, whereafter my hope and longing was, as
also we have said before: therefore out of the inclination of love, am I
occasioned to show openly, and to set forth a Glass of Righteousness, whereby
to make known before all eyes of understanding (that glass themselves
therein) the good and upright being of the true Christianity, and what our
calling is through Jesus Christ by the Word of the preaching of the Apostles of
Christ, and whereby also to lay open the understanding, Ephesians. 3.
whereon we are to set our hope, what manner life the Prophecies do stretch
unto, wherein Gods promises are to be established, and what manner ones they
be, or ought to be, that are the upright Congregation of the Christianity.

4. This verily have I (through Gods grace, Romans 12. 1 Cor. 3.
which is given unto me) plainly expressed in Letters, according to the life of
the upright Christianity; namely, according to the upright form, even as I
behold the same in the vision of the truth, through Gods heavenly Revelation
which is Romans 16. Ephesians. 1.3. Col. 1. 2 Timothy 1.
appeared and revealed unto me, Eccl. 24.33.
seeking therein the salvation of all men, and not mine own only; for
therefore to the end, that all controversy might now be ended, and that it
might be known what the true Christianity is, I have impartially noted or
described in Letters, the upright being of the Christianity, and also in like
manner the true teaching-office of the Ministration of the holy Word, in the
obedience of the love of Jesu Christ.

5. If now any man have right in his matter, concerning the Christianity, or if
any man minister the office of the holy Word rightly, in the obedience of the
love of Jesu Christ, according to the promises, he will also keep it, and will
likewise very willingly unite himself with us, in the obedience of the Love of
Jesu Christ, for I desire not with my writing, to bereave any man of the true
being of the Christianity, nor of the upright Office of the Ministration of the
holy Word, but much rather to point him to it, and to be serviceable unto him
therewith.

6. But they that are wrong, and stand in a conceit, or imagination, shall also
very easily perceive wherein they mistake, or are wrong, if so be they read
these writings, and do glass themselves in the Glass of Righteousness, and
have regard unto these testimonies.

7. Let every one know himself, and turn him to the Communalty of the love,
that he may be enlightened in his Ephesians. 1.
understanding, and be delivered and unburthened of the Romans 1.
vain bewitched being, and so with thanksgiving laud God.

8. Oh, what shall I say of the vain understanding of the children of men, and
of all their conceits and imaginations, whereunto they are subject! Oh, how
much experience have I of this their ignorance and conceitednesse! I have
examined it very much, I have had regard unto the judgment of many men, and
made my self common with every one; howbeit, I have found many things vain or
senseless.

9. But although I do thus write, yet let no man therefore think that my
humane ways have been still in the true understanding: O no! but concerning my
humane disposition and weak nature, I have found my self in much sin and
ignorance above many others.

10. I have also passed through many Sap. 5.
tedious ways, struggled much, stumbled often, and fallen many times, yea, I
have been even the chief among sinners.

11. But 1 Timothy 1.
mercy is showed on me, inasmuch as the most high God has permitted me to see
my humane ignorance, and thoroughly enlightened mine understanding, Mat. 13. Ephesians.
3.
and revealed his secret unto me, to the end, that I should discover the mind
of the life, and of his righteousness, according both to the divine, and also
humane nature and form, for to show evidently whereunto the man was created.

12. Now might some man say, that is assuredly a great gift of the most
highest: It is true, I must needs highly praise, land, thank the goodness of
the grace of God therein, inasmuch as the Salvation of men is manifested
thereby: But I my self have never had my respect upon the knowing of this,
whereby in any wise to rejoice my self therein, nor to glory thereon, as in
regard of my knowledge; but (to the end that I would not set my confidence upon
the knowing, nor upon the inlightning of mine understanding) I esteemed it
rather, as if it were not given me, or were not appeared in mine understanding,
then that in respect thereof, I would be without the love.

13. Wherefore in regard of the love, let us give no respect unto any of all
the gifts of God, for to rejoice our selves; or to glory in any of them without
the love, to the end that we may get and obtain the love, Cant. 8.
which is the sealing or making sure of the divine promises, whereunto also all
prophecies do point, Mat. 22. Mar. 12. Romans 13.
and therein cease; for if we have not the love, or if we attain not thereunto,
then 1 Cor. 13.
have we doubtless nothing.

14. Therefore [namely, for the loves sake] I do esteem it to be hurtful, to
repose our selves on any gifts of God, which in our knowledge are committed
unto us, for to obtain the love, and to have love one to another; must be all
our exercise, to the end the same might have a form in us.

15. For that cause let no man give respect unto his knowledge, nor to the
excellency of his understanding, nor to the richness of his Spirit, out of the
heavenly knowledge, nor to the gifts of his divine Prophecies, nor to his
learnednesse in the Scripture, nor to his sundry tongues and languages, nor to
the constancy of his righteousness and holiness (as thereby to think himself
to be any thing) but let him set all such things behind the back in silence,
having no regard thereunto, and 2 Cor. 10.
so give his understanding captive under the obedience of the love in the
spirit, and set his expectation and longing (fully and wholly) on the love, to
the end he may win the love.

16. For the love, Romans 13.
is the fulfilling of all this, and the divine being it self; and it is the
true life and holy wisdom promised for to come, to a shining of Jerusalem
round about.

17. After this wisdom let us hope and long, and esteem all to be nothing
worth, whatsoever is without the same, For whatsoever is without the love shall
perish, melt, and consume, 1 Cor. 13.
but the love abides for ever, whose years are not shortened, neither does the
number of her days fail.

18. And so for the loves cause, let us not know or maintain that we know any
thing, save 1 Cor. 8.
only the love, to the end we might win many unto her, for the ministration of
the true Christianity, shall (out of the love) only bear sway according to the
promises.)

19. But (alas) the children of men have very little regard hereunto, for every
one will needs know much, and besides that know also, what is right; howbeit
they come not to the knowledge of that which they should know, yet every one
gives his judgment out of the knowledge, and will thereout judge of the
wisdom of God and all understandings.

20. But this I lament, with sorrow of my heart (the which I see hear, and
prove by manifold experience) that the man is so unstayed, and that the upright
understanding of wisdom, is so darkened in the children of men.

21. For I find that many of them do much fail in their judgment,, and do not
comprehend the truth out of the testimonies of Scripture, because they Mat. 22.
understand not the Scripture.

22. Not only they, which are apparently without understanding, but they also,
1 Timothy 1.
that give out themselves for masters and teachers of understanding, Romans 2.
as foregoers and leaders of the blind, and as lights unto them that are in
darkness, and that account so of themselves, as if much divine understanding
were discovered and disclosed unto them, and therefore (through the show of
their deeds and works) they boast them highly, to have received Mat. 13. Luke
11.
the key of the entrance into the Kingdom of God, for to open the same or to
let in, or to shut it to and keep out, for to forgive fins or to retain.

23. The which I find in many to be nothing but a conceit, imagination, and
self-wisdome, which themselves have taken upon them, and so think to be wise
through the riches of their knowledge; and because of the respect which they
give to their understanding, they judge the sooner and boldlyer of those words
and writings, which are set forth to the good, not rightly respecting that
which is sought therein, and required or desired thereby.

24. But they that do rightly regard the word, will not judge rashly, but still
will have their respect unto the love, also they will not search the Scripture,
nor study therein for to know, utter, recite, or to publish the same in
historical manner, as the clarks of the knowledge use it in there schools, and
as the letter-learned do in their Synagogues and Assemblies, who (indeed) hold
very much of the Scripture, and (according to their own sense) do gladly hear
and speak thereof, Mat. 23.
but what the Scripture requires, that do they not.

25. But in the service of love; it ought not so to be, ye deerly beloved, but
every one is to cast down himself, 1 Pet. 5.
and to humble his soul, that he may obtain such a heart, mind and spirit, as
the service of the word points us unto, and so regard his calling,
whereunto he is required by the Scripture, to the establishing of the godly
promises, not after the Deuteronomy. 12.
choosing of any man's conceiving, but as God has heretofore spoken it, by the
mouth of his holy Prophets.

26. If therefore we have an inclined mind to the same, in the belief of the
love, that the love may obtain a lively form in us, then need we not to
study, strive, or dispute much, neither yet to ask much advise, nor to hold
Counsels thereabout, but we ought with our hearts Ezekiel. 14.
to turn away from sins and abominations, and so to come to an humble Mat. 11.
and meek heart, according to the mentioning of the Scriptures.

27. Now when we have heard or read the Scripture or service of the word,
to that effect, and that we have given over and yielded our selves before the
Elders Eccl. 6 8.
in the family of love thereunto, then is it altogether needful for us (for
the obtaining of such an upright heart) diligently and earnestly Esa. 55. Jer.
29.
to seek, Mat. 7. Luke 11.
knock, and pray, Eccl. 2.
to abide patiently the battle or trial, that meets us against our passage
toward the good life, Mat. 10.16. Luke 9.14.
to take up our cross daily by belief and hope in the patience, and so with
one accord, Act. 2.
to continue steadfast in prayer and faith, until that (through the service of
the word) we be 1 Pet. 1.
born or brought forth alive in the true word, out of the death and blindness
of the sin.

28. Which birth in the spirit, is not out of the word which is writable, nor
which is set forth by the unregenerate man out of the letter! O no, but out of
the holy and living word of God, 1 Pet. i. 2 John 1.
which is Spirit and life, and Christ himself according to the Spirit.

29. For the written word of the letter, is not the word it self, that
cleanses and sanctifies the man from the sin, or which procreateth the life,
but the same is a shadow or figure out of the holy and true word, and a
serviceable instrument whereby we are made well affected, (inwardly in our
souls) to the true word of Vivification, and do become believing of the same,
to the end that (through the belief and love) we might so (in the spirit of our
mind) be made Ephesians. 4. ^ Pet. 1.
of like being with the nature and being of the good life, even as the word or
Scripture witnesses thereof.

30. Lo, this is our calling, through the service of the holy word of the
Apostles of Christ, to the end we should so (through the same service, and her
drawing of our hearts to the love) be brought to the ministering of the
spiritual and heavenly goods, in such serving of the living God, Luke 1.
and in that upright righteousness and holiness, which is pleasing unto him.

31. But where now is understanding? where is there now any regard had unto the
word, and the matter rightly judged?

32. Where are the guides that err not? Esa. 3.9.28.56. Jer. 8.18.23. Ezekiel.
13.22.34.
The Prophets that lie not? the Seers that fail not? the teachers that mix not
their own imaginations with the word.

33. Is not the world every where so blind and dark, that men cannot discern
the shadow, Joh. 1.
from that which it shines from, the sounding voice Mat. 3. Romans 10. 1 Pet. 1.
from the word, the letter, 2 Cor. 3.
from the Spirit, the Image of God, from the Godhead, men's teaching and word,
Mat. 15. Col. 2.
from Gods Teaching and Word, the obedience and fear of men, Esa. 51. Luke 12.
from the obedience and fear of God, the righteousness which man esteems,
Mat. 23. Romans 10.
from the righteoufnesse which is of value before God, the natural man, from
the spiritual, the sacrifice of men, from the sacrifice of Christ, the
Oblations, from the Reconciliation, the Law from the Gospel, etc. Is not every
of these disorderly confounded one with another, in the understandings of men,
and so taken all for one manner thing.

34. This I saw, that many hearts were entangled therein, and it grieved me
exceedingly.

35. Oh darkness, and blindness, or weed, which from the beginning was sown
in Adams heart, how manifoldly have thou spread thy self abroad amongst us, and
thereby covered the whole world, that there is hardly any little plot to be
found, where the good seed might have his growing or springing up unto
fruitfulness.

36. If now it be not turned up [ 4 Esd. 4.
namely, the evil, and the peace wherein it is sowne] then shall not the good
appear, nor the place wherein it is sown.

37. O God, that the place of the evil seed were stirred and turned up, and
the ungodliness taken away 4 Esd. 3.
out of the heart, that the thistles and thorns might grow there no more, then
might the noble Lilly branch [namely, thy Sanctuary] once have his springing
up, 4 Esd. 6.7.
the belief blossom, and the love bring forth her fruits, whereby the upright
righteousness might ( Sap. 7. Mat. 13.
above any treasure of this world) be embraced.

38. Oh this same is it, which I sigh for, bewail, and lament, because I find
it not, and because that appears not, which God esteems, and is the
Salvation of men, and for that moreover with many it is to be sought and fetched
so far of.

39. But with thee (O God) are all Mat. 19.
things possible, who so (in belief of the truth) trusts in thee, the same
man can do much, and look what seems unpossible with men, that can thou
soon bring to pass.

CHAP. VIII.
1. He bewaileth the desolation of the Sheep of Christ, that go astray in the
wilderness and know not their right Shepherd. 6. Yet many content themselves
in that estate. 14. An exhortation to the Seers. 17. And to the desolate
People, that they behold and bewail the same their misery, and the loss of the
upright righteousness. 44. An inviting to the love, where the supply is only
to be found.

O God how long yet shall thy Psalm. 74.79.
Sanctuary remain wast? how long shall the sheep run scattered abroad, 3 Re.
22. Ezekiel. 34.
and in all respects remain bound, entangled, tied, and holden captive, as
though thou O God would not be their redeemer and Shepherd? for they Psa.
119. Esai. 53.
go astray in the wildernesses, and forget the Land promised them of God for
inheritance, and the holy City Jerusalem.

2. For behold (and it is to be seen and noted) the Foxes Ezekiel. 13.
do bear rule, and every one (in his own wisdom) uses craft, wiliness, and
subtilty, whereby many sheep and Lambs are caught and bewitched, and so remain
in the bands of the wildernesses, because they know not the true life, their
upright Shepherd.

3. For the fear which the foxes make, with the show of their wisdom, is the
snare, which has taken captive, and keeps bound, the poor silly sheep in the
wilderness, that they neither hunger nor long for the good pasture, supposing
they come to the best, and thus are they appeased.

4. O ye silly sheep, how long will you yet suffer your selves to be bewitched;
when will you hear the word of your Lord, Ioh. 10.
and the voice of your Shepherd, when will ye once desire to come unto him
that has made you, Ezekiel. 34.
that he himself may feed you?

5. Men may also see (yea it is plainly seen and observed) that Jer. 10. Ezekiel.
22. Joh. 10. Apo. 16.
the Wolves, Bears, Dragons, and Serpents, yea all venomous carrion (the
Generation of Vipers) do inviron and compass the Forest of the desert,
watching night and day, that the sheep come not out thence, neither taste of the
good pasture, nor yet be gathered to their good and upright Shepherd, to the
intent that they themselves, [to wit, that false brood] might still Ezekiel. 34.
keep the Sovereignty and pre-eminence, and that the bands of their Dommion
might not be broken.

6. And many of the common sort of Inhabitants of these vvildernesses, (though
they see and note, that it ought not so to be) do yet Ier. 3.
quietly look upon it, and carelessely loiter forth the time, if it touch not
them, they think then all is well, and use the Proverb, whilst a thing is
tolerable, it is commendable.

7. O God, they are little moved, how it fares with thine holy holy Land of
inheritance, which lies still vvast, or that thy sheep remain (as strayed) in
the wilderness, and thy Lambs be cruelly handled and torn, as long as
themselves may have but peace.

8. They Ier. 5.8.
mourn not once, neither bear they any sorrovv O God, for thy holy City
Jerusalem, howsoever they see, that it is trodden down, Iam. 1. Luke 2.
and lies utterly vvast.

9. They ask not once for Sion: thy temple, and thy Sanctuary, enters not once
into their hearts.

10. They make themselves delights, in the foreign Lands, and forget the Joy
in Sion.

11. Oh what shall I say of these wretchlesse ones, that neither seek nor
desire any thing, but to have their ease and repose in the flesh, and moreover
of those self-seekers, among the dispersed Israel, who daily rejoice them
with the entangled Babylon, and shrovvd themselves, under the contentiousnesse
and Genesis 10.
violence of Nimrod, and do not once think on the Law of their God, nor on the
seat of his glory, but take unto them, the foreskin of the heathen, and
vvallovv in the filthiness of the uncircumcised.

12. Oh! are not all these like the swine Mat. 7. 2 Pet. 2.
that has his delight in the dirt, and regards not the fairness of the
Roses, are they not also like the hedghog, which delights to be in the vvast
places of uncleanlinesse, contenting himself with mice and svvines flesh,
seeing it is even a pleasure unto them, to wallow themselves in all
uncleanness, and to eat all unclean meat, wherein they have a desire to live,
and do not once long for the pleasantness of the noble Garden, where men do
eat the pure herb, and the clean beasts, and where they sing and play the laud
song of the Lord, out of Apo. 13.14.15.
the Mercy Seat.

13. But (alas) the desolation (as is said) is yet (me thinks) best pleasing
in this world; Jer. 5.6 7.8.9.10. etc. Ezekiel. 16.20.
for I see that the same gets the prcheminence every where, and I cannot
otherwise perceive, but that the desolation is (now adays) most embraced, and
bears greatest sway, else must mine eyes be blinded, that I look asquint, and
see not aright.

14. Therefore, O ye Seers (which do bear sorrow, for the treading down of
Jerusalem, Psa. 74.79. Jer. 9. Lam. 1.2.3.4. 4 Esd. 2.3.4.8.10.
and are grieved from the heart, that the Lords Temple and his Sanctuary lies
wast, judge ye the matter, whether I have noted it rightly, or unrightly.

15. If I have noted the thing rightly, suffer ye then with me; I pray you,
grief and heaviness in your hearts, and sigh you with me to the Lord, that he
will have mercy on us, and set up his Sanctuary, for his holy names sake.

16. Oh send forth a cry to the desolate peoples; give them (with lamentation)
to understand the desolation whereinto they are fallen, that they may sorrow
and be grieved. Let them behold how poor and naked they are of the godly riches.

17. Come hither (I pray you) to the love and her service, O ye desolate
peoples, and consider (in this light) how that ye are all Sap. 5.
strayed from the way of life and understanding, and weep or lament over your
froward ways.

18. And come all ye that are ignorant; Pro. 6.
come and eat of my bread, and drink of the wine, which I power forth unto you,
forsake the ignorant being, so shall ye live, and shall walk in the way of
understanding.

19. I wisdom do in the love, cry and call unto you, O ye children of men
regard it, O ye ignorant ones, ye unwise, take it to heart, and hear.

20. For I will speak, Pro. 8.
and my lips shall utter some singular matter.

21. For my mouth shall speak the truth, Pro. 8.
and my lips hate that which is ungodly.

22. All the words of my mouth are righteous, Pro. 8.
there is no frowardness nor falsehood in them.

23. Therefore come and go with me, into the house of mourning, (where the
poor, the little ones, and the contrite of heart are) even there will I show
you, Apo. 3.
how poor and miserable ye are, and which are the most precious treasures, Pro.
3.8.6. Esa. 33. Col. 2.
and riches that you lack.

24. Come and help me to make a lamentation before the most highest, and suffer
sorrow for the most hurtfullest, Mat. 16.
loss of the upright righteousness, because it is not (or very little) found
in this world: for my heart is therefore oftentimes heavy. Oh where is it, or
where may I rightly find, where to ask after it?

25. Where (I pray you) is now Mal. 1.
the fear of God, (such as is unmixt with the fear of men) whereout the
beginning Pro. 1.9. Eccl. 1.
of the holy wisdom appears?

26. Where is the most holiest faith Romans 5. Ephesians. 6. Heb. 11.
in the true hope of salvation (which men To. 3.5. Gal. 2.
are justified by, from the sin) wherewith no vein or false faith is mixed?

27. Where is the pure love ( Mat. 22. Romans 13. Gal. 5.
which is the fulfilling of the Law, and 1 Timothy 1.
the principal scope of the belief) wherewith is mingled no discord, nor
selfe-seeking in the love?

28. Where is now Hos. 4.
faith and truth, whereon any heart may rest?

29. Where is the true ministering of the holy word, Act. 2.3.4.7.8.9.10. etc.
and working of the holy Ghost, wherewith the invention of man's wisdom has not
mixed it self?

30. Where is Gods Esa. 42.48. Apo. 4.5.7.
Honor, Land, and Praise (that belongs unto him only) wherein man's honor
and praise is not mingled?

31. Where is the pure God-service, which is Jam. 1.
not mixed, nor spotted of this world?

32. Where is the Law of the Lord, which Gal. 3.
leads unto Christ, (whereout the Gospel of the Kingdom of God arises,
where no humane Law is taught besides, that leads from Christ, and darkneth
the Gospel?

33. Where is the upright Circumcision, Dan. 10. Jer. 4. Romans 2. Phil. 3. Col.
2.
to the laying away of sin in the flesh, which was given by God, to Abraham and
his seed, for an Genesis 17.
everlasting sign of his Covenant?

34. Where is the Law of the spirit, which Romans 8.
quickneth in Jesu Christ, and freeth us from the Law of sin and of death?

35. Where is now the Romans 5. Ephesians. 2.
peace with God the Father, in pure and unspotted Consciences.

36. Where is now the Mat. 3. Romans 6. Gal. 3. Col. 2. 1 Pet. 3.
Baptism of John [or the grace of the Lord] over those, that are distressed
for the sins cause, to their amendment from the sin?

37. Where is now the true Baptism of Jesu Christ, Mat. 3.28. Mar. 16. Act.
10.19.
which follows thereupon, to the forgiving and justifying from the sin,
whereon the name of the Father is witnessed, the name of the son confessed, and
the name of the Holy Ghost; Ephesians. 1.
for a pledge of the godly inheritance sealed.

38. Where do any now keep Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Lu. 22. 1 Cor. 11.
the supper of Christ, where they break, distribute, and eat the bread (which
is the true body of Christ) to a remembrance of Christ, that he has suffered
in us for our sins cause, Romans 6. Phil. 2. 1 Pet. 2.
the death of the Cross, and so his death 1 Cor. 11.
is published, until he come in his glory?

39. Where do any now drink the cup 1 Cor. 10.
of Christ, in the communion of his blood, of the true Testament?

40. Where is now the Christian communion, Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 5.
or where are the upright Christians which do all eat of the same bread, and do
all drink of the same cup, 1 Cor. 10.
to an holy undivided body, whereof Jesus Christ is Ephesians. 1.4.6.
the head, and which are the Ephesians. 1. 1 Pet. 2.
peculiar ones of God, for an holy people to the God of Life, whom he has made
Kings 1 Pet. 2. Apo. 1.5.
and Priests through Jesus Christ?

41. Where is now the seed of the believing Abraham, Genesis 15.17.22. Romans 4.
Gal. 3.
wherein such promise is made, for the blessing of all Generations?

42. Oh where art thou, thou seed of Isaac, Genesis 21.22. Romans 9.
that Son of the promise, who art blessed by the Son of the promise; thou noble
stock Genesis 27.
of Jacob, thou chosen blossom of Israel, who only Deuteronomy. 4.
live in Gods Statutes, and not after the manner of the heathen?

43. Verily of all this, which I ask after, we find no whit at all in the
wicked world, nor yet among you, O ye desolate peoples, but only in the stock
of the love, that virtuous amiable being.

44. Therefore come ye all hither to the love, Jer. 7.18.25.35.
reform your being in her service, and let the love with meekness be planted
in you, Jam. 1.
so shall ye even therein find, all the goodlinesses of the riches of God, and
the whole communion of his Saints, namely, the whole house of Israel.

45. Unto which stock of Saints, and chosen Children of God, we 1 Pet 1.
are all called through Jesus Christ, that in the raising up of Israel,
according to the promises of God the Father, we should inherit the blessing.

46. O Israel (ye right children in Act. 3.
the true Testaments of your holy Fathers) when shall your dispersing have an
end, and your erecting come? Esa. 2. Mic. 4.
that the Law of the Lord, and his word may be declared, and his wondrous works
manifested, and all the heathen seek the righteousness; learn the Law of the
Lord, Zach. 8.
and walk in his streets, to the praise of the God of Israel, who only is the
Lord, for Esa. 43.44.
besides the God of Israel, there is no God more.

47. For truly the Idols of the Heathen, and all their spiritual wisdom
(which they set forth, besides the everlasting God of Israel and his Law, Esa.
44.45.46. Ier. 10.
is nothing else but foolishness and ignorance.

48. Many of them have no understanding in the Law of the Lord, nor knowledge
of his Ordinances, and of their calling through Jesus Christ Luke 2.
of the tribe of Juda, of the House of David, they have no right discerning at
all.

49. And therefore it is, that they miss of the meaning or intention of God,
and are thereby grounded on the glimmering of their knowledge, and not on the
stock of the upright olive tree, Romans 11.
to the which they are called, to be grafted thereunto.

50. But now when we consider all this, and that we are not partakers of the
Sap of the stock of our calling, Romans 11.
but to find our selves breken off from the same, and thereby miss of all
that, which is of God, and which his Ordinances are one with, if then we have
any love to the riches of God, and do consider and know the damagefull Mat. 16.
loss, with all the desolation Dan. 9.11.12. Mat. 24.
and abominations, which are come in between, then comes upon us, Esa. 13.
Dan. 12.
all woe and anguish, and we greatly bewail the loss of these riches of God,
above all the damages or losses of this world.

51. For where is there a more damagefull loss, Mat. 16.
then where one finds no righteousness of God, and where the Law of God
and his Statutes and Ordidances are in the loss so utterly darkened?

52. Oh what shall I more write, of this damagefull loss of the most
precious riches? my heart is heavy, and my soul is pained, in such sort, Ier.
9.13.14. Lam. 1.2.3.
that oftentimes I am forced to sigh and mourn, because my mind will not be
pacified.

53. O God, that they all savv, how they are Psalm. 14. Romans 3.
turned herefrom, and that no man has continued in thy truth, and how they
are Romans 7.
taken captive under the sin, and strayed from thee; (yea these precious riches
of God, they scarcely know,) and how poor Apo. 3 3.
and naked in themselves they are, without thy Sanctuary, to the end (out of
deep necessity) they might cry unto thee, Psa. 130.
for grace, and obtain (in their spirit) an inclined mind, to the obeying of
thy love, that thou mighest have mercy on them all.

54. For if so be they come not to thy love, nor to the obedience of the
requiring of her service, nor thereunto have no good will, belief or hope,
surely there shall then no life of Gods Sanctuary be found in them, how wise,
how skillful, and excellent or rich of Spirit, how learned and expert in
Scriptures, Languages or tongues soever they may be.

55. If moreover they lay not down their knowledge in the silence, even as
though they knew nothing at all; and that (through the service of the holy
Word) they reform not themselves under the obedience of the love, nor suffer
their understanding to be stirred up to obedience, whereby to be wholly
inclined to the love, to pass forth toward the same, Mat. 10.16. Mar. 8. Luke
9.14.
to take up daily their Cross with humble hearts, and to persevere Ephesians. 6.
Phil. 4. Col. 4.
in prayer and faith, with a firm hope, Ephesians. 3.
till the establishing in the love, they can by no means inherit any riches of
God or Christ, nor 1 Cor. 2.
understand or know any wisdom of God at all, how skilfully soever they
search, or study in Scriptures after it.

56. For there is no wisdom nor knowledge of Christ, nor understanding of the
Scriptures, to be had in any thing, but only in the love, or among them, who
are inclined, and well-affected thereunto.

57. They may many of them (I grant) seek much wisdom and understanding,
whereby to comprehend the saute, and (in conceit) be satisfied and appeased
with a taken on wisdom; but if they come not to the love, neither are taught
in her service to the true wisdom, they shall then find no wisdom nor
understanding, nor yet any righteousness nor life, but must Joh. 8.
die in their sins, and in their conceit of truth, for there is no right Spirit
of truth, nor wisdom without the love.

58. Wherefore every thing, which is Amos. 8.
decayed or broken down, must even now (through the love and her service) be
set up again, and all that straieth and is dispersed, Ezekiel. 34. Mic. 4. Soph. 3.
must again be gathered together, through the love and her service: namely, all
those that hope for the Salvation of the only body of Christ, for that is the
promise, to the children of the Testament, in the Jer. 23.30.31.33. Joel. 2.
last time, in the which God will magnify himself against all heathen or
uncircumcised ones.

59. This has God in former times promised, and he will perform it for his
holy names sake, Ezekiel. 38. Mic. 5.
to make it known and honorable far and wide, that his honor and Sanctuary
Psalm. 74. Dan. 8.
may no longer be trodden down, but may appear pure and clear: and he will show
in the last time, how that he only is the Lord, and that his office, work and
doing, is not bound nor tied to men's working, but that he performs the same
according to his will and pleasure.

60. O how happy is he, which is Esa. 5. Romans 12.
not wise in his own conceit, neither is with any spiritual Deuteronomy. 12. Jer. 7.
imagination bewitched, tied, or bound; but (in the sin) is daily against
himself, and loves not the evil, but is well-affected to the love, and so
Luke 21.
possesses his soul with patience, till the promises of Almighty God, that he
might live unto God in all truth.

CHAP. IX.
1. A Complaint over the greatest sort of People, that neither regard nor
expect the promises of Gods Righteousness, out of the love, but set up a
righteousness of their own, as being persuaded that the same is of God. 15.
The abuse of marriage. 22. The middle wall. 25. Shame to disclose the inward
evilnesse. 33. A Prediction of calamity to come upon the conceited wise. 34.
None can come to the new Man or Kingdom of God, but by the love.

BUt who has regard hereunto? who thinks on the righteousness which God
esteems.

2. Does not the most part of people intend to set up their Romans 10
own righteousness?

3. Who thinks on the Communion of Saints, Ioh. 6.
whom God the Father draws, to justification through Jesus Christ, in the
love?

4. Does not every one (which is come or risen up before the love) seek to
gather a private Congregation to himself, to advance his own word, and with
contention to stick to the same? not thinking that the Lord shall Esa. 66.
himself bring forth, through his Word and service of love, and that his
Salvation shall come from his right hand; and that so through himself, he will
bring forth unity in the love, and his children Esa. 66.
out of Sion, according to the word of his promise.

5. But who looks after it? who longs for it? who depends upon Gods
promises, that (in time to come) they shall be established, who hungreth or
thirsts after it? who thinks on the comfort of Israel, and upon the
consolation of Juda?

6. Every one supposes without fail, that he has the blessing of God already,
and that there is for to come, no more then is present with him, or which he
himself passes forth in.

7. Herein do the conceited Christians comfort them, and cheer up themselves
(among each other) but they have caught an hand full of wind, and do make
themselves glad with chafe.

8. They thresh the straw, Esa. 33.
and crush it very hard, but what avails it, in their binnes 4 Esd 6.
shall no bread be found, nor any corn in their barns, yea such things shall
come upon them from the Lord, and (for their stoutnesse cause) shall not bide
away.

9. Many of them cry also now: we have it, we have it, we are the Congregation
of Christ, we are Israel, Lo here it is, Lo there it is, this is the truth,
that is the truth, Mat. 24. Mar. 13. Luke 17.
here is Christ, there is Christ.

10. But when Christ shall show himself, Mat. 24. Luke 17.
even as the lightning arises from the East, and shines unto the West, then
shall their own word (which now is one with them) be clean against them,
because they have not esteemed the love, wherein the truth of God or Christ is
sealed for ever.

11. Moreover diverse have gathered many people or companies every where
together, by sentences of Scripture, and with glistering knowledges, terming
them by the name of Christ, and by the name of Israel, but the love they have
shut out at doors, and thereof had least respect and regard.

12. For who stands now in the love to the end Deuteronomy. 6.10. Mat. 22.
to cleave fast to the God of Life, and to love him, with his whole heart,
soul, and thoughts, and besides, to love another as himself, that God (who only
is the Lord) might be their arm, fortress, and strength.

13. Is not every man's eye that accounts not God, for the only Lord, fixed
upon Ier. 17.
flesh and blood, or upon the vain corruptible created things in this world?
and does not every one set his assurance on the same? does he not count it for
his arm or strength.

14. And thus living in such love to the corruptible things, and in that false
confidence, every one loves his own self, and ( Esa. 29. Ezekiel. 33. Mat. 15.
with his heart) turns from the Lord, and so passes on his error, and
merrily singing, Tob. 13. Apo. 19.
Alleluia: even, as though that God had his delight in such abomination, and
that Jerusalem were likewise builded up, and lay no longer trodden down.

15. In such a show or simulation, and in such pleasure of their own conceit
(not having Ioh. 5.
the love of God, nor bearing the Law of the Lord Ier. 31. Heb. 8.10.
in their hearts) they betake themselves to marriage, with bold courage,
bringing forth their children Ose. 5.
in the unrighteousness, and account that same for pure wedlock ordained of
God, the which yet among them, is but mere adultery, Ezekiel. 16.23.
and impudent whoredom.

16. For consider, who is now (I pray you) within the right matrimony or
conjunction of man and wife?

17. Was it not expedient that Gods Law and will Psalm. 40. Esa. 51. Ier. 31.
should be in the man's heart, and that so the same man should in his will and
disposition cleave unto that God, which has made heaven and earth? In like
manner ought not the woman also to follow the man, and (with the like
disposition) Ephesians. 5.
cleave only to the man's will, and so in her heart bear that which concerns
God, or at least, labor, hope, and long after it, and in that sort bring forth
her children, to the end to bring them up Tob. 1. Eccl. 7.30. Ephesians. 6.
according to the Law of the Lord, in the upright being, that the name of the
living God might therein be magnified, from their birth, and from Generation to
Generation for evermore.

18. But if we observe and note this thing aright, there are but few (alas)
that proceed by this rule, and therefore they are generally Esa. 57. Mat. 12.16.
adulterers and adulteresses.

19. For such as come not together by the Lord, but Tob. 6.
keep or shut God and his Law out at doors, are they not all Sap. 3.4.
children of adultery? lives not every one of them that are such, in his own
matrimony and conjunction, contrary to Gods Ordinance or conjunction, Sap. 3.
Heb. 13.
of the undefiled bed?

20. Therefore pass they not at all, for the pure begetting, procreating, or
bearing, to the bringing up of children in godliness, to the praise of the
most highest.

21. Oh! this same is with many, yet far from home, for every one desires
generally to bring up his children to himself, even to his own pleasure, that
he may thereby spread his own name, and not the Lords; and therefore there is
no love of God, nor unity in the love among them.

22. For every where there is a middle wall and division between God, Esa. 59.
4 Esd. 9.13.15. Mat. 24. Luke 21.
and the man, between the spirituality and the temporality, between the Prince
and the Subjects, between the husband and the wife, between the Parents and the
children, between one brother and another, and between one friend and another.

23. Every one minds his own, and would fain have another agreeing to his
mind: yea the man is now come to such presumption and stoutnesse, Esa. 45.
that every one in particular would gladly have, that (in all things) he might
use the everlasting God at his own will, and that God would give success to
all things, according to his pleasure.

24. And in such a manner is the wife minded toward the husband, the children
toward the parents, and moreover one people toward another, whether it be in
Ordinances, Religions, and Righteousnesses, or in temporal Laws. In every
thing there is own wills desire, middle wall, destruction, suspicion, mistrust,
and covertnesse.

25. Yet who takes it to heart? who does forgo himself? who considers it?
does not every man cover himself, that his shame might not be laid open?

26. Who can now (I pray you) acknowledge, that he himself is so unclean,
unjust, wicked, Esa. 1.
and dissembling, and that he ought to turn him from his unrighteousness?

27. Truly not many (alas) can brook it, nor yet well endure or bear the shame
thereof, by reason that they will not do away nor forsake the covering or show
of virtue, wherewithal they are covered.

28. For in this regard, the husbands will be much too upright, the wives too
honest, and the children much too proud Esa. 3.
and haughty, for to be content to acknowledge that they are open sinners, and
no better then whores and naughty packs, Mat. 22.
for thereby they might not in any wise come into the Kingdom of God.

29. So perversely are the children of men minded against God. For albeit they
are guilty in all respects, (if not with the deed, yet at least with the heart
in secret) yet notwithstanding they do all keep themselves covered before the
face of God, and his Saints; and would much rather be respected and accounted
for just persons, (even as the Pharisees Luke 7.
and letter-learned were) then with the Publicans to acknowledge their sins,
Luke 18.
convert and pray to Almighty God for his grace.

30. Whilst then the children of men will not understand nor acknowledge this
same, Joh. 9.
therefore remain they in their sins. Notwithstanding (out of their unconverted
hearts, and unacknowledgement of their errors) they search the Scripture, Joh.
5.
thinking to have the understanding of life therein, whereas the same is it,
Ioh. 5.
that accuses them, and gives testimony of the upright life: but to the same
life they desire not to come, for they know it not, neither the way that
leads thereunto: howbeit they persuade themselves that they are wise, and do
well know, how they ought or ought not to live.

31. But that which they ought before all things to know, they do not know,
understand nor see, for they ought necessarily to have seen, that they are,
(like broken of branches) Romans 11.
separated and straied from the upright stock, and likewise to know the
defection, Esa. 59.
from their God and his Christ, and the lying against the Lord.

32. Seeing then they are blinded, in regard of the discerning of the fall from
their God, and are not come to the incorporating with Christ, and yet say they
are Christians (and indeed are not, but are a Synagogue of the devil) and do
boast themselves of God, and God finds them liars in his sight, therefore
will he even Apo. 3.
spew such out of his mouth, and not suffer his holy name to be any longer
blasphemed by them, because they should see and know that they have Esa. 1.
blasphemed the holy one in Israel, 1 Mac. 3.
trodden down his Sanctuary with their feet, contemned him and his gentleness,
and in their presumptuousnesse, esteemed themselves great and wise.

33. Inasmuch as this same is still unknown to the world, and unto all
wel-conceited wise, and is of few looked into, and that the man learneth not to
know himself, whereby he might judge righteously; neither is with the
inclination of his heart, disposed to the love, nor hungreth nor lusts the
convertion to his God, and will 2 Timothy 4.
not abide the godly doctrine, but remain selfe-wise and stout of heart,
therefore do I even truly perceive great infelicity, sorrow, Mat. 24.
and misery, to be ready to come in this perilous time; yea such an estate
shall fall upon the children of men, as shall be out of measure horrible, and
all this same must needs light upon them, because every one is much too
self-wise in his own conceit, also too self-expert in the Scripture: and for
that every one supposes Jer. 8.
when he has the Scripture, and reads or hears the same, that he cannot
then err nor be deceived.

34. This say they, and yet do they all err, because the upright judgment
(out of a discerning of love) is not in them, and because out of the breasts of
the love, they have not sucked, and tasted the godly wisdom.

35. For it is certainly mere lies, what the letter-learned, Jer. 8.
and what the wel-conceited wise of spirit also do without the love, institute
or set forth, how clear soever in understanding, and how expert soever of good
and evil they are become thereby, for they must all submit them to the love,
and be reformed in her service, otherwise they can never, although (in their
imagination) they know, perceive, and com prehend all things, come to the new
man, Joh. 3.
nor to the Kingdom of God, for the love is only it, wherein every thing
(which is the truth and wisdom of God) is comprehended. She Col. 3. 2 Timothy 1.
is also the band or establishing of the perfection.

36. Whilst the love then has every thing (which is of God, Christ, or Truth,
contained or included in it, therefore might some man demand, shall we then let
the Scriptures pass? O no, God forbid: but men are not to use them for the
knowledge, nor to the end to teach them forth historically, but to the intent
they may give regard to such an upright spirit or life, as is set forth
therein, or required thereby (even as is 3 Clas. 24.
partly also set forth and declared, both of this, and of the knowledge, in the
third book of the Glass of Righteousness) that so through comfort of the
Scriptures, we should (to our rejoicing) Romans 15.
have our hope on the promises, and on the foreshewing of God, by his Prophets,
and by the Apostles of Christ (who have prophesied of the healthful life, which
abides sure in the love for ever) and so passing on toward it in the belief,
Romans 4.
give credit unto God, that he in his promises is true.

37. But it is to be lamented, that the Scripture is by so few at this day
discerned, out of the understanding of the truth, and of the love, whereby to
understand the same rightly, according to the mind of God.

38. True it is, there is much written, and diverse have set forth many
writings, and have had much provoking of spirit, and great inclination to
teach, howbeit every one severally, according to the sight or knowledge that he
has had, being in the state of the fall from God, and in the estranging from
his Salvation.

39. But inasmuch as they were not come to the love, and that their hearts were
not inclined to the love in all things, as they were to the spirit of their
glistering knowledge and comprehension; therefore did many of them err and
mistake, for the mind of God, Deuteronomy. 6.10. Mat. 22. Romans 13.
and the fulfilling of the Scriptures, is the love.

40. And the same is Col. 3.
the perfection, wherein eyery thing [to a life and truth of peace] stands
firm to our joy, and Ephesians. 1.
to the praise of the glory of God, to all and on all, that hope upon it and
long thereafter.

CHAP. X.
1. Great calamity shall come upon the children of Men, because of the
contentious knowledge. 2. Knowledge and truth differ. 5. The way of life
clearly showed. 6. Yet through ignorance mistaken. 16. A lamentation over man's
ignorance. 24. The author by his writings shows what is commendable, and what
is discommendable: counselling to learn upright understanding, and the special
Virtues of the Love, and to shun all disputing with the partial.

FOrasmuch as the man is now persuaded, that he himself (with his eyes of the
Spirit) does so clearly and nakedly discern and understand the right, as he
cannot be deceived, and for that every one which stands in partiality, is by
his sight or spirit contentions, howsoever each several party maintains his
own matter, and defends the same to be of God, and will in all things have
the right only and alone pass with his own matter, and will not effect the
love above all, to the unity of heart, therefore even through the same
glittering, in case they have not all their understanding captive under the
obedience of the love, there shall come horrible calamity upon the children of
men, in such sort, that upon this earth, they shall become an 4 Esd. 5.
abhorring one to another, for that every one standing stiff in the knowledge
and in the clearness thereof, will not [for the loves sake] give over his own
matter, thinking that the truth ought not to give place.

2. It is true indeed that the truth ought not to give place, but betwixt the
knowledge and the truth, there is great difference: for much knowledge [which
yet men call truth] can easily arise out of the subtilty of wit; but the truth
of God proceeds out of the love, and is even of one being with the love.

3. Therefore is the knowledge 1 Cor. 13.
divided and broken, but the love is the truth, Ioh. 17.
and the true being it self, and the perfection.

4. But [alas] this do not many of them know, to wit, that they should come to
the love, and so bear the love, for a mark of the righteous Spirit, and rejoice
them with the truth: Ioh. 17. 1 Ioh. 1.
that same is the word of life which was spoken of according to the promises.

5. Inasmuch now as I have noted, and do yet at this present find so much
boldness in men, by reason of their knowledge, and imagination of the truth,
whereon they are very stout and bold, and yet for the most part, it still
fails them of the truth and love, and for that the right way to the true
life, and the loves nature, is thereby missed of many: And seeing moreover,
that the right way and entrance into the true life, and into the loves nature,
is (by Gods grace) granted me to be seen into, therefore have I out of the
inclination of Love, clearly and nakedly, with uncovered words set forth the
right way or entrance into the true life, and the upright nature or being of
the love in the Glass of Righteousness, distinctly noting the divine, and the
humane, the spiritual, and the natural, and what is decent and meet to be
used, for a discerning, which is the establishing of the promises of God,
according to the Scripture, that both Gods righteousness and man's
righteousness might be known, and that we likewise in an inclination of love,
might with consenting minds, pass forth toward the same.

6. But alas, what avails it any man, that one point him out a good way, and
an even and plain path, if he walk not in the same, nor have no liking
thereunto?

7. What avails it to knock, and in diverse manners to call, if there be no
ears to hear, nor any understanding to comprehend, or to understand the same,
nor any heart to embrace such things?

8. Or, how shall one be able, I pray you, to declare conveniently unto such a
man his error, and the entrance into the good life, that he might rightly
regard and understand wherein his salvation consists, whereby he might be
delivered from the bewitching of his heart, and so know what right is, to the
intent he might once comprehend understanding rightly.

9. If a man say unto him, the increase, and the blessing 1 Cor. 3
comes only of God, Prove. 2. Sap. 8. Eccl. 1.
he is the giver of wisdom, and no man nor Letter, then runeth he clean away
from the same illuminated man, which points him to the life of wisdom, and
utterly gives over the Scriptures, and the daily Services of the holy Word,
which direct him to the upright life, and are serviceable thereunto; and so
departs from the wisdom, Jer. 7.11.13.
cleaving either to his vain imagination, or else to the world in her
foolishness and error.

10. If one say unto him, that he must suffer himself to be Romans 10 1 Cor. 3 2
Cor. 3.4.5. 1 Pet. 4. 2 Pet. 1.
served to the peace of life, by some illuminated man, to the intent, that by
hearing he may grow up in the belief to the salvation, then observes he no
difference often times between the unlightened men, and the Elders of the holy
Understanding in the Family of Love; but gives such respect to the unlightned
men for their knowledge, that he suffers himself to be Gal. 1.6. Col. 2.
taken captive thereby, to a bondage under their knowledges, and so becomes a
servant unto men, and is by the unregenerated men bewitched with something that
is not of God, nor leads to the life of salvation, in such sort, that through
his liking unto that which he hears of them, and by which he is seduced and
beguiled, he betaketh him to the vain things of the flesh, and forsakes or
forgeteth the true ministration of the Word of the Lord, and likewise also the
good exercises, wherethrough he might have come, or been brought unto God, and
to Psalm. 36. Ier. 2.17.
the fountain of upright and perfect wisdom.

11. Unto which fountain of upright and perfect wisdom, the man should of right
be always subject, and long after it: and moreover, according to the requiring
of the good exercise that leads thereto, hope thereon; turn all his affection
and inclination of heart thereunto, love the Wsdome and Pro. 4.
information, and submit himself obediently to the Service of the gracious
Word, that so he might come to the Prove. 2.
life of the upright righteousness, and then take part therewith, and not with
any of those things that lead not to the salvation.

12. If one say unto him that he must be spiritually minded, then climeth he up
(with his wit) very high, after the spiritual understanding, and will likewise
take upon him to understand the spiritual things, by his own knowledge, and
will be so utterly spiritual, and so quite and clean change himself out of
flesh into Spirit; that thereby he forgets and forgoeth the humane Ordinance
and equity, and to show love to his Neighbor, and unto all men likewise: Out
of which bewitched opinion of spiritualnesse, many divisions and corruptions do
arise.

13. If a man say unto him, that he should have regard unto the equity of
nature, seeing God has Genesis 1.
created the natural things also for the man's good, then does he on the other
side, so wholly adict himself to the natural and visible things, that he
receives them to his own bondage, and slavish delectation, and tyeth his heart
thereunto, and so shuteth or keeps off the most holiest being, and the true
holy Spirit of Jesus Christ, out of his heart.

14. If the man read the Scripture, and do out of the testimonies of the same,
hear that the Law of Moses and the Prophets have their Office and Ministry
Mat. 11. Luke 26. Gal. 3.
till unto Christ, and that in like manner all is in Christ fulfilled, and that
Christ Romans 10
is the end or fulfilling of the La w, whereout the Gospel, or second
Testament of the Holy Ghost proceeds, according to the fore-shewing of the
Prophets, then he thinks he will in any wise take the best, and in his spirit
receive Christ, and the Gospel, and that which is spiritual and heavenly of
God, supposing thus (with his understanding and knowledge) to run clean beyond
the law of Moses and the Prophets of the Old Testament [to wit beyond the
obedience of the foregoing Service,] and so will rely upon Christ, and be a
child of the New Testament; for he reads, that that is the most best, and
imagines, that if he should regard the Law and the Prophets, and should obey
the foregoing Service and requiring thereof, he should then go back and finish
his beginning of righteousness Gal. 3.
in the flesh or outward; for the Scripture and the foregoing Service makes
mention, that the fulfilling of the Law and the Prophets, is Luke 18.24.
in Christ, and that the spiritual and heavenly goods, be inherited in the
Spirit: And thus will he be one of Christ's, of the Gospells, and of the New
Testaments, and apprehend in his spirit the spiritual heavenly goods,
e're-ever he be passed through the Law or the Old Testament, or has understood
the Prophets of the foregoing Service in their requiring, Gal. 3.4 Heb. 7
how they lead him to Christ, and how, or in what sort all is in Christ
fulfilled.

15. Herein lies the man wrapped and snarled, and makes nothing thereof, Esa.
59
but desolation and destruction, altogether troubling his understanding and
conscience, and in like manner more others also, by his ignorance.

16. O God how is the understanding of the noble generation of man destroyed,
being become less of godly worthiness, then the beasts of the field! howbeit,
thou have chosen and created thee the man to this end, Genesis 1 Sap. 2.
that he should carry and bear the Image of thy living Godhead, to the land
and praise of thy glory, to the intent he should be unto thee (O God) Lev. 26 2
Cor. 6. Apo. 21.
a Temple and Tabernacle for thy holy dwelling.

17. But alas, the man is quite contrary, and against this same, and has very
little mind or desire Ier. 5.8
to come to his God again.

18. And therefore the fall and straying of men from their God, is become so
deep and far, that there is Psa. 14 Romans 3
scarcely any understanding, will, or desire of right conversion to be found
among them.

19. O God, how are we blinded from the right knowledge of thy requiring, and
become resisters and despisers of thee!

20. We have Esa. 59 Ier. 2, 32
turned the back unto thee, as those that know thee not, and are become as
children that are brought up of strangers, and are so fond upon strangers, that
they utterly despise and detest the sight of their Parents, and forget their
Fathers house.

21. We are even so far, O God, become strange toward thee, that we have
almost no pleasure in thee; for thou art unto us as the very contemptiblest and
most despised'st thing: Esa. 53.
Yea, so little have we rightly thought of thee, that (in respect of thy right
worthiness) we have counted thee utterly of no value, and esteemed thee
nothing worth; nevertheless, thou bear 1 Pet. 2.
our sins, and have compassion in our affliction, and art our Physician,
healing us of our offenses, for thou make us whole of the deadly wounds of
our souls.

22. O God, Psa. 25.79.
impute not our sins unto us, because of our ignorance, Luke 23. Act. 7.
forgive them also their offenses, that know not what they do.

23. For seeing the children of men know not thee aright, nor submit themselves
obediently to the requiring of thy Word and Service of Love, therefore surely
they fall here, or err there; in such sort, that often times they keep no
measure nor rule at all.

24. But seeing that such things are now sufficiently known unto me, and that
my spirit out of Gods grace, perceives a godlier life, then is found with many
of the children of men, therefore the inclination to the righteousness
constrains me distinctly to show both that which is commendable, and that
also which is utterly discommendable before God and among men.

25. Therefore O ye children of men, note (I pray you) your ignorance, and
think once upon that which is right, and learn an upright understanding, and a
right knowledge of the wisdom, that tends to the love.

26. Learn of the Love in her Service Mat. 11.
lowliness, long-sufferance, meekness, soberness, chastnesse, and
righreousnesse, in faithfulness and truth; that same shall be wholesome to your
reigns, do good to your Pro. 3.
navell, refresh your bones, and rejoice your heart, and shall be unto you a
living fountain Ioh. 7.
that springs to the everlasting life, and as a fruitfnll tree Psalm. 1. Icr.
17 Ezekiel. 47 Apoc. 22
planted by the waters side, that bring forth his timely fruits, whose greens
or leaves do not wither or fade.

27. Take this same to heart, and be not as the wild beasts; be Psalm. 32.
not like horses and mules, that have no understanding of wisdom.

28. Inrage not your selves in any wise, as the mad furious world does; set no
horns on your heads; thrust not your selves out, Prove. 1 Sap. 2.
like the unwise or fools, neither let your part be among the greedy or
covetous.

29. Keep you from the society of them that are forward to do violence, and of
such as count it a small thing to shed men's blood.

30. Have not much disputation nor reasoning with them that (by their will) are
desirous to have the matter to go on their side, or that are partially minded;
but rather in all things, observe what is right and equal, and what Romans 14
serves to peace and love.

CHAP. XI.
1 An Exhortation to the Family of Love, to embrace the loves nature, and to
pray with confidence for the godly wisdom. 18. Many pray for wisdom, that will
not acknowledge themselves to be unwise. 20. The poor of spirit are blessed,
23. The self-wise will happily for a time, like of the Love and her Wisdom,
yet according to his own sense. 25. H N. fears least the Glass of
Righteousness shall be misunderstood, as other Sentences arc. 35. The Alarm
is stricken up, to prepare men to the battle. 43. The Lord indeed works all;
but not without us, nor without our obedience. 47. The well-willing are not to
be dismayed. 51. The Christian fight is not with cursing nor killing, but with
patience to subdue the sin within us. 56. God is pleased to save the world by a
foolish Preaching under the obedience of the Love.

OYe children of the Family of the Love of Jesu Christ, if so be ye love the
Love, then consider also the Loves nature; for the Love is clothed with
righteousness, which also rejoices not 1 Cor. 13
in the iniquity, for her joy is in the truth.

2. After such a fashion consider ye the Love, and not after a vain course,
according to the mind of the flesh, Esa. 40.
for all flesh waxes old and changes; but the Spirit that cleaves to the
Love, does neither wax old nor change, but it abides for ever.

3. Hereunto have regard, that your life may be in the preservation of the
righteous, and fear not, like the fools or ignorant.

4. For why should ye perish with the fools and ignorant? wherefore should ye
inherit the cursing Mat. 25.
with the goats?

5. Separate 2 Cor. 6 Apoc. 18.
from them, and behold Gods right hand; for from thence comes unto us the life
of salvation, and the light of the holy understanding.

6. Even there learn with the wise, the godly wisdom, that according to the
Spirit, ye may be not earthly, Col. 3.
but heavenly minded.

7. Suck also in like manner all gentleness out of the breasts of the Love, and
seek the peace of concord.

8. And when ye have gotten all this same, then play, sing, Psalm. 96.87.
and praise the Lord as his little lambs, and Psa. 79.95.100.
as the sheep of his pasture, and as little children, 1 Pet. 2.
in whom there is no guilefull heart hidden, and so get you a naked lovely
heart, such as uncoveredly grows up in the Love, and 1 These. 3 2 These. 1.
increases therein more and more; and increase ye likewise in wisdom, and in
holy understanding.

9. If now ye be hereunto well minded, then shall your portion be with the
Kings and Priests, or with the Elders of the holy Understanding, and your
fellowship with such Senetors, as do further the Righteousness and your
Service of the Word, with the peacemakers, that do earnesty seek the unity in
the Love.

10. And thus shall then the slandering lips, Tit 2. 1 Pet. 2.3.
which defame you with all evil, by your good conversation with the wise, in
the wisdom, and with the just or virtuous, in all righteousness and integrity,
be put to silence.

11. Therefore be now (through the love and her service) wholly Romans 12. Ephesians. 4.
renewed, and purified in the spirit of your mind, pass now through the river
of the love, even to the rest of life, the holy land of promise, that the
ungodly bear no dominion over you.

12. Be altogether with one consent minded hereunto, and let the love have the
pre-eminence and dominion with you all, that the little ones may be protected,
and the simple defended.

13. Therefore, O ye lovers of the truth, seek unity, and labor for it, and
make a departure out of all heathenish being, which is after the course of the
worlds foolishness.

14. Do away the foreskin Deuteronomy. 10 Ier. 4
of your uncircumcised hearts: lay away from you (according to the former
conversation) the bewitching of the imagination, which glimmereth unto you
before the eyes of your spirit, and glittereth before your understanding, as if
it were some excellent thing.

15. Renew your understanding in the Service of the holy and gracious Word,
under the obedience of the Love, and so in the spirit of your mind betake you 1
Cor. 14
to the Love, and and as deer children be subject thereunto, whereby you may in
the love obtain eyes of clearness.

16. If notwithstanding ye be Iam. 1.
unwise, Apoc. 3.
blind, and Mat. 5
poor of spirit, yet grieve not your selves for all that; for then ye draw
near to the Kingdom of God.

17. If you desire godly wisdom, then Iam. 1
pray and believe, she shall be given you, so far forth as your prayer Romans 12.
is steadfast, and as ye pray to God, in a lowly heart, with such a prostrated
soul, as has a desire or pleasure to do, and to fulfill the Lords will.

18. Men may find many which pray unto God for wisdom, and for the right sight
of his Kingdom; but they will not acknowledge, nor Joh. 9. Apoc. 3.
understand, that they are unwise, poor, and blind, therefore they obtain
nothing.

19. For although that the wisdom stood even at their door, yet so well seen
are they, and so rich of spirit, through their own wisdom of the knowledge,
that the upright wisdom of God and the being of his Kingdom, must be feign to
tarry without.

20. Therefore right well speaks the mouth of the Wisdom, Blessed Mat. 5.
are the poor of spirit; for the Kingdom of heaven belongs unto them, or the
wisdom of God arises (as light) upon them, and not upon the rich, or upon the
great knowers.

21. For when we of our selves are become poor, blind, or unwise, or do forsake
that which is ours, and do come to contrition and meekness of heart, Psalm. 51.
Esa. 57.66
then will God dwell with us, and appear in such hearts, as also the Scripture
makes mention, and then are we also poor; but God is become rich in us, by
means of our vileness, or because we are poor in the knowledge: It is true.

22. These and other like things have I in many places distinctly set forth in
the Glass of Righteousness, and do here also set forth the same in this
Introduction to the holy Understanding; if any man regard it, let him consider
the inclination of mine understanding.

23. But what shall I say? I find the man much too self-wise Romans 1. 1 Cor. 1.
in his own conceit, and too void of understanding, in the mind of the love;
for commonly when the man hears of the love, and of the right understanding
of wisdom, he rejoices him in the hearing, and it seems as if it liked him
well, likewise for a time he commends it.

24. But in conclusion there is nothing among the greatest sort but
self-feeking, and very little do they understand the first Schoole-rule of the
Christian Doctrine of the service of love, for an entrance into the upright
life in Jesus Christ; but do understand every thing, which is held forth before
them out of Gods wisdom and love, according to their imagination, and
according to the mind of their liking. They seek thereout their own commodity,
2 Phil. 2.
and not the Lords; they run clean back from the mind of the love, and use all
subtilty to manitain their own opinion.

25. Whereout I observe, that the man (which is thus minded) conceives of the
wisdom and of the love utterly amiss. For which cause I likewise fear, least
the Glass of Righteousness (how plainly and rightly, evidently and clearly
soever it is set forth) shall not of many be discerned aright, nor yet be
conceived of, according to the truth.

26. If therefore they discern or conceive not aright of such apparent
sentences (as are so clearly and plainly uttered) that even every one (which
loves lowliness and righteousness) must needs approve the same, and
acknowledge that the man and the world is created thereunto) how should they
then be able rightly to understand or judge of all the mysteries of the
Kingdom of God?

27. For which causes sake (to the intent no man might have occasion to
estrange himself from the truth, unless it might be by his own revolting
heart) we have bidden or covertly set forth nothing, in the Glass of
Righteousness.

28. Notvvithstanding, if any thing be covered or hidden unto any, 2 Cor. 4.
it is hidden to the unbelievers, who have no desire nor love to the truth, nor
to the life which is of God, for such are darkened Romans 1.
in their understanding, through pleasure in their own mind, and through the
ignorance which is in them, Ephesians. 4.
and through the blindness of their hearts, do gather unto themselves, Romans 2.
a treasure of wickedness, to an horrible destruction; and so through their
own wisdom, do turn away and separate themselves, from the love, and from her
service.

29. But unto all lovers of equity, which have a desire and belief toward the
love, [to the intent that by her service, they might taste of 1 Pet. 2.
the uncorrupted milk, the Word of God, that Esa. 40. 2 Pet. 1.
lives for ever] we have out of the inclination of love, so openly and
clearly, according to the life painted out, and set forth the Glass of
Righteousness, that every one, who with an humble heart has regard thereunto,
and desires the understand of Righteousness, shall be well satisfied therein.

30. If also any man turn his heart unto God, and desire to do his will, the
same shall likewise well understand; that the restimonies of the upright life
in the love, (as it is set forth in the Glass of Righteousness) is the
upright ground of righteousness, that God from the beginning has required of
the man, which also in the restoring thereof shall continue for ever, to the
Salvation of the world, according to the promises, even as God has spoken the
same aforetimes, by the mouth of his holy Prophets, who have all Esa.
2.60.61.62. Jer. 31. Joel. 2.3. Zach. 2.8. Mich. 4. Soph. 3. Mal. 4.
witnessed and prophesied of that same upright life; for to come in the last
time, and in the same shall also all consciences be appeased.

31. For the end or fullness of the same, is the revealing or coming of the
Kingdom of God, Esa. 35.51.60.65. Apo. 21.22.
and the beholding of the joys and Salvation of the eternal, perfect and
uncorruptible being.

32. Oh that the man had any understanding in the godliness, and did perceive
whereunto God calls him, and did in like manner prepare his heart after the
meaning of the written sentences, and did let alone judging by the knowledge!

33. But no, the man is much too self-wise by his knowledge, and therefore he
is more inclined to judge of every thing after his knowledge, then to prepare
his heart to the good, under the obedience of the love.

34. Therefore it is very much to be lamented, that many among the children of
men, do oftentimes judge the sentences and writings (which have out of the
service of love, their ministration to the good life) according to their
Knowledge. For as soon as they read or hear the same, they suppose by and by
that they have rightly apprehended, and well understood them, not first minding
to enter in, to obtain, and to live in that which they bear witness of,
whereas yet the service of our writing tends hereunto, even that men's hearts
(as is there set forth) should be prepared to the same.

35. For men strike up no alarm, in the host, to the intent to make the people
unlusty to the battle, nor yet that they should but know the exercise of the
war, or judge of the Alarm-stroak, but that (with good courage) they should
prepare themselves to the battle or fight. Thereby every one (that has
courage to fight) does then make himself ready to encounter with his enemies,
and to root out his adversary, or to subdue him.

36. But (alas) I find it with many, otherwise in that alarm by which the man
is called to the spiritual Ephesians. 6.
fight, to the vanquishing of his enemies, which (inwardly in him) are killers
and murderers of his soul.

37. Therefore it is very true, that the children of this world are much Luke
16.
wiser in their dealing, as concerning the flesh, then the children of the
Kingdom are, in that which concerns the spirit.

38. What avails I pray you, an alarm made, if men prepare them not to the
battle? for many are persuaded, that this is no time of fighting, and that
there shall be no need thereof; supposing, because of their unbelief, that
nothing shall come of it; and lay their hands behind on the back, or put them
up in the bosom. Their heads are giddy, as if their hearts were utterly
unlusty, or dismayed to the fight.

39. If one should seek for men of war, where I pray you, should he find
them? Are they not for the most part gone back, Levit. 26. Jer. 48.
and become faint hearted as women?

40. If they do but once suffer harm, and be wounded; or forced by any evil
defamation, or assault of the wicked) to sustain any molestation or reproach,
then are they persuaded, that the cause is altogether naught, and so running
again after their case, they suffer themselves to be ruled by women, Esa. 3.
their enemy to reign over them; and in like manner make truth Esa. 28.
with death, and a league with hell, retain peace with the sin and accuser, and
become of one mind with the world, supposing that then all shall be well:
moreover they make an appointment or conclusion with themselves, that they will
no more trouble themselves with the doctrine of the Family of Love, nor yet
with the battle, thinking, Let them run that will.

41. For to resist the evil, to break and subdue the wicked heart and evil
thoughts, and to suffer much distress, contempt, and reproach, for the same
likes them not; they will none of that. Howbeit, we are always to fight
apainst the evil, and to keep good watch continually: we are always to think
night and day upon the virtue of the godly life, always to long, and to hunger
and thirst after it, alvvaies to speak and to treat thereof, with such as do so
labor thereafter; and yet then of many sorts of people (and letter-learned) to
be despised and reproached.

42. Because of this toil, and for the shame and reproaches cause, which
meets them (and because they love not the righteousness of the godly life,
with the heart) they let the matter pass, saying, out of unbelief, I cannot
further it, I hold me still or unoccupied about it: let the Lord work it, I
will commit it unto him. Supposing when they thus pass on according to their
imagination, or do live after the fashion of the world, and (with an Romans 2.
unrepenting heart toward God, do hold peace with the blasphemers and
strivers, against the truth of Christ and his love, that then God will make it
to be well with them.

43. Deceive not your selves ye dearly beloved, the saying is very right, Act.
16. Ephesians. 3. Gol. 1.
that the Lord works it, and that he will also cause it to go well with us,
Phila. 2.
and prepare us after his will and pleasure: howbeit not without us, nor yet
without the obedience of the requiring of the service of his holy and gracious
word, and of his love; and whilst that we turn us away in such a sort from
him, and from the Ministers of his word, and do refuse him; Luke 17
but it is done inwardly in us, under the obedience of the requiring of his
gracious word and service of love, so as we stand subject unto him with good
will) therein, and be of one mind with him, against the ungodly being, that God
may so in us magnify his holy name 2 Reg. 7.
and be called Ier. 10.
a God of Hosts, a Esa. 47.
God of Israel, or a God of such a one as bears dominion with God over his
enemies.

44. After this manner is God a Lord of his Army. He is only the Lord; but we
the instrument of his hands.

45. Out of such an understanding under the obedience of the Law of the Lord,
did the Kingly Prophet David, eftsoons apprehend a zealous stoutnesse, even as
in diverse manners we read in his Psalms, how valiantly and courageously he
sets himself on Gods part, against his enemies, as well in fighting with
good courage, as also sometimes in praying and making supplication, that God
might be his helper.

46. After the same manner ought it also to go with us inwardly in our hearts,
under the obedience of the love, 2 Cor. 3.
for no man can do any thing of himself, how stout, strong, or wise soever he
be, unless God be with him, who strengthens him, whom under the obedience of
the Word and his love, he finds to be of good will, and that prays unto him
for his help.

47. If then any man be weak, finding himself infirm yet to the battle, the
same is not Eccl. 2.
rejected nor despised, no nor any one that has been in error, so that they
do but trust in God, and be good of will, do abide in the faith, and so in
process of time do increase in strength, and be not unwilling in the word of
the Lord.

48. Therefore, Oye little and sorrowful hearts, Esa. 35.41.
be not dismayed, but be confident in hope, the Lord will not suffer you to be
Esa. 54.
put to shame: Therefore be of good courage.

49. Though that the battle come unto you, and that ye be despised by the
unbelievers of the gracious word, and by the blasphemers of the love of God,
and of the holy spirit of Jesus Christ, and that moreover, Mat. 5. 1 Pet. 2.3.
all evil be lyingly spoken of you, yet be not therefore dismayed.

50. For the God of Israel is Esa. 5.
our comfort, and he the same God will be our redeemer and our King, wherefore
have your refuge only on him, to the intent ye may not fear your adversary in
the fight. For truly this fight is godly and amiable.

51. Men curse nor swear not there, they do not there kill nor destroy any,
Ephesians. 6.
save only that opposite being against God, for it is no outward battle or war.

52. They use there no outward Esa. 2. Mic. 4.
swords or spears, they seek there to destroy no flesh of men, but it is a
fight of the cross and patience, Romans 6.
to the subduing of the sin.

53. This fight is also no disputation, bravvling, nor wrangling for the
knowledges sake of the Scriptures. It is likewise no contention with men,
howsoever the most part of factious men (which do every faction in particular
call themselves the right Christians) have even to this day so used it; and do
also yet still bravvle, 1 Cor. 3. Jam. 3.
contend, and strive one against another, (and that with a secret, hatred, and
envy) who should be best, wisest and holiest, and how to have right and equity,
every one in his conceiving, whereby they entangle themselves every way one
with another.

54. But such brawling and discord, do not I hold for any Christian-like fight,
seeing men do thereby forsake the love, therefore such a fight does nothing
further toward the life, nor toward the upright understanding of the divine
wisdom.

55. Moreover, all those which stand minded to such a kind of outward fight,
brawling, wrangling, and railing, have never rightly perceived nor understood
Ephesians. 7.
the inward fight. For inasmuch as they know not the virtue of the love, nor
that whereout she proceeds, therefore do they account the battle of the
righteous spirit (which through the cross, in the spirit of wel-vvilling
hearts, carries forth the fight against death, sin, devil, and hell) for an
ignorance and foolishness, because they do no more esteem of such a chosen
Salvation, as is brought forth after the manner of men, and which the man has
his glorying in, then of the righteous spirit of love and life, which God
himself brings forth, for Esa. 60.
a true light, and salvation of men, after his godly nature and manner: the
Esa. 42.48.
glorying whereof belongs only unto God, and to himself he also keeps it.

56. Wherefore seeing God has considered, that all man's wisdom is vain, and
that men by their wisdom know not Gods work (in his wisdom) nor his Salvation
through his Christ, 1 Cor. 1.
it has therefore pleased God through foolish preaching (under the obedience
of the love of Christ) to save the world [that is to say, all those that
believe in him] that he might catch the wise, Esa. 29. 1 Cor. 1. 3.
in their wisdom, the crafty in their subtilty and craftiness, and the
letter-learned in their knowledge of the Scripture, thereby making known unto
them, Psalm. 94. 1 Cor. 3.
how vain and void of understanding they are in the purpose of God; and how
that (by all wisdom and prudency, and by all their learnednesse in the letter)
they have not known any thing of Mat. 11. 1 Cor. 2.
Gods vvisdome at all, wherethrough the Almighty God is magnified, and by which
it is known, that his foolishness is much wiser, then all the wisdom of the
world, or prudence of man's wit.

57. Now whosoever believes the same, but on the contrary party is yet so
selfvvise, that he gives no ear at all, nor is inclined to the love, or to our
communion through the loves service (wherein Gods purpose is known or
understood) the same man surely shall not understand the mind of God, nor yet
his secret, Kom. 8. 1 Cor. 2.
for it is unpossible to understand the vvisdome of God, without obeying of
the love.

CHAP. XII.
1. It is meet, that every one submit himself to the appeared grace. 2. The new
day. 3. Patience toward the unbelievers. 4. Wherein the upright understanding
is to be found. 5 The worldly wise find it not, but will rest upon their own
wisdom. 13. An exhortation to cleave to the truth, without bondage to outward
things 15. What the perfect righteousness is. 19. And how we ought to cleave
thereunto, and to esteemof the outward things, so far as they are profitable,
and no further. 21. And that not for their own sakes, but for the Ordinances
sake. 22. How to behave our selves toward all men, wives, children servants.
26. He exhorts to give our minds to a lovely behavior toward all. 32. Not
to regard any thing that may cause dissension, but to set our chief respect
upon the inward, and not upon the outward, 43. The upright life is the same
that the Fathers lived in. 45. Whereunto also the Gentiles were called by the
Gospel. 46. He requires all people to take heed to their calling. 50. And to
turn away from the self-minded thoughts that do tempt and entice us. 51. Our
union with God in the spirit, is the stone that is disallowed of men, 55. The
Glass of Righteousness serves to try our selves by. 56. The man is diversely
perverted. How H. N. passed forth under the love in his humane nature, and how
God received him unto grace. 61. His little regard to the outward. 63. Yet not
despising it, because it is profitable to train up the man in his youngnesse.
65. Men ought to esteem the greatest, more then the least, and to put
difference in the Age of the Disciples. 66. That teacher, which is not entered,
nor has not accomplished the Righteousness in the love, is both himself, and
also his hearers far from the truth. 67. The Priesthood out of Levi is good in
his right use; but the Prieshood of Messiah is yet more excellent. 71. Why he
points not to the outward.

FOrasmuch then as (through the 1 Cor. 8.
revealing of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the resurrection of the
dead) there is out of grace, such an holy office or service of the love, to a
renewing of the world, now in the last time come unto us, and (according to
the secret counsel and will of God) committed unto us, in upright
righteousness and holiness to be ministered, therefore it were very meet,
that every one which is avvakened thereby, should submit himself thereunto,
and give ear unto us in the same service, to the obeying of the love in the
spirit, that every man's eves might be made bright, and become clearer and
clearer, to Act. 7.
behold with a clear sight of their eyes, Gods Kingdom of heaven, the which
now manifests it self unto us, and comes unto us under the obedience of the
love; and likewise with the same do appear and come unto us, livingly and
gloriously all Gods 1 Gor. 15.
Saints, which in times past died, and fell asleep in God.

2. Behold this manifestation or appearing of Gods Kingdom of heaven, Mat.
24.25.
and of the coming of Christ, together with all his Saints, Esa. 65. 2 Pet. 3.
is the new day of life, and the Dan. 12. 4 Esd. 7. 1 Cor. 15. 1 These. 4.
Resurrection of the dead, according to the Scriptures; which manifestation of
the Kingdom of God, and of the glorious coming of Christ, with his Saints, and
of the new day, we now under the obedience of the love, publish abroad in
all the world (for a Gospel Mat. 24.
of the Kingdom) according to the promises.

3. But if any man hears not, nor believes the same, neither is vvakened out
of the Esa. 29.
sleep of his ignorance, or will not hear this voice of the love, him do we
let alone therein, still bearing a favorable good will toward him, and do
cleave fast to the love, bear patience, with his ignorance and blindness, and
do consider, that all of us have heretofore been unvvise, 2 Pet. 2.
and have been blinded from this glorious light of life, yea we do yet
doubtless often find in our selves the lack of understanding, until the light
of life do manifest it self perfectly in us.

4. Howbeit, the right understanding consists not in many words 1 Cor. 2.
or sayings, nor in high or deep knowledge, as is aforesaid: but it is found in
long-suffering, and in such a heart as fears the true God, under the
obedience of the love, where men use temperance, 2 Pet. 1
discretion and kind-heartednesse, and where men love righteousness and
information of equity.

5. But where is it now, where may one seek and find it? who does earnestly
desire lust, or long for it? who applies his heart wholly thereunto?

6. Truly not the children of this world, which are the lovers of error, nor
yet the self-wise of the vain-conceited hearts, neither the lovers of their own
companies of Religion: For all these think not upon the service of the love;
neither will admit any thing, but what they have chosen: they blaspheme also
every thing, besides their own opinion, and have no regard to the Statutes and
Exodus 20. Deu. 4.5.6.
Ordinances of the most highest, nor to the Mat. 5.6.7.11.16.19.22.
doctrine of Jesus Christ, neither to the requiring of his Catholic Church.

7. And therefore will the man to maintain his own cause, be always above the
understanding of the love, and so be the loves Master: For there are few found
that do with whole heart submit themselves under the Love, to the intent they
might obtain (through concord and Joh. 17 Ephesians. 4. Phil. 1.
equality in the Love) one like mind to the good, to the one manner of
subduing or mortifying of the evil hearts, minds, and thoughts.

8. For that, or him that directs thereunto, they can by no means abide, nor
yet be minded to the lovely life of upright Righteousness, which I H. N. out
of entire love do bear witness of, because with many the same is not
(according to his upright being) hearkened unto, nor rightly understood; for
every one (with his conceited imagination, and unclean heart) will fain be
himself he, whom men ought to esteem for wise: in such sort, that many of them
do arrogantly ascribe understanding to themselves, as if they knew already all
that they should know, and were wholly such as in Jesus Christ they ought to be.

9. Moreover many of them are so rich Apo. 3.
and wise, as though they needed no more; and many persuade themselves that
they are such as do live free, and that they are every whit the same that they
should be, that also the Service of the love concerns them not, and that they
are past it all.

10. Lo, such things think the fools and unwise (those unfruitful Jude 1.
trees) that love their self-wisdom, and their own ease in the flesh, and are
quite dead therein; yea, though he be an Infidel or Heathen, yet scarcely
thinks he that he has any wrong understanding for all that; what might then
one that is wise think, or he that persuades himself that he is holy?

11. Now because many of them do esteem their own matter for such a fairness
1 Cor. 1.
or wisdom, therefore besides their own wisdom, they will in no wise hear any
Acts 7.
other understanding, nor esteem it for wisdom; for every thing is evil or
unclean in their eyes, which is without their wisdom; yet must they needs
acknowledge, that the inside of their vessel, Mat. 23.
is not cleansed from the filthiness, neither do they believe to be cleansed
through Jesus Christ, or to be justified from the sin under the Obedience of
the Love.

12. What helps it then, or whereto is it profitable, that one should show
any precious ornament or jewel of godly fairness unto such, if in their
hearts, it were against them, or that they loved not the same? Even so is it
also with the testimony of the Word in the Love, when there is no love joined
thereunto, for to love that which is heard or witnessed.

13. Therefore let us in all things [and before all] grow like minded to
concord Romans 12. 1 Pet. 3.
in the Love, 1 Pet. 5.
humble our hearts to the living God, and so love the virtue and the
godliness, and cleave to no ungodly being, or unorderlinesse of this world;
but let us (with impartial minds) hearken to the truth (for an instruction to
the wisdom) with long suffering, and cleave to the virtue of the good life,
with him that bears witness only thereunto, and takes part with no flesh.

14. Wherefore let no man bind his heart unto any outward thing which he is
served with to the righteousness of life, much less to the worldly things, or
to any thing which the desires of the flesh are inclined unto, that he be not
disappointed of the entrance to the life, which thing would be a great grief
unto me.

15. For this cause (that no man should err, but perceive whereunto our
calling tends) hear and understand what the chief sum of the perfect
Righteousness is.

16. It is an humble heart, Psa. 51.
that departs from all earthly and corruptible things, and with a lowly and
meek spirit is incorporated with God in pure Love, according to the Spirit,
living in the form of Jesus Christ 1 Timothy 1
in an unspotted conscience, and to have an inclined mind or desire to do the
Lords will, and to fulfill all righteousness.

17. Toward this let us pass on (with a good hope) in a sure faith and
confidence, let every one turn him Esa. 55. Jer. 18.25 35 Ezekiel. 18. Jon. 3.
from the ways of his error, and withdraw his heart from the bands of
selfnesse, to the intent (in an upright being) to serve These. 1 Heb. 9.
the living God only, and turn away his senses and thoughts from that which
hangs on, to a bondage of the heart, [that is to say, from all that is
created outward or vain, how holy, how good, how fair, or how amiable a grace
soever (according to the outward appearance) it may show forth unto the man:]
to the end, that no man be taken, or remain captive in any bewitching (to a
thraledome of his mind) with that wherewith the Heathen, and the unwise, or
uncircumcised of heart, are still bewitched, tied and bound, not only with the
outward show of holiness, or wisdom, but also with the delight of the outward
created things Romans 2
in this world, wherein with their hearts they become vain.

18. Therefore let us reckon all these things for such as they are, and repute
some of them (in that whereunto they are commodious) for good in their degree
and quality, to the end our heart may stand free in the everlasting uncreated
Godhead, according to the Spirit; that is, in the God of Israel, the Creator of
all good things: and moreover, let us suffer our hearts to be prepared
thereunto in the obeying of the requiring of the Service of Love.

19. That is truly the everlasting life, which in times past was preached unto
the world, and is now in the last time (by Gods grace) come unto us, under the
obedience of the Love, that our fellowship 1 John 1
should be with God the Father, and with his Son the Lord Jesus Christ, and
that our joy in the Love might be perfect.

20. On this only and true God settle your hearts, to a union with him, and
with his Christ, and love him Deuteronomy. 6.
from your whole souls, minds, and thoughts, and so then love all created
things in their degree, or as they are profitable.

21. Yet not for their own sakes, but for the Ordinances sake that God has
created them unto, and whereunto he has appointed them, as good; then shall
God be loved, honored, and served by you above your selves, and above all
visible things, and Exodus 20 Deuteronomy. 4.
you shall also neither have nor serve any Idols which are besides him.

22. In such a degree love ye also all men Lev. 19. Mat. 22. Mar. 12. Romans 13.
as your selves, or as your fellow-brethren, so shall there be no dissension
nor division found among you: and then (in the same sort) Ephesians. 5.
love your wives, which are minded with you in one heart and spirit to God
ward, as fellow members of your bodies, or else should ye be no married folks.

23. To the same good being of concord in the Love, Eccl. 7.30
love ye likewise your children that they may be brought up in righteousness
after the Law of the Lord, to serve the living God.

24. If any man has servants, whether menservants, or maidservants, Eccl.
7.33. Ephesians. 6. Col. 3.
let him not overcharge them with slavery, but use moderation; give them also
now and then time to rest and to recreate their hearts in the things that God
requires.

25. But beware of the stout servants, Eccl. 33.
such as in their leisure time seek nothing but unseemlinesse, pride, disorder
and lightness; for, for such, whether they be sons or daughters,
menservants or maidservants (if so be they exercise nor desire no
righteousness) labor serves much better then leisure; yet with discretion,
according to time and measure, always be holding the good before them upon
hope of amendment.

26. Hereunto let us be minded, and give over our hearts and minds, to live
therein, and always exercise love Romans 12 1 These. 3. 1 Pet. 1.3.
one toward another, and so Heb. 10. James 5.
with patience, and long-suffering, wait Luke 2.
for the consolation of Israel, and for the health of the house of Jacob, whom
God (in his time) shall call together from all the ends Mat. 24.
or coasts of the earth, where now they are dispersed.

27. Wherefore increase ye in the good, Ephesians. 4. Col. 1. 1 Pet. 1.
and grow up in the Lord, and for the communion of the Loves sake, and that we
with consent of heart, may be joined to the same, let us incline our hearts to
each other, to the end we may all become one, such as love righteousness, and
forsake dissension, and which despise nor reject none, neither Jew, Mahomet,
Heathen, nor any Sect or Faction, but rather draw all that will follow to our
communion under the obedience of the Love, that the Service of the Love may
become prosperous, and (in all upright righteousness) obtain the pre-eminence.

28. Whosoever then joyneth himself to our communion of the Love, yields
himself to the love, and to the requiring of her Service obediently, loves
the righteousness, Psalm. 15.24. Esa. 33. John 9. Acts 10.
and has no guile in his heart, the same is acceptable to God, and all such
shall be unied in the Love, and love one manner of righteousness, according to
the mentioning of the Glass of Righteousness.

29. Hereunto let every one be humbly minded, and so incline his fatherly heart
Mal. 4. Luke 1
to the children, to unity in the Love.

30. Let the children Ephesians. 6. Col. 3.
bow themselves (in holiness) to the humility, and so (for the unities sake in
the Love) turn their hearts to the Fathers.

31. The like also let every one do toward his brother, and one man toward
another, and that all under the obedience of the Love.

32. Do away from you Esa. 59.
the middle walls, and have love all that love righteousness, proceed on after
it, with one accord, have no regard to the foolishness of the Heathen, nor to
any such dealings or witnessings, as cause Sects, dissension or renting, nor
yet to their teachings and unprofitable devices, nor to the witching of their
God-services, nor to the subtle knowledge of their wisdom: For their ways
Jer. 5.
are snares, and their wisdom Esa. 19.42.58.
nets; who so has no regard to the Law of the Lord, nor to Abraham's God, he
shall be bewitched, tied, or taken, and be led away from the requiring of the
service of love by them.

33. But all ye which turn you to the living God, which made heaven and earth,
fear not the Gods of the Heathen, neither regard the nets of the wisdom of the
uncircumcised, seeing they reject the Lords Word and his Ordinances.

34. For the nets of the Heathen are like Spiders webs, which do soon rent and
fall asunder; but the Law or Ordinance of the Lord is steadfast, and abides
everlastingly.

35. Therefore let the Law of the Lord, and his Ordinances, be always for a
teaching unto you, and fear the God of Israel, and let his love be still your
rejoicing.

36. Mark the ground of the Love, ye deerly beloved, and let your ears of the
Spirit, that you may hear, your eyes of the heart, that you may see, and your
understanding, that you may understand, be opened or unlocked, not only to the
outward, earthly and corruptible, but chiefly to that which is inward,
spiritual and eternal.

37. For behold, I do verily witness this same distinctly enough unto you, to
the intent we might all have regard to the upright life inwardly in our hearts,
Romans 8.
become spiritually minded, and through the grace of the bountiful Godhead,
serve in the upright life, the living God only.

38. Let every one Gal. 6.
take heed to his time; for if we be already separated with our heart from
whoring with stocks and stones, (as from such Idolatries) doubtless it is then
so much the more expedient (inasmuch as such grace is extended on us) that we
observe our hearts and cogitations, and cleanse them from all outward
unprofitable things, to be made free and unbound therefrom, to the intent our
hearts abide not bound unto any manner elementish, created or worldly matter,
nor yet unto any kind of appearance of Col. 2.
spiritual or holy things, whereby (in case our hearts stood bound therein) we
may be lead a whoring, and our hearts be bewitched therewith.

39. Therefore let us not regard, nor give respect unto, or esteem any outward
things higher then for elementish, or so much as they are in their degree, or
as they are profitable in their Service: neither let us go a whoring with them,
to the intent our eyes of the Spirit may still have respect to the only God and
his upright life, for to cleave with true understanding, unto the same.

40. For whatsoever is outward, whether it be man or beast, and whatsoever is
to be seen, heard or felt, how fair, good, holy, or wise soever it seems to
be, must certainly every whit (so far forth as it stands in his right degree)
1 Cor. 15 Ephesians. 1. Heb. 2.
be subdued under the only God and his love.

41. This same verily should the man once consider and understand, to the
intent he might once be delivered and rid of his foolish witchery, and of
dissension, and of whoring with this or that.

42. Therefore let no man be tied or bound to the lusts of whoredom with any
outward thing, but give all his respect to that God, 1 Cor. 15
which is all in all, and inwardly in his mind let him take heed to the upright
life, which is godly, holy, and good, that he may bear the Image or like being
of his God; 1 Cor. 15
for as we have borne the image of the earthly, so shall we also in like
manner, bear the image of the heavenly, to the laud and praise of the glory of
God.

43. Lo, thereunto is my testimony, namely, that the upright life is the life
of the upright Fathers, which served and worshipped the invisible, great, Deuteronomy.
4.5.6. etc.
and almighty God only, (who still was God in Israel, and in Israel also
wrought wonderfully) who is Exodus 3. Mat. 22.
che God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.

44. Now in that these Tribes of Israel knew the God of heaven as a true God,
and lived and cleave unto him, therefore did they stand free and untied from
all the God-services of the Heathenish Sorceries, and were unbound from all
whorings with outward things.

45. To obtain this grace in God, that is the Gospel, which is through Christ
published to the Heathen, to the intent they should be released from their
foolish bewitched God-services, and from all their lusts of whoredom, whereby
they may with Israel, be incorporated into the stock of Abraham, and may
altogether as one manner of people, serve the only living God in one manner,
Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances, even as the second Book of the Glass of
Righteousness makes mention.

46. Therefore, O all ye people, Nations, and Tribes, if ye will not consider
whereto ye are called of the God of heaven, through the seed of Abraham,
according to the promises, neither do regard your heavenly calling aright in
her degree, nor give your selves over thereunto, nor fear Abraham's God, nor
love his Laws and Ordinances, but do build upon another foundation, Ephesians. 2
then surely shall ye be banished from God, and from the Citizenship of Israel,
and be constrained to serve vain things, Deuteronomy. 4.
and to keep such Ordinances as you do not know.

47. That same shall entangle your hearts, bewitch your understanding, and make
you bond-servants, which indeed we are, so long as we willingly remain Romans 6
subject to the sin, and to the Sorcery of the heathen.

48. Therefore lake heed to your time, and seek God, Esa. 55.
while he is near, and may be found, and while ye have yet space to turn you
unto him.

49. Let the ungodly Ezekiel. 18
forsake his ungodly being, and so come to the life through the death of the
Cross of Jesus Christ, then shall he live and die no more.

50. Let us apply our minds to the same, and turn our hearts away from all
sensuality of the flesh, not only from that which outwardly we look upon; but
chiefly from the self-minded thoughts which do arise Sap. 2. Mat. 15.
out of our selves, and do tempt or entice us thereunto, for to hold our
hearts in bondage to the vain corruptiblenesse, which (through the works of
unbelief) leads away from the living God, whereby we may be deprived of the
fellowship with God in the Spirit; for the unity and Ephesians. 2.
peace with God the Father in the Spirit (for to live one with another in all
Love) is the glorious liberty of the children of God, whereunto we are called
by Jesus Christ.

51. Lo, this is the stone Psa. 118 1 Pet. 2.
which was not allowed of the workmen, yet is there Acts 4.
salvation in none other; which stone is clean against all sense of the flesh,
and against all them that are minded only upon the outward: therefore of those
builders, [which will themselves act, or set up the salvation] he is rejected,
Esa. 8.28 Mat. 21.
and is unto them a stone of stumbling and offense: Psalm. 118 Mat. 21.
and this is a wonderful work in our eyes.

52. Behold herein we have likewise all sinned, and trespassed.

53. Therefore it stands us now upon, to regard well from the heart the mind of
the truth, and with humble hearts to pray unto the Lord, that he will not
punish us for our misdeeds of ignorance, Psa. 25 79. Dan. 9.
but will think upon us according to his mercy, and guide our hearts after his
will, that we might walk in his Ordinances, and be named after his Name, as
our God and Savior, who through the Service of his love makes our errors
known unto us, and releaseth or makes us free from all perverse or covered
nature of sin, from all arrogance and haughtiness of the revolters, and from
all falsehood, dissension and deceit, which at this time do every where bear
sway, and among many, have even hitherto had the pre-eminence.

54. O God, Dan. 9
let us in this dangerous time find grace in thine eyes, and incline thou our
hearts toward thee, and toward thy righteousness: bring our spirit out of
this desolation, and cleanse our hearts, minds, and thoughts from all
dissension, Psa. 51
and create in us an upright mind, that no evil come upon us.

55. Of which upright mind, and upright course of life of all upright hearts, I
have set forth a clear instruction in the tree of life, the fourth book of the
Glass of Righteousness, which Glass of Righteousness, with other more like
testimonies, I have heretofore set forth, to the intent that every one might
look into himself and know, whether he were of the upright communalty of the
righteous, and lived and walked in the upright ways of the just, and so
served the living God only, or not: For I wist not how to call any by name, for
to show outwardly, what sort I might judge for the rightfullest.

56. For I found the man Jer. 9
so altogether deceivable, so bewitched of understanding, so given to cover or
dissemble his lies, so lordly minded because of his understanding, so double of
heart, so earnestly bent to destroying and oppressing, against those that were
not like minded with his hearts conceiving, so Ier. 18.25.29.35.
declining from him, that according to the truth, pointed him to the way of
life, so self-seeking and partial for himself, so resolute in his opinion, so
reproachful and malicious with accusation at him, that desired to bring him
into the right way of the holy Fathers, so vvel-conceited and affected toward
his own phansies and errors, so hipocriticall in the virtue, so divided from
the righteousness, so separated from conscience, so little seeking that which
is the Lords only, so unstable in fidelity, so slothful and slow to turn him
to God, Pro. 6.24.
so without regard to the upright ways, so little reckning of the straying
from his God, so affectioned to the earthly visible things, and so
self-captived of heart, that I was altogether suspicious, jealous, and
doubtful of the man.

57. And not only of another, but also even of mine own humane nature, insomuch
that I held it straight unto all virtues and righteous dealings, for to do the
Lords will; in all my proceedings, for in that sort did I pass forth under the
obedience of the love with my humane nature, to the intent to obtain the
virtuous 1 Cor. 13.
disposition of the love, and to be incorporated to the same, with soul and
body, and with all the senses and thoughts of my humane nature, and
endeavoring me in this same, with all diligence the Lord received me into the
grace of his love, and into him and his love incorporated my mind, together
with my senses and thoughts, and so gave me inheritance with Christ and his
Saints, in his heavenly riches, Romans 16. Ephesians. 1.2.3. Col. 1.
and revealed his last will unto me.

58. But not according to any conceiving of the flesh, or after the
outwardnesse, namely, in any outward appearance, that likes the man, and the
sight of his fleshly eyes, or whereunto the man does sometimes set his heart
and understanding, as though he could satisfy God thereby, or as if a man with
his outward humanity, and with a show after the outward appearance, might be
incorporated into the God of heaven, and into his heavenly goods, or could live
in the Godhead according to the flesh.

59. O no, ye dearly beloved, Gods working in renewing of the man through Jesus
Christ, is not after the pleasing of men, nor according to any affection of the
flesh; nor yet such as any man by his fleshly conceiving or learned
understanding, should be able after the outward, to judge of the same working
of God in the spirit, or of him which is renewed in God.

60. For Gods working, and the renewing of the man, Romans 12. Ephesians. 4.
is brought to pass inwardly in the spirit, and in the inward senses and
thoughts, through the power of his holy spirit of love, wherethrough men are
abundantly filled with love toward the living God, and with love toward all
men.

61. My respect also (in my zeal to the virtuous nature of the love) was least
upon the outward show after the flesh, but it was most upon an upright heart
and mind, such as consists in a good willing obedience, and tieth or binds
it self to no elementish things, whether they be earthly riches, or worldly
possessions, because I would in spirit and mind, serve and please the living
God only, and likewise thereby love every man as my self.

62. And for this upright beings sake (because in all love, the same should
have and keep an 1 Cor. 4. Gal. 4.
essential form in me) I did (as is aforesaid) examine the senses and
cogitations of my human nature, whether by them, any other thing were loved or
desired besides, or whether they tied themselves unto any thing else. To the
intent I might for the loves sake of God and Christ, Mat. 16. Luke 9.14.
renounce, hate, and forsake it every whit, and crucify, Romans 6. Gal. 5. Col.
3.
and kill my humane senses and thoughts with their lusts and desires, so far
forth as they were not incorporated or subject to the good being of God, or to
his virtuous nature of the love, whereby I might live through the power of God,
and by the gifts of his grace, and through the co-incorporating of the upright
being of Jesu Christ, Luke 1. Ephesians. 4.
in all upright righteousness and holiness: that is, in the upright life and
mind of the living Godhead.

63. Now although I have here showed, that my respect was less upon the
outward obedience, then upon the inward godly obedience, and that I thus
labored for such an upright heart and mind, as was required by the outward
obedience, because I would Deuteronomy. 6.10.
serve the living God in his upright righteousness, yet did I not therefore
despise the outward obedience, nor the good Ordinances in their right use,
neither is it my mind or will, that men should not observe nor obey the right
use of the Churches services, or the Priests or Elders Ordinances, which are
exercised for a good outward discipline and decency, and to a bringing in of
the said upright righteousness! O yes, my meaning and desire is, that men
should observe Romans 14.
and obey them (as is said) in their right use, and likewise that the Elders
and Ministers of the word in the family of love, should by them require the
true righteousness of the upright inward being and mind which God esteems.

64. For so in that behalf, men are greatly to esteem the outward Ordinances,
and the obedience to the same, yet with difference in the understanding, as
according to their worth, and in respect of them for whom they are necessary,
namely, in such consideration, as the Ordinances and Ceremonies of the Law of
the Lord Romans 10. Gal. 3.4. Heb. 7.
and of the belief of Jesu Christ, have their ministration for, that is, by
them to train the man up, and so to support him in the youngnesse of his
understanding, until he be released from all self-mindednesse, ignorance, and
own wisdom or vain imagination, and the sight of the upright life, 2 Pet. 1.
come unto him in the spirit, and so of himself he love all that (with whole
heart and mind) which is right and just, and have a desire both before God Romans
14.
and amongst men, to live and to walk in all upright righteousness, and and to
fulfill the requiring of the gracious word of the Lord, and his service of
love: Lo, to show such obedience, is the best obedience, inasmuch as the
obeyers thereof, do inwardly before God, and outwardly amongst men, live by the
faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, Luke 1.
in the upright righteousness and holiness, and so not of compulsion but of
faith, are obedient unto all inward righteousness, and outward Ordinances of
the holy word and service of love, Mat. 22.23. 1 Timothy 1.
and that is the principal obedience, whereto men are to give the greatest
respect; for it is the principallest, which the outward services or ceremonies
have their ministration unto: It is true.

65. Wherefore men ought even before all things, to give the worthiest praise
and greatest honor to the greatest or best, and not to respect or esteem the
smallest, for the principallest: Likewise to observe a difference, between the
prudent, good-willing, and stable ones, and those that are without
understanding, evil willers, and revolters that they minister not the services
and Ordinances confusedly or mixtly out of the knowledge, nor disorderly
require the obeying of the same, as if any man should urge them without
difference, and should not distinguish between the state of the age of such
Disciples as had obediently accomplished the requiring of the services, and
attained unto the appointed Gal. 4.
time of the father and of the age of Christ, or were obediently grown up unto
the same, and the state of those Disciples that had not yet accomplished the
requiring of the services, nor attained unto the appointed time of the age of
Christ, but should give like honor unto, and esteem of equal value, eithers
age and obedience.

66. When a man then ministers an office of teaching, and yet is not entered
into the Disciples beginning of the Christian life, among the Elders in the
family of the Love, neither has obediently accomplished the righteousness,
which is wont to be required of the Disciples from their first entrance into
the Christian life, until the age of the elder Christ, and even for that cause
cannot distinguish the same passage in his right Ordination; surely the same
man, and likewise the Congregation that hears him, does stray very far from
the truth, and also from the right use of the Doctrine and Ordinances of the
ancient Fathers, tending to the Christian life, and from the upright being of
the love of Jesu Christ, and of his holy spirit, and do become both together
one with another, [namely, the teacher and the Congregation which he teacheth]
alike ignorant and unexpert in that which is of value before God, and likewise
in that which is most needfullest to be used amongst men, to their preserving
in the godliness.

67. For mark, the Exo. 28.29. Levit. 1.2.3.4.5.6. etc.
Priesthood out of Levi, which is ministered after the manner of Aaron is
upright and good in his right use, and is also in his service, (with the Law
and Ordinances of the Lord, and with the letter, and through the Letter) in the
Family of the Lord, very profitable and necessary, while the Gal. 4.
heir is yet a child, and has not attained or reached unto the appointed time
of his Father or Elder.

68. But the Priesthood out of Messiah called Jesus, who is unto his Believers
Psalm. 110. Heb. 3.9.10.
an High Priest at the right hand of the Almighty in the heavenly being, and a
Ioh. 1.14.
true light, in the light of the ministration of his truth, is much more
worthily to be esteemed, then the Priesthood out of Levi, for the same
High Priest does in his office, bring unto the Romans 3. Gal. 2.3.4.
believers in his name, [namely those that are obediently grown up under their
tutors and Governors until the appointed time of their age] the upright
righteousness, and the upright being of his love, and accomplisheth with them
(in their spirit and mind) all that which (with the Letter, and with the Law
or Ordinance, in the foregoing Priesthood) is taught and required in the
ministration of the Elders, whereby the Lord Jesus Christ (called Messiah) is
unto his believers and good willing obeyers in their spirit and mind, an
everlasting Joh. 14.
life, and a Heb. 8.9.
minister of the spiritual and heavenly goods, whose service also with them is
done in the 2 Cor. 3.
spirit, and by the spirit, and so is he unto them, an heavenly Heb. 5.6.7.
Ephesians. 1.2.
High Priest for evermore, not of the earth, nor of flesh and blood, but a son
of the most high God, in the heavenly powers of the invisible being, and is now
in the last time appeared and come unto us the chosen of God (in his glory and
triumph) from the right hand of God his Father: and so has with us (with the
spiritual and heavenly goods) his ministration Heb. 7.8.9.10.
in the most holy of his Tabernacle, under the obedience of the love, afthe
manner of Melchisedech, to the erecting of the perfection.

69. Thus (as is said) Jesus Christ has his ministration even from the
beinning, until the perfection through his Saints and Elect, and so is in his
teaching to his Heb. 9.
people a Salvation from their sins, and a blessing and reviving 1 Cor. 15.
Ephesians. 2. Col. 1.2.
from the death, and has then in that manner with them [namely, with the
living, his Believers] his ministration with the spiritual and heavenly goods:
And so in the same ministration he is manifested by his believers, that he is
he right Messiah and King of the Jews, and the true Psalm. 110. Heb. 7.
high Priest for ever, after the manner of Melchizedeck, who in his Priesthood,
is greater and more excellent then the man, because he abides for ever.

70. Behold this same high Priest, in the ministration of the spiritual and
heavenly goods, and this noble King of Israel and Juda, which rules in
righteousness, and of God is chosen to such an excellent glory, before the
foundation of the world was laid, is by inheritance sealed, to possess the 2
Reg. 7. Esa. 9.32. Ier. 23.33. Dan. 7. Mic. 4. Luke 1.
seat of David his Father, to the intent there may be no end of the peace upon
the same, from this time forth for evermore, and that so he may rule and reign
(as an everlasting peaceable King) over the house of Jacob, according to the
promises.

71. For in this sort, and to the finishing thereof, is he revealed unto men,
and published Ioh. 1. 1 Timothy 3. 1 John 2.
to the world for a Savior, because all people should believe in him, by him
inherit the everlasting life, and so confess him, and that sameis the true
righteousness which is availeable before God, and well pleasing unto those men
which are of a good will.

72. Now inasmuch as the rich bountiful God has (out of his grace) granted me
to perceive, that we are all called and loved to the same glory of God, and to
the upright being of the love of his Christ, because we should inherit with all
what is of God and Christ, the everlasting life, and for that the same is the
Ephesians. 1.5. Col. 1.
principal point of our godliness, therefore have I pointed none unto flesh
and blood, nor to any elementish or visible things; neither does my teaching
tend to the outward, but from the outward, to pass on to the same inward and
heavenly, and to Gods Kingdom of heaven, whereof is spoken before, to the
intent that no man should set the consolation of his soul, nor the comfort of
his Salvation upon the outvvard nor earthly, nor put his confidence thereon,
but only on the upright life of the righteous spirit, and upon the coming of
the godly glory in Jesu Christ, of which things I have (according to my sight
out of the heavenly revelation of God) much and abundantly spoken in the Glass
of Righteousness, and in this Introduction, mine exhortation is out of love,
also to the same, to the intent we should have an earnest love, and be provoked
with desire toward it.

73. Which life of Righteousness, whereof we witness, is inwardly, godly,
according to the divine nature, and outwardly brotherly, after the upright
humane nature; and that same is the upright righteousness, before God and
amongst men.

74. Who so now from the heart seeks God and his righteousness, and rightly
has regard to the upright life, the same person will acknowledge that my
teaching and ministration is of God, and that it tends to the upright life:
and who so likewise to this end searches the Scripture for the promises,
shall assuredly find, that it makes mention of such things, and that the Law,
the Prophets, and the Apostles of Christ, do all point and witness to the
very same.

75. When the man now according to the truth perceives this same, then will he
(for the love of righteousness sake) be also inclined there unto, and yield
his understanding 2 Gor. 10.
captive under the obedience of the love, praise God highly for his grace; and
through the belief pass on toward the upright life in all love.

76. Though he now and then fail, stumble, or fall, yet if his eyes of the
spirit have respect to the upright life, and to the love, and that he glass
himself daily in the Glass of Righteousness, doubtless the same shall cause
him to see, and shall rightly show him his spots, and shall be unto him, Ioh.
4.7.
as an open fountain of life, against the sin and way of death.

CHAP. XIII.
1. None can know God nor Christ rightly, but in the Spirit of the love. 11. No
better grounds then the Doctrine of the love. 14. An exhortation to the obeyers
of her service, that they blaspheme not other men's writings, nor condemn any
for Sects, but rather allure all to the love. 19. and that they put away the
evil as much as they can, out of themselves. 20. The despisers are vain. 23.
The consenters hereunto are counseled, not to think they have already
obtained, but to labor, and to continue in the doctrine of the love, till the
laying away of the mortal body. 32. Not to be dismayed at the enemies, but like
soldiers to prepare themselves to the battle. 33. Though we be sometimes
hurt, yet to take new courage still. 36. Considering whereunto we are called
through Jesus Christ.

TAke it to heart, O ye children of men, and let your understanding be renewed,
Romans 12. Ephesians. 4.
according to the spirit, to such an upright knowledge as God esteems, to
wit, with the word of truth, in the spirit, of the love, to an assured living
hope and good conscience in Jesu Christ.

2. For who so after the spirit, conceives not the same, nor is renewed in
his understanding (to the same upright knowledge) under the obedience of the
love, in such a one there is no knowledge of Christ, neither can he be rightly
turned to Christ, or to the upright belief, but only through the same.

3. For the fall from Christ is come, and it is according to the Prophecy
understood, known, and well perceived, how that the same, 2 These. 1.
through the child of perdition (according to the mention of the Scriptures)
has in every respect so utterly Romans 1. Ephesians. 4.
blinded, depraved, and corrupted the understanding of men, concerning God and
Christ, that the children of men (how wise or learned soever they of themselves
be) do neither Ioh. 8.16.
of the Father, nor yet of the Son, know any thing at all.

4. And surely, whosoever does not submit his understanding, under the service
of the love, the same man shows thereby, that he is without understanding,
because by his understanding he perceives not, how that he which has not the
love, 1 Ioh. 2.4.
has not also the Son, nor the Father, but is without Christ and his Church,
and can please God by no other means, also can neither now nor evermore without
the inclination of love, neither through any other services or literal
wisdom, come to the holy knowledge of God, or attain unto the same.

5. But if any now believe not this same by reason of the high regard to their
knowledge, or by means of any respect unto their holiness Col. 2.
or spiritual humility, such as they have chosen or taken to themselves, and
as is not according to the promises, as God in times past has spoken by Moses
his servant, and by the mouth of his holy Prophets, doubtless they (howsoever
they suppose or maintain Esa. 59.
that they have the light) must needs abide in 1 Ioh. 2.
darkness, for their unbelievers cause, whose unbelief cannot hurt the
believers, neither can the Work of God for all that abide back.

6. O deep and unsearchable vvisdome of God! Esa. 40. Sap. 9. Romans 11. 1 Cor. 2.
which of the great and high glorious wise, or of the self-chosen holy ones,
has ever attained unto thee?

7. Unto which of them, is thine arm known, that has heard or understood thy
holy word, or thy mind aright?

8. Therefore needs must they all in lowliness of heart be humbled under thee,
and become subject to thy true love (that they may rejoice them in the truth:)
otherwise they must remain blind in their imagination Ioh. 3.
and may not see the Kingdom of God, for ever.

9. For so long as they through the love, or her inclination Mat. 18.
be not in their corrupt understanding, turned about by the word of truth, and
are not well minded to the virtue of the love, certainly there can appear unto
them no light of the truth, to Salvation; for God has foreseen the perfection
Deuteronomy. 6.10. 1 Cor. 13. 1 Timothy 1.
in the love, according to the promises, and not in the knowledge.

10. Therefore let every one be lowly of spirit, 1 Ioh. 4.
and humble of heart in his knowledge, even as though he knew nothing, and so
have regard to the service of the love, what it requires; and let him hope and
long for it, to the intent he may be comprehended therein [that is to say in
the doctrine thereof] for therein is the godliness understood and known; and
so let him endeavor toward the best.

11. And I hope that I shall always toward the lovers of the truth do even
so, and not omit to set before them the most best; for thereunto tend all my
intents and desires, neither know I at all any better thing then the teaching
and ministering of the holy word, under the obedience of the love.

12. True it is, I have as far as I might examined many sorts of Foundations
and understandings, and have likewise considered and scanned whereon they stood
grounded, but there is yet no better thing come to my hand.

13. The Lord grant me his mercy, and strengthen my mind to do and accomplish
his will, to the Salvation of men in the love.

14. O ye lovers of the truth, that have humbled your fouls under the love and
her service, Deuteronomy. 6.11.^2. Pro. 4.
take (I pray you) the truth to heart, and reproach no man's writings, teaching,
nor exhortations, that have their ministration to the righteousness, and to
the concord, but draw it all under the love, that every one may give up and
bring all what he has taken on, or wherein he is learned, according to his
humane imagination, to the communion of the love: give ear only to the godly
Word of Life, under the obedience of the love, according to the manifestation
of the glorious and godly light, set forth in the Glass of Righteousness, and
so above all his humane knowledge, love the Concord, and the upright life.

15. Moreover condemn none particularly by name, and be not offended at any,
that your hearts Gal. 5. Acb. 12.
be not moved to anger, stumble not at any thing, and reproach nor reject none
for Sects, but love all them that endeavor toward righteousness, 2 Pet. 1.
with a like love, to that upright righteousness which God esteems, and thus
draw all wel-willing ones to the true righteousness, under the obedience of
the love.

16. And if any man seek the truth of you, and his heart be inclined to the
love, then join your selves with him in the love, and so speak 1 Pet. 3.
of the hope which is in you.

17. For who so loves the good, though yet for a while he be in error, may
for all that come to amendment in the love, unless he should give over his
heart in a wilful contentiousnesse, and despise the love and her service, for
his self-minds sake.

18. But unto every one that will follow, and is well minded to the love and
her service, Ephesians. 4.
unto such reach forth the hand to the unity of the upright life, and that all
in the love.

19. If the evil assail you, then put it from you, as much as is possible for
you, until the same evil get a going down in you, and go into silence: give
it no respite to follow after his desire, but become (according to the spirit)
Col. 1. 1 These. 3. 1 Pet. 5.
strong and firm in the good life, Deuteronomy. 7. 1 Pet. 2.
to a peculiar possession of God, even as it is here in this Introduction, and
in the Glass of Righteousness, according to the life showed and declared.

20. If so be ye cast this same behind the back, to wit, that ye refuse it, or
have no belief nor lust thereunto, nor do hope thereon; and yet by your
self-wisdom persuade your selves to be wise, then are ye vain, and utterly
unmeet to the Kingdom of God, and how wise soever ye be, yet shall you be
found vain, and without understanding, and void of the true light of life.

21. Now if any man say, that he is already in the life, and needs no more,
or that it is needful no more for him to hearken after any other
understanding, and therefore contemns this form of the upright life, and his
service to the same life whereunto we bear witness, and neither has it, nor
indeavoureth toward it, in the service of the love, certainly he is yet in the
death 1 Ioh. 2.
and darkness, and knows nothing at all either of Christ, or of the life
which is of God, even as the darknesses also have never perceived nor known him.

22. If any man then despise this good mind or spirit of love, and with the
heart withstandeth, and blasphemeth it; and does not entertain the upright
virtue of the love, the same man has beguiled his own heart, and after the
requiring of the knowledge of the old serpent, seeks his own advantage, and
not to do the will of the Lord.

23. But if on the other side (O ye dearly beloved) any do accept this which we
bear witness of, for right and truth, let him not hardly over-hastily persuade
himself, that he by his knowledge has already gotten it; for there must at the
first belief be joined thereto, and then look whose belief through the increase
of God blossometh 4 Esd. 6.
and is fruitful, let the same man attempt the battle in hope against that
which makes up it self against the same; Let him have regard to the Word of
life, and so pass on toward it, Luke 21.
with patience or in long sufferance.

24. That truly is the right Cross of Christ, Mat. 16. Luke 14.
which we are daily with good will, in the obedience of the requiring of the
service of love, to take up Act. 14.
in the belief, until we be well exercised in the love, and in the holy
understanding (whereunto we bear witness) and not only in the knowledge.

25. Lo to this present, I find nor know no way else to the life, therefore,
whosoever loves the same, let him endeavor toward it, Joh. 8.
and so abide steadfast in the requiring of the gracious Word, and of the
doctrine of the holy spirit of love, until the Romans 6.8. Col. 2.
laying away of his mortal body; then shall he with Christ and all Gods Saints
inherit the Kingdom of God and the everlasting life, in the heavenly being.

26. Let every one take heed to his time, and Gal. 6.
let no man deceive himself, with any vain Opinion, that he do not err.

27. For if any man Mat. 10. Luke 14.
loves or esteems any thing, better then the godly life (which is the very
Savior himself) such a one is not worthy of the Salvation, nor yet of the life
eternal.

28. And who so takes not up his Cross, and follows after the godliness
with his heart, Luke 14.
the same may not be his Disciple, that is, he cannot be taught in the
godliness, nor born a child of God in the heavenly being.

29. Therefore it is all nothing, that any man speaks much of it, if so be
(with the heart) he Esa. 29. Mat. 7.15.
follow not after the same, yea it is before God much more an abomination,
Psalm. 50. Ezekiel. 33.
that any man speaks of Gods righteousness, with talking or reasoning, and
does not with the heart follow after it, then any pleasure or delight unto him,
and yet may one find an hundred men, which reason and talk of it, where there
is not one of them that lives rightly therein, or loves it from the whole
heart.

30. Notwithstanding, though men do now and then (through some imagination)
think they have it, and have nevertheless failed therein, yet are they not
therefore to step back, tarry behind, or to lose the courage, but rather out of
the inclination of love, to take good courage again, and to Phil. 3. Heb. 6.10.
pass on toward the same godliness, until that it be in us, and that we
(according to the truth, be comprehended in the same, for by stumbling,
falling, and creeping, and by being sometimes lead, does a child (at length)
learn rightly to go.

31. By going wrong, and by hurting ones self, by means of passing in unpathed
ways, with breaking through thistles, thorns, and hedges, also sometimes by
doubting, and then by inquiring (and that all in hope) men come at last, or in
process of time to the right way, which we ought to walk to the life of truth
in the love, therefore let no man be without courage.

32. Though we find our selves sometimes without understanding, how to enter
into the life, or the Ephesians. 6. 1 Pet. 5.
enemies encounter with us, and so hardly beset us, that we know not how to get
thither, yet let us for all that, though it seem not credible, take a good
courage or mind Heb. 11.
in the belief, and not forsake the hope, for the hope Romans 5.
leaves none ashamed, and so give our attention, Pro 4.
to understanding and information, whereby we may attain thereunto, and to the
very same arm our selves, even as an unexpert soldier, that has a desire to
become a good man of war, armeth himself to the warfare.

33. Though at first he sustaineth some damage, as to be sometimes wounded,
smitten, shot, hurt to death, and by his enemies to be taken captive, yet
takes he still a fresh courage, and abides firm in hope, until he be well
exercised in the feat of war, who then is known for a man of war, that is one
that understands and knows well, where any thing is to be won or lost, and
wherein damage or advantage lies.

34. If therefore earthly warriors be so bold in hope, for the corruptible
things sake; how much more then ought we so to be toward the everlasting
uncorruptiblenesse, in case we have any desire or hope to the everlasting
uncorruptiblenesse at all, Osc. 23. 1 Cor. 15.
wherein death is swallowed up, and the everlasting immortality abides, where
all destruction passes away, and in it self as a smoke vanishes in such sort,
that there is even nothing remaining in it but the pure and clear, the fullness
and fairness of all virtues, according to the promises.

35. But a slothful and unbelieving man that always fears, and is Pro. 6.24.
negligent and disobedient hereunto, or a doubtful and vvavering person, that
still doubts of error, wounds, damage, and loss, such a one thinks not
upon obtaining 4 Esd. 2. Sap. 5. Apo. 2.
the royal Crown of everlasting life, and therefore gives no credit
thereunto; for so through his unbelief and disobedience he distrusteth God in
his promises, and is self-wise against Gods truth and his omnipotency, and
lying still on his lees or dregs, he prieth from far, how it shall fare with
the obedient believers in the service of the love; truly such as remain so
minded, enter not into the Kingdom of God, nor in the Heb. 4.
rest or inheritance of eternal life.

36. Therefore let every one consider once rightly, whereunto we are called,
through Jesus Christ. Is it not Mat. 25. Luke 22. Joh. 5. 1 Cor. 15.
to the everlasting uncorruptiblenesse and immortality, or kingly 1 Cor. 9. 2 Timothy 4. Jam. 1. 1 Pet. 5.
Crown of eternal life, to Romans 8. Gal. 5. Ephesians. 3.
the inheriting in the spirit, of the infinite treasures of the divine heavenly
goods, and moreover (through the belief) to be justified from the sin, for to
bring forth the Joh. 15. Ephesians. 4. Phil. 1.
fruits of God, which God has pleasure in, and to live in God eternally?

37. But (alas) this calling, the man has utterly forgotten, and through his
glosing which he has invented thereon, he is quite strayed from the sense of
his calling, and from the holy understanding.

An INTRODUCTION To the Holy Understanding.
CHAP. XIIII.
1. An admonition to awake, and observe our calling. 4. All without exception
are called. 5. We have all been ignorant of our calling. 6. But God does now
graciously let us see our blindness. 7. Therefore let us regard this grace,
and that the rather because of the horrible destruction that is for to come. 9.
The wicked must be endured with patience. 12. the Love is stronger then the
Belief. 15. If we fall, let us rise up again. 20. The way to the life. 21. Few
do find. 23. The evil must be overcomed of the good in patience. 26. much
written, yet great misunderstanding. 28. Those that have pleasure, and do
continue in iniquity, are like the devil, and be incorporated into his son.
33. Their certain punishment.

OH! awake yet once (I pray you) from the Esa. 29.56. Romans 13.
sleep of your ignorance, O ye children of men, and have a sure confidence Joh.
5. 1 Cor. 15. 1 These. 4.
on the Resurrection of the dead, so shall Christ Ephesians. 5.
inlighten you.

2. Take heed to your calling, that whereunto ye are bidden, therein ye may be
established according to the promises, that is for to obtain the high price or
Crown of everlasting life, for this price or Crown of everlasting life, is not
like a Crown of the Kings of this world, 1 Cor. 9.
which many of them stand for, and is of many greatly desired, and yet there is
no more but one that obtains it, and becomes King.

3. But according to the calling of God, we may all obtain 4 Esd. 2. Sap. 5.
Kingly Crowns, and be endowed with one manner fullness of divine treasures,
and be all Priests 1 Pet. 2. Apo. 1.5.
and Kings, according to the promises.

4. Hereunto we are all called to one, Ioh. 17.
and in one, no man exempted, Gal. 3.
the Gentiles as well as the Jews, the Commons of the people, as well as the
Magistrates, the sinners as well as the righteous, the poor as well as the
rich, the simple as well as the wise, the wives as well as the husbands, the
children as well as the parents, Ephesians. 6. Col. 3.
the bond as well as the free, the servants as well as the masters, and the
handmaids as well as the Mistresses, Act. 10. Romans 2.10. Gal. 2.
God is no respecter of persons; for all those that turn them to God and love
his Righteousness, are acceptable unto him.

5. Doubtless it is now made known unto many of us, that we have all in our
understanding been utterly estranged and Romans 1. Ephesians. 4.
darkened from the knowledge of our calling, and have cleaved to the 1 Timothy 4.
spirits of error, vvalking in the death, and not in the light of life,
likewise in sundry divisions, and not in the unity of our calling.

6. Nevertheless, that God which is rich of mercy, Ezekiel. 18. 1 Timothy 2. 2 Pet.
3.
and would not that we should perish, lets us now see through the
ministration of his gracious word, and through his bountiful and kind love,
the ways of our blindness, Esa. 59. Sap. 5.
and the deadly darknesses of our misunderstanding, pulling us to the light of
his clearness, to the intent that all we which are estranged from God, and
dead because of sin, might through the love of God the Father, and through the
ministration of his gracious Word be renewed again, for to quicken us again
Romans 6.8. 2 Cor. 4. Phil. 3.
in Jesu Christ, out of the death of sin, into the true unity of our
vocation, to wit, in this day of the coming of Jesu Christ in his glory, for
had not the same Jesus Christ been with the Amighty for a remnant, Esa. 1.
we had all in our estrangeing been as Sodoma and Gomorra, and must needs all
in like manner have perished.

7. Since God therefore does now show on us such love, that he profereth his
grace unto us, through the coming of his Christ, when as we (in our estranging
from his good being) were openly his Romans 1. Ephesians. 2. Col. 1.2.
enemies, and that he remembers not our ignorance, to revenge on us such
things, but out of the bountiful grace of his love, is inclined to help us,
and by the ministration of his gracious word, to reach us the hand, for to
pluck us to himself again in his love, let us then also make much of such a 2
Cor. 6. Heb. 1.2
grace, that through the bountiful grace of his love, we may in this horrible
time, be reconciled unto him, and not be punished with the wicked world: The
rather, for that there has been enough before hand showed us, of the horrible
Esa. 13. Ier. 20.25. Mat. 24.
destruction of the wicked world, and of all damned men, in the last days,
wherein few shall remain, or be saved; but not by the Lords fault, for God
desires instantly to draw us all to his salvation.

8. But because there are many now adays, that 2 These. 1. 2 Pet. 3.
believe not God in his promises, but count him a lier, and 2 Cor. 6. Heb. 12.
do not regard the time of his grace, neither will be saved, but have much more
desire and will to the iniquity, Ephesians. 4. 2 Pet. 2. Judah. 1.
and to all uncleanness, therefore also in this day, Romans 2.
comes the wrath of God upon those children of unbelief; and they shall not be
able to escape the horrible and fearful destruction.

9. Therefore let every one convert him from the errors of his blindness, Ephesians.
6. 1 Pet. 5.
and arm himself in the belief, and stand fast in the hope Ia. 4.
against the wicked, that makes it self up against Gods righteousness, the
which must be endured with patience, for Romans 5.8.
Patience brings forth in us a firmness, or a persevering in the hope, and
hope suffers us not to be ashamed, but prepares for us the peace with God in
the love.

10. But though now and then it pinch somewhat hard to show patience, yet have
confidence, Apo. 2.3.
and keep still what ye have, turn not back in any case.

11. Though happily you think that it falls heavy, find yourselves impotent
or weak, and the ways dark, desolate, unpathed, very long, 4 Esd. 7. Mat. 7.
Luke 13.
small or narrow, the hills seem high to get over, and the gates very strait to
go through, yet doubt not therefore ye beloved, give no regard to the unbelief,
that says it is impossible; but contrariwise, with belief and hope enter ye
in, for the belief is strong and mighty, Mat. 17.21. Luke 17.
she removes mountains out of their places, vanquisheth the enemies, Heb. 11.
and is a certain assurance of that which is hoped for.

12. Look then what ye out of belief, and according to the truth do desire in
God to obtain, that love ye with whole heart; for the love which in her
service, holds the heart fast with earnest love, is yet stronger then the
belief, 1 Cor. 13.
and goes far beyond it all, and not regarding any difficulty, she overcomes
it all, for the things sake which she loves, for the love makes that light,
which appears heavy; and brings life out of that, which seems to be death.

13. Therefore the love is not wearied with any thing, for that which a man
loves is precious in his sight, and he esteems it of great value: Romans 8.
moreover he regards neither loss nor trouble, to get or to come by that
which he loves best.

14. And therefore men are to 1 Cor. 14. Col. 3.
seek for the most best, that they may obtain the same, and not to respect any
of those things, that would oppose themselves, or be hindersome there-against;
for who so seeks not, obtains not, who so tastes not of the sour, shall
not partake of the sweet.

15. If any man fall, let him rise again, if ye be hurt or wounded, believe, so
shall ye be made whole, yea though ye were already dead; or were as dead in
your minds, yet if ye believe the gracious word and Salvation in the obedience
of his service of love, and put your trust in the power of God, Joh. 5.
ye shall surely live and not abide dead, for the saving from death Joh. 11.
is the Resurrection and eternal life.

16. Though ye find your selves even damned in the hell; and taken captive of
sin and devil, yet fear not but believe, Psalm. 18.23.33.116.
ye shall be delivered and saved from thence.

17. For the belief and hope toward the Salvation, and the love to
righteousness, in the grace of God, neither can nor may abide in the sin,
death, devil or hell, but they must prevail, vanquish, and bring to naught or
destroy, all that is not of God.

18. Therefore have neither the Mat. 16.
gates of hell, nor the bands of the devil, nor the Romans 8.
pangs of death, nor the strength of sin, nor the lusts of the world, nor the
mind of the flesh, any power over such believers, either to hold or to reign
over them, 1 Cor. 15.
but they bring them all under them to a victory;

19. But if at any time through the slenderness of our understanding, we be
plucked away from our good mind, or be after the nature of the Serpent, Genesis 3.
Sap. 2. 2 Cor. 11.
beguiled by the wisdom of the flesh, and thereby through weakness fall, and
be made so senseless, that we cannot discern the life from the death, yea,
become so feeble and fainthearted, that we have scarcely any desire at all to
the good, but do daily Romans 7.
suffer and feel the sting of death, yet let us not therefore be dismayed, nor
despair in mind, but rather so much the more cheer up our selves in the belief,
and through the serviceable word of truth, take unto us a new stomach and fresh
courage again, to a stouter going forwards, keep so much the sharper watch, and
still have diligent regard on the thing that may annoy us to the entrance of
the life, whereby we may through the belief and obedience of the Word, Ephesians. 6.
1 Pet. 5.
keep of and vanquish it every whit, and so with a good will have our passage
toward God in the spirit, until the love abide firm in us, and that we have
such a free heart and mind, as may be subject to nothing, but to the high
Majesty of the living Godhead only.

20. Now to come hereunto, we must renounce our selves and all created visible
things, not only outwardly after the flesh, but quite and clean inwardly with
the heart according to the spirit, and so give over our selves obediently under
the service of love, unto the God of life and his gracious word, Romans 6.8.
to a dying in the spirit, from every thing whereunto our will and mind
(according to the flesh or outward fashion) is tied, and keep our selves
diligently from all holy appearances, and worldly fashions, that so then 1 Pet.
1.
in the obeying of the gracious word and his service of love, our inward mind
for to come to a submitted being, may be made tender, soft, and lowly, and we
in like manner with humble hearts find our selves Psalm. 57.
ready to do the Lords will, Romans 6.
the end whereof is eternal life. It is true.

21. Which way to the life few do Mat. 7.
find, because it is unknown Mat. 11. 1 Cor. 1.2.
and hidden unto all understandings of the flesh, and unto all wise ones of the
world, and her Scripture learned.

22. Who is there now rightly inclined to the life and peace, but those that
endure all deadly things, dissension, and whatsoever comes upon them thereby,
until it Romans 6.8. 2 Cor. 4.
wholly vanish, and come to naught in them? and which have the life and peace
always before their eyes, and do pray with great fervency unto God in the
spirit, that he will be their power and strength.

23. After this manner ought we with humble hearts to be minded in every
thing that comes upon us against the good, for the evil must by the good be
Romans 12.
overcomed in patience.

24. Yet not out of our works or own power, Romans 3.4. Ephesians. 2.
O no, but through the belief in affiance toward God, and so abiding Gods
leisure in his work, we are daily to pray unto God in the spirit, that he will
destroy and take away, or root out the evil out of our hearts, and choose and
set up the good again therein.

25. Hereunto are we to 1 Pet. 5.
humble our hearts before God in his service of love, that we may find such
healthful grace before his eyes, in the coming of Jesu Christ, who now to the
Salvation of all those that hope in Christ, 2 Pet. 3.
and long for his coming, comes to a righteous judgment over the world with
equity.

26. Oh hereof there is surely much written, showed, and testified, were it but
observed and understood aright, but there is great negligence and much
misunderstanding among the children of men, for we find many lamentable
errors, not only in the erring world, but also in those that persuade
themselves to be wise, and to love the good.

27. Awake once O thou precious man, and consider that the eternal, God Ezekiel.
18. 1 Timothy 2. 2 Pet. 3.
has no pleasure in such unprofitable living, as is mixed with contrariety
unto God.

28. But if so be Oye children of men ye have pleasure in the destruction,
according to the course of the blind world, and do Sap. 2. Romans 1. Ephesians. 4. 2
Pet. 3. Jude. 1.
delight in the strange life of the ungodly being, go on thus boldly in the
same, and do show no Romans 2.
upright obedience to the word, Mat. 3. Lu. 3.13.
nor amendment from sin, then hardly think also that ye are certainly minded
Joh. 8.
against God, even like the devil himself, and incorporated with the child of
perdition, or of the devil that extolleth himself in the desire of his
errors, by means of the pleasure or reward of unrighteousness against God,
and against all that men worship God in, saying in his heart or essential
mind, that he himself is the Lord, 2 These. 2.
and exalts himself in like manner, in the hearts of the unbelieving and
disobedient men, to a ruling above God, and above the godly nature, and so
setting himself in the Temple of God, [that is, in man's heart] Dan. 8.9.12.
Mat. 24.
he utterly lays wast the House of the Lord, and in like manner works in
the man, a secret wickedness, which is not soon to be perceived.

29. Truly, who so with the desires of their souls do cleave unto this
pernicious nature, they are very abominable in their doings; for there is none
of them that does good, no not one.

30. Their best virtue is a covered sin, and an abominable hypocrisy before
God and his Saints.

31. Their throat is an Psalm. 5. Romans 3.
open Sepulcher; their tongue flattereth, their mouth speaks arrogance, and
they deal with unprofitable and false things.

32. Their lurking is Psalm. 10. Pro. 1.
how to beguile the simple, and to oppress the poor and innocent with tyranny,
not once thinking that there is a God, which will revenge such things, and
recompense it all unto them. O yes, he will certainly find them out, and render
them their just reward.

33. For if God spared not the old world, but Genesis 7. 2 Pet. 2.
condemned the same through the flood because of sin, nor Sodoma and Gomorra,
Genesis 19. 2 Pet. 2.
but for their ungodliness sake, caused fire and brimstone to fall from heaven
upon them, to their destruction, then will he not also assuredly spare this
wicked nature, but recompense his wickedness upon his own pate.

34. Seeing then the Almighty God did in times past, cause so great punishment
to come upon the ungodly for their unrighteousness sake, Mat. 11. Luke 10.
how much horribler punishment are they worthy of, 2 Pet. 2. Jude. 1.
that do now in this evil world commit ungodliness, because all those former
punishments upon them, who in times past committed ungodliness, are set forth
before these for example, that they should fear these last plagues of the
wicked world, Mat. 25. 2 Pet. 3.
which wicked world, is reserved for the fire, that it may perish thereby,
according to the promises.

CHAP. XV.
1. An expostulating with the man, for his bold and wilful cleaving to the
abominations of the wicked world. 5. The curse of such boldness. 7. The
fulfilling of the Law is the way to Christ, but the man by his wisdom will
have other ways, by cleaving whereunto the Antichrist is brought forth, in the
hearts of the unbelievers. 11. This embracing of Antichrist the man will deny
with the mouth, and contrariwise will confess the Law of the Lord, but in the
deed, he does the contrary. 14. An admonition against misunderstanding of
certain Scriptures and sentences. 24. Which sentences he explaineth. And first,
how the righteous spirit is procreated. 34. How those that are taught by the
righteous Spirit, are no longer the servants of the Prophets.

O Thou man that do yet with thy will cleave to the obominations, and vain
things of the evil world, will thou not once fear before the God of all Gods,
before the King of all Kings, before the wisdom of all wise-ones, before the
righteousness of all righteous ones, and before the highest judgment of all
Judges?

2. Will thou not indeed once remember that there is such a God, Esa. 45.
as requires righteousness? yes assuredly, he Esa. 28.
will make up himself with the same, terrify the earth and fall upon his
enemies, for they shall not be able to Lam. 2.
escape the hand of his vengeance; for he will Esa. 4 Ezekiel. 37. Ephesians. 5.
cleanse the earth of the uncleanness of the ungodly being.

3. Or think thou (O man) that God is dead, and thou shall live? Or that God
is blind, and thou see? think thou still to reign, and that God shall lie
down under thee, and be according to thy mind, as though that thou were the
head, and God the feet, and that he should be driven as a footstool to be put
under thee, and that his Law, Statutes, and Ordinances, shall still be trodden
down, and forgotten?

4. Make not too much ado (thou Esa. 28 45. Romans 9
earthen vessel) against thy Creator; for truly thy stoutnesse is too
presumptuous and arrogant against one that is much stronger then thou art.

5. Therefore look into it, all that have eyes to see, whether that all
haughtiness of the flesh does not exalt it self above God, and how gladly
every one bears dominion against Gods truth, and how that there be many do
cover themselves with the appearance of holiness, wherewith the eyes of many
men are bewitched, supposing that such haughtiness and appearance of holiness
is of God.

6. Under which covering of the show of holiness, and under the glorying Mat.
24
of the Lords Name, the man boldly forces on his arrogant conceiving, and
advances his own will, and forsakes or rejects utterly the Law of the most
highest, and the Statutes and Ordinances of his people Israel, which God in
times past gave them by Moses his servant, and ratified by the mouth of his
holy Prophets.

7. For at the end, or Gal. 4
in the fulfilling of all the same, has God brought forth his Son (the Sap. 7.
Heb. 1.
like Image of his Godhead) to the salvation of his people: which Son of God
Mat. 5
is not come to break the Law, but to accomplish the same, to the intent, that
the Law and the Prophets may still remain in their state and office until
Christ, whereby through the same Christ, men may be saved or justified Acts 15.
Romans 3.4. Gal. 2.3. Ephesians. 2.
from the sin by faith, and not by the works of the Law: Lo, thus comes the
Kingdom of God, and the everlasting life.

8. But whilst the man has by his wisdom, set himself above the wisdom of
God, he has brought in other Laws besides these, which are none of Gods, but
are false and lies, and has made none account of the Law of the Lord.

9. Therefore are also the Prophets which are thereout risen up, Mat. 24 2 Timothy
3, 4 2 Pet. 2
found false, and lying; and thereout likewise does the Devil at the end of
these same, bring forth the Image of his likeness [namely, the son or 2 These.
2.
child of the Devil, full of deceit and lies] in the hearts of lying and
unbelieving men, to a destroying and desolation of the people, and to an
abominable evil world, such as is full of wickedness and falsehood, even like
the Devil himself.

10. That same is the adversary of God and Christ, which is now revealed unto
us as a child of damnation, who (for as much as the fall from Christ is come)
has set himself 1 These. 2.
as a God in Gods Temple, [that is in men's hearts] and boasts himself as a
God, and so (with his own holiness and wisdom) polluteth it all,
presumptuously and proudly with great boldness Apo. 13
blaspheming Gods holy Name; which wicked nature, and adversary or enemy of God
and Christ, the man does in all respects cleave unto, and becomes of one
nature or coessence therewith.

11. Howbeit, that the man is joined to the adversary of God and Christ, and
deals so ill and unkindly with God and his Christ, that he will not willingly
confess with the mouth, but he is not ashamed to show it by his works and
deeds.

12. Let every one glass himself once aright, and then acknowledge according
to the truth, whom he loves, serves and cleaves unto, whether to the world
or to God, to Belial or to Christ, to his own mind, or to the mind of God or
Christ, with the mouth no doubt he will say, to God, and to the mind or will of
Christ, Tit. 1.
but with the deed it will be found quite otherwise.

13. In like sort fares it also with the understanding of the testimonies or
sentences of Scripture, with the mouth many happily will confess, that they
have well conceived all the sense and understanding of the holy Scripture; but
to follow that which the sense of the holy testimonies do betoken, point to,
and require, they clean omit, whereby it does sufficiently appear, that (with
the life and heart) they are minded against the same, and have not understood
the holy Scripture.

14. O ye deerly beloved, err not so wholly with the erring blind world, nor
with the conceitednesse of the letter-learned, that ye should forsake the Law
of the Lord: be not also Prove. 3 Romans 12
too wise in your own sight, and judge not of all sentences according to your
imagination: for much ignorance has taken the hearts of men captive, whereby
often times they judge ignorantly, because by their wisdom Mat. 11. 1 Cor. 1
they understand not the wisdom of God.

15. It is all reasonably well known unto me with what a perverse eye the man
does often times out of the testimony of the writings or sentences which he
hears, draw a perverse sense, as it goes now every where very brief amongst
men: of which sentences (wherein there do many err) there is both partly in
these writings and likewise in the Glass of Righteousness, plain Declaration
made, and how that many men do err therein, because they understand not the
Scripture.

16. But to the intent that no man through any wrong conceiving of the
sentences (which are now much treated of by the man) might receive any
hinderance to salvation, and that likewise every one may be guided into the
Holy Understanding of the Glass of Righteousness, and to an upright
conceiving of the same, we will recite certain sentences here following, and
uncover and clear the right understanding of the same, not only in this
Introduction, but also in many places besides of the Glass of Righteousness,
and show the wrong conceiving or sight of them, and warn every one to beware of
the judgment of his sight, which he gives by the ignorance of his imagination.

17. True it is, I have heretofore (in the beginning of my calling by God, to
the ministration of his holy and gracious word; under the obedience of the
love) set forth certain writings, but inasmuch as some sentences happily in
them, were not uttered in the plainest manner, therefore have I with the Supra.
foresaid principal Elders of the Family of Love, more amply and plainly
expressed them.

18. Also in the beginning of my vvriting, I could not find that among any of
the children of men, there was any such communalty of God or Christ, as was
comprehended in the upright life of Christ (as is also before mentioned) but
the everlasting God, who is Ioh. 4.
spirit and life, 1 Ioh. 4.
and the essential love it self, has in my office or service under the
obedience of the love, manifested the same unto me, and so the true Communalty
of God or Christ, which also is spiritual, lovely, and upright of life, has
he made known unto me in the spirit, I have also seen, heard, and touched, or
felt it, and being of one substance therewith, have my fellowship as one body
Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12.
in Christ with the same.

19. Oh would to God that all men had the grace, to humble them under the love
and her servite, that so then in the obeying of the service of love, the same
true Communalty of God or Christ, might also every where appear and come unto
the children of men; and that in the spirit of Jesu Christ or of the love, to
the intent that all error, contention, and wrangling among them all might once
have an end, and so we all one with another, might be of Romans 12.15. 1 Cor. 1.
2 Cor. 13. Phil. 1.
one mind in Jesus Christ.

20. But in as much as I could not heretofore in the beginning of my writing
perceive, or find among the children of men, that true and lovely Communalty
which is comprehended in the upright life of Christ, and that all my desire and
love was bent to the upright life of the same Communaltie, therefore have I
also from the beginning of my writing (out of the Service of Love) witnessed of
such a life of upright righteousness, and of such upright hearts, as the
communalty of God or Christ has her life in, according as the Glass of
Righteousness does also mention, and make relation of the same upright life of
the true communalty of God or Christ: neither can I yet perceive nor know any
other thing, then that the upright communalty of God or Christ (where she in
Christ appears or is revealed) lives therein, and shall still be minded so
to do.

21. And whosoever also Sap. 8.
loves the righteousness with whole heart, and has a desire to be joined and
incorporated to the only God and his true Christ, or to have his fellowship
with them, such a one will likewise (according to the sight of the true life,
which is appeared unto me out of the living God) be inclined or bent unto such
an upright being of the upright communalty of Christ (whereof we bear witness)
for to live, or to be comprehended therein under the obedience of the love,
through the belief.

22. Wherefore let every one note and mark our testimonies of truth according
to love, and not with perverseness of heart, nor in reproach or partiality,
that they appear not unto him in a cross or a contrary sense.

23. For sure it is very lamentable, that the testimonies of truth (which are
brought forth to the best) should be taken overthwartly and not aright; because
the perverse sight makes many to judge perversely and falsely, and unrightly to
understand the director, causes many greatly to stray. It is true.

24. It is recorded in the first book of the Glass of Righteousness, 1 Glass. 2
that the upright procreation of the righteous spirit, comes not of men but
Luke 1.
out of God only; this same word or sentence is very right, yea unchangeable
for ever. For otherwise God has never wrought among his holy ones, and yet
has testified of such things (afterward to come) by the mouth of his holy Eze.
36. Joel. 2. Act. 2.
Prophets, to the intent that men should think upon his wonders of old time,
and trust firmly upon those of the time to come, according to the promises,
namely, how that God is the Salvation, and will establish his holy Covenant,
Luke 1.
according as he has made the same with Abraham and his Seed.

25. Now when men have read this saying, and heard such a sentence, to wit,
that God will work things by his righteous spirit, they must then have regard
to the counsel that directs the way to God, and from the heart follow the
same with humble souls, Romans 12
still persevere in prayer until the coming of the promises, Tob. 4. Romans 13.
and not consent to the sin, but so take heed to such a healthful grace, as
being out of Gods mercy called to the very same, according to the promises.

26. For aforetimes the heathen were no people of the God of Israel, but were
Ephesians. 2.
strangers in the Testaments of the holy Fathers, and in the inheritance of the
godly promises, and Ephesians. 4. 1 Pet. 4.
every one walked his way in ungodliness, and in sundry Idolatries, and were
ignorant of the Lord.

27. But the everlasting God of Israel forgot not his Covenant, Luke 1.
but was mindful of the oath which he had sworn to Abraham his beloved, to a
blessing of the Gentiles, and looked on Act. 17.
the time of their ignorance, and did in like manner for a season cast off his
people, and show his hearty love on all the Generations of the earth, or
heathen, and caused a joyful message, through his Christ, to be published unto
them, Mat. 3. Luke 3.13. Act. 2.3.
to a repentance and amendment from their offenses, calling and bidding them
Ephesians. 2.3.
to be coheirs with the Citizenship of his people Israel, Esa. 2. Amos. 9.
Zach. 8. Act. 15.
that unto his people Israel, he might prepare him an upright people also out
of the heathen, according to the promises and foreshewing of his holy Prophets.

28. Hereon ought all Generations of the earth to have regard, and duly to
consider, whether they do accordingly take heed aright to their calling, which
is out of grace come unto them from the bountiful God of Israel, and whether
they do also with lowly hearts (as those that are unworthy the same) humble
themselves for to obtain the right Ioh 1.3^ 1 Pet. 1.
birth of the righteous spirit out of God, to be fellow brethren with the
children of the house of Jacob for to serve the living God, and in those days
(when Act. 3.
the refreshing shall appear from the presence of God) to celebrate and
glorify the same God of Israel with them, what time as he ingrafteth his
branches into their right stock again, who for the Gentiles sakes, have been
broken off and scattered, Lu. 21. Romans 12.
until the fullness of the Gentiles should be come in, the treading down of
Jerusalem have her end, and so all Israel be saved, according to the promises.

29. Therefore let us have a right regard to our calling, and separate our
selves according to the spirit, from the foolish course, Romans 1 Ephesians. 4, 5 1
Pet. 4
vain walking, and ignorant boasting of people, and humble our souls to the
grace of our calling.

30. For if God in times past spared not his own people, but did cast out,
break off, and scatter them abroad for their stiffeneckednesse, and prides
sake, and Act. 13 Romans 11
rejected the heathen in their room, how much less will he then spare the
proud heathen, but cast out, break off, lay wast and scatter them, and in their
stead, receive his own people Israel again, that they may serve him all the
days of their lives, Luke 1. Ephesians. 4
in such righteousness and holiness as is pleasing unto him, they shall be
his people, and he God with them, shall be their God from Generation to
Generation everlastingly.

31. For thus says the Lord concerning Israel, Esa. 59 Romans 11
there shall come a redeemer unto them in Sion, and to them that turn them from
sin in Jacob, says the Lord, and I make this Covenant with him says the Lord,
Esa. 59
my Spirit which is in thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart from thy mouth, nor from the mouth of thy Seed, and
childrens-children (says the Lord) from henceforth for evermore.

32. In those days shall the treading down of Jerusalem have an end, and the
word of the Lord shall be fulfilled concerning her; and unto her he said, Esa.
60
arise Jerusalem, be bright, for thy light comes, and the glory of the Lord
arises upon thee; (then also will the Lord cause himself to be heard, even to
the worlds end) Esa. 62
And they shall say to the daughter Sion, Lo thy Salvation comes, behold he
brings his Treasure with himself, and his revvard is now prepared before him,
they shall name them the holy People, the redeemed of the Lord, and thee [O
Jerusalem] they shall call, the visited, and not the forsaken City.

33. Lo these are the promises concerning Jerusalem, and concerning Israel in
the last time; let every one take heed to his time, according to his calling
through Jesus Christ, and the end or principal scope of all righteousness, 1 Timothy 1
is the love, wherein the promises of God are established; and that same is the
true 1 John 3.4
token of the birth out of God, through the righteous spirit: It is true.

34. It is also there [in the same book] recorded, 1 Glass.
that those which are taught by the righteous spirit, are no longer servants of
the Prophets, which (forsooth) some have read or heard thereof, and have by
that means forsaken the requiring of the Prophetical Word of the Apostles of
Christ, before they were (according to the mention of the Word) confirmed in
their cailing, and through the persuasion that they had the truth or Spirit of
God, they are stopped out of their calling, turned to the liking of their own
opinion, Romans 1. Ephesians. 4.
and so become vain in their understanding.

35. Some would needs account themselves free through the Spirit, 1 Glass 3.4
before they have tasted or known the Spirit of Promise, and so have run forth
before the time, and have not by their wisdom, understood the promises of God,
nor the calling of the Gentiles.

36. When the man now regards not his calling (according to the requiring
thereof) rightly, but looks about to some other understanding, and will count
himself free through the spirit, before the first or foregoing service (which
Gal. 3. Heb. 7.
directs or leads thereunto:) be accomplished or fufilled by him, then
forsakes he the service of the fore-witnessed or foregoing Word, and goes
forth in a liberty, which yet is false, according to his own spirit, before he
has fulfilled his servantship in the service of the foregoing holy Word, Luke
21.
wherein he should possess his soul with patience, 1 Cor. 11
and so show forth the death of Christ, upon hope and confidence of his coming
for an holy anointing, and for an upright freedom in Jesu Christ unto him.

37. Who so therefore reads these sentences in the first book, let him
observe thereby what they require, and how they sound; namely, that those which
desire to come to the blessedness and freedom of Christ, must Romans 6 Gal. 3.4
be at the first, servants or Disciples of the righteousness, deny and forsake
themselves for Christ his sake, and always long to come to the true obedience
of the righteousness in all love, 1 Glass. 7.
not according to men's imaginations, but according to Gods calling, that so
they might live John 8 Romans 6
free in the righteousness of God, and not in the sin, nor as servants of
men: this same is there distinctly set forth, were it but rightly understood.

38. But who so has regard to his own liberty, and not to the calling of his
salvation, nor in the obeying of the foregoing Service ( Romans 6 13. Ephesians. 4.
Col. 2.3 1 Pet. 2.4
to the mortifying and laying away of the sin in the flesh) does not take
heed to the same, that so he may be incorporated to the good spirit of Christ;
the same man erreth not only from the doctrine of the Word after the manner of
men, but also from the wisdom of the truth of God, and so gets a delight in
his own understanding; in such sort, that he neither hearkeneth, longs, nor
cares for the good any more, but has a desire to error and perversity.

39. Oh! it is sure very lamentable, that the man out of such a mind cleaves
to the unrighteousness, or else chooses another calling, and practices a
selfe-made humility, Col. 2.
or spiritualnesse, and cares not for Gods promises, nor establishing of his
Word, Luke 1 Acts 3
in such a sort as God has heretofore spoken by the mouth of his holy Prophets
from the beginning of the world.

CHAP. XVI.
1. Of the saying, that men should be impartial, how it ought to be
understood. 12. How the Common Love is profitable to impartiality. 16. Of those
that are outwardly just unto men, but unjust before God. 22. Of such as think
themselves to be impartial, because they regard no outward Religions, and in
the mean space withold from God that which is his. 28. Diverse rail at all
that observe any Religion. 35. How we are to judge of all outward God Services
and Ceremonies.

THere goes also a sentence abroad among many, (whereof likewise much mention
is made in our writings) that according to the requiring of Christian Doctrine,
men should stand 1 Cor. 3
impartial.

2. O ye deerly beloved, err not through any conceit of the imagination, but
have regard to the Word concerning the upright impartialnesse, and if ye mark
the same well, you shall understand, that men are to be impartial in the
truth, and with those that witness the truth under the obedience of the Love,
to the intent that no man take part with flesh and blood, but with the truth,
and be in the unity of the love, Romans 12 15 1 Cor. 1 2 Cor. 13. Phil. 2
well minded to a like life of righteousness, namely, with all them that do
under the obedience of the love, witness and minister the gracious word of
truth, and be comprehended in the upright brotherly love.

3. But men may not thus be impartial with the world, or with those that with
heart and will do cleave unto the world, that lie still in the vanity and sin,
and that are not believing nor desirous to obtain any better thing: no, nor
with the conceited wise, nor with the maintainers of factious ceremonies, 2
Cor. 12 Gal. 3 1 Timothy 6. 2 Pet. 2.
who are envyers, blasphemers, and evil speakers against the holy Word of
Truth, and of the service of his Love.

4. Truly, with such men are not to stand impartial, but with spirit and life
to be against them utterly, and yet to show forth the upright nature of the
love unto them, if happily by some means they might be drawn (to their
preservation in the godliness) unto the communion of the Love.

5. But with the Infra. 18
lovers of righteousness (as is aforesaid) and likewise with the sinners (such
as cleave not by their will to the unrighteousness, but do daily depart
therefrom, and have a fervent desire to the righteousness, under the obedience
of the love) men are to stand impartial, and to stick fast unto that which is
godly, and that tends to the concord and peace.

6. Therefore judge of the impartialnesse with understanding, and put a
difference between the godly life, and the life of the world, and try your
selves, if so be you know your selves.

7. Look into your hearts (observing whom you cleave unto, desire, and love)
how, or with what manner disposition, ye stand impartial, whether ye would
rather suffer Heb. 11.
or endure disgrace, reproach, and contmpt, with the Lovers of the
Righteousness, then cleave unto the honor, voluptuousness and riches, or
ease of this world: Oh! I fear that many of them boast themselves to stand
impartial with the truth, who notwithstanding are altogether partially minded
against the truth.

8. Nevertheless, let no man take any thing unto him out of any choosing,
whether it be out of loathing or of liking, but let every one search his own
heart, how he finds the same disposed, and examine once himself, whether he
stand impartial rightly or not.

9. And when the man has seriously tried and proved himself herein, in such
sort that he knows assuredly how his heart stands, (in case he wholly love
God and his righteousness, intend the truth in the Love with his whole soul,
and desire to deny and to forsake himself, Mat. 16. Luke 9.14
with all that is in the world, for the godliness sake) then shall he very
well know and understand a difference between the cleavers to the world, and
those that from the bottom of their souls love the righteousness.

10. Wheresoevea then any upright impartial hearts are found, and that they do
show forth under the obedience of the Love, the praise of God, the salvation of
men and the truth, out of the love of righteousness, and do point none unto
flesh and blood, nor to any visible elements, but only to the good life of the
true essential Godhead, and are thereunto serviceable to all men, to all
concord in the love of Jesu Christ, with those are the Lovers of righteousness
and truth, to stand impartial to the unity of heart in the love, and so to
have regard to the ministration of the godly testimonies of the holy spirit of
the Love unto obedience, for to walk in such a life of godliness, as is
pointed out and witnessed thereby, and in that manner to grow up in the good
Ephesians. 2. Apo. 21
to an house or tabernacle of the living God or Christ, and to give no further
respect to the outward, then as it is serviceable thereunto, to the intent,
that no man may be bewitched in his spirit, but may cleave to the virtue and
nature of the love, and that the Col. 3.
love may obtain a dwelling place or form in him.

11. Lo, after this manner ought men to live impartially in the good, Esa. 1.
Psa. 37. 2 Pet 3.
to turn from all ungodly being, and not to maintain the evil.

12. There goes also a saying about among diverse, that to show the 2 Pet. 1.
common love is the most best means to keep ones self thus impartial.

13. It is true, our writings do also testify such things; howbeit, let every
one for all that look to it, and beware of his own judgment, that by the Genesis
3. Sap. 2. 2 Cor. 11.
subtilty of the Serpent, or of her nature, or else by the mind of the flesh, he
be not beguiled; the saying in it self is very right, but many that mark not
the saying according to the truth, do speak the same with a wrong sight or
understanding.

14. For some use such sentences for their own seekings cause, and so in such a
show of virtue, their heart (in regard of being incorporated with God in the
spirit) remains covered, Esa. 29 Jer. 23
and estranged from God, and many also give great respect unto such sayings,
insomuch that by occasion thereof, they do oft-times (according to men's private
conceit) cleave to some outward virtue, which surely is the very smallest of
all, and do leave the principallest Mat. 23 1 Cor. 13 1 Timothy 1
or greatest, which God requires. The like did also many heretofore that were
learned in the Law, upon whom the Lord pronounced woe, because they observed the
least things of the Law (whilst they tythed Mint, Anise, and Cummin) and left
the greatest matters of the Law, Mat. 23 Luke 11
to wit, judgment, mercy and faithfulness.

15. For albeit they observed all this after an outward show, so as they seemed
thereby to be righteous, yet was it all surely of no value, seeing they were
not joined with whole heart unto God, Ioh. 15
nor according to the spirit incorporated with him.

16. Furthermore, diverse men there are found, which (after the outward fashion)
give every one his own, and unto diverse (out of common love) show outward mercy
indifferently, who also carry themselves so justly, that Phil. 3
outwardly they are not to be reproved in any thing, howbeit, they are inwardly
before God thieves and Mat. 23 Ioh. 10
false men, because they withold from God that which is his, Esa. 29 Ezekiel.
33. Mat. 15
that is to say, their heart, which is far from him, and stands subject or
tied unto visible things, which heart or inward mind, belongs wholly, yea
only unto God.

17. Therefore God is not appeased nor satisfied with the least, when the heart
is not turned from all visible and mutable things, and does not cleave
perfectly unto him, or at least endeavor toward it, to wit, that the man
desire of God out of his grace, that God will strengthen him to the obeying of
his will, and Eccl. 3
prepare his heart to his will and pleasure.

18. Look whose hearts are not thus minded, Deuteronomy. 6 Mat. 22
for to love and cleave unto God with all their souls, their common love is
false and altogether unclean, Romans 1
for they have yet willingly a pleasure in their own concupiscence, and are yet
far distant from the upright love of God, nevertheless they do sometimes
persuade themselves that they have the very best conceiving of the
righteousness, and so proceed on according to the common course of worldly
hearts.

19. Therefore there is great diversity between the unpartiall men, who addict
their hearts unto God, and to the good, and those men whose hearts have minded
worldly things, and yet do boast them of the unpartiallnesse. For look what
unto worldly hearts [namely, unto such hearts as are turned from God and his
service of Love] is a pleasure, lust, and life, that same is unto all the
children of righteousness, Luke 16
an abomination and a horrible death.

20. Wherefore mark well the meaning, in what state or being the right
unpartiality consists, and out of what heart it is, that men are to exercise
the common-love, rightly; verily with such an heart, as out of all his mind
Eccl. 1.2
fears God, and is inclined to the upright virtue in the love, or is
comprehended therein, and not with an unadvised heart, which is without
understanding in his common-love, and in his unpartialnesse that distinguishes
not the godliness, or the worldly righteousness, one from the other, or that
has a pleasure to run on crookedly and erringly, Luke 12
to set his rest or to fix his heart in the earthly love, Romans 1 Ephesians. 4 1 Pet.
4.
according to the course of the blind world, or mind of the flesh.

21. Be not utterly I pray you Ephesians. 5
without understanding, but learn well to discern the truth, and let the Lord
and his righteousness be a pleasure unto you, and err not by any wrong sight
that stands in opinion or imagination, but observe judgment, and regard the
thing which is right and just.

22. There is found moreover a certain kind of people, which persuade
themselves that they are unpartiall, because they stand untied and unbound from
all outward Religions or God-services, and from all such as are called Sects,
supposing that in such a sort it is altogether well with them, and that so
standing they are in good case, because they are so free, and have such a
conscience as passes not for such things: they set up their rest also, that
they will not trouble themselves about any thing, nor respect or have any
regard, either of Jerusalem or of Sion, or else of Gods Communion of Saints, but
do earnestly care how they may get their living and welfare, maintain their
Family, and vvithall do that which is equal and right to every man, having a
Proverb: Let Gods Water run over Gods Field, and let us take our rest.

23. Is not this to have utterly mistaken the life of the truth, and the
testimonies of the upright unpartiallnesse? Shall there be no Esa. 2 40, 59
Mat. 5 1 Pet 1
word of life then, nor service of love ministered, nor any thing thereout to be
expected, or Romans 8
longed for? Are then the promises of God (which concern Esa. 51.52, 60 etc.
Jerusalem and Sion) come all to an end? And shall the oath of God which he
has sworn (as that the world Nu. 14 Mac. 2
shall be filled with his glory) be thus utterly forgotten? Will he not then
gather together his holiness again, Esa. 43 Baruc. 5. Mat. 24
from all Coasts of the earth, and be gracious unto them? Yes assuredly, he
will not be slack, nor forslow his time.

24. But alas this is least thought upon; howbeit, that which concerns
themselves they think much of; but Lam. 1.4 Ezekiel. 8.9 23 Dan. 8
whether God has that which is his, or that he remains (as a stranger)
without his Sanctuary, that care they not for; they will be sure to take to
themselves the earthly things, which (as true it is) God has created for the
man, and for the man's welfare, but their hearts, which God (according to the
inward man) has created for Lev. 26 Ezekiel. 36.37 2 Cor. 6
his own dwelling, and for the praise of his glory, they draw to the earthly
Sap. 2. Romans 1
and corruptible things, and so steal or with hold-from God, that which is his,
and are thieves in Gods honor, and in his earthly created goods.

25. Note once I pray you and consider, whether the same be a right
unpartiallnesse or not; Notwithstanding in such a state they seem to be
righteous men for all that: yea such a one shall with many welenough pass for
a brother of the Gospel, but truly according to such a course (if we will
come no nearer unto God) we are before God Esa. 1 John 10
all thieves and robbers, Idolaters, Adulterers, and Adulteresses.

26. This is doubtless a great abomination or abhorring, that the man tieth
himself to such things as God has Genesis ^
created unto good for him, I say nothing yet of such as use them so unseemly
and inordinately, and so shuts his God out at doors, and keeps the godly
being out of his heart.

27. Therefore let us learn to stand upright in the unpartialnesse, according
to the truth, and not after the manner of men, and (before all things) give unto
God, Deuteronomy. ^ Mat. 22
that which belongs unto him, [namely, the heart and mind] and likewise 1 Timothy ^.
use that well which belongs unto us, to the land and praise of his glory,
that he (blessed may he be) who is all in all, may also be glorified and
praised in all, and that we in like manner might be made an Tit. 2
acceptable people unto him, as his own Creation, Genesis 1. Ephesians. 2
and work of his own hands, wherein he lives and reigns, and might moreover
be made the Sheep of his Pasture, a City of Peace, and an house 1 Cor. 3
or Temple for his dwelling. To this end should we take heed to his holy
calling, that we may be made children or Romans 8 Ephesians 3
heirs of his spiritual and heavenly goods. O yea, even so be it.

28. Again there are found certain others, which persuade themselves to be
unpartiall, who boldly reproach or revile others, and rail at those whom they
hold for Factions, or that are called Sects, and 2 Pet. 2 Jude. 1
so speak evil of that which themselves know not, neither can they discern
the matter, according to the truth, but despise the thing that seems amiss
in their eyes, and yet cannot point the erring or wandering ones to any better.

29. Oh when shall the perverse mouth once keep silence, the Psalm. 34 1 Pet. 3.
reproaching lips be put far from us, and that once sought (from the heart, and
out of love) which is equal?

30. O rail not ye beloved, and pluck no man from his zeal, to any fleshly or
worldly understanding, as some have done, whilst they have turned those from
their zeal, that were zealous after righteousness, and because they could not
point them to any better, then that was, which before they had their zeal in,
therefore fell they to the world, and became more erring and blind then ever
they were before, but in this manner ought it not to go ye dearly beloved.

31. But if there were any godly wisdom and upright love, men should use it in
this sort; that is to wit, they should testify that Phil. 4 Heb. 10
which were right and reasonable, according to the requiring of God and the
truth, they should cleave unto God with the whole heart in the spirit, and so
Ephesians. 4
reach one another the hand to the love, and not reproach nor despise any, nor
yet turn any aside to the earthly and mutable things, or to any partiality, to
the intent that they which had the right teaching and did minister the
gracious Word of the Lord, might then likewise be heard and understood aright
and according to the truth; and that all zealous hearts might be united Col. 3
in one band of love, and all they likewise which love the equity Sap. 8
and righteousness, become one heart Act. 4.
and mind, Ephesians. 4
as there is one God, one Faith, and one manner Salvation, in all and with all.

32. After such a manner ought men to stand unpartiall, and to this effect, 2
Pet. 1
to use the common love, and not to destroy that which is good, or to make
division, nor yet to strengthen the world in her wickedness, but to have a
desire that the zeal to righteousness, under the obedience of the love, might
be spread abroad among many, with a loathing of the sin, and all
unrighteousness.

33. Howbeit, to exhort any man that he suffer not his heart to be bound nor
entangled with any thing that is outward, is very meet, so far forth as his
heart may thereby be turned to have regard to the upright virtue of a pure
heart and to the love, Gal. 3
whereby to be subject to the outward things no more, but to serve the living
God with a willing spirit.

34. Thus or to this effect men shall loose the binding of the heart, and
proceed toward the upright righteousness, with a free mind and humble heart
to God; for such things does God require above all, and not the Romans 3 Gal. 3.6
tying to the outward, wherein neither life nor death of souls consists, nor
any life of righteousness required.

35. For indeed it is true, yea certain and sure, both by the testimony of the
godly truth in the spirit, and also by the testimony of the Prophets and
Apostles of Christ, that neither in any thing whatsoever is visible or
feelable, nor in any factious God services or ceremonies, which are observed
with men's hands in contention, and do not require any life of righteousness,
consists either any salvation nor condemnation, before God; Romans 14 1 Cor 8
neither can they bring any vantage or damage at all unto the souls of them,
whose hearts are not entangled therewith, or have not any abhorring thereof.

36. Notwithstanding, if the God-services and ceremonies be Jewish, or
Christian, Romans 3
then do they testify of the life which God commands, and Romans 8 Gal. 3.4
Heb. 7
requires by them: but if the ceremonies or God services be heathenish, or
men's invention, or if they be ministered in strife, and in schism or partiality,
then do those ceremonies and services show, that the life of those people that
minister them, is bewitched, and that they 1 Cor. 1.2
know not God, nor Romans 10
his righteousness, nor yet undeastand his Law or will, and that they do walk
in a Ier. 7.11 Ephesians. 4
mere imagination, and not after the Lords will, and that is the thing which
God forbids.

37. For surely it is thick darkness over the children of men, Esa. 59
that they be so utterly blinded and bewitched of spirit, that they cannot
comprehend nor understand the upright life of righteousness; for men are not
to be subject in the spirit to the outward things wherewith they are served,
but should let themselves be served therewith to the upright righteousness,
and should cleave unto that which is spirit and the true life it self, and
which is required by those outward services.

38. After this manner Romans 14 1 Cor. 8
if the heart be not tied with lusting and liking unto the outward things,
neither does through any fear or disliking abhor them, the Ceremonies do stand
free for the Believers, indifferently to be used.

CHAP. XVII.
In this Chapter is showed the right difference between the true God-service
and the Idol-service, and also the Ceremonies of eithers Services.

NOw there are certain also that (being entangled) make conscience, that men
must necessarily use the Christian Ceremonies (after the counterfeiting out of
the Letter) as a Commandment of the Lord.

2. Therefore seeing we now find many such people, as in their consciences are
tied or bound, that they must necessarily use the services and ceremonies,
which after the testimonies of the Christian Services and Ceremonies, are
counterfeited out of the Letter, as a Commandment of the Lord, and because
they understand nothing at all of the difference between the right Services and
Ceremonies, and the counterfeit, I could not for the Loves sake omit, to show
also a right difference of the same.

3. Thus mark now, ye Lovers of the truth, how that between the true Services
and Christian Ceremonies, which are administered Mat. 28 Mat. 16 Acts 2.3 4. etc.
out of the true light and word of life, and the counterfeit services and
ceremonies which are administered out of the knowledge of the Letter, there must
a right difference be noted and observed, and so then must be considered, to
what intent or to what sense the true services and Christian ceremonies are
Gods Commandment, and whether the services and ceremonies be Gods everlasting
Commandment, or else be but annexed Gal. 3 Heb. 7
or joined to the everlasting Commandment of God or Christ, for to serve the
man withal in the obeying of them, and to bring him in to the everlasting
Commandment and life of God, and that he should by such a means understand
Gods everliving Commandment Romans 12
and Will, and live therein: For Gods true Commandment has been from
everlasting, and Esa. 4 Mat. 24 1 Pet. 1.
and remains unchangeable, to everlasting.

4. It is Exodus 20 Deuteronomy. 5.
commanded in the Law, that men should rest upon the Sabbath day, or sanctify
the same, and such other like; and after that the mouth of the the Wisdom and
Truth says, Mar. 2
that the man is not made for the Sabbath days sake, but the Sabbath day for
the man's sake, showing a difference in Gods Commandment, [namely, between that
thing which was Gods commandment from everlasting, and abides unchangeable,
and that which for men's sake was annexed thereunto] because they should
understand Gods righteousness, and his everlasting commandment thereby.

5. And thus were the Exodus 12.38.39.40. Luke 1.2.3.4, 5, 6. etc.
ceremonies of the Law annexed to Gods everlasting commandment, [that is, unto
that which has been Gods commandment from everlalasting, and shall abide for
ever,] because the people of Israel should out of the ceremonies of the Law,
and out of the outward Godservices of the same, Deuteronomy. 30 4 Esd. 7
understand the life of godliness and the righteousness which God requires,
and so live therein [namely, to love their God Exodus 20 Deuteronomy. 4.6.10 Mat. 22
with all their hearts, and their neighbor as themselves] after all the manner
of their Fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to whom the ceremonies were not
commanded, and yet for all that (being obedient to the Lords commandments)
they walked always in his statutes and ordinances, which obedience or walking
in the upright life, was required by the Law, and by the obeying of the
ceremonies or outward God-services, and were published through Christ in the
world.

6. But whilst now that in times past, there came a Romans 11
blindness upon the learned in the Law, insomuch that they knew no difference
between the upright life that God requires (which is his commandment from
everlasting) and the ceremonies of the Law, which were annexed thereunto, and
that the upright life ( Mat. 3.17 2 Pet. 1.
wherein God had his delight) was appeared and come, therefore rose there up
many controversies about the services and ceremonies amongst them that Mat.
12.15, 19, 21, 22.
knew not the upright life, and there fell out many questions and janglings,
and that all for the law and the ceremonies cause; but God had no pleasure in
any thing save only his beloved, the like life of his being, in whom he had
good pleasure: And this is his Commandment, Deuteronomy. 18 Mat. 17. Act. 3
even that men should hear, believe, and obey the same, and live for ever
therein, and that men should obey the services and ceremonies administered out
of the true light and word of life, to an incorporating thereinto.

7. Now inasmuch as diverse in times past, Mat. 15, 23. Joh. 9
gave greater respect to the ceremonies, and works of the Law, then to the life
of godliness; therefore they did cleave to the ceremonies and works of the
Law, and believed not the life that was required thereby, but fell away from
the right stock of the Joh. 8
father Abraham.

8. But the believers (that gave more regard to the life of godliness, then to
the ceremonies or works of the Law) abode still Ioh. 6
by the word of life, and were not bound, albeit they forsook the ceremonies of
the Law, which were out of the Letter commanded, by the unilluminate and
unbelievers of the word of life; for the ceremonies could not in themselves
without the word or light of life, extend to any commandment of God.

9. Therefore was the upright life at that time Deuteronomy. 18
published and taught, because men should believe the same as a precept or
commandment of the Lord, and be obedient unto his requiring, that so (through
the belief) they might be made free Act. 15 Romans 3 Ephesians. 2
from the sin, or be justified therefrom, and might live thereby with God the
Father to an everlasting peace according to the promises.

10. This communalty or believers of the good life, were as children of the
belief and obedience, Mat. 26.28 Acts 2.4.
joined together to a bringing in to the same life, under the service of the
holy Word, and the hand reached them thereunto, with the Christian ceremonies
of Baptism, and the Supper of Christ, which Christian ceremonies were
administered unto them out of the word of life, and observed by them to
obedience; yet not for the ceremonies, but for the upright life's sake, which
(being afterward to come) was Infra. 23
required therewith. And thus the Christian ceremonies were not the everlasting
commandment of God; but the word of life was it.

11. Howbeit, the ceremonies were annexed thereunto for an assistance Gal. 3.4
Heb. 7
and bringing in of the believers into the life, as is aforesaid, even as the
same is prefigured unto us, by the ceremonies of the Catholic Church of Jesu
Christ, to the intent that the believers of the holy word, and of the good life
or Christ, should through the service of the ceremonies, 2 Pet. 1
have regard to the same word of life, being afterward to come.

12. Even thus for the good life's cause, and for the man's sake, are the true
Christian ceremonies of the gracious word, and of his service of love now in
the last time annexed unto Gods everlasting Commandment, for an assistance of
all them to the 2 Pet. 1
entrance of the upright life, which believe in Jesu Christ, and humble
themselves to the service of his love, to the end they should be brought
thereby to the life, which is Gods everlasting commandment, and still abides
[namely, to Deuteronomy. 10 30 Mat. 22
love our God with all our hearts, and our neighbor as our selves, and to
obtain the same Romans 3 Ephesians. 2.
through the belief] even as it is preached and written, because no man should
trust upon the ceremonies, and find himself deceived by being without the
upright life.

13. Nevertheless after those days of the foresaid ministration of the
Christian ceremonies, many 1 Timothy 4 2 Timothy 3. 2 Pet. 2
fell away from the true belief of Christ, or of the good life, knowing no
difference in Gods precept or commandment, wherethrough there are now also
many become vain in their understandings, in such sort, that they themselves
know not the meaning of the christian ceremonies, nor yet to what purpose they
were adjoined to Gods commandment; and by that occasion there is risen up (for
the Christian ceremonies cause) much discord and debate, even as heretofore it
came to pass, for 2 Cor. 11 Gal. 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6
the Jewish ceremonies.

14. Wherefore seeing the services of the former Christian ceremonies after the
Letter, do bring in controversy, and are not set forth or observed out of the
word of life, nor out of the love of Jesu Christ, to the unity of heart in the
love, but out of the letter with different understandings, and in dissension,
and cannot alone in themselves extend to any commandment of God, therefore are
not the believers of the good life [namely, the communalty under the obedience
of the love of Jesus Christ] bound (as is rehearsed) thereunto, as of necessity
outwardly to observe them, but they stand free unto them either to keep, or to
omit them, to wit Romans 14
as they serve them to peace, and are edifiable unto men; for Gods commandment
Ioh. 12
is the everlasting life, and that is the very love it self, even Deuteronomy. 10.30.
Mat. 19.22 Romans 13
to love God above all things, and our neighbor as our selves.

15. Lo, this (to be short) is the difference of the Jewish and Christian
ceremonies, and of those of the Family of the Love of Jesu Christ, namely, to
what purpose their office or service is commanded, and to what intent they are
annexed to the everlasting Commandment of God and observed.

16. Now there are likewise diverse people that will not use some ceremonies
(because they judge them as heathenish or idolatrous services, and as a
forbidding of the Lord) by means of abhorring and fear that they have of them,
least any harm or hinderance should happen unto their souls thereby, concereing
the which it also must be considered, how and wherefore the same should be
idolatrous services, and a forbidding of God, for every unright asage has his
occasion, sense, and signification,

17. For whilst the heathen or the urcircumoised people (are in respect of the
knowledge of God, become vain; Romans 1 Ephesians. 4
blind, and insensible, (as being utterly estranged from the upright life which
God esteems,) therefore do they make or counterfeit unto themselves out of
the vanity of their thoughts, services and ceremonies, which the vain hearts
that understand not Gods Law and Ordinance, are bewitched and bound with.

18. So then the vain, corrupt, and bewitched life [which neither knows, nor
loves the living God, nor his Romans 1 Ephesians. 4
righteousness; but is rebellious and unfaithful to God] is Gods forbidding.
And out of it have the blind people which know not the upright life, joined
thereunto their services and ceremonies, Deuteronomy. 12
wherefore the contary life to God is the forbidding of the Lord, [to wit, that
men shall not believe, serve, nor be subject to the same] and not alone the
heathenish services and ceremonies in themselves.

19. And for the bewitched life's cause, all is idol-service, and against Gods
will, which such people as are held captive under it, or in their inwardnesse
are corrupted and bewitched by it, do observe and use, not for the services,
but Esa. 1.58 Amos 5 Mic. 6
for their corrupt lives sake.

20. For albeit they do out of such a bewitched life of unbelief take on them
or counterfeit any thing, which men call Jewish or Christian ceremonies, yet it
is not that which avails before God, Ephesians. 2.4
because they are strangers from the life which is of God.

21. Therefore seeing they are become Romans 1
vain and dark in their understanding, insomuch that they know neither the true
God, or his true God-service, nor the Idol or his Idol-service, therefore
neither are their outward Gods which men call Idols in themselves, 1 Cor. 8
the right Idols (but they are that they are) neither are their services or
ceremonies, the right Idol-services: For the Idol and the Idol-service (which
God accounts for such, and shuts for ever without him and his Kingdom,
and will not have it to be in his Temple or Tabernacle, but inwardly to be
rooted out) 1 Reg. 15. 1 Cor. 6 Ephesians. 5 Col. 3.
is the depraved or corrupt life as is aforesaid; by which corrupt life, the
people that are holden therewith, are bewitched and tied to the unprofitable
and vain things, which indeed are all Idol-services.

22. Forasmuch then as the services and ceremonies of the vain minded people
(which are ministered in their estranging from Gods true righteousness) cannot
bewitch our hearts, whilst that we are not, nor may not be made partakers of
their vain, perverse and corrupt life with the heart, neither do suffer our
selves to take pleasure in such things, 1 Cor. 10
how should their outward services and ceremonies (simply of themselves) be in
any wise unto us a forbidding of the Lord, or any idolatrous service? John 4
For God is a Spirit, and in the Spirit makes known unto us, that he beyond
all and above all, desirefh Deuteronomy. 6.10 Mat. 22
only out hearts, and that therein (as in his living Temple) he will Lev. 26
Ezekiel. 37 John 14 2 Cor. 6 Apo. 21
live and dwell, and only in the same be served and honored, in all upright
righteousness and holiness.

23. Therefore mark this ground, and consider in your understanding, to what
purpose God commands to be obedient unto his services and ceremonies, which
are administered out of his word of life, and wherefore the heathenish services
and ceremonies be against God: and how that the right God-services and
ceremonies do cleave, and are knit to the good life and upright being of the
living God, and the right Idol-services and idolatrous ceremonies do cleave,
and are knit to the corrupt life and word of vain imagination.

24. Now if ye mark this according to the truth, then shall ye well understand,
how or in what sort Mat. 15 23 Romans
that the outward services of the heathen or uncircuncised, be esteemed least
of before God, and how also that the outward Ordinances of God, are the
smallest services in the service of his Saints, and that God does most of all
regard that we (through his Ordinances and ceremonies) be joined unto him, and
so then (according to the requiring of his ceremonies) Deuteronomy. 6 Mat. 22
love him with all our hearts, and our neighbor as our our selves, and John. 17
know him as a true God, how that he only is the Lord, and the everlasting life.

25. Nevertheless it is unto me well known, that sundry speeches go about among
the children of men, wherewith they despise and blaspheme our godly
testimonies, and according to their conceit out of the Scripture or Letter, or
out of the imagination of their knowledge, do allege much there-against,
saying, this is Gods commandment, hereby must we abide, or this is Gods
forbidding, who can say against it?

26. It is true concerning the outwad, they can (out of the Scripture) speak
very much, do make therewith much Romans 16
division, strife, and discord among each other; but they seldom think or
consider that they ought to come in the spirit, to Joh. 5
that which the Scripture points unto.

27. Oh that they all knew the right meaning of the commandment or forbidding
of God, according to the truth, then should the strife for outward things be
soon ended and laid down!

28. But look into the matter ye dearly beloved, whether it goes not now also
as it did heretofore with the Galathians (when many of them were bound with the
outward circumcision) Gal. 3, 5, 6
whilst certain caused themselves to be circumcised, supposing out of the
testimonies of the Scripture according to the letter, that the same (although
notwithstanding it was not administered unto them out of the Word of life, under
the obedience of the belief) was yet a commandment of the Lord, such as
according to the letter men were necessarily to keep; but inasmuch as they
distinguished not the services and ceremonies, which were administered unto them
out of the Word of Life, from the services which were administered unto them out
of the letter, without the word and light of Life, neither had the sight of the
living commandment of the Lord, or of God, nor yet discerned or knew the same
from the commandment according to the letter, therefore were they Gal. 3.5
lead away with the outward, from proceeding in the spirit, and were very
miserably bewitched with the outward, because they thought that even the
salvation of souls lay therein.

29. On the other side, there were also many among the Corinthians, that 1 Cor.
8
made conscience, and counted it for an abomination, to buy, eat, or use the
offering of the Idols, after the manner of the heathens ceremonies, supposing
that Gods forbidding and the hurt of souls, lay in the outward ceremonies of
the heathen, and that of themselves alone they were Idol-services. But what (I
pray you) is there on the one side or on the other, or in any such like that
concerns us?

30. Verily in case we be come to the knowledge of the truth, and to the right
discerning of this difference, then we know that all the outward services of
the heathen (so that the heart stand free from them) are not of force to Mat. 15
defile the inward man, 1 Cor. 4 Gal. 4
in whom Christ has his form.

31. Also there consists in them alone, neither salvation nor condemnation,
such as God respects. For look what the heathen or the vain minded
uncircumcised people do observe, as concerning their God-services that is their
ignorance, Ephesians. 2.4
because they know not the true God, neither do hunger nor thirst after his
upright righteousness.

32. In case then that we be come to the true knowledge John 17
of the living God, (the which is our calling,) and do from the heart love his
life of righteousness in the spirit, shall we then say, and in such an
ignorance rest persuaded, that the God-service after the heathenish manner
should be any thing, or that it were the very Idol-service it self, that be far
from us.

33. We confess before God and his truth, and before all that believe thereon,
that there is 1 Cor. 8
no outward Idol, nor any outward Idol-service in heaven, nor on earth, but
that there is one only God, (whose God-service requires the upright
righteousness, and likewise reaches to the Heb. 8.9
ministration of the spiritual and heavenly goods in the living being of God,
according to the spirit, wherethrough all things are, and out of the same and
his spiritual and heavenly ministration in the spirit, preceedeth John 17 Ephesians. 4
the upright righteousness and the unity of the heart in the love, and the
true God-service on the earth, whose Altar is Heb. 9
not made with men's hands, out is prepared of God from the beinning of the
world for evermore; and on the other side, we confess that all the
God-services and Gods of the heathen are but vain Ier. 10
mockeries, and for noughtels to be respected, then for a foolish enchantment
in the ignorance, wherewith the vain hearts (which know nothing of God, nor of
his Law) are bewitched and tied.

34. Whilst then the ceremonies which (in contention) men call God services,
and as it were Ordinances of Christianity, and which in sundry manners are
brought in out of the Letter, do now bring much wrangling, strife, and
dissension in, therefore busy we not our selves much about them (whilst that
our heart is very little, or nothing at all tied unto them) but rather have
more regard, Gal. 5. Heb. 10
to give heed after the spirit unto that which the ceremonies of the Law, and
the services of the holy, Church of Jesu Christ do require, or whereunto they
are administered and used by the holy ones of God, and by the ancient Fathers of
the holy Church of Jesus Christ, out of the true light.

35. Nevertheless though we say we have more regard to attend unto that which
the ceremonies and services of the holy Church of Jesus Christ do require, yet
do we not therefore despise the Christian ceremonies or services, as though
they were of no value, or were besides the mind of the Spirit of Jesu Christ; O
no, that be far from us, but we esteem them great in their right degree and
use, Genesis 17 Mat. 28 Mat. 16.
as that the salvavation is with the ceremonies (but not through them) promised
unto the believers, Romans 3.9 Gal. 2.3
yet not that it should appear or come out of them.

36. For if the salvation were bound to the ceremonies, then must God needs be
a liar, whilst he had not ability to show mercifulness unto men out of his
grace, nor to save them, Romans 3.11 Ephesians. 2.
but that they must deserve the salvation through the works of the ceremonies.

37. Howbeit God abides true, and gracious, Psalm. 116 Romans 3
but the man is unfaithful and lying; for the man has forsaken the covenant
of his God, and has 4 Esd. 7.8
not regarded his promises, but abused his ceremonies, broken and despised the
right ordinances, and in the ministration of them, has not attended unto the
salvation of the belief, nor yet trusted in God, to obtain the same according
to the promises, but is 1 Timothy 4
fallen away from the meaning of the belief, gone forth after his own taken on
faith, and has forgotten the rock Deuteronomy. 32 Romans 9 1 Pet. 2
of his salvation.

38. Nevertheless, though (through infidelity, and the ignorance of men) the
right use of the ceremonies, and the meaning of the true belief, and of the
godly promises, be of many men forsaken, Number. 23 Deuteronomy. 4 Romans 3 2 Timothy 2
yet is God true notwithstanding, and he withholds not that which he has
promised, for his holy names sake; hereby declaring, that he is not unfaithful
or lying as the man is, but an everlasting, Eccl. 2
gracious and true God toward those that love him, that seek his
righteousness from the heart, and Mat. 5
hunger and thirst after it.

39. For he Deuteronomy. 4
forgets not his Covenant which he has made with the Fathers, neither does
he break his promises in Luke 1
such manner as he has spoken them (aforetimes) by the mouth of his holy
Pruphets, but will (for his own sake establish them, and cause the man Psalm. 50
to see his own human unfaithfulness and lying against his God, how that the
man has not regarded Gods Covenant nor his promises, under the services and
ceremonies, which were ordained for him of God; to this end that he Exodus 12 13
Mat. 26 Luke 22 1 Cor. 11
should think upon the same, to the intent he might be saved, according to the
promises.

40. But not To. 9.11
that Gods promises are established out of the ceremonies, or through the works
of the ceremonies. O no, but Romans 5 Gal. 5
in the love, according to the spirit, and according to the truth out of the
heavenly being, through the belief, even as it is promised, and as the
Scripture makes mention.

41. Wherefore seeing that God has now out of his grace given us 2 Cor. 4
such clearness (under the obedience of the requiring of his service of love)
in the spirit of our hearts, therefore look we more upon the promises, giving
heed unto that [namely the 1 Timothy 1
love] which the promises are established in, then we do upon the like
counterfeited services or ceremonies: And for this cause we cannot let our
hearts be bound or entangled with any thing that is ministered without the true
light and service of love, nor yet yield to take part either against or with
it, burdo endeavor our selves to the upright Ephesians. 4
righteousness and holiness in Jesus Christ, and to all concord in the love
and her service.

42. For thereunto were we and all men called heretofore of God the Father,
through the spirit of Christ, even that we should come through faith Romans 3.5, 8
to the righteousness in Jesu Christ, and to his true Mat. 22 John 17 1 Timothy 1
love, and that the ceremonies out of the true light, should for the same
intent be serviceable unto us.

43. Now might one here demand if the matter be so, why then have some yet
regard to taking part with flesh and blood? And wherefore do some yet make
conscience to themselves, to account the Schismatic ceremonies indifferent
unto them for some are held captive with affections, in their conscience, Romans
14 Gal. 3.4, 5
insomuch that they must yet observe certain ceremonies, and others again have
such an 1 Cor. 8.10.
abhorring of them, that they must necessarily leave them?

Answer.
44. Their unbelief Romans 1 Ephesians. 4
and blindness is the cause of it, inasmuch as they believe not the promises
of God, nor yet understand that the same are avouched in the spirit, but will
justify and esteem themselves faithful, either by cleaving to these, or by
leaving of those ceremonies, and think that before God they should be counted
unfaithful, if their hearts were not steadfastly bound unto those things, which
they Col. 2
have chosen to themselves, and which without the word of life, and requiring
of his service of love, they judge their faithfulness to consist in, not
perceiving how unfaithful Esa. 59
and lying themselves are in their inwardnesse unto God and his upright
righteousness. For the Lord requires by his services and ceremonies
principally, the inward Ezekiel. 36 Mat. 23 Luke 11
cleanness according to the spirit. And even to that end did the old Fathers
of the holy Church of Jesus Christ, Act. 2.8 10. etc.
use the ceremonies among Christ his believers.

45. But because this is not understood nor believed aright by the children of
men, therefore know they not also what is reckned unto them for salvation, nor
yet wherein consists the condemnation.

46. For seeing they give respect to their unclean consciences, and are fast
tied to something that directs not to God and his righteousness, they cannot
therefore perceive nor understand what God requires of them, for their
consciences are stained with something which they esteem for holy, and yet is
not of God, and therefore they fear.

47. But if they came to the Joh. 1 2 Pet. 1 1 Ioh. 1
sight of the living being of God, which only is holy, and whereby all visible
things are hallowed, and be used or ministered uprightly, then would they
(through the ministering of the Sap. 13 Romans 1
visible things) have regard to the everlasting, and not to the corruptible,
either for to fear it, or else for to esteem the outward, above the profit
thereof, as whereby they might in any wise be accused, and would in the spirit
love that, which all is comprehended in, and which the ceremonies of the Law of
the belief, and of the service of love do point and direct unto.

48. So then the sum of all that God requires of us, is 1 Reg. 15
an obedience which is after God, and not after the manner of men, or according
to elementish working; namely, An Ezck. 36 1 Timothy 1
upright heart toward God and his righteousness, a Psalm. 51
willing spirit, and a pure unspotted conscience in Jesu Christ.

49. Heb. 6 10
Let us hereunto, in the obedience of the requiring of the service of Love,
proceed on with 1 Timothy 1
unfamed of faith, in Romans 12 1 Pet. 1.3
brotherly love, and in Romans 12 2 Cor. 13 Heb. 12
a peaceable mind; for thereunto are we called, and this same is the upright
Salvation, which God makes choice of in us.

Take it to heart.
CHAP. XVIII.
1. We are exhorted to accept of the proffered Grace, and to grow up in
Righteousness, unto the Glory which shall be revealed at the last. 3. Not to
bind our Consciences to any outward thing, nor to assume any Liberty to our
selves. 11. To take heed of Halting on both sides, and of Mixing with the
World. 15. We are at first, called to Sanctification, and not to much
Confessing with the mouth. 16. Christ (indeed) is to be confessed: but how?

SEeing then (Dearly-beloved) that such a godly sight is now in these dangerous
times by Gods Grace appeared unto us, that we sensibly perceive in our selves
the divine Calling to the same: (which appears unto us, not out of Flesh nor
Blood; but is brought unto us out of the heavenly Truth, or Loins of Jesus
Christ, through Acts 2.
the holy Ghost, Acts 15.
for to cleanse our hearts through Faith, according to the Promises; the which
is 1 Cor. 3.
the blessing and increase of God, that is not tied unto any working of men,
but is the power of God the Father himself, for Ephesians. 1.
a pledge of our Inheritance:) therefore let us take heed to such an appeared 2
Cor. 6. Hebr. 12.
Grace, and Heb. 3.
not turn us away in the time of the godly calling of Salvation, but give over
our hearts (in the belief) thereunto [namely, to the obedience of the Love, in
the Spirit] and so (with all inclination of love, with lowly hearts unto God,
and with long-suffering) Ephesians. 1.4. 1 Pet. 2.
grow up and increase in the Righteousness and Holiness that are pleasing
unto God, that we may be a seat of the holy Triumph of our Lord Jesu Christ in
his Coming. Which heavenly cleernesse of the godly Triumph, and of the glory of
his Christ in the Spirit, Romans 16. Ephesians. 3. Col. 1. 2 Timothy 1.
has hitherto been hidden from the World, and has ceased, because it should
be 1 Pet. 1.
disclosed and made manifest (in holy Glory) in the last time, to the joy of
the Believers, that hope for the salvation of upright hearts.

2. That truly is it which God requires, and whereunto all Gods Prophets have
born witness: And Joel. 2. Acts 2.
it shall come to pass (says God) in the last days.

3. Therefore let no man now make to himself any conscience, Col. 2. Gal. 4.5
nor suffer his heart to be bound or tied by any earthly outward thing, that he
be not thereby hindered for coming to the purity or sanctification of the heart,
which (out of God) comes to pass in the Spirit.

4. Let no man also take any thing upon him to any intent of Liberty, whereby
to live Genesis 3. Ephesians. 4.
in the apple of conscience, after the mind of this World. For (in such a
course) the Liberty should be wholly abused, and be unto us an occasion Gal. 5.
1 Pet. 2.
to use liberty according to the Flesh, and utterly to fail of the upright John
8. Romans 6.
Liberty in Jesus Christ.

5. But seeing that we have now obtained an upright liberty in Jesu Christ
(under the obedience of the Love) in the using of the Services and Ceremonies;
and that both it, and the manner how we are to use the Ceremonies uprightly (in
these dangerous times, is risen up unto us in our hearts, and vouchsafed us of
God, therefore are we to look into this Liberty after the Spirit, for to use it
to a growth of the upright life in the Spirit, that there may Isa. 1.10. Romans 9.
remain a seed to preservation: for then will the God of heaven (now in the
last time) make his holy Name, and his secret Wisdom famous and notable,
against all the wise of this World, Mat. 11. 1 Cor. 1. and 2. and 3.
who by their own wisdom, do not understand the secret Wisdom of God.

6. Hereunto let your hearts be inclined, ye Dearly-beloved, and not to the
infidelity delitie of the blind World, nor to the contention of the seditious
Letter-learned. And in any case take heed to your Eccl. 4. and 27. Gal. 6.
time, ye that are come to such a sight, and to the holy calling of the godly
love; and thank God from the heart (with a cheerful mind) Tit. 2.
for such an appeared grace, out of the bountiful kindness of his love, in
this last abominable time, whose end reaches to the destruction Mat. 25. Romans
2. 2 Pet. 3.
or condemnation of all wicked men.

7. Let your eyes of the spirit, and Prove. 4.
your whole heart of Understanding stand ever fixed or bent upon the upright
life. Look not about after the corruptible being, but love the happiness of
preservation, which is (through the Word of truth) in all love proffered unto
you; else shall you be found empty and without understanding, with all the Jer.
7.8.
conceited Wise of the blind World, which, with all her own wisdom, must needs
Isa. 29. 1 Cor. 1.
go down, and Gods wisdom (though unto the World it be a foolishness) shall
in the love stand firm for ever.

8. For Gods foolishness it 1 Cor. 1.
wiser then all the wisdom of the subtle wit, or understanding of the flesh.
For, if the man should have the right in his wisdom, doubtless God must needs
be in the wrong.

9. Therefore abides the Saying ever steadfast; Psalm. 116 Romans 3.
God only good and true in trying, and all men (of themselves) deceivable and
lying.

10. Which deceivable and lying Eccl. 21.
being the man ought, before all things, to eschew, even as a Canker, and with
the heart to cleave to none Pro. 1.3. 1 John 2.
whose mind, will, and desire has any delight and pleasure in the ungodly
being of the confused world: Mat. 10. Luke 14.
yea, though it were even Husband, Wife, Children and Kinsfolks, Father or
Mother, Sister or Brother, Master or Servant; Nay, be he who he will, so far
as he cleaves willingly to the evil.

11. Oh! Take heed to your selves, that in any wise ye go not (with the heart)
lame or limping 3 Reg. 18
, nor halt on both sides: that ye seek not the living God, with retaining the
Devils nature; 2 Cor. 6
nor Christ, with keeping the Belialish spirit of Antichrist; nor the
righteousness, by retaining any unrighteousness, to the intent that in such a
mixture ye perish not with the wicked erring World, which desires to serve God
and the Devil together.

12. With those which are so minded, Supra 16
hold not your hearts common, or at unity; you [I mean] that have a longing to
God and his Righteousness; but rather be ye against them, [namely, against such
as withstand all Righteousness, and the Unity in the Love;] yet not with the
Mouth, lest ye be burdened with any thing to your hinderance in Godliness:
Pro. 4.
but with the Heart, Mind, and Life. For in the same opposition is the right
Preservation in Jesus Christ which God esteems.

13. Nevertheless, unto the lovers of Righteousness, who have minded Love,
Concord and Peace, or do endeavor thereafter, we are to speak (according as
their Understanding can bear) 1 Pet. 3.
of the lively hope which is in us, [to wit, so much as serves to edification,
and may be godly to hear;] and so become full of the Spirit, and Ephesians. 1. Phil.
1. Col. 1.
knowledge of spiritual wisdom in all love.

14. Many have indeed heretofore (as it is reasonably well known unto many of
us) spoken of Letter and Scripture abundantly, rehearsed every man's Fails,
both of the Spiritual and Temporal, and (according to the Histories of the
Scriptures) confessed their Understanding; and yet have not marked nor known in
what sort or being they should prepare their Eccl. 2.
hearts before God: and so, by their untimely zeal, have cast themselves into
the hands of the World, and plucked a yoke Act. 15.
or burden upon their necks, which they were not able to bear.

15. Keep your selves, ye Deerly-beloved, from such things. For, at first, God
calls us 1 These. 4. 2 Thessalonians. 2 1 Pet. 1.
unto Sanctification in the Spirit, and not unto much Confessing with the Mouth.

16. Now, if any man say, Christ has taught to Mat. 10. Mat. 3. Luke 9. and 12.
confess him; That is right indeed, if it were well understood.

17. But, O Beloved! tell me, I pray you, How will ye confess Christ, Joh. 1.5.
whom ye know not, or before ye have, in Romans 6.8 2 Cor. 4. Phil. 3. Col. 2.
death and life, followed and put him on?

18. True it is, ye have read or heard of Him in the Scripture; nevertheless,
many have never seen Joh. 5.
his shape, and his love dwells not in them: and therefore they understand
not what they confess. For how should you by any means confess Christ, before
Gal. 4.
he have his shape in you, and that ye Joh. 17. Heb. 3. 2 Pet. 1.
be made partakers of his being?

19. Know ye not, that it is written, how that Christ says to his Father,
Joh. 17.
I have given them the cleernesse which thou have given me, that they should
be one, even as we are one: I in them, and Thou in Me, that they may be
perfect in one, and that the world may know, that thou have sent me, and thou
have loved them, as thou have loved Me. Father, I will, that where I am, there
may they also be with me, whom thou have given me?

20. Ruminate upon the sense, mark well the ground, understand the Scripture,
and take a view of your selves, whether ye have received of Christ such a
cleernesse or not; and whether he be one with you, and ye with him, and with
the Eather.

21. Now, if it be thus with you, to wit, that ye be come to such a 1 These. 4 2 Thessalonians. 2 1 Pet. 1.
sanctification in the Spirit, through Christ, then ye know who he is for to
confess him; and ye know him, how that he is Heb. 1.
the like image of his Father, one Being, Spirit or Life with the Godhead Apoc.
1.22.
who has neither beginning nor ending.

22. He says also, Joh. 14.
I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no man comes to the Father, but only
through Me.

23. Moreover, Joh. 10.
I am the door of the Sheep; if any man enter in by me, he shall be saved.

24. Therefore have regard to the ground of the Scriptures, how (in all things)
they point us unto Christ, to the intent that he should have his Gal. 4.
shape in us; and that we should be in all upright righteousness and holiness
Joh. 17. Heb. 3. 2 Pet. 1.
partakers of his Being, if it were but rightly understood. For it is
unpossible Exo. 33. Romans 8. 1 Cor. 2.
to know the Spirit of Christ, with an heart that is clothed or covered with a
mind of the Flesh.

25. If Christ therefore has a Shape in you, Joh. 7. How men shall rightly
confess Christ.
and you believe in him, as the Scripture says, then may you confess him
rightly: Howbeit, not out of your imagining, nor according to your knowledge
out of the letter, as the learned in the letter and the common people do, that
are without the communiality of the love of Jesus Christ; but confess him out
of the shape that he has in you, through such a cleernesse as Joh. 1. Acts 2.
2 Cor. 12 Gal. 1. 2 Pet. 1.
his Apostles confessed him by; even as it is written,

26. That which was 1 John 1.
from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes,
which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the Word of life. And
the life appeared, and we have seen it, and do testify and publish unto you
the eternal life, which was with the Father, and is appeared unto us.

27. Here may every one look into himself, whether he also do thus know Christ,
before he testify or confess much of him: otherwise he knows not what he
confesses.

28. Therefore, we must first be turned unto Christ according to the Truth;
that is, Romans 5. Gal. 5. 1 Pet. 1.
in Hope, through Faith, unto the righteousness, and so, with good will, stand
firm thereunto in the belief, Mat. 10. and 16. Lu. 9.14.
take up daily our cross in the obedience of the holy Word of the Spirit of
the love of Christ, and follow him with patience in our souls, to the
salvation, until he obtain a Gal. 4.
Shape in us, and his death Gal. 6.
of the cross become a joy unto us; and so in the truth know him, to the intent
we might confess him rightly.

29. For the heart must be turned into him, and he into our hearts; and then
may we rightly confess him with the mouth. Or think thou, O thou man, that
this pleases God, to speak of God sometimes Mat. 7.
with the mouth, and so to confess his Christ (not respecting among whom, or
to whom) of whom a man knows nothing at all, and whiles your Isa. 29. Mat. 15.
heart remains so far estranged from Christ, and from his upright
Righteousnesss and Holiness in the Spirit? O no: whosoever takes it so, shall
be deceived therein.

30. For, if thine heart be not turned to Christ and his Service of love,
neither be inclined to the 1 These. 4 2 Thessalonians. 2 1 Pet. 1.
sanctification in the Spirit, and thou, through the belief of the truth, do
not, with inclination of the love, Ephesians. 4.
grow up therein, then is all thy faith and confessing unprofitable, and
unpleasing to God and his Christ.

31. If thou therefore, O man, do either despise, or have no regard unto that
which is [out of love] held forth, or witnessed unto thee, thou shall surely
lament it at the last; namely, in those days when Misery shall fall upon thee,
and that thou shall see the Triumph of the gloriousness of Christ, Jude 1.
in many thousand Saints, coming Isa. 43. and 49.
from the rising of the Sun, and going down; from the midday, and from the
North or midnight; and that they Isa. 51. and 52.60.61.62.
shall with gladness be assembled (as a Kingdom of God their Father) unto Mat.
8.
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and unto all the holy Prophets; Mat. 8. and 25.
Luke 13.
and thou then shall find thy self shut out of doors.

32. And therefore now have ye all regard Psalm. 51. Isa. 57.66. Micah 6.
to an upright heart and meek spirit, according to the spirit or life of
Christ, and Pro. 1.
separate your selves from the ways of all the uncircumcised and unbeleeving.

33. Howbeit, not outwardly with the body, or with words; 1 Cor. 5.
for then must ye go out of the world, and abide in no place, for the
unbeleeving darknesses Isa. 5.9 60. 4 Esd. 14.
have covered the world everywhere. But 2 Cor. 6.
separate you from them with heart and spirit; Believe the good in the love,
and become likewise a light in the Lord; Apo. 18.
so shall ye not be partakers of their ungodliness.

34. This write I unto you, ye Deerly-beloved, for this intent, even to stir
you up hereby to a pure mind, and to that piety which God regards: also for
a warning of destruction to come; and that ye may perceive, how that men are to
stand unpartiall (according to the requiring of the Truth) for to use well the
2 Pet. 1.
common love, and to know the upright confessing of Jesus Christ: whereby to
understand (so much as the Lord, out of his grace, permits us to see)
wherein the calling of our salvation consists, to the intent that no man,
through misunderstanding or vain imagination, deceive himself, or be deceived
by others.

35. If now any man be drawn away, Gal. 1.
or lead aside from this good understanding which we bear witness unto, let
such a one turn him again to the Good (that his inclination to Gods requiring
be not in vain,) and lament and bewail his ignorance, that the Lord may be
gracious unto him; and so apply himself, with whole heart, mind, and will, to
the upright righteousness, which in the Love abides firm for ever.

CHAP. XIX.
1. Of the common Saying, They shall be all taught of God; How it is mistaken,
and with what hurt. 11. Who they are, and how they order themselves, that shall
be taught of God.

THere goes also a common Saying abroad amongst many, and it is Scripture,
[the which is recited in the first Book of the Glass of Righteousness, and
also in many mo places of our Writings] Isa. 54. Jer. 31.
They shall all be taught aright of God, and Ezekiel. 11. and 36. Joel 2. Acts 2.
by his Spirit.

2. Now, whiles some that have heard and spoken of this Sentence, understood
not the Scripture, nor rightly took heed to the sense of the Word, therefore
they have not explained the meaning of the Word aright.

3. Also some that have heard it, have let the counsel of the Word go, and so
are fallen into the forgetting of the good, turned away from the desire to the
Righteousness, and from the hope of Salvation, according to the Promises, and
have sticked unto Romans 1. Epes. 4.
covetousness and lusts, the snares of the confused world.

4. Truly, those that cleave to the Word, and his Service of Love in such a
sort, and do so take and understand it, they have conceived altogether amiss
of the Word and his requiring; and therefore they are Romans 1. Ephesians. 4.
become vain in their understanding: Insomuch, that they forsake the Scriptures
and Exhortations to the good all alike, and do let the conversion to God, and
to his Righteousness, utterly dye out of their hearts; speaking thus with
unrepentant hearts, out of the vanity of their mind, (not discerning the
upright understanding) It must all come of God; There is One that gives all;
For it is God only that can teach us; Of him must we receive all, and no men
can give it us.

5. This they say well; and run yet nevertheless forth, as if there were no
God, nor Ministering of his Word, that loved or required the Righteousness; and
do not once know, nor consider the estranging or Isa. 1.59.
falling from their God, whereby to turn them again to him and his
Righteousness, and to show repentance or Matt. 3. Luke 3. Acts 3.
amendment for their sins; and so in all humility to have regard to what
purpose God has given his Promises, and annexed or ordained the Ministration
of his Word under the obedience of the love thereunto, whereby they might receive
of him the virtue of salvation. For out of such a heart of humility Isa. 57.66.
4 Esd. 8. Eccl. 3. Jam. 4. 1 Pet. 5.
the humble do always in God find their salvation; and not the stout hearts,
that do not esteem of Gods righteousness.

6. O God! How dangerous a time is it now 1 Timothy 4 2 Timothy 3 2 Pet. 3. Jude 1.
in these last days, through the misunderstanding of the children of men!

7. What a number of false and venomous winds do there blow among the children
of men, to the hurt of their souls, and to a drawing of them away from the
Righteousness!

8. Oh, That there were in every one an hearty desire to the good! then might
they be protected and defended from the bewitching of the false winds, which
make the heart negligent to the upright Good, and bring it either to the
bewitched Humility, or to the Lusts of the vain world.

9. Therefore it is expedient to have a regard to Understanding, Prove.
1.2.3.4.8.
to take heed to the Wisdom, to esteem much of Godliness, to account the
upright Righteousness Sap. 7.8
for the most precious, above all Riches, and to make choice of the
Longsufferance, with the foresightfulnesse as Superintendents.

10. This did the holy Fathers in times past give heed unto; Sap. 11. Eccl.
44.45, 46.
and so God taught them in his wisdom, and preserved them, that they were not
partakers of the plagues of the ungodly.

11. Wherefore let every one understand the meaning of the Word aright, and
take a right view, that he may know who he is, and how he ought to apply
himself to be taught of God, and to be endowed with his Spirit, and what manner
of people God will choose for his holy people.

12. Truly not such, Sap. 1.
as with their hearts cleave unto the world, love the Evil, Pro. 1.
and in all things let go the counsel of God. Neither yet such, Mat. Luke 17.21
as hang their Hearts in buying and selling, upon coveteousnesse, or Romans 13 1
Cor. 10
in eating and drinking, upon gluttony; or in marrying, or being married, upon
unchastnesse; or upon any vain transitory rejoicing, whether it be in building
or in planting; and who in all their doings do not attend nor have regard unto
the works of the Lord, as it came to pass in the times Genesis 7.
of Noe, and in the Genesis 19
times of Lot.

13. For all those, whose hearts in the time of Noe, clave not to Gods
righteousness, but had a Lust, and gave over their hearts to the vain corrupt
things: they marked not the work of the Lord, neither had any respect to the
preservation of the Righteous, nor yet feared the punishment, which then was
ready to come upon all wicked men. Of all this they knew nothing, till the
Flood came upon them, and took them clean away.

14. Therefore understand and know the preservation of godly men in these last
days, and consider well the meaning, who or which they are, that shall be
taught of God, and in what course they walk (the which we have in some measure
expressed, 1 Glass. 7
in the first Book of the Glass of Righteousness, and do here at this
present express it:) namely, they are those that Mat. 5.
have hunger and thirst after the Righteousness, Judith. 8 Eccl. 2.3
that submit their souls to the obedience of the gracious Word, and his
Service, Luke 18
and continue daily in prayer (not in many words, John 4. Ephesians. 6. Phil. 4.
but in the Spirit, with desire to the Lord and his Righteousness) that they may
obtain grace at the hands of God, to live Lake 1
in his righteousness, with an upright heart, and pure spirit.

15. These are sorrowful for their sins, and sighing over them, suffer not
their souls to be quiet, so long as they know or feel in themselves any vain
or naughty Being, which their hearts are tied or bound unto: or so long as any
thing in them does reign over them, which is not GOD, because they may not in
all things serve their God only.

16. These that love the good Being from the heart, do seek in God to obtain
the same, and do labor and zealously endeavor thereafter: Deuteronomy. 4 Jer. 29.
Mat. 7. Luke 17.
For they seek and find, they knock and it is opened unto them, they ask and
receive: not in presumptuousnesse, as though God owed it them, because of their
seeking, knocking, and asking. O no: they look not upon their own doings, but
labor only for this, even how to please the Lord, giving themselves over
thereunto with humble hearts, according to the Spirit, and acknowledge that
they are not worthy of such Grace, thus to be accepted and established in Gods
truth and love.

17. With such humble hearts do they through the Love and her Service, seek to
find grace and peace at the hands of God the Father, and not the subtle
knowledge, 1 Cor. 6
which makes the heart stout and lofty: Mat. 6.
but they seek above all, and before all things, the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness. The which are the gifts of God, that God richly brings in the
everlasting life, unto such as worship and love him.

18 For those that pray unto him for an upright heart, and for a new and pure
Spirit, Luke 11
he does not endow with an evil heart or a wicked spirit (though sometimes the
evil heart, or unrighteous spirit make up it self there-against: yet is the
same taken away Ephesians. 6.
through the Belief, in the Cross or patience of Christ, upon hope of the
good that is for to come:) but they obtain faithfulness and truth, Luke 11
and the righteous Spirit, with an heart of meekness and love. And that is
Christ, or the Anointed, which is holy, and teaches right. It is true.

19. After this manner do they apply themselves that will be taught of God, and
his Christ, out of whom God will prepare him an Tit. 1.
acceptable people, to be a remnant for himself in the destruction of the
wicked world. Yea it shall be a Esa. 41 Soph. 3. Luke 12.
poor plain people: (not after the outward sight of the eye, but according to
the hidden inward man) such as hope on the Lord, and in the Spirit, rely and
trust upon his Name. And these same, yea such does God choose unto him for his
people, for to magnify his holy Name in them for evermore.

20. For consider, ye beloved, how should any man be taught of God, or Christ,
that will not give ear to his teaching or counsel, but does as Gods enemy,
cleave unto and love the Joh. 8. 1 John 2.
Devil and the World, which do openly resist God?

21. Therefore ought the lovers of the Truth, which hope for the salvation of
the perfect. Being, utterly to put out of their hearts Prove. 1
whatsoever concerns the vanity or misbehaviour, and every thing which the
heart, contrary to God and his Righteousness, is bound or tied with, so much as
in the Lord they are able, and so to give over themselves to God, that Gods
goodness may have his place in them, and not any ungodly Being.

22. Also all lovers of the Righteousness ought to Ephesians. 4.
reach the hand; and to Romans 15. 2 These. 5 Heb. 3.10.
exhort one another to the same: and so in one manner of Belief, to strengthen
each other toward salvation with a good courage: 2 Pet. 1
and to have regard to the sure prophetical Word [to wit, to the Service of
the Love, administered in his time] to treat thereof: Act. 2.20
to break that same bread among each other in stillness: and to persevere or
abide stedfest in prayer, till Esa. 25 2 Cor. 3.
all coverings (wherewith their hearts, after the flesh, or according to the
visible, are covered) be done away: and that the pure or clear [that is to
say, the spiritual, heavenly, and uncovered Being of Christ] 2 Cor. 3.
appear and come in their spirit, to the intent that so they might 1 John 4. 2
Cor. 5.
know, and cleave fast unto the living God, and his Christ, in the spirit (even
as he, blessed may he be, is a Spirit) and in all Love (wherein the Law and the
Gospel of the Kingdom and the doctrine thereof, is Romans 15 Gal. 5. 1 Timothy 1.
fulfilled) might with all their understanding, will and desire, live the
upright righteousness of God: Deuteronomy. 4 Mat. 22.
and that God likewise may be the most best beloved, and his Righteousness
Mat. 13. 2 Cor. 4.
their most precious Treasure, worthy to be esteemed high above all.

23. Whosoever now do thus, with an inclination to the same, stand in a good
will, to them belongs the blessing and happiness promised of God: to whom it
is also promised, Psalm. 82. John 1.
that they shall be made the children of God, and be blessed with the dew of
his increse, and be anointed for Psa. 45
Christians with the oil of Love and of his Spirit or Christian nature: yet
not out of flesh and blood, but out of the holy Divine Being.

24. When the man therefore is thus joined unto God, then may he with God,
rightly possess all things, and understand and know, whereout the horrible
destruction comes upon the Children of men.

25. Wherefore the man should fear his God, that he might come to the godly
wisdom, and might cleave unto that which is right and reasonable, to the
intent, that he might not perish with the wicked.

26. For wisdom, Pro. 8. Sap. 7.
is much better then Gold and Silver. Righteousness much worthier and
preciouser, than all Pearls and precious stones; and prudence much more
honorable, puissant, and strong, than all Castles, Cities, and Fonresses, also
mightier than the multitudes of the Armed. The fear of God does more quiet the
heart in a little, than do abundant Riches in all the pleasures and delights of
the world. It shall in his time be found and known to be even so.

27. Unto this holy and divine wisdom, apply ye your hearts, ye dearly beloved,
and be ye warned in this dangerous time, in which, all foolishnes and
ungodlines bears sway: whose end reaches Heb. 10
to the most horriblest destruction.

28. For so it comes, which is for to come, and all ungodly being shall make
up it self and be astonished, after that it shall Esa. 13.
fear, tremble, and quake, and be compelled in the beholding of his own
destruction, to suffer the vengeance of the fire, but the godly shall obtain
peace.

29. Therefore take heed, fear God, stick fast to virtue, humility, and
meeknes, least ye remain in the ungodlines, Apo. 18
and be made partakers of her plagues.

30. Watch Mat. 24. Luke 21. 1 Pet. 5.
and pray, and be reformed or justified, and stand fast upon Gods promises.

31. Observe your time, Gal. 6.
unto sanctification, Jam. 1.
and behold in you daily the spots of your spirit, in the Glass of
Righteousness, and wash you, Esa. 1. Jer. 4. Ezekiel. 36 John 3.
with the clean waters, in the laver of the Love; and be purged in your
spirit, Eccl. 2.
in the Furnace of the lowlines of haert, and so love that thing which is right
and reasonable.

CHAP. XX.
1. The Author bath kept back nothing, that is necessary to Salvation. 5. And
therefore clears himself of the Man's destruction. 8. Yet if any de know any
better thing, he desires that they will show it out of love, as he has done.
10. A Council to all lovers of the truth, how to behave themselves. 19. Showing
them what God requires. 26. He wills, that men desire not to have all at
once. 30. Many ignorant beginnings, have brought men into diverse
misunderstandings: especially, into security. 39. From which be exhorts to
return with a new courage, unto the service of the love. 43. Of diverse that are
diversely disposed to error. Some to rest upon themselves, some upon their
Liberty, some regard neither sin nor Grace, some straiten themselves to get the
promises: and afterward grow insolent upon their own worthiness. 57. Whereof he
wills to beware.

BEhold ye beloved, according to all that in my labor I have been able to do,
howsoever the same be plain, and not to be compared to the style of the subtle
and flowred eloquence) I cannot tell that I have (according to the sight which
is Romans 16 Ephesians. 3. Col. 1. 2 Timothy 1.
revealed unto me, out of Gods grace) kept back any thing from the man, that
serves, or is needful for him to know either to his Salvation, or else for a
warning unto him, of the present destruction, and of that that is to come.

2. Have regard to the time, and respect an unpartial heart in the Righteousness
Ephesians. 3.
Be established in the love, and be still mindful of the same.

3. I have showed my service out of the inclination of love: howbeit, I have
written against none in particular, but before all understandings
indifferently: I have weighed the equity, Esa. 28 Eccli. 21.
in the balance, measured the Righteousness with the Square and Line, and
described the Righteousness in Letters, according to the life, the inward life
out of God, [to wit, his good nature] I have expressed, and the outward
righteousness of man, have I not left out. To the intent, that it might all go
rightly forward in the true Being, and that no man might be bewitched, or
bound with any opinion or bewitching of spirit; but that every one might
according to the truth, and in the love stand free in God.

4. Lo, God Deuteronomy. 30. Act. 20.
is my witness, and Heaven and Earth also; that in all my writing, I have
neither sought nor desired any other thing, but the salvation of men in the
love. The Lord of his mercy vouchsafe us to find grace in his sight, Psalm. 86
and lead us in his ways, for to cleanse our hearts by Psalm. 51. Act. 15.
his righteous spirit and by faith, to the end, we may know him in the truth,
and be defended from all the errors and abominations of the wicked world.

5. Behold and awake, Ephesians. 5.
in the spirit of your minds lay hold of understanding: look to your selves, 1 John 2.
and let not the errors of this world delight you. I clear my self this day
before you all, and before all those that willingly desire or be minded to
error, or to the wicked world, that my Council and will is not so.

6. If any man therefore take pleasure, or be addicted to the world or to her
vanity and abominations: and do desire to fix his heart thereon. The same
erreth through the pleasing of his own mind. But as for me, I clear my self of
his destruction.

7. For lo, I have out of the inclination of love, called and bidden you all
out of the abominable World, unto conversion to God, and unto Repentance, and
unto Amendment, and have herein warned you all sufficiently: I have distinctly
showed you (as much as I might do and saw necessary) both death Deuteronomy. 11 Jer.
21. Eccl. 15.
and life, destruction and preservation: I have witnessed and pointed forth the
God of life, which has made Heaven and Earth, his Statutes Deuteronomy. 4
and Ordinances which stand fast for ever, (wherein all the upright Fathers
have lived, and which all Gods Prophets have born witness of) I have also
distinctly marked out. Therefore shall no man (that hears or reads our
writings, be able to John 15
excuse himself, as though that we have hidden the Council or Will of God from
him in any thing.

8. Nevertheles, if there be any greater God, then the God of Israel, which
has made Heaven and Earth: If there be now any better Law or Ordination, then
his Law: Deuteronomy. 4
Or better Statutes and Ordinances, then Gods Statutes and Ordinances,
according to his Ordination: If there be any perfecter life then the 1 Cor. 13
Col. 3. 1 John 4.
love, as is witnessed by his Christ: (for through the very same was John 1.
the life aforetimes published, which is everlasting: and on that same, or to
that same everlasting life, is even our service and pointing also.)

Or if three be any thing in any body, or if any man has any better thing, that
excels the everlasting life and the Love, which we bear witness unto, let him
manifest the same unto us, or let it out of Love be known unto us, to the unity
of heart in the Love, even as we to the self same unity, do witness, manifest
and publish, the everlasting life, and his righteousness of the Love and of
the upright being.

9. Or if any man persuade himself, that he knows some better thing, which
points nearer or clearer to the Almighty, than the holy Spirit of the Love
and of th everlasting Truth does testify and point unto us, (by which
Testimonies, he Ioh. 14.
brings, and leads us into all Truth:) Let the same man make himself
apparent unto us under the obedience of the Love, with an unpartiall mind; and
not withhold from us the most best, for to serve in the unity of heart in the
Love, as is said, in upright godliness, the living God only; For even thus
stands our whole heart affected.

10. Hereunto be ye now all armed and well disposed, O ye lovers of the Truth.
Beware that ye sleep not, Romans 13. Ephesians. ^
seeing it is now a time to Watch; but awake in the Spirit: and abide in any
wise in the Hope, until ye see the light to the life your salvation.

11. Make not hardly any light account of it: cast it not with the unregarding
ones, in the wind; but have respect always unto the good, and this service of
the Love showed on you; which is in Letters described and ministered unto you,
to a godly life, stretching to the Love, turn not aside from you; but take
Deuteronomy. 6. Prove. 4.
the same to heart: and grow therein, to an upright being of the Love. And so
then show your unpartiall service toward one another, according to the upright
nature and being of the Love; For the Love to the unity of the brotherly nature
requires such things, to the intent that the everlasting true God, might in
such upright Ephesians. 4.
righteousness and holiness as pleases him, and in the establishment of his
promises only be observed; and the earth likewise Esa. 60.61. 2 Pet. 3.
with righteousness, faithfulness and Truth, be inhabited. Toward this let
us go forward, in a meek spirit.

If ye hear any thing that sounds unto you strange or Hos. 8.
absurd in your ears, yet be not bitterly minded: but follow after long
suffering, and blaspheme nothing.

13. Let every one which is not to be spoken to, or to be councelled, run to
an end, with his understanding; and grow ye up in stilnes, and singlenes of
heart, Sap 9. Jam. 1.
praying God for Wisdom, and for an upright sight in the Truth; But tie not
your hearts unto any thing, save only, to the good life of the Truth; Ioh. 8.
For that shall make you free.

14 Above all things ye beloved 1 Cor. 14. Col. 3.
follow still after the Love, For there neither is, nor shall be, any thing
that may excel her. Deuteronomy. 6. Mat. 22 1 Cor. 13 1 Timothy 1
The Love is the cheifest good, the Truth a light to the life, and the
Righteousness our joy. Hereunto let our hearts be affected: for herein stands
the praise of the Lord.

15. Thus let us forsake all bewitching of the Spirit: and depart from the
evil, and increase or grow up in the good: And that all in stillnes, and in
the hidden wisdom of God. For the time peradventure will yet a little while
remain troublous, to speak freely before all people, of the Truth and godliness;
For at this time, she is Esa. 59. 3 Esd. 14.
yet with the World much too base, but love and esteem ye her so much the more:
and gather ye her to your selves, for a treasure in your hearts.

16. All what the wicked world loves, all the enormities and abominations,
that the Ministers of the wicked world, do gather in their hearts, and all the
envy, contentiousnes, and strife of the obstinate Teachers against us, and our
most holiest service of the Love, cast and hurl them all out of your hearts,
and inwardly have nothing to do with them; For their inwardnes is full of
vanity, falsehood and maliciousnes, and their joy is only in their foolish
knowledge, and in the earthly and transitory things.

17. But let your hearts be full of the life and being of the true Godhead,
and your joy only in his righteousness, that therein ye may live, in the
Spirit, and according to the Truth.

18. Let it be a pleasure unto you that God becomes Lord and King over all.
Have a desirous heart to the good, to the same reach also Ephesians. 4.
one another the hand, and retain no offense of mis-doing one toward another;
but exhort to amendment, Eccle. 28. Mat. 6. Col. 3.
and forgive in the Love, that so we may grow up with each other, in one band
of Love unto the godliness, as a reconciled or Tit. 2.
acceptable people of the Lord, through Jesus Christ, such as have found grace,
and mercy at the hands of God the father, for to inherit his promises, and to
serve him with pure hearts in all love.

19. Behold, to be comprehended herein, is the life which is everlasting: and
to reach one another the hand to the same godliness, and to exort to amendment
of life, and to retain no man his sins, is the Hos. 6. Matt. 9.
Mercy which God requires of us, and not Sacrifices.

20. He requires Righteousness, and hates the ungodly being; He shows his
longsuffering toward them of good will, Esa. 53. Heb. 2.
and bears their infirmity or weakness, as one that would not have any man to
perish or to turn back.

21. For a willing heart, is a delight unto him: and a broken or troubled
Spirit, Psalm. 51.
for his sins cause will he not despise.

22. A good confidence toward his grace of a converting sinner, is a joy unto
him: Luke 15.
and it causes also a joy in the heavenly Being.

23. Therefore Deuteronomy. 20. Esa. 55.
let no man be dismayed, nor faint-hearted: but let every one from the heart,
upon hope in the Belief; apply himself to the good: and Luke 21.
possess his soul with patience, unto the godly promises.

24. Let no man take any yoke upon him, out of his own choice, least by some
means of his unablenes, he fall into a loathing toward the good: but grow up
by little and little, and profit ye still from time to time.

25. Keep always what ye have: go not Apo. 2.
back in any case, that you loose not the Crown of Salvation. Go still forward
increasing in the good, and in the knowledge of the holy understanding: Heb. 6.
and so pass on toward the perfection.

26. Nevertheless, desire not to have every thing at once; but grow up in the
good, from the Heb. 5.
beginning of the Christian life (That is, from the repentance for sin, Matt. 3.
to go on in amendment of life, and to abide steadfast therein, even to the
Matt. 24.
end) until the true life of perfection: That is, Ephesians. 4.
until the old age of the Man Christ. The which is inwardly to obtain the
Love essentially.

27. And that is the perfection of our godliness, wherein we are to grow up,
from the beginning of our turning to God, and to the entrance of the first
School-rule of the Christian Doctrine of the gracious Word, and his Service of
Love; until we be established in God and his true Love, according to the
Promises.

28. If therefore any man love the good, and his soul desire to inherit the
same, let him go thereunto with an humble heart: and follow after it out of
understanding, that ignorance grieve not his soul.

29. For there have been many in times past, that would by force, have all the
righteousness all at once, and would feine, according to their fancy, consume
and destroy the sin altogether by heaps; but they have fallen into greater and
grievouser sins.

30. But in as much now as many beginnings, are with lack of understanding taken
in hand; therefore diverse men, are become vnlustfull to the Matt. 24.
Righteousness, and have turned themselves back again: and do cleave to the
world, and to her misunderstanding, more than ever they did before.

31. Diverse others perceive no difference between the illuminated and
vnilluminated Men; and so whiles they are not yet illuminated themselves, they
give regard both to their own Imagination of the Knowledge, and also to the
Precepts of unilluminated men because they trust upon such things: and suppose,
that in such sort all is well with them.

32. They discern not also the life, from the death in their inwardnes, nor
yet the hearing Pro. 4.
of Council and Doctrine, whereby to draw near to the living Commandment of
God, and to live therein.

33. Many others hold Apo. 3.
at a stay, and have no righteousness: neither do they ask, hunger, nor thirst
after it: and do neither go backwards nor forwards, which is indeed a great
shame.

34. It were better for one, to suffer now and then some Inconvenience for lack
of experience t so that he abide in the Hope; than to hold himself still, or
idle to the righteousness before he be come to the salvation.

35. For albeit one do sometimes by stumbling and falling, suffer some
inconvenience, yet he rises again for all that, and bewaileth his Ignorance:
and so then he takes a new courage again, with a more circumspect
understanding in the Spirit, x against the craftines of the sin; Ephesians. 6.
and thereby profits and increases in the righteousness.

36. Now when a man perceives, or is aware of the gain, to wit, that he
increases in the good; then is he of good cheer, and much stronger in the
belief, and firmer in the hope. Thus, in process of time, he grows up in the
Spirit of the good life, until he come to the perfection: that is to the Love.

37. Wherefore the loss teaches Prudence and Wit, for to attend unto the word
with understanding; but the gain brings weetnes, it makes firm, in the
hope, and begets a gladness in our hearts. When as, to abide in undesire to
the righteousness, and to be Apo. 3.
neither bot nor cold, but lukewarm, is by all means to be utterly
discommended.

38. I esteem in this behalf, much better of that man, Lu. 15.
who like the lost Son, has spent and consumed all his Treasure and Riches,
and out of great poverty turns him again, and seeks at his Fathers hands
the room of a servant (out of which humbling a man comes again to his
riches: and through such loss gets understanding, how to govern to a
multiplying the riches of God) then of such a lazy, slothful, and ane
loitering man, as for fear of loss Matt. 25. Luke 19.
burieth his Talent: and will neither make gain nor loss therewith.

39. Hereof beware ye dearly beloved, that ye bury not that little which you
have received of God, nor yet withold or withdraw your selves for any manner
of cause, from this our undeceivable and most holiest service of the Love.

40. For though that many people, have partly through the sundry partial
instigations of men, (risen up before our said service) been entangled, and
darkened in that understanding; and that therefore they could not rightly know
the truth in her degree; but did oftentimes stumble, fall, and and suffer
harm; yet, all ye that love the Truth with us, and have likewise fallen in the
same, learn Prudence now thereby: and turn again Esa. 55 Jer. 3. Ezekiel. 18.
into the way of righteousness. Refresh your selves in the belief with a new
cheer; and so through the service of the holy Word, be ye renewed in your
understanding under the obedience of the Love.

41. Under the same service give ear to the Elders of the holy understanding,
Deuteronomy. 11.
and follow not the Will or Council of your own mind; but Eccl. 6.
with the Elders, under the service of the Love, follow the mind and Pro. 1.
Eccl. 16.
Council of the Wisdom, and always keep your selves with the Elders in the
family of Love, 1 These. 5. Heb. 13.
to the concord, and to the multiplying in the good, and of the peaceable
Kingdom in all Love.

42. Become not wavering in any wise; But in case ye stumble, or fall, yet rise
again; and think, that it is sometimes better, that a child do in his good
willingness commit an error, or that a thing be done of him yet unperfectly,
than that he should remain brutish or untaught. Be not afraid, Matt. 25. Luke
19.
like the unfaithful Servant, that buried his Masters Talent: which was not
very well taken at his hands.

43. Men may find diverse that will take very great heed to themselves, least
they should be deceived or beguiled, and so will stay only upon themselves;
But because they so staying upon themselves, give no heed to the grace under
the obedience of the Love, therefore remain they such as they are: and come not
at any time to the light of life or day of Love: but abide still in the
Captivity of the blindness, because they know not her blindness, or bands of
her darknesses, wherewith they are bound.

44. Some others will in their unregenerate estate and deprivation, account
themselves free, and will not be subject unto any thing, neither to the
Scripture, nor to any Teaching, nor yet to the Service of Love; and therefore
in that sort do never come to the Ioh. 8. Romans 6.
Freedom of the children of God.

45. For in as much as they have not perceived, nor observed in the sight of
their understanding, the bondage of Ioh. 8. Romans 6. 2 Pet. 2.
sin, nor her dominion; thereforr remain they unproved and unexperienced:
neither do they sigh nor Jer. 8.
complain for the yoke of sin, which has taken them Captive; and do know
nothing at all, either of the Bondage, or of the Freedom, nor yet that they are
so utterly deprived, or estranged from God and his Christ as they are.

46. Now men may also find diverse, that are altogether light-hearted, and
clearlyminded: and so, in the range of their misunderstanding, have taken unto
them, Esa. 59.
a false light or conceited knowledge. These according to their natural
understanding, are well at quiet: their hearts are not once grieved for their
mis-doings any more. They have also no regard, either of sin, or of Grace: they
fear no Condemnation, nor hope for Salvation, or for any Redemption.

47. When it goes well with them but in their creature, and in their
Occupation of Trade, then are they content, and say, God be praised, we are in
very good case: we are rid of all intanglement of heart: we now get our living
godly and credibly, and toil not our selves with any thing.

48. But alas, howsoever the godly nature, or the Image of God Heb. 6.
be trodden down in them, and constrained daily to suffer the death of the
Cross for their sins, that pass they not once for.

49. Because they will not suffer with the godly nature, 1 Pet. 4.
or Christ, against the sin, they desire even nothing else, but according to
the Phil. 3.
flesh to sit still in ease, and look what in this behalf crosses them, that
reckon they to be utterly evil and unright: and and so wax wanton, or lustful
in the flesh, and licencious, or light-minded in their Spirit, following still
Sap. 2. Romans 1. Ephesians. 4.
that which likes them, after the property of ignorant fools: and despise the
godly Council of the Elders; as also the wisdom, and unity under the obedience
of the Love.

50. These are surely in very bad case, although they think not so; For Esa. 5.
they have no consideration on the work of the Lord, nor on the work of the
Devil; nor any regard unto that that shall perish, nor desire to that which
shall continue; This verily is a lamentable misery, the Lord keep us from such
a Plague.

51. Again, some may be found which do endure much straightnes in dying from
sin, for to receive the Promises which are made thereunto, according to the
Scriptures; and that they might so become honorable Saints, and be also
respected therefore. Yea they regard no affliction, so as they may receive or
get that; and thus they fall into a choosing, applying to themselves the honor
of the Promises.

52. And therefore, when according to their desire, they have gotten all that
honor, then persuade they themselves, yea, it is already certain, that they
have greatly merited, because they have suffered so much, strived and
vanquished so valiantly, and have so much knowledge, and do assume unto them,
that they are then holy; and that God on the other side is indebted unto them,
of all the Promises, and of the Blessing mentioned in the Scripture, being well
assured hereof, that it does of right and equity appertain unto them.

53. Now because they have chosen to themselves such an opinion, they suppose
that the Scripture witnesses of them, as the people of God, and that likewise
in regard of their holiness, the honor of Gods Promises belongs unto them.
They hold also so greatly of themselves, that they know themselves to be worthy
of all the high style of the holy Titles that men do give them: also all the
services that men show unto them, they boldly arrogate unto themselves and a
great deal more.

54. For in their own eyes, they are the most understandingest, and the most
best or holiest: yea, they are so exceeding proud upon their own knowledge and
righteousness, as if there were no God any where else, save only with them,
according to the knowledge of their cogitations; and as though that the true
God, had utterly excluded all others his creatures.

55. Oh! What an abominable thing is it to assume and feine to ones self such a
spiritual conceit? For thereout is able to spring great abomination and
wickedness, such as is much worse then any fact of open sinners.

56. For there is no greater sin, then a spiritual pride; Act. 12.
in which, the man ascribes holiness to himself by his works, and exalts
himself therewith; Mat. 12 Luke 11.
which last error is much worse than the first.

57. O ye dearly beloved, beware of such a nature of bold arrogance, that you
become not back-sliders thereby, from the single humility and meeknes of the
upright being of Jesus Christ; and that you fall not into the abominations and
dreadful punishments of ungodly Men.

CHAP. XXI.
1. Of the upright hearts, and their lowly estimation of themselves, 8. The
ground of upright repentance is showed in the thirteenth chapter of the third
Book of The Glass of Righteousness.

MOreover, men may also find diverse upright, and wel-willing to the
righteousness, who in all obeying of the holy and gracious word, under the
obedience of the Love, endure great straitnes, for the righteousness sake; who
also regard no straitnes so as they might obtain but such Grace, Romans 6.14.
that the Sun might not have Dominion over them; but that they might be Ioh.
8. Romans 6.18.
freed from it, for to serve in righteousness, and love the living God only,
and to be obedient to the requiring of his word, not thinking what they are
then worthy of, or how they are then to reign, or what does then belong unto
them.

2. O no, their thoughts reach not so far; but they are still inclined for to
walk brother-like in the Love, and with earnest desire to do the will of the
Lord. They have regard unto Gods Promises, trusting even upon this, that God is
true of his word, as one that shows his Grace on such as love him, Esa. 57.66.
and are lowly of heart.

3. When as they have now, with singlenes of heart showed all obedience, in the
service of the gracious Word of the Lord, and of his holy Spirit of Love,
suffered much grief and affliction for their sins cause; and have tasted of the
refreshing or anointing to the health of their souls, then become they but so
much the more lowly and humble of heart Romans 12 1 Pet. 1.
and so much the more brotherly and peaceable toward all men; and count
themselves unworthy of such grace: neither know they how they shall be able to
be serviceable enough in the Love.

4. They esteem moreover very little of their own word, that arises out of
themselves according to the flesh; but the requiring of the serviceable Word of
the Lord, where-under their hearts stand humbly submitted, to all upright
righteousness and holiness, they make great account of, and hold it very worthy
to be obeyed unto: Moreover the life of righteousness, which is ministered and
set forth in the service of the love, they cleave unto with all their hearts,
and above all praise it exceedingly; and gladly would that all men were in the
godly nature and brotherly love, obediently come thereunto.

5. These show always toward God and his service of Love true humility and
obedience, and toward men true love, faithfulness; and Truth: and do not
desire according to the foolish pride of the world, any praise or service of
men to themselves; but rather that the righteousness in the Love, might have his
proceeding, and all people might under the obedience of the Love serve God, and
inherit the peace of Christ.

6. Out of such an upright heart (being Ephesians. 4.
grown up to the old age of the holy understanding, and Matt. 13.
taught to the Kingdom of God) they testify Psalm. 1 15.
that all Laud, Honor and Praise, belongs to God only, and not unto them.
And so in their proceeding in the same upright life; they likewise serve or
reach the hand either to other; and thus in their service they point the man
only unto God, and to the salvation of God in Jesus Christ.

7. this mind or nature is far the most best, because by it the man esteems
the Grace of the Lord to be great, and all his own doings or works, and anguish
respects or judges he, as Phil. 2.
of no value. The Lord of his Grace, bring us all to such a mind, Amen.

8. The Ground of upright repentance and amendment for sin, is at large plainly
expressed and with clear distinction uttered unto you in the third book of the
Glass of Righteousness, in the thirteenth chapter according as the same is
practiced and used of all good willing ones, which seek and love the good life
of the upright and lovely being from the heart, and do out of all their soul
pass forth toward it, under the obedience of the Love.

Take it to Heart.
CHAP. XXII.
1. Sundry Opinions are taken from the Scriptures. 2. Diverse do contend about
the Kingdom of God, both what it is, and whence to be had, and when. 5. But the
Scripture is clear enough, and the matter it self is explained. 24. He
exhorts to the Reading and hearing of the Glass of Righteousness: where men
shall see the everlasting Ordinances of God, and the upright life, wherein Gods
people have ever lived. 30. The same Ordinances were renewed by Moses, and the
life published by Christ for a Gospel. 31. In sure hope whereof, the Believers
rested, and are now with Christ manifested in Glory. 45. He calls upon such
as have too soon named themselves Christians, that they lay away their vain
boasting, and turn to the Love and her Service.

THere are also diverse men that draw sundry Opinions of Understandings, out of
the Scripture: But every one particularly, after his own conceiving. Howbeit in
as much as they know not the Council of God, nor comprehended his wisdom,
therefore do those Opinions and Understandings fall out to be of several sorts:
and do for the most part run all one against another, and are among each other
entangled.

2. Some strive for the Kingdom of God, or inward life of Christ (which is
called the new Man:) and suppose that it is this or that, or that it is
here-hence or there-hence after the outward appearance; for to come or to be
obtained.

3. Others think, that it shall be first found and obtained, after the death of
the Creature. Yea, the Principallest of the Learned in the Letter: who will
(forsooth) be the understandingest in the Scripture, do maintain such a ground
of Belief.

4. O God! How long shall the Scripture through the false and unright light or
sight, be yet set forth and taught?

5. It is doubtless plainly and clearly enough written, Luke 17.
that the Kingdom of God is inwardly within us. He is in the midst of you
(says John 1.
John) whom ye know not: The same is he, that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost.

6. But many (as it well appears) know him not. For he, who is the very Col.
1.
Image of God; or the Christ, and the Kingdom of the glory of God, has his
going down in us, inwardly: and suffers the Romans 6.
Death of the Cross, for the Sins cause.

7. Nevertheles, if any man be baptized inwardly in the death of Christ, and
Romans 6. Col. 2.
with his like Death, be, until his burying, planted into him, the same arises
also with Christ, and lives. For then, inwardly is Gods Kingdom of Heaven even
in him, and not specially, here or there, as among these, or among those: but
the Kingdom of God is here and there: among these, and among those: namely, in
every one, in us. Howbeit unknown to many, as is already said.

8. Now if the Kingdom of God be within us, and that we (as the Scripture
says) John 7.
believe in Christ, then ought we, after the Council of the Wisdom, and of the
holy understanding, to seek it inwardly there: for even thither shall it come,
and so be found inwardly within us.

9. But who so seeks it only at the hands of another, and does not attend the
coming thereof inwardly, according to the direction of the holy word and
service of love, the same shall in no wise find it.

10. For this cause men are not in the seeking of the Kingdom of God, to
despise the Council and Service of the holy word, which under the obedience of
the Love, teaches and directs rightly to the same; but, with lowly hearts to
give good ear thereunto.

11. Therefore believe the truth, and follow the Council of the Scriptures,
Mat. 7
seek and ye shall find, etc. Mat. 18
Turn you about, and become as little Children, and not subtle, cunning, Prove.
3. Romans 12.
or wise in your own selves. For who so receives not the Kingdom of God Mar.
10 Luke 18
as a Child, he shall not enter therein.

12. Wherefore it is all to no purpose, to set ones mind upon any thing, that
is above in the Heaven, or that is beneath under the earth: either what people,
this or that is: or where hence Christ shall come, or not: or with what outward
appearance the Kingdom of God comes.

13. For behold, if ye find not the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, Lu. 17.
inwardly in your souls, and the form of Christ in his glory, appeared not in
your 2 Cor. 4. Gal. 4.
inwardnes, then shall ye be constrained to miss, or be without the Kingdom of
God and Christ; John 6.
and shall likewise not eat the bread from Heaven with Christ, Lu. 14.
in the Kingdom of God his Almighty Father.

14. Therefore seek it, where it is to be found: and take right regard, whether
it comes: hunger and thirst ye after it. Nevertheles, have you not after it,
out of your own choosing, through misunderstanding; but go ye Psalm. 84.
from one virtue to another.

15. Posses ye your Lu. 21.
souls with patience, have regard on the coming of Christ, contend not any
more, 1 Timothy 6 2 Timothy 2. Tit. 3.
and strive no longer with flesh and blood.

16. Let it once suffice that ye have contended and wrangled for the Scriptures
cause: rather now endeavor you, in obeying of the requiring of the service of
love, Jam. 1.
to receive or put on the gracious word of the Lord in your hearts, and labor
ye Ephesians. 4.
for the unity of the love. For in such a sort shall the Kingdom of God come.

17. Now when you have thus received or put on the serviceable gracious word of
the Lord, the true Christ after the flesh, in your hearts or inwardnes, then
apply your selves therewithal, in your inwardnes, to the good being which the
gracious word of the Lord requires in ^is service, for to overcome in like
manner with Christ, every thing that is against him, to the intent his enemies,
Psalm. 110.
for a footstool; may be laid under his feet.

18. And when you exercise your selves herein, be ye likewise baptized in the
death of Christ, (that is, in his patience) Romans 6. Col. 2.
and with his like death or patience be ye planted into him: and so Ephesians. 6.
overcome ye through the belief, with the like cross or patience of Christ,
the sin, death, flesh, and the world, Devil and Hell, and all sensuality,
which arises out of your own wisdom of the flesh: and be ye likewise in your
inward man; Romans 12 Ephesians. 4.
renewed unto righteousness, 2 Cor. 4 Phil. 3.
in the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Lo. thus does the Scripture teach us, if
it were but rightly understood.

19. When we are now passed through this, Col. 1.
and have through the death of Christ, even until his Resurrection, overcomed
all those deadly things, then have we peace Romans 5. Ephesians. 2.
with God the Father, and stand firm in the love, which is the end or
fulfilling of all the spiritual Testimonies. And therein is comprehended the
perfection.

20. Not that we come hereunto, out of our own strength. But when, with lowly
hearts we Esa. 55. Ezekiel. 18 Joel. 2. Eccli. 2.17.
turn us obediently to God, and the service of his gracious word, then does God
also offer himself unto us, and out of his Calling in the spirit, allureth or
draws he us unto himself, justifying us through the belief, in Col. 1. Heb.
9. Apo. 7
the blood of Jesus Christ, and makes us clean from our sins, and gives us
the everlasting life.

21. This is verily the word of Faith, Act. 2.3 4, 5, 7, 8. etc. Romans 10. 1
Pet. 1.
which was published by the Apostles, through Christ, for a Righteousness unto
us. 2 Cor. 11. Gal. 1. Phil. 1.
Whosoever therefore preaches any other Christ, or preaches Christ any other
way: publishes any other Gospel, or publishes the Gospel upon any other
fashion or ground: or believes any otherwise, or builds upon any other
foundation, 1 Cor. 3
than God has from the beginning, through his Prophets and Apostles, required
and willed, the same man remains Gal. 1.
execrable or accursed, according to the mention of the Scriptures.

22. For 1 Cor. 3
no other Foundation may there be laid, than the same that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ, who from everlasting was, and is, and abides for ever. Through
whom God made all whatsoever is any thing: and Heb. 1.
he bears up all things by the power of his might, and makes the clensing of
our sins, through himself. Unto him as a Father of all, be Laud, Honor, and
Praise, for evermore, Amen.

23. These and such like things, was I partly of necessity moved to rehearse
unto you, ye dearly beloved, to the intent, you might consider them aright, and
understand the diversity of every thing, that concerns the Salvation of men.

24. Furthermore, see that ye humbly, with meditation to God, apply your selves
out of the inclination of love, to read, or to hear the Glass of
Righteousness; and consider or mark the life which is witnessed and set forth in
the same. Behold there in the spirit of your understanding, the everlasting
unchangeable Statutes and Ordinances of Almighty God, which also shall remain
unchangeable for ever. For that which is there witnessed, is such an upright
life, Genesis 1. Ephesians. 2.
as the man is created unto, for to live therein. In which Statutes and
Ordinances, the Lords people have lived from the beginning.

25. Yea, such a Life, Statutes and Ordinances, are a delight and joy to all
upright hearts and Prophets, to live therein; and they have heretofore born
witness thereunto, that in time to come, men should live in them. For through
the truth, they saw into the life of peace in the love; and that through the
life of peace in the love, every thing is made perfect, and therein stands
firm, or abides steadfast.

26. That verily is the life which is true, Joh. 1.
and that life is the light of men, Ephesians. 1.5. Col. 1.
and the head of the holy Commonalty. Who so goes out of it, comes to the
death, blindness and darkness.

27. But the souls of those that live therein, are blessed in the Lord. For
such people does God require, as do walk in his Ordinances, (that is to say, in
the life and peace of love) Deuteronomy. 6.2.
and do love the only God from the heart.

28. Lo, it is the true God, that requires such upright Righteousness: and he
himself cleaves to his Righteousness; his Statutes and Ordinances,
everlastingly. Joh. 1.2
For he is the spirit of his life, the life of his word, the word of his
Spirit, Exodus 3 Mat. 22.
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, or Israel.

29. That verily is the true life of peace, and love: and the Statutes and
Ordinances, are the same upright righteousness, which the holy Fathers have
lived and walked in.

30. The same Statutes and Ordinances of the holy Fathers were by Moses
renewed, Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5.
and witnessed unto a life before all people. And that life was through Jesus
Christ (being risen from the Dead, and ascended into Heaven) Mat. 28. Mar. 16.
published unto all people for a Gospel, because they should live therein. And
unto all that believed thereon, was the Resurrection from the dead, and the
everlasting life, witnessed and promised through Jesus Christ.

31. In sure and firm hope whereof, the upright Believers have rested in the
Lord Jesus Christ, till the appearing of his coming, which is now in this day
of the love, revealed out of the heavenly being, with which Jesus Christ, the
former Believers of Christ; John 5. 1 Cor. 15. 1 These. 4.
who were fallen a sleep, rested, or dyed in him, are now also manifested in
Glory.

32. For Christ in the appearing of his coming, raises his deceased from the
dead, 1 Cor. 15.
to the intent that they should reign alive, with him over all his enemies:
Mat. 25. John 5. Romans 2. 2 These. 1.
and condemns all the ungodly, which have not liked of him.

33. This is the joyful Message, published to the Gentiles, whereby Ephesians. 2.3
as fellow-Heires in the Testaments of promise; they are bidden and called to
the house of Jacob, and to the Citizenship of Jerusalem, To the intent, they
should depart from the brutishnes of their errors, and from the sundry
intanglements of their Idolatries, and turn them to the God of Israel, for to
serve him only, and to live in his Statutes and Ordinances, through the belief.

34. Which Righteousness To. 2.3.
is required out of the Law: and is now in this last time openly and evidently
witnessed out of the inclination of love, and through the insight of the same
upright life, to a view of the upright righteousness, which the man is created
unto: and to a demonstration, whereunto, or to what end or fulfilling, God has
given his promises, and made his Covenant with the Fathers.

35. Behold hereunto (namely, to that which we bear witness of) is the Calling
of the Gentiles made, Romans 11. Ephesians. 2.
who are out of grace, called thereunto, for to serve with the Stock of
Abraham, one God in one manner of Righteousness.

36. Lo, these are the promises, Genesis 17.
which were committed to the Jews in the Circumcision: And Jesus Christ, the
safemaking word of the Lord is amongst them, Act. 13. Romans 9.
Romans 15.
for the truth of Gods sake become a Minister of the Circumcision, to confirm
the promises made unto the Fathers, that the name of the God of Abraham might
be magnified likewise among the Gentiles. And for the mercies sake toward the
Gentiles, is the Grace of life published also to the Gentiles, to the intent,
Act. 10.11.13. Romans 11.
they should praise God, and know the God of Israel, and his Ordinances.

37. Which God and his righteousness, we do now know in the love, through the
spirit of truth, which according to the spirit, Joh. 14.
leads us into all truth: that is, into all love, according to the promises.
Col. 5.
For the love is the band of perfection. By which Band, we are sealed and
confirmed for ever in the same perfection, to the intent, that Gods Glory, his
Covenant and promises, may likewise abide firm, from everlasting to
everlasting, Amen.

38. Behold the same God of Israel (who out of his Grace, prepares and
brings all this unto us) is the God, Genesis 1.
that has made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that is therein. He it is
that does wonders, who neither breaks his promises, Deuteronomy. 4. Luke 1.
nor forgets his Covenant: who also suffers not his Law and Righteousness
to be trodden down for ever: but he sets up the Children of Israel, his
beloved: Not for their Righteousness; Deuteronomy. 9
but for their Fathers sakes, toward whom he had a desire, according as he
promised, and spoke the same in times past, by the mouth of his holy Prophets.

39. Therefore have regard unto the everlasting unchangeable God, being an
invisible living God: the God that has made you, created every thing that
lives and has breath. He Heb. 13.
it is, which was, which is, and which is to come: who lives everlastingly,
and shall still continue. And so is also his Life, Law, or righteousness.

40. Wherefore give heed unto the thing that is right and reasonable, and shall
continue for ever: glass your selves in the glass of Righteousness, and
therein behold according to the spirit, the upright life, and the Exodus 20.
Deuteronomy. 5.
Lords Statutes and Ordinances, which stand firm in God for evermore.

41. Let not the matter in any wise seem too slender or too small unto you.
For though the Righteousness whereof we testify, be 1 Cor. 2
no eloquent speech, and that the same seems to be but as a small brook, yet
is it notwithstanding Ezekiel. 47.
a bottomless Sea, which all Rivers do run into. And whatsoever can be uttered
concerning the Righteousness (were it even by so great multitudes of Books, as
is the sand by the Seaside) it is every whit comprehended or grounded in the
very same.

42. Who so lives therein, or in the obedience of the same life the gracious
word, Prove. 4
loves the same life, and with a lowly and humble heart, applies himself
obediently thereunto, Ecl. 39
such a one shall become wise in the hidden wisdom of God. For the obeying of
the requiring of the service of the gracious word of the Lord, and of the Law
of his Statutes and Ordinances, Psalm. 119.
does make the man wiser, than all his chosen Masters or Teachers: and in that
manner comes he to the holy understanding of the godly wisdom.

43. Hereunto let us be minded from the heart, ye dearly beloved, and regard ye
the kind mercy of God showed on us, out of his love. For such a perseverance or
clearnes of the healthful or safe-making Being, is showed unto us worthy in
open sight, and has in these last days, given us to know his requiring in our
spirit and understanding, to a right distinguishing of life, Deuteronomy. 30 Jer. 21.
Eccl. 15
and death, to the intent, that we who are yet in peril of death, and do suffer
grief and heavines for the sins cause, should conceive hope toward such an
healthful life, and rejoice us in the Godliness.

44. Therefore let no man be 2 Cor. 6 Heb. 12.
negligent in such an appeared Grace; but every one give God the Honor, and so
sigh over his wretchedness, that he may be reformed of his errors.

45. O ye Children of men, ye that have named your selves before the time, or
much too soon, with the name of Christ, or with the name of Israel: Lay away
from you your vain boasting, Mat. 3. Luke 3. Act. 2.
repent, and amend you, and betake your selves to the love and her service,
that ye may be saved.

46. Do not think in your hearts, that ye yet remaining, without the gracious
word and his service of love; do nevertheles stand sure in Gods Covenant: or
that ye may not have transgressed nor forsaken the Covenant of your God.

47. Think not also that ye are before God (howsoever after your conceit, ye
have hallowed your selves) any worthier, than all other Heathen are, which are
without you. For truly, ye are subject with them all unto vanity,
misunderstanding, and destruction and alike, covered under the darknesses, not
knowing, what ways ye all walk. For your own righteousness is strange and
unknown before the God of Israel: inasmuch as the same is not his life of
righteousness, nor yet his Statutes and Ordinances.

48. Therefore ye, which live and walk without the Doctrine and Service of the
gracious word, are even altogether, touching the inward man; one manner of
people with all Heathen, although outwardly ye have sundry several sorts of
good Services or Ceremonies; but truly they are to no advantage or unity unto
you, but to all controversy and division: they are not to the life, but much
rather to a death, and destroying one of another.

CHAP. XXIII.
1. Whether the Christians and their Ceremonies have any preferment, or not. 6.
They have been blinded as well as the Jews were in times past. 7. So as there
was no difference between them and other people. 8. Every one has made a
chosen Righteousness to himself. 10. But now the godly knowledge is revealed
out of the Love. And men ought to regard it, else to be found of no value. 15.
Not the outward Christianity, but the inward man is the thing that God
esteems. 20. But almost all turn them to the earthly things. 22. He leaves
every one free: but touching himself, he will hold him always to the good
life. 25. The godliness shall surely come forth: but who shall be partakers of
it, is known to the Lord. 27. He exhorts to Unity and Peace, etc. 31. And
requesteth that none will be offended at his Writings. 33. If any man have
gifts, let him not be proud thereof, but ascribe all unto God.

NOw some might here demand, whether the Christian Ceremonies be nothing at all
furthersome, or whether they (omitting all other ceremonies) have not in them
some advantage toward the life? For if the Christian ceremonies had no benefit
in them, then to what end are the Christian ceremonies? And what preferment
then have the Christians by them? Or to what purpose bear they the Name of
Christ?

2. Truly, (as we have also showed before) the Christians and their ceremonies
have in their right quality and use, much advantage: for unto the Christians is
committed the ministration of the gracious Word of the Lord, and the revealing
of the everlasting life: and to this end are the Christian Ceremonies given
them, that all those which believe in Christ, the gracious Word of the Lord,
should have a firm or sure confidence on the revealing of that same life, 2
Cor. 4. 2 Cor. 11. Gal. 3.
the which is with the Christian Services and Ceremonies, promised for to come
unto them, to an everlasting light and beholding of the naked clearness of
God, through the uncovered face of Christ. 1 Cor. 13 2 Cor. 3.


For thus with the same Services and Ceremonies, are the promises of Salvation
to come committed to the Christians, Romans 9.11.15. Ephesians. 2.
or to the Christian communalty. They are also the children of the Testament of
the holy Fathers, Acts 3.
through the Belief, and that in all respects, after the same manner as the
Jews are the children of the Testament, in the promises of their Fathers, out
of whom are born the Jews as heirs, and not as thereunto called. Genesis 17.
Which promises were committed unto them in or with the Circumcision, which the
God of Heaven ordained for an everlasting covenant between Himself and Abraham
and his Seed; Namely, that the God of their Fathers (according to the promises,
and according to the same covenant) is even their God, and remains a God of
their seed for ever.

4. Which Jews, (howsoever they are as Branches broken off from their right
Stock) are also grafted upon no strange Stock, Romans 11.
nor yet set or built upon any strange foundation, but upon the foundation of
the Promises, and Stock of their Fathers, to which salvation the Gentiles are,
through the Belief, called, out of Grace, as fellow-heires of the same
promises in Israel, for to serve the living God. Ephesians. 2.3.


5. Lo, these promises made to the Fathers, to the salvation of the Gentiles,
are committed to the Christians in Belief: and the Christian ceremonies are
witnesses of the truth of the same.

6. Howbeit, forasmuch as such a holy Belief, and service of Ceremonies to
such a salvation (as was evangelized in the preaching of the Apostles of
Christ) has ceased, and by the Christians been forsaken, therefore have they
been covered under the sin, blinded from the knowledge of their calling, and
estranged from the understanding of Gods promises, even as the Jews also in
the time when they knew not the godliness of life, were blinded and estranged
from the understanding of the promises. Yet were they Jews notwithstanding
outwardly: Romans 2.
but no Jews according to the inward hidden man, such as God esteems, John 8.
according to the life of their Father Abraham: Romans 3.
And therefore there was no difference between them and the Grecians, but they
stood alike under the sin.

7. Inasmuch as it goes now also thus with the Christians (or which men so
call) therefore is there between them and other people, no difference but they
are all alike under the sin. And in regard of the righteousness which avails
before God, they are no otherwise to be distinguished, save only by the
ceremonies.

8. And every one, because of his misunderstanding, makes a righteousness or
an Ordinance unto himself; which through the glistering of his knowledge, he
chooses or respects for a (very) Righteousness, and makes to himself in
like manner with the same, a Congregation, not attending upon the promises of
God, nor upon the upright righteousness which through Jesus Christ he is
called of God unto.

9. Now whiles all this comes to pass out of misunderstanding and bare
imagination, Jer. 7.
and out of the ignorance of the upright Righteousness, therefore is there
dissension likewise. For every congregation in particular, Mat. 24.
persuade themselves that they are the Christians, or the people of Israel: and
do diligently use all dexterity and sharpness of wit in their cause, for to
maintain the same in his proceeding, and think by their wit to obtain the
salvation, and so walk their own way; Romans 3.
whereby also they are all void of the grace of God, to the knowing of their
error and blindness.

10. But inasmuch as this godly Knowledge is now out of grace revealed unto us,
as that we through the clearness which God has powered into our hearts, 2 Cor.
4.2.
do understand to what salvation, or to what manner of health of the earth God
has given his promises (to which purposefor to establish the salvation, the
Belief is preached) Therefore for the loves sake can we not omit it, but must
needs witness the same, and reveal the Peace, and the true Love whereunto we
are called, if happily there might or may be found any which had a desire or
inclination thereunto: and then likewise we with them and they with us (whether
they were far or near) might be gathered together in the Love, according to
the promises.

11. Seeing then that God neglects not his mercy toward is, but has made
known unto us his will (to the intent his Word may stand firm, according as he
in times past has spoken by his Prophets) that unto his people Israel he will
gather him a people out of the Heathen, which shall serve him in
righteousness: 2 Mac. 2 Amos 9 2 Mac. 2 Act. 15.
(at which time God will gather his people together again, and be gracious unto
them, and build again the Tabernacle of David, and again set up his people
Israel, according to the promises:) therefore ought we in like manner, from the
whole heart, and with good will to give heed unto that which is now by Gods
grace, according to the truth, made known and tendered, under the obedience of
the Love unto us: and in the same appeared grace to believe the salvation
whereunto we are called, and to prepare our hearts in lowly minds thereunto,
that we might inherit our calling according to the promises.

12. But if any people refuse it, and for all that should persuade themselves
in their hearts to be still Christians, or that their Congregation is the very
people of Israel (not thinking of the restoring of Israel, which in times past
was fallen: and thus suppose that they have attained to the best) and in their
blindness set their confidence upon their own wisdom, righteousness and
ceremonies, and upon their faith; then shall it likewise go with them in these
days, as it did heretofore with the Jews that believed not on the grace which
was appeared unto them.

13. 4 Esd. 6.
For in his time shall their full storehouses be found empty, and the empty be
filled with goods. For their Christianity according to the inward man shall be
judged and known for an unchristianity, and their belief for an unbelief.

14. Therefore let no man boast himself of his Christiany because of his outward
baptism, nor because of his outward righteousness, or narrow ways of his
walking, according to his choosing, or bare imagination: but let him give heed
to the promises, and unto what the Gentiles are called, and whom the
Christianity consists: the which is a Christendom according to the inward
man, in the Spirit; as also Paul in the preaching of his Gospel testifies.

15. 2 Cor. 4. Phil. 2. Col. 1. Heb. 1. 1 Cor. 15 Ephesians. 4. 1 Cor. 3. Ephesians. 1.
For the true inward man is the thing that avails before God: namely, the
very like Being of God, which the love is form ed in, and the man created unto,
to the intent he should bear it, to the laud and praise of the glory of his
God.

16 And through the revealing of such a heavenly clearness (as that we
discern, that many, yea almost all, which do boast themselves to be
Christians, are yet mere strangers therefrom) we do well know the fall from
the right ground of the Christianity, and the bands of darkness wherewith we
were all held captive: And therefore we are all void of the grace of God, Romans
3.
that he may have mercy upon us all, to the intent he alone may have the glory.

17. Now whosoever perceives this same, let such a one turn him to the Spirit, to
the God of life, and to his righteousness, according to the requiring of the
Love, and her service; that his understanding may, Ephesians. 1.
through the Love and her service, be enlightened according to the Truth, in the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, and that likewise he might love God the Father,
Dent. 5.
and live in his statutes with an upright heart.

18. For out of the God that has made Heaven and Earth, goes the right
judgment, Heb. 4.
his Word is living and powerful, and sharper than a two-edged sword: and his
burning is as a flame of fire, to a consuming or devouring of all ungodly
Being. Deuteronomy. 4. Heb. 12.


19. Whosoever fears not him, as a true God, nor loves his Righteousness,
over such a one stands his severity for ever. Romans 2. Exodus 20
But many thousands find grace in his sight, that do but turn them unto him,
love him, and keep his Commandments

20. But who has any regard hereunto? Whose attention is toward the Lord? Who
is there that is spiritually minded? Who gives ear? Whose heart and eyes turn
them to the inwardnesse of the Being of God? Truly very few: But they turn them
almost all unto themselves, to the earthly things, or unto Flesh and Blood: and
do very gladly hear that which sounds pleasant unto them, 2 Timothy 4.
according to the delight of their fleshly ears: and so shut the ears of
their heart against the God of Life and all the World, alienate their spirit
from his holy wisdom, and will not hear him, nor accept him for their King,
that they might live in his Law and Ordinances.

21. Therefore will not he also count them for his people, neither regard them.
Psalm. 1. Esa. 29.
But they shall be compelled in their estranging, to become like the tossing of
chafe, wherein the whirlwind, to a scattering, mingleth it self.

22. Behold, ye dearly beloved, of these and other like things, I have opened
much unto you in the Glass of Righteousness, to a distinction of the
knowledge of righteousness: look unto which ye are minded, Deuteronomy. 30. Eccles. 15
into that may ye go; whether into the sin, to the death; or into the
righteousness, to the life. I leave every one free, unbound, uncompelled.

23. But as for Me, my whole heart and mind stands altogether inclined to the
good life of upright righteousness, Romans 12. 2 Cor. 3.
and all my confidence is in the God of Life, that I shall not forsake the
ways of his Rightenesse (which are by the grace of God brought and given unto
me in the sight and being of: my Spirit) but shall still observe the same; and
under the obedience of the Love, administer them unto the children of men:
according to all the manner, as I have set forth and described them, according
to the life, out of the inclination of Love, in all my service of writing, for
a serviceablenes to many.

24. Whosoevr therefore with me, has any desire to God and his righteousness,
let such a one then from his whole heart, apply himself also with me unto the
same. He also that strayeth, and has no regard unto God nor his
righteousness, neither is minded to the Love and her concord; but will rather
mix his heart with the World and her abominations, and go on after his own
imagination, I must needs look upon it: howbeit, it makes me sorry, and I
suffer grief for it, because he does willingly thus hunt after his own
destruction.

25. For behold, it shall come to pass, that the Esa. 60 61.62. Abac. 2.
godliness, uncompelled through the belief out of the Love of righteousness,
shall come to light, according to the Promises

26. But who they are that shall be made partakers of it, and find such Grace
in the sight of God, or from whence they shall come to join with us, for the
concord of the Love and her service, that is only known to the Almighty and his
Spirit; But the unity of us all shall be Ioh. 17. Act. 4. Ephesians. 4.
one heart and mind in the Love. To the which one-minded Communalty mine heart
stands always inclined. The Lord give us all Grace, to be joined to his
People in righteousness of heart, Amen.

27. Let every one also from his whole heart be minded thereunto, and apply
himself for the same unities cause, to the Love and her service, and to the
righteousness of heart before God: and so stand for the good with all
diligence. Let him likewise, daily apply himself Ephesians. 6 Col. 4. 2 These. 3.
in prayer unto the God of life, that he will vouchsafe to enlighten him and
all lovers of the Truth, together with all People, with the knowledge of his
wisdom and understanding, to the intent they might all incline their hearts,
to the Love and her service, and so Gods matters be well understood, and
interpreted according to the Truth, to the health of the earth, and renewing of
the World with righteousness.

28. Wherefore Romans 14. Gal. 6.
bear one with another, out of Love: receive also unto you all welwilling
hearts, to the concord in the Love, and understand their testimony to the good:
and repair one another understanding, to the unity of heart in the Love, and
let no man rail, nor make Sedition or Division but let every one oyn himself
unto us in Jesus Christ, under the obedience of the Love: and let him likewise
in Jesus Christ seek the good to his preservation, that the service of the Love
be not hindered.

29. If now by any it should be found, that some man should bring forth any
chaff amongst us, with the Corn; yet shall not men despise him for it, but
repair him in his understanding, with good Gal. 6. 2 Timothy 2.
instruction to the meekness, and to the obedience of the Love in the Spirit,
that so through the service of the Love, men may gather the good Corn, the
treasure of righteousness, Matt. 13.
into the Barn, the man's heart, and that in like manner, the vain being
together with that which is deadly and pernicious, may utterly perish.

30. Whosoever now can rightly judge let not him rail; but let him try the
matter, 1 The. 5.
and take or conceive the best out of it: and thus meet the little ones: and
draw all to the Love, that no man may be offended, nor made bitter-minded. Let
every one be minded hereunto from the heart, Matt. 13.
that all offense may be rooted out, and destroyed from the Lords Kingdom.

31. After the same manner also my request is, that those which read or hear
our Writings, will not take them to offense; but bow their hearts under the
Love, and receive that only which is right and reasonable.

32. But if so be any man do suspect any misunderstanding in our writings, let
him bear with the same through Love, that through the Love, all may be amended
and repaired; For my service is to unpartiality and to unity of heart in the
Love, and that according to the gifts of the holy and godly understanding;
which are of God given and committed unto me.

33. Moreover, if any man persuade himself, that he is more richly endowed with
gifts, 1 Cor. 4
let him not be proud upon the riches of his gifts; but let him humble himself
among us, under the obedience of the Love: and then show likewise with his
gifts according to the mind of the Love, and according to the requiring of her
service, his good willing service, without offense, and unseperated from us and
our Communalty, to the intent the fellowship of the lovers of righteousness, 1
Ioh. 1.
may in every respect be in the Love, and be drawn and served out of Love to
that purpose.

34. For who art thou O man, that thou do proudly lift up thy self, for the
gifts cause of thy God, and that thou should not be content to submit thy
self with thy gifts or understanding, under the obedience of the Love of God
and of Christ? 1 Cor. 4. 2 Cor. 3. James 1.
Know thou not, that there is no man, that of himself can have any good
thing or upright understanding, except it be given him of God? Wherefore bring
and submit all under God and his Love, Es. 42.
whatsoever does belong unto him; and separate not thy self from us, seeing we
are also well-willing thereunto.

35. If then thy gifts, be all gifts of God, see that thou Psalm. 34.
praise God in those gifts of his, under the obedience of his Love, and make no
breach or division with the same, nor in any wise despise not another
therewith, that has received less then thou have; but show forth Love in all
that is given, or committed unto thee of God: and so join thy self with us,
unto the gracious Word of the Lord, which the God of heaven has raised up
among us, according to his Promises.

36. Be also not Ezekiel. 3.4.
Lordly, neither advance thy self by accusation against thy inferior brother:
likewise desire not to 1 Pet. 5. a 1 These. 5.
quench any man's small godly gifts, which he obtains under the obedience of
the Love, nor judge, that any man besides his godly gifts has taken on in his
Council any Flesh and blood; but be at peace with all them, which to a concord
with the Elders in the family of Love, do obediently submit and give over
themselves, with all their gifts and understandings under the Love and her
service; For Romans 2 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.
the gifts of God are manifold, yet minded all to concord and Peace, forasmuch
as the true God of life, is with his gifts no God of discord, but of Peace.

37. Wherefore there is also in the manifold gifts of God, no more but one God
1 Cor. 12.
which works all: to whom of right belongs the highest respect, above al
things; For he is the most highest, the living, and the Everlasting: Psa. 139.
whose Works are wonderful, and his Sap. 17. Romans 11.
Judgments incomprehensible.

38. His height is unmeasurable, his depth unsearchable, his glory unspeakable,
his wisdom unwritable, his grace infinite, his word is unchangeable, his Law
inviolable, his Truth uncorruptible, his Spirit unmovable, his mighty Arm
unfrayable: and his glorious Majesty remains stable for evermore.

39. Behold, this living and true God, of whom we have received our godly
gifts, is an everlasting and true Light. John 1.
The same Light is an everlasting true Life: that Life is an everlasting
steadfast Word: that Word is John 6.
a true Spirit.

40. The same Spirit is Sap. 7.
the holy Wisdom, and the upright Understanding. The holy Wisdom and upright
Understanding is the Providence. The Providence is the Will, which wills that
all what good is may be. In this Will is the Belief. The Belief is the Power
and Might to accomplish. In the Power is the Work and Deed. The Work and Deed
is all the visible and invisible Being which God for himself has brought forth,

41. But all the things that are Gods, and which the true God has brought
forth and made [both the invisible Being, and the visible created Things] are
all Witnesses, Romans 1.
that He, the same our living God, is the Creator of all things, the giver of
all good gifts, and the eternal and true God, to the intent men should serve,
honor, and worship him Deuteronomy. 6. Mat. 4.
only as God, Lord, and King.

42. And that same like Being of his Godhead Genesis 1. Eccle. 17
was in the beginning formed in the man: Which like Being of the Godhead, and
the light of his clearness, the man has, Genesis 3. Romans 5.
through the fall from his God, been deprived of. But the coming of the same
light is in the resurrection of the dead; to a godly glory, Esai. 60.62. Joel
2. Acts 2. 2 Pet. 3.
promised to be in the last time. And that same [as a new World, full of Light
and Life, wherein Apoc. 21.
God himself dwelleth] Psalm. 97.
appears unto us now in the Love, and in the Righteousness of the
everlasting uncorruptiblenesse, according to the Promises.

CHAP. XXIV.
1. GOD has ever spoken to the Fathers concerning his Son, or like-being,
who is the Heir of all things, and the end of the Law and the Prophets. 5. The
same Son promised to the Believers, that the true Life should be declared in
the last times. 8. Which is now fulfilled in the Love. 10. But not understood
by many. 12. An exhortation to lay down all contending under the Love. 22.
Every Father of a Family, in the Love, has liberty to use special Ceremonies.
23. All to be done to the Love and Peace. 25. As GOD extends his mercy. on
us: so should we take heed unto it. 26. H. N. witnesses of this grace: and it
shall in time be manifested over all. 28. He glories not in his Revelations,
but in God: Neither does he despise any others therewith. 32. Howbeit his heart
is inclined unto them that embrace the Love. 34. There are no other people of
the LORD, but such as obey the Love. 35. He has not by his writings defamed
any; but called all to the Unity of Heart.

THis Almighty God, which was, which is, and which abides for ever (who gives
his honor to Esa. 42
none other) spoke in times past by Moses and his Prophers, unto the Fathers,
Heb. 1.
and that oftentimes, and in sundry manners, whereby He Deuteronomy. 4 Esa.
42.45.51.55.
required the true fruit of his Righteousness: and did still testify of the
like Image of his Being, and ceased not therein, till the time 2 Kin. 7. Psalm.
89. Acts 2.
was fulfilled, that his beloved one was appeared unto them: namely, Mat. 1
Romans 1. 2 Timothy 2.
his Son, the fruit of his loins, and the very like Being of his Godhead.

2. And even as the same Gods Son, [namely, the like Being of the said God
who lives for ever] was from the beginning, the First, whom Joh. 1.
God finished all his works by: so is he also the last [that is to say, the
perfection] of all those things which God has promised by Moses and his
Prophets, according as it is written thereof. Romans 10 1 Cor. 13. Gal. 3.
In whom the Law and the Prophets cease, or be fulfilled.

3. Insomuch then as the Law and the Prophets were in the same Son of GOD in
times past, fulfilled in Israel: and did cease in the same Son, the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is the Romans 10. Gal. 5. 1 Timothy 1.
end of the whole sum of the fulfilling of the Law and the Prophets, to the
confirming of the Promises of GOD the Father; therefore did GOD then also at
the last, at the end or fulfilling of his Law and Prophets, Heb. 1.
speak unto the people of Israel, and to the Believers of his Word, by the
same Son; restifying how that all is Deuteronomy. 7. Ephesians. 1. 1 Pet. 2.
His: which Son he has appointed for an heir of all things, and Heb. 1.
the same bears all things with the word of his power; and he is unto us a
cleansing of our sins through himself.

4 This only borne Son of GOD the Father, is given to the Children of Men,
to the end they should be Romans 11.
grafted into his Spirit, [which is the holy Spirit of Love] and in their
minds be Joh. 15 Ephesians. 3. 2 Pet. 1.
of one Being therewith.

5. Through which holy Spirit, the same Son of God, Jesus Christ, has also
promised his Believers, that the Truth of the Life, should nakedly and clearly
be Joh. 14 Acts 1.
manifested unto them, whereby at the very last, to a conclusion of all godly
things, they in like manner might declare the Love, the most brightest
Daylight: and through the same true Light, Gods most holiest Being, draw all
people that have any desire toward God, to the unity of Peace under the
obedience of the Love, to the intent we all which love God, and his
Righteousness, should in these last days, know and understand in all things,
the mind of God in perfect clearness, and through the holy Spirit of his Love,
walk in all truth, as in a true light of the godly Clearness, according to the
Promises, even as God also has spoken the same, through the Son, whom he has
made heir even of all that is Gods. Mat. 11. Luke 10. Joh. 3.
For all what the Father has, is His.

6. But because of his Long-suffering, (that his goodness might be known in
the Love: and that none, through his default, might miss of the fullness of
the Life) he has spoken thus in times past, for to establish it in the last
time.

7. I have (says Joh. 16.
the Lord Jesus Christ) yet many things to say unto you: but ye cannot bear
them now. Howbeit when the Spirit of Truth shall come, the same shall lead you
into all Truth: For he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall
hear, that shall he speak: and he shall show you that which is to come. He
shall glorify me: For he shall receive of mine, and show it unto you. All what
the Father has, that is mine: Therefore have I said, He shall receive of mine,
and show it unto you.

8. Lo, all this Love does GOD now, through this new Day, or Light of his
Fatherly Love, show on us, for to draw our Spirit in him, out of the earthly,
lying, and deadly Being, unto his Love, in the Heavenly true Life, which is
everlasting.

9 Which his Love, Joh. 17 1 Cor. 13 1 John 4.
is the perfect Being of God and of Christ, and of the holy Ghost, which
heretofore was Esa. 2.
promised for to come in the last time: and it is the Apoc. 21.
Jerusalem, which is now in the last time come down unto us from Heaven, and
the perfect fruit of Righteousness, where the Sun of clearness does never go
down, according as GOD has spoken in times past by the mouth of his holy
Prophets, who have all likewise prophesied of this salvation, to the intent
that all people, to the unity of heart in the Love, should have a sure hope
toward God, and toward their salvation.

10 But alas, it seems that this Belief and Hope to this same, is by many
Jer. 5. 1 Timothy 1.4.
forsaken: or else the salvation and the truth is not well understood, for to
hope thereon.

11. For there are found with many sundry divided testimonies: and every one in
His, or the most part, will defend, that his testimony is brought forth by the
Spirit of Truth. But among these, there is found great fail by many, whereby
many are made doubtful in their belief, Matthew. 24.
and become cold in their zeal to the Good. And by means of their dissentions,
Luke 17.
which they have stirred up, and do yet daily stir up among themselves
against each other. Many know not what they shall hope for, or believe.

12. Wherefore for the Unities sake in the Love, O ye children of men, lay
down your contentions under the Love, and have regard unto Gods promises, and
to your Calling: and incline likewise your hearts to the obeying of the love,
and of the requiring of her service.

13. For in the obeying of the love, and of the requiring of her service, ye
shall become of one mind, and shall know, that there is no more but Ephesians. 4.2. 1
John 5.
one God or Father, who alone, is only good and almighty, no more but one
Christ, with him at his right hand; who only is the everlasting Mediator and
Savior between God and us, out of him no more but one spirit, who only is
true, and no more but one love, Col. 3.
which only is the band of perfection.

14. Nevertheles, the Gifts of God, through the spirit, under the obedience of
the love are manifold. Likewise also the Services are manifold. Which Romans 12.
1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4.
Gifts and Services, are all to the Commodity and Profit of the Communalty, and
are also all serviceable to the love, and to the unity in the peace. Howbeit,
it is all but 1 Cor. 12
one spirit, that works all through the service of the love. Which service of
the love, is not ministered, for to break that which God has spoken and
promised in times past: but Mat. 5 Romans 3.
to establish and accomplish it all, according to the Scripture.

15. Therefore let none of ours (whose souls stand subject under the Love)
take upon him 1 Cor. 5
to contend against any for any of the gifts of God, which are of God
graciously bestowed upon them, nor for the Services or Ceremouies cause, which
any man observes or publishes, albeit the same be manifold.

16 For it is not for us to contend or strive against any, for the gifts cause
which any man receives of his God, neither to contend against any man's
Services or Ceremonies, which he uses, to the training up and edifying of the
people, except (as it is convenient and edifiable to further the peace) that
they do all stand subject under the Love and her Service.

17. For one has this gift: and Romans 12 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. 1 Pet. 4.
with the same he is serviceable to the Communaltie, to a unity of heart in the
Love. Another has another Gift, and it is also serviceable to the Communalty:
and yet notwithstanding they are all used to the Love and to the Concord in
their Services.

18. Moreover, some use one kind of service, or such a manner of Ceremonies:
and some again, other Services or Ceremonies, wherewith they train up the
people, to the making known of that Righteousness unto them which God esteems,
and they are also serviceable to the same: And all likewise are done, to the
Love and her Concord.

19. Therefore seeing the Gifts of God, and the services are manifold, we let
them stand free to every one, and do not contend against them, so far forth as
they stand all under one God: and that they do not exalt their Services and
Gifts, above the love and her service; but do submit themselves all thereunder,
and do likewise confess, that God only is the Lord, and only gives in his
service of love the godly Gifts.

20. Wherefore let no man contend with his Gifts or Services, nor let no man
make any breach therewith, in the Communalty of the love; but Psa. 34
praise God in all his works. And that all, to a unity of peace in the love.

21. Lo, such a unity, do the services, Ceremonies, and gifts of the one-onely
holy spirit of love serve unto, all to the good life and Peace: and if we be
all minded to the good life, and to the peace, then shall no man's services or
Ceremonies be offensive unto us: neither shall we contend or wrangle for them.

22. For every 1 Pet. 4
Father of a Family under the love, has doubtless the liberty, in his Family,
to use Services and Ceremonies, according as he perceives out of the
Testimonies of the holy spirit of love, that they are most profitablest or
necessariest for his Household, to the life of Peace, for to keep his Household
thereby, in Discipline and Peace: training them up therewith, that they may
learn to practice and use 1 Cor. 14. Phil. 4.2.
that which is right and equal, for to manifest unto them thereby, the true
righteousness which God esteems.

23. If any man therefore has obtained in the obeying of the Doctrine of the
gracious Word and his Service of Love, any gifts of God: or if any man has any
heavenly Revelation, or if any man use any service of the Priestly Ordinance,
let him with us be serviceable to the love therewith, to the intent it may all
be agreeable with the love, and may all be done to Concord, in the service of
love, and not to strife, dissension, or schism, to the intent, that the good
life in all love and peace, might be lined under one head, the living God, and
only King, according as in times past it was prophesied thereof.

24. The same life in the love, is the life and very like Being of Almighty
God: namely, Christ, the gracious word of God the Father, (by whom John 1.
God made all that is any thing.) It is also the one only holy spirit of the
Prophets: unto the which, all spirits of the Prophets, and all services, that
come out from God, 1 Cor. 14.
are subject and serviceable to the love, and only minded to the peace and
life; for God is no God of discord, but he is a God of Peace.

25. Forasmuch then as the God of Heaven, does now show his mercy on us: and
does daily disclose unto us, the thing that so many days has been Ephesians. 3
hidden, therefore let us likewise with thankfulness, and with submitted
obedience to the love; 2 Cor. 6 Heb. 12.
take heed in the spirit, to the godly grace, and not be slack or slow, to
further the good; but Ephesians. 4.
reach one another the hand, and be serviceable to the love, with helpfulnes to
the virtue, that the service of the love be not hindered 1 Cor. 6
nor evil spoken of.

26. And seeing such heavenly Revelations, are by Gods Grace to me unworthy
committed, and according to the mention of the writings, which through the
grace of God, are come forth or set out by me H.N. under the obedience of the
love are opened, and granted me to be known and Ephesians. 3.
understood, because I likewise should reveal the same in the world: therefore
do I also witness the same among the Children of men, indifferently out of the
inclination of love, to the intent, that virtue and unity may grow and multiply.

27. And these my testimonies of truth, shall also unto those (which now are,
and hereafter shall come) be to a right discerning of the upright and lovely
life, to as many as believe the same, and be comprehended in the love. For
among them shall this service of love to the same life, according to the true
being; everlastingly proceed on out of the love, according to the promises.

28. Behold ye beloved, concerning all this which is revealed to me by the
living God, 2 Timothy 1
and which I have testified and published out of his holy and gracious Word, I
have no other glorying, but Jer. 9. 2 Cor. 11.
in God the most highest, in the light of his true being, and in his heavenly
revelations, even as it is sufficiently testified.

29. Out of which Revelations of God, I show my service out of the inclination
of love, unto all those that affect the Love, to the end we might with one
consent be minded to the love; for to 2 Cor. 10.
draw the understanding under the obedience of the Love and her service.

30. In the same service stands also all my hope and confidence in the living
God, and my salvation in his Christ; Which Christ stands firm for us 1 Ioh. 2
to a Reconciler before God the Father, and in the service of his Love
everlastingly; that through the same service our inward mind, should stand
free, and firm in God and his Christ; and not be tied to any thing besides,
without the Communion and service of the Love, whether to the sin, or else to
men: neither to any created or elementish things nor yet to any earthly or
worldly things; whereby with one accord we might live boldly in God the most
highest, with the Communalty of the Love.

31. With these despise I none in his understanding, whether he be great or
small, that every one (as right and meet it is) may give his understanding 2
Cor. 10.
captive, or suffer it to be plucked under the obedience of the Love: and
likewise do that Phil. 4.
which is just and equal; For who can refuse the Love, or withhold himself
from her service, if so be he love the good.

32. Doubtless whosoever refuses the love, and withholdeth himself from her
service, or with his understanding, is against it, the same man shows
thereby, that he is without understanding, and not minded to concord in the
love; And moreover, that his heart thinks not upon the good, which God
esteems; but rather, upon his own good, which he has chosen to himself. But
who so are fully affected to the love and her service, and unto all that are
just and equal, and do unpartially submit themselves under the obedience of
the love, unto them am I inclined.

33. For with them, does my heart desire to live, in such a life as is just and
reasonable, Phil. 4.
lovely and peaceable, and with them, in like obedience under the love, to
stand obedient in the same life, Ephesians. 4.
to all unity of heart in the Love.

34. Behold, the true Christians of Israel, the people of the Lord, ard even in
this sort minded with us; and there are no other Christians, nor Jews, nor
House of Israel, nor People of the Lord; but those that stand subject with us
to the Love with one accord, and over whom the Love is likewise the head: who
with us also, are not partial or divided with this or that, which is earthly
or visible.

35. Thereunto in like manner is the service of my writing: namely, to the
right stock of life in the Love, and not to contend or to strive against any.
And I do not know, that I have written against any man's dealing, (so far
forth as the same is according to Truth, and out of love.) Neither have I named
any faction by name for to contemn them, nor singled out any persons
particularly, whereby to reproach them: neither reviled any man's Religion for
heresy; but have called and invited all men, to the unity of heart in the
Love. The which is the blessing of all the Generations of the Earth, according
to the Promises made to the Fathers.

36. Therefore let every one glass himself, and look how near his cause is
right: and so give over his understanding to the obedience of the Love: (for
therein consists the upright being) to the intent that all may, through the
Love and her service Ephesians. 1.
be renewed, and the Corruption reign no more; but that the upright
Righteousness which God esteems, Esa. 60.
may come to light, according to the Promises.

CHAP. XXV.
1, The Author concludes this Introduction, with his Desire and Request to all
that read; or hear his Writings, that they apply themselves unto that, which
is set forth therein. 3. It is much happier to be among the lowly and sorrowers
for sine than to be with the proud and dissolute. 6. A menacing of the
obstinate. 12. The reward of the righteous: and the horrible End of the
rebellious.

HErewith ye beloved we will cut off, and end this Introduction, to the holy
understanding of the Glass of Righteousness. And we desire of all those that
read, or hear our writings of the godly Testimonies, and likewise of all those
that have any desire to the Truth, and do humbly apply themselves to that which
is witnessed by us, and do join with us in all uprightnes, under the obedience
of the Love, to the intent that the Love may bear the dominion, and rule in us
to a one minded Communion, in one amiable and godly life, that they will not
take it grievously, to suffer contempt, heavines, or anguish for a little
while, with those that love the Righteousness; but rather stand always minded
(whether it be in prosperity or adversity) to be joined to the mind of God, in
all love even as the same under the obedience of the Love, is plainly and
clearly described, according to the life that abides for ever in the Glass of
righteousness.

2. The Almighty God grant us his Grace, and strengthen our minds to the same,
Ephesians. 4.
in the unity of Love and Peace: and in like manner all lowly hearts, that hope
upon the righteousness and suffer heavines, for the sins cause.

3. It is surely much happier to be among the lowly hearts, where 2 Cor. 7.
is heavines and sighing for the sins cause, Matt. 18. Romans 15. 1 These. 5. Heb.
3.
where exhortation to amendment, and instruction to the knowledge of God and
Christ is, and where men out of love d Prove. 27.
reprehend the blindness of the heart for the righteousness sake, than to be
among the haughty, where the flattering lips of the ungodly and the dissolute
stout, or uncircumcised of heart are; where men embrace all gladness,
commendation, praise and honor of men, and not the honor of God.

4. Wherefore have regard hereunto, and awake to the good; For behold, It shall
in his time be found, that the endurers or sufferers (who now for the sins
cause, bear heaviness, sorrow, and the Cross; and who out of the love of
Righteousness, endure out such things) shall be turned to a Esa. 60 62.66. 4
Esd. 2. Ioh. 16.
godly joyfulnesse; where contrariwise, all despisers of the Righteousness
which now rejoice themselves in ungodliness (how evilly soever they do it)
shall be turned to Matt. 25.
grievous sorrow and pain; yea, 4 Esd. 5. Apo. 21.
horrible it is to remember, the reward of the unrighteous or wretched men,
which is for to come upon them.

5. O how happy is that man, which joyneth himself to the Word of the Lord, in
his service of the Love, and Esa. 1. Mat 18
turns him away from the evil: which betimes 1 Cor. 11.
hears his Judgment and so sets himself down in the dust; k which
receives Wisdom, and Instruction to Virtue: that loves the Righteousness,
and Prove. 3. Heb. 12.
refuses not the Chastening of the Lord, that he may be upright of heart,
before God; For it shall go well with him in this day of the righteous
Judgment which God, now brings over the whole Earth; yet passing through
great dangers of his salvation.

6. How will it go with you then, Prove. 11. 1 Pet. 5.
O ye sinners and sinneresses, which receive Sap. 2. 2 Pet. 2. Jude 1.
this transitory life for your delight, and keep God out of your hearts, and
have not once borne sorrow nor heavines for your sins.

7. Where will ye then hide your selves, ye haughty, ye covetous, and ye proud
men, and all ye arrogant self-wise, that now will not submit nor give over your
selves to obedience, under the service of the Love of the gracioue Word? Sap. 5
What profit I pray you will your pride, and your riches then yield or bring
you?

8. Who think ye, will then have compassion on your misery, ye which now
withhold your selves from the obedience of the Doctrine, and requiring of the
gracious Word, and make your selves common with the worldly minded and with
those that oppress the little ones, grieve the Consciences of the simple, and
betray, persecute, and spill Ezekiel. 22.
the innocent Blood?

9. Oh! I am astonished, whilst I think upon the horrible being of the ungodly,
the wicked perverse nature that will not convert.

10. Oh how horrible and fearful shall it be unto him, that shall behold it
with his eyes? Yea, what misery and VVoe comes over him, that shall taste
bear, and be tormented with the same eternally,

11. Therefore Pro. 15
much better in this dangerous Time is a little in the fear of God, with the
Righteous; than superfluities with the ungodly. It is also much better, to
suffer and endure Poverty, Shame, Reproach, Affliction, Heaviness, Anguish and
Contempt, Heb. 11
with the Children of Peace, which have regard on Gods Righteousness,
according to his Promises, than to have all the Delights or Pleasures, with all
the honor, riches, and Triumphs of this world.

12. For the Reward of the Righteous redoundeth Pro. 11. Sap. 5.
to Gods Glory; but the recompense of the ungodly, of the wicked world, with
all unbeleevers or resisters of the good, Apo. 21
shall with confusion perish in horrible calamity, and with misery: It is true.

Take it to heart.
Love ye the Virtue fervently,
Give God his Honor due:
Delight therein continually,
That is his Doctrine true.
CHARITAS EXTORSIT, PER H. N.

FJNJS.

