Princeps Rhetoricus or (...) ye Combat of Caps.


Drawn forth into ARGVMENTS, GENERAL and SPECIAL.

In usum Scholae MASONENSIS: ET In Gratiam totius Auditorii Mercurialis.

VENI, VIDE. Nella (...) la (...).

LONDON, Printed for H. R. at the three Pigeons in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1648.

DUCI RHETORICO, Et toti Decentiarum Satellitio, (...).
(...).
SAlve peculium dulce-triste meum, suavissima Maceries; Egovobis commendo haec
Principis Rhetorici Argumenta; quasi multum in parvo; (...).
Nam de integra Fabula conclamatum est. Ne igitur totus pereat Princeps noster,
decerpsi (quasi rediviva Principis Hippolyti membra) Haec quae sequuntur
collectanea, ut fiat Virbius Quid plura? state vos in procinctu virtutis,
Nobilitatis, Eloquentiae and Religionis. Fiat. Valete.

J. M.

Chori Princeps Rhetorici. THE SCHOOL MODERATOR: OR, (...). THE COMBAT OF
CAPS, December. 21. 1647.
THe whole draught of the Invention moves upon two principal Hinges:

1. The maine Plot, or (...). 2. The Counter-plot, or (...).
The first designs forth the Orders of the Place in point of Government; the
other, the Didacticall part, in way of Method, thus, in order following.

1. The Maine Plot represents the Fundamental discipline in ordine ad Regimen
usitatum Loci: and is wrapped up in the first part of the Title, (Princeps
Rhetoricus) In relation to the Authority of the School Prince, his five
Seniors, and twelve Sub-seniors or Keepers, throughout the whole year, and
consists of two Dramaticall parts:

1. Citement. 2. Indictment.
The Citement summons the Officers, Seniors, Sub-seniors, and Juniors in the
five first Classes, at the Instalment of their Prince. The Indictment belongs
to the Fresh-men and Sub-juniors of the fifth and sixth Form, according as they
stand severally charged by their Seniors.

2. The Counter-plot lays forth ((...)) our Methodicall Exercise, alternis
diebus, three days a week, i. e. Grammatically and Rhetorically on Tuesday;
Poetically on Thursday; Logically on Saturday, viz. upon some Thema simplex,
some one word Problematically given forth upon Monday morning: As Cubus, Era,
Sphaera, Annus, several weeks, several words, canvased Philologically through
the Grammarians, Lexicons, Glossaries, Nomenclators, Critics, Historians,
quasi opus Philologicum: and also hunted through the Arithmeticians and
Cosmographers quasi Exercitium Mathematicum: and forthwith out of the present
Result the Declamers come forth, quasi Praxis Rhetorica: this for Tuesday
perenniter: the Books being laid by the Library keepers prae manibus, in
ordine ad Classes; and the Exercise recorded in three several Books, and kept
by (...), the keeper of the weekly Papers.

Now the Thesis or Controversall word for the present was Pileum, a Cap, being
the garb of the place. But occasionally at this time e re naeta; For a
negligent young Student of the House had lost his College Bonnet, whose name,
together with his loss, renewed the old Schoole-game, The Parson has lost his
Cap, and so fell in accidentally to be the Basis of the Counter-plot, and gave
the Title (...). The subject of the second, third, fourth Acts, debated
Academically. And thus the two Plots interweave all the year Scholastice,
Methodi gratia. And to day Dramatice, Compendii causa, ut mundus in Tabellula,
The Essay of a Fortnights study. And thus much for the Argument at large.

The Persons of the Rhetorical Drama, are the same with the Domestical
Students, distinguished by a threefold degree: In ordine ad 1. Officia. Their
Titles and Offices. 2. Classes. Forms and places. 3. Aetates. Ages.

1. The Office is twofold: 1. Schoole-Officers, 2. Court-Officers; yet both
Mercuriall: Only the first more properly attend the business of the Public
Weal, or School; the other the pleasure of the Prince, or Moderator. That
respects Substance, this Ceremony.

2. The Classes are ever six, with an Entrance, termed Vestibulum.

3. The Ages were not here much material to the Plot; yet the Plot is
material to the Ages. Fiat Aemulatio, and Pudor.

Now as for the terms of the distinct Titles and Places, they will hardly
admit of English; being originally imposed, and still use in Greek or Latin,
which are the indispensable dialect of the province; and yet we will venture
here to rank them in a triple Paralles

1. (...), or (...). Seniores. Old standers. 2. (...). Juniores. Succeeders. 3.
(...) Tyrones. Fresh-men.

The two first, in order to their Charge, are called (...), Keepers, or
Guards-men; but in another sense, (...), or (...), quasi e specula decernentes:
in a Grammatical Acception, Overseers, Watchmen, Spies. For in this Vtopia,
the main business is (...), Custodia, Tuitio, Excubatio. Watch and Ward,
(...), where every Officer stands Sentinel in the defense of Decency, and
defiance of Rudeness: for as (...), decent ofder, is (...), so it is the
(...), the guarded treasure, the golden Apple of our Hesperian Garden. O^do
Anima rerum, and needs many watchful eyes to guard it; Tot Argi oculati,
vigilesque Dracones. And thus in order following stands the Posture of our
School Model, (...): And therefore in Rank and File, see them here upon their
march, facing the Spectators.

Officiorum Tituli Specifici: The Officers in their Threefold Order.
1. Office. 2. Classis. 3. Aetat. Anno. (...). Princeps Rhetoricus.
School-Moderator. ^ ^^ (...) Moderator Mercurialis. Decider of Controversies.
(...). and Monitor Monitorum. Keeper of Keepers. 1. 13. (...) Legumque Custos.
Defender of the Laws, and Mr. of Requests.

The four prime Monitors.
1. (...). Praeses succelli. President of the Chapel. ^. 13. 2. (...).
Decentiarum explorator. quest-man of Decency. 2. 12. 3. (...). Linguarum
Custos. Monitor of Language. 2. 13. 4. (...). Ingenii speculator. Observer of
Invention. 3. 13.

(...). The twelve Sub-officials, or subordinate Monitor or Keepers.
Offic. Class. Aetat. 1. (...). Praefectus Scrinii Rhetorici. Chief Register
of Exercise. 3. 14 2. (...). Librarius. Producer of Auth. Keeper of the three
School Libraries. 3. 14 3. (...). Ostiarius. Commander of the keys and
hatches. 3. 14 4. (...), sive (...). Nolae Curator. The Timer of the Bell and
hourglasse. 3. 13 5. (...). Lucifer. Orderer of the lights. 4. 13 6.
Cubiculorum decurio. Chief Chamberlain and searcher of studies. 4. 14 7.
Praeses limitaneus. Marquess of the Bounds. 4. 14 8. Aulae mensor. Controller
of the Hall. 4. 13 9. Silentarius. Usher of the Peace. 5. 13 10. Ambulantion
ductor. Leader of the Fieldwalks. 5. 14 11. Sigillorum procurator and
productor. Overseer of the Sigillums. 5. 9 12. (...). Pileorum monitor.
Overseers of Gowns and Caps. 3. 15

The Court-Officers. Insignium (...).
Offic. Clas. Ae t^^ 1. Ceremoniarum, Rituumque Custos, Ordinunique magister
Urbanus. Master of Ceremonies. 2 15 2. Nequitiarum Regulus, five Atlas minor,
Tyronumque patronus. Master of Misrule. 2 11 3. Caducifer, ^eciali^ Her^cticus.
Mace-bearer, and Herald at Arms. 4 14 4. Aman^cuses Rhetorici. The two
Rhetorical Text bearers, Aristotle on the right hand, quintilian the left. 5
10 5 10 5. Diademifer. The cap of Rhetorical Maintenance. 5 15 6. Tyro^^^^
(...). Master-Keeper of the Fresh-men. 3 15

Personae personantes Orchestri^^s.
1. (...). Sir Sh^^ulus The Parson, or Cap-loser. 3. 15 2. Merlins Chorista
Merlins Chorister, or Fo^d Hope. 3. Echo. Empty Fame. 5. 9

The Fresh-men and Sub-juniors of the 6. Form.
1. Sir Antonio Draggle-gowne. 2. Sir Henrico Srud^e-hawke. 3. Monsieur le
Card-^^ummer. 4. Monsieur le Tittle-tattle. Monsieur le Incongruo. The
Vestibulum, or Petty Tyrones.
The Habit.
THe habit was uniform, pro more loci, (...), Gown and Cap, differing in the
color of the Fancy, quasi significator officii, the ensign of office. Only
the Prince and six prime Seniors wore Beavers, to show the privilege of their
long standing, with Brims also reverst, in token of freedom above the rest;
and decked with stars of several magnitudes; having in their right hands
Trunchions of several colors, and silk Bends ore their shoulders, Emblemata
Honorum, Types of their calling.

All white Gloves. white Pumps, Linen Stockins, knots differing in color.

The Symbolicall Properties.
1. A Mercuriall Mace Argent. Caduceus, with two Snakes, interwinding, and
plumed Argent. signifying the power of Serpentine eloquence. This is the
Fexanima Pytho, insinuating persuasion.

2. A Mercuriall Bonnet, plumed Argent, Edged Or; typifing the gallant
rational Headpiece, a Princely Presence, and a freeborn Speaker, whose
brains are laid with Gold, and his tongue tipped with Silver. Aurum Argentumque
loquitur.

Again, the Snakes have respect to the will, the Cap to the the Intellect, the
wings to the fancy, and the Colors to the Passions.

3. A Scutchion or Mercuriall Shield, which bore Gules, three Keys, Or. on the
dexter hand; but on the sinister, a Bend Azure charged with four Stars of
equal radii; over them Sol, under that a Cube, Triangle, and Circle, all Or.
the Crest or Rose with wings Argent. quasi Rosa volans.

Observe farther, that the allusion was Mathematical, and chiefly
Astronomicall, from beginning to the end, as thus: The two designs are as the
Artick and Antartick Poles, bearing the Axis of the maine work. The five
Strophae, Antistropta, or Acts, do bear the number and office of the Zones;
the seven chief Seniors wander as the Planets through the Zodiac, the Planets
proper stage; the twelve Sub-monitors, as the twelve Signs, fixed to the
Zodiac, The entire number of Actors, the same with the Constellations; some
Southern, some Northern moving, all according to their Longitude, latitudes,
and altitudes, according to their place and magnitudes, in the upper and lower
division of the School place. All in time and order of vicissitude, moving
through the degrees of the Zodiac, till they have reached to the (...), the
highest pitch of School Honor, viz. Princeps Rhetoricus, the Sol scholae;
(...), the Mercuriall Moderator of the whole Regiment; for it is Sceptrum
successivum, in ordine ad meritum Ascensionis.

The Prologue twofold: 1. The mock-Prologue. 2. And the Serious.


1. THe first lays the contrivance of the Anti-plot or counterdesigne: Vbi
consulitur de inductione Pilei in Scenam and Curiam Principis Rhetorici. The
Contrivets five, Misrule, Corister, Custos pileorum, Ostiarius, and Monitor
Scholae.

2. The second gives the argument of the maine plot or fixed work in hand. Being
twofold.

1. In Greek Iambic, Ad Doctos. 2. Ad populum. In English.
The English Prologue.
All hail thrice fair Assembly.
What Orders, Laws, Rights, Constitutions, here
Run yearly round in this School Hemisphere:
And what Our Elders, and Our Classes do,
Are this day tendered to your public view.
Our Prince is King of Bees; whose well-mann'd throne,
No peevish VVaspe can clime, nor lazy drone.
Under whose VER GE our new Atlantis lies,
And comes well-neere th'Utopian Paradise.
As for the scene that lies in Grecian-Rome,
A piece new weaved ith Greek and Latian lome;
Yet for your sakes (sweet Ladies) all along,
The work's imbroder'd in our Mother Tongue.
Sirs, you are wise, accept what is not ill,
Who are not wise, let them do what they will.
The expression of the Mercuriall Coat Armor.
1. THe Scutchion is also allusive every way; by the Plumed Rose in the Crest
is declared, that fragrancy and celerity are the top-work of eloquence:
swiftness, and sweetness, are the last and highest parts of this science:
again, Invention must not drag low, language must fly high.

2. The 3 Golden Keys lay open this Conceit; that Logic, Rhetoric, and
Grammar, are by way of entrance, taught fundamental in Schools; but the work
is left to be crowned and matured in the Academies: therefore as we the 3 Keys,
Oxford gives the 3 Crowns, which also decypher the 3 principal Scienences, 1.
Theology, 2. Law, 3. Physic: And why may not we here have a Key for them also?

3. By the Cube, Arithmetic; by the Triangle, Geometry; by the Circle,
Cosmography are here intended, and stand Quartered under the 4 Stars, as taught
in a different place and manner from the other three Arts before.

4. The Bend of Stars with eight Radii, represent the prime 4 Seniors or
Ministers, each man being Keeper of 8 distinct Laws or Canons; Himself shining
amongst his fellows as a Star in his place: Again, these Stars denote the 4
cardinal qualities here (under this Prince) professed, attained, kept, 1.
Language, 2. Invention, 3. Manners, 4. Religion, each consisting of eight
several branches, clear and starlike.

5. The Sun has the chief influence, as the glory and light of the rest;
(...), and stands mounted in the highest angle above the bend of stars, locus
Principis Rhetorici, the Princes place; but by the Sun is chiefly intended
Religion, without which, all Arts are but mere darkness, or at least, Ignis
fatuus. Yet our Sol appears quartered in a sinister side, because the Pulpits
does challenge the upper hand of the Schools, and Theology the wall of
Philologie.

But if the Parson at any time shall lose his Cap, and turn Tityre tu patulae,
a Coridon of our Arcadia; then will we Quarter our Sol upon the right, and his
Cap upon the left; for then he is our Junior: his Sheep-hook has done Homage
to our Rod; Divinity has struck Top sail to Grammar, and the Liturgy in
Syntacticall obeisance has vayled his bonnet to the Accidence.

6. The two fields, Gules on the right hand, Azure on the left in a
Philosophical acception lively depaint the Will and the Wit, the Heart and the
Brain, the two fixed seats of our fourfold learning.

Thus much for the Blazounrie in brief, Sed aliquid latet, quod non patet, qui
nucleum vult nacem frangat.

And now we come to the Argument in special, and Correlative to each Act.

Princeps Rhetoricus, The school Captain.
BUt why Princeps, and why Rhetoricus? that falls in next to be scand, for non
est in promptu ubique O Edipus, all teeth are not nut-crackers. Therefore
observe, that the whole allusion brancheth it self, into five strains of
Rhetoric, or Acts Oratoricall distringued here by 5 titles:

The first Act we call Inauguratio, the Instalment,
The second, Pompa, the Entertainment.
The third, Criticus, the Linguist.
The fourth, the Disputant.
The fifth, the Judge or Moderator.
And in order to these is personated a Prince thus qualified: Princeps.


In the first, Princeps legitime inauguratus.
In the second, Princeps Pompaticus.
Third, Philologicus.
Fourth, Philosophicus.
Fifth, Judicialis.
And in the Catastrophe of the scene, Princeps Religiosus: and through the
whole Acts, Princeps Heroice moratus: of noble deportment; alluding to the
seven fold buckler of Ajax, under which Ulysses lay protected. Homers Prince of
Eloquence: and thus much for our Prince, Quatenus Princeps: invested with
Title, Authority, Quality; now view him quatenus Rhetoricus.

His Prince-part was a notion assumed, feigned, and allegorically Rhetoricis.
borrowed: but the Rhetoric part and title are in earnest, and (ex professo)
opus loci and Personae. For now One was to make good in himself (by way of
president to the rest) the Character of a complete Rhetorician, and that by the
exact Test of our two Rhetorical Text-men, Aristotle and Quintilian: for one
while he cunningly insinuates; as at his first Ascent to the Chair. Detur,
ait, Dignori, ego enim (comparative) non merui.

Like Caesar in Tacitus, waving finely his new imposed dignity; and yet at the
same instant, policetur abunde, promises mountains, to rule like an Angel.
Again, sometimes his speech becomes demonstrative, praising and inveigling:
sometimes deliberative, pondering the future good: sometime Juciciall;
according as the Lost-Cap finds Argument through the five Acts, occasionally,
and ex Ansa data: for still the matter is before the Judge, coram Judice lis.
And still the Parsons Cap makes work for all. Argumentative.

Then next, touching those three Aristotelian Requisites, 1. Natura, 2. Ars, 3.
Exercitatio. they were better there seen, then here spoken. As candid
spectability, a Tongue well hung, firm sides, retentive memory, fancy clear, a
princely undanted presence, and cujus ex ore melle dulcior s^uebat Oration, etc.

But to complete the matter, after some fair Essays of 1. Invention, 2.
Disposition, 3. Elocution, and 4. Pronunciation, he falls upon the moderating
part of Oratory; and exhibits a Rhetorical skill in the Bee-like use of
Authors, culling out for his own Hive, the flowers inservient to his present
purpose, mutatis mutandis 3 ter, i. e. Alterum, Alteratum, or Aliud.

Sometimes again he leaves moderating, and falls to debating, syllogystice,
upon the Argument, till being victor in the truth, he concludes by a double
power, Argumento 1. recti. 2. sceptri.
And so becomes in fine, both Princeps and Rhetoricus, co-incident in nature
and title, the Rhetorical Princess: for, in vero convenient Rex and lex.

The Arguments of the 5 Acts severally and particularly; and these in twofold
notion, 1. Historical. 2. Moral.
ACT. I.
Princeps legitime inauguratus, or, The Instalment. The Argument Historical.
SCENA I.
A Curtain is displaied, (...), the prime School monitor appears in a studying
posture: is interrupted by the entrance of the 2 Text-bearers, inducing (...)
the wandering scholar Lose-Cap to the sight and speech of the Monitor, with a
Petition tendered de recuperand^ Parsonuli Pilco, for recovery of his Cap,
defunct; the Petition is accepted by Phylophylax the Monitor; with promise to
be presented in Court, and to have fair audience in the business (for his
Office is not only School-Superintendent, but also libellorum custos, Master of
request and complaints) And here is the first stone laid in the Arch-fabrick of
the counterplot.

SCENA II.
LOrd of mis-rule enters with his bonny fresh men, undertakes their protection,
contra gentes and jura; and against the imperious wand of Custos Tyronum, his
main Antagonist and theirs. And this is the second trick of wit in the cross
plot, so to disturb the main plot.

SCEN. III.
HEre the maine plot begins. The Master of Ceremonies appears with the Keeper
of the Fresh-men: It Is consulted De Curia recte curanda, that things be done in
Place, Time and Order. Exit Ceremonius. Custos induces his Fresh charge,
pearcheth them up at the Bar: succeeds again Ceremonius with his whole
Court-traine. And first, marshalleth his fourth Classis, next his fifth; then
fall in the Officers, Seniors, Attendants, Prince, in ceremonial order.
Ceremonius leads the way, next him, Lord Mis-rule, then two Monitors abrest.
Singly succeeds them Monitor Monitorum; next, Praeco Fecialis, the Mercuriall
Herald at Arms, Princeps Rhetoricus in the midst. After him the two
Text-bearers; then the other two Monitors abrest, the Cap of Maintenance after
them, and last, Custos* Tyronum, Proclaimer and Guards-man General.

They proceed to Election, on a fourefold Ground; 1. Sucession, 2. Merit, 3.
Suffrages, 4. Laws and Customs.

Invenitur Caduceo Habilis and Idoneus, proclaimed fit for the Mercuriall
Scepter.

The Quaeries are ten: As first, whether he has orderly ascended from Classis
to Classis, non faciens saltum, not making a skip.

2. Whether he be patiens inediae, frigoris, and sudoris. An multa tulit,
fecitque sudavit and alsit: whether he be Snow-proofe, able to endure Heats and
Colds, and to watch by the Lamp of Cleanthes.

Again, whether he has learned obedire and imperare, to obey and command, as
Junior and Senior; and whether well verst in the Laws appertaining to the
Chair Mercuriall: whether been moratus, Been linguatus, Religiosus, and
Humilis.

And being approved by the Register general, proclaimed Prince by the Herald,
and voiced by the rest, he ascends the Chair of Eloquence.

Then follows the citement of Officers; after that, the Canto or Hymn of
Congratulation^; the Speeches Encomiasticall ad Principem.

After the Citement, the Indictment is read against the Tyroes, whose penalties
are imposed in way of several Theames, and liberty to speak for themselves,
par poenae culpa. Their Patron is Lord of mis-rule.

SCEN. IV.
EX Improviso, abruptly breaks in Sir Shone, Molestus Interpellator Curiae, in
a great fume, impatient of longer attendance, a blunt, unbred, rude, insulse
Scholar, and as roughly entertained by the Guards-man: they chop Logic at
staves end dilemmatically; Here I can have ye, and there; but pates find
mediums. Master Keeper assaults the Parson, Argumento Baculino, with Halberd
Eloquence, the Parson indoctrinates the Keeper with Crab-tree Logic, but is
foiled at his own weapon; till Misrule, and the Schoole-monitor, his Fratres
fraterrimi, complotters and sworn partners, step in to his rescue; by whose
provision and request, his Petition is heard, registered, and deliberated on,
but deferred till the next Court Sessions Mercuriall.

(...). Ode Acclamatoria. The Congratulatory Canto.
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...).
The humble Partishon of Sir Shone of Wales, in forma paperis following.
BE it known to all and some, that her has a partishon in her packets, ad
hunc venarabilem collegium, propter facere Huc and Cry, post cappum sumum
(misere defunctum, and lostum) per omnes Chamberos, Studies, and Corneros. And
also her desires to enter her Actions, or rather her Passions in te Law, for a
scire facias, through te six mercuriall classes, with a non est Inventus, as
touching her Pileus; and a Quare Latitat, amongst all her cozen Scholars, and
her shall be pound to pray, for her six venerable said Monitors while her may,
for ever and a day, and longer too, when her has nothing else to do.

The Moral Argument of this Act, for want of room, we pass by.

The Authors, like so many flourie fields, Campi Rhetorici, were Tacitus,
Justine, Justinian, Quintilian, Eutopia Mori, Atlantis Verulamei, Apuleius: The
Greeks, Homer, Aristophanes, Plutarch, Zenophon de Cyropaedia, Longinus, (...).
Aristotle's Rhetoric, Plato, Aeschylus, etc. The language chiefly Greek; but
Auditorii gratia, translated here and rhere into English.

ACT. II.
Princeps Pompaticus: or, The Entertainment. The Argument Historical.
ATlas minor, alias Misrule, ascends his Astronomical Cabinet. A Scematicall
figure is erected at the command of the Prince de pileo restaurando. His
censure upon Astrology. This course failing, by the consent of the Court, a
Hue and Cry is voiced. Sir Shone the Proclaimer. An Echo answers within; he
runs in after the Echo, his supposed countriman; instead of him, falls upon
Merlins Chorister, the old welsh Bard; who by the Harmonious power of his
voice, summons in (in three several dances) 18 Caps distinct.

The Song between Chorister and Echo.
Choris. Echo, O Echo; thou Oracle, O Echo, Echo tell.

Echo. What shall the Echo, Echo tell?

Choris. The Scholars Cap is lost, how shal't be found?

Echo. Charm Atlas, Charm the Caps from under ground;

By six and six, so shall the Cap be found.

Choris. Caps all, O Caps all, appear at Echoes call,
Six great, six small.

Echo. Here, here we rise at Echoes call.

Choris. When you the Viols hear, brave Sprights appear.

Echo. Sound Viols sound, for at your sound we will venture.
Room, room for Caps, by six and six we enter.

The first Dance, consisting of the six Grammatical Persons.
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. I. Thou. He. We. Ye. They.

After the Dance they impeach each other De furto Pilei. I puts it off to Thou,
Thou to He, so the rest alternative; but neither I, Thou, nor He, We, Ye, nor
They: Ergo tandem Nemo, Nemo is the man, No body has it.

Morally alluding to the depraved nature of children; accusing and excusing;
peevish liars: the Tutors task to cure.

And also implies, that men themselves act the Childrens Scean; Instead of
vindicating, often recriminating, waspish, serpentine, childish, saying,
unsaying, gainsaying. Quis enim non ab Ovo mendax?

And thirdly, it alludes to the Academians contradictory humor, Affirmo, Nego.

The second Dance consisted of six Gypsies, Cap-men, of several Colors.
THe intent of this, was like the other, but in a higher way. Suggere jam
Quintiliane Colorem; every man has some color for what he says, or does; in
a several cast of natural Rhetoric.

But by these colors is primely intended the principles and depth of mystical
Philosophy: in which the idle Scholars Cap is seldom found.

The third Dance was of the chief Faculties, personated lively.
1 A Cardinal. A Miter. Signifying Degrees of preferment. 2 A Master of Arts
Square Cap. Degrees of Learning. 3 The Falkner. Montero. Degrees of Gentry. 4
Seaman. Saylors Thrum. Degrees of travel. and Foreign. 5 Soldier. An Helmet.
Degrees of Martial Officers. 6 Smith. Fuddle-cap. Degrees of Trades.

MORAL.
Thus every Cap what ere it be,
Is still a sign of some degree.
The Dance ends merrily. Lose-Cap breaks his confining Circle, and chops in
among the Caps, dancing; is defended from their Battouns by the Soldiers
buckler, and carried away upon his shoulders; the Seamen advancing one leg,
fuddle-Cap the other, shooing him in the exit.

The sum of the intendment, belongs to oratoricall practice; these 6 be
subjects of eloquence; work for a wise head, and a winning tongue. A sight
proposed to the Prince, what manner of men he has to deal with; that will be
great or wise.

ACT. II. SCENA II.
After that all vanish and nothing effected, Atlas demands further of the
Merlins Chorister what is to be done. He answers again in SONG.

Cho. Echo, O Echo, for Merlins sake O Echo, once more tell,

Echo. What shall the Echo once more tell?

Cho. Tell who the Cap does wear, and who goes clear,

Echo. No figure cast by Spel, or Charm, or Magic:
But Scholar-like, by Grammar, Wit, and Logic.

Atlas interprets the Oracle, the Prince likes and consents; and commands a
preparation Scholasticall, de Pilei disquisitione Etymologica.

ACT. III.
Princeps Rhetoricus, or, Criticus the Linguist.
The Argument. THe Philologicall Books are fetched forth from the Trino-Musaeum;
the Triple Library, 1. Grammatical, 2. Philosophical, 3. Mathematical; the
Grammarians are first scanned; then the Glossaries and Dictionaries, then the
Declamers ex tempore deliver their Cap-verdit Etymologically. The Prince in his
Chair moderating; Monitor scholae, and two head Monitors maintaining the Table
in the middle, the other two at Desks ex opposite, and Forms ex adverso to
Forms. This way also proving invalid, command is given by his Highness
elegance; for an Academicall Certamen, logically controverted.

Exeunt omnes. ACT. IV.
Princeps Academicus, or, The Disputant.
THe Authors scientificall, and in order to the 7 Arts are produced. Then a
set dispute between the three main sciences; de melioritate Praerogativa Pilei;
the question is stated two ways, 1. Which is guilty of the Parsons Cap. 2.
Which most worthy among themselves of the three: Next intervenes a Question
between the two Princes, Rhetoric and Misrule, de prioritate Galeri and Pilei,
the pre-eminence of the Hat and the Cap; but while the disputes grew hot,
enters a message from the Cantabrigian Fellow-Commoners, desiring of the Court
a conference touching the new lost Cap, as a maine case concerning their
Coppy-hold, It Is condescended to, and the Court dissolves for the present.

ACT. V.
Princeps Judicialis, or, The Judge.

HEre is a set form of a Sessions; a Court of Judicature, more Judiciali. The
Tyroes declame: the Theams five, 1. Horn-book, 2. the Hawke, 3. Long Tail, 4.
Knave of Clubs, 5. A Noune is the Name of a Thing.

Before the Declamation each fresh Declamer takes his Briny Dos of water and
salt; from the hand of the Tyro-guardian: at every stand, or dead lift, they
are helped out, by their Suggester, and nimble-tongu'd Patron Monseiur de la
Misrule; and at last by his mediation, Annuit Princeps, the Bills of Indictment
are expunged; Et donantur Pileo Tyrones: made free of the College. Exit
Misrule.

Misrule within sends Message to the Monitor Monitorum; He craves excuse for
his absence a while; A flourish of Cornets. Forthwith return in form of a
pontifical Train the 5 Counter-plotters; Misrule in the midst as a Prince; and
the Scholars Cap advanced upon a Trunchion, more triumphali: He is made to
give account of his device, that no offense be given or taken; and after some
Questions problematically propounded by the Prince; He and his seniors are
invited to an Astronomicall dance in reference to the Planets, with Laurels,
each bearing a star advanced frontwise. After this the Prince returns to his
Chair, gives his charge to the Tyrones, Juniors, and Seniors in their turns,
concluding that Religion is the finis ultimatus, the ultimate End of all our
Sudies; and Humility the last work of Religion, ending with this Motto, Quanto
doctior, tanto submissior; withal couching briefly in a fourfold distinction,
the four Ends of all men's Academicall labors, 1. Mechanical, ditescere, 2.
Sophistical, clarescere, 3. Philosophical, cognoscere, and 4. Angelical,
videre Deum. i. e. Practic^s, se abnegando.

The Questions in this ACT accidently emergent were these.
1. WHether the Mercuriall Cap be more injured by the Fathers indulgence, the
Sons negligence, or the Masters insufficience? 2. Whether a lying humor be
rather sucked from the dugs of the Nurse; or the paps of custom, or rather, An
mendacium be ex traduce? Hereditary? 3. Whether the Parsons Cap has received
more cuts and blows, from the blunt weapons of Bacchus, or the sharp sword of
Mars? 4. Whether a-wel-bred Rhetorician did ever want a Mocenas, or his Cap
mendicant? 5. Whether every Noble and great Gentlemen ought to be princeps
Rhetoricus, a prime good speaker? 6. Whether every Master of Arts be princeps
Rhet. Et e contra? 7. Whether the greatest enemy to the Cap, be not the Cap?
Science against Science more persecuting then Ignorance? 8. An pileum
Sir-Shonnuli fit ex Lana Caprina? 9. An fiat Pileorum transmigratio? 10. Pileus
An tandem fataliter -- Exeat omnis?
EPILOGVS.
AS soon as the Court-scene closed, and had as it were bid goodnight to Action
and Invention, Prince-Misrule-Atlas (now left singly on the Stage) presents the
Audience with a Caution or two, by the Horarie Advise of his Quadrant; which
being elevated to a just height, he calculates the howrs of the day, 3 of
clock, 33 min. and 3 digits. Then warns them, Maturare Reditum, imminet ursa;
to hasten homewards, lest (...) the Keeper of the great Bear meet with them
after All. The Bear being a starting-enemy to the Coach-Horse; and Twilight a
dangerous time for Caps. Venit Hesperus ite.

So Atlas bids his Star-like Guests Adieu,
As you have shined on Us this Day,
With friendly Influence: So may
The New year shine on You.
E font Cambrino, Jan. 19. 1648.
FINIS.

