A CONFERENCE BETWIXT The Kings most Excellent Majesty, and Mr. Peter's, the
Minister, at Newmarket.

Wherein is declared the Desires of the said Mr. Peter's, to the Kings Majesty,
and His Majesty's Reply.

Likewise the further proceedings of the Army. And a Declaration of the Lord
Mayor of London.

London Printed by B. A. June 22. 1647.

NEVVES FROM THE ARMY
SIR,
SInce my last unto you, dated the 18. of this instant month, We have received
further Orders from the General, for removal of our quarters toward the
Western Road, which was accordingly done, several Regiments being now
quartered about Reading, Windsor, and the rest of the adjacent towns. Our
trayn of Artillery is come from Oxford to the Generals headquarters, and
diverse soldiers designed for Ireland ^re again joined with us. Some rumors in
the army of high particulars, but I will wave them, and rather clip the wings
of such suggestions, then to have them dispierced for advancing of discord But
I trust to the great Jehovah of Heaven, that if a further breach does arise
betwixt the Parliament, City, and Army, that He will be pleased to close it up
again, and firmly knit the hearts of all in those silver thrids of amity, that
so the glory of God may be exalted, His Royal Majesty advanced into his
throne, and peace and truth established within his Majesty's Realm and Dominion.

We have received advertisement at the Head quarters, that a party of horse are
advanced nearer toward your City; but (I say now, as I said before) I hope
with no evil intent; Our agitators sits close (being two out of every
Regiment) and what ever they conclude upon, the army gives their whole assent.

We have received some advertisement of a Letter sent to the General, from
both houses of Parliament, to require him to deliver the King, to the
Commissioners now resident with his Majesty, and so to be conducted to
Richmond, and to require him to withdraw his Army forty miles from London, to
forbear recruiting his Army, or to possess any new towns, Castles, or
Fortifications; but the army has declared their unwillingnesse to resign up
the King, until such time that they have received satisfaction and redress of
their former grievances proposed to the honorable houses of Parliament; yet
thus much I dare presume to say, that his Majesty's residence in the protection
and power of the Army, does not a little embolden them in their present design,
but it does also promp them up to high conditions.

For other particulars, I shall refer you to the enclosed, and remain

Your affectionate friend, T. Nichols.
Redburn June 21. 1647.
Postscript.
UPon the close of this Letter, I received information of a Messenger arrived
at St. Albanes, sent by the Parliaments Commissioners from Newmarket, with
Propositions to the General. 1. To know his answer to the Votes of both
Houses, concerning the disposal of his Majesty's Royal Person to Richmond.
And secondly, that He would be pleased to send them a speedy answer, for
further satisfaction therein. The said Messenger further intimated, that there
was a late conference betwixt his Majesty, and Mr. Peter's the Minister; at
which conference, his Majesty told the said Mr. Peter's, that he had often heard
talk of him, but did not believe he had that solidity in him he found by his
discourse, after his Majesty had ended his discourse, Mr. Peter's began with
these expressions. Humbly desiring his Majesty that He would be pleased to
hear him preach; his Majesty replied, no, not as yet, but he would have a
further Conference with him another time, and so Mr. Peter's withdrew.

A Declaration set forth by the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor of London,
concerning the Trained Bands, and Auxiliaries, belonging to the said City.
These are to declare and make known unto all, that in the beating up of the
drum and sounding of the trumpet, the intention is, for the suppressing of
tumults and outrages (such as are and may be committed, for the preservation of
the peace, and for the defense of the Parliament and City. Wherefore these are
earnestly to exhort and require all persons lifted for the Trained Bands and
Auxiliaries within this City and Liberties, as they tender and wish the good of
themselves, their wives, children, and families, preservation of the peace and
safety of the Parliament and City, That immediately upon beat of the Drum, or
sound of the trumpet, they, and every of them, under conduct of their several
and respective Captains and Commanders, will with all readiness and alacrity
repair to their Colors (as often as occasion may require) for the cause and
purpose aforesaid.

And all Constables and Officers within this City and Liberties are hereby
straightly charged and commanded to do and perform their respective duties
with all readiness, for conservation of the peace, and therein to be from time
to time ayding and assisting unto the said trained Bands and Auxiliaries, and
the Commanders of them, as they, and every of them will answer the contrary for
their neglect and remissness.

FINIS.

