THE EIRST ANNIVERSARY OF THE GOVERNMENT UNDER HIS HIGHNESS THE Lord Protector.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Newcomb, and are to be sold by Samuel Gellibrand at
the golden Ball in Paul's Churchyard, near the West End, Anno Dom: 1655. 1654.
Jan: 17.

THE ANNIVERSARY.
LIke the vain Curlings of the Watery maze,
Which in smooth Streams a sinking Weight dos raise;
So Man, declining always, disappears
In the weak Circles of increasing Years;
And his short Tumults of themselves Compose,
While flowing Time above his Head dos close.
Cromwell alone with greater Vigor runs,
(Sun-like) the Stages of succeeding Suns:
And still the Day which he does next restore,
Is the just Wonder of the Day before.
Cromwell alone does with new Luster spring,
And shines the Jewel of the yearly Ring.
It Is he the force of scattered Time contracts,
And in one Year the work of Ages acts:
While heavy Monarchs make a wide Return,
Longer, and more Malignant then Saturn:
And though they all Platonique years should reign,
In the same Posture would be found again.
Their earthy Projects under ground they lay,
More slow and brittle then the China clay:
Well may they strive to leave them to their Son,
For one Thing never was by one King don.
Yet some more active for a Frontier Town
Took in by Proxy, beggs a false Renown;
Another triumphs at the public Cost,
And will have Wonn, if he no more have Lost;
They fight by Others, but in Person wrong,
And only are against their Subjects strong;
Their other Wars seem but a feigned contest,
This Common Enemy is still oppressed;
If Conquerors, on them they turn their might;
If Conquered, on them they wreak their Spite:
They neither build the Temple in their days,
Nor Matter for succeeding Founders raise;
Nor sacred Prophecies consult within,
Much less themselves to perfect them begin;
No other care they bear of things above,
But with Astrologers divine, and Jove,
To know how long their Planet yet Reprives
From the deserved Fate their guilty lives:
Thus (Image-like) an useless time they tell,
And with vain Scepter strike the hourly Bell;
Nor more contribute to the state of Things,
Then wooden Heads unto the Violls strings.
While indefatigable Cromwell hyes,
And cuts his way still nearer to the Skies,
Learning a Music in the Region clear,
To tune this lower to that higher Sphere.
So when Amphion did the Lute command,
Which the God gave him; with his gentle hand,
The rougher Stones, unto his Measures hewed,
Dans'd up in order from the Quarreys rude;
This took a Lower, that an Higher place,
As he the Treble altered, or the Base:
No Note he struck, but a new Story laid,
And the great Work ascended while he played.
The listening Structures he with Wonder eyed,
And still new Stopps to various Time applied:
Now through the Strings a Martial rage he throws,
And joining straight the Theban Tower arose;
Then as he strokes them with a Touch more sweet,
The flocking Marbles in a Palace meet;
But, for he most the graver Notes did try,
Therefore the Temples reared their Columns high:
Thus, ere he ceased, his sacred Lute creates
Th'harmonious City of the seven Gates.
Such was that wondrous Order and Consent,
When Cromwell tuned the ruling Instrument;
While tedious Statesmen many years did hack,
Framing a Liberty that still went back;
Whose numerous Gorge could swallow in an hour
That Island, which the Sea cannot devour:
Then our Amphion issues out and sings,
And once he struck, and twice, the powerful Strings.
The Commonwealth then first together came,
And each one entered in the willing Frame;
All other Matter yields, and may be ruled;
But who the Minds of stubborn Men can build?
No Quarry bears a Stone so hardly wrought,
Nor with such labor from its Center brought;
None to be sunk in the Foundation bends,
Each in the House the highest Place contends,
And each the Hand that lays him will direct,
And some fall back upon the Architect;
Yet all composed by his attractive Song,
Into the Animated City throng.
The Commonwealth dos through their Centers all
Draw the Circumf'rence of the public Wall;
The crossest Spirits here do take their part,
Fast'ning the Contignation which they thwart;
And they, whose Nature leads them to divide,
Uphold, this one, and that the other Side;
But the most Equal still sustein the Height,
And they as Pillars keep the Work upright;
While the resistance of opposed Minds,
The Fabrique as with Arches stronger binds,
Which on the Basis of a Senate free,
Knit by the Roofs Protecting weight agree.
When for his Foot he thus a place had found,
He hurles ever since the World about him round;
And in his several Aspects, like a Star,
Here shines in Peace, and thither shoots a War:
While by his Beams observing Princes steer,
And wisely court the Influence they fear;
O would they rather by his Pattern wonn,
Kiss the approaching, nor yet angry Son;
And in their numbered Footsteps humbly tread
The path where holy Oracles do lead;
How might they under such a Captain raise
The great Designs kept for the latter Days!
But mad with Reason, so miscalled, of State
They know them not, and what they know not hate.
Hence still they sing Hosanna to the Whore,
And her whom they should Massacre adore:
But Indians whom they should convert, subdue;
Nor teach, but traffic with, or burn the Jew.
Unhappy Princes, ignorantly bred,
By Malice some, by Error more misled;
If gracious Heaven to my Life give length,
Leisure to Time, and to my Weakness Strength,
Then shall I once with graver Accents shake
Your Regal sloth, and your long Slumbers wake:
Like the shrill Huntsman that prevents the East,
Winding his Horn to Kings that chase the Beast.
Till then my Muse shall hollow far behind
Angelique Cromwell who outwings the wind;
And in dark Nights, and in cold Days alone
Pursues the Monster thorough every Throne:
Which shrinking to her Roman Denn impure,
Gnashes her Goary teeth; nor there secure.
Hence often I think, if in some happy Hour
High Grace should meet in one with highest Power,
And then a seasonable People still
Should bend to his, as he to Heavens will,
What we might hope, what wonderful Effect
From such a wished Conjuncture might reflect.
Sure, the my sterious Work, where none withstand,
Would forth with finish under such a Hand:
Fore-shortned Time its useless Course would stay,
And soon precipitate the latest Day.
But a thick Cloud about that Morning lies,
And intercepts the Beams of Mortal eyes,
That it is the most which we determine can,
If these the Times, then this must be the Man.
And well he therefore dos, and well has guest,
Who in his Age has always forward pressed:
And knowing not where Heavens choice may light,
Girds yet his Sword, and ready stands to fight;
But Men alas, as if they nothing cared,
Look on, all unconcerned, or unprepared;
And Stars still fall, and still the Dragons Tail
Swindges the Volumes of its horrid Flail.
For the great Justice that did first suspend
The World by Sin, dos by the same extend.
Hence that blessed Day still counterpoysed wastes,
The Ill delaying, what th'Elected hastes;
Hence landing Nature to new Seas is tossed,
And good Designs still with their Authors lost.
And thou, great Cromwell, for whose happy birth
A Mold was chosen out of better Earth;
Whose Saint-like Mother we did lately see
Live out an Age, long as a Pedigree;
That she might seem, could we the Fall dispute,
To Have smelt the Blossom, and not eat the Fruit;
Though none dos of more lasting Parents grow,
But never any did them Honor so;
Though thou thine Heart from Evil still unstained,
And always have thy Tongue from fraud refrained;
Thou, who so often through Storms of thundering Lead
Have born securely thine undaunted Head,
Thy Breast through ponyarding Conspiracies,
Drawn from the Sheath of lying Prophecies;
Thee proof beyond all other Force or Skill,
Our Sins endanger, and shall one day kill.
How near they failed, and in thy sudden Fall
At once assayed to overturn us all.
Our brutish fury struggling to be Free,
Hurried thy Horses while they hurried thee.
When thou had almost quit thy Mortal cares,
And soyl'd in Dust thy Crown of silver Hairs.
Let this one Sorrow interweave among
The other Glories of our yearly Song.
Like skilful Looms which through the costly thread
Of purling Ore, a shining wave do shed:
So shall the Tears we on past Grief employ,
Still as they trickle, glitter in our Joy.
So with more Modesty we may be True,
And speak as of the Dead the Praises due:
While impious Men deceived with pleasure short,
On their own Hopes shall find the Fall retort.
But the poor Beasts wanting their noble Guide,
What could they more? shrunk guiltily aside.
First winged Fear transports them far away,
And leaden Sorrow then their flight did stay.
See how they each his towering Crest abate,
And the green Grass, and their known Mangers hate,
Nor through wide Nostrils snuff the wanton air,
Nor their round Hoofs, or curled Manes compare;
With wandering Eyes, and restless Ears they stood,
And with shrill Neighings asked him of the Wood.
Thou Cromwell falling not a stupid Tree,
Or Rock so savage, but it mourned for thee:
And all about was heard a Panique groan,
As if that Nature self were overthrown.
It seemed the Earth did from the Center tear;
It seemed the Sun was fallen out of the Sphere:
Justice obstructed lay, and Reason fooled;
Courage disheartened, and Religion cooled.
A dismal Silence through the Palace went,
And then loud Shreeks the vaulted Marbles rent.
Such as the dying Chorus sings by turns,
And to deaf Seas, and ruthless Tempests mourns,
When now they sink, and now the plundring Streams
Break up each Deck, and rip the Oaken seams.
But thee triumphant hence the fiery Carr,
And fiery Steeds had born out of the War,
From the low World, and thank less Men above,
Unto the Kingdom blessed of Peace and Love:
We only mourned our selves, in chine Ascent,
Whom thou had left beneath with Mantle rent.
For all delight of Life thou then did lose,
When to Command, thou did thy self Depose;
Resigning up thy Privacy so dear,
To turn the headstrong Peoples Charioteer;
For to be Cromwell was a greater thing,
Then ought below, or yet above a King:
Therefore thou rather did thy Self depress,
Yielding to Rule, because it made thee Less.
For, neither did thou from the first apply
Thy sober Spirit unto things too High,
But in thine own Fields exercisedst long,
An healthful Mind within a Body strong;
Till at the Seventh time thou in the Skies,
As a small Cloud, like a Man's hand did rise;
Then did thick Mists and Winds the air deform,
And down at last thou powr'dst the fertile Storm;
Which to the thirsty Land did plenty bring,
But, though forewarned, o'r-took and wet the King.
What since he did, an higher Force him pushed
Still from behind, and it before him rushed,
Though undiscerned among the tumult blind,
Who think those high Decrees by Man designed.
It Was Heaven would not that his Power should cease,
But walk still middle betwixt War and Peace;
Choosing each Stone, and poysing every weight,
Trying the Measures of the Breadth and Height;
Here pulling down, and there erecting New,
Founding a firm State by Proportions true.
When Gideon so did from the War retreat,
Yet by the Conquest of two Kings grown great,
He on the Peace extends a Warlike power,
And Is'rel silent saw him raze the Tower;
And how he Succoths Elders durst suppress,
With Thorns and Briars of the Wilderness.
No King might ever such a Force have don;
Yet would not he be Lord, nor yet his Son.
Thou with the same strength, and an Heart as plain,
Did (like thine Olive) still refuse to Reign;
Though why should others all thy Labor spoil,
And Brambles be anointed with thine Oil,
Whose climbing Flame, without a timely stop,
Had quickly Levelled every Cedar's top.
Therefore first growing to thy self a Law,
The Ambitious Shrubs thou in just time did aw.
So have I seen at Sea, when whirling Winds,
Hurry the Bark, but more the Seamens minds,
Who with mistaken Course salute the Sand,
And threatening Rocks misapprehend for Land;
While balefull Tritons to the shipwreck guide,
And Corposants along the Tacklings slide.
The Passengers all wearyed out before,
Giddy, and wishing for the fatal Shore;
Some lusty Mate, who with more careful Ey
Counted the Hours, and every Star did spy,
The Helm dos from the artless Steersman strain,
And doubles back unto the safer Main.
What though a while they grumble discontent,
Saving himself he dos their loss prevent.
It Is not a Freedom, that where All command;
Nor Tyranny, where One dos them withstand:
But who of both the Bounders knows to lay
Him as their Father must the State obey:
Thou, and thine House, like Noah's Eight did rest,
Left by the Wars Flood on the Mountains crest:
And the large Vale lay subject to thy Will,
Which thou but as an Husbandman would Till:
And only did for others plant the Vine
Of Liberty, not drunken with its Wine.
That sober Liberty which men may have,
That they enjoy, but more they vainly crave:
And such as to their Parents Tents do press,
May show their own, not see his Nakedness.
Yet such a Chammish issue still dos rage,
The Shame and Plague both of the Land and Age,
Who watched thy halting, and thy Fall deride,
Rejoicing when thy Foot had slipped aside;
That their new King might the fifth Scepter shake,
And make the World, by his Example, Quake:
Whose frantique Army should they want for Men
Might muster Heresies, so one were ten.
What thy Misfortune, they the Spirit call,
And their Religion only is to Fall.
Oh Mahomet! now could thou rise again,
Thy Falling-sicknes should have made thee Reign,
While Feake and Simpson would in many a Tome,
Have writ the Comments of thy sacred Foame:
For soon thou might have past among their Rant
Were but for thine unmoved Tulipant;
As thou must needs have owned them of thy band
For Prophecies fit to be Alcorand.
Accursed Locusts, whom your King dos spit
Out of the Center of th'unbottom'd Pit;
Wand'rers, Adult'rers, Liars, Munser's rest,
Sorcerers, Atheists, Jesuits, Possessed;
You who the Scriptures and the Laws deface
With the same liberty as Points and Lace;
Oh Race most hypocritically strict!
Bent to reduce us to the ancient Pict;
Well may you act the Adam and the Eve;
Ay, and the Serpent too that did deceive.
But the great Captain, now the danger's ore,
Makes you for his sake Tremble one fit more;
And, to your spite, returning yet alive
Dos with himself all that is good revive.
So when first Man did through the Morning new
See the bright Sun his shining Race pursue,
All day he followed wlth unwearied sight,
Pleased with that other World of moving Light;
But thought him when he missed his setting beams,
Sunk in the Hills, or plunged below the St^eams.
While dismal blacks hung round the Universe,
And Stars (like Tapers) burned upon his Hearse:
And Owls and Ravens with their screeching noise
Did make the Fun'rals sadder by their Joys,
His weeping Eyes the doleful Vigills keep,
Not knowing yet the Night was made for sleep:
Still to the West, where he him lost, he turned,
And with such accents, as Despairing, mourned:
Why did mine Eyes once see so bright a Ray;
Or why Day last no longer then a Day?
When straight the Sun behind him he descried,
Smiling serenely from the further side.
So while our Star that gives us Light and Heat,
Seemed now a long and gloomy Night to threat,
Up from the other World his Flame he darts,
And Princes shining through their windows, starts;
Who their suspected Counselors refuse,
And credulous Ambassadors accuse.
"Is this, says one, the Nation that we read
"Spent with both Wars, under a Captain dead?
"Yet rigg a Navy while we dress us late;
"And ere we Dine, raze and rebuild our State.
"What Oaken Forests, and what golden Mines!
"What Mints of Men, what Union of Designs!
"Unless their Ships, do, as their Foul proceed
"Of shedding Leaves, that with their Ocean breed.
"Theirs are not Ships, but rather Arks of War,
"And beaked Promontories sailed from far;
"Of floting Islands a new hatched Nest;
"A Fleet of Worlds, of other Worlds in quest;
"An hideous shole of wood-Leviathans,
"Armed with three Tire-of brazen Hurricans;
"That through the Center shoot their thundering side
"And sink the Earth that dos at Anchor ride.
"What refuge to escape them can be found,
"Whose watery Leaguers all the world surround?
"Needs must we all their Tributaries be,
"Whose Navies hold the Sluices of the Sea.
"The Ocean is the Fountain of Command,
"But that once took, we Captives are on Land.
"And those that have the Waters for their share,
"Can quickly leave us neither Earth nor Air.
"Yet if through these our Fears could find a pass;
"Through double Oak, and lined with treble Brass;
"That one Man still, although but named, alarms
"More then all Men, all Navies, and all Arms.
"Him, all the Day, Him, in late Nights I dread,
"And still his Sword seems hanging ore my head.
"The Nation had been ours, but his one Soul
"Moves the great Bulk, and animates the whole.
"He Secrecy with Number has inchas'd,
"Courage with Age, Maturity with Have:
"The Valiants Terror, Riddle of the Wife;
"And still his Fauchion all our Knots unties.
"Where did he learn those Arts that cost us dear?
"Where below Earth, or where above the Sphere?
"He seems a King by long Succession born,
"And yet the same to be a King dos scorn.
"Abroad a King he seems, and something more,
"At Home a Subject on the equal Floor.
"O could I once him with our Title see,
"So should I hope yet he might Dye as we.
"But let them write his Praise that love him best,
"It grieves me sore to have thus much confessed.
Pardon, great Prince, if thus their Fear or Spite
More then our Love and Duty do thee Right.
I yield, nor further will the Prize contend;
So that we both alike may miss our End:
While thou thy venerable Head do raise
As far above their Malice as my Praise.
And as the Angel of our Commonweal,
Troubling the Waters, yearly make them Heal.
FINIS.

