NO DROLL, BUT A RATIONAL ACCOUNT, Making out the probable Fall of the present,
with the Rise and Succession of what the ENGLISH WORLD understand by the Term
of A FREE PARLIAMENT:

In a Letter to a Friend.

1 Cor. 9. 1. Am I not a Free man?

LONDON, Printed for YE.

NO DROL, but a Rational ACCOUNT Making out the probable Fall of the present,
with the Rise and Succession of what the ENGLISH WORLD understand by the term
of a FREE PARLIAMENT.
Sir,
DIspensing with those Epistolary Caresses, (with which friends entertain each
other) I shall immediately without Prologue, give you an account of the grounds
of my Confident persuasion, that our English affairs are not far from settling
upon their old Bottom.

The Topics from which I shall deduce my arguments, shall be from
Considerations of the present Power called a Parliament, the Army, the
Sectaries, Foreiners, General Monk. More heads I might pitch on, and more
arguments might be raised from either of those that have been mentioned: but I
shall confine my self, and present you at one view, such which are plain and
conspicuous, to every one that has but three hours leisure to sit still and
consider, that being the space of time which I have allotted my self, for the
summing up of these following Reasons.

First this Parliament.
They are in great Contempt with the people universally, and are stigmatized
with such a name of Contempt, that every child's mouth is, as well, as every
history hereafter will be full of: generally hated, very little either loved or
feared. Such a power certainly cannot stand. But if it were granted, that they
were either loved or feared (with one or both of which all the world by
experience knows that a power that is likely to continue must be supported) yet
the surest mark or indicium of a fall (which verity it self has proclaimed as
an indisputable Maxim) appertains to them, and that is, An house divided
against it self cannot stand. For the Army, the Anabaptists, the Presbyterians,
the Independents, the Protector, nay the King himself have each their friends
amongst them, which according to their several interests, do either disorder,
or discover Counsels, and put them upon such extravagancies, that there appears
to be little sound wisdom in their Resolves.

Nay, though we should conceive them to be all as one man, the affairs and
concerns of the Nation are at this time so jumbled, and discomposed (the
public distempers bearing some analogy and proportion to actue diseases in the
body, for which a sudden remedy must be found) that it is not probable that
many Physicians (especially having little skill) can find out the Remedy, or by
a timely concurrence pitch upon what may be sor recovery, before the Patient
has breathed his last.

But leaving Similies, and to speak plain English, they have made it their
business, and do daily disoblige such which have been called the Parliaments
friends; witness their resolve to put to sale the Estates of the Boothians,
which are very numerous in every County and City, and such which have not yet
felt so much, as the smart of Sequestration, who no douby, rather than admit
such a Sentence to be executed, will rally that affair into better order, being
now better armed than they were, and have better laid their counsels, and
intelligence, having the plausible and lovely pretense (or rather the just end
and design) of a Free Parliament.

Now consider, who are to manage the affair against their just and well ordered
designs, even such whose Grandees and leading men (as some could be named) are
rash, heady, inconstant and extremely ill beloved, declining in their
Reputations even with those that are thought to be their Seconds, and Abettors.

But provided that none of these things were known concerning them, (viz.)
universal contempt, intestine Divisions, distempers, for which a sudden remedy
is to be pitched on, the ingrate character of disobligation of friends, or were
it that they had sober Leaders, is it possible think you to eradicate out of
the peoples minds a sense (and that accompanied with a male-contentednesse)
that they are not the fourth part of that Power they would have the people
believe them to be, that is, the Representatives of the Commonalty, acting (in
the exclusion of their fellow Members) what they have condemned in the Armies
late Force as Treasonable?

And yet to see the strange blindness and delusion of men, as it were,
resolved to ruin themselves! How have they lately indevoured to stir up those
high degrees of dislike and hatred of the people to an unappeasable rage, and
fury, by a resolution once again to inslave their Consciences with a
Contradictory Oath of the Blackest Qualification (being negative) in such a
juncture of affairs, when all things are full of mutation and inconstancy; and
when every one that has any thing of Conscience left alive, as to oaths, are
ready penitently to beg God forgiveness for former perjuries, and are very
loath to be entangled with more?

But true it is, and a sad truth it is, there are too many that are ready (so
they may secure their temporal) to hazard their eternal concernments; but our
wise Senators, as if they were thoroughly studied in the art of Self-Ruine, have
contrived a way to lose that may have throats wide enough to swallow down any
oath they will present them with, and that is by the thundering vote of 100000 l.
per mensem, which Tax they were about to impose before their last dissolution,
even upon the neck of fifteen months Tax in a Quarter of a year, and lately
have reassumed the Debate. And though they have let it rest a little while, yet
there is no probability, that they can conclude of a way to keep off such
burdens, their debts with their Militia being increased. Now there is no one
that keeps horses, but knows, that a great burden, coming upon a galled back,
will make any beast fling off its Rider. If great Taxes and impositions upon a
wasted people do not make them do the like, I lose my conjecture.

A wasted people, I say, all Trade being dead and decayed, and no likelihood of
Supplies for the alleviation of their intolerable pressures from our Superiors
mannagement of affairs: and this undoubtedlie is to be thought reason, that
when a Nation grows universally necessitous, Fine words, plausible
Declarations, and fair promises, have but little efficacy, either to stop or
allay a popular rage, which is every minute ready furiously to break forth.

But it may be said, that such a suggestion is but a flourish; when that we see
a straight rein carried on the neck of the people, by persons eminent, and in
Arms, will not suffer them to know their own strength, and consequently will
hinder that fury breaking forth. Some little plausibleness seems to be in the
objection, but that which weakens it, is: That this Parliament have not now a
Cromwell, an Essex, a Fairfax, a Fleetwood, or a Lambert, for that work. And a
sense of their own weakness fills them full of jealousies, even of such, they
would have the world believe they most love, and that seem to pursue and
strengthen their interest. Never had jealous husband more suspicion of his
wife, than they have of General Monk, and the jest of it is, that even Mr.
Harrington himself is thought by some of the soberest of them, to propose to
the world his Oceana and Rota, as a pretty piece of problematical intrige, to
pussle and amuse them in their intentions, that look toward that way of
settlement.

This, and other things Considered; I am of persuasion, that their friends are
without name. The Anabaptists, they have discarded, put out of Commission,
disbanded, and the readmission of this or that particular self-seeking person
into favor since, will not reconcile that interest, or party. The
Independents, they have lost by their conclusions in their chiefest cabal: that
a National Church is necessary. The Presbyterians, they fright from both their
affection, and obedience, with the severe menace of Sale and Sequestration: And
they must certainly despair of any Compliance from the Kings party, whether
Papist or Protetestant, they having been so ground and oppressed by them: And I
suppose all, or most of the young (and as yet uningaged) both Gentry and
Clergy, that are new come into the world, have little affection, either for
them or their ways, but breath after a settlement upon old foundations both in
Church and State.

The Symptoms and signs of which Epidemical disaffection (if no other be named)
manifestly appears in the variety of bold Declarations, viz. of the City,
Cornwall, Devonsbire, Norfolk, Suffolk, Glocestershire, Cheshire, Yorkshire,
Barkshire, Northamptonshire, Kent and Lincolnshire, and other Counties
following those Presidents, if well weighed might be enough to make their
hearts ache.

But how can they expect any friends, that neither are nor know how to be
friends to themselves? for though they may abound in little pieces of cunning
and spightful artifices, whatever other spirit they have, they have not amongst
them the true spirit of Government, which knows nobly and generouslie the
truly wise and not crafty way of self-preservation, and protection (not
destruction and confusion) of Subjects.

Not to multiply instances, one of the chiefest properties of a well managed
Government, is so to order affairs, as to be well provided with intelligence,
that is truly such, and not tales, and trifling informations of Mercenary
pick-thanks.

I have heard that since the late disturbance, one of them has laid out 500 l.
in intelligence: it is possible he might have had for his money many canting
Letters by the Post, acquainting him it may be that Queen Elizabeth is dead, I
mean of such things that cannot be prevented, -- or perchance another Item in
order to the balance of that vast sum, may be the information of some few
pimping, treacherous telltales, that frequent clubs and Coffee-houses, whose
chief business is to jilt others into discourse, that speaks their dislike of
the present Power and their proceedings; and what is the issue of all such
intelligence, but their own trouble and amazement? they being like him that is
affected with the Yellows, that is, very cunning to find a man in bed with his
wife, and then runs Horn-mad; but for that noble kind of intelligence that
searches the very veins and intrails of interests, either foreign or domestic,
they must needs be strangers to; for to that, there is a stock of depth
requisite, and an honorable esteem, so as to be received into Councels without
suspicion; and though such agents be suspected, they must have parts sufficient
to weather such a point.

But the chiefest thing that puts Governors into a capacity of preserving
themselves, and protecting their subjects, is, a Tegal Title to that Supremacy
they have over people. If that be wanting, The best Laws and Constitutions they
can make, or promote, will not be satisfactory. And especially the Penal part
of the Law, will be so far from satisfying, as that it will inrage; though both
the Law, and the Execution of it, be in it self Just. For this is written upon
mine, and every man's spirit, by the indelibel Law of Nature, not to take
unkindely the blows of a Father, though he mistake, and I deserve not
Correction. When as, I shall as naturally despise that person that has nothing
to do with me, and has no superiority (of right) over me, if he gives me but
Reprehensory words; Yea, though I may de facto deserve them.

Now, if we Consider what Legality they have to the Supremacy, according to the
general apprehension of the people; how can they hope for other, but that their
Indulgencies, will not win upon affections, and their severities will at
last, rather enrage, than strike a reverential awe upon the spirits of people;
Every one being now, almost of this opinion, (viz) That besides the known right
of the King, and that major part of the Parliament, consisting of Lords and
Commons excluded by them, (though entitled to the Legislative power by the old
Fundamental laws of the Nation) that they are out of doors, by the death of the
last King; his grant for their perpetuation (were they a full House) expiring
with him: For, he can no more oblige his Heir to such a performance (it being
through a tumultuary force, and intrenchment upon a reasonable prerogative)
than a present possessor of an estate in tail, can grant away either the whole,
or part of the inheritance, from his heir at Law, and that obligatory to his
Successor.

Besides, Sir H. Vane his spiteful remembering them of their Act (the day
before the last rout, and that now standing upon record) for their dissolving,
(and not adjourning) has not a little weakened the present powers pretensions
to legality.

More might be said on this head; but I Will wave that superfluity, having said I
think enough, to presage the instability of this present Power, from
Considerations relating to the Power it self.

The Army
They are any man's money; though possibly there may be some divisions among them
as to opinions, which is not much to be minded, since the purging, and
expulsion of their phanatick and sectarian Officers. -- And too; as the common
Soldiers, if examined well, their may amongst them be found a great number,
that heretofore have actually been in the Kings service; and a greater number,
whose judgments incline them to take to that party, if they could be satisfied,
that another easy employment would occur to their indigent, and necessitous
condition. And I do apprehend that there is no more skill wanting, to persuade
them, to serve a diverse interest to what they seem to serve, than he has, that
knows how to Court, and Win a Mistress, that is only Coy in pretense.

Again, Consider that the new Officers put in place of the Walling fordians,
are most of them of Presbyerian interest, and principles; and, which way that
looks, all the world now knows so well, that it is folly for any that mention
it, to draw over it any tiffany or veil.

Moreover, the Soldier, whatever his persuasion, or in^erest (besides pay) may
be, must necessarily understand, that this Parliaments chiefest concern (even
beyond the countermine, and opposition to the common enemy) must be, the
keeping them in subjection, and in such, that they may discard, purge, order,
model ad libi^um, so as to prevent the several forces, which through former
presidents, they are both acquainted with, and inclined to.

The Sectaries.
They are such, either upon the score of delusion, or selfend; the latter of
which, I conceive to be the weakest interest in the Nation. For we begin well
enough to espy the cheat of either self-advancement, or enriching, by the
specious pretense of Religion. And there is none that have been sufferers,
(which kind of men are very numerous) but their fingers itch, to be plucking
off the painted feathers, that are imped into the wings of such dissembling
daws. And for such which are deluded, and so follow the dictates of an
erroneous conscience, it will not be wide of the matter, if it be asserted with
confidence; That conscience if it be not urged to speedy action, it ^^^urally
follows the dictates of reason; Which, if there be leisure enough given for
what is naturally redicated in the soul of man, to exsert it self, it may in
time be brought to right conclusion; or in a little time, be brought to a
biviom uncertainty. If the first, they will soon concur with what is asserted;
if the last, the hands of the phanatick will so sufficiently be palsied; that
motion, and activity will by consequence without any great difficulty, be
either delayed or diverted.

But suppose we do grant, that they are past hope of recoverie from the
spiritual disease they have contracted, by drinking in of poisoned waters
(which is the worst that can be supposed) I conceive the present Powers
favoring their Interest, will rather weaken, than strengthen their own; for
it is plainly seen by any one (that will not be wilfully blind) that the
English Sectaries are of such Spirits and Principles, that they will be pleased
with no Power that shall be set over them; but howsoever they be favored or
indulged, the Liberty that is given will make them the more presume upon
factious Contrivances: that being one tough humor of theirs, not to be moved
by all the politic medicines, even to count is Religion, to oppose and
contradict the present Superiority whatever it be, as it was lately in a very
public place discoursed by two eminent Sectaries of very different
persuasions; and concluded by them both, that a Single Person were the best
Medium to promote their various interests, and I (though different from them
both) do concur with them in this, That that Center wherein such distant lines
meet, will prove the best Basis for a future Settlement.

But supposing they do not generally stumble upon such an expedient, but that
things proceed according to the present appearing establishment, It will be
found a difficult thing for any particular interest (whose diverse applications
are very frequent) to acquiesie in the determinations of, or to gain
satisfaction in, any thing that is desired from a company (they know) divided
in interest, every man being apt to promote his peculiar Party, though with an
unbecoming neglect of the public: hoping to waft himself safely over the
troublesome surg^^^^ our distracted times, in a private Bottom of his own.

To conclude this, their humors being so various and different, and being much
a stranger either to their Principles or practices, and believing they will
daily, if not hourly suggest to themselves (from what is hinted) more reasons
than I can furnish them with, I am inclined to believe that the non ultra of
those that have any thing of brain or conscience left them, will be to
subscribe to the capital assertion.

Foreiners.
The universally received rule of (...) and providence trumpets forth this
certainty, That no person or nation can subsist without the mutual assistance
of a private or public neighborhood. -- But now, whilst this Power that is in
being continues, as we have not at present, so can we not upon any rational
grounds expect for the future any Cordial or advantageous foreign
Correspondency; for they are not so much contemned at home, but as much abroad,
and the name of an English man for their sakes.

Applications from Foreiners do de facto cease, As either apprehending the
present Power, not to be worth the minding, or because there has beeen so much
variation and inconstancy in our Supreme authority, that they doubt, that by
that time their Envoies and Agents have their instructions, and come to set
their foot upon English Shores, those to whom their Messages have been
directed, may in all probability not be found.

But suppose they do continue so long: Ambassadors when they come, find not
that splendor which strikes an awe and seriousness upon the spirits of
State-Ministers; (for let me speak my apprehensions) however it may be thought
by wise men, that the pomp and ceremony of Religion may eat out the substance
and reality, when it exceeds measure: yet undoubtedly that splendor (which the
mortified Hermit may call pageantry) is a thing very requisite to make power
and Supremacy awful and regarded. But as to us, when foreign Serenissimos shall
come to apply themselves to our great Masters (especially after a self-denying
Ordinance) they may ch^^ce to find some of them in the Fleet, or Upper Bench,
or if they should ask after the palaces of such that have better fortunes, it
will in likelihood be told them, that his or their Lodging is at the Cat and
Fiddle in such an allie, and what repute this gains with foreiners, let all
that have traveled imagine.

But to speak (as I apprehend) more to the purpose, What foreiner is there that
may be in such a condition, as either to be afraid of us, or may be ready to
court us for either benefit or assistance from us; for these are the motives to
our grounds of foreign Leagues; it is true, were our hearts united, we are a
Nation as expert in Martial affairs at this time, that there is no one Nation,
but may be afraid of us: But alas! how to conquer or keep down the Common
Enemy, is object sufficient for our studies and courageous endeavors; and who
is that Common Enemy now? but ninety nine parts of our own Nation, if they were
to be cast into an hundred portions. -- But if we consider particular Nations,
where is one in the European world, that we have not either provoked, or that
are not very weak and ruined, or that wait not to make their Markets on us, as
occasion shall serve? Spain we have provoked by assisting France against them,
and by the protracted war that has been between us these three years past.
France cannot forget what injuries we did them when we upheld Spain against
them. And we cannot expect other, but that they uniting should remember our
mischiefs to both, Portugal we wasted, and though we should enter into a strict
union, it is now to no purpose, they are so low. Holland cannot forget our Naval
injuries, and would rejoice to see our ruin. What impediments have we been to
the affairs of Denmark, and if we should endeavor to hold up the head of
sinking Swedeland, what account would it turn to? or may we expect any great
matters from the distressed Protestants of Lucerne, Angrona, and the Polish
Borderers? Those if any we have obliged by our large and charitable
benevolencies toward them when distressed, had we not played the trick of a
skittish Cow, which having given a good pail of milk, kicks it down with her
foot; Had we not converted those vast sums which were so truly bestowed for
their relief to other uses, and those poor creatures scarce any thing the
better.

In a word, as to espousing or ballancing foreign interests, we have (almost for
these twenty years past) rather played the fool, than the States men: this
being principally considered, we having trifled away the Support of our
Nation, and that which all the world have voted to be the English stanchest
interest, and that is Trading.

General Monk.
Justine mentions a cunning worshipper of the Rising Sun, who while all the
Nobles and people were looking toward the East, (an bitious of the first
salute) quite contrary turned his face to the West, and by the reflection of
of its early be^ms upon the tops of the houses directly opposite, made the
first discovery.

So we notwithstanding the old Adage says, Ab Aquilos ne omne malum, have been
some few months staring toward that point (while our eyes are almost weary)
to see whether we could discover the approach of the refreshing beams of a Free
Parliamentary interest (which most are now of opinion must rise from the
South) and no disswasions of the timorous, or confidences of the conttarie
minded could shake our belief, but that General Monk was the Postilion to
Phoebus his Chariot

And when the riddies of his mysterious Declarations and Messages have been
opposed as an Argument to baffle our hopes, we have looked on those rather as
motives to strengthen them, pleasing our selves with a Fancy, that a duekish
Gray, rather than a bright, clear and radiant Morn, is the more cortain
Prognostic of a fair day ensuing; but Mr. Seat by his Secretaryship (in the
answer to some late applications) making him to speak plain English, without
the least tang of that Country from whence the great Colonel is marched, has
done the Nation this courtesy, even to free them from delusion, and that
hopeful Person this kindness (I wish it prove such) even to draw upon him a
double portion of odium, in place of that universal love which began to be in
the hearts of the generality of the people toward him, whilst; they were
persuaded that he would prove (not a promoter of a new Instrument of
government) but an Instrument to promote the revival of our Fundamental and
ancient established government.

The concurrent circumstances that wrought a general belief, that he would be
an assertor of a Free Parliament, or, (as the people universally phrased it)
that he would be honest, were these. Some true, some possibly otherwise, yet
such which were generally received as true. --

As that when Sir George Booths business was on foot, he was not very zealous
in making provision to oppose that action.

That he should soon after manifestly appear to be a mortal enemy to Lambert,
who was destructive to that undertaking, nipping it in the bud.

That he spoke his desatisfaction, with proceedings, in the readmission of
this Parliament, when Richard was unhorst. That when this Parliament sent for
him up (as they now have done) (and I suppose will do his business for him if
he take not beed) he refused; pretending for an excuse, that by his remove the
Scottish affairs might possibly be discomposed.

That he never made any actual application to this Parliament for a Commission,
though possibly he might receive that ticket which made him a Commissioner and
a Colonel (a more honorable place no doubt, under them, than General under
Cromwell) yet we never heard of any returns on his part (as the manner was then)
of an engagement to fidelity.

And then, while the Committee of Safety was Trump, we were full of it, that
the Scots Convention had voluntarily given him a years tax in hand.

Besides which, there was none but were bold to say he had received no small
sums of Foreign Coin, and some supply of Arms.

And it is presumed, that the City were encouraged by the hopes they had of
him, when they plucked up their spirits and declared for a Free Parliament; Even
then, when they were threatened, and feared daily to have their houses fired
about their ears with Grenades.

Besides all this, there were other things whispered concerning him, that gave
some persons greater assurance than all this. If they were Secrets they are not
fit to be published, if Lies, less fit.

But if there be any hopes left concerning him, they are upon these grounds,
(viz) The first Oaths he seasoned his conscience with, (and Que semel est
imbuta recons servabit ^dorem Testu diu) were those of Allegiance, and
Supremacy. He being an understanding person, must understand this, or nothing;
even, that an Oath is a Sacred thing, by which tie he was obliged not only to
the late King himself, but his Heirs, Now, whether through distaste, (as some)
or like a Soldier (as others say) he declined that causes when he could do no
more Personal service ^ and obliged himself to the Protector, he took no
contrary Oath, or if he made a promise, it was not to him, and his Heirs, or
other Successors, and so may be looked upon as free from any obligations, except
he has privately of late tied himself up, by any Engagements, which the world
has not yet heard, or taken notice of.

Again, if he be not extremely deluded, and talked out of his prudentials by
Mr. Scot, and Mr. Luke Robinson, he must needs understand himself to hold
an-gel by the tail, while he espouses this present slipery, and ticklifh
interest (which appears to be so by the foregoing, and subsequent reasons) But
suppose it would be as durable, as story tells us the Venetian State has been,
the most he can hope for, is but to be a test de Bois -- But if he looks back,
and takes the beginning of our troubles for his horizon, and considers how Essex
was laid a side with ignominy; Fairfax uncommissioned, after all his great and
Expeditious services; Cromwell, after his death branded with the name of Tyrant
and Traitor; Lambert before he had scarce wiped the sweat from his victorious
brows, after his achievements against the new branch of the Common enemy,
shamefully laid aside with a trifling benevolence of an Act of Indemnity;
Fleetwood sent home by weeping-Cross: It were enough methinks, to smother any
ambitions hopes of greatness, or any hardy confidence of so much as security,
in the birth, especially being a servant (as he possibly in Complement
professes himself to be) to such Masters, so suspicious, so derided, so hated,
and striving against the stream of the whole Nations inclihations, we having
spent our whole stock of wanton blood, and are by poverty, forced unanimously
to cry out, if not ready to sight for Peace, and a livelihood, and not for
tricks and Fancies.

I will not trouble you further, than by the addition of one argument more, for
the: backing of the Capital assertion, And that is, That he that Writes this
freely, and imgenuously, acknowledges himself to have been one of those
thousand well meaning Persons, that in the beginning of our unhappy times was
deluded with those fair and Religions pretenses that were then on foot, but
now, penilently and heartily begs God, his King, and his Country forgiveness;
being willing to hazard yea sacrifice all his private Interest, for the
advancement of the public welfare, for which he prays; and conceives the
only remedy and Expedient to be A FREE PARLIAMENT.

Black Monday, Jan. 30. 1660.
London, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-Iane.


