News from the Royal Exchange: OR, Gold turned into Mourning:
FROM Exit Tyrannus Regum Vltimus Anno Libertatis Angliae Restitutae primo.
Januarii 30. Anno Dom. 1648. TO ECCE! Exit non Tyrannus, sed Regum Hominumque
optimus Anno Angliae Foelicitatis Vltimo.

ENGLISHED: The last Tyrant of Kings dyed in the first Year of the Liberty of
England Restored, January 30. 1648. Behold! It was not a Tyrant King that dyed,
but the best of Kings and Men, that suffered in the last Year of Englands
Felicity.

An Acrostick upon King Charles.
C Crowns of Gold with Cemms beset are vain,
H Heavenly Crowns of Content are Gain:
A A Shadow is the Throne this World affords,
R Riches and Honors are but Weights with Cords
L Loading the Princes shoulders; who them bare,
E Each Common Trouble call's for them to share.
S Soul therefore let thy Meditation
S Soar higher for a Habitation:
T Treasure up Goods, where neither Moth nor Rust
U (Undervalue things that turn to dust)
A Ar^ able to corrupt; that so thy Heart,
R Rising above the height of Man's desert,
T Triumphing, may released be of smart.
CHARLES STVART.
ANAGRAM, Arts Chaste Rule.
Epigram.
TIll Arts Chaste Rule we do approve,
And all things seek to win by Love,
We must all miseries endure,
Not Goods, nor Lands, nor Lives secure
Can we expect, when each day brings
New Changes, and new Sufferings:
Wherefore Call in and him Enthrone,
Who only can lay Claim to th'Crown;
Let not the towering minds of men,
Insult for private Interests then;
But Tribute give to whom it is due,
That so GODS Blessing may ^nsue,
Lest he O'return, o'return, o'return,
And many Towns and Cities Burn:
And waste the Nation, to perform
His Word which shall not be forlorn
Who has it promised to give
To whom it is due as he does Live:
Therefore do not his word withstand,
But to Its Right restore the Land;
By which a Pardon you may find,
When to Repentance you are inclined:
That so in Peace your days may end
Which in this World God does you lend.
The peoples Complaint through want of their Exiled Sovereigne LORD the KING.
WE Englishmen are worse them Esops Frogs,
We called those Tryant Kings which were but Logs,
For when both Peace and plenty filled our Nation,
We not content'cry out for Reformation;
Jove sent us Storks: who in short time devour
One hundred thousand Natives by their Power:
This strikes us to the Heart, and we bethink
How to repair our Chains, broak Linck from Linck.
We try a Parliament which does not please,
We make of them a Rump, and yet not cease,
We reform our General to a Protector,
Who turned out Rumps, and played the gallant Hector.
He Parliaments did call, and they did come,
He turned them out and left an empty Room,
Till Jove called him aside by a great wind,
Who left us all to grope like those are blind;
For when his Son did take the Royal Throne,
We cried a Log, a Log, and threw him down:
We called the Rumps again we had before,
Who by a Cipher were turned out of door:
A Safe Committee then did rule the Roast,
Of which we have no reason for to boast:
Our Rump did worm them out, and sat again,
Till twice they Roasted were, which work't their bane:
At last the Parliament of forty-eight
Began to fit in The House in former State
At their re-sitting all the Bell did Ring,
Much more they will, when we have Charles our King.
London, Printed for Charles King. 1660.


