A SERMON Preached the 11. of May 1652. IN TAVNTON, UPON The Occasion of their
great Deliverance, received upon that Day.

BY GEORGE NEWTON Master of Arts, and Minister of Gods Word in that Place.

LONDON, Printed for William Roybould at the Unicorn in Paul's Churchyard
London; and are to be sold by George Treagle in Taunton. 1652.

Ezra 9.13, 14. Seeing that thou our God have punished us less then our, etc.


THe wickedness of Israel in matching with the daughters of a strange God,
after the Lord had sharply punished them, and then delivered them again by a
miracle of Mercy; was the occasion of these words. The whole story certifies
us, that when the time of their Captivity in Babylon was expired and run out,
God wonderfully stirred up the heart of Cyrus first, and after of Darius, to
make a Proclamation and Edict, by which the Jews (who then were Captives under
their Dominions) were permitted to return, to setle in their own Country, to
repair the desolation of the Temple, and therefore to re-erect and re-establish
the worship of the Lord amongst them. An incomparable mercy if we consider
whence they were delivered, and to what they were restored, and such as should
have been a strong engagement, and mighty obligation to obedience. But alas! it
proved not strong enough for their Corruptions, for they no sooner were again
replanted in the Land of Canaan, but they turned aside from God, and waxing
wanton with their Peace and Mercy, joined themselves in Marriage with the
people of the Lands, that were about them, and mingled the profane and holy
Seed together, which Ezra being made acquainted with, he was exceedingly
affected with it, so that he rent his clothes and tore away the hair of his
head and of his beard, and having spent his spirits in a holy passion, he sat
down astonished; until at length returning out of this amazement, he betakes
himself unto the Lord in prayer, and there exceedingly bewailes the peoples
sin, and manifests withal a horrid apprehension of it, if they should yet
again return to their old abominations, which it seems he much feared; Seeing
that thou our God have punished us less then, etc.

Two things we have especially to be considered in the words, First, a rare and
eminent Mercy acknowledged, Our God has punished us less then our Iniquities
deserve, and given us such a deliverance as this. And then a horrible abuse
supposed, should we again break thy commandments: in the same kind, and in
the same degree, in such a manner and in such a measure as before. I do not
say we shall, but if we should, what then? Why then our condition would be
desparat, there would be no possibility almost of an evasion? Would not thou
be angry with us, till thou had consumed us, that there should be no remnant
nor escaping? There are a remnant of us yet, but then thou would destroy that
remnant too, and so there would be none left. In the mercy acknowledged you may
take notice with me of these two particulars.

First, something Negative or Privative, the withholding of evil: Seeing that
thou our God have punished us less then our iniquities deserve? Punished us
thou have indeed by our cruel enemies, but not to the extent and latitude of
our deserts. Then something positive, the bestowing of good, and given us such
a deliverance as this: Not barely a deliverance only, but such deliverance,
such as cannot be expressed.

So that you see my Brethren, here is mercy upon all hands, mercy in the
punishment, mercy in the deliverance from it; mercy in the punishment, that it
was such, so little, mercy in the deliverance from it, that it was such, so
great: Mercy in the punishment, that it was infinitely less mercy in the
deliverance, that it was infinitely more then they deserved. All the ways of
God are mercy and truth, mercy not only when he saves, but mercy when he
strikes his people: When he strikes he does so little, and when he saves he
does so much: when he strikes he is so gracious, and when he saves he is so
glorious, that he is wonderful in both these.

Well then my brethren, here is a Treble and a Base, to make you music on this
solemn Day of Joy; the one is very low, and the other very high: The punishment
is very low and flat, abundantly below their sins, beneath their merits and
deserts. But the deliverance on the other side is high and shril, indeed above
Ela, Such as the Prophet cannot reach in his expression; and therefore mentions
it in such a manner, that he leaves it rather to be wondered at, then
distinctly understood. And given us such a deliverance as this. These two my
brethren will do very well together, though they be of diverse sounds, yet if
we join them, they will make a good concord. And therefore that I may not mar
the music, you shall hear them go together; and out of both, I shall raise
this observation.

Doctr. It is the manner of the Lord when he punishes his people, to abate and
to be very moderate, when he delivers them and shows them mercy, to exceed and
to transcend all measure.

Both these you see are set together in my Text, that so the one of them might
sound the better for the other: Seeing thou our God have punished us less then
our iniquities deserve, and given us such a deliverance as this: The prophet
lays the punishment and the deliverance side by side, that you may look upon
them both at once, and compare both together, that you may see the smalnes of
the one and the greatness of the other: For if you mark it well, he sets a
special emphasis on the Deliverance, no emphasis at all on the Affliction. The
punishment is spoken of by way of diminution and abatement in a lessening way,
less then our iniquities deserve: But the deliverance on the other side, is
spoken of by way of augmentation and enlargement, such a deliverance as this. I
shall proceed with both the branches of the text and point in order.

It is the manner of the Lord when he punishes his people to abate and to be
very moderate. There has been a question started in these latter days,
whether the Lord at any time in any case does punish his people. And true it
is, he does not neither can he punish them in a way of Vindication or revenge,
for Christ has fully satisfied for them.

But he is often said to punish then in scripture in a way of castigation and
correction: So the Original, is renderd in my text thou have punished us says
Ezra. And for my own part, because I am not so far skilled in the Hebrew, as
to adventure to control the translatours of the Bible; I allow of that
expression in the sense before mentioned. And so I should advise all those to
do, who have no better skill then I have.

Well, when the Lord does punish or correct, or chasten his people (call it how
you will) it is his manner to abate, and to be very moderate; to do too little,
rather then too much; to do rather less then more; Less then their iniquities
deserve, as you have it in my text. He often lays on many stripes under, never
one stripe over. Never more then we deserved: When he is sharpest, we must
acknowledge with the Church, that he has not rewarded us according to our
sins. Psalm. 103.10. Never more then we can bear, for the Lord knows whereof
we are made, remembers that we are but dust. He understands very well how
weak we are, and therefore he debates with the affliction, as the Prophet
speaks, Isa. 27.8. whether it be too heavy for us, yea or no, and if he find
it be, if he perceive the storm of wrath to blow too rough upon his people, he
stays his rough wind, in the day of the East-winde, as it is added there in
that place. Nay, my beloved, as he never gives us more in a correcting way,
then we deserve, never more then we can bear, so never more then we do need. If
need be, we are in heaviness, as the Apostle in that known place, 1 Pet. 1.6.
God never lays a stroke, a trial, an affliction more then needs upon his
people. He always keeps himself within compass: And therefore he is said to
spare his people according to his promise, Mal. 3.17.

There is a twofold mercy opposed to the strictness of a twofold Justice, with
which the rigor and exactness of it is qualified and allayed. Either
misericordia parcens, or, remunerans, either sparing, or remunerating mercy.
The exactness of Justice in dispensing recompenses, is tempered with
remunerating mercy, when there is more bestowed on men then they deserve: The
rigor of Justice in dispensing punishments, is qualifyed with sparing mercy,
when there is less inflicted upon men then they deserve. And this God always
exercises in the corrections that he lays upon his people, he tempers them
with sparing mercy; he stays his hand, and refrains his indignation. It is his
manner to abate, and to be very moderate, as you have heard. That Phrase of the
Apostle in another case, may be applied to God in this particular, his
moderation is known to all men. And it is singularly known to you the people of
this place, how he qualified his wrath in all the late afflictions, that have
been upon you: so that you must confess with Ezra in my Text, That he has
punished you far less then your iniquities deserved. And there are many
reasons of the point, I shall touch the principal.

1. And first of all, to say the truth, he has no mind to punish or correct
at all; so that it is no wonder, though he be very moderate in his corrections,
he afflicts not willingly, nor grieves the sons of men. Lam. 3.33. He has no
will at all to do it, no of himself he delights in showing mercy, Mich. 7.18.
The act of Justice is a little strange to him, what the act of Mercy is? for he
is rather, though not more merciful then just; and hence he styles it, his
strange act, which he is not so well acquainted with, Isa. 28.21. It is not
with our heavenly, as it is often, with our earthly parents; they correct us
for their pleasure, as the Apostle speaks, Hebr. 12.10. to satisfy their
humor, and their passion, and the like. So does not God, he takes no pleasure
to afflict us; no, his delight and pleasure is rather to be showing mercy. You
may observe how loath he is to deal against us, and how unwillingly he takes us
up to lash us, Hos. 11.8. How shall I give thee up Ephraim, how shall I deliver
thee Israel, etc. That hand cannot be cruel in correction, that takes the rod
with such abundant reluctation.

2. When he is forced to correct us, he does it in a good temper, and that is
another reason, why he is so moderate: He corrects us not in anger, at least
not in the heat of his anger, which has no measure in it, no mixture of
compassion with it, which is the thing the Prophet prays against, Jer. 10.25.
but with judgment, that you with serious counsel, and mature deliberation, as
is added, etc. he is not like a furious man strikes, and on a sudden and in a
rage, and felleth to the ground, never considering with him self, whether the
blow be is about to reach, be fitted and proportioned to the strength of him
that is to under go it, yea or no: No he chastens his with judgment and
advice: He does it in a settled and composed way, he is not angry, at least,
but a little angry. When he deals against the wicked, he is sore displeased at
them, as his own expression is, Zech. 1.15. but he is but a little angry with
his own people, as is added, etc. and because he is angry but a little, he
corrects them but a little.

3. The Lord is very moderate; because as he corrects his people in little
anger, so in great love: They may look up and see him smiling, when he lays
upon them; when he is most severe and bitter with his people, his kindness to
them works still, according to that sweet and precious promise, Psalm. 89.31. If
his children forsake, etc. Then will I visit their transgressions, etc. If he
be in a little heat at any time, he recollects himself again, and in the midst
of wrath remembers mercy, as the Prophet speaks, and tempers it with this
allay; he considers with himself, as once he did with Ephraim, Jer. 31.20. Is
not this my own son, is he not my pleasant child, whom I am laying on upon.
And shall I use my own sweet child thus? Shall I show him no compassion? With
that his bowels turn within him, and he says, that he will surely have mercy
upon him.

4. When he punishes his people it is his manner to abate, and to be very
moderate, because he aims not at revenge, but reformation. Indeed revenge will
have the most in a business, it will have full and perfect satisfaction, he will
not spare in the day of vengeance. And hence it is that when God deals against
ungodly men in such away, he pays them home; because he does it, as his own
expression is, to satisfy and ease himself, and not to benefit or profit them.
So that the Lord may say, when he is laying on them in the heat of his
displeasure, as Isay 1.24. Ah, I will ease me of my enemies! Now I shall ease
my self of such a drunkard, of such a swearer and blasphemer, of such a lewd
profane and vicious liver that was always vexing me. Now I shall hear him
swear no more, now I shall have him rend my wounds no more; I shall be pressed
with his sins no more; I shall be quiet now I see, I shall be eased of him
forever.

But now (my brethren) when he deals against his own people, it is a greater
trouble to him, to make them suffer his corrections, then for himself to suffer
their indignities and provocations: Nor does he aim a whit at satisfaction
(for that he has received from Christ to the extremity of Justice) but only
at their reformation: So that he gives correction to them, as physic to
recover, and not as poison to destroy. And hence it is, that he deals
moderately with them, according as he finds their strength and case to be; yet
he may not kill, but cure them: He does so chastise his people, as that he does
not loose the weakest of them by the extremity, or length of the affliction
that he lays upon them. The rod of trouble shall not rest upon them, least
they put forth their hand to evil, Psalm. 125.3. I will sift the house of Israel
says the Lord, as corn is sifted in sive, Amos 9.9. But yet the least grain
shall not fall upon the earth. I will not loose one grain of good wheat, as it
is added, etc. and this for clearring of the former member of the point. It is
the manner of the Lord when he punishes his people to abate and to be very
moderate.

But now (my Brethren) on the otherside, when he delivers them, and shows them
mercy, it is his manner to exceed and to transcend all measure: Then he takes
his full scope, and does not bound and stint himself as in the former: No he
bestows upon his people superlative and matchless mercies, and salvations; he
gives them such a deliverance as this, such as has no parallel, no equal,
with which it may be sampled or compared: Of which that may be said, which the
Holy Ghost affirms of the spice, which the Ethiopian Queen presented to King
Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 9.9. There was not any such spice; so there was never such
mercy. In delivering, the Lord sometimes out-dares himself in showing mercy,
does rare and singular, and extraodinary things, such as he is not wont to do
at other times; such as his people are not able to express, as David speaks,
Psalm. 106.2. Who can utter the great and mighty acts of God? who can show forth
all his praise? Such as they are not able to believe; no, they seem like men
that dream, as Israel did, Psalm. 126.1. such as they are not able to imagine;
he does abundantly above all that they can think, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians.
6.20. nay to go higher yet, such as they are not able (in some sort) to bear:
As it is said of Jacob, when they told him that his son Joseph was alive, and
that he was made governor over all land of the Egypt; his heart fainted, Genesis
45.26. so God sometimes gives such transcendent mercies and deliverances to his
people, that their hearts faint within them, they have not strength enough to
bear the sudden flush of joy, that comes breaking in upon them. He loadeth
them, yea, over loadeth them with benefits, powers out upon them such a heap of
mercy as they cannot stand under. And whether the deliverance of this Day, were
such a signal one, such a deliverance as this, such as you are not able to
express, such as you were not able to believe, nor to imagine, nor to bear
almost, I leave it to your selves (my brethren) to consider. Ah my beloved,
when you were first informed that relief was come, and that the Enemy was
drawing off the Town, tell me how it fared with you, was not the joy too great
for you? too large for those poor hearts of yours to hold? did it not stretch
them, and dilate them overmuch; so that your spirits even fainted in you? I
know when you reflect upon those days of old, you will seal to this truth;
That when the Lord delivers his, and shows them mercy, it is his manner to
exceed, etc. And this he does for many reasons; I shall name a few of them, etc.

1. The condition of his people may be such, that in respect of them it may be
necessary, that God stretch him self a little, and go beyond himself (I mean
his ordinary course) in their deliverance: Unless the Lord be pleased to
exceed, it will not reach them to be beneficial to them. As there are sins of
diverse sizes and punishments of diverse sizes, so there are mercies and
deliverances of diverse sizes too, and one of them must be proportioned to the
other. If the affliction and distress be of the large size, so must the
deliverance be. And hence it is that God sometimes makes the salvation of his
people out of measure great, because their troubles and afflictions have been
so: Such a distress must have such a deliverance.

2. When God delivers his, and shows them mercy, it is his manner sometimes to
exceed, etc. that he may make them recompense for their former miseries. And
even as Joseph, when he had dealt somewhat roughly and unkindely with his
brethren for a while, and used them so, as if be had forgotten all affection
and relation to them; yet in the end, his bowels yearned upon them, so that he
was not able to contain himself; and then he opened all his heart, and showed
his love more fully to them then he had ever done before: So when the Lord has
dealt a while severely with his people, as they think (though it be always
less then their iniquities deserve) and when he sees them likely to be
swallowed up of sorrow and despair, then his bowels work within him, and he can
hold no longer, but is overcome: And out he breaks into such sweet and melting
declarations of his love, as come not from him at another time; when he
perceives his people at the point to sinck, and to be overcome in their
afflictions, he labors to revive and cheer them up again, with more then
ordinary revelations and discoveries of his mercy: He sees the spirit would
fail before him, and the souls that he has made; if he should be always
wroth, and if he should contend for ever, Isa. 57.16. And therefore as the
loving father when he perceives the child about to swound, while he is laying
on upon it, presently lets fall the rod, and falls a kissing and embracing of
it, and speaking very kindly to it, to fetch life in it again: So deals God
with his people, when they faint in their distresses, and sinck away under his
hand, away he flings the rod, and falls upon their necks, kisses away their
tears, and makes them know how dear and precious they are to him,
notwithstanding this sharpness.

What was the time that God did so abundantly reveal his love to Hezekiahs
soul, as himself expresses it, Isa. 38. but after that extreme affliction,
when in stead of peace, his soul was full of bitterness; so that he could not
speak in prayer, but chatter'd like a Swallow, and mourned like a Dove. You
have heard of Jobs affliction, how unparalled it was in all respects, and
what end the Lord made, James 5.11. and that end was all mercy, God did exceed
in that business, and transcend all measure: So that me thinks, I see Job even
ravished to an ecstasy of joy, and I am confident that God had never showed him
so many choice and pregnant tokens of his favor all his life before, as in the
end of that affliction. And verily the Lord is never wont to manifest such
singular and extraordinary mercy to his Church and People, as when they have
been dead and buried as it were; when they have been in a remediless and
desperate case but just before, that he may make them full requital to the
utmost, for all the trouble that has been upon them.

3. When God delivers his people, it is his manner sometimes to exceed, etc.
that he may lay upon them mighty Obligations. The Lord delights to have his
people much engaged, exceedingly endeared and bound to him; and upon this
account sometimes, he does over and above for them, that they may see how much
they are beholding to him, and how much they ow him. That by this means he may
oblige and bind them strongly to obedience: And therefore this is made the
scope and aim of God in all the great things that he did for Israel, that they
might keep his statutes and observe his laws. The Prophet makes a Catalogue
before of many rare, choice, and precious mercies, which he followed them
withal: And then at last, he shuts up all with this, which shows the end of
God in all; That they might keep his statutes and observe his laws, Psalm. 105.
last verse.

4. When God delivers his people, it is his manner sometimes to exceed, etc.
that he may raise the greater trophie to his own honor, and make his name be
remembered in all generations. The Lord sometimes is pleased (my brethren) to
erect pillars, to set up monuments of mercy, that the memorial of it may not
die for ever. He builds a Nonesuch, by the greatness of his power, and for
the honor of his majesty: He gives his people such a deliverance, talis that
you cannot find a qualis, it is not to be matched again. And even as Princes
when they have a mind to make their greatness known and spoken off, are wont
to do some extraordinary act; so God execeds in ways of kindness to his people,
to this end, that he may appear the more glorious, and that he may show forth
to the ages to come, the unsearchable riches of his power and mercy. Its true,
that both of them appear, even in his common works, and the least and lowest of
his favors; But in such rare and choice deliverances and salvations that
transcend all measure, they sparkle forth with dazzling luster.

Use 1. Is it the manner of the Lord when he punishes his people to abate, etc.
Then let us be exact observers and admirers of the rich mercy of the Lord both
ways: When his work is in his hand, let our eyes be in our head, and let us
diligently look to one side and the other, when he strikes, how he refrains;
when he saves, how he exceeds. The Prophet Ezra very acurately notes them both,
Thou have punished us less then our iniquities deserve, and given us such a
deliverance as this? and we should strive to do as he did. But alas we use to
be quite upon the other hand, our manner is to amplify crosses, and to
deminish mercies; when God afflicts, we tell over; when he delivers, we tell
short: We look on our afflictions in a multiplying glass, which represents
them more and greater then indeed they are: But when we look on our salvations,
we turn the other end, which makes them to appear as nothing: When we speak of
our distresses, we aggravate them to the utmost; we rise, we grow in our
discourse, as he in the Poet, I am twice, thrice miserable, nay ten times, nay
twenty times, nay a hundred times miserable. But when we speak of our
deliverances, we extenuate; we are miserably short, low and flat: we are quite
contrary to God, we exceed where he abates; and we abate where he exceeds: Oh
my beloved, let us not be so cross to God, who is so kind to us; but let us
learn of Ezra here, to think and speak of our afflictions in a way of
diminution; and on the other side, of our salvations, in a way of augmentation:
And this let me apply a little to the business of this Day.

1. Learn to lessen your afflictions, at least with reference to your deserts:
Acknowledge with the Prophet, in my Text, That they were less then your
iniquities deserved. Its true, you suffered sharp and bitter things, when you
were shut up by the Enemies, and many of you more then others: Your feelings, I
confess, were much, your fears were more: But what were all these to your
sins, if God had dealt in rigor with you? Some of you I suppose lost your most
choice and precious friends, which next to God were dearest to you in the
world; Why, it is a mercy that you have one friend left: Some of you lost your
goods and your estates; why, it is a mercy that you have a penny left: some of
you lost your limbs; why, it is a mercy that you did not lose your lives: some
of you lost your houses, you saw them flame and burn till they were raked in
their own ashes; why, it is a mercy that your selves are not at this instant
burning in the flames of Hell it self: Many of you were swept away by the
Bullet and Sword; why, it is a mercy there was any remnant or escaping; that
there is one left to tell the news of this deliverance, to magnify the Lord
for it. In death there is no remembrance of him, in the grave, who can praise
him? Where are they that lost their lives in the sieges of this place? they are
not here to join with us in the solemnity and cheerful celebration of this
happy Day; to magnify the Lord with us, and to exalt his name together: some
of them, were they here no doubt, would be as forward as the best of us: But we
may say to God concerning them, as sometimes Hezekiah did, The grave cannot
praise thee, etc. Isa. 38.18. or as Heman sometimes did, Psalm. 88.10. Will thou
show wonders to the dead, shall the dead arise and praise thee? No, this is our
Prerogative who are preserved from the grave, and rescued from destruction: And
it is an extraordinary mercy of the Lord to us, that while others are gone down
into the place of silence, our lives are lengthened out to sing his praises,
and to speak good of his name, to keep another day of of thankfulness to him,
who is the God of our life: O let us say, as Hezekiah did in such a case; The
living, the living, they shall praise thee, as we do this day. And thus if you
survey your sharpest troubles and afflictions; you shall find a mixture and
allay of mercy in them, and so be forced to acknowledge, that God has punished
you far less then your iniquities deserve.

2. Learn hence to amplify deliverances and salvations, to raise them to the
very height, above expression with the Prophet in my Text, such a deliverance
as this, as has no words to set it forth: such as posterity will not be able
to believe: and truly (my Beloved) even such a one was yours; it was a
Nonesuch in the land, God dealt not so with any other people, so that it
shines among deliverances, even as the Moon among the lesser Stars: Survey the
great things that the Lord has done in these late years of wonder, and you
shall find that the salvation of this place was the greatest of them all, none
to be compared with it; it had an asterisme of mercies in it, body mercies,
soul mercies, estate mercies; which conspired altogether to make it out of
measure glorious: Among the rest, this excellency was peculiar to it, that it
turned the scales of the whole business in these late wars: Oh my beloved, look
round about this rare deliverance, and amplify it all the ways that you can
think upon; remember how you prized it, when you were pleading for your lives,
before the Lord, in the day of your distress, what you would have done or
given to be assured of a deliverance, from that cruel death, which with amazing
thoughts you looked for, when you were ready to be taken by an enemy, whose
rage and malice was boiled up to the height against you, etc. who would in
probability have spared neither age nor sex; I say, remember how you prized it
then, and do not let the price to fall again: Then it was valued at the
highest, when you were reaching after it with fainting souls; now it is nothing
with abundance of you: Oh loath your selves, for this baseness, and make it your
great business of this Day, to raise and to keep up the price of this
incomparable mercy, to make the most of such a rare deliverance as this.

Use 2. It is the manner of the Lord when he punishes his people, to abate and
to be very moderate; when he delivers them and shows them mercy, to exceed and
to transcend all measure; and do we find that he has so exceeded as in other
mercies, so specially in the deliverance of this Day. Then let us seriously
consider, what a weight of duty lies upon us, and how we ought to transcend and
to exceed in our returns to God again. Believe it (brethren) ordinary matters
will not serve the turn; as God has done more for us, so he must have more
from us then from any other people: we must do singular and extraordinary
things; if he exceed in mercy, we must accordingly exceed in duty, there must
be some proportion of the one unto the other; we must strive to render to him
according to the benefits that he has done us, and to come up as near as it is
possible to his measure; such a deliverance must have such returns, and here to
pitch upon particulars.

1. Such a deliverance must have such a remembrance, it must have some
memorial answerable to it. As for our selves (my brethren) we must ingrave it
on our hearts, and keep a Register of all the mercies that concurred in it. As
David had an inventory of the Gold and Silver that he provided for the temple,
but the iron and the brass he numbreth not, because it was without weight, 1 Chronicles. 22.14. So though we cannot reckon all the mercies of the Lord, his
daily, and his hourly mercies, because indeed they are without number, yet we
must be exact in numbering and setting down his Golden and his Silver mercies.
Such a deliverance as this, with all the circumstances of it, must not be
forgotten by us.

And yet this is not all my berthren: we must not only keep these rare and
extraordinary mercies in our minds our selves, but we must take some course
that others may be mindful of them, and that while the world lasts, that the
Lord may have his glory kept afoot in following ages, A duty much commended to
us in the Scripture, upon such occasions. When God had wrought a great
salvation for his people Israel, Moses commanded them to write a song, and to
teach it to their children, that it might be a witness for the Lord against
them, viz. if they should prove unthankful, Deuteronomy. 31.19. When the Lord shall
build up Sion, he shall appear in glory, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 102.16. And
what then, must they keep one day of thankfulness, and so an end? No there is
somewhat further to be done, this shall be written for the generations to come,
and the people that shall be created shall praise the Lord. Indeed there is an
Ordinance of the high Court of heaven, to this purpose, Psalm. 78.5. He
appointed a Law in Israel, which he did command our fathers, and what did he
command our fathers? That they should make the praises of the Lord his strength
and wondrous works, that he had done, that they should make them known unto
their children, and to the generation that was yet to come. And therefore I
beseech you (my beloved) let us think upon it, let us endeavor to perpetuate the
praise of God, let us use some means or other to transmit it to posterity, to
make succeeding generations know what God had done for this Land, for this
place, that he may have the glory of it as long as the sun and moon indureth.
Brethren we have a great task in this kind, we have very much to do, because
the Lord has done so much: truly I think, that there was never any generation
that had such a weight of duty lay upon them. It was the saying of a wiseman,
that troublesome times were good for the writer, and il for the liver, he that
lives in them shall have sorrow enough: He that writes of them shall have
matter enough; and certainly these times of ours, yield matter of transmission
to succeeding generations more then any former ages. Let us take care as much
as lies in us, that nothing be lost, not a scrap of any thing that God has
done for this Land, or for this Town, in plague, and in the sieges, but that it
may be all conveyed down entire and whole and undiminisht to following ages;
that the generations that are yet to come may praise the Lord; And to this end
I shall set before you two things.

1. God will be a gainer by it. Alas (my brethren) it is little glory, we can
bring him in our selves, and in our own time, if we should spend all our days
in praising him, they are short and will be done upon the sudden. But if we can
take course that all the generations, that are yet to come, shall praise him
for the mercy which we have received, as long as the world lasts: this will be
a great advantage, and truly if we love him, and be affected with his mercy as
we ought to be; we will endeavor what we can to raise, and to advance the
little tribute of glory and thanksgiving, which he is like to have among us,
after so many rich and precious favors heapt upon us. And seeing we our selves
who have received so much, can pay so little; we will be so honest yet, to
charge our heirs, with what is coming from us to the Lord. And even as David
lays a tax on all Nations, all Angels, all Creatures, to come in and to
attribute what they can to the praises of the Lord, so we will lay a tax on all
succeeding generations, while the world continues, that God may not lose all;
but that he may in some proportion have the glory that is due unto his name.

2. Succeeding generations will be gainers by it too; me thinks the Prophet
mentions it as advantage and privilege to them of those times, Psalm. 44.1. We
have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us, what works thou
did in their days, and in the times of old: He seems to be affected very
much with the relation; And truly (my beloved) it may be very beneficial to
after ages, to be acquainted with the work of God, to know what he has done in
former times; it will bind them and engage them, to walk in some proportion
answerable to them; or if they do not, it will be a witness for the Lord
against them: As Deuteronomy. 31.19. It will testify what God has done, and what
they ought to do; that they will not be able to be quiet, if they be
unthankful. And therefore I beseech you (my beloved) let us think of something
in this kind or other, after such a rare deliverance. The people of the Lord
of old, were wont to set up monuments of the great works of God, as Jacobs El
Elohe Israel, Genesis 33.20. Moses his Jehovah Nissi, Exodus 17.5. and Samuels Eben
Ezer, 1. Sam. 7.12. And shall there be no monument of such astrange salvation
as ours was? No memorial of such a deliverance as this? Truly (my Brethren) if
you will set up some remembrance of it, some work of Piety or Charity, to be a
stranding monument of this deliverance; you would do something worthy of your
selves, and of the Lord who has been so gracious to you.

2. Such a deliverance must have such a celebration, as is answerable to it;
and truly for the outward part, I must acknowledge you exceed in this place;
you do well that you triumph and Shout, Ring, make Fires, and feed upon the
Creatures, and that liberally too: but yet you must not think that this is the
main business (for bodily exercise profits little) nay which is worse, you
must not suffer it to be a hindrance to the main business. Truly (my brethren)
I have observed heretofore, that there has been too much flesh, too little
spirit, in the observation of this Day. The bodily and fleshly part, has been
very high indeed, but the spiritual part which God alone regards, for it
self, has been very low and flat. Men's Tables have been better furnished, and
their bodies finer dressed, but for their prayers and their praises in their
Families, or in their Closets, they have been either none at all, or all one as
at other times. There are too many of us, who have taken too much liberty upon
such days as these, in a carnal fleshly way, and have been overcharged, and
made unfit for spiritual service: I say, as the Apostle, Such rejoicing is not
good; rejoicing is good, but such rejoicing is not good. Oh my beloved, I
beseech you, let not the mercy of the Lord have a return of sin instead of a
return of praise; yea under the show and color of praise: do not make this
blessed day an occasion to the flesh; let this be such a feast as follows a
holy convocation, and is agreeable and suitable to it. While we are at it, let
us do as birds do, sip a little and look up, take the creature moderately, and
and look up with thankfulness, to the God of our mercies; let us rejoice with
trembling, tremble to sin against God on the day of our rejoicing.

3. Such a deliverance must have such a Reformation, as is answerable to it, a
choice and singular and extraordinary reformation, such a one as is not to be
matched again in all the Land. As there was no deliverance like ours, so there
must be no Reformation like ours, it must be high and full, beyond any other
people, that it may be said of us as of Josiah once, with reference to the
exact and glorious Reformation that he made, like unto him there was no King
before him, nor after him arose there any such. So there was never any people
like to Taunton for thankfulness and for obedience, nor after them shall there
be any such, that they that look upon us, and observe us, may say to us as they
did to the virtuous woman, Prove. 31.29. Many people have done virtuously, but
you have excelled them all. Never did God exceed in mercy to a People, as he
did to Taunton, and never did a people excel in holiness as they have done.
Ah my beloved, think upon it after the Lord has given us such a deliverance as
this, shall we again break his commandments? as you have it in my Text. Shall
we do it, who have been so signally delivered by the naked arm of God? and
shall we do it in the self same kind, that we have done in former times? As
Ezra speaks expressly here, shall we again break thy Commandments, by joining
in affinity with the people of the Land? after this, shall we return to our old
corruptions, and our wonted ways again? shall those which have been heretofore
the sins of Taunton, be the sins of Taunton still? Beloved, look a little back
upon your former practices, and see what alterations this signal mercy of the
Lord has made among you, especially those which are the public known and
noted; evil of this place. Not to speak of pride or covetousness, or Sabbath
profanation. Some say the Taverns and the Alehouses, were never so frequented,
that Drunkenness was never so common, and so rife amongst us, as it is at this
day. Ah (my beloved) what will become of this in the latter end? why verily if
God be still provoked thus, he will exceed in wrath as he has done in mercy,
he will be angry till he has consumed us, that there will be no remnant nor
escaping: He saved a remnant last, but now he will destroy that remnant too,
and make an utter desolation.

Oh (my beloved) let us who are before the Lord this day, remember, that we are
the remainder that are left, the residue that are escaped from the late
judgments that have been upon this place, to tell the world how sharp God has
been to others, and how merciful to us. And therefore let the fear of the
great God of heaven be upon us the remainder of our days, let us consider why
he has preserved us, not to be instruments of his dishonor, but monuments of
his praise: That present and succeeding generations, may say of us, as the
Prophet did of Israel, Deuteronomy. 33.29, Happy art thou O Taunton, who is like to
thee, O people saved of the Lord: None have been like to thee in mercy and
salvation, and none are like to thee in holiness and Reformation.

FINIS.

