Divinity-knots Unloosed.

OR A CLEAR DISCOVERY of truth; by resolving many doubts, according to
Scripture, Orthodox Divines, and sound Reason, so as weak capacities may
receive satisfaction therein.

TO WHICH PURPOSE, A Number of Points are explained by familiar Simile's.

A TREATISE INTENDED specially for the instruction of young Christians in
ROTHSTORNE parish in CHESHIRE: But published for a further extent of the
benefit thereof, to the Israel of GOD.

By Adam Martindale, one of the meanest Laborers in the LORDS Harvest.

2 Timothy 2.7. Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

1 Pet. 5.10. The GOD of all grace -- make you perfect, stablish, strengthen,
settle you.

London, Printed for John Hancock, in Popes head Alley, near the Royal
Exchange, 1649.

Divinity-knots Unloosed.

OR A CLEAR DISCOVERY of truth, according to Scripture, Orthodox Divines, and
sound Reason, so as weak capacities may receive much satisfaction and benefit.

Herein seventy five Doubts are resolved, drawn from these several heads most
in Controversy.

Viz. Touching the Scriptures, and God: his Decree and Creation. Of Providence.
Of the fall of man. Of the Law of God, and the two Covenants. Of Christ the
Mediator, Of Free Will. Of Calling, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification,
Faith, Repentance, and good Works. Of Perseverance, and Assurance. Of
Christian Liberty, and Liberty of Conscience. Of the Civil Magistrate, and
Church Censures. Of Religious Worship, and of the Sabbath day. Of Oaths. Of
the Church. Of Communion of Saints. Of the Sacraments.
By Adam Martindale, one of the meanest Laborers in the LORDS Harvest.

London, Printed for John Hancock, in Popes head Alley, near the Royal
Exchange, 1649.

To my Dear and precious Father, CAPTAIN JAMES JOLLIE: AND To my present, and
quondam Hearers, at Rothstorne in Cheshire, and Gorton in Lancashire.
Dearly Beloved,
THough the Title Page informs you for whose sake I was especially induced to
write this small Treatise; it was never intended by me, that any party of you
should wholly monopolize my thoughts of love and Christian respect; but
howsoever my duty presses me more, in reference to the charge I daily
undergo, then to thrust my Sickle into another Harvest: Yet since this comes
on the public Theater, you may all challenge as well a share in it, as the
Author whom all of you may justly claim (though in different relations
peradventure) to be your own. Concerning the Book it self, it behooves me not
to say much; To dispraise it beyond my own judgment, were sinful modesty; to
praise it above desert, unsufferable arrogance. Medio tutissimus, etc. The best
course is to leave it to your Christian perusal, and charitable survay; and so
I do; telling you only, that nothing, save the weakness is mine own. For
the main substance (though the most of it came immediately out of my memory in
this form you see it, without any considerable consulting of Authors) was of
that store, which in reading the Scripture, and other Divinity Books, and
hearing Sermons, conferences, etc. I had before treasured up. Some things
indeed there be, which you shall hardly meet with in any Work yet extant; but
those I also disclaim as none of mine: For so far as the truth of GOD
appears in them, the spirit of God, the guide to, and in all saving truth (in
whose hand I am at the best but an Instrument) may justly appropriate it to
himself, as his right and due. Though sometimes I am forced to clash with
unsound opinions, I have concealed the Authors Names, as having a desire to
vindicate the truth, not to provoke any to vindicate himself: for which cause I
have not only declined all bitterness of expression (which I think below a
Christian at all times) but also the recital of their own words formally
(contenting my self with the matter) least it should too plainly appear who
owneth the Tenets I oppose. If notwithstanding all this, any be disposed to
wrangle with me, I shall hardly trouble the World, or my self so far, as to
rejoyne to such replies: But if I be reasoned with in the spirit of meekness,
whether it be in this public way, or any other, I dare with a safe conscience
(and shall be ready as my occasions will permit) to give an account, in a
brotherly way, to any that shall desire satisfaction, concerning any thing
herein asserted: Thus I commet both you, and this small piece to the blessing
of GOD, remaining,

Yours in the affairs of the Gospel, A: Martindale.
Strethill, April, the 9. 1649
Divinity-knots unloosed.
CHAP. I Of the Scriptures, and by the way, of the light of Nature.
1. Doubt. IF the Scripture be a perfect rule 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. Psa. 19.7. Deu.
12.32 Pro. 30.6. Isa. 8.20. Revel. 22.18, 19.
, how can the light of nature be of any use in spiritual matters?

Resol. A rule may be said to be perfect, in three cases: 1. When there is a
perfect enumeration of, and provision for, all particulars that possibly can
fall under it, 2. When it runs in general terms, and is comprehensive enough
to include whatsoever is to be taken within it. 3. When it particularizeth the
principal, and expresses the rest more generally.


As for example:

This homly Simile (though it may seem ridiculous to critic wits) is of great
use, if well considered, for the clearing of this questioned truth, to the
capacity of weak Christians, for whose sake this work was undertaken.
In a Lease, we account the rules perfect, which a Tenant is to walk by, in
occupying the ground which is letten him, if 1. it give him particular leave to
pasture, mow, and sow, or secondly, say in general terms, he is to have it
to all tenantly uses, or give way that the Tenant shall have it for tillage,
and all other tenantly uses.

Now the Scriptures are perfect in the last sense; they deliver particular
rules for all the maine points of Faith and practice; but matters of
circumstance, and inferi^ur alley are comprehended perfectly, though more
generally: And therefore as he that holds his Living to all Tenantly uses,
had need of so much judgment as to draw this general into particulars: So
when the Scripture enters not upon the particulars, but in the general
commands order, decency, and edification 1 Cor. 14.26.40.
, we had need of the light of nature, assisted by the spirit of God, to judge
according to the general dictates of Scripture, what in such a time, and such
a case, may make for order, decency, or edifying.

2. Doubt. How can Ministers tell us what the Word imports in the Original of
any text they quote, seeing themselves (as some with probability affirm) never
saw the Original?

Resolution. By the Original we do not mean the first Copies that were
written, but faithful transcripts of them in the same language, and these none
can deny us to have seen, except they will deny withal, that our Bibles in
English (which are translations thereof) are the word of God, which the
Objecter seems not to do. And yet, although we hold that no tongue can so
fully express the sense of some places, as that wherein it was written; nor is
of the same authority, but as it agrees therewith; we freely confess, that in
the Characters and Printing, there may be error (which may be rectifyed by
comparing one Book and place with another:) And without the spirit of God to
assure us, no knowledge of the Original is sufficient to give us full
assurance that it is Gods word 1 Cor. 2.14.
, but by the help of the holy Spirit 1 John 2.20, 27.
, the Scriptures may sufficiently inform an illiterate man for his salvation.

CHAP. II. Of God.
3. Doubt. IF God be unchangeable Jam. 1.17
, how can he be said to repent Genesis 6 6. 1 Samuel 15.11.
.

Resol. It is spoken according to our capacity, for though God do never repent
Number. 23.19. 1 Samuel 15.29.
, (that is, change his counsel) yet he does as if he did repent, when he
undoth what he had before done Genesis 6.6, 7.
. Nor may God be charged with changeableness, though the course of his
providence be turned, but the change is in us. You know the Sun by the same
quality, and in the same season, will soften Wax and harden clay, yea, will
soften the earth when it is frozen, and harden it at other times, and yet the
Sun never alters his quality, but is still the same: So though God be
gracious to some, and severe to others Romans 9.18. Ezekiel. 18.
; yea, severe and gracious to the same person at diverse times, and in
different respects Ezekiel. 18 21, 22, 23, 24, etc.
; yet he is one and the same for ever Exodus 3.14.
.

4. Doubt. If God be a spirit, how is he said to have hands, eyes, wings, etc.?

Resol. This is only spoken, as the former, according to our capacity, that by
the hand of God we may note his power Isa. 59.1.
, by his eye, wisdom Psalm. 11.4.
, by his wings, protection Psa. 57.1.
.

5. Doubt. If God be indivisible and simple, how can the sacred essence be
distinguished into three persons?

Resol. I see your skill in Logic is small, or else it were easy to know how
to distinguish betwixt things, that cannot be divided: I can distinguish
between the essence and existence of the same thing, betwixt inseparable
accidents, and their subjects, or (to speak Common-road language) between a
body and its substance, form figure, etc. and yet not divide them. So it is no
repugnancie in reason it self, that the Godhead be one entire entity 1 Cor.
8.4, 6.
, and yet considered in a personal respect may be distinguished into the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost Mat. 3.16, 17. 1 John 5.7.
.

6. Doubt. I find in the 45. of Isaich, Verse. 21. that Christ says, there is
no GOD but himself, notwithstanding we hear him saying as much by his
Father, John 17.3. how can both be the only true God?

Resol. GOD and CHRIST differ not essentially, but only personally; the Father
is GOD, so is the Son; yet they are not two Gods, but one: There is no other
God but that God which the Father is, nor any God, but that which Christ is,
and this word (only) is not exclusive of any person of the Trinity (for every
person is the only God) but of all others, whether reputed Gods, or Creatures
1 Cor. 8.4, 5, 6.


CHAP. III. Of Gods Decree, and creation.
7. Doubt. TO what purpose should I seek the good of my soul? If I he elected
I shall be saved, if not I cannot.

Resol. It is not for you to search the Cabinet of Gods counsel Deuteronomy. 29.29.
, but to believe John 3.18.36.
, and repent Luke 13.3, 5.
; which if you do, you are not to question your salvation Ephesians. 2.8 2 Timothy 1.9
2 Cor. 7.10
. Saving Faith (though it be not a cause) is a fruit of election Acts 13.48.
, for God has respect to the means, as well as the end, and conjoyneth them
in his decree Ephesians. 1.4.5. and 2.10.
: and therefore we may conclude, that believing we are justified Romans 3.28.
, which is an assured argument we were predestined Romans 8.29, 30.
, and shall be saved Tit. 3.7.
. But on the other hand, they that are hardened by sin Psa. 95.8. Heb. 3.13.
, are rejected of God Romans 9.18.
, and shall be damned 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
.

8. Doubt. If God predestinate the means as well as the end, seeing sin is the
means tending to damnation, whom he predestinates to damnation, does not he
predestinate them to sin? And if so, how can he be free from it?

Resol. In Predestination two things are to be considered: 1. Gods preterition,
passing by, or non^electing of a person. 2. Predamnation, or fore-condemning a
person to perdition.


The former is of the mere pleasure of God, for there can be no other reason
given, why this man is chosen, and that refused. Now those whom God thus
passes by, through want of that assistance which he is not bound to give, fall
finally from God, and so considered, are pre-damned, or foreordained to
destruction. God does not force, or cause men to sin, but leave them to it:
For sin being no positive thing, but a privation of what should be: Viz. of
obedience, arises from the insufficiency of the Creature, left to it self: If
a King by his wisdom could foresee, that diverse of his Subjects would prove
Traitors, and be hanged, unless he prefer them, and does forbear to gratify
them so far, only because it is not his pleasure so to do, can he be justly
accused of the Treason which after they commit? I believe no politician will
affirma it: Must we then be so bold as to charge him who is of purer eyes, then
to behold iniquity, to be in any sort the cause thereof, because he does not
uphold us against it?

9. Doubt. If God do not only pass by men, but predamne them to Hell also by
this his decree (as you showed in the resolution of the last Doubt) how can his
justice be cleared, seeing man had then not actually sinned?

Resol. Men sin in (...), not from eternity: yet are their sins from eternity,
and to eternity with God. For with him things are not past, present, and to
come, as with us, but always present, in one infinite moment. And therefore
the Lord who seath all the sins of a reprobate by one pure, individual act,
from, and to all eternity, may as well piss an act of damnation against them,
(...) they were actually committed.

10. Doubt. Might not God as well damn men in a capacity of holiness, as thus
to leave them to sin, and then condemn them for it?

Resol. It is a curious and unprofitable question, to dispute whether he might
not without wrong to the Creature, have done so: Perhaps Romans 9, 20, 21, 22.
will prove he might, but such a case never did, not will fall out: However to
our capacity, the justness of God should not shine so perspicuously, if he
should damn a Creature that never sinned; for then should he inflict
undeserved punishment, whereas in the course he now takes, he only denies
undeserved savours, and lays on them deserved penalties.

11. Doubt. But if Gods decree bind not men to a necessity of sinning, how
came sin into the World, seeing Men and Angels were made holy, and the whole
Creation is by GOD himself pronounced good Genesis 1.31
?

Resol. GODS decree does no otherwise bind man to a necessity of sinning, then
the withdrawing of the upholding hand from a staff reared up, binds it to a
necessity of falling; Viz, in a privative way. I showed before, that sin is
only privative; that is, a defect of some thing required, as darkness is
nothing else but a defect of light: and these privations do not necessarily
require causes, or creation; light was indeed created Genesis 2.3.
, but darkness was before on the face of the deep Verse. 2.
. Now though God made Angels and Men holy, he made them not Gods, that they
should stand of themselves without his help, which when he withheld from man,
and some of the Angels, they faltered in their obedience, and so became sinful.

CHAP. IV. Of Providence.
12. Doubt. HOw can God by his providence dispose of second causes that things
can come to pass contingently, freely, or miraculously, when he has
foreordained how they shall be in his immutable will?

Resol. There is a twofold necessity. 1. In Gods decree, so all things that
are, fall out necessarily and cannot be otherwise, 2. In Natural causes, so
fire necessarily burns, water necessarily wets etc. Now to us things are said
to fall out necessarily, when we apprehend a sufficient next cause. But this
sometimes is not, sometimes appears not before the effect, from whence the
notions [Contingent free, miraculous] have their rise.

As for example.

When an Infant is formed in the womb, though in respect of Gods decree, it is
necessarily a male, or necessarily a female, and so in time will prove: Yet to
us from whom the next cause of this distinction in the womb is hid, it is
contingent whether it be Male or Female.

13. Doubt. How can God strengthen and govern all Creatures in their actings,
and be free from sin, seeing many actions are sinful?

Resol. You must distinguish betwixt the action, and the evil in it; some sins
are actual, but none actions. Therefore as a skillful Minstrell playing on a
jarring Instrument causes it to sound, but its own badnesse causes it to
sound jarringly: So God causes us to act, but that we act sinfully, the cause
is in our selves. To kill a man is not simply evil, sometimes it is not only
lawful, but a duty Jer. 48.10.
; but killing a man upon such terms, without a just cause or call. Sin lies
in the moral circumstances, not the physical substance of the action.

14. Doubt. If God be perfectly glorious, how can he glorify himself in the
works of his providence, seeing nothing can be added to that which is perfect?

Resol. We may consider the glory of God these two ways.

1. As it is essential to him, and so it is ineffably perfect.

2. As it is revealed to us, and this because of our weakness, is only in
part, and by degrees. A Moses can but view the back parts Exodus 33 23.
; a Paul but see in part 1 Cor. 13 9, 10.
, and darkly as in a glass Ibid. ver. 12.
: And GOD is said to glorify himself, when by the great works of his
providence, he lets us see further into his glorious attributes.

15. Doubt. If the providence of God offer to men occasions to sin, how is God
free from the iniquity committed by reason thereof?

Resol. As a King that executes justice, though he know some wicked fellows
will thereat, take occasion to be Traitors to him, is not to be blamed: So
GODS works being holy, though wicked men abuse them through their own
perverseness, and make them occasions to sin, he is not unrighteous, but
punishes them in just judgment, suffering them to fall by their own folly.

16. Doubt. When GOD by his providence makes wicked men scourges to his people,
how can they be blamed for doing what GOD would have done?

Resol. Though wicked men can do nothing to the people of GOD, but what he
gives way to Psalm. 124.6. Psalm. 129.1, 2.3. Acts 4, 27, 28.
: Yet foraimuch as they endeavor to exceed their Commission Psalm. 83.4 Isa.
37.27, 28, 29, 33.
, and aim not at Gods glory, but their own ends Isa. 10.6, 7, etc.
, showing hostility and not pity to Gods people Ps, 137.7. Lam. 2.17.
; they shall answer for their ambitious malice Isa. 10.12
; though God by his wisdom will cause the wrath of man to praise him, and the
remainder of wrath he will restrain Ps. 76.10.
.

CHAP. V. Concerning the fall of Man.
17. Doubt. HOw could tasting the forbidden fruit be so great an offense, as
to deserve damnation?

Resol. Some give this reason, that this act of our Parents, was a breach of
each of Gods Commandments in particular, and endeavor to make it appear by
an induction, though for mine own part, I think it holds in some, not in all,
but this I desire to speak with modesty and submission: However it cannot be
denied, but the breach of the least of Gods Commandments makes us guilt of
all James 2 10.
: And the violation of his Law, who is infinite, deserves infinite punishment,
which because it cannot be in extent (we being finite) must be in duration. Nor
does the small value of the fruit abate any thing, but rather aggravate it, for
(as Master Byfield says well) their sin was greater, that upon so small an
advantage would adventure eternal happiness.

18. Doubt. But how comes it to pass, that Adams fault and punishment is
derived to his whole posterity?

Resol. Adam stood in Covenant with God as Man, not as a Man; that is, as a
public, not a private person: and therefore as he received the Covenant of
works, and for a time stood by it for himself and all mankind, so for himself
and all mankind he fell from it Romans 5.12. to 20. 1 Cor. 15.22.
.

19. Doubt. Would it not have made more for GODS glory to have kept men from
sin, to serve him in holiness?

Resol. No: For by this means man is a fit object for the rich mercy or just
judgment of God, which by occasion hereof GOD manifests to his own glory.

20. Doubt. Some affirm that sin dishonors God, other say he cannot be
dishonored; whether of these is true Doctrine?

Resol. They may both be true in a different sense; for the word (dishonor)
may be taken two ways:

1. To degrade or make one unhonourable, that before was honorable; but in
this sense it is rarely (if at all) found in Scripture.

2. To disrespect ot sl^ight one that is honorable, and still remains worthy
to be honored: In the former sense God cannot be dishonored, but in the
latter he may Mal. 1.^ Romans 2.2
; even as Children by their disobedience do not render their Parents
dishonorable Mat. 1 4, 5, 6,
, but dishonored Mic. 7.
.

21. Doubt. How can men in justice become liable to eternal punishment for sin
committed in time, and it may be in a short time?

Resol. 1. They are committed against an eternal God, and therefore are
always (as it were) in committing before, and against him.

2. If men might live eternally, they would sin eternally; and God punishes
according to the rebellion of their wills.

3. Though punished in Hell, they still retain their enmity against God, and
therefore justly is their penalty continued.

CHAP. VI. Of the Law of God, and of the two Covenants.
22. Doubt. IF the Covenant of works be for substance comprehended in the ten
Commandments, how can Christians which are free from the Law be bound to
observe them?

Resol. The Law of the Ten Commandments contains the matter of the Covenant
of works, but is not the Covenant formally, any more then the Copy of a Lease
written by a private hand, Simile,
having never been sealed and delivered according to Law, is the Lease it
self: The matter of the Covenant without the form, cannot sufficiently
constitute it. Now the form of the Covenant of works is the condition
whereupon the duty is undertaken: Viz. Do this and live; Life is promised upon
perfect obedience, damnation threatened upon the least disobedience. The Gospel
indeed requires the same things, but not upon the same terms, for whereas
the same Covenant of works says, Do this and live, the Gospel says, Live
and do this. Christ has freed us from the Law, as it is a compeller and
condemner, but not as it is a directory, or (to speak properly) we are freed
from the Covenant of works as it is such, but not from the things therein
contained: even as a Servant which obeyed his Master out of slavish fear, or
for wages, if his Master adopt him, and make him his heir, though he still be
bound to do the same things, yet forasmuch as he acts from different
Principles, Viz. of love, thankfulness, and (...) reverence, he is perfectly
free from that Covenant which (as a Servant) he made with his Master. In like
manner the adopted Sons of God, (though they are to act the same things that
the Law of works required) yet in as much as they do them not to be justified
and live, but because they are justified, and do live; nor are bound to them
under the penalty of revenging wrath, but fatherly chastisement) are perfectly
set at liberty from the Covenant of works.

23. Doubt. If the Covenant on Mount Sinai was a Covenant of grace (as it must
needs be, because in it was forgiveness of sins) How can Christ be said to be
a Mediator of a better Covenant then Moses? better and worse seem to intimate
there be two Covenants of grace.

Resol. They are not called better and worse in respect of the matter or
substance of them, but in the manner of dispensation. When we compare two
Books of the same nature together (as suppose they treat of Grammar, Logic,
or Philosophy) the one treating in a prolix, dark, and confused manner, the
other in a brief, methodicall, and plain way, and say this is better then
that, we do not mean that the subject matter of the one is better then the
other, but only the excellency is in the method and expression. So when the
Covenant of Grace, as it is handed to us by Christ, is preserred before the
same, as it is set forth by Moses in types and shedowes, we must understand it
of the perspicuity and compendiousnesse of the administration, together with
the freedom from burdensome Ceremonies, not of the Covenant it self, for that
is one and the same to them and us 1 Cor. 10 1, 2, 3, 4.
.

24. Doubt. How can the Jews Covenant and ours, be all one, when as in theirs,
forgiveness was not for every sin (namely, not for presumptuousnesse Number.
15.30.
, nor uncircumcision Genesis 17.14.
) nor of all their sin at once, but by degrees successively, for when they had
offered Sacrifice for one transgression, they lay under the next till Sacrifice
was again offered: But Christ has at once paid a full price, and acquitted us
from all our sins?

Resol. With reverence to the learned Author from whom this doubt arises, I
believe it is a great mistake to say, the Jews Covenant had not remi2sion of
all sins. That the presumptuous sinner and uncircumcised person must be cut
off, the places forequoted prove, but this cutting off was excommunication, or
a loss of their part in the external Covenant of God, till the one repented,
the other became circumcised, and cannot be understood of an unpardonable
condition, for that either uncircumcision, or presumption (especially this sort
of presumption in the Text alleged, being opposed only to ignorance) was
unpardonable, and therefore all damned that were defiled with them (as it must
needs follow) is not only unproved, but disproved by Scripture Jos. 5.2, 3, 4,
etc. Romans 2.26. 2 Samuel 12.13. 2 Chro. 33.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
. Nor is there any more force in that which is alleged concerning the
graduality of forgiveness, for the Sacrifices did not of themselves make the
atonement, but as Ordinances typifying Christ they did (as it were)
Sacramentally apply and seal the pardon of sin to the conscience, as they
should from time to time offend and stand in need of pardon; but that Christ
did at once bear the sins of Believers, as well Jews before his coming, as
Gentiles since, is plain by that clause so much stood upon by the reverend
Author, The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all Isa. 53.6.
, and many other places Rev. 13.8 Gal. 4.4, 5. Isa. 53.5.
.

25. Doubt. How could the Covenant on Sinai be a Covenant of grace, seeing the
Apostle calls it a killing Letter, and a ministration of death and condemnation
2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 9.
?

Resol. I conceive the Apostles meaning was not that the whole Covenant on
Sinai beginning, Exodus 20. and ending with Levit. 26. was a killing letter,
etc. For the Sacrifices and Ceremonies typifyed Christ, and sealed forgiveness
of sins, and reconciliation to God If you observe this distinction, you may
easily answer to all arguments built upon any other Scripture, which seems to
assert that the Jews lived under a Covenant of works.
. But Moses is there to be considered, as he was the Minister of the Decalogue,
or ten Commandments, without respect had to the Types and Ordinances whereby
Christ was signified; and that this is not my private opinion, but the sense of
the place, may appear by two reasons.

1. We are told ( Verse. 7.) that this ministration of death was engraven on
stones, but only the ten Commandments were so engraven Exo. 34.1.28.
; therefore he only means them.

2. The Apostle here speaks of a ministration about which Moses was employed
when his face shone 2 Cor. 3.7.13.
: But this glory was vouchsafed him when he received the ten Commandments
alone Exo. 34.28, 29, 30.
, therefore them only he means; and to speak the truth, the Contents of the
two Tables being received alone, as Moses brought them down in his hands, not
as in subordination to Christ the Mediator, but as a servant of God the
Creator, proclaiming his exact and rigid Law, must needs be a Covenant of
works; though the same being received in subordination to Christ (which was
truly (though more dimly) held forth in these Ceremonial observances) hinders
not, but that Israel lived under a Covenant of grace.

26. Doubt. When the Apostle blames the Galatians for revolting from the
Gospel to the Law, what Law means he, the moral or Ceremonial?

Resol. With submission to better judgments, I believe he means the whole
Covenant on Sinai containing both the Moral and Ceremonial Law, which was a
Covenant of grace, when Moral duties were pressed in subordination and
obedience to Christ the King of the Church, and Ceremonial, as typifying him
to come: But when their imperfect obedience of the moral Law Gal. 3.10, 11,
12, 18. and 4.21.
, and rotten Ceremonies long before abolished Gal. 4.9.10. and 5.6.
, were cried up, and rested in for justification and life eternal, they became
an unsupportable yok of bondage Gal. 5.1, 3 Acts 15.10
, binding men under a Covenant of works Gal. 5.3.
, and making the death of Christ (as to them) of none effect Gal. 2.21. and 5.2.
.

CHAP. VII. Of Christ the Mediator.
27. Doubt. HOW could Christ be sent by his Father, and yet be equal to him,
seeing the Scripture says, He is greater that sends, then he which is sent?

Resol. Christ as God is equal to his Father, but as Mediator (in which
capacity, he was sent) an inferior to him Phil. 2, 6, 7.
.

28. Doubt. If Christ paid a full price to his Father for the redemption of
mankind, how can the salvation of the Elect be attributed to the grace of God?

Resol. Had it not been for the grace and mercy of God, Christ had not been
bestowed on us Joh. 3.16
; nor needed God to have given way that Christ should be surety for us, though
he had been moved to that end, although when God had accepted him as surety,
and laid the whole debt upon him, till he was fully satisfied; he is bound in
faithfulness and justice it self to forgive us our sins 1 John 1.9
. A creditor needs not to take a Surety for a debt already due, unless
himself please, and if he do, it is a courtesy to the Debtor (for if he will
he may lay him by it, till he pay or rot) yet if he do accept of a Surety, and
lay the debt upon him, and be accordingly paid and satisfied, he cannot require
it again, but is bound in justice, Law, and conscience to acquit the
principal: In like manner, God without wrong to mankind might have bound them
over to eternal punishment in their own persons, without accepting any other
to be bound for them; but having accepted of Christ to enter bond with them,
and received the whole sum from him, acknowledging the receipt thereof under
his own hand and seal, he cannot in righteousness charge it again upon us.

29. Doubt. If Christ have fully satisfied his Fathers justice for the Elect,
so that all (and only) they that are in Christ have their sins pardoned, how
can any man ask for givenesse of sins? If they be in Christ it seems to be
superfluous, if not, sinful; for whatsoever one that is out of Christ does is
sinful.

Resol. Whether men be in Christ or no, they ought to pray for pardon of sin
Mat. 6.12 Luke 11.4. Acts 8.22.
: for although those which are in Christ be free from damnation, yet not from
correction for their failings 2 Samuel 12 14 Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32, 33, 34.
. And therefore have cause to pray that God would neither hide his face from
them, nor afflict them for it. And though a man be in the state of nature, yet
prayer being an Ordinance of God, and a duty incumbent to every one Psalm. 79.6
Jer. 10.25.
, in the use whereof God is pleased to let forth himself and vouchsafe a
discovery of Christ Acts 10.30.
, every one should beware of sleighting it; for although the prayer of a wicked
person be sinful, and therefore may be thought unprofitable, so is their
hearing of the Word without Faith Heb. 4.3.
, and yet they must hear that they may have Faith Romans 10.14, etc.
: Yes its generally said, whatsoever is not of Faith is sin Romans 14.23.
; and without Faith it is impossible to please God Heb. 11.6,
, insomuch that the plowing of the wicked is iniquity Pro. 23.4
. And yet I do not think any man holds that faithless men are to forbear
every thing, and wicked men plowing. No more must natural men forbear
praying, because they cannot pray as they ought, but rather be more serious and
frequent that God in his own Ordinance may meet with them, and work upon their
hearts effectually.

30. Doubt. I can easily grant that we may pray for assurance of pardon, but
for the pardon it self we may not, because every Elect person (and reprobates
are excluded from pardon) has all his sins past, present, and to come, laid
upon Christ: And therefore though be be in the height of his sins, he stands
in no more need of pardon then a Saint in Heaven: Hence it is, that some
Gospell-Preachers of these days expound [forgive us our debts or sins] to
signify no more but [manifest to us that our fins are forgiven us] And when
David begs pardon of sin, it was either because he lived under an imperfect
Covenant, wherein remission was obtained successively, as sacrifice was
offered; or else he was under a temptation, as in another case, when be charged
GOD to have forgotten to be gracious Psalm. 77.7, etc.
?

Resol. Those which make this objection do ordinarily distinguish (in the
pardon of sin) betwixt Gods decree to forgive, and the manifestation hereof;
but they leave out a third thing, without which the enumeration is imperfect,
to wit the execution of this decree; from want whereof, all these mistakes
arise: For the actual pardoning of sin consists neither in the decree nor
manifestation of pardon, but it is a thing distinct from them both, following
the one, and leading the other in the order of nature and time.

For when a Malefactor is condemned, and his Sovereign purposes in his heart
to pardon him, this intention of his (suppose it be unalterable) is but a
purpose to pardon, not to pardon formally; nor yet though the manifestation
thereof be added, except it be in a judicial way, for though it be never so
well known that the King intends to forgive him, yet he is not forgiven till
his pardon be sealed, and confirmed according to Law: and then his assurance
and self satisfaction arises from the sight or knowledge thereof. In like
manner, though God has chosen the Elect before the World was, that they should
receive in Christ the forgiveness of sins, and this his decree unalterable
(and as to God before whom all things are present) they are already pardoned,
in the same manner that Christ is called the Lamb slain from the beginning of
the World for the certainty and efficacy thereof, though he was actually put to
death till the fullness of time, yet (as to them) the pardon has not actual
existence, till God give them Faith in Christ, whereby they receive the
actonement; but till they believe, they want not only the assurance of
forgiveness, but forgiveness it self, for they are Children of wrath Joh.
3.36 Ephesians. 2.3.
, and condemned persons Joh. 3.19
. This considered, I cannot but greatly wonder, that any learned man should
without warrant of Scripture, and against the stream of Commentators, expound
[forgive] to signify [declare forgivenesse] (a thing vastly different, though
subordinate to it) upon one slender reason, not to be owned by such a man. For
what though a man ought to pray in Faith, and this Faith demonstrates that our
sins are already pardoned; (which is the strength of the reason brought) seeing
I have proved before Doubt. 30. answered.
, that a Believer is not free from correction, though from condemnation be is.
As for David I have before In the Resolution of the 25. Doubt.
overthrown the pretended difference between the Covenant of Crace under which
he lived, and that whereunder we live: Nor can I think that he was under any
temptation when he writ the 25. and 51. Psalms, in which he frequently beggeth
pardon: I readily grant that some passages of the 77. Psalm, were spoken in
such a temper, for himself tells us so Verse. 10.
: but that any thing in these Psalm Viz. 25. and 51.
was so spoken, is impossible to be proved, either by themselves or any other
Scripture, which is a strong argument to me that he was himself, and did not
personate a Believer in his sinful doubtings, when he spoke thus; especially
considering that he seldom or never leaves any Error on record without some
dash or brand to know it by: And therefore till some man show me as good ground
to prove him under a temptation when he asked forgiveness, as when he said,
God had forsaken him; I see no reason why the places should be paralleled, and
the one expounded by the other.

CHAP. VIII. Of Free Will.
31. Doubt. HOw can any be said to have Free Will, whereas natural men are
taken captive by Satan at his will 2 Timothy 2.26.
, and those which come to Christ are drawn by the Father Joh. 6.44
?

Resol. The will of man may be depraved by corruption, or regulated by grace;
but destroyed or violently forced by neither: One may be so powerfully
persuaded by reasons and importunity that he cannot say nay, and yet not
necessitated to yield or deny, but acts freely: So in the will of man, though
corruption be so forcible and prevalent in its instigations in the
unregenerate, that they cannot but will and act iniquity, yet is not the will
violently hurried and dragged (like a Bear to the stake, as we say) but
complyingly, as when a blind man is led by another; and when as grace acts the
will, it does not take it prisoner, or carry it headlong, but persuades it; for
when Christ draws, his people become willing Psalm. 110.3.
, and run after him Can. 1.4.
.

32. Doubt. Let me understand you thoroughly; Do you mean that man since the
fall has Free will to good or evil, so that he wants no power, but will
only, to believe and repent?

Resol. By no means, no more then a mad, or possessed man can dispose of his
own strength for his own good: For though I hold that the will of man is not
lost, nor absolutely determined this way, or that, by any inevitable necessity
in causes purely naturally, yet withal I asserted, that by the fall of man,
the will is wholly depraved, and as long as corruption is the guide, it must
needs act corruptly, and not otherwise. To make this plain, consider one of
the Simile's I used concerning a blind man led by another: You know a blind man
follows his leader freely (that is, he is not haled or dragged away forcibly)
which notwithstanding I hope no man will say, that a blind man which relyeth
wholly on the guidance of his leader, can go whither he will, and escape all
dangerous places of himself, but according to his guide so is his going. So
the will of man acts freely, but it sees not by its own eyes, but is guided
by the understanding, which because of corruption is a false guide to it; and
therefore until God by his spirit sanctify the understanding, to be a
faithful guide to the will, it must needs act perversely, though freely.

33. Doubt. If a man in his natural condition cannot do good or evil as
himself wills, why is he blamed for it, or exhorted to amend?

Resol. If a man by his own unthriftinesse make away his estate, is he not
still suable for his debts, though unable to pay them? And when God gave us
ability to do his will, and we lost it through our own default, are we not
still debtors to his justice? May not he blame us for making our selves
incapable? And whereas the Scripture calls on us for amendment, it is to
convince us of our wants and insufficiency, that we may the more seriously
seek to him, that has promised to ease and heal them. The Prophet bids us
make our selves new hearts Ezekiel. 18 31.
, and yet David desires God to do it Psalm. 51.10.
: So then it must be our aim, but Gods act Romans 9.16.
.

CHAP. IX Of Calling, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, Faith,
Repentance, and good Works.
34. Doubt. IF God love his people when they are in their blood (i. e. in the
height of their sin) what need they to be called justified, adopted, and
sanctified? For if God love them he will ever love them, and therefore they
must needs be saved, though they were never called, etc.

Resol. I might ask you a like question; If God loved the World Joh. 3.16
, why should he give his Son for it, seeing whom he once loves he ever loves?
The truth is, the LORD loves his Elect whilst they are finners, but not as
they are sinners. A man may like a piece of Land, which as yet brings forth
nothing but thorns and briars, not because such, or that of it self it will
grow better, but that by his own work he can make it fruitful: So God loves
an Elect sinner, but it is with respect to his own graces in time to be
planted in them Ephesians. 1.4. and 2.10.
: And therefore it is necessary that those which God from eternity loves, be in
time called by the Word and Spirit (except such as are incapable) they being
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, etc. See the Scripture last cited.
.

35. Doubt. If we be justified freely Romans 32.4.
, how can God have respect to Faith, in justifying us?

Resol. As a hand receiving a gift, hinders not but the gift may be free,
though perhaps such a thing as cannot be received without a hand to take it;
even so Christ for our justification is freely bestowed on us, though we cannot
possibly receive him without Faith, howsoever he may be tendered to us. But
that all cause of objection against the freeness of this work on Gods part,
may be abundantly removed, even Faith it self (the hand which receives Christ
and all his benefits Joh. 1.12.
) is freely given us Ephesians. 2.8.
.

36. Doubt. What need we sanctification, repentance, or good works, if we be
justified by Faith alone Romans 3.28
?

Resol. Faith which justifies is not alone, though Faith alone justify
(instrumentally I mean, else it is God that justifies Romans 8.33
) for as the fruit-bearing tree is not without leaves, though the fruit soring
not from the leaves, either by intervention or concurrence, but from the tree
immediately: So a lively and justifying Faith purifieth the heart Acts 15.9
from which sanctification and good works have their rise. And therefore that
Faith which in due time does not show it self in works, is not a saving, but
a dead Faith Jam. 2.17 18, 19, 20
; though they neither prevent, not assist Faith in the act of justification.

37. Doubt. If Christ and all his benefits belong to Believers, how can Heaven
be conferred on persons as a reward for their good works?

Resol. Heaven is not bestowed on any by way of just recompense of his works,
for the best are unprofitable Servants Luke 17.10.
; how then can their works purchase Heaven? But God who can as well reward
according to works in mercy Psalm. 62.12.
: as Justice does abundantly repay them for all their pains and service, by
putting them in possession of that Kingdom which he ever intended them,
without respect had to the worth of their works, Simile.
or repentance. A Father at his death does abundantly reward his Son for his
obedience, when be gives him his Lands, although he had long before, out of
mere Fatherly offection stated them on him: So God uses to reward those that
serve him with the same things which before he had freely promised them. Upon
Abraham's obeying of God, and non-resusing to offer up his only Son, God
promised him a large reward; and this is, that he shall have a numerous and
happy seed, wherein also all Nations should be blessed Genesis 22.15, 16, 17, 18.
: And yet that which is here bequeathed to Abraham, as a reward of his
obedience, was before this time steated on him by free promise Genesis 12.2 and
15.5.
. In the same manner and order God rewards his people for their obedience and
service to him done, when he bestows on them that heavenly Kingdom which he
purposed should be their inheritance before the world was.

38. Doubt. What need we to believe, seeing 2 Timothy 2.13.
GOD will be faithful though we believe not?

Resol. The Original Word which is translated [ we believe not (...).
] is not only such a word as denotes the present time 1 Viz. being the present
tense.
, but also it, and another of affinity with it (...).
, are frequently used for the hesitations and staggerings of the faithful; and
does not import a privation of the habit of Fiath by infidelity (for that is
damnable Mark 16.16. Joh. 3.36. Mat. 17, 20 Mark. 9.24 and 16.11, 14. Luke
24.11, 41.
) But only a negation (or rather a suspending) of Faiths acting in some
juncture of time, which the Text quoted in the Margent will sufficiently
clear, especially to him that is able to peruse the Greek Copy: And therefore
I can see no more in the Text alleged but only thus much; If we believe not,
that is, if for the present (or sometimes) we by reason of weakness,
discontinue or intermit actual believing, not being able to hold to a constant
course in acting Eaith on the promises of God, we must not measure God by our
selves, as if he started aside from us, as often as we from him, but will still
remain faithful, which if he should not do, it could be no less to him, who
by an excellency is called faithful, and is faithfulness in the abstract, then
a denial of himself.

39. Doubt. How can we be said to have faith, and yet cannot work miracles
Mat. 17.20.
?

Resol. The ordinary answer is (as I take it) that Christ in the place cited,
means not Faith in the general, much less justifying Faith in special, but
a certain sort of Faith (specifically different from the saving) whose
adequate and was miracle-working, whereof he was then treating; which
distinction other Scriptures will sufficiently warrant Mat. 7.22. 1 Cor. 13.2
: But a learned man of these days has a more subtle notion, which is, that
Faith is a resting on a promise, without which it is not Faith, but
presumption: And so the sense is, that whatsoever God promises, we may believe
and hope for, and accordingly will the issue be, how difficult soever it
appear.

40. Doubt. If the persons and actions of Believers be not perfectly free from
sin, how can either of them be accepted with God, which bates and abborres it?

Resol. God indeed hates and abhors the sins of the Elect, yet their sins being
laid upon Christ, nothing hinders why their persons and actions may not be
accepted through him.

41. Doubt. If no sin can be so great, but upon repentance it may be pardoned,
how comes the sin against the holy Ghost to he unpardonable?

Resol. No sin for the matter of it can be so great but it may be pardoned, but
that wicked action, which considered simply, might be forgiven, may through the
concurrence of aggravating circumstances become unpardonable. Two men may be
guilty of the same kind of transgression (if respect be had only to the
materiality of it) and yet the one sin against the holy Ghost, the other not.
Paul blasphemed and was forgiven 1 Timothy 1.13.
, the Scribes and Pharisees blasphemed and could never be forgiven Mat. 12.24,
31, 32. Mark 3, 22 28, 29.
, for he did it of ignorance, they out of spite and malice: So that as bad an
act may be forgiven, as forgiveness is denied to: But the maine reason why
this sin where it is found cannot be pardoned, is, that they being convinced of
the truth, and yet still resisting it, are given up to delusions to believe
lies 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. Simile.
, and so go on to damnation. For as a wound which would be found curable
enough, if good Salve were in due time applied thereto, may be the death of the
man, if he be distracted and will suffer nothing to be laid to it; so though no
transgression can be so vile as to be simply unpardonable, yet if it be
accompanied with such circumstances, that impenitency must needs follow (as
here it always does) it can never be forgiven. Deering on Heb. p. ult.
But on the other side (as says learned Master Deering) he that carefully
repents and trembles at the thought of this sin, is far from it is the
East is from the West.

CHAP. X. Of Perseverance, and Assurance.
42. Doubt. IS it not a ready course to make men careless of their ways, when
they are taught they can never fall away from grace?

Resol. No, but rather a great encouragement to be diligent 1 Pet. 1.5 13. 2
Pet. 1.10
, for he that would not serve God out of love, though he noching benefited
himself thereby, is not yet in the state of grace, and then what have such to
do with perseverance? But he that is truly godly, finding himself to be
delivered from his enemies, will serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of his life Luke 1.74, 75.
; and if he falter herein (though God will never utterly cast him off) he will
be offended and chastise him, with corporal and spiritual scourges.

43. Doubt. I have heard some in these days speak much against trying a man's
selse by Scripture marks and signs, calling it a kindling of sparks of our
own, and I much desire to know whether it be safe so to try my self?

Resol. Under favor, it is (to say no worse) a great mistake, to call the
work of the spirit within us (or any arguments drawn from thence according to
the testimony of the Spirit and word of Grace) sparks of our kindling, for
they are sparks of Gods kindling; this sort of teaching being a Scripturall
teaching 2 Cor. 13.5. 1 John 3.14 Jam. 3.17.
, and (if rightly used) may be of singular use and comfort; for they are as
way-markes, discovering to us, whither our courses tend: And you know it is a
great deal of satisfaction to a Traveller, that he is in his way, when he
finds such a place of note, as his Map tells him he must pass through, before
he arrive at his journeys end.

44. Doubt. Yet I understand not the right use of these notes, or trials; and
therefore I beseech you proceed further?

Resol. I shall go on in my last comparison, and show you the rules. Suppose
than a Christian to be the Traveller, Heaven the place to which his way lies,
and these notes or signs remarkables in the way: Then,

First, As the remarkables (be they Hills, Rocks, etc,) must be so fully and
truly described, that the Traveller may know when he comes at them, neither
doubting of them, nor mistaking other things for them. So whatsoever grace is
pitched upon, we must have distinct knowledge of it, what it is, and how
discernable from counterfeits, before we can assuredly say we are come to it.

Secondly, A diligent Traveller coming to such a place as assures him to be in
his way, stays not there, but goes on toward his journeys end: No more must
Christians stay because they find they have gone aright so far, but proceed
from strength to strength, and grow in grace.

Thirdly, A Traveller should not despair as if he were out of his way, though
he find not his way-marke (which perhaps is a good distance off) as soon as he
sets out; but hope that although it yet appears not, or very dimly; yet in
due time, he shall perfectly discern and recover it: So though one that
desires to fear God, and believe in him, do not at first so clearly as he
desires discern some graces in himself, he should not despair, but go on
hoping in the Lord till he be pleased to speak peace Psa. 85.8 Isa. 40.31. and
50.10.
.

Fourthly, If a Traveller have once attained to a clear sight of such a
remarkable place as afterward he loses the sight of, by going through some
valley (a mountain interposed) he is still to hope, and hold on, till he
again recover the sight thereof: So though Christians, which formerly have
found the precious fruits of the spirit in themselves, fall afterward into
temptation, or mountains of difficulty arise, they are to remember how it has
been with them, hoping in God, and continuing in the use of means, till they
recover their comfort again.

45. Doubt. If men be dead in sin till they be regenerate, and alive ever
after, what need is there of marks or signs? He that is alive, knows that he
lives, and a dead man can make no use of them.

Resol. The comparison halteth, for though the spiritual life and death in
many things resemble the natural, in many things they differ; especially
concerning the matter in hand: It is almost a miracle of madness, for a living
man to think himself dead; and yet in ordinary experience, we find many weak
Christians in whom there is the life of grace, which cannot for a long time be
assured thereof: It is impossible that a dead man should either know himself
to be dead, or think he is alive; but we read of diverse spiritually dead that
have so judged of themselves, as Caine, Judas, and many in humane Stories Read
the Story of Spira.
, amongst whom Julian the Apostate deserves the first place, who having in a
Battle received his deaths wound, belched out this desperate blasphemy,
Vicisti Galilaee, meaning Christ as an enemy had vanquished him. And too
frequently to our grief do we meet with Heretics, Hypocrites, Civilians,
etc. which have deaths brand upon them, and yet are confident their case is as
good as any man's; insomuch that no arguments (without the special assistance
of Gods spirit) are sufficient to convince them of the contrary.

2. Though life were easy to be perceived, yet growth is many times more
difficult, and this Doctrine of trial does as well enquire into the growth, as
truth, of grace.

46. Doubt. How should there be any certainty in trying a man's self by these
notes, when an eminent Preacher of these days has proved that neither
universal obedience, nor love to the Brethren (which are accounted two of the
plainest) have any certainty in them? Not the first, because there is no such
thing in any mere man, as universal obedience: Nor the second, because this
love has such qualifications as men shall hardly find in themselves See 1 Cor
13. Ver. 4.5, etc.
: Or if such love can be found, yet we cannot know we love the Brethren, except
we know that those whom we love, are the Brethren; it is not sufficient to love
them under the notion of Brethren; for so Papists love one another -- And
therefore Love to the Brethren is rather a note to know others then our selves,
for the Apostle does not say, Hereby I know, but Hereby we know, etc.

Resol. By universal obedience we do not mean exact obedience to the Law in
every part of it, without swerving or interruption, but unblamable walking in a
Gospelsense, which indeed is rather universal in will then act, for though
When they would do good, evil is present with them Romans 7.21.
, so that they do not the good which they would, but the evil which they
would not Ver. 19.
; yet they delight in the Law of the Lord after the inward man Ver. 2^.
. And this their obedience is called universal, in as much, as a Christian
does not pick nor choose among Gods Commandments, but has respect to them all
without exception or difference, endeavoring to walk up to them, or as near
as may be: Now such universal obedience as this must be in a Christian Jam.
2.10
, and where it is, must needs be a good sign of an happy estate Ps. 119.6.
.

As for Love to the Brethren, methinke [1 John 3.14.] is so plain, that he
which says, we cannot know our condition hereby, does directly give John (or
rather the holy Ghost) the Lie: And what if love have such qualifications as
are spoken of, 1 Cor. 13. Cannot the tree be known, until it bear fruit, it
were absurd arguing to say (in the season when a plant is new set) this is no
Apple Tree, because we see no Apples on it. And when it appears that we
unfeignedly love the Brethren, in whom we apprehend the Image of God, shining
in the graces of his spirit (not out of any byrespect, but love to the God they
serve) may we not conclude we love them, because the fruits of this love do
not presently appear? Is it reason to say there is no love, because it has no
fruits to our discerning, or rather to say here is love, and in Gods ^ime we
shall see fruits.

Nor need we to know infallibly, that they are the Brethren whom we love; if
they profess and practice the true Religion, we are bound (till the contrary
appear) to take them for Brethren; and if we love them under that notion,
though they be not such, our humane judgment indeed is mistaken, but our love
is nevertheless true: Charity hops all things 1 Cor. 13.7.
: But what think you did the reverend Author mean, when he tells us, Papists
love one another under the notion of Brethren? Does he think it alone, to love
him which (as far as the judgment of man can reach) is a true Saint, and one
which the Word of God proves to be an Idolater? Was it alone, to love Judas for
his Masters sake, while he was undiscovered, and to love a blasphemous Scribe
or Pharisee, under the notion of a Brother? The Papists wilfully shut their
eyes against the truth, and therefore out of sinful ignorance, take those to
be the Brethren, which (for the present) neither so are, nor can be, and love
them under a wilfully-mistaken notion of Brethren: But we, according to the
rules of love, modesty, and prudence (neither condemning any without manifest
cause, nor prying into Gods secrets, nor blindfolding our own knowledge) take
those for Brethren, which for the present may be (and we hope are) the
Brethren; and though we be mistaken, it is no sin of ours, who were never made
the judges of the heart, but are to rest satisfied in men's outward profession
and conversation: Nor can this be a sign to know others, and not our selves;
for we cannot know whether others love the Brethren except we knew their
hearts. And though it be not said (1 John 3.14.) I know I am, etc. But We know
we are, etc. That makes nothing against me, but rather for me: Had John spoken
in the singular Number [I know] it might have been thought to be some special
persons privilege; but he says [We] that is [you and I] writing to ordinary
Christians, as is very probable: And the same persons are made the subjects al
along; for says he, We know that we are translated from death to life, because
we love the Brethren. So that the same persons that loved the Brethren, did
thereby know that themselves were translated from death to life.

CHAP. XI. Of Christian Liberty, and Liberty of Conscience: ALSO, Of the civil
Magistrate, and Churchcensures.
47. Doubt. IF Christians must not be the servants of men 1 Cor. 7.23.
, how come Rulers to have any power over us?

Resol. The meaning is not, that we must not serve men at all (for that would
contradict the Verses immediately sore going 1 Cor. 7.20, 21, 22.
and almost infinite other places) but do not so serve men, that it hinder you
in the service of God.

48. Doubt. If every one must bear his own burden Gal. 6.5.
, and be judged according to his works Romans 2.6
, why should any man (Magistrate, or other) trouble or interrupt him, though he
be heretical or blasphemous, but leave him to God, and his own conscience?

Resol. The vilest sinner on earth may plead thus: But the truth is, that
though the principal and ultimate judgment of every man's cause be left to
Christ to be determined by him at the day of judgment: Yet God out of his
singular wisdom has appointed, that open wickedness (whether it be matter
of opinion or practice) be judged and punished also by Authority
Ecclesiastical and Civil, and if either sort neglect their duty herein,
themselves become culpable Neh. 13.16, 17, 18. 1 Kin. 9.22 1 Cor. 5. tot. Rev.
2.14.15, 20.
.

49. Doubt. But what good is this restraint like to work, but to make men
either more violent, when they see their Tenet opposed, or else Hypocrites (if
they be restrained) for God only can change the heart?

Resol. This also any notorious wretch may say for himself; but trust reposed
in men by God must be discharged, and the issue left to him.

50. Doubt. But if my conscience be erronous, what course can I take? If I go
against the truth, I sin 2 These. 2.10.
, and if I go against my conscience I sin also Romans 14. ult. 1 Cor, 8.7. etc.
?

Resol. It is true, and therefore the way is to pray and seek for
satisfaction, that your conscience may comply and close with the truth.

CHAP. XII. Of Religious Worship, and of the sabbath day.
51. Doubt. TO what purpose should Christians pray for any thing, seeing God
has promised they shall want nothing? Can God forget his promise? Or needs he
any remembrancer?

Resol. Prayer is a duty incumbent to all men, especially Christians, and the
way wherein God is pleased to make out such promises Mat. 7.7.
; and therefore you must not think that Gods absolute promises tie him to give
such and such things, whether they will ask or no Jam. 4.2.
, but that he will enable his people to pray, that they may receive the
promised mercies Isa. 51.9.
? He having resolved he will be sought unto for the accomplishment of his
promises Ezekiel. 36.37.
.

52. Doubt. Some scruple the singing of David's Psalms, saying they were only
penned for the present occasion, and conceive that the Psalms mentioned in the
New Testament were not David's, but such as men assisted by the spirit of God,
composed for the particular occasion 1 Cor. 14.26.
: But what think you of it?

Resol. Though David's Psalms were penned for the particular occasion, yet the
use of them still remained, and some of them were sung many Ages after 2 Chronicles.
20.21. and 29.30.
, nor can it be proved that they ever ceased to be Gods Ordinance.

As for the New Testament, we often read the word [Psalmes] therein, and for
the most part in such a sense, that David's Psalms must needs be thereby meant
Luke 20.42. Acts 1.20. and 13.33. Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16. and elsewhere.
, but never (to my remembrance) in the sense you speak of; for such
occasional composures are rather called Hymns, or Spiritual songs, and
distinguished from Psalms Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16.
. To that place you cite, Viz. 1 Cor. 14.26. I answer:

First, The Apostle there speaks of abuses and d sorders, and therefore it is
hard thence to prove a duty: It is rough Logic to say, the Apostle reproves
them that they had each of them a Psalm; therefore Christians must (or may)
have each of them a Psalm.

Secondly, Admit that Paul reproves them not for any faultiness in the matter
of their worship, but the manner of performance (which I confess is likely to
be his meaning) our opinion may well stand with it; for he might well mean
David's Psalms, and so the sense will be this, Every one chooses what Psalm
himself pleases, etc.

Thirdly, Suppose he meant any other kind of Psalms then David's, yet he
excludes not them, neither in this place, nor elsewhere.

Fourthly, If those which had the extraordinary gifts of the spirit, to compose
such spiritual Songs, as abovesayd, made less use of David's Psalms, by
reason of their own extraordinary abilities, it were no warrant to us, which
pretend to no such gifts, to neglect, such excellent helps as David's Psalms
are.

53. Doubt. How do you know that this day which we celebrate, is the first day
of the week which the Apostles kept, and is called the Lords day?

Resol. As well as the Jews in Christ's time, that they kept the seventh, or
you that you are baptized: We must not think our Ancestors were so silly, that
they could not count seven.

54. Doubt. I, but that is not all, let them account as well as they can, the
time will vary much in the revolution of one thousand, six hundred, forty eight
years; and therefore how can this be said to be the same, considering with
all, that in Countries far distant it may he night in one, when it is day in
another?

Resol, I confess, I am neither Astronomer, nor Geographer, nor do I think
we stand in need of such Calculations: Let years revolve whither they can, the
days of the week will still follow one another in the same order they do. The
Jews Sabbath was above twice as old as ours is, when Christ was on the Earth,
and the course of the Sun twice interrupted in the mean time Jos. 10.13 2
King. 20.11.
: Yet Christ never reproved them for observing a wrong day, but he, and his,
observed it, till it was changed Luke 23.56.
, which they would not have done, had there been any error in the Jews
account. The distance of place (I confess) may alter the time much, yet I
verily believe that he, which in all his travells (or wheresoever GOD places
him) shall observe a day weekly, beginning with the first, and so holding on,
keeps it seasonably: And if this be not allowed, I see not how the Patriarcks
in their Pilgrimages, or Proselytes, which dwelt in all parts of the World Acts
2.9. and 8.27.
; (to say nothing of the distance which some conceive, was between Canaan it
self, and Paradise, where the Sabbath was instituted) could observe the
seventh day Sabbath in its season.

55. Doubt. Might we not, as Master Calvin wished, appoint a part of each day,
or as others think, any other day (so it be one in seven) in stead of the first
day of the week, seeing that day is not positively set down to be kept?

Resol. Though I reverence Master Calvin as highly as any man that was alive
this hundred years; yet I cannot comply with him nor any men else, in judging
another time so fit for Gods service, as that which by the Apostles themselves
was set apart Act. 20.7 1 Cor. 16.2
, whose example (they being inspired by the holy Ghost) may as well in this, as
many other things supply the want of a precept Phil. 3.17
.

56. Doubt. How should I know when to begin and conclude the Lords day?

Resol. It it a great question among Divines: For mine own part (with
submission) I think it begins at the dawning of the day, when Christ arose
Mat. 28.1
: I know it is said ( Genesis 1.) The evening and the morning; and not The morning
and the evening; nor dare I say it is an Histero proteron, for the often
inculcating of it seems to point at some Mystery: But this I say, that though
it be granted that the natural day and particularly the Sabbath, containing
four and twenty hours, had its revolution from evening to evening; yet
nothing hinders why the Christian Sabbath may not be from morning to morning;
for seeing the Lords day is kept in memory of Christ's resurrection, why should
it not as well begin at the hour and minuite, as be celebrated on the day that
he rose from the dead?

CHAP. XIII. Of Oaths.
57. Doubt. HOw can swearing by the Name of GOD be a sin, seeing it is not
only allowed, but commanded Deu. 6.13 and 10.20.
?

Resol. Swearing by the Name of GOD, so it be with reverence, and upon just
ground, is not a sin but a worship of God, tending to his honor, by making him
the Judge of secrets, but swearing customarily, rashly, and vainly, is a
breach of the third Commandment; and the like may be said of other worships:
But the meaning of the places you cite, is this, When thou shall be lawfully
called to swear, thou shall swear by none other but God alone; for to him
that worship appertains.

58. Doubt. But how can these passages stand with flat prohibitions on the
other side, SWEAR NOT AT ALL Mat. 5.34
, and ABOVE ALL THINGS MY BRETHREN SWEAR NOT Jam. 5.12
?

Resol. Very well, for the sense is, Swear not at all by the Creature; Not by
Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem, or thine head, says Christ Mat. 9.34 etc.
. Not by Heaven, Earth, or any other Oath, says the Apostle James Jam. 5.12
: The general expression, Swear not at all, must be expounded by the
particulars enumerated: Others say, the Scribes and Pharisees taught, It was
lawful to swear in their ordinary Communication, so they were not perjured,
and Christ heads himself against their Doctrine, forbidding swearing in
ordinary course, to which James subscribeth in the place quoted. Both
expositions are agreeable to sound doctrine though they cannot both be sense of
the places. But that Christ should forbid all swearing, cannot be the sense of
it, for God himself appointed an Oath to decide controversies, Exodus 22.7 etc.
1 Kin. 8.31 Ezra 10.5. Nehe. 5.12 and 13.25. Isa. 65.16. 2 Cor. 1.23 Heb. 6.16.
2 Cor. 11.31.
which being neither typical nor grounded on special reason, peculiar to
those times, but of common equity, concerning us as well in the days of the
Gospel cannot be abrogated. Compare the Scriptures in the Margent.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Church, and Communion of Saints.
59. Doubt. WHethr is there such a thing as an universal visible Church?

Resol. The Church wherein God has set Apostles (1 Cor. 12.28.) can be no
other. Universal it must needs be, because comprehending universal Officers;
and it can neither be the invisible on Earth, nor the tryumphant; for Apostles
(as such) belong to neither of them (though as Saints they do) for Judas was
an Apostle Mat. 10.2, 3, 4.
, but appertained neither to the invisible Church on Earth, nor the tryumphant
in Heaven Joh. 17.12. Acts 1.16.
.

60 Doubt. How is it possible that Believers through the World should hold
Communion, when they are of so many different opinions?

Resol. Diversity of opinion is a great enemy to Communion, and therefore it
should be our desire and endeavor to be all of one heart and judgment 1 Cor.
1.10.
: Yet it is possible, Communion may be held in the maine, amongst those which
are not of one mind in all things Phil. 3.15, 16.
.

CHAP. XV. Of the Sacraments.
61. Doubt. HOw can Infants be capable of Baptism, when the Scripture no where
commands it, nor tells of any that were Baptized?

Resol. Though the Scripture lay down neither Precept nor President in
express terms; a Doctrine that may be proved by undeniable
Scripture-consequence may not be rejected. Christ overthrew the opinion of the
Sadduces by Scripture Mat. 22.29, to 34.
, although he alleged nothing expressly against their error, but only by way
of consequence: Howbeit the confutation was so clear, that the multitude
understood, and admired it, his enemies were put to silence, and a fresh party
prepared themselves to give an onset.

62. Doubt. Yet methinkes a matter of so great importance, and so much
contended for, should be proved by one place at least of express Scripture?

Resol. Though the least part of Gospell-truth is worthy to be contended for,
so it be in love and modesty; and the delay of Baptism without just cause, is
a sleighting of Gods gracious tender, yet the dispute being only concerning a
circumstance of time, we account it nothing so weighty as if it concerned the
substance and essence of Baptism. Nevertheless it cannot be denied, but even
weightier matter then Baptism it self are not to be found in express terms
in the Scripture: The Mystery concerning Trinity of Persons, in Unity of
Essence is no where read, Totidem verbis (as we say) in the Word of God,
howbeit it is sufficiently proved, 1 John 5.7. and no less then blasphemy to
deny it: Neither is it said in any place expressly, that the holy Ghost is God,
though undenyably proved, 1 Cor. 3.16. Acts 5.3, 4. Or how does it appear that
Women did, or ought to receive the Lords Supper? Or that the Son of a Believer,
being a grown person, was (or ought to be) Baptized, which notwithstanding our
opposers hold and practice: They must not answer me, that whole Families were
baptized, among whom it is probable there were some such; for it may be easily
replied, It is as probable, that in some of the Families mentioned, there was
at least one Infant, or person in minority, which if we shall suppose, seeing
the whole Family was baptized, it must needs be baptized also, which they will
in no wise grant, though it be the more probable of the two.

63. Doubt. I shall say nothing concerning the Trinity, or of the Deity of the
holy Ghost (your self having proved them both sufficiently, though (I
confess) only by strong consequence, not in express terms, which I never
before observed) but to me the Scripture is plain enough, that Women may
receive the Lords Supper, because they may examine themselves 1 Cor. 11 28.
, and we read of Women that have had Faith, Repentance, Knowledge, and Charity,
as well as men: And as easy is it to prove, that a Believers Son (when
himself is a Believer) must be baptized, seeing Faith makes capable Mark 16.16.
; but I find not the like proof for Pedobaptisme?

Resol, Mistake me not, I did not deny the things you plead for; only I say
they cannot be found in express terms, but must be made out by consequence,
and this you shall find is equally strong for Pedobaptisme as for them, which
(to satisfy your doubt) I shall briefly show you in these few Arguments.

1. Argument.
Disciples are to be Baptized, Believers Children are Disciples: Ergo, They are
to be Baptized.

That Disciples are to be Baptized, no man can doubt, that understands, Matthew.
28.19. which Scripture is most naturally rendered (...).
: Go, disciple all Natinos, baptizing them, etc. And those which deny the
lawfulness of Childrens baptism, do not only acknowledge this, but urge it
much against us, as supposing that Infants cannot be Disciples; And therefore
all the stresse of the argument lies in the proof of the Minor, which may be
done thus. Peter blaming such as urged Circumcision, and observance of Moses
Law, has this passage Acts 15.10.
, Why tempt ye God, to put a yoke on the neck of the Disciples, etc. To the
understanding whereof you must note, that the false Teachers taught the
Brethren that they must be Circumcised, because of the Law of Moses commanding
it Acts 15.1
(for no other Law could bind them to it) and this Law did not only require
that adult persons, but that all their Males eight days old should be
circumcised Genesis 17.12.
. So that these Patrons of Circumcision must needs lay this unsupportable yoke,
as well on Believers Children, as Believers themselves, and yet they are all
called Disciples; I conclude therefore, seeing Christ commands that Disciples
must be baptized, and Peter includes Believers Children in the number of
Disciplet, Such Children are to be baptized.

2. Argument.
If Baptism be come into the room of Circumcision, Infants may be as capable
of it, as they were of Circumcision:

But, Baptism is come in the room of Circumcision: Col. 2.12
Therefore, etc.

3. Argument. --
64. Doubt. Stay a little, before you proceed to any other Argument, I desire
you would vindicate the assumption of the last, from just exceptions: How can
Baptism be come in the place of Circumcision? When first, they were both on
foot together a long season: Secondly, Males only were Circumcised, but
Females are also baptized: Thirdly, Circumcision must be administered strictly
on the eight day; but no such rule is observed in baptizing Children: Fourthly,
Circumcision was to confirm Canaan, and certain temporal blessings to
Abraham, and his seed Genesis 17.8, 9, 10.
, for such was the Covenant of God with him Genesis 17.4, etc. and 15 18, etc.
.

Resol. To these your four allegations I shall shape you out as many
particular answers.

1. 1 Exception removed.
They might be both on foot at once, and yet one succeed in the place of
another. Solomon was anointed King, his Father being yet alive 1 King. 1 39,
43, 44, etc.
; in like manner was Eleazar made Priest, before his Fathers death Number. 20.26.
; yet who doubts but they were their Fathers successors? Gospell-Ordinances
came in the room of typical Ceremonies Joh. 4.22 23, 24. Heb. 10.1.
, though they were in being at one time Act 16.2
. So Circumcision was in being, but even expiring, when baptism was instituted.

2. 2 Exception taken away.
Males only were circumcised because they only were capable, but Women were
also included in the Covenant, for it was made to Abraham and his seed, whereof
the Females were a very considerable part, and though they were not personally
circumcised (because incapable) they were not excluded from Circumcision, but
included in the Circumcision of the Males. A Church or Family was accounted
circumcised, when the Males were circumcised. The whole household must eat the
Paschall Lamb Exodus 12.3, 4.
, and yet no uncircumcised person must eat thereof Ver. 48.
, surely then Women in Israel were not reputed uncircumcised: But now for
Baptism, Women are not only virtually, and constructively, but actually,
properly, personally, and formally capable thereof, as well as men: In a word,
we read that Lydia (a Female) was baptized Acts 16.15.
; and that an Infant may be, it has been (and by Gods help shall be surther)
proved: and then why not a Female Infant?

3. 3 Exception taken of.
Whatsoever in the time of the Law was not established on such grounds as
concern our times also, but was either typical, or grounded on special
reason, peculiar to those times, we never judged our selves obliged thereby: Of
which fort of precepts, that concerning the precise observation of the eight
day is one.

Master Tombs himself (if my memory fail not, for I have not his Book now at
hand) does acknowledge that the eight day typ fied the resurrection, which
confession is indeed ingenious, but not all the proof we have; for the
Scriptures show that the eight day was exactly limited, because of the Mothers
Ceremonially uncleanenesse the first seven days, which must be past ere the
Child could enjoy this Ordinance whereof we speak Lev. 12. Verse. 2. compared
with ver. 3.
. If any man shall here reply, this can be no reason, because she was unclean
three and thirty days Ver. 4.
: I answer, first, that though she was unclean soking, yet not with the same
kind of uncleanesse, for else the spirit of God would not have divided them,
but have said, she shall be unclean forty days, nor have called them by
distinct names, the one, separation of infirmity Lev. 12.2.
; the other, blood of purifying Ibid. v. 4.
. Secondly, though it were the same uncleanesse, it did not prejudice the
reason, because the eight day was an intermission betwixt the seven, and three
and thirty days, as the word [then] shows, And she shall then (that is,
after the eight day is over, and the Child Circumcised) continue in the blood
of her purifying, three and thirty days, etc Ver. 4.
. To conclude, there is good reason that as they were to take the first
opporrunity, wherein the Ordinance of Circumcision could be orderly administered
(which in ordinary cases was the eight day) so should we take the first fit
opportunity for the Baptism of our Infants, and not defer it when it may be
orderly administered, but the strict observance of the eight day by special
reason concerned the Jews, but not us.

4. 4 Exception answered.
In the Covenant made with Abraham some things be peculiarly promised to him,
and his Seed, as those you recited; but some things common to all the faithful
with him, as that passage [ To be a God to thee, and thy Seed after thee Genesis
17.7
.] Now Circumcision confirmed both sorts of promises to his Seed after the
flesh, but only the spiritual mercies to Proselytes, which were his Children
only by Faith and profession, not by generation: It is not to be imagined,
that every Circumcised bond-servant had an inheritance in Canaan bestowed on
him: Neither reason nor History make for such an assertion (much less that
Proselytes, dwelling in far Countries, must have possessions in the Land
which God gave only to the Sons of Jacob Genesis 28.3.
) though they had right to their holy things Exodus 12 48.
. Understand therefore, that when we say Baptism succeeds Circumcision, we
mean only so far as Circumcision was a seal and argument of a man's being in
the spiritual (though external) Covenant of God, and not as it confirmed
temporal rights and privileges. Having thus vindicated the assumption
according to your desire, I shall proceed, and lay you down more Arguments.

3. Argument.
All that belong to the external Covenant of God ought to be Baptized:

But, The Infant Seed of believing and repenting Parents belong to the
external Covenant of God:

Therefore, They ought to be baptized.

The Proposition is proved, Acts 2.39. where Peter urges the repenting Jews
to be baptized on this ground, because the promise (that is, the external
Covenant of grace, or rather the external part of the Covenant of grace) was
to them and their Children: If this was a good reason then, it is so still. And
that the Infant Seed of believing and repenting Parents, belongs to the
external Covenant of God, is as plain, 1 Cor. 7.14. To understand which place,
consider that there be only three sorts or kinds of holiness, of which
Children can be capable, which we may call (till better names be found out for
them) personal, conjugall, and federall: The first cannot be here intended,
for many a Believer has unsanctified and graceless Children, which could not
be, if one believing Parent should so sanctify the other, that the Seed should
be internally holy. Not the second, Viz. Conjugall, or Marriage holiness, and
if the Apostle had only meant such Children were lawfully begot in Wedlock,
not adulterously, or in Fornication; for he makes such an opposition between
uncleanesse and this holiness as will not admit this interpretation: Else
(says he) were your Children unclean, but now they are holy: Uncleanness and
holiness are here opposed; so that if by [holy] he mean only lawfully
begotten [uncleane] must needs signify unlawfully begotten: And then the
Apostle says thus much in effect, that when neither party believes, they live
and beget Children in adultery, or fornication; but this cannot be his meaning,
for it is not true, Marriage being honorable, and a bed undefiled, not to
Belevers only, but to all men Heb. 13.4
. It remains then, that they be Covenant-wise, or federally holy, or set
apart to God. For the Lord having taken a believer and his seed, into Covenant
with himself Genesis 17.7 as before.
, though his Wife be an unbeleever, her infidelity cannot make Gods Covenant
ineffectuall.

For further proof, let us view again that Scripture in the second of Acts,
Verse. 39. The promise is to you, and TO YOUR CHILDREN: This is spoken to
Evangelicall repenting Parents, and agrees to all such.

Add hereunto, that many absurdities (and those no small ones) will follow, if
we deny Children (because such) to be incapable of the external Covenant; as,

Christ: for before he came in the flesh, if a Gentile had joined himself to
the Jewish Church, he had taken hold of the Covenant for himself and his Seed,
but now only for himself; and is not a man's tenure much worsned, if he
formerly held to him and his heirs for ever, and now only for term of life:
Surely the clearenesse of dispensation, and freedom from burdensome Ceremonies
appertaining to the Covenant of grace cannot make nmends for this loss: A man
had better undergo many inconveniences with his own Land, then to have a
morec ommodious piece for term of life only.

Abraham should not then come on the Gentiles, according to Gal. 3.14. but
only part of it, for his privileges were not personal only, but hereditary,
i.e. belonging to his Seed.

Christ should be less kind to his Church now then when he was on the Earth,
for then he acknowledged, that Infants were not debarred, for their infancy,
from the Covenant; but says, Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven Mat. 19.13.
Mark 10.14. Luke 18.15
: I know some may answer when Christ says [of such] he means not Children,
but such as they are: Viz. such as are harmless, humble, and meek, like them:
But the reply is easy, that he intended to take in both; for the Original
word (...).
, which is here translated [such] when it is referred to a pattern, does not
exclude, but include it.

I can give you many instances where the word must needs be so taken: where
Christ says, Who so shall receive one SVCH Child in my Name, receives me Mat.
18.5
; were it not ridiculous to say, Christ's intent was to tell them, that if they
received any other Child like that, in his Name, they received him; but if they
received that very Child which he showed them, they received him not: It is
said, John 4.23. That the true worshippers shall worship the Father, in spirit
and in truth; for the Father seeks SVCH to worship him. Here the word (such)
cannot signify such as are only like to them that worship in spirit and truth
(for such counterfeits are hypocrites, whose service God abhors) but they that
do so worship. Compare also the first Verse of the second Chapter to the
Romans with the second Verse of the same, and you shall see that such things
are the same things. In the same sense this word is taken in sundry other
places Mat 9.8 Act. 16.24 Gal. 5.23.
.

Think withal what reason you can give, why Christ should be so angry as Mark
tells us he was Mark 10.14. The Greek word (...), imports indignation, or
grievous vexation of spirit, and so is used, Mat. 20.24 and 26.8. Mark 10.41
and 14.4 Luke 13.14
, when his Disciples rebuked them that brought Children to him, that he should
pray over them Mat. 19.13.
: Was this the sole cause, Viz. that they were like those that belong to him in
conditions? Then wheresoever the like virtues are found, they that hold them
forth must also be admitted, and Christ would have been displeased, had they
been rebuked: And upon this ground (as Master Cotton rightly affirms) Christ
might as well have said, Suffer Doves and Lambs to come to me, for of such
(that is, such meek and harmless ones as they are) is the Kingdom of Heaven.
But surely that opinion would savor strongly of the idle, that should set
Christ in a posture of readiness to receive Doves or Lambs, to pray over them,
and to be displeased with his Disciples, had they rebuked such as brought them,
which yet he must have done had he been uniforme in his working according to
reason This is clear to him that understands the axiom. A quateus ad omne
valet consequentia.
, and those imitable virtues the sole cause why he received them.

65. Doubt. There is a great deal of reason in that which you say, and I
acknowledge my self much engaged to you for condiscending to my capacity, in
avoiding terms of Art as much as may be: But I observe, you made much use of
Acts 2.39. and I doubt whether it can carry all the weight you lay on it, for
there be no less then three strong exceptions against it.

All to whom Peter spoke were Jews by Nation, to whom indeed this promise
belonged: Keep you to Believers in Abraham's line, and you may say to them, The
promise is to you and to your Children: but you cannot affirm the same of
others, for there is no such promise.

Others expound the place thus; The promise is to you if you repent, and to
your Children, and to those that are afar off (that is Gentiles) even so many
as the Lord our God shall call, if they repent: Or thus, whosoever God calls
(be it your selves, your Children, or any of the Gentiles) to them the promise
belongs.

Some affirm, this is no the promise of Genesis 17. (as you seem to take it) but
of Joel 2. which the speech concerns all along this Chapter; and the sense
is, The promise (Viz. of extraordinary gifts of the spirit, to speak to people
of strange languages, in their Mother tongues, as we do this day) is to you,
and to your Children, and to as many as are afar off; even as many as the Lord
our God shall call: to wit, to Preach to such people as he has called us.

Resol. 1 Exception taken off.
Admit they were all Jews by Nation (although I see no necessity to grant it:)
Is not the partition wall yet broken down? Ephesians. 2.12, 13, etc. Acts 10.34, 35.
Gal. 5.13, 14. Romans 2.26.27, 28, 29, and 4.9. 1 Cor. 7.19 Gal. 6.15.
What then signify these Scriptures in the Margent? If it be, what mean
learned men to cumber us with such distinctions or restrictions, as Believers
in Abraham's line, and Believers out of his line?

2. 2 Exception removed.
The limitation, Even as many, etc. limits only the immediate clause, And to
all that are afar off: not the whole sentence; the sense being this, The
promise is to you and to your Children (absolutely) but not to you and your
Children alone, but to such also are afar off, if the Lord call them to
repentance; nor do I speak this for mine own advantage, but the scope of the
place proves it; for else Peter might better have said, the promise is to all
that repent, then to proclaim the Covenant of God to repenters and their Seed,
and when all is summed up, there is no promise to the penitents seed at all;
were not here a fair slourish about nothing, to say, so much of mercy offered
to their seed, and yet their seed receives no benefit at all? Yes (you will
say) their seed may also repent, and then have the privileges the Parents had:
But I would feign know under what notion the Child of a Believer becomes
capable of these Covenant-priviledges, whether as a Believer, or as the Child
of a Believer? If it be said, as a Believer; then it cannot be as the Son of a
Believer; for had all his kindred been Turks, or Heathens, he might (yea ought
to) be received when it appears that himself believes: If as the Child of a
Believer, why may he not be received in infancy? For he can never be more the
Child of a Believer, then he is the first minuite of his life.

3. 3 Exception replied unto.
This promise cannot be that of the second of Joel (though I grant that is
insisted on in this Chapter) for it runs not in the same terms: That in Joel
is to the Sons and Daughters immediately; this to the Parents, and secundarily
to the Children like, Genesis 17.7. Much less will the coherence allow it. For
when the poor creatures were pricked in their hearts, crying out, Men and
Brethren what shall we do? Was it suitable to tell them, the must repent and
be baptized all of them; and then if it should please God to call them to be
Preachers, they might expect the extraordinary gifts of the spirit inabling
them to Preach to people of strange languages, or if he called their Children,
or any of the Gentiles to the like work, they might expect the like
assistance? Were this salve for a wounded conscience, groaning under the burden
of sin? If there were no Women amongst them (which yet is to me very doubtful)
we may nevertheless suppose upon good probability: 1. that many of them (if
not the most) were never called to be Preachers: 2. On the other side,
experience tells us, that in some places (as New England for example) Ministers
that have been sent to people of strange tongues (as appears by the blessing
of God upon their endeavors) have not attained to their speech by immediate
inspiration, but in time acquired the knowledge thereof, by industry and
conversing among them: Nor 3. can ministerial abilities appease an awakened
conscience, but the revelation of free pardon; and so must Peter's speech be
expounded, Repent and be baptized every one of you for the remission of sins,
and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost (a gift frequently bestowed on
ordinary hearers in those days Acts 8.15 16, 17. and 10.44, 45, 46. and 19.2.
cum 6.
) and his maine argument to of grace) is to you and to your Children. Thus move
them to repent and be baptized, is this The promise ( i.e. the external
Covenant I hope these objections have received their full answers: I would
only add this more concerning them; though they be brought by one party, and
for one cause they do vehemently interfere, and fight one against another,
insomuch that no two of them can stand together: For the first supposes the
promise to be the Covenant of grace, and advances Jews above Gentiles in the
enjoyment of it, making the Privileges of the Jews hereditary, but of the
Gentiles merely personal: The second likewise supposes it to be the Covenant
of grace, but utterly quasheth the pretended difference between Believers in
Abraham's line, and Believers out of his line, which the first exception urged:
The third denies it to be a Covenant of grace: So then take which you will,
and it overthrows the other two; and yet these multiformous creatures must
all be drawn in one yoke (though they look so many several ways) to the
prejudice of the truth; but it is impossible a cause should prosper under so
many and manifest contradictions.

Serpents avibus geminantur, Horat.
tigribus agni.

66. Doubt. How can an Infant be in Covenant with God, when as it does not
consent to its own baptism; and a Covenant requires the consent of both
parties?

Resol. 1. It is a mistake to think that baptism brings a soul within
Covenant, whereas it is an evidence of a man's being in Covenant with God
(external I mean all along) before he was baptized Acts 2.38 39. and 8.37.
cum 38. and 16.14, 15.
, as Circumcision also was Genesis 12.1, 2, 3. cum Chap. 17.7 Josh. 5.3. cum Jer.
31 32.
.

2. Gods Covenants do not need a restipulation on the creatures part: He made
a Covenant with Abraham's seed, while yet he had no child Genesis 12.15. and 17.
Chapters. Acts 7.5.
; yea he did not only Covenant with Noah and his seed, but with every living
creature Genesis 9.9 10.
, and yet these could not restipulate. When men Covenant both parties must
consent, because else the one knows not the others mind, nor has power to
work him to his purpose: but God performs all; he becomes their God and makes
them his people Jer. 31.31, 32. Heb. 8.10.
.

67. Doubt. How can Children be lawfully baptized, seeing Faith is required
Mark 16.16.
which Infants have not?

Resol. Things must be understood according to the capacity of the persons
spoken to: Paul says, if any would not work neither must he eat 2 These. 3 10.
. Must therefore Infants, and they which are disabled by sickness or age,
either work or perish? In like manner, Christ's words which you quote seem to
import, that he which believes not must not be baptized; but look at the
precedent Verse, and you shall see such are pointed as, as can hear the Word
Preached, which Infants cannot: Infants believe in their Parents, as Levi paid
tithes in Abraham, and Parents bringin their Children to Christ, the children
themselves are said to come to him Mat. 19.1^, 14. Mark 10.13, 14. Luke 18.1^,
16.
.

If you allow not this, consider what dangerous Doctrine, and uncharitable
judgment, you must needs by consequence entertain: Viz. that all which dye
Infants are damned; for it you say an Infant cannot be baptized, because it
has not faith; by the same reason you must conclude also, that because it
wants faith it cannot be saved; for the Text you allege, is far more
express for that, then the other: He that believes not shall be domned.

68. Doubt. Some conceive, 1 Cor. 7.14. proves a Child to be out of Covenant,
except one of the next and immediate Parents be a Believer? I pray you tell me
your apprehension thereof.

Resol, Truly I think it does not; Nec stantem a part affirmativa cogit
(...), locus, 1 Cor 7.14. ubi Apostolus dicendo liberos cujusvis parentis
fidelis (majoribus omnibus ethnicis) esse Sanctos liberos amborum parentum
immediatorum (reliquis omnibus majoribus membris) (...) esse (...). (...)
Apolloaium Ca. 2. p. 38.
for although in such a case as theirs, when the Gospel was newly sown
amongst them, and all their Ancestors had been heathens, one of the Parents
must needs be a Believer, or the Child be destitute of federall holiness; yet
I judge far otherwise, concerning the seed of believing (though remote) Parents
Exo. 20.6 Genesis 17.7. Psa. 89.29. and 103.17.18.
.

69. Doubt. How may the Papists be answered, which contend for Christ's real
presence in the Host, seeing Christ said expressly, This is my body, and his
words must needs be true?

Resol. We confess, he is present truly (though not corporally, but
Sacramentally) in the same sense that Paul says, The Rock was Christ 1 Cor.
10.4.
; that is a figure of Christ.

70. Doubt. If a man must examine himself, and so eat of that bread and
drink of that Cup 1 Cor. 11.28.
, why should any other examine him?

Resol. It is not intended exclusively, as if none else might, but that
himself must except he will be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, and
eat and drink damnation to himself Ver. 27, 29. (...),
: The word which is translated [so] is an Adverbe of likeness, and therefore
it cannot be rendered, Let a man examine himself, and so (that is, without more
ado) let him eat, etc But thus, Let a man examine himself, and so (that is,
in that frame of selfe-examination) let him eat of that bread, etc.

CHAP. XVI. Of the state of Men after death, and withal, of the Resurrection,
and last Judgment.
71, Doubt. HOw can a man comfort himself, in the death of his profane
kindred?

Resol. He may quiet his heart with these confiderations following.

1. God is ready to forgive those which repent at the last moment, and for
ought we know, may work repentance, when the party is too far spent to
express it.

2. Gods decree is unchangeable, and therefore they either were elected and are
saved, or Reprobates and could never have been saved, had they lived a thousand
years.

3. Had such as are rejected of God, lived longer, their impenitent hearts
would have caused them still to have treasured more wrath to themselves, by
proceeding further in wickedness Romans 2.5
.

4. Our relation to them (the maine cause why we are grieved for them) cease
after this life Mat. 22.30.


5. However it is with them, God will dispose of all things for his only
glory, which should be more dear to us then our friends (yea our own) souls.

72. Doubt. If the whole man (soul and body) sinned, how can it otherwise be
but the soul must dye as well as the body?

Resol. Man in his actings is to be considered collectively, not
distributively; and as sin is not acted by the soul and body in a divided
sense, but jointly by the whole man, consisting of soul and body, as its
constitutive parts Genesis 2.7.
: So man dies not in a distributive sense, as if the body dyed by it self, and
the soul by it self; but as a creature compact of both, he dies (or cease
to be what he was) when the soul (which is the essential form of a man) is
taken away. A Parliament when dissolved, loses its essence (as such) though
all the members be alive; so does an house dimolished, though all the
materials remain whole: So when the soul and body are disunited, the man is
dead. howbeit the soul lives either in happiness, or woe Eccles. 12 7. Mat.
10.28 Luke 12.4. and 16.23. 1 Pet. 3.19 Revel. 6.9.10, 11.
.

73. Doubt. If there be no satisfaction of the justice of God after this life,
which men having given, shall be forgiven and saved, how is it said, Till thou
have paid the last mite Luke 12.59.
, or uttermost farthing Mat. 5.26
?

Resol. This word [till] is often found in Scripture, signifying (or at least
not excluding) perpetuity Genesis 8.7. and 28.15. 1 Samuel 15.35. 2 Samuel 6.23 Psalm.
110.1. and 123.2. Mat. 1.25. and 28.20. 2 Timothy 4.13 2 Pet. 1.19
, and taken in that sense, the force of it is thus much; if thou be not
reconciled to God in Christ before thy death, thou shall be cast into the
prison of Hell, there to abide the exact justice of God for ever, because thou
never can so satisfy his wrath, as to be acquitted from it.

74. Doubt. If every soul when it leaves the body, goes either to Heaven or
Hell immediately, to what purpose is the resurrection, or day of judgment.

Resol. There is very great reason for them: a^,

First, That the whole creation may be purged, and delivered from the bondage
of corruption Romans 8.19, 20, etc.
.

Secondly, That the soul and body which suffered or finned together, may in
the righteous day of the Lord be crowned, or punished 2 These. 1.6, 7, etc. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
.

Thirdly, That all hidden things Eccl. 12.14. Luke 12.2.
; yea the secrets of hearts Romans 2.16.
, may be discovered, that thereby Gods righteous judgment may be also revealed
Romans 2.5
.

Fourthly, That he may publicly right his people upon their enemies 2 These.
1.6, etc.
.

75. Doubt. Godly men, are men still, and Christ avoucheth, That every idle
word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof at the day of
judgment Mat. 12.36.
: How then can they be said to be discharged from all sin?

Resol. The meaning is not as if the godly shall be called to account, for
their idle words, or any other sins; but only thus much; that the judgment of
God shall be so exact and severe, that even so much as an idle word shall not
pass him without full satisfaction to his justice, on the transgressour, or his
surety; and that he which has not his pardon already procured by Christ, shall
be found culpable at that day, and the sentence of condemnation pronounced
against him, though he had only one idle word to answer for.

Postscript.
SOme Friends expected ere this time I should have published a Treatise tending
toward accommodation in Church discipline, which they know I have made a
considerable procedure in: Others of a maligning spirit, scoff at me, as if to
finish it, were either impossible, or vain: To both these I shall only say
thus much: Viz. That however the perusing of many tracts, for the materials
therein improved, together with multiplicity of employment in an unsettled
condition, and withal the want of a Book or two, which yet I cannot attain,
have hindered the perfecting thereof; I hope it will not be long ere it have its
due from me: After which (if its prolixity hinder not, but that I mry have a
fair opportunity to make it public) I shall send it abroad, and my prayers
after it, for a blessing thereon: If not, though the fault will not be mine, I
shall make amends as far as I can, either by Printing an Epitome thereof, or
at least, by suffering such Friends to peruse it in writing, as desire the same.

July, 30. 1649.
Imprimatur,

Joseph Caryl.

The Texts of Scripture. Places in the Book. Genesis 1.5.8.13.19.23.31. Chap. 12.
Resol. to 56. Doubt. Genesis 6.6. Chap. 2. Doubt. 3. Genesis 17.7. Chap. 15. Resol.
to 64. Doubt. Genesis 17.14. Chap. 6. Resol. to 24. Doubt. Levit. 12.1.2.3.4. Chap
15. Resol. of 64. Doubt. Numb. 15.30. Chap. 6. Doubt. 24. Deuteronomy. 6.13. and
10.20. Chap. 13. Doubt. 57. 1 Samuel 15.11. Chap. 2. Doubt. 3. Isaiah 45.21.
Chap. 2. Doubt. 6. Matthew. 5.26. Chap. 6. Doubt. 73. Matthew. 5.34. Chap. 13.
Doubt. 58. Matthew. 12.36. Chap. 16. Doubt. 75. Mat. 17.20. Chap. 9. Doubt. 39.
Mat. 19.13. Chap. 15. Resol. to 64 Doubt. Mat. 28.19. Chap. 15. Resol. to 63.
Doubt. Mark 10.14. Chap. 15. Resol. to 64. Doubt. Mark 16.16. Chap. 15. Resol.
to 67. Doubt. Luke 12.59. Chap. 16. Doubt. 73. Luke 18.15, 16. Chap. 15. Resol.
to 64 Doubt. Acts 2.39. Chap. 15. Resol. to 64. Doubt. Acts 15.10. Chap. 15.
Resol. of 63 Doubt. 1 Cor. 7.14. Chap. 15. Resol. to 64 and 68. Doubt. 1 Cor.
7.23. Chap. 11. Doubt. 47. 1 Cor. 11.28. Chap. 15. Doubt. 70. 1 Cor. 12.28.
Chap. 14. Resol. to 59. Doubt. 1 Cor. 14.26. Chap. 12. Resol. of 52 Doubt. 2
Cor. 3.6, 7, 8. Chap. 6. Doubt. 25, 2 Timothy 2.13. Chap. 9. Doubt. 38. James
5.12. Chap. 13. Doubt. 58. 1 John 3.14. Chap. 10. Resol. to 46 Doubt.

The Capital Contents of this short Discourse.
CHAP. I. Concerning the holy Scriptures, and by the way, of the light of
Nature. p. 1. Chap. 2. Of God. p. 4. Chap. 3. Of Gods Decree, and of Creation.
p. 6. Chap. 4. Of Providence. p. 10. Chap. 5. Of the fall of Man. p. 13. Chap.
6. Of the Law of God and the two Covenants. p. 16. Chap. 7. Of Christ the
Mediator. p. 22. Chap. 8. Of Free Will. p. 28. Chap. 9. Of Calling,
Justification, Sanctification, Adoption, Faith, Repentance, and good Works. p.
31. Chap. 10. Of Perseverance, and Assurance. p. 38. Chap. 11. Of Christian
Liberty, and Liberty of Conscience: and withal of the Christian Magistrate,
and Church Censures. p. 47. Chap. 12. Of Religious Worship, and of the
Sabbath Day. p. 49. Chap. 13. Of Oaths. p. 54. Chap. 14. Of the Church, and
Communion of Saints. p. 56. Chap. 15. Of Baptism, and the Lords Supper p. 57.
Chap. 16. Of the state of Men after death; and withal, of the Resurrection,
and last Judgment. p. 80.
FINIS.

