News from the FLEET. Being a true Account of what has occurred therein since
the Dutch Ships joined them in their present Expedition for Breast. With a List
of the English and Dutch Ships and Guns.
Licensed July 24. 1689. J. F.

From the Fleet at Sea near Vshant, July the 13th, 1689. SIR,
I Have often remembered my Promise to you when last together, but could not
find sufficient to trouble you withal, but now am resolved to let you know
what is current with us; First I have sent enclosed an exact List of the Fleet,
that are joined at this Minute, both of Dutch and English Men of War, with
their Fireships, and their order they are to fight in. Next, on the 4th
Instant the Happy-Return, Portsmouth, Dover, and Jersey-Frigats, were ordered
by the Admiral to look into Brest-Harbor, to observe the French Fleet, with
their number, etc. But on the 5th at brake of day, upon the Coast, they espied
within Gunshot of them a French Man of War of 18 Guns and 80 Men, (a pretty
Frigate capable of carrying 36 Guns; (more of this hereafter) but as soon as she
saw our Guns fire, and felt our Shot, she made all the Sail she could to escape
us, she being a prime Sayler: our Ships sailing well, more especially the
Jersey-Frigat, who plied her well with their Fore-chace, and sometimes with
whole Broadsides, she sailing before the Wind still, plying her Stern-Chace very
briskly upon our Ships, cutting our Masts and Rigging, and ours hers, from
three in the Morning, until between twelve and one at Noon, when the Jersey
Shot had the good Fortune to shoot his Main Topmast and Main-yard by the
Board, upon which she immediately struck her Ancient, after having chaced her
ten Leagues South-west in the Sea.

The French Man of War's Name is La Villiee, Monsieur Pickerd Commander; she
was a Fire-ship under the said Commander, at the Fight with the French upon the
Coast of Ireland, but she being almost a new Ship and a prime Saylor, they made
her a Man of War, and put 18 Guns on Board, with 80 Men at Breast since the
Fight, and sent her in all haste to Waterford to carry Colonel Porter to K. J.
who its said came from Room; but on her return we met with her as aforesaid,
she having left three French Men of War, of about 30 and 40 Guns each, in that
Harbor, who wait the Motion of the late K. James to carry him off, when put to
the rout, which is expected when our Forces are landed; for the Letters do add
that Ireland is but in a very bad condition to hold out against the Force of
England, having neither Trade nor Money; but they have been buoyed up with false
News of our not being able to appear at Sea against the French: But I am of
opinion the French will not appear fairly to us; we having this Day sent into
Breast 12 Sail of Men of War, and 4 Fireships, under the Command of Sir Francis
Wheeler in the Rupert, with an exquisite French-Protestant Pilot, to do what
Execution they can, and to dare them out.

We have taken many Ships of the Northern, Dutch, Danzeckers, etc. loaded with
French Commodities, and Wine and Salt, all to be sent into Plymouth, amongst
them one French or Irish Man bound for Ireland from France with Volunteers.

July the 15th. This day is held a Council of War on board my Lord Torrington
Admiral, on Capt. Wilford, for contriving to carry away their Majesty's Ship
Pendennis to the late K. J. in Ireland; and on some other Officers for
Misdemeaners, and as soon as I know, you shall have the Knowledge of it.

A List of the English and Dutch Fleets.
The English Fleet.
The Red Squadron. Fireships. Men of War. Guns. York 60 Vice Admiral.
King-Fisher 46 Robert and John. St. David 54 Resolution 70 John of Dublin.
Heneretta 62 Jersey 48 Woolwich 54 Admiral. Advice 48 Owners Love. Edger 72
Fire-Drake. Elizabeth 70 St. Paul. Pendennis 70 Fubbs Yatch. St. Alban 50
Happy-Return 54 Rear Admiral. Diamond 40 Sophia and Half Moon. Montague 60
Hampton Court 70 Defiance 64 Hampshire 46 The Blew Squadron. Greenwich 54
Admiral. Reserve 50 Cygnet. Rupert 66 Duke 92 Cadiz Merchant. Suffolk 70
Centurion 48 Charles and Henry. Warspight 70 Portsmouth 46 Oxford 54 Rear
Admiral. Tyger-Prize 46 Thom. and Elizab. Lion 60 Berwick 70 Cambridge 70
Charles. Mordant 46 Dover 48 Plymouth 60

The Dutch Fleet.
Eendraght 70 Vice Admiral. Fregat Honsterdyck 50 Command. Regat. Harlem 64
Brander. Gelderland 72 Command. Dupen. North-Holland 70 t'Wapen v. Horn 52
Gasterlant 52 Fregat. Hollandia 70 Admiral. Commander Genit Groes. Elswout 50
West-Friezlant 80 Brander. VValcheren 70 Command. Cornelis Autonesse. Amsterdom
64 Damiaten 36 Command. Andois Mugse Vanger. Schattershoeft 46 Cortine 50
Frigate. Waerdingen 46 Rear Admiral. Capt. Brakel. Prove. Vtrecht 56 Brander.
Sierickzee 62 Geeroondeburgh 62 Com. de Gough. Ridder Schap 60 Vreede 52
Vrijheyt 72

There is the Vice Admiral of the Blew Captain Killegrew expected with more
Ships of War.

July the 13th, came into the Fleet about seven Sail of Dutch Men of War and
Fireships, their Names as yet we have not.

We expect our Vice Admiral of the Blew, and 6 or 7 third and forth Rate more,
all which are needless, for the French will not appear to these we have.

London, Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old Bailey, 1689.


