The Copy of a LETTER FROM NEWCASTLE Containing diverse passages of the
Proceedings between the Kings Majesty and the Scots, sent by a Gentleman of
note.

WITH The Copy of an Act concerning the power of the Estates of Scotland, the
continuance of the Parliament and Excise.

As also the Lords of Session for Administration of Justice.

Signed by Sir Alexander Gibson, Clarke Register to the Parliament of Scotland.

Tuesday the 21. of September 1646.
These papers from Newcastle are printed and publishkd according to ORDER, and
for general satisfaction.



LONDON printed for E. E. Anno Dom. 7ber 22 1646.

The Copy of a LETTER FROM NEW CASTLE, Published for general satisfaction.
SIR,
ON Wednesday the 9. of this Instant September 1646. Mr. Cant, Mr. Blayre, Mr.
Dougl^s, and others from the Committee of the Ki^k of Scotland were with the
King, and had conference with his Majesty concerning diverse things in matter of
conscience; for his Majesty propounded some things concerning the Covenant, and
also the propositions, which he said he could not in conscience p^sse; but the
conference was so private that I cannot give you the particulars of it, and
will not write by heresayes lest I should mistake.

On Thursday the 10. Instant, the Commissioners of the Estates of Scotland were
with the King, and they have been often with His Majesty, and diverse Posts
have been sent to and fro, between here and Scotland, with packets; His
Majesty has of a few days past used but little pastime, by reason of much
time taken up in conference, and privasie, there was some speech amongst us as
if the King would take the Covenant and sign the Propositions, but I know not
upon what grounds that rumor was raised, nor was there any reason (that I could
learn) to expect it by reason of any promise from His Majesty, only a kind
of waving it till Montrill came.

On this present Friday the 13. the Scots Commissioners here received letters
from the Commissioners at London; upon reading, and perusuall whereof they were
very busy; how things pass there I shall not need to write to you, being
better acquainted therewith then my self; The Country all about in these parts
desire to be eased of the Soldiers; some long in daily expectations, others
are sadded between doubts and fears.

We had also letters from Scotland, whereby the Commissioners were sent for to
a general meeting of all the Estates, and Gentlemen of the Kingdom, the
meeting is by authority of a former Act, the business they meet about is to
consider in a Parliamentorie way, of all such things as shall be needful to
them, concerning that Kingdom, both in relation to themselves to the King, and
to the Capitulation with the Parliament of England, about their marching out of
England, and surrendering up the Garrisons, Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Graford
Linsey, the Earl of Calender, the Earl of Castles, the Lord Lenerick, the
Lord Balmerinoth, Sir Alexander Gibson, and the rest of the Commissioners are
preparing for Scotland, The Earl of Calender I believe will leave a substitute
here, till his return.

Some other particulars I have to write unto you, which are of importance, but
require no such haste but that I may take a little more time, which to the end
that I may be the more large in, I shall desire you to be satisfied with these
few lines (until the next opportunity, which God willing I shall not fail you
of more large, then now by reason of many businesses I can any ways contract
further times at present to do more in) having much ado to perform this.

And I have sent you here enclosed the Copy of the Act, entitled an Act done,
and past in the first session in the first Triennall PARLIAMENT, of our
Sovereign Lord CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of SCOTLAND, ENGLAND, FRANCE,
and IRELAND, defender of the Faith, houlden at Sint ANDREWS respective 1646.
Collected, visied, and extracted forth of the Books, and Register of the Acts
of Parliament by Sir ALXANDER GIBSON of DURY Knight, Clarke of his Majesty's
Council, Register, and Rolls, under His sign, and Subscription Manual.

These advertising you of all the particulars I have to impart unto you, at
this time, I subscribe my self,

Your most humble Servant E. N.
Newcastle this 11. of September 1646.
An Act ^one and passed by the Parliament of Scotland for the giving Au^^o^it^
^o the States of the Kingdom; As also for their continuance of sitting; the
continuance of the Excise, and the conformatio^ of the session, for
administration of justice in the Kingdom of Scotland.
The Estates of Parliament now convened, in the first session of this first
Triennall Parliament, continues this present Parliament, and all matters
belonging thereto, (which are not committed or remitted respective to the
Committee of Estates of Parliament, or to other Commissi^ners granted in this
session of Parliament) while ^he first Tuesday of November next to come; at
which day, or sooner, as the Committee of Est^tes* or quorum thereof shall
appoint, ordaines he whole Estates to be present, and to attend at Edenburge;
or where it shall happen the Committee of Estates to appoint the Parliament to
be houlden for the time, with power likewise to the Committee of Estates, to
conveine the Parliament sooner if they think fitting, and to appoint any other
place at that time if they find the same expedient: And in the mean time, the
Estates declare this present Parliament current to the day aforesaid; And
ordaines the whole Acts and Statutes made and concluded in this session of
Parliament, to stand, and have the force and strength of Acts of Parliament,
conform to the tenors thereof, sick like as any Acts, and Statutes of any
preceding Parliaments in any time by gone: and ordaines public proclamation to
be made hereof, at the Market Cross of St. Andrews, by sound of ^rumpet. And
the Estates continue the Excise, and ordaines the Act already made, to stand,
and endure till the fifth day of November, next, conform to the Acts already
made there-anent: And also ordaines the Lords of session, to conveine and set
down in session for administration of justice to the leiges, to continue at
the ordinary times appointed for the sitting of the session at Edenburg, while
they be discharged by Parliament, Committee of Parliament or Council.

ALEX: GIBSONE Cler. Registri.

FINIS.

