A true Translation of a Paper written in French, delivered by Margaret Martell
to the Undersheriff at the Time and Place of her Execution, at Suffolk-street
end, July 16. 1697, for the barbarous Murder of Elizabeth Pullen Wife of Paul
Pullen, Esquire

Published by Authority.

ALmighty God, Eternal Father, in obedience to the ignominious Penalty which
thou have inflicted upon me, I most willingly submit to the Decree of my Death
for the Punishment of my Crime; to the committing of which, in the Justice of
thy Judgments, thou did abandon me, for having as I believe abandoned my
Religion, which I renounced some Years ago to profess another Religion, ^n the
Profession of which I have always been a bad Liver, as having no Obligation
upon me to declare my self to any Person who could hinder me from following my
irregular Inclinations.

O God of Goodness, cause me to feel the Effects of thy Mercy; and ^udg me not
according to the Rigor of thy Divine Justice, because I cannot expect any
thing from it but severe and rigorous Punishments, by reason of the Greatness
of my Crimes, which are most enormous: Nevertheless, hoping in thy infinite
Goodness and Mercy, I take the Boldness to beseech thee that thou would be
pleased to grant me a sincere and real Repentance.

To this purpose I implore thee, by thy holy Name, and for the Sake of the Love
which thou bear thy self; I implore thee also, O God, for the sake of my
Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ, who redeemed me, by his Life and Sufferings, by
all the opprobrious Injuries and Pains which he endured, by his Death, and by
his Blood spilt for me upon the Cross.

O Divine Jesus, be pleased to call to mind that thou have assured us, That
thou did not come to save the Righteous, but Sinners; and that ^hou do not
desire the Death of a Sinner, but that he should turn from his Wickedness, Turn
me therefore from my Wickedness; O my most adorable Savior; I beg it of thee
through the infinite Greatness of ^hy Mercy, for it is by that alone by which I
hope to obtain the Pardon and Remission of all my Sins.

My God, I declare, before God and the World that I now dye in the ^aith, and
in the Communion, of the Holy Roman Catholic and Apo^tolick Church, and that I
steadfastly believe whatever she believes and ^eaches.

O holy Virgin, Mother of Grace and Mercy, pray for me, and defend me from the
Malice of the Devils. Most faithful Guardian Angel of my ^oul, preserve me at
this Moment, and forsake me not till thou have conducted me before the Throne
of God. O my adorable Savior Jesus Christ, put thy Cross, and the infinite
Merit of thy Blood, between thy Judgments and my Soul. Save me, my God, for my
Destiny and my Salvation are in thy Hands. Into thy Hands, my God, I resign my
Soul.

Jesus, Maria; Jesus, Maria; Jesus, Maria; Jesus, Maria; Jesus.

LONDON, Printed for E. Mallet in Nevil's -Court in Fetter-Lane, 1697.


