NEVVES OVT OF THE LOVV-COVNTRIES, Sent in two Letters: The one to the Earl of
NEW CASTLE, The other to Captain CRISPE, Now resident with his Majesty*
Declaring the likelihood of Civil wars to be betwixt the Prince of Orange,
and the States of the United Provinces.

First printed at Oxford for William Web, and since r^pri^t^d in London. 1643.

MY Lord, since the departure of Collonell ^oring (from whose happier
expr^ssions I doubt not but you have received the humble acknowledgements, and
assurances of my service to your Honor) we have here but little news, is
worthy your Honors observance. His friends with what strength they can produce
are making their best dispatches to second him. We have our hearts in England,
though our bodies be in Holland, and our bodies are making what speed they can
to overtake our hearts. The eyes of the Princes of Christendom are looking on
you, and know not well what to resolve upon, but stand a while at gaze, and
wait on the events that do attend you. We heard of some defeats were given
you, but we dare not be such cowards to your Honor and your cause as to
believe it, especially since At^^ has credibly informed us that in spite of
winter and opposition you have cut your way through your thickest enemies, and
with gallant resolution and success do increase in numbers, as you adv^^ce
mo^e near unto his Majesty. If you could dispense with so much honor, as to
forbear your hand a little from your sword and take your pen into it, it
would bring great satisfaction to us to understand the news betwixt Oxford and
London, and to be informed therein from a person of your eminence and
authority. The affairs move here in the same condition as they do with you,
and are almost sick of the same distempers. The Prince has kept a private
Christmas at ^^eda, and though he has been often invited to the Hague, he cannot
be induced to take his journey to it, and thinks himself safer garisoned in his
ow^ town then befriended in the Queens Court. Count Ernests Son has been
much wrought upon, with what friends and strength he could make to assist his
Majesty of England, but being not to be persuaded thereunto, he told the Prince
of Ora^ge very resolutely, that he would not adventure his honor, nor his life
in that quarrel, nor lose a drop of blood among parricidiall swords, and gave
the Prince who still importuned him to that service such bold and unrespective
words, that the Prince forgetting all moderation with his closed hand struck
him on the cheek, who not enduring the indignity betook himself unto his sword,
and making a full thrust against the Prince had desperately endangered his life
had not the vigilance, and fidelity of some that stood by prevented the
mischief which was pointing at his life. There was also since that one Gray an
English man, and a soldier sometimes in Collonell Culpepers Regiment, who
suffered justly the strappado for speaking scandalous, and traitorous words
against the Queen of England, and did not blush to affirm and compare her to
the late Queen of France her Mother, saying, that in this respect she was like
unto her, and wheresoever she came, that division, war and ruin did attend
her, ascribing the difference betwixt the Prince of Orange and the States to
her residing amongst them. I could willingly write out the other hour, and
enlarge my service to your honor, but I know ^n these active times you look on
men, and not on papers, and having not the leisure to peruse them, I should
rather torment you, then delight you: I should therefore be a very bad subject
and sin against his Majesty and the common good, should I withold you any
longer from your great employment which cannot have a more able supporter then
your self, nor a more faithful votary then he who is my Lord,

Your Honous most humble and constant servant. S. R.

SIR,
THE distempers of these times are great, contrary winds and minds blowing
from all the corners of the Christian world* I do by the opportunity of the
first Bark committed to the wind and Seas, acquaint you with our distractions
equal in many respects unto yours. We have heard of much dangerous opposition
against your King, and it is our wonder, that you should turn your country
into an Anarchy, and rend power from the King to invest your selves with
Democraticall Diade^es: while they labor to keep the free liberty of the
Estates of Holland, they would maintain their old Rights, and keep the Prince
of Orange only titular, and depending upon their will, limiting his power to
be subordinate to popular Regality, a solecisme and contradiction in nature;
your affairs move upon the same hinge. But the Prince of Orange that is a
known Soldier, and has deserved much of the Estates, will not brook this
opposition; but finding that the common people esteem Princes and Soldiers
only in the field, and do forget their brave service, accounting them for
service, only their servants, and then prove ungrateful: Besides, a Prince
incensed can endure no vulgar weakness, strong only in base thoughts and
contempt of Principalities, as your plebeians are in England. From these
motives much disturbance is like to proceed: For when vulgar strength and
Principality meet, they are like torrents, that mutually oppose one another.
These growing evils are nourished by malignants, as you have; some declare
themselves for the Prince, some for the States: and I know not whether they
have learned the Art of opposing Princes, by adhering to your Parliament; but
believe it, we foresee what horrible mischiefs the Fates have plotted against
us, and what blood must be drawn from our own veins, or rather vanities,
pride and ambition, and competition for prerogative, drawing us on to murder
one another, as you (according to intelligence given us) did at Kenton battle:
Our hopes are weak concerning any pacification; but our fears are great that
the Low Countries have seen their best and most flourishing days: for war
does shut up all trading and commerce; and where it does once enter, it
destroys whole kingdoms, it brings in wretched misery, and all sorts of
ineffable calamity. What passionate words can declare the bleeding state of a
kingdom distracted by civil war? Our daily intelligence of your affairs,
does make great impressions of fear in us, that our disagreement between the
Prince of Orange and the States, will at last (as your contention in England
did) break out into a civil war. In regard of the firm league between
England and Holland, and the good service our country has done unto that
Kingdom, by frustrating the continual designs of many Spanish Fleets, and
sinking their tallest ships in the merciless seas, I persuade me, that the
report of these growing dissentions amongst us, will make some begin to compare
your present state with ours. Prerogatives claimed on both sides, does thrust
us on to fight, and our great power flatters us, that we have both right unto
that which we pretend. The Prince and the States are united and separated, as
the King and Parliament are in England, by the affection of the people, and I
fear that this our division can bring nothing but ruin. Join with us
therefore in your prayers, that it would please God to settle and compose the
distracted condition of your Kingdom, to establish your King in peace, and the
general affection of his subjects, and vanquish all his enemies in his own
Army; and that our country looking on your calamity, may clearly behold it
self, and what we shall be if we fall out about words. It is a strong piece
of the Devils subtilty, to provoke nature to shedding of blood, let the cause
be never so good, his ends are close and private, and destruction of kingdoms
is that whereat his malice does chiefly aim. But we hope ambition shall not
make us butcher and murder one another, as you have done: And since some part
of Englands strength must needs live and dye with Hollands happiness, let your
prayers beseech heaven for peace in both countries, to prevent our war, and
set a period to yours.

Your loving obliged friend, H. R.

FINIS.

