THE PARLIAMENTS Proceedings justified, in Declining A Personal Treaty WITH
THE KING, Notwithstanding the ADVICE OF THE SCOTTISH COMMISSIONERS to that
purpose.

By HENRY MARTEN Esquire, a Member of the Commons House.

LONDON, Printed for John Sweeting at the Angel in Popeshead Alley, 1648.

The Parliaments proceedings Justified in Declining a Personal treaty with the
King.
To the English Readers.
Dear fellow Citizens,
MY late endeavors of this kind were bestowed upon a few Strangers, in telling
them that the waters were yours, and not theirs, wherein they went about to
fish: my present desire (from a double engagement I find upon me, one of my
own making, the other made when I was born) is to show you, that you are the
fish they went about to catch. First in a net which they spread for the whole
shoal of you, where you were represented; being disappointed there, they go to
it now with paper Angles, laying for you (man-meal) what you may be most apt to
bite at, according to your several pallats, as they are probably set, some to
the Court-way, some to the Presbyterian, or, as they are disgusted, some with
your Honorable drudges, and others with your gallant champions.

These new Peter-men (more dangerous to you in point of profit, as well as in
point of honor, then those that fetch your Herring from off your coasts) are
the Scottish Commissioners: and these four considerations which I have
enumerated, are the corner stones whereon they build their confidence of
persuading some of you, that five persons trusted by another Kingdom for quite
another purpose, should settle your peace, should manage your affairs of
Church and State, with more advantage to you, then that numerous Body that was
entrusted by you, has adventured for you, and must partake with you of all the
good or ill their council shall produce. But since it is possible for a
stander by to see more then a Player, and since we might perhaps hope to find
as much faithfulness in Forreiners as we have done treachery in many of our own
countrymen, let us consider in this advice offered unto and rejected by the
Parliament, not from what hand it comes, but upon what foot it stands.

The particulars insisted on, are these.

First, before the primum quaerite, and with more earnestness then the unum
necessarium,) That there be a treaty upon all the Propositions, and that a
personal one; and that for that end, the King be invited to come to London,
with honor, freedom, and safety, as the most equal, fairest, and just way to
obtain a well grounded Peace.

The most equal. How like Umpires they speak? not like Councellers; or as if
they had entered into a Covenant with the King, as well as with us, whereas I
thought it had been their part to have managed the Agreement with the common
enemy, to the most advantage of their confederates, and not as persons
indifferent, whether the Hounds catch the Hare, or the Hare deceive the Hounds:
I have not skill enough to distinguish such Ambodexters from detestable Neuters.

Secondly, The fairest! What is that? the smoothest, easiest way, why every
fool can tell you, that the easiest way to Peace, is by leting your enemy do
what he list; and so they would have it on this side Tweed: and so they would
say, but for shame. Therefore the fairest way of couzening you, is not by
surrendering up your Liberties all at once, but by suffering you to be formally
disputed out of every one of them, and by drawing on your shackles link by link.

Thirdly, Peace is then in a just way, when the disturbers thereof are so
suppressed, as the disturbed cannot, or need not fear a new disturbance from
them.

-- Neque enim ad Pacem via rectior ulla est,
Quam belli Authors, Mart Perire suo.
Where they say the King should be invited to London, they mean admited, for He
has invited Himself. But why to London? His houses (as He calls them) sit at
Westminster, White Hall is in Middlesex, unless they can confide more in
Colonel Titchbourn, then in Colonel Hammond.

Then he is to be received with honor, freedom, and safety. What honor He is
capable of, that shall come with a Pass like an enemy, where he might have
staid with the dignity of a King. I know not; but I believe if ever the
Parliamenr did Him any wrong, it was with giving Him, after the desertion of
His Trust, the same respect which is usually rendered unto the Kingly Office,
when duly administered.

As for safety, the Parliament should not do it Self honor, if whosoever they
please to send for, upon a Treaty, might not come and go with all the safety in
the world.

As for freedom, though I confess, the consideration of restraint does very
much invalidate the credit of a grant made by a person restrained; yet since a
Prisoner may be as voluntary an Agent in many things as an other; and since
Liberty it self, is as valuable to Him, as any thing that can be received from
Him; especially, considering the danger of His being loose, I see no reason why
we should so easily give Him His freedom, who has made us pay so dear for
ours. But now come their Reasons.

Argu. I. The sending of Propositions without a Treaty has bin often without
success, and the new Propositions are less to the advantage of the Crown, then
the former; and so no reason to expect better satisfaction, then formerly we
had.

Ans. This is a two-edged Argument, and therefore if it should be beaten down
to the Fencers pate, he might be hurt with either side of his own weapon; for
do they not confess, that if the new Propositions were as much or more
advantageous to the Crown, then the former, a treaty might be dispensed withal,
and yet better satisfaction expected then formerly we had?

Again, Does it not intimate, that if we admit Him to a Treaty, He needs not
greatly care what out Propositions be?

There is a little mistake too in matter of fact; for Propositions have been
sent as well with a Treaty as without, and still returned with the same
success, unless by Treaty they mean a Personal one; and that indeed we have not
yet been so inconsiderate, as to venture upon. Therefore say these Councelors,
do it now, which Reason stands good to justify what we, in the Votes of
January, lately resolved, far otherwise then they advised us. Thus, addresses,
and applications to the King, by Propositions with treaty, and without, when He
was in a considerable condition for strength, and when he was not, have been
often assayed without success; therefore we will make no more addresses nor
applications unto Him.

Arg. 2. The Kings removal from His Parliament, is acknowledged by the Houses
in several Declarations, to be the chief cause of all the war, mischief, and
calamities of the Kingdoms, then His Majesty's presence with his Parliament,
must be the best, if not the only remedy, to remove our troubles.

Answ. In their first Argument, they mentioned Treaty and left out Personal; so
in this they speak for a personal presence, not caring whether there be a
Treaty, or no; so they can bring Him in upon us. But weigh their Reason: First,
they quote our own Declarations in such places, as themselves do not believe
the truth of. For I would ask them, if His absence from the Parliament of
England be so pernicious here, why is not His absence from the Parliament of
Scotland as formidable to that Kingdom? Why do they not employ all this
earnestness in procuring to themselves the blessing of His company?

Then (allowing it true against us, who affirmed it,) the consequence thereof
will hang thus; My groom being drunk, and falling asleep with a candle by him,
has set my stable on fire, and burnt it down to the ground; therefore his
awaking and coming to himself will set it up again. Because Agag by drawing his
sword, had made many women childeless, it seemed to be Saul's opinion. That the
putting up his sword again would restore the children to their mothers: But the
ways of God were more equal in that case, where by the way you shall observe
two remarkable Acts of retaliating justice; One of the Kings had his thirst
after man's blood quenched with his own; and the other, for thinking that Laws
did not extend to the punishing of Kings, was himself punished with being
unkinged.

Argu. 3. In a Personal Treaty the Commissioners of both Kingdoms may give
Reasons for the Equity and Expediency of our desires, but without a Treaty or
giving Reasons for asserting the lawfulness and expediency of the Propositions
to be presented, they may be esteemed Impositions.

Answ. Here they would make you believe, that if there were a Treaty, they
would join with your Commissioners in pleading your Cause against the King; and
all the while they are telling you so, do join with Him in pleading for a
Personal treaty against your Commissioners in Parliament. But admit they would
be true to their trust, and would remember on which side they were first
retained; What kind of Reasons be they, that enemies use to show one another
in their treaties? One party says, such and such things we will have, or the
war shall go on; and the other, such and such things you shall accept, or do
your worst; and if there happen any communication besides of it is concerning
the advantages or disadvantages, standing out, the probability or desperateness
of relief; but our showing the King how expedient the things we ask him, would
be for us is a sure way to be denied; how expedient for Him, as sure a way to
be laughed at.

Our Propositions might indeed be more properly termed of Grace then Peace,
because we give Him therein the honor of granting what we are able to give our
selves without Him: Propositions though, and not Impositions, because we leave
it in His power to deprive Himself of that Honor, without forcing Him to take
His Office up again; and yet I believe, if the chance of War had turned the Die
on his side, as it did on ours, we should have had Impositions from Him upon
Impositions, and of another kind of nature; and so should our dear Brethren
too in their turn, and that for having made themselves our Brethren; I mean the
generality of the Nation: the Negotiators perhaps, and Treators of both
Kingdoms might have saved their own stakes well enough*

Argu. 4. The King may have some just desires to move for the Crown, and for
Himself, as that He may have His Revenue, and that He may be restored to His
Royal Government, which may be done with greater honor and satisfaction unto
Him by a Treaty then otherwise.

Answ. As for the Kings being restored to the Crown, as well officio, as
beneficio; I thought every body had understood that the Propositions, being
signed on His part, that was the only thing to have been performed on ours. In
respect whereunto the things we sent, might well be esteemed Suppositions; and
if the greatest Honor and Satisfaction of the conquered, must be aimed at by
the Conquerors; I dare say, both these Considerations would better be complied
with, by submiting wholly to Him, then by treating at all with Him.

Arg. 5. A personal Treaty with the King, is the best way to beget a mutual
confidence between him and his Parliament; it is the best way to clear His
doubts, and to remove all difficulties; and it is the absolute best way to give
and receive mutual satisfaction.

Answ. Do you mark how they talk still of mutuallity? Of equal giving and
receiving? As if the Parliament and their Prisoner were upon a Level.

Besides, no treaty can indeed be altogether equal betwixt the King, and the
peoples Parliament, for he deals but for himself, and perhaps for some of his
own Family or Posterity; they for two whole Nations. Again, the matters to be
Treated on, concern him in the extent, or the Retrenchment of his power to do
hurt: They concern us in our well being, if not in our being. Hic pradam petit,
not salutem. And therefore if the Parliament should not make the best use in
your behalf, of those advantages which God has put into their hands, they were
not only indiscreet for themselves, but unfaithful toward you.

It is true, that the enterview of friends does use to strengthen friendship,
but the meeting of enemies is a new way to Reconciliation. A confidence, I
confess, it would argue, though not in him, of us, (for God Almighty, not he,
has trusted him with us already) yet in us of him, but such a one as would be
less for our credit then a diffidence, unless we could see some change wrought
in the affections of him, or of his party.

Arg. 6. We cannot expect that his Majesty will grant in terminis, whatsoever
Propositions shall be sent unto him, nor can every thing in the Propositions be
of that Importance, as that the not granting of it ought to hinder the peace,
neither will the Houses of Parliament, give full power to their Commissioners, to
make alterations in the Propositions, as they shall see cause upon debate;
wherefore a personal Treaty with his Majesty in London, is the most probable
and expedient way to remove or reconcile all differences.

Answ. We had Reason to expect without any plenipotentiary authority delegated
unto Commissioners, as is used in cases of a doubtful war; That the King
should have granted in terminis, whatsoever Propositions the Parliament thought
fit to send him, especially being to be made up into Laws, whether he consider
us as a free people, and therefore fit to give our selves the Law, or as his
victors, and therefore fit to give it him.

If some few things in the Propositions were of less Importance then the rest;
could any man have Imagined, that rather then he would grant them, he should
hinder his own Enlargement, and his Reception into so fine an office?

The words [at London] seem to be foisted in by the Printer, for they have no
more dependence upon any one syllable in the half dozen of Reasons then
Warwick-Castle has.

The way to remove or reconcile al differences betwixt the King and us, had
been worth the showing before the war began, that it might have bin prevented.
But for the Parliament (when after so long and serious consideration, they had
Resolved upon what terms they would re-admit the King to the Exercise of his
function, had addressed themselves 6 or 7 times unto him, had reduced their
desires into 4 particulars, whereof one was necessary to our safety, some
others not to be abated for honors sake, and put them into the form of Bills.
Whereby, if he had passed them, he had been owned for King again, though he
should have denied all the rest) to be persuaded to let go their hold, to turn
all loose again, and go to it a now with Syllogisms, whether we shall be freemen
or slaves, to hazard a gained cause upon a treaty; I say not a personal one,
but a Treaty upon all the propositions, is a thing which I think the King
(though he does desire and press it) cannot be so weak as to flatter himself
with the hope of ever bringing it about.

Obj. His presence may breed division and continue our troubles, and when his
Majesty desired to come hither from Oxford with freedom and safety, it was
thought unfit, and denied by the Houses, and the Commissioners from Scotland.
Look ye (Countrymen) the Scottish Commissioners are on our side once again,
and dispute against the King, but how long it will last? you shall see.

Sol. That argument now has no force at all, for the case of affairs, the
Kings condition and ours, (which were given for reasons in that answer to his
Majesty) are quite altered from what they were then. Then the King had armies
in the field, he had garrisons and strong holds to return to. Now he has none
of these. And his Majesty offers a full security against all hostility or
danger that can be expected, by granting to the Houses the power of the Militia
by sea and land, during his reign.

Rep. First, A man might tell them, that sure the King has still as many
Armies in the field, as we have Garrisons as many, and strong holds, or else
his granting or not granting our Propositions for peace, could not be so
considerable to us, as they would make it.

Secondly, what ever they think, Sir Thomas Fairfax knows he has indeed no
open force at all, and yet the objection has force enough, for the Parliament
knows that there is need of keeping of Sir Thomis Fairfax and the army under
his command, or else they would not put the Kingdom to the charge of sixty
thousand pounds per month; they are not ignorant, that besides their first
enemies (who are rather kept under then brought in) there is a daily swarm of
discontented persons in all parts, some from the unquietness of their own
disposition, some for want of employment, some for want of what they earned
when they were employed, others for pure want, some from unsatisfaction in
point of Church Government, and not a few from a weariness of expecting the
issue of our Parliaments longanimity toward the common enemy, and whether it
be their purpose rather to continue us for ever in our distractions, then to
settle the Commonwealth without him, who first diserted it, and is to this day
set in his heart, upon being either an absolute Tyrant over us, or no King; I
leave you now to reckon how strong the presumption is, that when such a pair
of bellows shall come to blow the ashes from off the coals, that were (as I
told you,) raked up but not put out, when such a brand shall be brought into
the midst of a house full of bituminous matter in every corner thereof, we may
assure our selves to find our divisions heightened, and our troubles renewed.

But they tell you (so grossly, as if they did not mean to cozen you,) you may
be fully secured against all the dangers of his coming into the thickest of
you, by the offer he makes us of treating after he shall be with us concerning
the power of our Militia, for he declares himself plainly, that no one
particular desired by us, shall be understood to be so granted by him, as not
to be null and void, in case the whole be not agreed betwixt us, from whence
you may gather, that either we must not be safe at all, or else we must be
content with that shadow of safety that is to determine, (at the latest) with
his breath in stead of all other things which the Parliament can propose for
the present Peace, or for the future weal of England or of Ireland; and indeed
some of his friends with whom I have occasion to converse, will by way of
discourse ask me what a Devil We would have besides the strength of the
kingdom by Sea and Land? let him have that but for a month, and he shall ask
nothing else. I answer them almost in their kind: the prince of the air (whom
they mention so often) seems more reasonable in his demands then our heavenly
Father, for where God requires the whole heart, he will accept a little piece
whereby he craves in effect no less then all, since he is sure God will have
no partnership with him. When a Serpent would obtain an entrance, he needs not
capitulate save for his head, it is not so with other creatures. The power of
the Sword is to a Monarch of absolute necessity for the maintenance of his
tyrannical government, and that power had need to be always actuated; the
same in the hands of a Parliament (or the representatives of a free Nation) is
not so much the power of the Sword as of the Buckler, and will not be exercised
at all, but in cases of Rebellion or Invasion; if all the quarrel betwixt the
Parliament and the King were (as is preached in some Pamphlets and libelled in
some Sermons) which of them should domineer over the people, the forenamed
offer might perhaps serve their turn; and yet I should advise them to consider
that if the temptations of the Court, either by Sugar-plums, or by bug-bears,
have been able (as by sad and frequent experience appears) to deboche so many
of the peoples deputies in this very Parliament, as (if they were altogether in
the Commons. House again, and could but persuade most of those Moderate
Members to join with them whose estates during the late war have lain in
Roundheaded quarters) might carry what Vote they pleased without much
opposition, though for the making a Forest of all England, and a God of
Nimrod. I should advise them (I say) to consider that the like inference may in
short time work upon the Members of the Army, and then the Heyfer indeed is
Ours, that is, of our breed, and for us to keep; but her service will be his to
plough his ground for him, and bring him home that croppe, which all his
Bazan-Buls, and nobly descended horses have been foiled in.

7. Argument

Arg. 7. Which the Commissioners call a farther Answer to their own Objection,
is indeed a seventh Reason newly thought on, and borrowed our of the
Parliaments Reply to the Kings Message of the 11. of Sept. 42. [All this
notwithstanding as we never gave your Majesty any just cause of with drawing
your self from your great counsel, so it has ever been and shall be far from
us, to give any impediment to your Return, or to neglect any proper means of
curing the distempers of the Kingdoms, and closing the dangerous breaches
betwixt your Majesty and your Parliament, according to the great trust which
lies upon us, and if your Majesty shall now be pleased to come back to your
Parliament without your forces, we shall be ready to secure your Royal Crown
and dignity with our lives and fortunes, your presence in this great counsel
being the only means of any Treaty, betwixt your Majesty and them with hope of
success.

Answer.

An. All this cannot relate to all that which has been done since September
42. he that says if you shall now be pleased, does not tell you at what time
soever you shall be pleased; he that offers you fair terms if you come without
your forces, would be thought to imagine you have forces to come with.

One while the Reasons of our former Delarat. go for nothing, because the
Kings, condition and Ours are quite altered from what they were then; another
while, and that within four or five lines we must be held to our old refused
offers, notwithstanding any alteration of affairs.

8. Argument.

8. Arg. If they were esteemed enemies to the Parliament and the peace of the
kingdom who advised the King to withdraw from his Parliament? what estimation
will the world have of them (scil. the Parliament) who after such a Declaration
will not suffer him to return to his Parliament, when he offers to cast
himself into their arms?

Answer.

Ans. This whole Island (I mean the highest authority therein) did justly
esteem them enemies to the Parliament and the Peace of the kingdoms that
advised the King to withdraw from the Parliament? but since he has followed
that advice, has fought against them, has despised all overtures of
reconciliation with them, the knowing part of the world will esteem them no
less enemies that shall for base and sinister ends advise the Parliament to
receive him, and shall injuriously asperse the Parliament for declining that
advice, especially considering how falsely it is affirmed that he cast himself
into Our arms: The fact standing thus; when Our arms had made his
Headquarters too hot for him, he cast himself into the Scottish Army, and
they (like men of honor,) understanding by how they were entertained,
delivered, up into Our hands all the strengths and priosoners (among whom he
was one) that had come to theirs in England.

9. Argument.

Arg. 9. If so kind an offer shall be refused, and the King driven to
despair, it is to be feared, these Kingdoms shall be involved into greater
difficulties then ever.

Answer.

I will admit for once that the King has yet some good thing to offer, and
some goodness of will to offer it unto the Parliament. Do they not deal
hardly with Us who will not suffer us to refuse a kindness, to say no we thank
him, without beckning him into despair, and threatening Us with an involution
of such difficulties as never were, nor (as is to be hoped) will be? And
therefore I do hold that as Pharaoh was then most kind to the Israelites when
he slighted all their poor addresses, so the Lord was then their complete
deliverer when he shut out all communication with their oppressors, by drawing
off a Sea betwixt them.

FINIS.

