THE LIFE and DEATH OF Mr. Ignatius Jurdain, ONE OF THE Aldermen of the City of
Exeter; Who departed this Life July 15th. 1640.

Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright; for the end of that
man is peace.

Psalm. 112.9. He has dispersed, he has given to the poor, his righteousness
endures for ever.

1 Cor. 15.55. O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory?

Drawn up and published by Ferd. Nicolls, Minister of the Gospel at Mary
Arches, Exon.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Newberry, and are to be sold at his Shop at the three
Golden Lions on Cornhill by the Royal Exchange. 1654.

TO The Right Worshipful Simon Snow Esquire, Major of the City of Exeter, the
Aldermen, and the rest of the Common Council of that City.
Honored Sirs,
I Have had many thoughts heretofore, and some of late, to publish a short
Narrative of the Life, and Death of Mr. Ignatius Jurdain, a Worthy Member of
your Society; and the latter might have been stifled as the former, had not the
solicitations of some friends, both nearer and farther off, excited me to carry
on my purpose to performance; And having set about this business and brought
it to some issue, I have taken the boldness to present it unto you; and I
supposed, that it would not be unacceptable to you, he being for a long time of
your Society, and an honor thereunto as unto the whole City: His Name (no
doubt) would have lived, and that in great esteem, though this small memorial
of him had never seen the light; but yet hereby many may take notice of more
particulars, then formerly they have heard of, and take occasion to recount
many more remarkable, and praiseworthy qualifications that were in him, then
have come to my Knowledge: I might have added many more things, but I have
omitted them, partly because I was not assured of the certainty of them, and
partly because I declined Personal reflections, which would have sounded very
harshly in the ears of many. That which has been done (though with much
weakness, and not answerable to his worth) has been out of a desire to honor
him, that was so zealous for the advancing of Gods glory, and to set his
example before your selves, and others for imitation: For the good examples of
holy men are as the light side of the cloud, Heb. 12.1. Perk. in loc. N. Annot.
in loc. Dyk. Dec. of the heart. c. 12.
to give light to others, and to direct them in the Wilderness of this World
toward the heavenly Canaan. I know you have a surer and a straighter rule, and
a brighter light to direct you, then any humane examples, the infallible and
unerring Word of God, Psalm. 119.105. Prove. 6.23.
Psalm. 119. and Prove. 6. whereunto you shall do well to take heed as to a light
that shines in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1.19.
2 Pet 1. But yet God himself would have us to observe the commendable examples
of good men, and to set them before us for our imitation and pattern, as Prove.
2.20.
Prove. 2. To walk in the way of good men, and to be followers, or imitators of
them, 1 Cor. 4.16. (...).
1 Cor 4. but we may not follow the best of men in all things but with a
limitation, as they follow that exemplary Rule Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1.
1 Cor. 11. And I know not, whether I should press the imitation of this
renowned Worthy, in all things, as in his so early rising in the morning, to
enjoy communion with God in holy meditation, the bodily temper of most not
being able to bear it, so that we may herein rather admire then imitate him. He
was (as I conceive) of an Heroical and raised spirit, elevated above the Absit
verbo invidia.
ordinary rank of true Professors of Religion; for as Heroical virtue (as the
Moralists Arist. Ethic. lib. 7. c. 1. Piccol. Philos. Grad. 6. c. 1 -- 6.
say) excells moral virtue in an high and eminent degree; so there is a kind of
Heroical Keck. S^st. Eth. lib.;. c. 5.
spiritual virtue, as Abraham's Eminency in Faith, and the like I may say of
this Holy man's intensiveness in zeal for God, that excels the ordinary virtue
of Christians. (i) 2 Pet. 1.3. Called to glory and virtue.
I know that some did much undervalue him, as a man of mean and low parts;
they would acknowledge, that he was an honest well meaning man, but weak, and
beneath those that were accounted wise men; but suppose that his natural, and
acquired parts were not so great as some others, yet for his zeal and courage
for the truth and cause of God, his close communion with God, and indignation
against sin, I dare boldly say, he did excel the most of men: And they that
have greater parts of knowledge and wisdom, should be provoked by his
example, to act the more vigorously for God, for every man must give an account
of the improving his talents for the Mat. 25.15.
behoof of the Lord, that has entrusted them therewith, remembering that of our
Savior Luke 12.48.
Luke 12. To whom much is given, of him shall much be required.

There be three things, which in the ensuing Narrative, you shall find very
commendable in him; his Piety, Justice and Charity, wherein I shall crave leave
to commend him to your imitation, and if you shall exceed him therein, I know
no good man that will blame you, though I cannot secure you from the Scorpion
like lash of the virulent tongues of wicked men.

1. For his Piety, all that knew him, and did not look upon him with an evil
eye, will give testimony to it; and it will be your honor to stand up
zealously for God, and to walk sincerely and uprightly before him, and as under
his eye, who sees not only all your actions, but your seeret intents, purposes
and designs, whether you look with a squint-eye upon your sinister and
self ends, or with a single eye aim at his glory, in all your undertakings:
And you should let it appear, that you are on the Lords-side, Exodus 32.26.
now so many Apostat se and revolt, yea, deeply Esaias 31.6.
revolt from him, I speak it not in way of doubt or jealousy of you, for many
bless God for your stedfastness in the faith, in these declining days; and
your constant attending upon the Lords holy Ordinances both on the Sabbath and
Week days is very exemplary, not only to those of inferior rank in this
City, but to others that either see, or hear of your forwardness therein. But
Holiness should appear also in the whole course of your conversation, both in
your public administrations of Justice, (for you judge not for man but for the
Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2 Chr. 19.6.
And the Seat of Justice is the place of the Holy, Eccles. 8. Eccl. 8.10. N.
Annot. in loc. Pemb. Expos.
the Holy One, or Holy God;) and in your more private conversing with men, and
most secret retirements, Holiness to the Lord, that under the Law was engraven
upon the High Priests Miter, and to be worn upon his forehead, Exodus 28.36.
Exodus 28. should now be written on things of common use, Zech. 14.20. N.
Annot. in loc.
Zech. 14. you should consecrate your selves and all your actions to the
service of the Holy God; the more sincere and constant you are herein, with the
greater comfort you will give up your account unto the righteous Judge, when
you shall be called unto it; and your account draws very nigh, Jam. 5. Jam.
5.10.
Behold the Judge stands before the door.

impartial administration of Justice against Swearers, open profaners of the
Sabbath, unclean persons and other scandalous Offenders wherein he showed
himself another N h. 13.17.
Nehemiah and Psalm. 106.30.
Phinehas, will but mind you of that, which I have cause to be persuaded, that
you resolve to do; And you have advantage to do more, in some respects, then he
had, because many of those disorders and pollutions Esaias 56. 2-6.
of the Sabbath, (the removing of which found great resistance in those days)
have been, for many years, taken away, and yet I dare not say that he was the
first that brake the ice, and set upon the reformation of abuses upon the Lords
holy day; for I am informed by one, that was an Active Officer in the
redressing of those profane abuses, that his immediate Mr. John Sheere, Major.
A.D. 1616.
Predecessor in the Office of the Majoralty did begin to reform some open
profanations of the Sabbath; Whether any did attempt it before, is more then I
can learn, it being long before my coming to the City. But God has a perfect
Record of all things that are done by men, especially for his names sake,
whether men take notice of it or no.

Charity and beneficence to the poor and other pious uses; I leave it to your
serious consideration, how far he was a pattern to you therein, if you think it
too much to do as much as he did, yet liberality and forwardness in well-doing
is left as a charge upon you by God himself, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18.
1 Timothy 6. and he would not have you to forget it, Heb. 13. Heb. 13.16.
seeing it is well-pleasing to him; And you will be no losers by it here but
great gainers; the more free you are this way, you may expect that the Lord
will deal the more freely, and bountifully with you, or yours, you have his
Word, and that is as good as any bond for you. Prove. 11.24 25. Eccles. 11.1 --
Psalm. 37.26. Esaias. 32.8.
see Prove. 11. Eccles. 11. Psalm. 37. and Esaias 32. And this will f^rther your
account, Phil. 4.17.
Phil. 4. in the great day of reckoning, for then the Lord will take special
notice, not so much, of that which you have laid up for your selves, or yours,
as of that, which you have laid out for him, and his. But I am here prevented
in pressing one point of Charity upon you, for providing for the poor; for in
your late act of Charity, shall I term it? or Justice and Mercy meeting
together, I mean the erecting of a Work house: You have taken the best care
that the ranging and disorderly poor might be set on work, and so be better
provided for by their own labor, then by being relieved at men's doors; and
that no Psalm. 144.14.
complaining, by that clamorous sort of idle people, may, for the future, be
heard in our streets. The Lord strengthen your hearts and hands for the
perfecting of that righteous and charitable work, and for the Psalm. 41.1. (...)
Pisc. Qui prudenter segerit. Genesis Translation, Judges wisely. Ainsw. Prudently
attends.
wise considering the condition of the impotent poor, that they being
restrained from begging, may have no just cause of complaining to God or man by
reason of want. God has honored you above many, I beseech you let it be your
chiefest care to honor him, in the faithful discharge of your duty unto him,
and of the trust committed by him unto you, that this City may be truly styled
the faithful City, Esaias 1. Esaias 1.26. Fidelis in aeternum. The City's Motto.
and we may say with the Prophet, Jer. 31. Jer. 31.23.
The Lord bless thee thou habitation of Justice and mountain of holiness;
This is the sincere desire of him that is willing to sign himself

Sirs, Yours to be Commanded in the service of the Gospel, Ferdinando Nicolls.
Exon. December. 24. 1653.
TO The READER.
Good Reader,
IT is a truth which always God has made good in his providence, that the
memorial of the just shall be blessed; therefore since the Canon and rule of
faith, or those Authentic records which we call The Scriptures, have been
closed up: The Lord has stirred up in every age some that could handle the pen
of the writer, to continue the memory of his eminent and faithful servants to
posterity with praise and honor. It would be vain in a case so known, to tell
you particularly what has been done in this kind, by Dorotheus, Sophronius,
Jerome, Gennadius, Epiphanius, etc. and by modern Writers without number; the
Ancient Church had her Diptychs or public Tables, wherein the names of persons
most noted for piety were recorded; and though the modern Canonization used
among the Romanists be ridiculous, and some Sainted that were Hominum monsira
-- heu quam multi inter homines Scripti sunt in Sanctorum albo qui in arcano
dei consilio descripti sunt in reproborum nigro: quam multi sunt ac quorum
imagines ardent cereis, qui ipsi ardent in flamma! Molinaei Hyperaspistes. page
48.
scarce men, and their legends bundles of lies the very stain and infamy of
Christianity; yet there is no reason that the true Saints, Gods Worthies,
should be defrauded of their public honor, and buried in obscurity and
silence without any Monument of their worth, and religious eminency: especially
when we do consider how much Gods glory is concerned in the credit of his
servants, as also the profit of others; partly that they may be acquainted with
the ancient ways of the Spirit, and those Good old paths wherein the Children
of God walked and enjoyed communion with him: partly that they may be provoked
by their examples to follow them in faith and patience, and heavenlinesse and
strictness of conversation; we see many times that examples work more then
precepts, not only as they convince, but as they do encourage: they convince
more, because they are real, we look upon precepts as words spoken of course,
wherein Religion may be counterfeited at a cheaper rate; therefore Noah, though
a Preacher of righteousness, is said to convince the world by preparing An
Ark, Heb. 11.8. and they encourage, because in them we see, that the exercise
of godliness, though difficult, yet is possible, when men that are subject to
like passions, and have the same interests and Concernments of flesh and blood
that we have, can be thus mortified, self-denying, heavenly, holy: now examples
have this force, not only when the Saints are alive, and liable to present
notice and observation, but after their death, when transmitted to posterity by
faithful records; yea then many times they work more, their infirmities being
buried with them, and their lives do then rather instruct then Exasperate,
Pascitur in Vivis livor, post fata qu^escit.
living Saints standing in the way of interests are more hated, and looked upon
with prejudice, but usually there is a greater esteem of the dead; how often do
Gods Children live envied, and die Sainted!

All this is prefaced (Reader) to induce thee to a more serious consideration
of the present memorials of that holy man, Mr. Ignatius Jurdain, in some sense,
the Wonder and Phoenix of his Age and place of abode; concerning whose piety
and frequent communion with God, his constant heavenlinesse, his charity in
giving, lending, and entertaining, his doing justice with impartiality and
diligence, thou will have a more particular account in the ensuing story; only
give me leave from my self to suggest a few passages and observations: 1. That
for his temper he was a man of a raised Zeal and Heroical spirit, one of those
rare examples which the Lord gives the World now and then, and therefore his
actions are not to be measured by an ordinary standard. 2. Seldom or never did
any come into his company, but he would discourse with them about holy things,
asking the younger how they hoped to be saved? the more grown if they professed
Religion, whether they had any assurance? which if they denied, he would tell
them that he was even ashamed of them; in good earnest (says he) I would study
the promises, and go into my closet and lock, the door, and there plead them to
God, and say, that I would not go forth till he gave me some sense of his love.
3. His entertainment at his Table was free and sufficient, but frugal and
sober; if his Wife at any time excused the slenderness of it, he would say,
Humilis cibus and t^nius potussunt divitiae Christianorum, Hieron.
Brown bread and Kennel water is good fare with the Gospel. I have often heard
him say so, there is somewhat a like saying of Mr. Greenham's, and possibly Mr.
Jurdain might borrow it thence, it suiting so well with the temper of his
spirit. 4. A formal man had once preached a Sermon at the Cathedral about
heaven, the discourse was for the most part frothy, and beneath the dignity and
worth of such an argument, Mr. Jurdain was present as well as my self, after
Sermon I went to his house, (being to receive a Letter from him for Oxford)
after many good instructions he asked me, if I had been at the Sermon that
morning? I told him, yea; and did you (says he) hear those wonderful things
which God has provided for them that love him? and so readily picked out all
those passages which were any way subservient to use and profit; 'twas
wonderful to me, to see how an holy heart can draw comfort out of any thing:
the Sermon as Mr. Jurdain repeated it to me, was another kind of Sermon, and
seemed to be very savoury and spiritual: I remember with what warmth and vigor
he spoke of it, even to this day, and hope that I never shall forget it. 5.
This is not to be forgotten, his sending a Letter to the late King, and
expostulating with him about his setting forth the Book concerning sports and
recreations on the Lords day, which was enclosed in another to the Bishop of
Exeter, to desire him to convey it: and notice being given to the Bishop that
Copies of it were divulged (possibly by the transcriber) he thought he could
not conceal it with safety, and therefore carried it to the King, who when he
had read it, in a great Anger said he would hang him; But the Bishop (a pious
man) fell upon his knees, and besought his Majesty's pardon, alleging, That
God had not a better servant, nor his Majesty a better Subject in the whole
Land: When the Bishop returned from his month of attendance, Mr. Jurdain went
to visit him, and after civilities past, the Bishop said, Ah Mr. Jurdain would
you put me upon so hot a service? you know there are many eyes upon me:
(meaning the Archbishops faction, who suspected him as a favourer of Puritans)
Yea my Lord (replied M Jurdain) there are eyes upon you, the eyes of God and
his holy Angels to see how you discharge your Office and Duty as the Kings
Chaplain and a Bishop of the Church. 6. Now and then, when he had leisure, he
would often go to his neighbors shops, and admonish them to take heed that the
cares of the World did not deadden their spirits to heavenly things, telling
them, If they had many thousands it would not still the cry of conscience,
purchase the least fovour from God, not so much as ease the pain of the teeth,
or keep off one fit of an ague, yea if money were thrown to the dogs they would
not so much as smell at it. 7. He would often persuade his fellow-Magistrates
to a liberal provision for the poor: and when they would ask him where they
should have money? he would Answer, God will provide, rather then the poor
shall want let us sell our Gowns. 8. When he distributed money to the poor
with his own hands in a time of great infection, and so some asked him if he
were not afraid of the plague, What (says he) afraid of Gods visitation! let
us fear rather the plague sore of our own heart. 9. In his troubles in the
Star Chamber, when one told him, he was sorry the Lord Keeper was against him,
he Answered, I have a greater Lord Keeper then him, the Lord is my keeper, I
shall not be afraid. 10. It Is not amiss to observe what others thought and
said of him; I remember a godly man observes of him, that in every business
(though in some he adventured far) the Lord carried him thorough with
reputation, and so compares him with another of great parts, who though godly
was always foiled in every undertaking: Drunkards and frequenters of the
Alehouse were afraid of him, he was their usual bugbear; their Memento in the
middle of their excess was, It is time to be gone, Mr. Jurdain will come by
and by: the ordinary sort of men were convinced of his integrity: I have
overheard men carnal and vicious at a time of election of Burgesses for the
Parliament, speaking to one another, if you choose any choose Jurdain, he will
be right for the Common Wealth, and do the City se vice: he was twice chosen
Burgess for the Parliament, and twice Major of the City, and once Deputy Major
in a time of great infection and pestilence: The reverend Minister that
preached his Funeral Sermon (from whom you have the discourse of his life)
said, Look upon his Will, and you will think him the richest man in this City;
though many exceeded him in estate, but few or none in making provision for the
poor; delinquents seldom went from him without conviction: A Noblemans servant
that had scorned him being brought before him, and convicted of having sworn
rashly three times, Mr. Jurdain demanded his Fine, and showed him the
heinousness of the sin, with which the man was calmed, and though he came from
his Companions braving, yet he returned with the acknowledgment that he was a
faithful Justicer, and when they asked him what Jurdain did to him, he
Answered, he gave me good Law, and fair words.

Good Reader, by this taste thou may judge of the Man, thou will be better
acquainted with him, when thou have read over the ensuing Collection of the
passages of his life, drawn up by an able and faithful hand, who has been
careful that nothing should be inserted of which he had not sufficient
evidence, and that many things might be omitted which could not be divulged
without reflection on particular persons; whatever is lacking of consequence
may be supplied in another Edition.

Thus much I thought good to signify to thee, desiring the Lord to help us
more and more to be followers of them who through faith and patience have
inherited the promises.

Thine in the service of the Gospel, Thomas Manton.

Errata to be corrected.
PAge 1. line the last, for [Or] read [and] p. 3. l. 11. I intend [not] to be
inserted, l. 22. Genesis 9.5. figure 9. to be blotted out. line 30 Religious
prefixe (a) ret. line 31 for [that] read [if] page 4. line 1 for [which] read
[with] line 7. for [if he] insert [as] line 16. Romans 7. the next figure to be
blotted out. page 5. l. 18. He had taken, dele [taken] page 6. Marg. (...). p.
8. l. 17. for [free] r. [frequent] p. 9. l penult marg. (...). r. (...). p. 13
l 20. for [fully] read [wholly] page 14. l. 10. for [Duy] r. [duty] p 18. line
30 was chosen, r. twice chosen. p 19. line 11 dele [and reproved by his holy
and gracious conversation,] it being twice printed, line 18. Marg. Act. 5.4.
read 41.

The Life and Death of M. Ignatius Jurdain one of the Aldermen of the City of
Exeter, who died July 15th Anno Domini 1640.
THe memory of the just is blessed, says wise Solomon Prove. 10. Prove. 10.7.
he leaves a sweet memorial behind him, though, whilst he lived, he was
vilified and defamed, and laden with reproaches, yet when he is departed this
life, his name is as a sweet and precious Ointment, even unto those that
formerly could take up his name as a Proverb of reproach, but especially to
those that honored him in life and death.

His memorial is blessed.
This Eminent Saint, this holy and just Man is a Real proof of that doctrinal
Assertion of Solomon; his memoral is blessed, and they that in his life time
undervalued him, do now (or seem at least to) make an Honorable mention of
him; but he now lives with much honor in the hearts of those that saw and
acknowledged that true worth which was in him, when he was despised by the men
of the World; but there may a generation arise which knew him not, and that
which has been received by tradition may be forgotten. That therefore his name
may live, when others, that maligned him, dye, or their names rot, and that he
may be a pattern of Piety and Charity to succeeding generations, it has been
thought fit to commit to writing, and to publish to the world those singular
graces, and memorable acts that did shine forth in him both living and dying;
And it is not unworthy our observation, that God stirred up the spirits of
diverse well affected Christians about one and the same time, to desire the
publishing of the Life of this renowned Worthy of the Lord, whom some may Envy,
and others Emulate, but few are found that in all things do or can imitate.

The place of his Birth.
Ignatius Jurdain was born at Lyme-Regis in the County of Dorset, (that little
Town so famous for the long Siege by the Kings forces, and for repelling the
most furious assaults of those that beleaguered it,) and it may add to the fame
of it, that this man was born in her; Psalm. 87.5. As it was an honor to be
born in Zion, so it was an honor to Lyme that he was born there.
He was sent by his Friends to Exeter when he was young, where he was to be
brought up in the profession of a Merchant; and being sent to the I Will of
Garnsey about the age of fifteen years, God, who by his providence brought him
to that Place, did by his Grace effectually call and Convert him; So that for
after time he resolved to be like that wise Merchant in the Gospel, Math. 13.46.
to part with all for that Pearl of great Price, when many others did make it
their great work and their highest design, to get the pelf of the World, and
to load themselves with thick clay d. Hab. 2.6.
And in testimony of his thankfulness to God, he left by Will a considerable
Legacy to the Poor of Lyme, where he was born, and to the Poor of Garnsey where
he was Newborn.

His Conversion in his younger years.
God seasoning his heart with Grace in his younger years, the General course of
his life did for the future relish of it, as wise Solomon has observed Prove.
22.6. Quo semel est imbuta recens Horat. Quintil: Jnstit: Or at. l. 1. c. 1.
His Private Life.
Prove. 22. in the general, and in him we have a particular and approved
instance. As he was trained up in Religion from his youth, so he continued, not
only in the form and profession, but in the Life and power of it, until his
old age, and death.

What was more specially worthy observation in his private course, before the
time of showing himself in his public Office of Magistracy, I cannot give any
certain account, it being so long since; and there being but few living, that
either did observe his holy conversation, or that are able and willing to give
deserved testimony to it; Few things are recorded of John (Baptist until the
day of his showing unto Israel, viz. in his public Ministry, Luke. 1. Luke
1.80. (...). Spanh. Dub. Eu. T. 2. Dub. 100.
And but little of our blessed Savior himself until the time of his public
ministry. And therefore it is the more excusable, if the former part of his
life be passed over, and we come to the time when he was Magistrate, and the
chiefest Magistrate, the Major of the City; I know not whether the City did
more honor him in choosing him to be Major, or he the City in his zealous and
faithful discharge of his office and public trust.

His Public life in his Magistracy.
But I intend to limit my relation to his Acts and doings as a Magistrate (yet
therein he was most exemplary to all that succeeded in that place of dignity,
or the like in any other City or Corporation) but shall declare that which has
been partly observed and testified by men of known Fidelity Testes fide digni.
and Integrity, and partly noted by mine own experience and observation; which
that I may the more distinctly record, I shall refer all to three heads, his
Piety, Justice and Charity, showing how he honored God therein; and then how
God honored and preserved him, when he was about his work.

1. To begin with his Piety, wherein he was most eminent; there have been few
men observed to walk so with God as Enoch. 1. His Piety.
Genesis 9.5. and before him, as it was enjoined to Abraham, Gen 17. and to hold
so constant and close communion with him as he did. It was his constant
practice, Genesis 5.22. Chap. 17.1.
for many years together even to his old age, to arise betwixt two and three of
the clock in the morning, and that in the coldest season of the year, and then
to meditate and pray in secret until six a clock, the appointed time of the
morning Sacrifice in the family; when he was called from secret devotions to
the exercise of religious family duties (rare and unparalled example of all
that I have known or heard of;) And that at any time he had overslept himself
(as he accounted) and did not rise until four a clock, he would much bemone
himself for that he had lost so much time of sweet and comfortable communion
with God. And had he not experimentally found much sweetness in this his
spiritual converse with God as David did, Psalm. 104.34.
Psalm. 104. he could not have continued so constant therein; And he thus
awaking with God and renewing his acquaintance with him from day to day, no
marvel that he did walk whith him all the day long.

His Sincerity.
His care was to walk very exactly and sincerely according to the Apostles
direction Ephesians. 5.16. (...) See Dr. Prostons Sermon on that Text.
Ephesians. 5. but though he studied to approve himself to God, and to walk as in the
sight of God 2 Cor. 2.17.
2. Cor 2. yet he could not escape the malicious censures of men, if he did all
in Hypocrisy; he knew that he had the imputations of dissembling and hypocrisy
cast upon him (by men void of charity and sincerity) but the testimony of his
own conscience did more comfort him, then the uncharitable censures of men
deject him, and he had wont, upon that occasion, to take up the words of Job
Chap 27. Job 27.5.
Till I die I will not remove mine integrity from me; and many have often heard
him to profess, that he would not willingly sin to get a world, though the
evil which he Romans 7.25. His sincerity questioned.
would not do that he did, (as it is incident to the best of men Romans 7.1. and
he did bewail it with grief of heart. The sincerity hoth of his intentions and
actions have been questioned, and some have not been ashamed to say, that under
color of doing justice and providing for the poor, he robbed the poor, and
helped to keep his own house with that money, which was due to the poor. But
for that falsehood which was charged upon him, there is none could ever better
clear him from it then himself, not only his conscience witnessing for him
before God, but his books (wherein he kept an exact record of the money which he
received for swearing and drunkenness according to the penalty of the law)
and the Officers that distributed the money testifying his uprightness before
men; so that he might truly say with Jacob, Genesis 30. Genesis 30.33.
My righteousness shall answer for me, and so it did herein both before God
and men.

His Conscience in the exercises of Religion.
He was a man that made Conscience of all exercises of Religion both in private
and public, his frequent discourses of heaven and the way thereunto, and
assurance of interest therein, did declare, that his heart and conversation
were much in heaven. Matt. 12. Mat. 12.34, 35.
And he had wont to take occasion to confer of spiritual and heavenly things
with all sorts of men that he did converse with; One should seldom hear him
speak but of heaven and heavenly things, his heart was so full of heaven, that
he could not but utter and breath it forth in his discourses with men, and
especially with those whose hearts and faces were toward heaven, when he was
at Table receiving his daily food, he did usually minister occasion of holy
discourse, and divert vain and unprofitable talk, to edifying speeches that
might minister grace to the hearers Ephesians. 4. Ephesians. 4.29.
and to take occasion from earthly things to speak of heavenly, as from the
sweetness of the Creatures to speak of the infinite sweetness which is in
God, from feasting on earth to the sitting down with Abraham Mat. 8.11.
Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven, and feasting with God and his
blessed Saints there, and when the Table-cloth was taken away, he would often
say [In heaven there is no taking away, here we are soon satisfied and cloyed,
but there will be such a feash that we shall be continually delighting our
souls in it, without any cloying]. And his manner was to close his meals with
the singing of some short Psalm.

His Reading good Books.
He delighted much in reading good and holy books, but especially the Book of
books the holy Scriptures, wherein he most delighted, he had taken therein the
property of a godly person Psalm. 1.2. Psalm. 119.97.
Ps. 1. and Psa, 119. The word of God was his meditation all the day long; yea
day and night, he did not only read the scripture more then twenty times over,
but he read it with special observation (as appears by the Stars in the
margent. S. Senens. Bibl. l. 3. or such like signal notes*
asterisks and marks in his Bible) and application to himself. The like course
he took in reading over that useful book of Mr. Rogers his seven Treatises, and
other practical books wherein he was very conversant; and his collections out
of several Authors do abundantly testify; And he took so much delight in
reading that voluminous and excellent book of the Acts and monuments of the
Church, set forth by Mr. Fox, commonly called the book of Maertyrs, that upon
occcasion, he told a Friend, that he had read it seven times over.

His Zeal.
His zeal for God and his glory, and against Idolatry, Profaneness and other
evils, whereby God was most highly dishonored, was most eminent and
remarkable. He was a man of an Antilaodicean temper; he had well Learned the
Apostles direction. Romans 12.11. (...), not (...), as in some Copies.
Romans 12. To be fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord, and not the time. He was
not like another Ignatius Ioiola the founder of the Order of the Jesuits.
Camerar. Hist. Obs. l. 4. c. 9.
Ignatius that was a man of fire, that was set on fire of hell to promote the
cause of the Prince of darkness; but he had an holy fire kindled in his heart
from heaven, whereby he did burn with zeal for the advancing of Gods glory, and
an holy indignation against sin and error; he would (if it had been possible)
have burned up all the dross and filth, that did corrupt the truth of God, and
was contrary to the way of holiness. And therein he was very like unto Eusebius:
Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 30. Hist. Magdeb. Cent. 2.^.10. Fox's Acts and Monuments
in the 3. of the Ten Persecutions. He was a strict observer of the Sabbath.
Ignatius the Martyr.

He was a very strict and conscientious observer of the Christian Sabbath, the
Lords day; He did then rise very early as on other days (if not earlier) and
did stir up those of his family to an early rising on that day, saying This is
Gods day, and as we do expect that our servants should rise early to go about
our work on our days, so God expects our early rising on his day, to go about
his work and service] And he did then very carefully attend upon the Lords holy
Ordinances; the feet of them that dispensed the Gospel were very beautiful in
his eyes. Romans 10.15.
Romans 10. more beautiful then their faces to many others; he was one of those
Saints that sat down at Gods feet to receive his Word Deuteronomy. 33.3. Act. 22.3.
Chap. 21.16. Senesco semper aliquid addiscens.
Deuteronomy. 33. as Disciples at the feet of their teacher Act. 22. and he was very
desirous and willing to learn of any that came with the Lords message unto him;
he was a M^ason, an old Disciple Act. 21. A Disciple when he was old; it never
entered into his heart to cast off: Ordinances, no not when he had attained an
high degree of Perfection; He was a constant noter of Sermons, even when he was
old, not for his own benefit alone, but for the good of his family, to whom he
did constantly repeat the Sermons. And if he found himself overtaken with
drowsinesse in hearing the Word (an infirmity incident to age,) his manner was
to stand up, and to rowse up himself that he might hear the more attentively;
He knew that Religion consisted not in hearing and repetitions and Profession,
but in practice, and therefore his care was to digest his hearing and knowledge
into an holy conversation. (...) Ignat. Epist. ad Romans His exciting of others
to good


And being desirous not to go to heaven alone, but to draw others with him, his
usual course was, when he went with his family, to attend upon the Lords holy
Ordinances, to give an exhortation to his children and servants: [that they
should consider into whose presence they were going, and whom they were to
hear, even that great God, to whom they were to give an account of every word
which they did hear, and be careful to lay it up, for their practice; and not
say, my Father or my Master would not afford me the time, for if they did, he
would protest against them in the day of Judgment;] And as he was going to the
Congregation on the Week days, he would often find some of the Country people
come to the Market early in the morning, and he would ask them where they did
live, and they answering five, or six, or more miles off, be thereupon did
take occasion to show them, how vain a thing it was to pursue the World, and to
neglect the care of their precious souls, and ask them [how they could rise so
early to get the world, and not rise as early to get interest in Jesus Christ,
and to attain the favor of God, and assurance of eternal happiness;] And then
he would look back upon his family and say, [here you see these people can rise
betimes to get a little part of the world, and your will hardly arise early to
get the assurance of the favor of God, which is far better then the whole
world.

His speaking of the Sermons which he heard.
After his return from Sermons, he would be speaking to those that went with
him, of what they heard, exhorting them to be mindful of it, and put it in
practice, and one of the company being troubled at the hearing of him to press
such things upon them, told him that he had heard many good Sermons The name of
the Cathedral.
at St. Peter's, but never heard one at the great Conduit before; to whom he
replied, [ Sirs, are ye troubled to be put in mind of the Word of God, I pray
God the time come not when you are in hell, that you wish you had not only
practiced the Sermons which you heard at St. Peter's, but had received good
counsel from the Word at the great Conduit also.]

His Assurance.
Thus by his diligent attending upon and careful applying the means of grace,
and Gods blessing upon them, he attained a very great measure of assurance, a
kind of Plerophory, such as the Apostle speaks of, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. (...).
1 Thessalonians. 1.5. much Assurance: and Col. 2.2. (...).
Col. 2. Full of assurance, of understanding, by which he was carried as with a
full fail to holy duties: If we consider the measure and the constancy of it,
there be few Christians that have attained so much. Assurance was much in his
tongue and heart, and it was that which he earnestly labored for, and obtained
by fervent prayer and diligent use of the means. God gave him the Romans 8.16.
Testimony and Ephesians. 1.13.
seal of his Spirit, and so assured him of his eternal love in Christ, of his
adoption and eternal happiness in heaven. God gave it as part of his reward
for his sincere and faithful service.

He had sometimes more then ordinary illapses and incomes of the Spirit for the
strengthening of his assurance: His extraordinary Comforts.
I Will instance one particular alone; He being at a Sermon, and attending
heedfully to those discerning and differencing marks of uprightness which were
then laid down, and one mark being more powerfully pressed, and coming fully
home to his condition, he being in a deep and serious meditation, and
reflecting upon himself, and finding it to be truly in him, it seemed to him,
as if one struck him upon the shoulder, encouraging him and saying, Be of good
cheer, thou art the man; upon which he had presently such inward joys and
ravishings of Spirit as were unexpressible.

And as he obtained, so he carefully kept his assurance by free trial of
himself and his spiritual estate toward God; His keeping his Assurance.
he had wont to try himself by all the marks of sincerity which he found in the
Scriptures, heard in the Ministry of the Word, or read in the writings of godly
Divines, and thereby he did clear up his evidences for heaven; and he did not
only daily try his estate by some marks, but he kept a narrow watch over his
heart and ways, and so his assurance was preserved. And he kept it a long time
together, for 30. years or more: And being asked whether he never met with any
temptations of doubting of his estate toward God, he gave this answer, [That
he had been and often was sorely assaulted by Satan's temptations, which were
set against his faith and assurance, and that he had been foiled in respect of
the application of some particular promises, but he was not driven from his
holdfast of Christ, or from the assurance of his interest in the Covenant of
grace, but still he acknowledged, that his assurance and all his ability in
spiritual things was through Christ that strengthened him, Phil. 4.13.
Phil. 4.]

His exciting others to get Assurance.
As he had this assurance in himself, so he was very forward to stir up others
to get this assurance; there were scarce any that he met with, if he supposed
that their faces were heavenward, but he would be questioning with them about
their assurance, blaming them if they did not labor for it, and encouraging
them to seek for it. And when some did ask him how they should get it, he gave
this answer, [ That they should importunately seek it of God, and not give him
any rest until be granted it unto them; I would (said he) lock or bolt my
door, and beg it of God, and I would never give him rest until I had obtained
it; and then, that they should daily try themselves by some marks, and three he
did often mention as trying himself thereby: 1. A sincere desire to fear the
name of God, as Nehem. 1. ult.
Nehem. 1. 2. A sincere endeavor to do the will of God in all things required,
Psalm. 119.6.
Psalm. 119. 3. A full purpose of heart to cleave to the Lord, Act. 11.23.
Act. 11. And these he did not only speak of, but press with much
earnestness, as longing that others should partake of that high privilege and
heavenly gift with himself.

He feared not Death.
From this assurance it was, that he was so fearlesse of death; he knew that
death was an enemy, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15.26.
1 Cor. 15. but that through Christ it was a friend to open the gate to heaven.
Whereas death is as Bildad says, Job 18.14. N. Annot. in. loc.
Job 18. the King of terrors to flesh and blood: and as Arist. Ethic. lib. 3.
cap. 6. (...).
on that was led by the light of Nature said, That it was the most terrible of
all terrible things; yet he being assured of his interest in Christ, it was not
so to him, for he Vid. Gryn. Disp. Theol. de Mortis metu.
looked upon it as having lost its sting in Christ. He made it so familiar to
him by his continual meditating of it, that he was so far from fearing it, that
he did delight in the speaking of it, earnestly desired it, and with joy
expected it; whereby he discovered his great Calvin. Instit. l. 3. c. 9. 5.
proficiency in the School of Christ. It was his usual saying, [That if death
were offered on the one hand, and the Kings Crown on the other, he would take
the Crown and throw it into the Kennel, and choose death far above the The same
spirit breathed in him, as in Ignatius the Martyr. (...). Ignat. Epist. ad Romans
crown;] for he knew he should be a gainer by it, for he should obtain the
crown of life and glory, He had a desire to have dyed for Christ, as Ignatius
of old, (...), Ignat. Epist. ad Romans
Jam. 1. 1 Pet. 5. And that he feared not, but rather Jam. 1.12. 1 Pet. 5.4.
hoped for death: It appears by this, that when the Plague was very hot in the
City, and he being in the highest place of Authority there at that time, and
the poor flocked about his house for relief, though he would not causelessly
expose himself to danger; yet being in the discharge of his duty he feared not
the plague, but he often professed, [That if the Plague should (by Gods
disposing) seize upon him, he would have kissed and welcomed it as the
Messenger of death;] Nor was the meditation of death then in his mind only in
times of danger, but at all times, there was not a day when he did not speak of
it; and not only when there was occasion offered of such discourse, but he
would take occasion to speak of it; as if he were invited to a Feast, he would
tell the Messenger, [That he would come if he did live so long:] And when he
went out of his house upon public or private business, he would as it were
take a solemn leave of his wife telling her, [That he knew not whether he
should return to his house again.]

His Meditation of heaven.
But his mind was not so much upon death as upon heaven (to which he was assured
that death would be a passage for him) sure his heart was much in heaven, or
heaven was much in his heart, as appears by his frequent discourse of it both
day and night; for Matthew. 12.34.
Matthew. 12. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: As Ignatius
of old had the name of Jesus so deeply engraven in his heart, that he could not
but make frequent mention of it, H. Magd. Cent. 2. c. 10.
All that knew him (and looked upon him with an unprejudiced eye) would say,
that he was a most heavenly minded man, a man that lived as much in heaven, as
most that ever lived upon the earth: When in the night he looked upon those
bright lights of heaven, Ezekiel. 32.8.
Ezekiel. 32. the firmament adorned with those stars of light, Psalm. 148 3.
Psalm. 148. he had wont to raise up his thoughts and his speech much higher, to
the glory of the highest heaven, saying, [If this heaven be so glorious, how
does the heaven above exceed in glory, where God alone shall be the light; and
yet the righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father,]
Matthew. 13.43.
Matthew. 13. These are but some few heads of his Piety, to which much more may
be added, and they that knew him will mervail, not that so much is said, but
that no more.

as eminent for Justice, as for Piety; when he was advanced to the chiefest
place of Government in the City, His Justice.
to be the A. ^. 1617.
Major of that Honorable Corporation, he was an exemplary Magistrate, not only
in the year of his Majoralty, but ever after so long as he lived; he looked not
upon it as a place of honor only, but as an office of trust, wherein he might
honor God, and do Justice to men, and reform those evils which abounded then
in that place: He did not glory so much in having the Sword carried before him,
(though it were a singular honor to that City, Henry the seventh.
that the Kings Sword should be taken from his side and delivered to the Major
to be carried before him, as a signal testimony of his favor, and their
loyalty and courage in the insurrection of Perkin Warbeck.) as he was desirous
to draw forth the sword of Romans 13.4.
Justice against evil doers, and not to hold it in vain, Romans 13.

His impartial administering of Justice.
He was observed to be one that did impartially administer Justice, and without
respect of Persons did punish evil doers, of what quality or condition soever
they were that did transgress the Law; whether they were of the City, or
strangers that came thither, they should not (if complaint were made to him)
escape condign punishment, such as the Laws of the Land, or custom of the
place did award.

An instance of it.
To give but one instance of many; there was a Gentleman of quality (whose name
I spare) that was complained of for swearing five Oaths, and other
misdemeanors, thereupon Mr. Jurdain sent a Constable with a Warrant to bring
him before him, but the Gentleman gave the Constable menacing terms, so that
he durst not execute his office, whereupon M. Jurdain sent one Constable more,
who brought the Gentleman to him, and he being in his Court when he came, after
diverse good admonitions given him, and telling him, that though he were never
so great a Gentleman, [That he could no more go to heaven so long as he took
such courses, than he could eat that stone,] (pointing to a great stone in his
Court) he required him to pay five shillings for swearing, which he did, as
also to give in sureties for his good behavior; but this the Gentleman refused
to do, saying, he was a stranger; thereupon Mr. Jurdain bad the Constables to
carry him away to prison, till he should find sureties, which they did, and as
he was going into the prison door, he desired to return back again, and he
would give bait, which he did; and then having received many good
instructions, (though he were a man of a very high spirit) gave him many hearty
thanks, with promise of amendment for the future.

The Bridewell could witness how many disorderly persons were sent thither by
his Warrants, more then any other of the Justices of his time.

And the Stocks and whipping Posts could testify, what Swearers, Drunkards,
unclean Persons, and such like notorious offenders were punished principally by
his executing of Justice. And if any of the Offenders, that were liable to the
censure and penalty of the Law, desired to be spared, he would tell them, [Here
be my Children whom I dearly love, and if any of them should commit such
offenses, they should suffer as you must do, and therefore I cannot remit of
the penalty of the Law.]

How fair pretenses soever they made, he caused the Law to be executed on them;
yea and the more severely because of the greater dishonor that redounded to
the name of the holy God thereby.

When some scandalous Offenders, (whose names I omit) for the gross sin of
Uncleanness were accused and questioned before the Court, and some for
by-respects did plead for them to have them spared, he desired that the
Watchmen that were at the Gates to keep out the Plague (it being a time that
the sickness was in some neighboring Towns) should be called home, for the
Plague was in the Guild Hall of the City; and he told them, that if they did
not execute the Law upon them, he would complain of them to the Council Table;
and thereupon after much contest, there was order taken for their severe and
just punishment.

He was very vigilant (especially in his Majoralty, when the Government of the
City lay most upon him) both to prevent and remove disorders, so that he would
go with the Constables in Person to search for idle and disorderly persons on
Sabbath days at night, and at the end of the Assizes and Sessions, and Fair
weeks.

His Zeal against Swearing.
He did not only execute Justice, but he showed himself very zealous therein,
and the greatest indignation against those evils whereby God was most highly
dishonored, as swearing and Sabbath-breaking; swearing was most odious to him;
and had there been a greater penalty then was at that time appointed by the Law
of the Land, he would most gladly have inflicted it. But he punishing as many
as were brought before him, struck such an awe into most, that some that lived
then in the City, and near the place of the greatest concourse of people, the
Corn-Market, observed, that they did not hear an oath sworn for many years
together.

A notable instance of it.
I have heard it credibly related, that being summoned to appear at the
Star Chamber, for an act of Justice, wherein it was supposed that he went
somewhat beyond the strict letter of the Law, (of which I shall hereafter give
an account) and being in the presence of some of his Judges, and hearing them
to swear diverse oaths, he told them, That they must pay for every oath that
they had sworn, or otherwise he would make it farther known.

Against the Profaning of the Sabbath.
When he was Major, he did much reform the open profaning of the Sabbath; for
whereas the Fullers had wont to set their Mills a going on the Sabbath, he put
a stop upon them for that whole day, knowing that that day was fully to be
dedicated to God and his worship and service; and whereas it was usual to sell
fruit and herbs, and other things on the Lords holy day, and Bowling and
Cudgel-playing, and other profane pastimes were then much used, by his zeal and
vigilance, and the care of good Officers under him, they were wholly removed,
though not without much reluctance and opposition, and He contended with
unreasonable men, as Paul with beasts at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15.32. (...), and as
Ignatius the Martye from Syria to Rome. Ignat. Epist. ad Romans and Epist. ad
Tars. (...).
danger at the first; for there were Commotions and Tumults, and great
resistance, but by his constant zeal for God and his day, they were suppressed
and quel'd.

His Constancy in the execution of Justice.
And not only when he was Major, but ever after being a Justice of Peace; And
he continued so for 22. years: he was much employed in the execution of
Justice, sometimes the whole day from morning to night; he did not only execute
Judgment in the Jer. 21.12.
morning (after he had been with God in the mount of heavenly meditation) but
all the day long; as Moses sat to judge the people, and the people stood
before Moses from Morning to the Evening, Exodus 18.13. His Mercy in Judgment.
Exodus 18.

He was not for Judgment only, but for Mercy also, and he showed mercy to the
souls of those that were brought before him as transgressors of the Law, and
to be punished according to the Law, for he would labor to convince them of
the heinousness of their offenses, that he might bring them to the sight of
their sins, and to repentance for them.

His encouraging of Officers.
He did much encourage the Officers under him to the diligent and faithful
discharge of their duy; (and they stood in need of it, meeting with much
discouragement from some others) and finding them somewhat backward, through
timorousness or other by-respects, to execute his Warrants upon men of high
place, he would encourage them to be active and forward in doing their duty,
and tell them in good earnest, (for that was his usual word) That if he had as
good a Warrant from God, as they had from him to apprehend offenders, if he
were required to apprehend the devil himself, he would not be backward to put
it in execution.]

Justice, then for Charity, both in his life, His Charity.
and at his death: In his lifetime he was a man free-hearted, and open-handed,
he was a great friend and Patron of the poor; he was another Job in that
respect, he could truly say with him, Job 30.25.
Job 30. Was not my soul grieved for the poor? it was no doubt; and the bowels
of his compassion did yearn toward them; he was an Advocate, and did earnestly
plead for them, and especially for Gods poor, honest poor men, whose hearts and
faces were set Godward and heavenward, and his hands were very open to relieve
them; he did that for them which few others of far greater estate had hearts to
do.

His care for the Poor in the time of the Plague. A. C. 1625
His Care for the poor was most remarkable in the time of the great Plague in
the City (which was 28. years since;) for, in the Majors absence being chosen
his Deputy or Lieutenant, he seeing the deplored condition of the City,
accepted of it: And then he wrote diverse Letters to many Towns in Devonshire,
and some in Dorset, and Sommersetshire, and by that means procured diverse
sums of Moneys, for the supplying the Wants of the many hundreds of poor
that at that time were in a very distressed condition; I have it from the
relation of one that was a near neighbor, and diligent observer of his care
for the public good of the City and for the poor, that he had seen morning
after morning coming to his door sometimes thirty, sometimes forty, fifty, or
threescore, or more; some wringing their hands, and crying that their husbands
were dead; others that their wives were dead, others that their children were
dead, and that they had not any thing to bury them: Some again, that their
Families were sick, and they had not wherewithal to relieve them: Others, that
they had diverse Children, but they had no bread, nor money to buy it for them;
some cried for bread, some for Physic, some for shrouds. And he not only gave
them the hearing, but his bowels yerned toward them, and his hands were
stretched out for their relief: For, standing within his Shop. With his own
hands he gave supplies unto them all, and sent them to their homes for the
present; and then the next morning there was a renewing of the sad complaints
of the poor, and his renewing of his charitable care of them, and so Morning
after Morning for near three months, until the Major came into the City.

His care for poor Housekeepers.
Besides his great care to supply the wants of the poor that came unto him, he
had a special respect to poor Housekeepers and Tradesmen, such as were ashamed
or unwilling to make their poor and sad condition known, and a peculiar care of
the Godly poor, concerning whom, he would advise with the Constables and
Churchwardens of every Parish, and according to their need would proportion
some relief and help unto them, and send it by the hands of the Constables or
Wardens.

His constant care for the poor.
And his care for the poor was not only very great at that extraordinary
season, (as their exigents did require) but so long as he continued in the Land
of the living; and he was so constantly versed in this great work of Charity,
that he did it as it were naturally, as the Apostle speaks of Timothy, Phil.
2.20. (...).
Phil. 2.

An Aspersion cast upon him wiped off.
But though he did well, yet he heard ill for this, and it was by some cast in
his teeth that he made beggars: And when he was asked by a man of place and
estate, what he would give to keep the poor from begging; (supposing that he
would not be so forward therein as he was in relieving them) he freely offered
a great part of his estate, on condition that the other would do the like; but
he could not obtain that of him to follow him.

His Hospitality.
He was given much to Hospitality, he did not love to eat his morsels alone by
himself, as Job 31.17.
Job 31. he did well remember the Apostles direction, Heb. 13.2.
Heb. 13. Be not forgetful to entertain strangers, he was most loving and
friendly to them, and such especially as did suffer for their conscience sake;
as those godly Ministers that were silenced for Nonconformity (although his
judgment was in a good measure satisfied in that point) to him they did
continually resort, and by him were kindly entertained; So that by the profaner
sort, he was cried out upon as the Arch-Puritan; and by those that took
Religion to heart, honored with the title of Gaius mine host, and of the
whole Church, Romans 16.23. N. Annot. in loc.
Romans 16. And he is much commended for his hospitality, (if it be the same
Gaius as it seems to be) 3 John 5, 6.
3 John 5.6. Beloved thou do faithfully, whatsoever thou do to the
brethren (thy neighbor Christians) and to strangers which have born witness
of thy charity before the Church.

The Legacies in his Will.
But if we consider his last Will or Testament, we shall see very rare and
unparalled acts of Charity: As he gave one third part of his temporal estate
to his Wife, and another third part to his Children; (according to the custom
of the City) so out of the other third part he left very large Legacies,
especially to the poor: I shall omit many Legacies given to Ministers and
others, and point at some more remarkable; I will deliver it in the words of
his Will, [First I give to all the poor of this City and County that have pay
of Parishes, and also those which dwell in There were seven or eight of them.
Almes-houses, I give five shillings to each to be paid at my burial; I give to
one hundred poor people more ten shillings to each, to be given to such as my
Overseers shall think to have most need, the honest poor to be chiefly looked
unto. Also I give to the poor of Lyme where I was born, and to the poor of
Garnsey where I was newborn, five pounds to each place: (which accordingly was
done by those Overseers) Also I forgive all the moneys owing to me, if it be
under the These smaller sums to the poor were very many.
value of twenty shillings each.] And after in a Postscript [Also my Will is,
and I give now more to fifty poor people of this City and County, by twenty
shillings to each by my Overseers, or most part of them.] Thus out of that
estate which God had given him, he gave again by way of gratitude to God, I
mean to the poor, who are Gods Receivers: God gave him and left him a competent
estate, (after his many and great losses) and which was more, he gave him an
heart to honor Prove. 3.9.
him with his substance, and to lay it forth as it became a faithful Steward,
in the service and for the honor of his Lord who had entrusted him with it.

Apology for his Charity.
I know that some do wonder, and others sharply censure him for his
extraordinary charity and liberality, and especially for that he left no
greater portion of his estate to his Wife; but this may be said in his defense,
That the straight and close hearts of men are not a fit measure to measure his
large heart by: And besides, God had opened his hand, and given very liberally
to him blessings spiritual and temporal; and especially spiritual, the graces
and comforts of his Spirit: and he having so sweet a Communion with God above
most other men, what mervail if he did more for God then other men? And
concerning his Wife, as he left her the third part of his estate, so likewise
Executrix of his Will, and there had much more come unto her then did, had not
some debts (which he accounted good) failed and come short of his and her
expectation: besides, he did assure himself, that her Sir Simon Baskervill.
Brother then living, a man of great estate, would be ready to supply any of
her wants.

Thus you have seen what he did for God; and we are next to consider what God
did for him. What God did for him.
Besides all those graces which were eminently in him, whereby he was enabled
to act so zealously and vigorously for God, which were the free gift of God,
and that Assurance which he had, which was a part of his reward; The Lord
advanced him from a mean and low estate, to the highest place of dignity in the
City; his beginning was but small, as appears by his answer to those that
threatened to follow him with Suits, that they would not leave him worth a
groat; he cheerfully replied, [ That he should be then but two pence poorer
then when he came first to Exeter, for he brought but six pence with him
thither:] And yet, by Gods blessing on his labors, he got a competent and
comfortable estate, whereby he did maintain a large Family of Children and
Servants, kept hospitality, was liberal to the poor, and open-handed to any
pious use, more then those that had far greater estates: but when he had the
greatest temporal estate, he set no high estimate upon these fading perishing
things, he set them not up in his heart (as the men of the World use to do) but
trod them under his feet; and he did usually set them very low in his ordinary
discourse, and especially when he was speaking of heaven and heavenly things:
And yet he did not forget to acknowledge Gods goodness in bestowing any of
these outward things upon him; He found by experience the uncertainty of
riches, 1 Timothy 6.17.
1 Timothy 6. and that they had wings and would fly away, Prove. 23.5.
Prove. 23. but he did not run after them, crying, as they that use to set their
hearts upon them, but saw Gods Job 1.21.
hand in taking as in giving, and so was quiet and content, having
experimentally learned in a good measure that great and difficult lesson, to be
content in any estate, Phil. 4.11. (...).
Phil. 4. by vicissitudes and changes of estates God did exercise his faith and
patience, and Contentation.

His advancement to the Majoralty.
Having passed through the several Offices, he ascended at last to the highest
place of honor in the City, to be Major there, wherein (as has been said) he
demeaned himself as it became a Christian Magistrate, and his ambition therein
was highly to honor God who had honored him. And afterward he was chosen to
be a Burgess for the Parliament, Burgess of Parliament.
wherein his zeal for God, and against the corruptions of the times was
abundantly manifested. He was a great stickler to have the Bill passed for the
punishment of Adultery with death; but those times would not bear it, some of
the Lawmakers knew some special reason for it.

His honor in the hearts of Good men.
God did not only advance him to places of dignity and honor in the eye of the
world, but gave him an high place in the hearts of his people; and if it be
true which the Arist. Ethic. l. 1.6.5.
Moralist notes, that honor is in the Person honoring; then he being advanced
in the hearts of men, (as he was especially in the hearts of good men) he was
highly honored, and therein God made good his promise to him, 1 Samuel 2.30.
1 Samuel 2. Such as honor me I will honor. And his name was very precious in
the sight of those that knew his worth, while he lived, and since his death.

I acknowledge that he was a byword to many, A byword to Others.
and that his name was taken up by way of reproach, but they were such as were
upbraided, and reproved by his holy and gracious conversation, and reproved by
his holy and gracious conversation, and he knew that his Lord and Master did
suffer much more in this kind, that this was a chip of that cross which he
must and was willing to bear, and he was well content to drink of this bitter
cup after his Master, and with him he did despise that shame Heb. 12.2.
which the men of the world cast upon him, nay accounted it his honor to
suffer shame for the name of Christ, as the Apostles did, Act. 5.4. (...).
Act. 5. But some brought shame upon themselves, that thought to cast contempt
and scorn upon him: Among other instances this one was remarkable, That being
chosen Burgess for the Parliament, not without much opposition, and going up
to London to clear his Election, at which time there was an accusation sent up
against him by a man of no mean place and power, That he was the Hospes
Schismaticorum. The very expression in the Letter.
host of the Schismatics. It was presumed by some that he would be sent back
with disgrace. And therefore there was a Sermon prepared by one to jeer him at
his return, this being the text, Psalm. 114.5
Psalm. 114.5. What ailed thee -- thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back? (Thus
men of profane spirits will dare to make the Sacred Word of God to serve their
own base ends and lusts,) but Mr. Jurdain was confirmed in his place to which
he was chosen; and so shame was cast into the face of the profane scorner, and
the Sermon, or invective rather, became abortive.

God standing by him in his troubles.
And as he stood up for God, so God did stand by him, and assist him, and carry
him through many troubles and dangers that did threaten, and even compass him
about. One act of Gods Providence among others was most notable, in delivering
him out of his troubles. He having done an act of Justice in punishing an
unclean Person (whose offense was aggravated by some heinous circumstances)
being moved with indignation against the offense, he went (it seems) besides
the Letter of the Law in some circumstance. And thereupon some friends of the
Person punished (being stirred up with indignation for the disgrace that
reflected upon them, more then for the dishonor done to God, and the foul blot
that was cast upon Religion) did resolve to prosecute him to the uttermost for
it, and they put him to great charge and trouble. When the matter came to a
final decision in the Star Chamber, it was much feared by many of his friends,
and through the boasting of his Adversaries, that some heavy censure should
have been passed upon him to his crushing and undoing; and when friends failed
him on earth, he flees to heaven for succor and defense, he cried to God in
David's words, Psalm. 22.11. Verse. 19.
Psalm. 22. Be not far from me, O Lord, for trouble is near, for there is none
to help; and O my strength, haste thou to help me: And he set apart an Evening,
and a great part of the night, for fasting and Prayer, that he might engage God
on his side, who had the hearts of all men, even the greatest in his hand to
turn them as he pleased, Prove. 21.1.
Prove. 21. And behold the next morning a real and gracious answer from heaven,
he was acquitted and commended by the Lord Keeper, and God stirred up the
hearts of diverse of that high Arbitrary Court to speak in his behalf; Thus the
Lord was a very present help in trouble to him, Psalm. 46.1.
Psalm. 46. And after that he was freed and came home, he piled up the books and
papers of all the proceedings in that vexatious business, under his Cupboard
in his Parlour, which was the place to which he did usually resort: (and where
he had that daily sweet heavenly Communion with God forementioned.) And being
asked the reason why he left so many papers and books to lie in that manner;
his answer was, [These I keep in my sight as memorials and Monuments of Gods
mercy in freeing me from my troubles.]

These are the principal things that came within mine observation, or notice
from others that well knew this Saint of God, so eminent for Piety, Justice,
and Charity, and zealous in all, in the general course of his conversation:
Many particulars have been omitted, but by that little which has been said,
you may Ex pede Herculem. A. Gell. Noct. At. l. 1. c. 1. His Sickness.
guess at the great worth of this holy man.

I come now to the last act of his life, his sickness, and the period of that,
his death: In his sickness which was very painful, he being sorely afflicted
with the Stone and the Cholick, he manifested more then ordinary Patience, His
patience.
not opening his mouth in any word that might savor of any repining or
discontent at his present condition, but meekly and patiently submitting to
Gods afflicting hand, and waiting for his long expected and desired
dissolution: His Faith and Assurance.
He did then much act faith in Jesus Christ and his gracious Promises, and his
assurance remained unshaken, though Satan was then busy with him by his
temptations; but being strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, he
did resist him: Some of his nearest friends, that observed his confident
assurance in the course of his life, of his happy estate in heaven after death,
did suppose that Satan would have set upon him with so much violence as to have
shaken his assurance, and, no doubt, he had will enough to do it, but God, who
had him in his chain, would not permit him to do it; but he went out of the
world as a Conqueror out of the field, being victorious through Christ over
all his spiritual enemies. I may not omit one particular in his sickness,
which was, his taking all occasions of exhorting and encouraging others to
constancy in the faith, His Exhortations to others.
zeal for God, and making sure of heaven; and his spirits beginning to fail
him, he would say, [I cannot speak much more to you now, remember what you have
heard from me in my health;] And he was willing to incite others that were
absent to the discharge of their duties; He instance only one particular, that
the Major of the City, that then was, sending to visit him, he called the
Messenger unto him, and said [Remember me to Mr. Major, and tell him from me,
that he have a special care of these three things; To do Justice, to provide
carefully for the poor, and to make sure of heaven;] His gracious speeches in
the time of his sickness were many, and more then I can, or were fit here to
express.

His Death.
Having fought the good fight of faith and finished his course, he sweetly and
quietly resigned up his soul into the hands of his blessed Savior and
Redeemer; He departed this life July 15th. On the Sabbath.
1640. being the Christian Sabbath, The Sabbath was his delight on earth, and
on that day God gave him to enjoy an Eternal Sabbath with him in heaven: As he
had sweet Communion with God in the use of Ordinances for many years on that
day, so he went to enjoy an immediate Communion with God on that holy day: And
after all his labors he entered into rest, that glorious rest in heaven, Heb.
4.11.
Heb. 4. His departure hence was in the 79. His Age.
year of his age and, according to his account for the new birth, in the 65th.
year, for so long he reckoned since the time of his effectual Calling. His
Funeral.
His Funeral being kept some few days after, there has not been any man known
to be more lamented then he, the loss being so great not to the City alone,
but to all these Western parts, the influence of his example as a zealous
Magistrate and Christian reaching far and near.

I will conclude this Story of his Life and Death with that which was the text
of his Funeral Sermon, Act. 13.36.
(Omitting only the name of David) Act. 13. After he had served his own
generation by the will of God he fell on sleep; He sleeps in the Lord, and will
rise gloriously in the Morning of the Resurrection, Psalm. 17. ult.
Psalm. 17. and Psalm. 49.14.
Psalm. 49.

Being dead he yet speaks.
But though he sleeps the sleep of death, yet, being dead with Abel he yet
speaks, Heb. 11.1.
Heb. 11. His zealous conversation speaks zeal and fervency to this Laodicean
and lukewarm generation, and bespeaks all Christian Magistrates, especially
those of that City where he lived, and all the Saints in all places to imitate
his Piety, Justice, Charity, and all those graces which did shine forth in his
holy and gracious conversation. I Will shut up all with that voice from Heaven,
Revel. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea
says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works do
follow them.

FINIS.

