SAD and FEARFUL NEWS FROM BEVERLEY.

OR, The Northern Diurnall. Wherein is Declared how a great Barn of Corn was
set on fire, to the great damage of Sir John Hotham, and the Inhabitants of
the said Town, and the manifold Abuses that are daily offered to those that
take part with the Parliament, by the Cavaleers, and others that are in
Authority: NAMELY, The Earl of Lindsey The Earl of Northampton The Earl of
Newcastle, The Earl of Rivers.


Whereunto is annexed, A Declaration of the Lords and Commons, concerniog the
particular Actions of the said Earls.

Ordered that this be printed and published

John Brown Cler. Parl.



July 26. LONDON, Printed for I. Harnom.

HORRIBLE NEWS FROM BEVERLEY.
SIR,
HAving so fit an occasion to write to you, and knowing how answerable our
hortestive News will be to your Desires; I have thought it necessary to inform
you of the most Remarkable passages that have happened from the 17. of this
present July to the Date hereof.

On Monday His Majesty went to survey His Forces, and to give Command that
Civil Order should be kept in every quarter, expressing a great deal of Care
of His Subjects, and indeavovring to preserve them from any Oppression, and by
his Princely Demeanor, and frequent passing Declaration, to draw more to His
Party, which is at this time very considerable.

On Tuesday it was generally thought that his Majesty would have given Answer
to the Petition presented by the Earl of Holland from the Parliament, but of a
certainty I cannot inform you. This day the Earl of Lindsey endeavored a
Vessel laden with Victual and other Provision, coming down Humber to Hull,
but by the Assistance of two ships lately sent by the Earl of Warwick, the
Vessel was safely conducted, and the said Earl glad to strike sail, and trust
to his heels or else He had mistaken his way and sailed for London instead of
Beverley.

On Wednesday Sir John Hotham having intelligence that the Fort lately raised
at Paul by the Earl of Lindsey was but weakly guarded, He sent out a party in
the Evening, when it grew darkish, to see if they could that means obtain it,
that doing him most hurt: But the Earl of Lindsey having left his ship being
chased by the Earl of Warwickes ships, was secretly arrived; so that finding
they could not attempt it without great loss, they chose rather to retreat,
then at so dear a rate to purchase it.

This day likewise came News to Beverley of a great skirmish fought at
Manchister, between the Lord Strange and the Lieutenants for the Militia, sent
thither by the Parliament.

Colonel Luasford is sent forth with Horse and Foot, but to what end is not
yet known; but as some think to assist Mr. Henry Hastings, Son to the Earl of
Huntington, who has gained a great party in Leicestershire, and it is feared,
that they intend forcibly to ceaze upon the Magazine of that County.

The Kings Majesty is gone in person to Leicestershire, it is thought to put the
Commission of Array in execution.

Thursday. Thursday News came to His Majesty, that Mr. Digby, Brother to the
Lord Digby, had raised a troop of horse and did intend very suddenly to present
His service to His Majasty.

Friday. Friday several Cavaleers returned out of Lincolnshire with Horse and
Ammunition, that they had forcibly taken from the Inhabitants of the said
County.

But for ought it could be conceived they received no great thanks from His
Majesty; neither does His Majesty contemn any other of those abuses, which are
daily offered to the inhabitants of these parts

One thing now I will tell you, the Country is afraid that we shall have such
a Race of Cavaleers, that we shall never be free from these distractions; for
we have scarce a good Maid within ten miles of the Camp: we can scarce keep
our wives from being overrun.

His Majesty in his own person settled the Array in good posture in
Lincolnshire, and he is expected to go into Wilshire, to settle the Militia;
for it is Reported the general County stands better affected to the King, then
to the Parliament, although the Earl of Pembroke has endeavored in his own
person to dispose of the same.

There had like to have bin a great combustion in the Army between several
Captains; namely, Captain Atkinson, Captain Ward, Colonel Lunsford, and diverse
Lieutenants, which endeavored to raise Parties; but at his Majesty's return
two of them were casheer'd, and the rest checked for their disobedience.

A great mischance happened in Hull, a great Barn of Corn was set on fire, and it
is feared, that it was done by some of the Inhabitants that stand not well
affected to the Parliament.

This is all that at this time I have to write; only the next Opportunity you
shall hear from me, till which time I rest

Your Friend and Servant ABEL MASON.
From Beverley July 23.
The Parliaments Declaration.
THe Lords and Commons do declare, that a Garrison of Soldiers is at
New Castle, under the Command of the Earl of New Castle Likewise Earl Rivers
being put into the Commission of Ariay, exercizes it with much rigor,
imprisoning oll thoso that oppose him.

Ordered that this be printed and published

John Brown Cler. Par.


