A True COPY of the PAPER DELIVERED by MARGAERT MARTELS own Hand, Before she
went to the Place of EXECUTION.
July the 16th. 1697.
O God most Powerful, Eternal Father, for to make you an Honorable
restitution, I accept most freely the Sentence of my Death, in Punishment of my
Crimes, for the which you had abandoned me by a just Judgment, for having left
my Religion these many Years, and professed another, in the which I always
lived ill, being not obliged to declare my self to any one, who might have
hindered me from following my unruly Inclination.

O God of Goodness, make me sensible of the works of your Mercies, and do not
Judge me in the rigor of your divine Justice, because I ought not to expect
nothing from you, but severe Punishments, by reason of the multitude of my
Offenses, which were very enormous; Nevertheless hoping in your Goodness, and
in your infinite Charity, I presume to beg of you that you, will be plesaed to
give me a sincere and sure repentance; I beg of you by your most holy Name and
the Love that is born for you, I beg of you again (O my God) by my Savior and
Redeemer Jesus Christ: By his Life and Miseries, by all his Injuries,
Disgraces, and Torments that he endured by his Death, and by his Blood that was
Spilt for me on the Cross.

O Divine Jesu, remember that you have assured us, that you did not come for
the Just but for Sinners; and that you did not seek their Death, but rather
Repentance; Convert me then, O my Adoteable Savior, I beg it of you by the
infinite Greatness of your Mercy, for it is by that alone, which I hope to
obtain Pardon and Remission of my Sins. My God, I declare before Heaven and
Earth, that now I die in the Faith and Union of the Holy Catholic, Apostolic
and Roman Church, and I firmly believe, what it believes and teaches.

O Holy Virgin Mother of Mercy, Pray for me, and defend me from the malice of
Devils; O Angel, Guardian of my Soul, defend me at this hour, and do not
abandon me till you have conducted me to the Throne of God. O my Adorable
Savior Jesus Christ, put your Cross, and the infinite merits of your precious
Blood, between your Judgment, and my Soul: Save me, my God, for my death and my
Salvation are in your hands. Into your hands my God, I recommend my Soul.

Jesu Maria, Jesu Maria, Jesu Maria, Jesu Maria, Jesu. LONDON, Printed by Mary
Edwards in Nevils-Court in Fetter-lane.


