AN APOLOGY FOR The Service of Love, AND The People that own it, commonly
called, The Family of Love.

Being a plain, but groundly Discourse, about the Right and True Christian
Religion: Set forth Dialogue-wise between the Citizen, the Countreyman, and an
Exile: as the same was presented to the High Court of Parliament, in the time
of Queen Elizabeth; and penned by one of her Majesty's menial servants, who was
in no small esteem with Her, for his known wisdom and godliness.

With another short Confession of their Faith, made by the same people. And
finally some Notes and Collections, gathered by a private hand out of H.N.
upon, or concerning the eight Beatitudes.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread-Eagle at the West end
of Paul's, 1656.

To all courteous Courtiers, the Exile sends greeting.
YOu courtly Courtiers, courteous by kind,
Lowly, wise, and pleasant in mind.
This little Device from the ground of his heart
The Exile has sent you, take it in good part:
And when you have read it, peruse it again,
For the matter is weighty, true, and eke plain.
Weigh well the fire, do nothing in have,
And measure you likewise the wind as it blows:
So call me again the day that is past,
For that is the right way Gods wisdom to know.
Both ear, yea and heart, so that ye prepare,
O ye lovely Courtiers, courteous all,
These things for to mark, which I now declare,
Left Gods wrath once kindled, unawares hap to fall.
Where godly Love as a marriage weed,
In lowly hearts works all things new,
There is the truth expressed indeed
In holy life, it is very true.
The head of the Spring where ever it lie,
If it be kept sweet pleasant and clean;
From thence then all Rivers, descending thereby,
Much sweetness of taste, shall there through obtain.
First sound ye the water, and measure the wind,
Then mark well the matter, and sup up the mind;
The Libertines herein, are set out full plain:
So are Christians likewise, that in peace would remain,
But when ye perceive who the Libertines be,
Then wish that all Christians might be set free.
Gods blessing shall fall, upon their heads full sure,
That first shall begin the same to procure
By way of Petition, when they shall think time,
And God shall the Rulers hearts thereto incline.
God save the Queens Majesty, and give her the might,
Good Christians to defend, and subdue Libertines quite.
The Argument.
IN few words, the Exile hereafter does approve,
That wonderful and necessary, is the service of Love.
If you weigh well his words, you shall easily espy;
That among some of our learned there is a wedg awry,
But to redress the same, that can no earthly man do,
Each man to amend one, is the next way thereto.
But yet by no other mean, may a man thereto attain,
Save alone by the mean expressed in Loves service certain.
And the chief of all virtues he does likewise approve,
To be a meek minded spirit, fast grounded in Love.
An Apology for the Service of Love.
A Mavelous Matter manifested by an Exile, through a short Communication, in
manner of a Dialogue: And pointing as it were with his finger, upon an
unconfutable truth: He gives to all Courteous hearts, that shall vouchsafe
advisedly to read the same, great cause of careful Consideration.

The Citizen, the Country man and the Exile, Interlocutors. And first, the
Citizen to the Countryman. THou know right well Countryman, that the
Citizen has often times need of the Countryman, both for clothing, victuals,
and other necessaries; wherefore I pray thee, let us two hold friendship still,
and be merty together in honest pastime, like as we always in times past have
done: But now I pray thee Countryman, tell me, how happens it, that thou
art so sad now a days, over thou wast wont to be?


Countryman. I have not any cause to be merry, considering the state of the
world, and dangerous time that now is.


Citizen. Why Countryman of fellowship tell me the cause, is it for want of
worldly things? or else what is the matter? show me, for thou know me to be
thy friend; yea, in very deed, I am thy near kinsman; therefore thou may be
bold to express thy mind freely unto me, and I shall truly, and trustily keep
thy Counsel; for I intend to be merry and follow my trade, and not to busy my
self in other men's matters.


Countryman. I shall then tell thee, as unto my very friend, the cause of my
heaviness: when I consider what great cause we have to be thankful to God for
his manifold goodness, mercifulness, and great benefits extended on us his
creatures in our creation: And in that he has also given us his holy law, as a
glass of righteousness, therein to look into and behold our sinful spots,
and deformities, and so learn thereout the way or mean, to become purged from
the same filthynesse; yet now, although we have seemed to look therein a long
time, I see that our spots and deformities generally; are waxen worse and
worse. And about the law or holy Scriptures, there is risen every where great
contention, and this I see come to pass, through all Christendom, so well
among those which are counted for men of high knowledge, and great learning, as
likewise among all other sorts of smaller understanding, in consideration
whereof I have both for my self and others more cause to lament, then for to
laugh or be merry.


Citizen. Notwithstanding Countryman, thou know right well, that we have
been taught these many years, by our learned preachers, and that as it seems
according to the Scriptures, that all our spots are cleansed, and washed away,
only by the death of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and by no other means,
whereof we may in no wise doubt or mistrust, but must acknowledge that he has
made a full reconcilement, and satisfaction to God his Father, upon the Altar
of his Cross, once for all our sins, and for the sins of the whole world: yea
moreover as thou know, that we all have our freedom thereby; though yet, as
it cannot be denied, we have been deceived in times past, by many false
prophets, and teachers, which have craftily crept in amongst us, in sheeps
Clothing, under pretense of holiness: But yet Christ says, you shall know
them by their fruits, and those you know were the superstitious papists, which
brought in all Idolatry and abuse: But now, God be thanked, all such
Abominations with worshipping of Images, etc. is gone, you hear, and Banished
quite out of this land, truth is set up in place, the Gospel of Gods Kingdom is
sincerely preached, all over, by Gods true prophets, elect ministers, and
upright disciples of Christ, and is thankfully received, you see, of all people
to their salvation, and so the bands of Antichrist, son of perdition, which
is the Pope, are broken, and we now by that means, are set free from all
thraldom, wherein we were once captivated, and are restored into the liberty of
the Gospel; for even so you know we are taught, to this day.


Countryman We are so taught I grant, and have not much presently to say there
against: But yet how many in these days, amongst such as account themselves
for wise and learned, are likewise still deceived and do deceive others, I keep
silence thereof: for thou know well enough that I have been shent
heretofore, therefore I mean not to contend, or once seem to meddle in such high
matters, as are above my capacity: and you know moreover; that it is thought
some were constrained, to sing a song at Paul's Cross, in which one among the
rest, overreached himself so high above his accustomed note, that soon after
in quavering, he lost his voice for ever.


Citizen. I know of whom you mean: Well, it is a lamentable case that such
things should be wrought among Christians; yet nevertheless happily he had not
otherwise than his desert.


Countryman. And again happily he was set on, or entered into so high a Note
by others, and by such means, might perhaps be constrained to overreach
himself as it were unawares; yet will I not judge herein, but leave it to him
that knows all secrets, and will reward every one according to his deeds.


Citizen. But I pray thee Countryman, who is he that stands yonder to still
all this while? he seems to be neither Citizen nor Countryman; but rather a
wildman that were clothed in moss, and coming late out of the wilderness or
mountains: his hair, as seems to me, hangs strangely over his shoulders, and
his garments seems to be torn with wild beasts, or else rent with bushes.


Countryman. Alack he is a poor Exile, and is indeed our very near kinsman:
for he was born of my mother, and was her second son begotten of my father, but
is not my brother. He is now termed of the Family of Love, or of God; and
because many seek after his blood, he may not therefore well as yet show his
head; notwithstanding happily, if be were here, forasmuch as he is an Exile,
and has no certain dwelling place, he durst with more boldness answer thee in
all thy doubts, and these deep and dangerous points (whereof thou have spoken
before) than I dare do: For you know that it is meet for a Countryman to
follow his calling, and not for to meddle in divine causes, that are above his
capacity.


Citizen. That is well said Countryman, for indeed, I would gladly talk with
such a one as would answer me boldly plainly, and fully to all whatsoever I
should demand of him. Ho, thou poor fellow come hither, I would speak with thee.


Exile. Here I am, what is your pleasure with me?


Citizen. How say thou, Exile? will thou answer directly, plainly, and fully
to all things that I shall ask of thee, and that according to truth?


Exile. Yea, according to my simple understanding, and as one unlearned; wist I
that you would credit me, when as I have told you the truth.


Citizen. Then first of all tell me, Where is thy dwelling?


Exile. My dwelling place as yet is uncertain on earth, though often times in
the wilderness, and mountains among wild beasts.


Citizen. And what are thy garments made of, wherewith thou seem to be so
strangely clothed?


Exile. Of the skins of wild beasts.


Citizen. How happens that?


Exile. Lest otherwise I might hap to be devoured of them.


Citizen. And why art thou, as an Exile, fain to fly?


Exile. Because that I being nevertheless a Christian and a true hearted
subject to the Queens Majesty, and in all things obedient unto her Laws and
Ordinances, may not yet be suffered to live in rest and peace: and that only by
reason of some envious and blasphemous tongues.


Countryman. I pray thee Citizen, spend not the time about such trifling
matters and questions; but rather go to the former matters, whereof you spoke
to me erewhile, and know his understanding therein.


Citizen. Very well, content, though this be no trifling matter, that
Christians, and true hearted subjects to their Prince, and living obediently
under her Laws and Ordinances (might it so be proved) should be thus
persecuted, especially in the days of our most gracious Queen Elizabeth: and
also in the days of preaching the Gospel. First of all then, this is my
question, How say thou Exile? Are not all our spots and deformities washed
clean away, and we so cleansed from our sins, by the death and passion of Jesus
Christ only?


Exile. Yea, all theirs are to whom such words are spoken, or promise made in
holy Scripture, neither is there any other washing, or cleansing of sinful
spots I confess, but alone by the death and passion of Jesus Christ.


Citizen. To whom are such words spoken, and who are they then, that shall be
saved, or whose spots are done away by Christ?


Exile. Only to such, as through the preaching of the word of the Gospel, are
in true repentance converted, under the obedience of the love, or life of the
same word, to the faith, doctrine, and life of Jesus Christ and his apostles;
and even like as were the Congregations of the faithful, to whom such
comfortable words of salvation and cleansing, or freedom by Christ, were
written in times, past: To all suchlike I say, are such Comfortable promises
made, and do so stand fast established for ever, and not to the obstinat
unregenefate or unrepenting sinners.


Citizen. But yet tell me, how say thou, Are not all free by Christ?


Exile. So many as are thus cleansed as aforesaid, or are delivered by Christ,
through the Regeneration of the true Baptism, of repentance and newness of
life from the sin, death, Devil and Hell, wherein they were captived, and so
restored, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, they are all no doubt
free through Christ.


Citizen. Will thou then deny the Sacrament of Baptism?


Exile. Though I speak of the true Baptism, or regeneration through
repentance, and newness of life, yet do I not deny the holy Sacrament of
Baptism, which signifies regeneration in Christ, and is ministered to Infants,
thought some have most unjustly so reported of us.


Citizen. It seems unto me by thy words, that thou should partly stand in
doubt concerning the manifold mercies and benefits of God extended toward us
and all mankind, in giving over his Son unto the death of the Cross, as though
he had not sufficiently therein fulfilled and accomplished upon the Altar of
that his Cross a fall satisfaction and sacrifice for the sins of the whole
world: the which thing who secret does deny doubtless he erreth very much and
is against the holy Scriptures.


Exile. I do nothing doubt or mistrust, concerning the manifold graces of God
the father, extended toward us all: Nor yet concerning the full and perfect
satisfaction sacrifice or oblation offered up by Jesus Christ, once for all,
upon the Altar of his Cross, when as he give his holy body to be Crucified,
and his most precious blood to be shed, for the redemption of all mankind, for
to bring again through himself, the generation of mankind, which is altogether
estranged from God and his righteousness, by the disobedience of Adam, in his
Innocent and glorious estate, wherein he was first created: And therefore I
have no doubt at all, but do believe assuredly according to the Scriptures,
that Jesus Christ has of his part accomplished it all. Notwithstanding of this
one thing I stand in doubt, viz. Whether many at this day amongst us, which
boast our selves for Christians, and for partakers of all the merits of Christ's
death and passion, have any earnest lust or inclination, with all Gods elect,
to accomplish that which on their part is lacking of the passions of Christ,
and is nevertheless earnestly required of us, in the holy Scriptures, viz. to
repent us earnestly of our sins past, to forsake our selves taking, up our
Cross, and following Christ; to dye unto sin, to crucify the flesh with her
lusts, to put on the new man of rigteousnesse, to dwell in Christ, and to have
him to dwell in us, or to put on Christ, to have the same mind in us that was
in Christ, to become as little Children, to believe in him, to keep his word,
and to do all whatsoever he commands, to love one another, to obey our
governors, and to live under their Laws; and even so to eat the flesh of
Christ and drink his blood, that so we might have life in us: doubtless
whosoever does not thus endeavor himself to walk as is aforesaid, in this
infallible Christian rule, which is expressed more at at large unto us in the
Service of Love, in the after following of Christ; he may not know the truth,
or Christ, become made free of the truth, nor inherit the Kingdom of heaven, or
be saved.


Citizen. Thou have put me in mind of a mavelous matter: But tell me, can any
man live so pure (whilst he is in this mortal life) but that he shall sin?


Exile. Understand, there is no man living, be he what he is, but he shall
sometimes sin or offend, whiles he is this mortal life; notwithstanding, He
that is born of God (namely Christ Jesus the man of God from heaven, that new
Creature in whom the seed of God remains) sins not. And then know this
also, that there is a great difference between sin unto death, and sin not unto
death.


Citizen. That is so indeed; but yet then, what think thou herein? have we
not been deceived in times past, by many false Prophets and false Teachers,
which have walked among us in sheeps clothing, being inwardly ravening Wolves?
And were not those the superstitious Papists, which brought in all abuses, as
worshipping of Images, with much more idolatry into this Land, although it be
now banished quite.


Exile. Yes, we have been no doubt in times past much deceived, and yet are to
this day. The superstitious Papists, I grant, were false Prophets, and false
Teachers, which brought in many abuses with idolatry (for covetousness is
idolatry) and the Prophet complains saying, This people carries unclean, or
foul Idols, in their hearts, meaning still to go on in their wickedness, etc.
Yea, all what the man esteems more of in his heart, than of God and his holy
Law that same is to him an Idol; he falls down before it, serves and
honors it, prays likewise unto it.


Citizen. Will thou say then, that many of us in this Land are yet deceived,
and that we have now in these last days, false Prophets and false Teachers
among us?


Exile. Yea, for so it is prophesied or fore spoken in the holy Scriptures, to
come to pass in the last times: notwithstanding yet must I needs think well of
all such Preachers, as hunger and thirst after the truth, righteousness, love,
obedience and peace, expressing likewise the same in their good and godly
conversation.


Citizen. How shall men know then the false prophets and false Teachers?


Exile. By their Fruits.


Citizens. That is very true: but show me I pray thee, by some certain notes or
manifest tokens, how I might henceforth know them with their fruits; for that I
and all men might-ever after beware of the false, and give heed to the true.


Exile. Then mark well these six Notes following.

1. They are such as presume to teach others the way to eternal life, before
ever they have walked therein themselves, or yet have once desired to become
first the disciples of Christ, or of his word, to a reformation of their own
lives, etc.

2. Such as will be taken for perfect Christians, and godly teachers, ere ever
that Christ, who is the truth, the right spirit and the life, have gotten a
living shape in them, whereby they might first preach Christ aright, out of a
good conversion in all love, even so then go before the people, having both oil
in their vessels, and light in their Lamps, etc.

3. Such as will seem to have put on the new man of righteousness, and yet
never took in hand, nor have known how to do off the old man of sin and
wickedness first: notwithstanding, they take upon them to understand, and to
expound Gods secret mysteries out of the Scriptures, etc.

4. Such as will be free by Christ, and teach men so, ere ever they seen into
their Captivity and thraldom of the sin, death, devil and hell, whole
bondslaves and captives they themselves yet are: and ere ever they have
repented them rightly from their sin, in such sort, that it might ever after
appear among all men, in their holy walking.

5. Such as will take on them to understand, and publish forth the secret
mysteries of Gods divine wisdom, contained in the holy Scripture, by the
ingeniousness of the fleshly wisdom, they themselves being as yet unregenerate
and given to lying, blaspheming, traitors, oppression, covetousnes,
persecuting, with all kind of maliciousness, wickedness and licentiousness of
life.

6. Such as boast of their deliverance, in the last resurrection, and teach men
soere ever they have got any part in the first, or are renewed in the Spirit
and mind, or yet stand up with Christ, from the death etc.

All these and such like, say I, are false prophets, though covered in sheeps
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening woulfs; men shall know them by their
fruits: with their mouth indeed, they confess Christ's but in their deeds deny
him; they are likewise blind guides such as have taken on them to lead the
Ignorant out of darkness into he light, and yet themselves, as those that love
not the light, will still remain in darkness: These are very Libertines,
inclined always to hatred and iniquity, stirring up strife, setting variance
amongst Princes, breaking laws, despising authority and ordinances of men,
resisting Gods love and mercifullnesse, Blaspheming the truth, and persecuting
the Innocent or simple, which love God and his righteousness, and walk in all
obedience and peace: Wherefore those be the children of Beliall, and void of
all wisdom, such as unless they repent in time, must be shut out amongst the
foolish, rejected for the workers of iniquity, and with all Hypocrites receive
their portion in the hellish condemnation consider advisedly of it, for it is
very true.


Citizen. But will thou say, that all those and such like are no Christian?


Exile. Yes verily, by sign or outward show, and name they be.


Citizen. And must not such preach the truth notwithstanding, and show forth
the many high knowledges, and secret mysteries out of the Scriptures.


Exile. Yea, all what they heart spoken or chance to read in any writing, that
can they readily speak out again: But not like as all those true prophets of
God, and disciples of Christ have always done, out of any Godly understanding
through the holy Spirit of God or Christ; for that were impossible, because the
same Spirit is not with them. For allbeit they have the Scriptures, and the
Godly witnesses, wherethrough they mean to be understanding and wise, yet
forasmuch as they give not all their understanding over as captive, under the
obedience of the love of Christ, and his holy word, as under that same Being or
life, whereunto the Scripture witnesses, but run still forth with the
knowledge, so have they verily neither light, truth, spirit, nor being of God,
Christ, nor of his word. And therefore they neither know, nor yet understand
any thing at all rightly of that whereof they then pray or speak forth unto
others.


Citizen. If all such as thou have here spoken of, were libertines having
neither light, truth, nor spirit of God or Christ; then God be merciful unto
us, for then were it all in vain for many a one in these days to stand up or
teach in a Congregation: notwithstanding I cannot be persuaded as yet, although
I most needs grant, that for the most part, they do not live the same which
they do teach to others, like as they themselves have confessed, but that they
nevertheless preach unto the people both Gods word and the truth out of the
right spirit; be they themselves never to evil, else God forbid: And I pray you
Sirs, did not Judas, amongst the rest of the apostles, go and preach the
Gospel, and yet was not he a wicked one, and betrayed his master? And did not
Peter, which denied his master, preach Gospel also? And it is written, The
Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat or Chair; what they bid you observe
that observe and do: But as they do; do you not, for they said and do nor:
Therefore why may not wicked men preach the truth?


Exile. Let us consider advised by of the Scriptures, and be no longer
deceived: Forasmuch as it stands written, that Christ is the light of the
world, the Heavenly truth, the right spirit, yea and the word of God it self:
Then how were it possible that those which are void of Christ, should preach or
prophecy aright, the true to inde or word of God, contained in the holy
Scriptures, the whilst I say, that the same spirit of truth is not in them; for
it is written, that the Scripture never came by the will or mind of man, but
holy men of God did speak as they were inspired by the holy Ghost; And it is
written also, that the natural or fleshly minded man, perceaveth not the
things of God, etc. And again wisdom will not dwell in a froward soul, nor yet
in a body that is subdued to sin: For, where wickedness has the upper hand,
the holy Ghost does fly from thence: And yet note then moreover, that after
such time that man has once entered into Judas; he preached not (...) Peter*
perceaving afterward what he had done, he wept bitterly: wherefore I am not
against any one that will weep with Peter: And as for such as sit in Moses seat
or chair, which teach the law uprightly, I have not once touched; I speak only
of them that sit in their own chair of pestilence which reach their own law, or
Imagination of their fleshly parts and good thinking, but not the holy lan^ of
the Lord, which is spiritual and contains the truth, the life, or Christ it
self. And therefore for want of the true spirit of understanding, there arises
in these days great contention, about the Scriptures.


Citizen. The more is to be lamented: But yet I pray thee answer me herein, for
I am not resolved in this matter: Have we not now the truth amongst us? Is not
now the Gospel preached sincerely, and received of all people thankfully to
their salvation: where through the bonds of Antichrist, which is the Pope of
Rome, that had us long in captivity, are now broken, and we all by that means
set at liberty?


Exile. We have no doubt the holy Scriptures which bear witness of the truth,
and therein the mind or meaning of the truth is contained amongst us: So have
we many wholesome Sermons preached, and declared unto us, notwithstanding had we
the truth amongst us, so had we Christ amongst us: and had we Christ amongst
us, so world we no doubt love him or his word, and neither would persecute him
nor his members: And then, had he once a form or shape in us, so should he
likewise manifestly appear out of us, in our good conversation and holy
walking: For it is written, If Christ be in you, then is the body dead or
mortified concerning sin: And again, Whosoever has not the spirit of Christ
the same is none of his. And were the Gospel preached sincerely out of the
truth, that is, out of the spirit of God or Christ, through a good conversation
under the obedience of the word, in all meek-mindedness, and godly love: so
would many thousands in this land, doubtless have repented them of their former
life, and amended their ways upon the preaching of the same Gospel: and would
have moreover followed the footsteps of such godly Preachers or Prophets, as
had even so imitated Christ; and so then in very deed the people should have
received the Gospel thankfully to their salvation: and by that means should the
bonds of Antichrist, (which is the sin, the devil, or will of the flesh) which
has long time held us captive, be broken in us: and we then rightly through
Christ, should have been delivered therefrom, and set at liberty;
Notwithstanding, how many in these days are set at liberty, or have taken to
themselves at liberty to do all manner of uncomliness both against God and man;
I refer that to the Testimony of their own Consciences,


Citizen. I perceive then thou art not against any godly Preachers, that walk
forth in all obedience of the word, and in whom Christ does live and dwell,
which also do show forth, through the same meek-minded spirit, all due
obedience to God and Governors, as likewise an upright, lovely, peaceable and
brotherly life toward all men: and that preach forth the same word of truth
and life (which they as then have both felt, handled, and tasted of) unto
others more.


Exile. No verily, but I do reverence in the Lord all such, as the true
ministers, and distributers of the heavenly riches and treasures of God and
Christ: and only to such is that high office of preaching or prophesying
committed, and to none other; for such will not resist the godly life in the
Love, whereunto we are all, out of grace, undeservedly and lovingly called, and
warned in the service of Love, now in these last days of our preservation.


Citizen. I think no less, but that thou have expressed unto me thy mind aright
herein; but yet tell me, Will thou then say the Pope is not Antichrist?


Exile. I know not the man: notwithstanding to say what I conjecture of him, I
do not otherwise imagine of him, but that he is or may be possessed with the
spirit of Antichrist, which is the will of the flesh or of the devil, the
contrary anointed one, and enemy to Christ, rhrough which spirit many ignorant
ones in these perilous days, as well among the high learned, as among the
ignorant, have taken to themselves a freedom to work all manner of blasphemies,
oppressions, persecutions, with all other uncomely abuses, both against God and
men. But yet such a freedom and liberty, understand, does not the Gospel of
Christ bring in, or teach, but rather the Devil, and that spirit of Antichrist.


Citizen. Thou have doubtless made me afraid, and also astonished at these thy
wonderful answers: so that, I dare scarce demand any more matter of thee, lest
happily any one should ly in wait in some secret place and over-hear us, and so
carry this our communication, to some of our learned that now be in authority;
for then we all happily, if they might find us, should sing a Counter note,
unless we did recant all the same, and yet have thou spoken an unconfutable
truth.


Exile. The case is lamentable, the whilst the truth may not be spoken freely,
notwithstanding, if you have ought else to demand of me, either touching
natural or Heavenly things, ask of it freely, and I, under permission, and
according to my understanding, will answer as the Lord shall give me in mind:
for as much as all things needful both natural and spiritual are expressed
at large unto us, in the Service of Love.


Citizen. Of fellowship then, show me a little of thy understanding, touching
the natural creatures, that are earthly and elementish, how and in what manner
they live, move, and have their course of being, for that my dull capacity
might the better conceive of the Lords works in the Spiritual creatures.


Exile. I find out and perceave (according to my simple understanding) that the
Lord the maker of Heaven and earth, has ordained and set all things natural,
that they should remain in the upright form and order, and that likewise the
whole mass of the earth, as man, beast, fish, foul, herb, tree, with all
else that is earthly, and elementish, which is under the Sun, is to be beheld
and considered of him in five parts, of the which, four be elements viz. Air,
Earth, Fire, and Water, of whose substances every particular living creature is
partaker: The fifth part is a natural living Being, wrought through the
almighty power of the heavenly word whereby every creature is sustained, and
lives in his natural kind or being, and brings forth likewise thereout his
fruit or increase. And there is no visible substance or creature, being earthly
and elementish, that is not or has not been partaker thereof: And allbeit now
that this whole mass, has from in the beginning of Creations increased it
self mightily, in many creatures on the earth, yet do we see in as much as
every element (so soon as the life is taken away from the creature, or the
creature from it) claymeth or takes him his own, viz. the fiery element his,
the ayry his, the watery his, and so leaves to the earthly only his own: yet
the earth is not therefore any whit the bigger: the water, not any whitt the
more increased: the air, never the fuller or larger: ne yet the fire any thing
at all augmented thereby.

And why? Like as the same increase out of Gods workmanship, has proceeded
from them in the life; even so does every element (at the departure of the
life) claim again to himself no more but his own, like as is said etc.


Citizen* I perceive more by these thy words, then ever I could consider of
before; For I see now that God has ordained, or set the natural creatures, and
every one in his course, for to remain in a comely order, to an everlasting
praise of his holy name. But yet I pray thee, like as thou have spoken some
what of thy understanding things natural: so let me also hear a little of thee,
concerning the spiritual and heavenly workmanship of God in man, for his
preservation in Christ Jesus.


Exile. The great mercifulness of God the Father, concerning his gracious
workmanship in the man, and how he has in the beginning formed him, according
to his own Image and similitude, is to be beholden, or considered in an
heavenly or spiritual manner, viz. in the very like being of his Godhead, in
perfect righteousness and holiness. Notwithstanding now, the man being fallen
away through Adams transgression; from this his former glorious estate wherein
he was set, so is there no way or mean for him, to come again to be brought
thereunto, but through faith in Jesus Christ, and that only by his death, and
passion, bloodshedding and resurrection, when we as Christians become turned
clean about, viz. When we out of Gods grace, upon the founding forth of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, do repent us unfainedly of our sins past, amend our
lives, take up our cross daily on us against the sin, and even so crucify the
flesh with the lusts and desires thereof, etc. according to the Scriptures, and
also like as we are raught, and counseled thereunto at large, in the Service
of Love.

To this end, and to the man's preservation, will the Almighty God now in the
end of the world, prepare him his Angels or Ministers: And all what is gone out
from God and enranged, and would gladly return to him again; the same shall
they now (through the sounding forth of his Gospel or last trump) gather
together as good wheat: All those shall be brought again through Christ unto
God. And contrariwise, all middle walls, ignorant knowledges, false wisdoms,
wicked imaginations, which are not proceeded of God, but are risen up out of
the bottomless pit of darknesses, together with all whatsoever has handfast it
self, or holden fellowship therewith, and will not have any better, shall be in
like manner gathered together as unprofitable weeds; yea, all those shall be
found as incorporated members to the iniquity, and thrown (soul and body) into
the bottomless pit of the everlasting condemnation, as likewise into the
hellish fire which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels from the beginning:
Lo thus shall every one claim his own: The bottomless pit of the condemnation
(from whence all evil does proceed) shall, through the sounding forth of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, claim his. And the mighty God (from whom all good does
proceed) shall, through his Christ, claim unto him, all godlinesses or virtues
which are proceeded from him, together with all whatsoever separateth it self
from the iniquity, has handfast it self, or held fellowship with the
godlinesses; all those as incorporated members to the godlinesses, and godded
or spirited with God in one spirit, shall go to God again, and shall reign with
God and Christ (soul and body) in the kingdom of heaven, and live in joy
everlastingly. It is very true.


Citizen. But is there not some Predestinate unto preservation, and again some
predestinate unto condemnation, as also elected thereto from the beginning?


Exile. Yes verily, there are two with their members, that are predestined or
preordained thereunto from the beginning: The one is, Christ the man of God,
predestinate unto preservation, and with him all his incorporated members: The
other is, the man of sin Antichrist, predestinate unto condemnation, and in him
all his incorporated members. As for any other predestination then this, (come
it out of Turkey or else where) I know not of it.


Citizen. Thou have told me the truth, and also fully answered me to all things
natural and spiritual, which I have demanded of thee. What shall I ask more?
God be merciful unto us, and unto all such as err of ignorance, and give them
eyes of understanding, and ears of pure hearts, that they seeing in what estate
they yet do stand, and hearing also which is the right way to come out, might
repent them, turn from their wickedness, believe rightly, and so come to the
knowledge of truth, and be saved, Amen.

Now Countryman, thou have heard this fellow, and his wonderful answers, what
say thou to it, for I am almost at my wits end, and marvellously astonished.


Countryman. Doubtless Citizen, he is in great Heresies and misbelief, or
else I may tell to thee in counsel, in any of the learned in these days are far
out of the way that leads to life, and also ignorant of the ground of the
heavenly truth; wherefore I think it not amiss, that thou examine him
concerning his belief in God the Father, in Jesus Christ the Son, and in the
Holy Ghost the Comforter; and whereupon he has grounded his Religion: how he
came by this understanding: what he thinks of our learned Preachers in these
days: as also of other matters as thou shall think meet, lest happily we might be
seduced, through some subtle heretic; infidel, or disobedient person, which
perchance might be against the Queens Religion, or else pretended to bring
confusion over the Land.


Citizen. Thy counsel is very good but then I pray thee rather talk with him
thy self; for I am brought into such a trembling perplexity, and sorrow of
heart since I have heard him, and that as well for mine own cause, as also for
others; which I yet see going astray, that I dare ask no more questions.


Countryman. Very well then, I will talk with him my self. Come hither Exile,
show us I pray thee, whereon thy belief, and thy religion stands grounded?


Exile. I protect before God and man, That my belief is in God the Father, in
Jesus Christ the Son, and in the Holy Ghost the Comforter, and is grounded on
the Faith of the Holy Fathers, Prophets and Apostles mentioned in the holy
Scriptures: also according to the common Apostolic Creed, the Creed of
Athanasius, and the Nicene Creed, to even so far forth as I may obtain grace
and power thereto, of the Lord.

Secondly, I acknowledge, there is no other way or mean, either of remission of
sins or of salvation for us to be had, or yet mercy to be obtained at Gods
hand; but alone in, by, and through the death, passion, and resurrection of
Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior: And that he has offered once for all, upon
the Altar of His Cross, a full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice and oblation,
for the sins of all the whole world.

Thirdly, I do acknowledge, that none shall be partakers thereof, but only such
as upon the publishing forth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, do show forth an
unfeigned repentance for their sins past, and walk in new obedience or in a new
life, according to the requiring of the Gospel: also such as believe aright in
God, and Christ and are even so baptized into the death of Christ: Such as are
regenerate of the water and of the spirit, and forsaking themselves and their
own lives, do take up their cross on them, and follow after Christ in death and
sinful lusts and desires: and so stand as those that are waking and waiting for
the coming of their bridgroom, ready prepared, having both oil in their
vessels, and light in their Lamps: Such as love God and his Christ, and as his
very disciples keep his Commandments, and walk in all love toward God, and
their neighbor, and in all dutiful submission and allegiance toward their
Governors; and also live obediently under all their manly Ordinances: And
finally, such as in whom Christ lives and dwells, or those that incline
themselves under the obedience of the love of Jesus Christ, and of his holy
word, with all diligence thereunto.

Now, as touching my Religion, this I say, so often as I call to mind and
consider the great love and kindness of God the Father, showed on me unworthy
one, in that he has created me like unto his own Image, and given me also his
Law, for that I might live therein; And, which is much more, has out of his
mere love and mercy, and of our part undeserved, sent his son Christ to be a
Savior of the world, etc. So stand I Religatus or bound again, (that is to
say, Religious) to love my Lord and God (which loves me so entirely) with all
my soul, heart, and might; and for His loves sake to love my neighbor as my
self: To love my Prince and all that bear authority under her; to live as a
subject under her Laws, and humane Ordinances: And finally, to walk uprightly,
peaceably, and brotherly among all people in all love: And this is only to be
obtained at Gods hand by prayer, and humble submission under the obedience of
Gods holy word, through the comforting of the Holy Ghost, or Spirit of Love, of
which spirit God has promised to shed forth, upon his sons and daughters
plentifully, now in these last days, like as is manifest in the Service of
Love. And therefore I acknowledge, that whosoever now shall refuse to incline
or endeavor himself, for to walk in the same small or narrow way, being called
or warned thereto out of love, by the Gospel of Jesus Christ, to live in such a
groundly faith of Jesus Christ, in such a true Religion, and upright obedience
to God and Governors, and in all subjection under Gods holy Laws, and manly
Ordinances: and likewise in such a brotherly love toward his neighbor, and
peaceable life toward all men, as I have here rehearsed, and likewise, as is
more at large expressed, in the holy Scriptures and in the Service of Love: He
is doubtless out of the true faith of God and Christ, and erreth very much, and
shall not, neither now, nor hereafter (unless they repent in time) find mercy
with God, or yet through Christ obtain remission of his sins, inherit the
kingdom of heaven, or yet become saved. It is very true: therefore consider
advisedly of it in time.


Countryman. Tell me how come thou by this understanding,? or by what means
was it made manifest unto thee?


Exile. Through the obedience of the word of God the Father, ministered out of
the love of Jesus Christ, through the holy Spirit of love, and in the Cross of
Jesus Christ, etc. out of which ministration, all things needful to be known,
so well things natural as spiritual, are at large laid open, the true
discipline frequented, all grounds of Religion, with all manner of errors,
nakedly declared, the truth manifested: And also all people both Christian and
Heathen, Jew or Gentile, or of what Nation or Religion whatsoever, etc. are
lovingly called and warned, to repentance and reformation of life: likewise
forewarned of the great plagues, unlucky misery and woe, that will speedily,
and unawares come upon all unrepenting sinners, and licentious
Scripture-learned, to their utter condemnation in the fire of hell, among whom
I have been chief; and now what am I poor sinner, that I should not submit my
self, to such a gracious warning, and repent ere ever Gods heavy wrath and
indignation, in his righteous judgment fall upon me to my utter destruction.


Countryman. But what think thou of our learned Preachers in these our
days, whilst many of them happily, have not heard or read of such a ministration
out of love, as thou speak of here; or else, if they have heard of it, they
have not perhaps so well considered thereof as it seems thou have done, art
thou against them?


Exile. I am against no learned Preacher, which advertizeth the people to
repentance, godliness, peace, obedience, and love; and so long as they love
God, and his righteousness, they have, I suppose, all heard of the ministration
of Love; and have many read and seen of the Books, though perhaps they have not
understood them effectually, or rightly considered the mind of the Author
therein; for had they so done, then would they not verily have spoken so much
evil of them, as they have done, unless (as I cannot so think as yet) they did
obstinately hate God, and abhor all righteousness, peace and love, neither yet
would they have imprisoned, not so shamefully slandered so many simple souls,
which upon admonition from the destruction, given them in the Service of Love,
have had an unfeigned desire to repent and amend their lives, although some of
them happily are, in certain points through ignorance or fear.


Countryman. Will thou then take part with, and justify the Author and his
Books, and so condemn our learned Preachers?


Exile. I will neither take part with, nor yet justify the Author, nor yet any
of his Books, but will leave them to answer for themselves; neither do I
meddle with things therein, which are above my capacity. Notwithstanding, all
what I find therein written (or else where) that advertiseth me to repentance,
godliness of life, obdience to God and Governors, love toward God and my
neighbor, and peace toward all men, according to the Scriptures; that must I
needs think well of. Nevertheless, if he or his Books be not able to answer for
themselves, so then will not I answer for them: neither will I before a
Law-judge, condemn any, whether learned or unlearned, but leave that unto
those, unto whom judgment does belong.


Countryman. I cannot mislike thy Answers, yet notwithstanding, some may
happily gather of such like words, as thou have here spoken unto us, That the
Author of those aforesaid Books, with all you that are now termed of the
Family of Love, go altogether about to put down that Religion which her Majesty
has now set up and allowed, and to bring it to naught: And in so doing,
forasmuch as she is chief Governess of the same Church, etc. it may be imaged
that ye are so against the State: yea and perhaps such like matters, have been
put either into her Majesty's head, or else into some of her honorable
Counselors heads: And thereupon it is come to pass, that you are by some of
our learned Preachers, termed for Libertines; yet all this notwithstanding, I
will not give any rash credit or judgment therein, until I have first heard
thee speak of it.


Exile. I give you most hearty thanks therefore: Then first of all I beseech
you, let me know what you call the Religion that is set up, or at the least
wise willed so to be, by her Majesty, and allowed: so shall I the better give
you an answer therein, according to my simple skill.


Countryman. It is to preach the Gospel plainly and sincerely, out of Gods
holy Spirit, that all people learned or unlearned, may so well by their life as
by their Doctrine, understand the same to their endless comfort and salvation;
and so to express a true belief in God the Father, and in Christ our Savior,
to expel all idolatry, to abandon and abolish all foreign powers, to
administer the Sacraments and Ceremonies of the Church uniformly in their right
Order: To obey the Queens Majesty, and live under her Laws and humane
Ordinances, acknowledging her as chief Governess in all causes, etc. here
(under Christ) in this Realm of England and Ireland, etc.


Exile. This certainly is a good Religion, were it once generally put in ure:
notwithstanding, whatsoever men list to imagine of us; that may they, we cannot
let them: But hear me, and I will tell you, as it shall be found in the truth;
Were all his Books of whom we spoke, rightly considered of with indifferency,
so should they be found assistances in all, to this aforesaid Religion, and not
hindrances: For, did the Preachers first, and then the people, according to
his writing, and admonition in the Service of Love, viz. repent them, and
follow such counsel as is expressed by him, in the same: so should no doubt the
Gospel then be sincerely preached, according to her Majesty's mind, and the
true belief published to the salvation of many: All idolatry and foreign
power, as well inwardly as outwardly, expulsed and driven away: The Sacraments
and Ceremonies of the Church should then be rightly administered: The Queens
Majesty obeyed, not for fear, but rather out of love, and acknowledged as chief
Governess in all causes, etc. as is meet; And which is more, the Lords heavy
wrath whereof he has often warned us, in the Ministration of Love; and alas,
which also I fear me is at hand, for our wickedness cause, should then be
easily appeased. And then yet moreover, whereas many times it happens, that
the Prince is taken away for sins cause of the people, her Majesty should then
reign prosperously amongst us, in all those her good enterprises; and should
also live unto a good old age; all discord should then cease and come to an
end; and so we, in the Realm of England, should live joyfully, in all
tranquillity, godliness, obedience and love; and be safely protected of God and
his holy Angels, from the danger of any adversary worldly or ghostly: But to
say, that we be Libertines, that is not so: and who so shall look rightly into
the Service of Love, he shall well perceive, that therein is no liberty to sin
given or taught. We are indeed frail, and full of infirmities, and have all
need of Gods mercy; therefore our desire is, that we might obtain such grace
and power with God the Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby we might
so repent us of our sins past, that we might henceforth leave off from our
wicked ways, more and more take up our Cross on us against the sin, die even so
daily with Christ, and so imitate him in death and life, until such time as we
become raised up again, with Jesus Christ in a new true life; for that we might
by such means escape, the horrible plagues and miseries, which now in these
last times, are in coming over all licentious Libertines, and unrepenting
obstinate sinners: For other rejoicing have we not, then alone in the cross,
death, bloodshedding, and resurrection of our Savior Jesus Christ. And as for
the Libertines and who they be, I have sufficiently expressed before in six
notes. He that has ears to hear, let him hear, and who lists not, may choose.


Countryman. But yet, this one thing I know for a surety, that thou and thy
company, are not only suspected to be superstitious Papists; but also it is
thought that this ministration called the Service of Love, is published forth
to the end, to maintain all superstition and abuse in the Roman Religion: and
wist we two so much, then doubtless we would not once deal therewith, nor yet
talk with thee any farther, wherefore I pray thee yet once again, that thou
would for my further satisfying in this behalf, show us thy mind therein, ere
ever we do part hence.


Exile. The truth is (so far forth as I can perceive) that the Author of those
Books, in his Ministration out of Love, does neither maintain or allow any
manner of Superstition, frequented in the Roman or Popish Church; But he,
indeed, seems to open and disclose the first ground of the same Religion, and
the signification of every thing, so well Sacraments as Ceremonies, frequented
and allowed in the same Church, willing every one that shall hap to dwell,
where he must live under the same Sacraments and Ceremonies, and where the same
are by the Laws of the Land allowed and commanded, to obey the Rulers and their
Laws, and for obedience cause, not to rebel in any case against their Rulers,
but rather to go to the Church where the same are administered; and there to
mark only upon the signification of the same; and what a Christian life and
obedience to God and Governors, the same in their right signification, do ask
and require of them.

And yet he acknowledges them no otherwise, but as Sacraments, Ceremonies,
Signs, Images, Figures, or shaddows of good and holy things, etc. But above
all, he exhorts all to the humble obedience, peaceable and Christian life,
which those do figure forth: And as for us, I put you out of doubt, we do
likewise utterly detest all superstitious Papistry; but we most chiefliest do
desire, that the same true obedience and godly life (which is Christ Jesus)
might increase it self more and more, in us, and in many.


Countryman. That life indeed is the best, but why does he call his
ministration the Service of Love, and those that take warning thereat, why are
they termed the Family of Love? show me thy understanding herein, because such
a name seems to me, as also to many as yet, very straying?


Exile. I will tell you according to my simple understanding, and as I gather
by such writings of his, as I have read in the Service of Love, Forasmuch as
all the generations of men on earth, so well Jew as Gentile, Christian as
Heathen, Papist as Protestant, yea of what Religion soever, have now in these
last horrible days, not only most grieviously transgressed Gods holy
Commandments; but also (every one in his) is far away digressed, from the
first ground whereon they were set: and are yet moreover (even with the old
world, and with those of Sodom and Gomorah) run into all licentiousness and
carelessness of life provoking thereby Gods just wrath and heavy indignation:
So that of his justice, he might therefore worthily have destroyed us (like as
in the days of Noah) even all the children of men. Yet notwithstanding he has
now, as a gracious Father, and according to his wonted mercy, pitied the
generations of men: And therefore has once again, according to his promises,
warned all people upon the earth, through this his ministration out of Love, to
repent and turn, every one from his wicked ways, believe the Gospel, become
baptized, and so be preserved ere ever the great woe, misery, plagues and
unlucky judgments fall suddenly and unawares upon all unrepenting, and
unbelieving sinners, and licentious Scripture-learned, or Libertines, to their
condemnation in the fire of hell: All these plagues (says he) and many more
are like to come shortly on us all, if we take scorn to be warned by these
latter lovely admonitions, etc. which he terms, A service of ministration out
of the Spirit of Love or of God, wherewith the man is served or ministered unto,
to his preservation: and therefore he calls it oftentimes The Service of Love;
Further, why he calls all those that repent and amend their ways, upon the
admonition thereof the Family of Love is this, because he thinks them meet to
bear such a high name, the whilst, that being so graciously served and warned
thereby, they so desire as Gods children, to love God as chief, and their
neighbor as themselves, to obey their Prince and Governors, to live obediently
under their Laws: as also to deal uprightly, brotherly, and faithfully with all
men in all love, testifying even so aright, and according to the truth, that
they only are the true Christians, which lead a Christian life, and not the
talkers thereof; And thus much concerning my understanding therein.


Countryman. But how comes it to pass then (tell me) that you are now
almost of all men, as well great as small, yea rich as poor, but especially of
the learned Preachers, bruted forth and that most odiously; for the most
detestable Sectaries or Heretics, that ever reigned on the earth; yea, and as
people not worthy to live in a Commonwealth?


Exile. What be those brutes wherewith we are so bruted? tell me, and I will
answer you so near as I can according to truth.


Countryman. These they are: Some say, you deny Christ, the Trinity, and the
Lords prayer; others say, that you are Libertines, and lie one with another
wife, desiring to have all men's goods in common; likewise some say, you would
have no Magistrates, and that you account whoredom, murder, poisoning, etc. to
be no sin: as likewise that you deny the resurrection of the flesh, and the
immortality of the soul: Others say, you justify your selves by your works
without Christ, and that you condemn the Scriptures, and would not have them
used; as also that you say, you live without sin: yea and some say, you are
against the State. And moreover, that you will obey Turk, Pope, or any other
of what Religion whatsoever, under whom you dwell: as likewise whatsoever you
say, when you are commanded by a Magistrate, to render an account of your Faith
or Religion, you use to dissemble, and mean not the same that you say; with
hundreds more, too much here to recite.


Exile. O Almighty and most merciful Father, thou which always show mercy
to such as love Thee, and keep thy Commandments, thou know, our Religion,
is only to love Thee as chief, and our neighbor as our selves, according to
thy holy word: To obey our Governors, and to live under their Laws, not once
calling in doubt, that this Church is now in subjection under heathenish
Magistrates, which command the things that thou have forbidden. Look down O
Lord we beseech thee, and behold our misery; let us not now be driven away from
our dutiful obedience, which we owe to thee, and to these thy Magistrates and
Governors, for any manner of fear, tyranny, and false brutes, of such as live
not under thy Law. Alas, Countryman, alas! we are indeed grossly abused, by
some that teach men disobedience to Magistrates and Laws, falsely citing that
piece of Scripture, It is better to obey God then men: by that, drawing the
peoples hearts from obedience to fantasies: and which of all is most dangerous,
when even their own company, are by the high powers dealt withal herein, then
their teachers say of us, Those be they that will have no Governors, etc. Thus
grievously slandered are we, as thou have said: So while they set all men to
wonder at us, for the thing wherein they are guilty themselves, and not we;
they have (the more is the pity) sufficient opportunity, to perform their
malice, and to establish their purpose; which God grant that the Magistrates
may at last, though now very late, discern thoroughly. Notwithstanding, if these
their false brutes, should be credited of the Magistrate, (as God forbid) then
alas we were without remedy, or hope of justice at their hands, and must be
condemned, yea, although we were never heard.


Countryman. Be of good cheer, Exile, and let no such things astonish thee;
for be sure thou shall find the Magistrates, not only wise, honorable, and
learned; but also such as will graciously hear every ones cause with justice,
and reform in time that which is amiss: Wherefore I pray thee yet further, show
me the cause where out such brutes are raised and proceed against you.


Exile. It comes to pass hereout, forasmuch as many in reading the Books of
H. N. (out of which Books we also are charged to have gathered Heresies) will
take upon them contrary to all justice and equity, to judge, determine, and
expound our mind and understanding therein, according to their sinister
conceiving of the matter. And thereupon have not only thrown us into dungeons
and prisons, to our great loss and hinderance; but also have published forth
such like innumerable lies, and most horrible defamations against us; reporting
the same notwithstainding to the people, and that out of their preaching
places, for an infallible truth, whereas many of them, never as yet talked with
any of us, whereby they might first know what Heresies we hold, and have
gathered out of the said Books, and so are these their unjust brutes and
slanders, believed of many, and published abroad for an infallible truth; and
no marvel: for (will you see the devil) who would have thought I pray you, or
supposed, that the learned Preachers of these days, could have spoken forth
(whether it were out of report, of of malicious envy) so many horrible lies,
and blasphemies against so harmless a people, which never as yet gave them, not
any man else any cause thereto.


Countryman. Yet have thou not fully satisfied me, as what manner of people
those be that thus shamefully use to blasphem and persecute you, wherefore I
pray thee tell me that.


Exile. Mark my words and I shall tell you a great and dangerous matter, and
also satisfy your demand, what they be that now chiefly seek thus injuriously
to deal with us: Understand, there are by her Majesty and her good Laws,
appointed for every spiritual promotion, and office within her dominion, chosen
men to perform all that function, as Bishops, Deans, Parsons, Vicars,
Prebendaries, Preachers, etc. Besides which Officers and spiritual Governors,
there are crept in also, some by the favor of one man, and some by another,
certain others, which are scattered almost the land through, which also have
gotten great stipends, out of men's Benevolence: And these preach without either
order from her Majesty, or any public Authority; yea, and supposed to be to
the number of four or five thousand: and note moreover, these pay no Tenths nor
Subsidies, and yet impoverish them that should. Also, they cry out against al
spiritual Offices and Officers, although they be found meet for that function
by learned men, and thereto have authority by Laws and Statutes confirmed: They
say notwithstanding and teach others to call them dumb-dogs, and
sleeping-hounds, with such like names: which thing to redress, her Majesty has
granted Commission: But wot you what, those for whose reformation the same was
granted, have so prettily handled the matter, that they either by substitution
of Commission, or else by some other trick, have now to deal in the Commission
themselves by their own hands, and so compel men to yield to these dangerous
attempts, by whom also now we are thus strangely handled.

Now see, Countryman, whether this be not a strange Metamorphosis, when the
offenders against all Laws, are made Judges over the true observers of all good
Laws, and reverence^s of all Authority: let all wise, honorable, and courteous
hearts consider advisedly hereof; for it is high time.


Countryman. But yet, although they be not able to recompense you touching
such injuries, as you have sustained at their hands, may not they all
notwithstanding possibly repent them thereof and amend; and so you and they
henceforth join together in one heart of godly love, viz. To love God above
all, and your neighbor as your selves: to obey the Queen, and Governors, and
to live under her (...) and Ordinances, as likewise to use all reasonable
dealing and friendliness, amongst all men, like as becomes true Christians to
do, according to the Scriptures, and Service of Love?


Exile. Yea verily; the possibility thereof is of the Lord to all, and among
all that stand good willing thereunto, and can believe; And that it might even
so come to pass we all do, and will pray unto the Lord both night and day: upon
our knees.


Countryman, Yet one thing more I have to demand of thee, which is this: For
as much as our learned Preachers, yea, and especially, those which have done you
such injuries as aforesaid, do in words advertise the people to love God and
their neighbors, obey the Queen and her Governors and to live under their
Laws; as also to lead an upright life like as H.N. does admonish all the
generations on earth, in the same Service of Love* What then is the difference
between them and you*


Exile. Look a little into the matter with me, I beseech thee: There are very
many found in these days, that believe of God and of Christ, but yet very few
that endeavor themselves, through true repentance and newness of life, under
the obedience of Gods holy Word, as is aforesaid, for to believe rightly in God
and in Christ, that is, so as God and Christ might dwell in them, and they in
him: Lo hereby are the children of God known from the children of the devil:
and this is the very difference between them and us. And therefore the holy Law
of God or Commandments, which they teach to be observed upon pain of
damnation; and yet have not any lust thereunto themselves; and then again in
the end, confess it to be impossible for any man to accomplish or live the
same; That do we with all our hearts desire to observe and keep, believing the
possibility thereof to consist only in the Lord our God; and that the
accomplishment of the same, shall in time come to pass in us, and all that
believe, by the might of God the Father, through Jesus Christ. Consider
advisedly thereof, all you that be wise.


Countryman, Now I do perceive that the difference betwixt them and you, is
not much to speak of, and in few words this: what they say the same, you desire
to do: and this is not any more then is betwixt heaven and earth, light and
darkness, flesh and spirit, etc. Selah* And I think thou have spoken all this
out of the ground of three heart without either dissimulation or guile.


Exile. Yea verily, and even so the Lord increase his love in me, and in many,
Amen. Neither have I done this without cause, as some both honorable and
worshipful with others in her Majesty's Court knows: But like as I have
sustained many great and grievous injuries: so have I also, according to Gods
holy word, expressed in the Ministration of Love, humbled my self in all
stillness and patience, under the obedience of the (...) of Jesus Christ, and
h^ Cross* And now again has the same love constrained he; partly for the
clearing of my self, against so many odious and intolerable brutes and
defamations, that have been spread forth against me to my utter undoing, and
also partly for the satisfying of others which are brought there through into
great mistrust fullness of us and our Religion, to write this little devi^e,
(...) will to any one of the ignorant resisters of the Love of God, and his
mercy toward them, neither yet toward any one of any adversaries; O no, but I
rather wish unto them, as also to all people on earth, gra^e so to humble
themselves, under the obedience of the word of God the Father, which is
ministered out of the love of Jesus Christ now in these las days, that they with
us, and we with them, through true repentance, in one consent of godly love and
one obedience might (...) stones be coupled, and fast builded up in Jesus
Christ, to one holy Tabernacle, Temple, Family, Habitation or house of Love or
of God: for as much as God is Love, and so henceforth to be no more but one God,
one Faith, one Baptism, one Christ, one Lord, one Savior in us all, over us
all* and amongst us all, in all love, Amen. To whom with the Holy Ghost, be all
laud and thanksgiving for ever and ever, Amen.


Countryman. The God of love and peace make us al meet to be of such an holy
Family, Amen. In very deed Exile, now am I fully persuaded and do find it in
the truth, that the obedience to the word of God the Father, through the
ministration of the Love of Jesus Christ, which consequently requires all
dutiful obedience to Magistrates and Governors, is the very way to attain to
the right spirit of wisdom, or key of the holy understanding without which
spirit, the holy Scriptures have always been, and so shall still remain for
ever, as a fast sealed Book, which no man amongst all the wise of the world, or
Scripture-learned, could ever open or unlock; forasmuch as it appertains to
the Lamb Christ only, that meek-minded spirit, fast grounded in Love, to open
the same; But what shall I say more? Alas Exile alas, that ever it should be
found true, or recorded in writing, especially in these days of our most
gracious Queen Elizabeth, that upright Christians, and true-hearted subjects,
should suffer such cruel persecution. Oh alas woe is me, who shall give to mine
eyes tears sufficient, that I might weep enough for the miseries cause, which I
now see coming swiftly over the face of the whole earth* Alas, how will it now
go with all those Libertines, and licentious Scripture-learned, which have out
of their good thinking knowledge, and without the spirit of the Lord, thus
seduced the ignorant, abused her Majesty's Laws and Ordinances, blasphemed the
Love of God and her Ministers, and persecuted simple and true hearted subjects,
which have not resisted them: Now shall they be found happy which have done
well, and whose days are ended on the earth; for they shall not see the misery,
which for the wickednesses cause that presently do abound, must fall over all
the children of men. Alas, whither then shall all the children of men fly, that
they might escape all those horrible plagues? Well, we are right sorry for thee
and thy company; and yet much more sorry for those which have brought this
trouble upon you; for we do well perceive, that you have been injured,
slandered, and persecuted overmuch. God give them hearts to repent, that have
wrought you this injury, and give you all in the mean time patience to bear the
same: God be merciful and gracious to thee and thy company, which now are
spoken evil of, and give to the persecuted and Exiled such favor, in the eyes
of her gracious Majesty, that they may in some convenient time, have liberty,
to walk forth freely unmolested; and that your orderly and good life, may show
that you love God and his Laws.

That they all may at some convenient time have liberty, to walk forth freely,
unmolested; and your orderly and good life may show that you love God and his
Laws, and that your subjection may testify, that you live under her Laws
obediently, not disturbing any one about Religion, but walking your selves
uprightly, and brotherly among all men, as becomes the Gospel.


FINIS.

