AN ARGUMENT In Defense of the Right of Patrons to Advousons. And incidently of
the Right of TITHES in general.

As it was delivered to the Committee for Tithes, on Wednesday the 14 of
September 1653 and taken exactly by one that has skill in Tachygraphy or the
Art of Short-writing

LONDON, Printed for Edward Blackmore at the Angel in Paul's Churchyard, 1653

An ARGUMENT In Defense of the Right of Patrons to Advousons. And incidently of
the Right of TITHES in general
As it was delivered to the Committee for Tithes, on Wednesday the 14 of
September 1653 and taken exactly by one that has skill in Tachygraphy or the
Art of Short-writing
May it please you, Sir,
I Am of Council for two, one as claiming right to an Advouson; the other as
being a late Purchaser of Fee-Farm Rents issuing out of Tithes appropriated and
distinct from Impropriacions: That of Tithes in general is a large and copious
field, it would tire your patience too much for me to speak as the subject
matter deserves or affords, yet it stands so much in my way that I cannot
pass it by, (the interposition of it causing an Eclipse to my intended Plea to
Advousons and Fee-Farms) if not removed. I shall therefore crave leave to speak
a word or two to it. First, I conceive that by the Law of God and Reason, that
a maintenance is due to the Dispensers of the Word of God, for what Soldier is
there in this Commonwealth that does fight without his Pay? Who planteth a
Vineyard and eats not the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock, and eats
not of the milk of the flock? Is not the common Labourer worthy of his hire? ae
fortiori, then the Dispensers of the Word of God ought to have a Compensation
and Maintenance for his Labor, pains, and sweat of his brows, in holding forth
the precious things of Jesus Christ. I shall make a further step, and hold,
that the maintenance of the Ministers or Dispensers of the Word of God ought to
be in this in dividual and numerical way of decimal parts, or Tenths, or
Tithings.

First by Usage under the Law, for the Tribe of Levy they had their 48 Cittyes
with their territories round about; they had their Tithes also, the first born,
and the first fruits of every thing the Earth brought forth for the use of man.
Under the Gospel though they had not Tithes actually paid them, (because they
were as it were in their mocion to the Land of Rest) yet it appears by Origin
and many other ancient Authors, that they were continually claymed as their due
and right, and this continual claym, Mr. Littleton tells us preserves a
right, nay it prevents discents que tollent entries; we may deduce and draw
Tithes down from all Ages, and Nations in the Christian world, and that is one
Argument that Wollebius, and all Divines in Christendom uses to proov the
Bible divine, because it is used, received, and believed, of all Nations: And
certainly there must be digitus Dei in it, that all Nations ab origin before
they heard of oneanother, that they should all fix upon one way of the
Ministers mayntenance by Tythings.

They are not only due by Usage under the Law, and the Gospel, and the
Concurrence, and Concord of all Nations in Christendom; but I shall make a
further step, and prove them to be due by the Common Law of the Land, and that
I shall proov by the writ of waste in the Register, which is the ancientest
Book of the Common Law, for the Book Case of 26 Ed: 3 Lib. Assizes Pl. 24.
proves that Original Writs have been long before the Conquest, nay time out of
memory of man, the beginning whereof cannot be known either by Reading or
Record. For if any one cut up the Parsons Trees, or do any other waste, he may
by the Common Law of this Land have a writ of waste against him, and say in his
writ that such a one cut up his Trees ad exheridacionem ipsius vel Ecclesiae;
and both ways are good, as it is adjudged in Hen: the 7 fol: by his bringing
of this writ it appears that the Parson has not only a Freehold but a
fee-simple and good inheritance in his Tithes, or gleabe, for of a lesser
estate then a fee-simple or fee-tayl a writ of waste will not ly; therefore in
my Lord Cooks fifth Report fol: says that if there be Tennant for Life,
Remainder for life; and Tennant for Life commit Wast, Remainder for Life cannot
bring an action of Wast; the writ of Wast always concludes ab Exheridacionem
ipsius, and Remainder for Life has but a Freehold and no Inheritance, so Cook
in his first Institutes Fol: says that if Tennant in tail Special make a Lease
for Life, and Lessee for Life commit Wast, and then Tennant in tail brings a
writ of Wast, and pending the writ, he becomes Tennant in Tail apres
Possibility of Issue extinct: now this Wast is dispunishable, for he is now
become but Tennant for Life, he has but a Freehold, he has no Inheritance,
and the words of the Writ must be observed, because penal ad Exheridacionem
ipsius: The tenth part severed from nine parts, was always suable at Common
Law; for Trespass lies if taken away; Brook title Tithes. Many other
Authorityes I may add upon this Head, but I hasten to that I first propounded
of Advousons, and Fee-Farmes.

Thirdly, it is not only due by Usage under the Law of God, and Gospel, and
Concurrence of all Nations, and by the Common Law of the Land; but it is due by
the Custom law of this Nation, which is superintendent to the Common Law; Mr.
Littleton tells us that Consuetudo private Communem Legom; for Custom is of
that puissance and nature, that it must be time out of the memory of man, and
therefore a Copyhold Estate, the essence and being of it is secundum
consuetudinem Manerij; it cannot be intayled for the Statute of Westminster the
2 de Donis of intayling Estates though in the 13 of Edward the firsts time, yet
it is extant of Record, and therefore said to be within the memory of man; for
Littera Scripta manet, this need not be proved by the Authorityes of our
Books, for it is obvious to every man's sight and experience, that some Parsons
has Tithe of Furz by Custom, and others Tithe-Pigeons, Upon this a
Committee-man quibbled, and said the Gentleman did say true in Tythe-Ale, and
that is the reason why Parsons have commonly such fiery Faces.
if sold by Custom: and some Parsons have Tithe Rabbets by Custom, and some
Parsons have Tithe-Ale by Custom: But to satisfy you for the Authorities of the
Law in this point, see Cook second Report, fol. 44. Doctor and Student 2d. cap.
5. See Cook second Institutes, fol. 664 where he says, that a Parson by
Custom may have Tithes of such things as are not Tythable of Common Right.

Fourthly, I shall proov that Tithes are not only due by Usage under the Law
and Gospel, by the Concurrence of all Nations, by the Common Law, by the Custom
Law of the Land, but they are also due by Statute Law, and the Spiritual right
of them as it were waved and made Temporal, by several Acts of Parliament: To
begin with Magna-Charta, the beginning and Fountain of all our Laws, the
Birthright of the Freeborn people of England, the pale and bounder of the
people from the Tyranny of Kings, and Userpers; and therefore it was always
strugled by the people to be confirmed by all Kings, and so it was 32 several
times: This MagnaCharta, being so many several times confirmed by so many wise
Parlements, that my Lord Cook in his second Institutes upon this says, that
all Statutes made against it are void, and this Statute, this Magna-Charta, the
good people of Englands Birthright, this does establish Tithes: other Statutes
have been made, as the 28 of Ed: the First cap. 13. Statutes since the blessed
Reformacion, and casting off of the Popish yoke, Tithes were made Temporal and
Recoverable in Common Law Courts, by 27 of Hen: 8. the 31 and 32 Sta: of Hen:
the 8. the first of Ed: the 6. Ch: the 2 of Ed: the 6. Ch: the 13. and the
Statutes in the Late Parliament. Thus you see how all Parliaments have been
tender of Tithes, nay do so much favor Tithes, that they give them better
Remedy then other Free-holds, or Inheritances; they give them Treble damages



Hen: the 8. and the casting off the Popish yoke, and all supersticious uses
forfeited to the King, yet these Tithes of the parson stood firm, and adjudged
not supersticious; as appears in the Bish: of Canterberies case, and the
Bish: of Winchesters case, in Cooks second Report: I need not put you in mind
of the several Acts of the late Parliament, being so fresh in your memories.

Others will object that Tithes are chargeable, we will have them by stipends.

Truly I think they cannot be less, for they are commonly but 50, 100 or 200
Pounds per annum.

The Clergy of Holland whose Apes we seem to be in this of Stipends, allow as
much, nay and their Wives and Children provided for to boot; but I may say that
the people of England pays no Tithes at all, for Cook in his first Institutes
58 says that all the Lands in England were the Kings Demesnes, and I have seen
an ancient Record that Ethelwolph the second Monarch of the Saxon Race (his
Father Egbert being the first that brought the former Heptarchy under one sole
Prince) conferd the Tithes of all the Kingdom upon the Church, by his royal
Charter, or which thus Ingulph Abbot of Crowland, and old Saxon writer, King
Ethelwolph with the consent of his Prelates and Princes, which ruled in England
under him in their several Provinces, did first enrich the Church of England,
with the Tithes of all his Lands, by his Charter Royal.

You may see by this, that they are of a Temporal constitution with the
consent of his Prelates and Princes. And that the Case is no more then this;
John Astiles graunts a Rent charge out of his Land, and then sells me the
Land: I hope you will all say, that I cannot be said to pay the Rent Charge,
for I considered it in my Purchase. Therefore thus you see the people grumble
and complain to pay Tithes, and to be eased of this great Burden: when as
indeed they pay none at all

Some will say they are Burdensome to pay them in specie; we will pay them by
Stipends, which is more preporcionable and more easy.

This Objection will receive this Answer; that Tithes are more easy, First to
the Parishoner in general, for now they pay it in specie, then they will pay
it in nummis numeratis, and I know that the Countryman generally had rather
pay twelve pence in Free Quarter or in specie, then si penc in Money; besides
now the honest Parson living at home with him, can take it at his best
convenience, but the Collector he is responcible to the Treasurer, who expects
a strict account; therefore the Collector being thus a stranger must ask and
have, or else distrain and use violence.

I am sure it will not be proporcionable nor easy to the Parishioner in
particular, for those who are many hundreds, that have a modus decimandi, as
having purchased Abbey Lands, which by order of Cesterciens, Hospitallers, are
free from paying of Tithes; or by the Statute of the 31 of Hen. 8. of unity of
Possession pay no Tithes, or by real composition pay but six pence for 3
hundred pounds per annum, will by an alteration of Tithing to a Stipend pay
twenty pounds per annum, or more; thus you see these men undoubtedly injured by
this alteration of Tithes into Stipends.

The Parson I am persuaded will not consent to the alteration of Tithes into
Stipends, for now he has his Tithes at home, and paid himself, he can keep as
much of them as will keep his house without sending to the Market, the rest he
may let his Neighbor have a good bargain in, and so maintain a love and
correspondency with his Neighbor, and receive his money at home when his
Neighbor can best spare him it; but if he have his maintenance in Stipends,
and receive it of Treasurers, he must often be interrupted in his Studies, in
making many journeys to him, and many of them will prove bootless, for the
Treasurers will say, I am busy, or Money is not come in, or his Betters must
be paid before him, with many other Delays, which none but those that are
acquainted with receiving Moneys of public Treasuries can imagine. Some I know
have been compounded out of half their Pay, because they have not Moneys to
stay in Town for their Pay, or because their present occasions necessitates
them to it.

But I have been too much transported with my zeal in speaking too long of the
Justice in right of Tithes, I shall make you amends in speaking less of the
right of Advousons and Fee-Farms, issuing out of appropriated Tithes, having
made the Porch bigger than the House.

First, for Advousons, I shall maintain that if Tithes be taken away the Patron
will lose his Right of Presenting, and his Right in Tithe: and that he has as
good an Estate in it as any other man has in his other Lands and Possesrions;
and in this I speak but my Lord Cook's words in his first Institutes, fol. 17.
b. my Lord Cook does ground himself upon very many good Authorities in the Law,
as 7 Ed. 3.63. 24 Ed. 3. fol. 34. H. 6.34. 19 Ed. 3. Quare impedit. 154.
Mirror cap. 3. Sect. 17. Dyer. 83. I shall prove it also by Writ out of the
Register, A rescriptis valet argumentum, as first the Writ of Right of
Advouson, when the Patron loses by default this is a Writ of a higher nature,
that he may try it again, there is a Juris Vtrum, there is a quare impedit, a
Darrein Presentment, a quare non admisit, a quare incumbravit, a vi Laica
amovenda. Thus you see the Law like a wise Physician prescribes these several
Remedies for the several Obstructions which may happen in the Patrons right in
Advousons.

I may draw an Argument from the Topic of good pleading, for Mr Littleton and
my Lord Cook in his Book of Entries says, that such a one is seized of his
Advouson, Vt de feodo and de jure, as of his fee, and of right.

The original of Advouson came either as they were Founders or Benefactours to
them, as appears in Cook in his first Institutes, fol. 17. b. or else by
Purchase from the Crown upon valuable consideracion: I must confess that no
Patron can take money for presenting to a Benefice, it were Simonie if he
should, and therefore Cook in his first Institute says, that a Guardian in
Soccage cannot present to a Benefice, because he cannot take money for it; and
he ought by the Law to give an account to the Infant; but the same Author
says, that the Patron may present his Son Si Persona idonea sit, and this will
be a good provision of the Father for the younger Sons portion, and therefore
in an eye and respect to this the Law looks upon an Advouson as Assets, Fleta
lib. 2. c. 65. Britton 185. 5 H. 7.37. 32 H. 6. fol. 21. 33 Ed. 3. Garrante
102. therefore the Law in an eye and respect to this gives the Patron Damages
if he be disseised or outed of his Advouson, as appears by the Stat. 18 Ed.
1. But why go Lso far in this thing that is so plain, to add more were but
nodum in scyrpo ^uerere, or to light a Candle at the noonday.

I come next to the Purchasers of fee-farm rents, for if the subject be taken
away the Adjunct must needs follow, Accessorium sequitur suum principale: if
you take away Tithes from Parsons, as they having no right to them, these Rents
which they have granted out of Tithes must fall to the ground, and vanish with
them: if Tenant in tail infeoff his Son within age and the Son at full age
grants a Rentcharge out of the Land, and then Father Tenant in tail dies,
the Son is by this remitted, and the Estate out of which the Rent was granted,
is gone, the Rent is gone also: Cook first Institutes, fol. 310.

M. Littl. Sect. 5 28. tells us if a Parson of a Church charge the Glebe of
the Church by his Deed, and after the Patron and Ordinary confirm the said
Grant, then the Grant shall stand in its force, but in this Case it behooves
that the Patron has a Fee-simple in the Advouson; for if he has but an Estate
for Life or in tail in the Advouson, then the Grant shall not stand, but during
his Life and the Life of the Parson which granted: so that by this you may see
that the Patron has an individed and joint Estate in the Glebe with the
Parson; the Patron and Parson by this you may see are more seized Per my and
per tout, of the Glebe than Jointenants are of any other Estate, for Jointenant
have Moities in judgment of Law, which may be extended, or a Fine or Particion
sued of it: but Patron and Parson has such indistinct fee in the Glebe, as if
Lands were given to Baron and Feme and their heirs, here is no Moities, for
Husband and Wife are but one Person in Law: you may see also by this that the
Parson, Patron, and Ordinary (concurrentibus his) may grant Rent-charges out of
the Glebe, and if you will allow the Patron and Parson no right, then those
Purchasers of those Rents which are many hundreds in this Commonwealth must
lose their Bargains upon valuable considerations, which the Law did then allow
them to make. Likewise there are many others which have extended Parsons Tithes
upon Debts, and given money for Leases of them by way of Fine before hand,
these will also be defrauded. I shall not mention Impropriations, but hint you
of a Passage in the last Parliament, when Bishops were to be purged out of the
House of Lords, one Lord stood up and said, Shall we agree to this Vote? we
stand upon the same foundation with them, we shall be wounded through their
sides, Et proximus ardet Vcaligon, our turn will be next, and so it proved:
these inconveniences you see will follow. The Cords and Bonds of the usage
under the Law and Gospel with the concurrence of all Nations will be broken,
the Common Law and Custom Law will be infringed; thus the Statute Law and
Magna Charta will be violated, the right and fee of modus decimandi, will be
intrencht upon, the propriety that Patrons have in Advousons and in Tithes will
be trampled upon, Fee-farm Rents which men have hazarded to buy, to assist this
Commonwealth with moneys will be extinct, former Purchasers also of Rents out
of the Parsons Glebe will be merged also: these with many other inconveniences
which the frailty of man cannot conceive at present, only the Midwife of time
and expetience must bring forth, will follow if this Law of Tithes receive an
alteration: and therefore Lycurgus when he altered any Law, he exercised it in
his own Family twelve years first to see what inconvenience would happen upon
it before he would command it to be obeyed abroad; I hope therefore that you
seeing the right of Tithes and Patrons in Advousons you will make a farther Law
to strengthen them, and I hope Tithes seeming shattered like a broken Leg, you
will unite them by a future Provision, that they will stand the firmer ever
after.

FINIS.

