THe humble request of certain Christians reproachfully called Anabaptists, who
only desire to own, embrace, profess and maintain the pure truths of God in
the hatred of all errors, as namely universal redemption, free will and
falling away, with all other things contrary to wholesome doctrine, who are
accused as factious movers of sedition and rebellion, and the cause of these
unnatural wars, and of the difference betwixt His Majesty and the
Parliament, that seeing such a common defamation is raised upon them, by reason
that perhaps some professing and owning some truths of God in outward
profession which they hold, being hypocrites, do walk very scandalously in the
broaching and practicing of damnable errors and heresies, even denying the
Lord that visibly seemed to have bought them, and bring upon themselves swift
damnation, and many follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the ways
of truth are evil spoken of, 2 Pet. 2. 1. 2. and indeed now this Scripture is
fulfilled, whereby we, according to that which our Savior Lord and Master
said, do undergo the hatred, revilings, and all manner of evil speakings of
many, which although it be a sign to us of our blessedness, Matthew. 5. 11.
inasmuch as they speak it of us falsely for his name sake, yet considering he
says, that they that kill us will think they do God service, although indeed
he says withal, it is because they have not known the Father nor himself,
John. 16. 2. 3. and seeing he has a time to reveal himself to his own, and
has promised that the knowledge of God shall cover the earth as the waters
cover the sea, Esa. 11. 9. and that all shall know him from the least to the
greatest, Jer. 31. 34. mark, it seems knowledge shall begin at the least. And
whereas we now see God stirring up the Magistrates to take part with his poor
despised Saints against their antichristian great opposers, wherein he has
made them his sword to lop off the heads of them already, which we acknowledge
with all thankfulness, first to God, and secondly to them, and are further
encouraged to entreat them as they are just and godly, for Gods sake to hear
our cause, and do us justice, that if God be God, we may follow him altogether,
then will wrath and stripes flee away, and peace, plenty and prosperity with
true joy and gladness will come in the room thereof: for when our ways
please the Lord, he will make our enemies at peace with us, Prove. 16. 7. we
therefore desire all that fear God, that they that are the most affectionate
Christians would get the hands of all in their Parish that fear God, who may
be many more then they expect, for there were seven thousand that had not bowed
to Baal, 1 King. 19. 18. when Eliah thought he had been left alone: therefore
go to all in your Parishes, and desire their hands to so reasonable a request
as this, namely, that inasmuch as there are such accusations against us as
aforesaid, that the Parliament would be favorably pleased for the glory of God
and the clearing of his truths, and the farther shining forth of Jesus Christ
in his glorious Gospel to his people, to call us before them, and also of the
Doctors of the Synod as many as they please, and proclaim that all the
accusers of what we hold contrary to the truth of God, may here accuse us; and
if those Doctors can prove their Ministry, Baptism or Sabbath to be commanded
of God, or owned by Christ, or any thing we hold to be contrary to godliness,
then we will thankfully be reduced to the truth, and repent and revoke our
error, and suffer for our presumption, but if it shall be made evident, that
neither their Ministry, Baptism nor Sabbath be commanded of God, although it
be a light but very new sprung forth to bring us out of ignorance, whereout
when it pleased not God to give us the means to see and come forth, the time of
that ignorance God regarded not, but now will command all his people every
where to repent, and walk after the light, and give them repentance for his
glory, and their eternal comfort. Even so come Lord Jesus. Thus entreating all
that fear God, as they pity poor souls, that desire to be reduced from all
errors to all truths, and be confirmed and settled therein, to get in their
several Parishes as man y hands as they can to a Petition to the Parliament
for this so reasonable a desire, the which Petition you shall have at M.
Barbers in Thredneedle-Street at the horse-shoe, from Thomas Nutt, one for
every Parish.


