A DISCUSSION of that Great Point in DIVINITY, THE SUFFERINGS OF CHRIST; And
the QUESTIONS about his Righteousness Active, Passive:
and the Imputation thereof.

Being an ANSWER to a DIALOGUE ENTITLED The Meritorious Price of our
Redemption, Justification, etc.

By JOHN NORTON Teacher of the Church at Ipswich in New England.

Who was appointed to draw up this Answer by the General Court.

Romans 3.26. To declare I say, at this time his righteousness, that he might be
just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus. London, Printed by A.M.
for Geo. Calvert at the Sign of the half Moon, and Joseph Nevill at the Sign of
the Plough in the new Buildings in Paul's Churchyard, 1653.

The STATIONER to the READER.
FOr the better understanding of the following Treatise, the Reader is desired
to take notice,

1. That the three Fundamental Truths therein asserted, confirmed and cleared
are these, 1. The Imputation of the disobedience of the Elect unto Christ. 2.
That Christ as God-man Mediator and our Surety fulfilled the Law by his
Original conformity, and active and passive obedience thereunto for the Elect.
3. The Imputation of that Obedience unto the Believer for Justification.


2. That the three opposite Tenets of the Dialogue as they are held forth
therein, are proved and concluded to be Heresies; Heresy being taken for a
Fundamental Error, that is, such as he that knowingly lives and dies therein
cannot be saved.

To the much Honored GENERAL COURT OF THE MASACHUSETS Colonie Now sitting at
Boston in New England.
Right Worshipful, Worshipful, and much Honored in our Lord Jesus,
THat this weak Treatise comes forth under your Name cannot seem strange to
him who remembers Natures Offspring by instinct sheltring it self under those
wings from whence it received life and breath.

Reluctances from personal unfitness to undertake this Service, Religion
forbad me to hearken after, whilst I considered the call of the Court
thereunto to be the call of God; and how unworthy it would be for any of Aarons
Sons so far as lies in them to fail Moses leading on and calling to follow in
a Cause immediately concerning the Lord Jesus, especially at such a time when
to be silent were not only to deny a joynt-witnessing with you to the truth;
but in appearance tacitly to strengthen the adversary in bearing false
witness against the power of the Christian Magistrate concerning the Defense
of the Truth: Seeing Donatus now cries aloud again, Quid imperatori cum
Ecclesiis?
What has the Emperor to do with the Churches? Notwithstanding that position
concerning the Magistrates power in matters of Religion be attested to by
Civill-Law, Common Law, Nature, Scripture, Reason and Testimony both old and
new.

The lawful Administrations by the Kings of Judah touching the custody of the
first Table they did not as Types of Christ but as Servants of Christ,
otherwise what was done by the Type must be fullfilled by the Antitype, but
Christ never exercised any act of Civil Government. Again, the coming of the
Antitype is the abolishing of the Type, consequently then it should be
unlawful for Civil power now to assist the Cause of Religion. The reason given
of such administrations was not typical but moral, viZ. to put away evil from
Israel; the moral reason is of like force now as then; the reason of the Law
and the Law live and die together.

1 King. 20.42. 2 Chronicles. ^3.11.
Ahab King over an Apostate Church dies for not putting Benhadad to death for
Blasphemy.

When Jehojada put the Crown upon Joash his head, he gave the Testimony into
his hand.

The King of Nineveh proclaims a Fast. Jon. 3.7. Dan. 3.29
Nebuchadnezzar makes a Decree against Blasphemy. Ezra 1.
Cyrus gives out a Proclamation for the Buiiding of the Temple. Dan. 6.29
Darius the Mede makes a Decree for the acknowledgement of the true God: Ezra
7.13
The like does Artaxerxes for the beautifying of the House of the Lord. These
being Heathen Princes could not be Types of Christ, as Kings of Judah.

In the times of the Gospel, Act. 21.28 23.29.24.5.6.25.8. and 19.20.26.3.
Paul in a matter of Religion appealeth unto Caesar, which neither Lysias,
Felix, Festus, nor Agrippa decline the audience of.

As Religion was the cause of the War purposed between the nine Tribes and a
half, and those on the other side of Jordan; So Religion shall be the cause of
the War both purposed and performed by the ten Kings against the Man of Sin,
Rev. 17.^^
which supposes Civil Authority acting therein. Isa. 49.23
The Prophets speaking of the times of the Gospel, assure the godly that Kings
shall be their Nursing Fathers, and Queens their Nursing Mothers, and that
false Prophets shall be thrust through with a Sword. Zec. 13.3.
This power then of the Magistrate expires not together with the Legal
dispensation of the Covenant. From the premises appears the vanity as well as
ignorance of their evasion who acknowledge the power of the Magistrate in the
time of the Old, yet deny it in the time of the New Testament.

The adaequate end of the Magistrate is to procure that the people may live a
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. 1 Timothy 2.2
Magistrates are called Gods, strange Gods who take no care of godliness. It Is
a carnal and unworthy position that limits the Magistrate to the Corporal, and
restrains him from the care of the spiritual good of the Subject, thereby
spoiling this Olive of its choicest fatness wherewith it rejoices both God
and man.

That licentious and pestilent Proposition, The care of the matters of Religion
belongs not to the Magistrate, is a Stratagem of the Old Serpent and Father of
lies, to make free passage for the doctrine of devils; an invention not unlike
Saul's Oath, the trouble of Israel and escape of the Enemy; a sad error that
fosters all error; a Satanicall device tending to undermine the policy of God;
attempting to charm that Sword with a fallacy, whose dexterous and vigorous use
instrumentally puts away evil from Israel, and turns every way in its manner
to keep the path of the Tree of life. The rusting of this Sword of divine
execution in the Scabbard, has been more destructive unto truth then the
drawing of the Sword of Persecution. Persecution has slain Thousands, but the
deadly Sea of false doctrine has slain ten Thousands. See Mr Cottons Answer to
Mr W. chapter 33.
Might this Imposture prevail, then rejoice ye Heretics, Idolaters, Seducers,
Ranters, etc. but woe be to the Sheep of the slaughter, whose Possessours may
slay them, and plead themselves Not-guilty at the civil Bar.

Both Swords make up a complete Medium of all our good and remedy of all evil,
and are of special use each to other mutually, as well as of necessary use
unto the people jointly. The Magistrates need the Ministry to fix them in the
Consciences of men, and the Ministers need the Magistracy to preserve them from
men that have no Conscience, or worse. Saul feels the worth of Samuels
Countenance: Joash soon wants Jehojada, nor does Jehoash forbear to honor
Elisha with the compellation of My Father, My Father. Again, the Levites stand
in need of Nehemiah; and Hezekiah calling them Sons, intimates their Orphan
like condition without his assistance. O mi Imperator, tu me gladio defend ego
te verbis and scriptis defendam.
My Emperor (says Occam to Ledovick) you shall defend me with your Sword, and
I will defend you with my Pen.

The counsel of peace shall be between them both. As the sacred power is
likened to Heaven, so is the civil power compared to Earth: Man cannot continue
without either: Both policies acted according to the Word with Christ's Spirit
in respect of the external means of our welfare, hold forth a happy Analogy
with the concreated Image of God, and assisting grace (together with what
superiority then became) in the state of innocence, and are a resemblance of
what the renewed image of God and immediate assistance of Christ shall be in
the state of glory. They are that unto the People of God throughout the
Metaphorical Sea and Wilderness of this Life, which that man of God and Saint
of the Lord were unto Israel throughout that natural Sea and Wilderness unto
the Land of Canaan. This is that Moses and Aaron.

Both Powers are Gods way to man's well-being and all good, the polity of
heaven. The violation of them is Satan's method to man's woe and all evil; the
treachery of Hell. Whereby is legible the constant Antipathy between Dogmatists
and Order; together with the reason of the present insurrection by the Spirit
of Error against both Policies; Contemptus Disciplinae comes haereseon.
Danaeus de h^eresibus Prolegom. cap. 1.
Ataxie (as of old) being still found a necessary companion of Heresy, and all
experience having proved that the latter cannot be long-lived without the
former.

How formidable then is that worse then Ammonitish Lust (too much adhered unto
by many not only in but of Israel, in this hour of the Gospels Passion) which
endeavors together with the putting out of the right eye of Magistracy, that
neither the name of Councels in Jerusalem, nor of Office-rule in Churches may
be had any more in remembrance. Luther sometimes wrote to the Senate of
Mulhaysen to beware of the wolf Muncer.

I appeal to any competently judicious and sober-minded man, if the denial of
rule in the Presbytery, of a decisive voice in the Synod, and of the power of
the Magistrate in matters of Religion, does not in this point translate the
Pap^ll power unto the Brotherhood of every Congregation. Thou that abhorrest
Episcopacy do thou commit Popery? Alas, alas! Is there no medium between
Boniface and Morellius, between Papacy and Anarchy, Babylon and Babel? If there
be a mystery of iniquity in the one, is there not a University of iniquity in
the other? Confusion is not far from every evil work, and though not mystical
in it self, yet mystical in this that the way to so manifest confusion and
ruin should not be manifest. The Historians indignation that the East was
overcome by a drunken Commander with a drunken Army, Curtius.
is now become (I speak the words of truth and soberness) a matter of
astonishment, when so drunken a Tenet in an Age of such learning, piety,
action, suffering, and success, should threaten the hopes of so glorious a
Reformation come unto the very birth. Ingemuit orbis Christianus and miratus
est factum se esse Arianum.
The Christian world long since sighed and wondered at it self, that after such
sore travel and bringing forth of a man-child, it was in point of doctrine
become an Arian: the Lord Jesus grant that there may not be cause for so
considerable a part of the world of the Reformed to sigh deeply and wonder,
that after its present like pangs and birth it should (to say nothing more
grievous) in point of discipline become a Morellian.

Of so great moment is the Doctrine of these holy Tacticks of the Civil Sword,
as that the neglect has been contemporary and accessory to the efficacy of
error, the effectual exercise thereof signal to the times of Zions mercy.

Atque hinc profecta est tota, etc. Zanch. in praecept. 4.
The difuse of the Civil Sword as concerning matters of Religion gave
opportunity to the rise of the man of Sin; the abuse of it maintained him; the
good use thereof shall help to ruin him.

Scultet. in Isa. 49.23.
It went well with those Churches when that good Old Duke hearkened to
Melancthon citing those words; Kings shall be thy Nursing Fathers, and Queens
thy Nursing Mothers; Act. 18.17
but it fared ill with Sosthenes when Gallio cared for none of those matters.

That the care of Religion is the duty of the Magistrate, is evident; yet when
and how far to bear, Scripsit Constantinus sui esse officii, ante omnia id
officere, ut in Ecclesia sit unae fides Eusebius. l. 3. de vita ejus
in case of error concerning matters of Religion, is a great Quaery of these
times. Unity injudgement is to be endeavored as much as is possible, because
truth is one and indivisible, yet some difference touching the truth must be
endured, because of the weakness of men. To tolerate every thing, and to
tolerate nothing, are both intolerable.

Zeno's Union, Anastasius Act of Oblivion, Zenonis (...), Anastasii (...),
Osiand. Cent. 6. l. 1. c. 5. id. cent. 16. l. 2. c. 68. Cassand. de officio pij
viri, and alibi.
Charles his interim, Cassander's advice, were humane policies that sought
peace with the loss of truth. Schismatical rigor prejudiceth truth with the
breach of Peace. Deservedly abhorred amongst all Christians is the Spirit of
that Giant who made all he took even with his Bed, by stretching out them that
were shorter, and cutting short such as were longer.

A Toleration is not an approbation. Those distinctions between mixtures in
Religion, and errors in those that profess the same Religion, between
Fundamentals and not Fundamentals, between errors held forth by an erroneous
conscience and a contumacious will; between persons peaceable in Israel and
disturbers of the State; between points that are clear or orderly decided with
due time for conviction, and such as are disputable and of depending
disquisition; being prudently applied, may be of special use hereunto. Zanchy
commends two Rules for this purpose, the Rule of Faith, and the Rule of Love:
The Rule of Faith whereby we may not be wanting to the Truth, and the Rule of
Love whereby we may not be wanting to our Brother. Junius cont. 5. l. 2. c. 19,
22. Phi. 3.15, 16.
Junius treating of this Subject, betakes himself from disputation unto prayer;
yet so, as commending to his Reader the counsel of that great Casuist, Let us
therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded; and if in any thing ye be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you: Nevertheless whereunto
we have already attained, let us (...) est verbum militare, tum enim milites
dicuntur (...), cum persistentes in sua quaque statione, ordine procedunt, etc.
Zanch. in loc.
walk by the same rule, let us mind the same things.

The sum whereof is, that those who consent in Fundamentals, notwithstanding
they dissent in points of an inferior nature, are not only to be tolerated but
are to be looked upon (by Gods blessing thereby in the use of means) as likely
to be gained, provided they walk regularly and orderly.

Such hitherto have been the suitable proceedings of this Court unto the
premises, tempered with that zeal against the error and tenderness toward the
Author of this Dialogue, as that they that hear thereof have cause to bless
you, as the eyes that saw gave winesse to you.

Upon which occasion, having (after the example of Leo to Theodosius) rendered
hereby unto you solemn thanks, I accounted it my duty that wheresoever this
poor Script should come, not only that this should be told as a memorial of
you, but also

That you have now above twenty years ruled in this place, during all which
space you have not been ashamed to take upon you the protection of your exiled
Brethren, fled for conscience sake from the face of the late Prelacy to worship
God in this vast Wilderness,

That you have given proof by so long experience unto the world, that Civil
Government and the Congregational way may consist together,

That you have been amongst the first of Magistracies which have approved and
practiced that Congregational way; no small favor from God, nor honor to your
selves with the generations to come, when that shall appear to be the way of
Christ.

I have no more to add, but that poor New-Englands superadding hereunto the
concurring Testimony of the Synod, Court, and Churches respectively, to what
shall be found to be the Truth concerning Doctrine and Disciplihe (according as
you were lately stirred up) shall thereby doubtless witness a good
confession, a service of a high nature, which God will not forget, and
posterity will reremember, gain to it self not the least name among the two
Witnesses: Such work was worthy of Christ, and both the work and worth of those
that during the Reign of Antichrist were and are designed to prophecy in
Sackcloth.

And lastly, help to prepare that choice weapon of bearing witness to the
Truth, an Engine fitter to do execution then Goliath's Sword; which together
with the rest of like nature held forth in the Ages of the Patience of Saints,
the true David has promised to make use of and prosper unto victory, not only
in the lighter skirmishes of the Lord, but in the great day of Battle of God
Almighty at the Fall of Babylon, in the place of Armageddon: For even then it
shall be said, They overcame by the Blood of the Lamb, and by the Word of their
Testimony; Though the Witnesses die, their Testimony lives; This shall be when
they are not, Higgajon Selah.

The Lord lift up your hearts in his Name, always inspiring you with that
divine discerning of the Seasons, that through his Grace you may quit your
selves as becomes his exiles in such a cause, and at such a time. So prays
and cease not to pray

To your Worships and worthy Personages respectively, Sincerely addicted and
devoted, JOHN NORTON.

THE CONTENTS.
PART. I.
THe Introduction. Chapter 1 Page 1 The stating of the Controversy. Chapter 2 Page 13
The Vindication of Genesis 2.17. Chapter 3 Page 20 The Vindication of Isa. 53.4, 5.
Chapter 4 Page 35 The Vindication of Isa. 53.6. Chapter 5 Page 32 The Vindication of
Exo. 20.10. Lev. 1.4. and 4.29. Lev. 8.14. and 16.20, 21. Chapter 6 Page 48 The
Vindication of 2 Cor. 5.21. Chapter 7 Page 53 The Vindication of Matthew. 26.37. Mar.
14.33. Luke 22.43. Chapter 8 Page 56 The Vindication of Heb. 5.7. Chapter 9 Page 70 The
Vindication of Psa. 22.1. Chapter 10 Page 77 The Vindication of Gal. 3.13. Chapter 11
Page 90 Christ redeemed us not from the curse of the Law by his Soul-sufferings
only; And of the meaning of Haides. Chapter 12 Page 105 Of the Dialogues Arguments
taken from the description of the torments of hell, and from the place of
suffering the torments of the damned. Chapter 13 Page 110
PART. II.
SECT. I.
Of the nature of Mediatorly Obedience, both according to the Dialogue, and
according to the Orthodox. Chapter 1 Page 135 Of the diverse ways of Redemption.
Chapter 2 Page 141 Of that wherein the true meritorious efficacy of the Blood of
Christ lies. Chapter 3 Page 147 Whether the Jews and Romans put Christ to death.
Chapter 4 Page 156 Of the Dialogues distinction of Christ's dying as a Mediator and
as a Malefactor. Chapter 5 Page 164
PART. II. SECT. II.
Of the Moral Law. Chapter 1 Page 176 The Dialogues Arguments against the
Imputation of Christ's Obedience unto Justification, Answered. Chapter 2 Page 185 Of
the Dialogues distinction between Legal and Mediatoriall obedience. Chapter 3 Page
195 Of the Dialogues further Reasoning against the influence of Christ's
obedience unto justification by way of Imputation. Chapter 4 Page 207 Whether the
Justice and Righteousness of a sinner does lie only in Gods merciful
atonement, pardon, and forgiveness. Chapter 5 Page 216 How Abraham's Faith was
imputed to him for Righteousness. Chapter 6 Page 224 Of the Enumeration of the
causes of Justification, according to the Dialogue, and according to the
Orthodox. Chapter 7 Page 233 Of the Dialogues examination of certain Arguments
propounded by M. Forbes for the proving of Justification by the imputation of
the passive obedience of Christ in his death and satisfaction. Chapter 8 Page 244
Of Atonement or Reconciliation. Chapter 9 Page 246
AN ANSWER TO A DIALOGUE ENTITLED The Meritorious Price of Man's Redemption,
Reconciliation, Justification, etc.
And pretending to Prove I. That Christ did not suffer for us those unutterable
Torments of Gods Wrath which commonly are called Hell torments, to Redeem our
Souls from them. II. That Christ did not bear our Sins by Gods Imputation, and
therefore he did not bear the Curse of the Law for them.


CHAP. I. The Introduction.
THE Mediatorly obedience of Christ in the full extent thereof comprehends
the universal execution of the whole Office of the Mediator, which he as King,
Priest and Prophet, thoroughly performed, and still performs to the glory of
the Father, and salvation of the Elect. This Dialogue singleth out a principal
part of his Priesthood, against which it contends primarily, and against the
received doctrine of Justification secondarily; the later necessarily following
upon the former. Omitting therefore the Kingly and Prophetical parts of the
Mediatorship altogether, and so much of the Priestly part thereof as is herein
untouched, for the better confining and guiding the apprehension of the Reader
in the ensuing Dispute, before we close with the Discourse it self, give me
leave (together with the foregoing intimation) to premise briefly certain
Propositions, four Questions, five Distinctions, with some few Arguments. The
Distinctions serving to Answer some chief Objections. The Propositions,
Questions and Arguments, tending to clear and confirm the Truth.



Do this and thou shall live, Lev. 18.5. But in the day thou eatest thereof
thou shall surely dye, Genesis 2.17.) proceeded with man in a way of justice.

creature, viz. Gods constant will of rendering to man what is his due; this is
the free constitution of Gods good pleasure, whose will is the first and
absolute rule of Righteousness.



That which thus obliges God in a way of Reward, is called Merit, in a way of
Punishment Demerit: yet so as the, word Merit is ordinarily used promiscuously.

Absolute, so God cannot be a Debtor to the creature, no not to Christ himself:
or By Way of free Covenant, so God has in case made himself a Debtor to man.
Justice then consisting in rendering to every one their due, and Gods will being
the rule of Justice; it follows that and only that to be the due, desert,
merit or demerit of man, which God has willed concerning him. The Moral Law it
self, that eternal rule of manners, The recompense contained in the promise in
case of obedience; The punishment contained in the curse in case of
disobedience, are all the effects of Gods good pleasure.

Merit by virtue of free Covenant, notes such an obedience whereunto God by his
free Promise has made himself a debtor according to order of Justice. Demerit
notes such disobedience whereunto by force of the Commination, death is due
according to the order of Justice. Merit or Demerit is a just debt, whether in
way of reward or punishment: the genus of merit is debt, i. e. To indebt or
make due its form in a way of Justice.

man should dye. As God (with reverence be it spoken of him, who cannot be
unjust) in case man had continued in obedience, had been unjust if he had
denied him life: so in case of disobedience, he should be unjust in case he
should not inflict death.



In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die; he could not avoid in
respect of his power now limited to proceed by this rule; but man having
sinned, man must die, and satisfy the Law that man may live Justice requires
that the Surety should die, th^^ the Debtor may live, That he might be just,
and the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus, Romans 3.26. God suffers
multitudes of sins to be unpardoned, but he suffers not one sin to be
unpunished.



flows his proceeding with men according to the Law of righteousness freely
constituted between him and them.



Nam hujus mysterii summum, imo tota ratio independit, quis negat potuisse Deum
alio quovis modo providere saluti hominu^? sed hoc voluit, nec nisi hoc, Cham.
de Descensu, To. 2. l. 5 cap. 12.
for who can deny that God could have saved man in another way? but he would
save him thus, and no otherwise then thus.

This great principle is all along to be kept in mind, and occasionally to be
applied, serving not as a sword to cut, but as a leading truth to loose many
knots of carnal reason. The good pleasure of God is the first rule of
Righteousness, the Cause of all Causes, the Reason of all Reasons, and in one
word all Reason in one Reason.



1. In the dignity of the person obeying. 2. In the quality or kind of his
obedience. 3. In the acceptance of this obedience.


The person obeying was God-man. The first Adam was by Gods institution a
public person, hence in him sinning the world sinned, The second Adam is not
only by Gods institution a public person, but also an infinite person, because
God: This public and infinite person doing and suffering, was as much as if
the world of the Elect had suffered. If the first Adam a finite person, was by
Gods institution in that act of disobedience, A world of men; why should it
seem strange that the second Adam being an infinite person should be by Gods
institution in the course of his obedience, As the world of the Elect? He being
an infinite person there needed no more then Gods pleasure to have made him The
world of men, yea ten thousand-thousand worlds. That which is infinite knows
no bounds but Gods will.

The kind of his obedience was Legal, the same in nature and measure which we
by the first Covenant stood bound unto.

This his obedience to the Law was more acceptable to God, then the
disobedience of Adam was detestable; yea more acceptable then the obedience of
Adam, had he continued in the first Covenant.

Though all these ingredients are so essentially requisite unto the obedience
of the Mediator, as that the defect of any one of them renders Christ an
insufficient Mediator, yet is it both the grand Error, and a great part of the
unhappy Labor of the ensuing Treatise, to take away the Second of the Three.

It is therefore unworthy a Christian to say with Fevardentius, One drop of the
blood of Christ is sufficient to have redeemed us: Or with Bellarmine, That the
bodily death of Christ is sufficient for the Elect, (though according to both
performed in way of satisfaction to Divine justice.) But much more unworthy a
Christian to say with the Dialogue, That the bodily death of Christ is
sufficient for redemption, though not performed in order to satisfy justice.



Genesis 2.17. no otherwise obliged himself by the Law to the punishment of sin
with death, but so, as that it was free for him to execute that punishment,
either upon the offender or upon the Surety.



The essential part of punishment is that execution of justice which proceeds
from the curse, Desperatio non est de essentia paenae infernalis, Bellar.
enerv. To. 1. lib. 2. c. 2.
considered absolutely in it self without any respect to the condition or
disposition of the patient, this may be called The essence of punishment. The
accidental part of punishment is that execution of justice, which proceeds
not from the cause considered absolutely, but from the disposition or condition
of the patient being under such a curse, this may be called A penal adjunct.
For examples sake:

In the execution of the sentence of death upon a malefactor; Mors Per se
Aeterna.
the separation of the soul from the body is of the essence of the punishment;
the gradual decay of the senses, impotency of spirit, loss of friends, are
accidental parts of punishment or penal adjuncts, arising not from the mere
separation of the soul and body, Polan. Carcer debiti pars nulla est. Parker de
Descen. l. 3. number. 91.
but from the disposition of the patient. In case of execution of the sentence
of imprisonment upon a debtor; Imprisonment is of the essence of the
punishment, but duration in the prison is from the disposition of the debtor,
viz. his insufficiency to pay the debt.

The essential punishment of the curse, is the total temporal privation of all
the sense of the good of the promise, called by some, The pain of loss; and
the inflicting of the positive evil flowing from the curse, considered
absolutely in it self, without any respect to the disposition of the patient,
called The pain of sense: This essential punishment was that and only that
which Christ suffered.

Medull. l. 1. c. 22. th. 6.
The death which Christ died was in nature and proportion the same which was due
unto the Elect for their sin according to justice.

The accidental part of the punishment of the curse, is all the rest of the
penal evil thereof, and befalls the reprobate, not from the curse simply, but
from the disposition of the patient under that curse. Of these accidental parts
of punishment (which if you please may well pass under the name of penal
adjuncts) are final and total separation from God; final death in sin, final
and total despair, duration of punishment for ever, the place of punishment,
etc.

Pataeus in Matthew. 27.46. p. 889.
Absolute separation from, disunion or discovenanting with God, is a consequent
of reprobation, but not of the essence of punishment, because the elect,
notwithstanding the Commination stood in as full force against them as against
the reprobate, yet continued elected and in Covenant with God in Christ; the
Elect were in Christ before they were in Adam. The personal union of Christ
continued, notwithstanding he suffered the punishment due to the sins of the
Elect.

Sin is not of the essence of the punishment, because essential punishment is a
satisfaction unto justice for injury done; but sin is a continuing of the
injury, and a provocation of, not a satisfaction unto justice.

Essential punishment is an effect of justice, of which God is the Author; but
it is blasphemy to say God is the Author of sin. The Elect suffer no part of
penal punishment, yet are left unto sin.

Duration for ever and the place of the punishment are adjuncts, as the nature
of them sufficiently shows.

Vide Zanch. de natura Dei, l. 4. c. 6. Hatred is taken either for the willing
of affliction, or for hatred opposite to eternal love; in the last sense God
hates not the Elect. Odium sumitur pro volitione maloru^ odio opposito amori
aeterno.
Twiff. Vind. Great. l. 3. errat. 8. S. 7. Dei ira in electos non est odium
oppositum dilectioni qua^ antea ipsos est prosecutus, Rhetorf. exc. 1. c. 2.
and the hatred of God strictly taken. Wrath is sometime taken for Gods hatred
of persons, and signifies reprobation; thus the reprobates are called Vessels
of Wrath, Romans 9.22. Sometimes for the execution of Vindicative Justice, Romans
1.18. and chap. 2.5. in this sense the elect are called the children of wrath,
Ephesians. 2.3. because their state by nature is such whereunto vindicative justice
is due by reason of their sin. Sometimes for the execution of corrective
justice, Deuteronomy. 4.21. Psalm. 78.62. in the first sense God is wroth with the
reprobate: in the second sense he was wroth with Chirst, in the last he is
wroth with the Elect: Though in the second sense, not in the first, God may be
said to be wroth with Christ; yet in no sense could God be said ever to hate
Christ: God hates both persons and sins of the reprobate, he hates sin in the
Surety and in the Elect, but he ever loved their persons. God is wroth with all
whom he hates, but he hates not all with whom he is wroth.



made up. Parker de Desc. lib. 3. n. 55.
Such a measure is necessary; but that this measure should be made up by
suffering these or those particulars, is arbitrary.

Bonavent. li. 3. in Sent. did. 22. q. 4. Rivet. Cathol. Orthod. Tom 1. Tract.
2. qu. 60. Willet. Synops. Cent. 5. genesis contr. 20. p. 5. q. 3.
Christ suffered a Penal hell, but not a Local; he descended into hell
Virtually, not Locally; that is, He suffered the pains of hell due unto the
Elect, who for their sin deserved to be damned.

Genesis 2.17. or God might dispense with the execution thereof without violation
of his justice: But God could not dispense with the execution thereof without
the violation of his justice. What was sometimes spoken of the Law of the Medes
and Persians, holds true at all times concerning the Law of God, that it
alters not; for the confirmation of this truth Christ solemnly engages his
truth, Verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one
tittle shall in no ways pass from the Law till all be fulfilled, Matthew. 5.18.
This sentence was universal given to Adam as a public person, and holds all
his posterity, whether elect or reprobate in case of sin, guilty of death.
Hereby the omnipotent has so limited himself, as that now he cannot do that
which else he could do, in respect of his absolute power. The command being
given out for Lots preservation, God could not destroy Sodom till Lot was
secured, Genesis 19.22. for the Decree being passed, and the word gone out of his
mouth, God cannot deny himself; Hence in the case of execution of justice, it is
not only a truth, that God spared not the Angels, 1 Pet. 2.4. nor the old
world, verse. 5. but it is also a truth that he spared not his Son, Romans 8.28.
Unto this purpose Piscator well interprets those words of our Savior [ If it
be possible, etc.] Matthew. 26.39. Confer. Piscat. Analys. and Observe. in Matthew.
26. Davenant in Col. 1.20. p. 105.
That is, says he, If in respect of the righteous will of God the father there
could be any other way found to save the Elect, without Christ's suffering of
the wrath of God for their sin, he prays that then the cup might pass from
him, but because that could not be, he submits his will to his Fathers will,
the sum whereof is, God shows by the example of his Son, that he having
constituted his Law, the rule of relative justice, between him and man; the
dispensation, with the exemption from punishment in case of sin was impossible.

i. e. the punishment due to the sins of the Elect, or else God is untrue in
that Commination, he that sins shall die, because the Elect themselves do not
suffer it: But God is true. The strength of Israel will not lie, 1 Samuel 15.29.
God cannot lie, Titus 1.1.

Polon. ^ynt lib. 6. c. 36.
But Christ was the Surety of the Elect, Heb. 7.22. By so much was Jesus made a
Surety of a better Covenant. Neither is the Argument at all infringed, by
saying he is our Surety in regard of the Covenant of grace here called a better
Covenant, but not in respect of the Covenant of works; for besides that the
word better is not to be referred unto either Covenant it self, but to the
manner of the dispensation of the Covenant of grace under the Gospel: we are to
know that the Covenant of grace it self obliges us to fulfill the Covenant of
works in our Surety. Faith establishes the Law, Romans 3.31. We cannot fulfill
the Covenant of works, or the righteousness of the Law in our Surety by
believing, if it were not a truth that he fulfilled the Covenant of works for
us.



Romans 3.31. Gal. 3.21. Therefore.



i.e. his passive obedience, there can be no remission of sin without
obedience, there is no reason to acknowledge his active obedience (whence we
are accepted as righteous) this being in vain without that: if there be neither
passive obedience nor active, then there is no remission of sins, nor
acceptance as righteous, and consequently no justification.

Romans 3.31. Do we then make void the Law through faith God forbid: yea we
establish the Law.

Willet. Synops. Cent. 5 genesis contr. 20.
Christ suffering the essential punishment of the curse, i.e. the wrath of God,
contains nothing derogatory from the worth of his person, nor prejudicial
unto Redemption.

The denial then of Christ to have satisfied the wrath of God, in that it
renders the Mediatorship of Christ insufficient, takes away the being of the
Justification of a sinner, and leaves the elect to suffer the wrath of God in
their own persons, which who can exempt (to use Peter's words) from the charge
of a damnable heresy? and if so, in that it so denies Christ to have suffered
the wrath of God as therewithal it not only exceedingly diminishes the love
of God and the love of Christ; but also imputes injustice and untruth unto God,
leaves the Law for ever unsatisfied, made void by the Gospel, and not
established by faith: one and the last of which Paul looks at as abomination,
Romans 3.31. I see not how it can be pronounced less then both an abominable and
damnable heresy.

These premised, come we now to the Dialogue it self, beginning with its
beginning, viz. the stating of the Controversy.

CHAP. II. The stating of the controversy.
Hold that Jesus Christ our Mediator did pay the full price of our Redemption
to his father by the merit of his mediatorial obedience, which according to
Gods determinate counsel, was tried through sufferings, inflicted upon his
body as upon a Malefactor, by Satan and his Instruments.

but this manner of speech the Dialogue declines, choosing rather to express it
self by affected if not ambiguous terms, viz. [Christ paid the price of our
redemption by the merit of his Mediatoriall obedience] the meaning of which
Sibboleth we shall soon see.

The Question between the Orthodox and the Dialogue is not whether the
Mediatorly obedience of Christ be a meritorious price of redemption, but
whether the Mediatorial obedience of Christ in the Dialogue be the Mediatorly
obedience of Christ; So that hitherto you do but beg not state the Question, or
rather boast of a question begged, then state a Question to be disputed. That
part of the Controversy which concerns Mediatorly obedience shall be truly
stated in its due place.

It is very true that the Mediatorly obedience of Christ is the meritorious and
full price of redemption, but most untrue in the sense of your Mediatorial
obedience for you leave out and reject from thence Christ's obedience to the Law
of works as God-man, his judicial bearing of sin, his suffering the punishment
due for sin, in way of satisfaction to divine justice, Sustinent quidem, sed
non ita ut usquam satisfaciant justitiae Dei Ursin. Ex. plic. Catech. par. 2.
q. 17
and all this as the Surety of the elect, without which the Mediatorly
obedience of Christ is insufficient and uneffectuall, for we cannot bear sin
nor endure the punishment of sin so as to satisfy the justice of God, nor can
we perform legal obedience, yet all these must be suffered, Genesis 2.17.
overcome, 1 Cor. 15.17. and done Lev. 18.5. otherwise no salvation, Gal. 3.10.
otherwise sin still reigns, the curse has dominion, and justice remains in
its full force to the execution of eternal death.

The Mediatorly obedience of Christ being by your leaving out these essential
parts thereof made unsufficient, there can be no mediatorly sacrifice,
satisfaction, price, or any merit therein or therefrom.

The trial of Christ's Mediatorly obedience lay in the greatness of those
sufferings, which as Mediator he was to undergo, and was so much greater in
respect of God, then it was in respect of Satan and his instruments; as the
sufferings of the soul exceed the sufferings of the body; the just charge of
all the sins of the elect, the unjust charges of men; and as the righteous
wrath of God exceeded the unrighteous wrath of Satan and his agents.

I put as much worth and efficacy in Christ's Mediatorial obedience so tried, as
they do that plead most for our redemption by his suffering Gods wrath for us.



Though you do say so, yet if you say not the truth, your so saying makes your
doctrine never the more safe, but so much the more perilous as by such specious
pretenses it is rendered more apt to be received. Aarons Calf was never the
less an Idol notwithstanding those glorious words spoken of it, these are thy
Gods that brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt, Exo. 32.8. the fictitious
Mediatorial obedience of the Dialogue is no whit altered from it self,
howsoever gilded over with the falsely arrogated attributes of the obedience of
Christ.

They place the price of our Redemption in his suffering Gods wrath for us in
the full weight and measure, as it is due to our sins by the Curse of the Law:
I place the price of our redemption in the merit of his Mediatorial obedience,
whereof his Mediatoriall sacrifice of Atonement was the Masterpiece.

the worth of a thing and the price are to be distinguished; Vid. Cham l. 9. p.
121. (...) Materialiter. Formaliter.
Rhetorf.
the full worth may be tendered by the buyer, but the worth is not a price
without the acceptance of the seller. Ahab offers the worth of the vineyard, 1
Kin. 21.21. but it was not a price without Naboths consent: though the
obedience of Christ being the obedience of God-man, was of infinite virtue in
it self, yet it could not have obliged God to the acceptance thereof, nor make
him a debtor thereunto without his consent.

What to judge of your mediatoriall obedience we saw before, which being null,
its merit, price and sacrifice must needs perish with it.

I agree with others in this, that divine wrath is fully satisfied for the sins
of the Elect, by the merit of Christ's. Mediatoriall obedience; I differ from
others in this, namely, in the manner of his satisfaction, I say, that Christ
did not suffer Gods wrath for our sins, by suffering the extremity of his
wrath, neither did he suffer the torments of hell neither in his body, nor in
his soul nor any degree of Gods wrath at all.

Epicurus, who in his disputation concerning the Gods, abused the hearers with
yielding that verbally which he took away really; so while you yield verbally
that divine wrath is fully satisfied, you steal away the truth from the less
wary Reader really; for in the very next line but one, you say, Christ did not
satisfy Gods wrath for our sins by suffering so much as any degree of Gods
wrath at all.

And though you would seem to qualify and hide your vast and sad diff^rence
from us, saying, you differ from us in respect of the manner, yet you cannot
but know full well that you differ from us not only in the manner, but also in
the matter of Christ's satisfaction. Whilst you deny and oppose what you know
we affirm and defend, namely, Christ's suffering of the wrath of God, and that
in way of satisfaction to divine justice. For the confirmation whereof, give me
leave upon this occasion to insert an argument, otherwise somewhat out of its
place.

Such meritorious, mediatorly obedience as indebted to God in point of justice
to remit the just punishment of sin without any violation of justice, nay, with
the establishment of justice, must needs be done in such a way of satisfaction
unto justice, as includes also a suffering of justice. But the meritorious
mediatorly obedience of Christ is such meritorious mediatorly obedience,
whereby God is indebted in point of justice to remit the just punishment of
sin: If we confess our sins he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins; 1 John 1.9. without any violation of justice, that he might be just, and the
justifier of him that believes in Jesus, Romans 3.36. yea, with the establishing
of justice; Do we then make void the Law by faith? God forbid: Yea, we
establish the Law, ver. 31.

Therefore the meritorious mediatorly obedience of Christ was performed in such
a way of satisfaction unto justice, as included also a suffering of justice.
You disagree with the truth and us, and scarcely agree with your self.

Though I say that Christ did not suffer his Fathers wrath neither in whole nor
in part, yet I affirm that he suffered all things that his Father did appoint
him to suffer, in all circumstances, just according to the prediction of all
the Prophets, even to the nodding of the head, and the spitting of the face, as
these Scriptures do testify.

1. Peter told the Jews that they had killed the Prince of Life, as God before
had showed by the mouth of all the Prophets, that Christ should suffer, and he
fullfilled it so. Act. 3.17, 18.

2. Christ did expressly by his Disciples tell, that he must go to Jerusalem and
suffer many things of the Elders and chief Priests and Scribes, and be killed
and raised again the third day, Mat. 16.21.

3. After his resurrection he said to the two Disciples, O fools, and slow of
heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken: Ought not Christ to suffer
these things and to enter into his glory? Luke 24.25, 26. and in ver. 44.46. he
said thus to all his Disciples; These are the words which I speak unto you,
that all things must be fullfilled which are written in the Law of Moses, in
the Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning me, thus it is written, and thus it
behoved Christ to suffer and rise again from the dead on the third day.

4. Paul told the men of Antioch, that the Rulers of the Jews condemned him
because they knew not the voices of the Prophets concerning him, and therefore
though they found no cause of death in him, yet they desired Pilate that he
should be slain, and when they had fullfilled all things that were written of
him, they took him down from the tree, and laid him in a sepulcher, Act. 13.27,
28, 29. mark this phrase, They fulfilled all things that were written of him;
if they fulfilled all his sufferings, then it was not Gods wrath but man's wrath
that he suffered.

5. The Lord told Adam not only that the promised seed should break the devils
head-plot, but also that the devil should crucify him and pierce him in the
footsole, Genesis 3.15. the devil did it by his instruments, the Scribes and
Pharisees by Pilate and the Roman soldiers.

says, that his Father did not appoint him to suffer his wrath either in whole
or in part: That you say thus cannot be denied, but with what reason you so
say, let the Reader judge by what follows. None of the Scriptures alleged by
you confirm, though some of them alleged by you, deny what you affirm.

Christ shows that he must suffer many things by the Elders, chief Priests,
and Scribes, Matthew. 16.21. true, yet he does not there show that he must not
suffer the wrath of God. God fullfilled those things which he had before showed
by the mouth of all his Prophets, that Christ should suffer, Act. 3.18. (...).
according to this sense the Greek Text is to be read, and not as you seem to
mistake it; this may include, but certainly excludes not the suffering of the
wrath of God, Luke 24.25, 26. concludes that Christ was to suffer: the word All
ver. 26. includes the suffering of divine justice: the word All Act. 13.27, 28,
29. is to be taken in a limited sense, for all things that were written of him
to be fullfilled by the Romans, and the Jews, as the instruments thereof; not
absolutely for all things whatsoever he was to suffer from any.

They fullfilled all things that he was to suffer from them, true, but it does
not therefore follow that they fulfilled all things he was to suffer: The
meaning of those words, Thou shall bruise his heel, Genesis 3.15. is, that Christ
chiefly, and with him believers that live godlily; both which are the seed of
Eve, shall suffer affliction and persecution by Satan and his malignant agents,
which are the seed of the Serpent.

Notwithstanding what you have hitherto said touching the stating of the matter
controverted, that the Reader who shall be pleased to cast his eye upon this
poor paper may not be at a loss; but may with the more facility, clearness,
and distinctnesse go along with us in the following discourse: he is desired
here to take just and seasonable notice, that the whole controversy between
you and us consists of four parts.

1 Concerning Christ's suffering the wrath of God due to the elect for sin.

2. Concerning Gods imputation of sin to Christ.

3. Concerning the nature of Mediatorly obedience, or the meritorious price of
redemption.

4. Concerning the Justification of a sinner.

The Dialogues method wherein (though in respect of the two first immethodical,
for the second should have been first) the answer is constrained to observe;
and accordingly to begin with the first, viz. Whether Christ suffered the wrath
of God due to the Elect for their sins; we assert the Affirmative, you
endeavor to prove the Negative; and that first by disproving the received
interpretation of Certain Texts, alleged by the Orthodox for the proof of the
Affirmative, which we are now (Christ assisting) to consider with you.

CHAP. III. The Vindication of Genesis 2.17.
Genesis 2.17. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death.
YOu say that the term Thou is thou in thine own person, and thou in thy
posterity; thus far I approve of your exposition: but whereas you extend the
term Thou unto the Redeemer, this last clause I dislike: for the death and
curse here threatened cannot extend it self unto the Redeemer in the manner of
his ing out our redemption.



1. What is here intended by death. 2. The distribution of death. 3. The
application of that distribution.
The Death here spoken of is the wages of sin, Romans 5.21. and 6.23. That is,
all evil (the evil of Adams sin excepted) in one word. As all lines unite in
the center, so all sorrows meet in that one term Death. The commination Thou
shall surely die, is not particular concerning some kind of Death, but
indefinite, therefore aequivalent to a universal comprehending all kinds of
death; God inflicts no evil upon man but for sin, and all evil not only of
affliction, but also of sin follows upon Adams sin; Original sin proceeding
thence as an effect from the cause, and actual sin as an act from the habit:
As all evil is inflicted for sin, so all evil in Scripture Language is called
Death. The evil of affliction Exo. 10.17. Of bodily Death, Genesis 3.15. Romans
8.10. Genesis 26.10. Exo. 21.16. Of spiritual death, i.e. the death of the soul
in sin, 1 Timothy 5.6. 1 John 3.14. Of eternal death, Joh. 8.51. Ezekiel. 33.8.

Concerning the Distribution of Death.
Punishment is taken in a large or strict sense, If taken largely, the
castigations of the elect are punishments but not so, if taken strictly. Poena
est castigatio aeterna, vel vindicta poena correctionis vel maledictionis
Oecolampad. in Ezekiel. 22. Castigatio electorum est poena late sumpta voce poenae
eadem non est poena, stricte sumpta^ voce poenae. Polan. l. 6. c. 4. The
sufferings of the Elect are not vindicatively-paenall in a strict sense, i.e.
they are not inflicted by God upon them in a way of satisfaction to justice.
Death is either Death In sin Separation of the Image of God from the soul, and
the Castigatory or correctively-poenall and temporary in the Elect. Properly
poenall, viz. Vindicatively, or strictly-poenal, i.e. in way of satisfaction to
divine justice.
Presence of sin.
For sin Separation of the soul from the body Temporal and castigatory in the
Elect. Temporal and properly-poenal in Christ. Temporal and properly poenal in
the Reprobate.
Separation from the sense of the good things in the promise, Partial,
temporary, and castigatory in the Elect. Total, temporal, and properly-poenall
in Christ. Total, perpetual, and properly-poenall in the Reprobate.
Presence of the evil things in the Commination. Separation of the whole
person, soul and body from God. Total, eternal, and properly poenal in the
Reprobate.



The castigatory or correctively poenall part of death only was executed upon
the elect, the essential properly poenall part upon Christ: both the
essential and circumstantiall properly-poenall parts of death upon the
Reprobate.

The castigatory but not poenall, i. e. strictly-poenall part was and is
executed upon the elect, Post remissam culpam adhuc tam multa patimur, and
tandem etiam morimur, ad demonstrationem debitae miseriae, vel ad emendationem
labilis vitae, vel ad exercitationem necessariae patieutiae. August. tractat.
124. in Joannem.
for though Christ freed his from the punishment of sin; yet not from the
castigation or correction for sin, thereby leaving a testimony against sin, a
remedy for sin, a place for conformity unto their head.

The whole essential properly-poenall death of the curse, that is, the whole
essential punishment thereof was executed upon Christ.

The whole properly-poenal death of the curse is executed upon the reprobate
both in respect of the essential and accidental parts thereof.

Adam then standing as a public person containing all mankind (and which is
more: so standing as that the first Adam a public person contaiing all
mankind disobeying, was a figure of Christ the second Adam a public person
containing all the Elect obeying; so Paul expressly, who is the figure of him
that was to come, Romans 5.14.) the meaning of these words, In the day thou
eatest thereof thou shall die, is this: If man sin man shall die, either in his
own person as the Reprobate, or in the person of the man Christ Jesus their
surery, as the elect, according to the distribution above: so is the Text a
full and universal truth, Man sins, and man dies.

Touching the Reprobate there is no controversy: Concerning the Elect thus,
Either Christ suffers the poenall Death of the curse due to the Elect for
sin, or the Elect suffer it themselves, or the curse is not executed; but the
Elect suffer it not themselves, neither is the curse not executed; for then the
truth of the Commination, and Divine justice should fail. Therefore Christ
suffered the poenall Death of the curse due to the Elect for sin.

Briefly, this Text Genesis 2.17. is Gods judicial denunciation of the punishment
of sin, with a reservation of his purpose concerning the execution of the
execution of it. The punishment is denounced to show divine detestation of sin,
to deter man from sin, to leave man the more inexcusable in sin: his purpose
concerning the execution is reserved, that the mystery of the Gospel might not
be opened before its time. This for the clearing of the Text.

Since you dislike the last member of the disjunction you do ill to approve the
former, for thence it follows, Either that God is not true, or else that Adam
with his Elect posterity must perish: for they sinned, yet by your exposition
neither die in themselves nor in their surety, notwithstanding the Divine
Commination; and so either you take truth from God, or salvation from the elect
(which also denies the truth of God in the promise) in your very entrance.

But why cannot the curse here threatened be extended unto the Redeemer?

This Text does not comprehend Jesus Christ within the compass of it, for this
Text is a part of the Covenant only that God made with Adam and his posterity,
respecting the happiness they had by Creation.

He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not
shall be damned.

Adam in his eating intended and prohibited in this verse, was a figure of
Christ to come, Romans 5.14. Vel potiu^ ex ipso eventu and Evangelij patefactione
hunc typum Apostolu^ nos vult intelligere. Pareus in loc. Sequitur illam
comminationem (quo die comederis morieris) ex intention divina^ non fuisse
pure legalem, etc. Vide Rhetorf. exercit. pro div. gratia ex. 2. c. 2.
It Is certain then (though Adam during the first Covenant perceived it not) yet
that Christ was couched and comprehended in some part of the revealed will of
God, during the first Covenant. It Is very probable that the Tree of Life Genesis
2.9. was a Figure of Christ, who is called and indeed is the Tree of life, Rev.
22.2. If Christ be not within the compass of the Text, the Text is not true.

Death here threatened concerns Adam and his fallen posterity only, therefore
Christ cannot be included within this Death.



God laid down this rule of Justice to Adam in the time of innocence, Why
should the Mediator be comprehended under the term Thou?

Unde admirabilis Dei (...) cognoscitur qui in morbo remedium, in morte vitam,
in perditore ^ervatorem adumbratum voluit. Paraeus in locum.
He that compares Romans 5.14. with Genesis 2.17. has an unspeakable ground of
consolation, whilst he reads Gods purpose to redeem us in our first fathers
sinning, and we in him. From hence Paul gathers an argument to conclude that
all Adams posterity descended from him by way of ordinary generation to be
guilty of Adams sin. Whilst you acknowledge that in Genesis 2.17. God laid down a
rule of justice to Adam, you must needs imply the surety of the elect to have
satisfied that rule of justice, and consequently to have suffered the wrath of
God, and in conclusion you tacitly contradict your self, and act our cause.

The nature of death intended in this Text is such as it was altogether
impossible the Mediator should suffer it.



The essential part of death for sin was intended to the surety not to the
elect sinner. The essential and circumstantiall poenall part of death in sin
and death for sin, was intended for the Reprobate.

The Text must needs proceed according to this interpretation in respect of the
elect. There i^ as good and greater reason why it should so proceed in respect
of Christ, it being much more impossible that he should suffer death in sin,
that is, become a sinner, then that the elect sinners should suffer poenall i.
e. properly-poenall death for sin: that is, be damned, though both be
impossible.

The death here threatened must be understood primarily of a spiritual death or
death in sin.

Adam in the day that he sinned, and therefore primarily inflicted, is vain and
impertinent; for that denies not the inflicting of eternal death to be
intended afterward, nay, it rather argues eternal death to be primarily
intended, because not executed; according to that Proposition, That which is
first in intention is last in execution.

That which is of the essence or substance of the punishment of sin, is
primarily in the curse, and therefore primarily to be understood; but death for
sin, not death in sin is of the essence of the punishment of sin, as we saw in
the first Distinction, Chapter the first.

Instead of proving your assertion, viz. That it was impossible for Christ to
suffer any of the cursed death, intended Genesis 2.17. your arguing only proves
another thing, viz. that the death here primarily intended was spiritual
death, i. e. death in sin, which Christ could not suffer, and so you lose
your Question.

Though it be granted that death in sin be here understood primarily; yet if
death for sin be understood secondarily, then this argument concludes not
against Christ's suffering any death intended, but only against his suffering
the death primarily intended in the text.

Though death in sin compared with eternal death be primarily intended in
regard of Adams reprobate posterity; yet it cannot be said it was primarily
intended in respect of Adam himself (if you will yield him to be saved) and his
elect posterity; because that would imply eternal death to be secondarily
intended, which was never at all intended as concerning them. Howsoever,
certain it is, that death for sin as concerning the essential poenall part
thereof, is solely intended concerning Christ; and death in sin, not at all.

in Genesis 2.17. demands what kind of death it was, that God threatened to fall
upon Adam in this Text; he answers to this purpose, It seems to me (says
he) that we must fetch the definition thereof from the contrary: Consider
(says he) from what life Adam fell, at the first (says he) he was created in
every part of his body and soul with pure qualities after the image of God,
therefore on the contrary (says he) by dying the death is meant, that he
should be emptied of all the image of God, and possessed with corrupt qualities
as soon as ever he did but eat of the forbidden fruit.

Calvin) upon the place, how God threatened death unto Adam, in the day wherein
he touched the fruit, since he deferred the punishment unto a long time
afterward.

Your labor to confirm Adams falling into death in sin the same day that he
sinned, is altogether impertinent: the Question being, Whether ^uch poenall
death for sin is not here intended, as it was possible for Christ to suffer?
Mihi definitio petenda ex opposito videtur: tenendum inqua^ est ex qua vita
homo ceciderit; erat enim omni ex part beatus. Calvin in loc.
That poenall death for sin is here intended, Calvin proves (though you omit
his proof) by the nature of opposites, thus: The death that he fell into was
opposite to the good he fell from. But the good he fell from was all kind of
blessedness. Therefore the death he fell into comprehended all kinds of
misery. This is the scope of his argumentation, your mistake thereof, though it
is easily pardoned; yet your other defect in the citation, the Reader that
compares Calvin and the Dialogue together can hardly excuse.

If there be good and necessary reason (as there is) to exempt our Mediator
from suffering the first cursed spiritual death, then there is good reason
also to exempt him from suffering any other curse of the Law whatsoever.



Though Christ was not a sinner inherently, yet he was a sinner imputatively,
whereupon the substantial curse of the Law was justly executed upon him.

Examine the particulars of any other curse of the Law, and they will be found
to be such as Christ could not suffer. Diseases, natural death, putrefaction
of body after death, eternal death, are curses of the Law; Christ did not bear
diseases and bodily infirmities, yet by the common doctrine of imputation you
must affirm it: nor suffer natural death in our stead, nor see corruption, nor
suffer eternal death, therefore he did not suffer the cursed death meant Genesis
2.17.



Duration of punishment for ever is not of the substance of punishment, but is
an adjunct following upon the inability of the Patient to satisfy justice; as
continuance in prison is no part of the debt, but the consequent of the debtors
inability to pay the debt; the punishment of the damned continues for ever,
because they can never satisfy divine justice; The punishment of Christ
endured but a time, because he satisfied justice: The sufferings of Christ were
eternal in value, though temporal in duration; Mors aeterna duratione and
pondere. Paraeus in Romans 3. Willet. Synops. cen. 5. genesis cont. 28. par. 4. qu.
3.
had they been eternal in duration, he had been overcome by the curse; had
they not been eternal in value, he had not overcome the curse.

Christ suffered death as inflicted upon him by the justice of the curse, Gal.
3.13. 1 Pet. 2.24. hanging on the tree was a type, therefore a divine testimony
of a cursed death: The curse notes the execution of justice, and that executed
upon sin in our stead, Romans 5.25. Who was delivered for our offenses.

The bodily death of Christ alone did not redeem our bodies, nor the spiritual
death of Christ alone redeem our souls, but the whole suffering of that person
who was God; In respect of his humane nature both body and soul from the
instant of his incarnation to the instant of his death redeemed our whole
persons, both bodies and souls. Those places of Scripture, which attribute our
redemption unto his blood, are to be understood synechdochically, mentioning a
more visible part of his sufferings for the whole.

My reasons why Christ could not suffer eternal death for our redemption
therefrom, are first, Then he must have suffered all other curses of the Law to
redeem us from them, but I have showed that utterly impossible immediately
before. 2. Then he did descend locally into hell it self to suffer it there:
for no man can suffer death eternal in this life: no man can suffer the second
death till after this Life is ended.



Sufferings for sin (as we have diverse times said before) are such as are
poenall essentially, viz. in respect of the punishment considered in it self,
namely, the privation of the present fruition of the good of the promise, and
inflicting of the sinlesse misery of the curse: or consequentially, viz. not in
respect of the punishment it self, but in respect of the condition of the
Patient, such are called detestable consequents, namely sins, imperfections,
etc. And evils that are proper to the reprobate. 3. Innumerable common sorrows
of this life. 4. The duration of the punishment for ever.

As the eternal virtue of Christ's sufferings redeemed us from the eternity of
suffering formally, so Christ in suffering the wrath of God formally, suffered
virtually whatsoever was due to the Elect for their sin, and so by suffering
redeemed us from all the properly-poenall curses of the Law whatsoever.

It Is true, Heb. 2.17. and 4.15. Omnis poena damnatoru^ his duobus continetur
generibus, ut aliae pertineant ad corpus, aliae ad animam. Cham. 1.2. l. 5. c.
19. s. 14.
in all points he was like unto us, sin only excepted; in [All] generically,
not individually; that is in [All] in respect of the general kinds of
temptation, namely both bodily and spiritually, but not in [All] in respect of
each particular passion and malady.

As concerning your second Reason. The place of punishment is not of the
essence of punishment. Malefactors may and often do suffer out of the ordinary
place of execution. The devil always suffers hellish pains in some degree, yet
is many times out of the place of hell. Souls in this life feel the wrath of
God in some degree; it is not impossible then in respect of the thing it self,
but that it may be felt in its full degree. Christ felt the joys of heaven out
of heaven in his transfiguration and after his Resurrection; so he both might
and did feel the pains of hell out of hell: There is a poenall hell and a
local hell; a poenall hell may be where there is not a local hell.

It Is from the free dispensation of God, not from the nature of the things
themselves, that the full measure of the wrath of God is not ordinarily
executed in this life. As Enoch and Eliah entered into the joys of heaven
without death. So (if God please) may a person enter into the pains of hell
without death: The Reprobate alive at the last day shall not die, and yet shall
suffer the pains of eternal death.

The distinction of the first and second Death in respect of the order of the
execution holds only concerning the Reprobate; Christ suffered the essential
poenall wrath of God, which answers the suffering of the second death due to
the elect for their sin, before he suffered his natural death.

If Christ bare Adams sin by Gods imputation, and his curse really, then you
make Christ to be dead in sin.

i.e. the obligation of the punishment.

God imputed not unto Christ the guilt of Commission of sin, but the guilt of
obligation unto punishment for sin committed; and because so, the contrary
follows from our doctrine, viz. that Christ is not dead in sin,

As it is not the inherent righteousness of, or actual working of
Righteousness by Christ, Willet. Synops.
but the virtue, power, and efficacy which is imputed to the believer; so it is
not the inherence or commission of sin, but the guilt and punishment of sin
that is imputed to a Believer.

Consider the true force of the Word Impute, in the natural signification
thereof, and then I believe you will acknowledge that it cannot stand with the
justice of God to impute our sins to our innocent Savior; for to impute sin to
any, is to account them for guilty sinners, and to impute the guilt of other
men's sins to any, is to account them guilty of other men's sins by participation.

Lev. 17.4. Or that which is not his properly, but as a legal Surety only; So
Philemon may put Onesimus his debt on Paul, ver. 18. or that which though it be
not his properly, yet is his in a way of grace; So the word Impute is used ten
times, Romans 4.

Distinguish between the nature of sin, and the guilt of sin, and there will
be no cause to say with Socinus, that it is against justice to impute sin
(understanding thereby the guilt of sin) unto an innocent person, especially
upon these considerations.

1. If the innocent be of the same nature with the nocent. Ursin. Paraeus in
Romans 5. Dub. 5.


2. If he voluntarily undertake the paenal satisfaction of the debt.

3. If he can satisfy the punishment.

4. If he can thereby free others from the punishment which they cannot undergo.

5. If in this satisfaction he looks at the glory of God and the good of man.
It is therefore not only a perilous untruth, but a high blasphemy to say, and
that without any distinction; should God impute our sin to our innocent
Savior, he should be as unjust as the Jews were.

The mere imputation of the guilt of sin, does no more infer a participation
with the commission of sin, then the imputation of the righteousness of Christ
infers a participation in the working thereof.

If our Mediator had stood as a guilty sinner before God by his imputing of our
sins to him, Then he could not have been a fit person in Gods esteem to do the
office of a Mediator for our Redemption.

i. e. without the commission of sin, Heb. 7.26. So it was requisite that
Christ should be made fin, i. e. that the guilt of sin should be legally
imputed to him, 2 Cor. 5.21. both were necessary to make him a meet Mediator.

You err, not distinguishing according to the Scripture.

The common doctrine of imputation, is I know not what kind of imputation; it
is such a strange kind of imputation, it differs from all the several sorts
of imputing sin to any that ever I can meet withal in all the Scriptures.



If you know not what kind of Imputation it is, the being of things depends
not upon man's knowledge, much less upon his ignorance, but upon the will of
God: notwithstanding the term of imputation in this sense were not in the
Scripture, yet the thing intended by it is: The terms of essence, trinity,
satisfaction, merit, etc. are not in the Scripture expressly, yet are they
acknowledged generally to be contained in the Scripture by just consequence;
because the things contained by those terms are found therein expressly: The
very term Impute taken for judicial imputation of that unto a person, which is
not his properly; yet reckoned to be his in a way of grace, is (as was said
before) ten times used Romans 4.

Your other Reasons for what you assert, which you promise immediately before,
we shall expect in their place.

CHAP. IV. The Vindication of Isa. 53.4, 5.
Isa. 53.4. Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows.
HE says not only (says M. Jacob) that he sustained sorrows, but [our]
sorrows: yea, the Text has it more significatively [our very] sorrows, or our
sorrows themselves, that is to say, those sorrows that else we should have born.

Jacob understood according to that distinction premised, Chap. 1. M. Jacob on
Christ's Sufferings. p 33.
is both solid and acute, and that this Learned Author is so to be
interpreted, his own words sufficiently argue.

The Evangelist Matthew has expounded this text in a quite contrary sense, Mat.
8.17. saying, that this Text was fullfilled when Christ did bear our
infirmities and sicknesses from the sick, not as a Porter bears a burden by
laying them on his own body, but bearthem away by his own power.

Pet. 2.24. that by bearing those griefs and sorrows, he intends Christ's
bearing them in our stead, appears ver 5, 6, 8, 10, 11, 12. of this chapter, as
also from the collation of the two Hebrew words used in this very place; for
though Nasa, he has born, be of more general use, signifying sometimes to
bear as a Porter bears a burden, (...)
and sometimes otherwise; yet Sabal he has carried, signifying properly to
bear as one bears a burden, restrains the sense of the former word, and
limits it to the received interpretation.

This Text therefore in Isaiah may either be understood as a compound
Proposition, containing these two truths,

1. That Christ should bear our spiritual griefs and sorrows for us.

2. That he should heal bodily diseases as a type and figure of his bearing our
spiritual griefs and sorrows. Piscat. in Mat. 8.17. Veritas magis quid quam
figura habere debet, ficut dicitur plus hic est qua^ Jonas. Park. l. 3. de
Desc. n. 63. Dialogu.
So the word [fullfilled] in Matthew is true properly of the type or specimen,
and symbolicaly or typically of the thing signified: or the word [fullfilled]
in Matthew is taken figuratively, i. e. metonymically, viz. the sign, namely,
healing bodily diseases, put for the thing signified, namely, a healing-bearing
of spiritual diseases.

That of your coherence which concerns the question, is already answered, the
rest is either impertinent or uncontroverted.

Isa. 53.5. But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities; The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed.

These words I confess do plainly prove that Christ did bear diverse wounds,
bruises, and stripes for our peace and healing: but yet the Text does not say
that he bare these wounds, bruises, and stripes of Gods wrath for our sins.

1. It was Satan by his instruments that wounded and bruised Christ, according
to Gods prediction, Genesis 3.15.

2. Christ bare these wounds bruises and stripes in his body only, not in his
soul; for his soul was not capable of bearing wounds, Satan could not wound his
soul: the Jews fullfilled all his sufferings, Act. 13.27, 29. Peter expounds
the Text of his bodily sufferings only, 1 Pet. 2.24. If Peter's phrase, He bare
our sins in his body on the Tree, had meant any thing of his bearing Gods wrath
for our sins, the case of his sufferings had not been a fit example to exhort
to patience, his appeal to God had ^ot been suitable. 3. The end was a trial
of his mediatoriall obedience and our peace.

Jobs sufferings, yet he says God has taken away, Job 1.21. So Joseph Genesis
45.8. David Psa. 39 9. in cases much alike.

Satan and men were Instrumens in inflicting such a stroke, therefore it is no
stroke of divine vindicative justice, is no good consequence: All evils
inflicted upon the reprobate, whether corporal or spiritual, are strokes or
acts of vindicative justice: So often then as Satan or men are isntrumental in
inflicting such evils, so often Satan and men are isntrumental in strokes of
vindicative justice, judicial punishment of sin with sin is an act of
vindicative wrath; but of this parents are instrumental in the propagation of
original sin to their Reprobate children. The spiritual distres of an
excommunicate person that is a Reprobate, is an effect of vindicative wrath;
But in such distresses Satan is instrumental, 1 Cor. 5.5. That delusion of
which, 2 These. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. is an act of vindicative justice; But in
working it, Satan and men are isntrumental. Casting the wicked men into hell,
is also an act of vindicative justice; in which Gods Angels are instruments,
Matthew. 13.42. Creatures then both good and bad may be instruments of Gods
vindicative wrath inflicted both on body and soul. Yet we must distinguish
between the wounds, bruises, and stripes inflicted upon Christ, and the sin in
inflicting of them. Satan and his agents were the sole authors and actors of
sin, yet as concerning the wounds, bruises, stripes themselves: though Satan
and men were the subordinate instruments, yet God himself was the Author and
principal efficient of them. The Lord has laid upon him the iniquities of us
all, Isa. 53.6. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, verse. 10.

The sufferings of Christ included in this Text, are not only such wherein
Satan and men were Instruments, but some of them were inflicted immediately of
God, without any second means as instruments thereof.

Not only the body but the soul also is capable of bearing wounds, bruises, and
stripes: hence we read of a wounded spirit, Pro. 18.14. A wounded conscience,
1 Cor. 8.12. The broken and bruised in heart, Luke 4.18. The plague of the
heart, 1 King. 8.38. The words proceeding from the very same Hebrew roots, with
the very words used in this Text, are in the Scripture applied to the soul: My
soul is wounded within me, Psa. 119.22. A broken and a contrite spirit, Psa.
51.17. Receive instruction or castigation and not silver, Pro. 8.10. which
words proceed not only concerning corporeal, but also concerning spiritual
chastening. Should the soul be supposed to be incapable of wounds, bruises
chastenings properly, yet experience shows it is capable of them
metaphorically. Satan being a spirit may have access unto, and consequently
both may and does afflict the spirit, 1 Cor. 5.5. Ephesians. 6.12, 16. If Satan could
not, God can. Christ suffered not only in body but in soul, Isa. 53.10. when
thou shall make his soul a sacrifice for sin: My soul is exceeding sorrowful
even unto death, Mat. 26.38. Mar. 14.13. His great heaviness, sore amazement,
agony, sweat as it were drops of blood, Mar. 14.33, 34. Luke 2^.44. cannot be
looked at in a person that was God-man as less then the effects of
soul-sorrows, hell-sorrows. Thou shall not leave my soul in hell, The soul is
by judicious and learned Authors understood properly, Rivet.
Hell metaphorically, that is for pains aequivalent to the pains of hell it
self. Parker de Desc. l. 3. n. 62. (...) Vir doloru^.
His sufferings are in the plural number called passions, not a single
passion, 1 Pet. 4.13. Death's not a single death, Isa. 53 9. to show, as some
conceive, his sufferings, both of soul and body. He was a man of sorrows, Isa.
53.3. The word [All] Act. 13.29. is to be taken in a limited sense (as you were
told before) for all that he was to suffer by them there mentioned, not for all
that he was to suffer.

He bare our sins in his body, 1 Pet. 2.24. therefore our sins were imputed to
him; he bare them in his body, but not only in his body: he hung upon the tree
being made a curse, Gal. 3.13.

The curse is not only bodily but spiritual: As we were delivered from our
sin, so he bare our sin. But we were delivered not only from the bodily, but
also from the spiritual punishment of sin. Therefore

Most aptly from the example of Christ's suffering patiently the punishment of
our sins he committed not, are we exhorted to suffer patiently our chastisement
for the sins which we have committed.

With good reason did he appeal in his sufferings unto the righteous Judge;
because though he suffered justly in respect of God, yet he suffered most
unjustly in respect of men.

The demonstration of the Mediatorly obedience of Christ is truly acknowledged
as a subordinate end of his sufferings, but the supreme end you leave out,
namely, the manifestation of the glory of Gods mercy tempered with justice;
Mercy to the elect, justice unto Christ. To declare, I say, at this time, his
righteousness [or justice] that he might be just, and the justifier of him
that believes in Jesus.

Whilst you so often affirm the obedience of Christ to be meritorious, and yet
all along deny it to be performed in a way of justice, you so often affirm a
contradiction: The very nature of merit including justice: for merit is a just
desert, or a desert in way of justice, as Chap. 1.

I hold it necessary often to remember this distinction, namely, that Christ
suffered both as a malefactor, and as a Mediator at one and the same time.



The Dialogue makes him a malefactor, in respect of men's false imputations
only, but denies any imputation of sin unto him by God.

He bare our sins in his body upon the tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. Peter means he bare
the punishment of sin (inflicted according to the sentence of Pilate) in his
body on the tree: sin is often put for the punishment of sin.

upon him by the Jews, bare, as you say, our punishments and our sins, i. e.
the essential part of our punishment due to us for our sin; From your own
words I infer then; Christ bare our punishment and our sins, either in the
account of the Jews, or in the account of God: Not in the account of the Jews,
they charged them as his proper crimes, without any regard to the sins of the
elect; therefore he bare our punishment and our sins in the account of God.

In that then Christ suffered punishment. Paraus in Heb. 10.
and bare our sin in the account of God, it follows, Christ bare guilt in the
account of God, because guilt and punishment are relates.

Punishment does not only signify a suffering, but such a suffering, that is,
suffering for offense in way of justice. Had Christ suffered death without
guilt imputed, his death could not have been called a punishment: thus, whilst
you acknowledge Christ to have born punishment and born sin, and that by just
consequeoce at least in the account of God, and yet deny the imputation of
sin, you run your self into a contradiction.

He bare our sins in his body, but not only in his body: Body is here taken
synechdochically both for body and soul: a part of the humane nature for the
whole: he bare them upon the tree, that is, he bare the curse due to sin, Gal
3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law being made a curse for
us; for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree: he bare the
moral curse which was the truth signified by the Ceremonial curse, Deuteronomy.
21.23. the moral curse extends both to soul and body.

I will show you how Christ did bear our sins diverse ways, in several senses.

1. When he bare away our diseases as I have expounded, Isa. 53 4.

2. As our Priest and sacrifice, as I have expounded, Isa. 53.5.

3. As a Porter bears a burden, as I have expounded, 1 Pet, 2.24.

4. When he did patiently bear our sinful imputations, and false accusations,
and imputations of the malignant Jews, Psa. 40.12. Psa. 69.5. In these words
Christ does not complain or grudge against his father for his imputing of our
sins unto him, as the common doctrine of Imputation does make the stream of
Interpreters to speak

viz. Isa. 53.4, 5. 1 Pet. 2.24. We have seen before. It Is very true that
Christ bare our sins as our Priest and sacrifice, and as a porter bears a
burden, yea as a surety: but very false that he bare them only in your sense.
Scripture is in sense and not in sound only.

(...).
Your calling of the Jews unjust criminations of Christ, sometimes our sinful
imputations, sometimes the false accusations of the Jews, sounds too harsh,
without a distinction.

It Is true that Psalm. 40.12. and Psalm. 69.5. hold forth a type of Christ
complaining under the injuries of the Jews, from which their false imputations
are not excluded, though neither of them only, nor chiefly. To complain unto
God is blameless and no grudging: To cemplaln against God is a sin and shows
grudging. M. Ainsworth whom you often make use of in his notes on Psalm. 69.5. is
amongst those who acknowledge sin to be in Christ by imputation, yet (your
conscience herein appealed unto) where did you ever read in him or any other
orthodox Interpreter, that Christ complained against God, as (say you) the
common doctrine of Imputation does make the stream of Interpreters to speak.

CHAP. V. The Vindication of Isa. 53.6.
Isa. 53.6. All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his
own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all.
THe Lord laid not the sin of the Elect upon Christ by imputation; The true
manner how the Lord laid all our iniquities upon Christ, was the very same
manner as the Lord laid the sins of Israel upon the Priest and sacrifice, and
no other.



How then did the Lord lay the sins of Israel upon the Priest, and upon the
sacrifice?

The Priest bare the iniquity of the holy things by his Priestly appearing
before Jehovah with his priestly apparel, especially with the golden plate,
Exo. 28.38. he bare the iniquity of the Congregatton by eating the peoples
sin-offering in the holy place to make atonement, Lev. 10.17. The Lord laid all
our sins upon Christ as upon our sacrifice, Isa. 53.12. where dying, bearing
sin, intercession, are Synonima's. He bare the sins of men, namely, by his
Mediatoriall sacrifice. God laid all our sins upon Christ as our sacrifice of
atonement; In this sense Paul explaineth the Levitical bearing of sin, Heb.
9.26, 28.

to answer the Antitype; Similitudo non currit quatuor pedibus. Paraeus Log.
122. Figura non habet quodcunque habet veritas.
but to testify and according to the pleasure of the Author to exemplify the
thing typified. Logic refers types to similitudes, and you know the Proverb,
Similitudes run not on four feet; there is always some dislikenesse between
the parts of the comparison: Jonah was a type of Christ lying dead in the
grave, yet Jonah though he lay in the Whales belly, did not lie dead there.

Put case you produce a type which holds not forth bearing of sin by
imputation in the Antitype; except it may appear, that the manner of Christ's
bearing sin was thereby fully intended, you conclude nothing. Aaron the
High Priest wearing the golden plate upon his forehead, having engraven
thereupon HOLINESS TO THE LORD, typified the perfect holiness in Christ, by
reason of the Divine nature, whereby he was able effectually to bear, and bear
away sin; What is here against Imputation? nay, it is implied in the Priesthood
of Aaron,

The Priests Lev. 10.17. by eating the peoples sin-offering, declared by that
act, together with the forementioned appearing in their stead, confessing of
their sin, and offering sacrifice for them; that by divine institution they
took upon them typically to make atonement for their sin. Hereby it is more
plainly figured that Christ should bear away our sin by bearing it in our
stead. This Text makes against you.

It is very true, God laid our sins upon Christ as our sacrifice, Isa. 53.12.
therefore (say we) by imputation: for Christ's sacrifice is his voluntary and
obedient yielding himself unto death, according to the Covenant of God in a way
of satisfaction to divine justice for sin, and meritorious expiation of sin.
Hence in your saying he bare sin, ergo not by imputation, you may see your self
entangled in a contradiction, and the argument turning head directly against
you. In but saying so and not proving it, you beg, but do not prove what you
say,

Synonima's are diverse words signifying the same thing, but death, bearing
sin, intercession, are doubtless diverse things, though they concur as
ingredients into the same whole of Mediatorship.

Those other words [OF ATONEMENT] are here only superadded unto your reason
immediately before-going, and were also necessarily implied there: this then
being the same reason with the former, the former Answer may satisfy both.

The force of this reason is; (...). Sursum tulit Piscat. in 1 Pe. 2.24.
Christ's sacrifice was effectual to procure Atonement, therefore sin was not
imputed to him: a mere non-sequitur; nay, the contrary consequence is true:
Christ appeared, that is, was manifested in the flesh to put away sin. Heb.
9.26, 28. was once offered to bear the sins of many, ver. 28. The greek word
used here by Paul, and elsewhere by Peter, 1 Pet. 2.24. signifies to take,
carry, or bear up op high, and that so as to bear away; and is an allusion unto
the whole burnt-offering; that we may then have the clear and full sense of the
Apostles phrase, we must inform our selves, as concerning the type or manner
how the burnt-offering was laid upon the Altar (whereunto the cross is in some
respect tacitly compared) which was thus.

The Person that brought the sacrifice was to put his hand (lay his hand says
Ainsworth) upon the head thereof, yet living. Lev. 1.4. as confessing his
guilt, and putting, or imputing it upon the Beast to be sacrificed. Compare
Exo. 29.10. Lev. 4.24, 29. and 5.5, 6. and 16.21. By the like ceremony of
Imposition of hands sin was charged, both for the testifying of the accusation,
and the stoning of the offender, Deuteronomy. 17.7. Guilt thus typically imputed to
the Beast, it was slain and laid upon the Altar.

The Apostle then whilst he is speaking of the Antitype, choosing out such a
word to express Christ's bearing of sin, teaches us thereby that Christ did
both carry up and bear the load of our sins imputed to him upon the cross, and
also bear them clear away: and thus Isaiah, Paul, and Peter sweetly agree
together, and interpret one another, as concerning Christ's bearing the
imputation of guilt and punishment of sin.

If you will build the common doctrine of imputation upon this phrase, The Lord
laid all our iniquities upon Christ, then by the same phrase you must affirm
that the father laid all our sins upon himself by imputing the guilt of our
sins to himself, for the father is said to bear our sins as well as Christ,
Psalm. 25.18. and 32.1. and elsewhere.



The Hebrew word NASA signifies sometimes to take up a burden simply, as is to
be seen in the places mentioned by you; sometimes to sustain or bear a burden
as a Porter bears it, Levit. 5.1. Numb, 18.1. Deuteronomy. 1.31. Isa. 49.12. the
word therefore is to be interpreted according to the nature of the agent spoken
of, Christ bears away our sins, as the surety, by satisfying the debt; God
takes away sin as the creditor, by acquitting the debtor upon satisfaction
given. Your reasoning is as if one should say, Upon the payment of the debt to
the Creditor by the Surety, the Creditor discharges the debt. Therefore the
Creditor pays the debt.

Sure you mistake your self in arguing out of this Text from the word NASA,
against concluding the doctrine of Imputation therefrom, because the word NASA
is not in the Text.

Those three terms, Blessed is the man whose transgression is born, whose sin
is covered, whose iniquity is not imputed, are Synonima's, and they do sweetly
expound each other, and they do also set out the true manner how sinners are
made just and blessed, namely, when their sins are born away, covered, and not
imputed by the fathers merciful atonement, pardon, and forgiveness.

Paul alleging these words of David Romans 4. shows us that the Psalmists
scope therein, was to teach us justification by faith.

Paul finds imputation of righteousness, Romans 4.6. in David's not imputation
of sin, Psalm. 32.1.2. Imputation of righteousness, the effect whereof is our
justification, consisting of the not-imputing of unrighteousness, and the
accepting of us as righteous: Paul teaches expressly, David by consequence.

The justification of a sinner held out by the Dialogue, which not only denies
it self to be the effect of, but also denies, and well nigh defies the very
being of Christ's mediatorly obedience to the Law, is a pestilent fiction. You
here preproperate your conceit, concerning the formal cause of justification;
but of it in its proper place.

The word (...) which is translated in ver. 6. has laid upon, is translated in
the 12. ver. of this 35. chapter has made intercession, and therefore the Verb
signifying both incurrere fecit and intercessit, is too weak a foundation for
the doctrine of imputation, and of Christ's suffering Gods wrath.

Psa. 22.1. Why have thou left me? will not hold: because the same word
elsewhere signifies to help up or fortify, Neh. 3.8. and 4.2.

Piaculum significat sacrificium, and flagitium. (...) significat sanctum and
profanum. (...) significat been precari, and male precari.
Who indifferently acquainted with the Languages, is ignorant that one Hebrew
root has not only various, but sometimes contrary significations (the like
whereof is observed in other, and may be in our English tongue) in such cases,
which signification is here or there intended, the learned know: how they know
it, is not here the place to speak.

The word (...) by virtue of the conjugation, signifies to cause to meet
together upon a heap: the root signifies properly to meet one, or fall upon,
metaphorically to intercede, because the intercessor does as it were meet the
offended by his prayers, and interposes between him and the offender. We look
at this text, not as a foundation, but as a solid argument of imputation.

CHAP. VI. The Vindication of Exodus 20.10. Lev. 1.4. and 4.29. Lev. 8.14. and
16.20, 21.
EVery owner must impose both his hands upon the head of the sin-offering, this
imposition of hands did (as the assertors of the doctrine of imputation say)
typifie the Lords laying our sin upon Christ by imputation: and so godly
expositors do understand it. See Exo. 20.10. Lev. 1.4. and 4.29. and 8.14. and
16.20, 21.

Aaron and his sons imposed their hands on the head of the sin-offering, Exodus
29.10. the owner thereof laid on his hands, Lev. 1.4. and 4.29. the Elders of
the Congregation lay on their hands, Lev. 4.15. the Priests, Lev. 4.4. and
8.14. Aaron himself lays both his hands upon the live goat, and confesses
over him the iniquity of the children of Israel, Lev. 16.21. which confession
of sin though it be only expressed in the case of the Scapegoat, yet it is
judged to have accompanied imposition of hands upon the sin-offering; From the
collation of the texts with Lev. 5.56. as also because there is like reason in
all. Calvin in Lev. 1.1. Junius in Lev. 1. Ainsworth Lev. 1.4. Willet in Lev.
1. qu. 9. and 4.10. and 16.23. Annot. in Le. 16.21. Ita per fidem oportet nos
peccata nostra imponere Christo, h.e. certo sta^uere quod illa ei impofita sint
a Deo ut ea expiaret.


Orthodox and judicious Expositors seem rather to understand that the rite of
imposition of hands did typifie the profession of their faith in Christ as the
true sacrifice to be slain for sin imputed to him: and that the present
sacrifice (or beast slain) was a type thereof: then that it did typifie the
Lords laying our sin upon Christ by imputation: there is difference between an
act typifying Gods imputation of sin unto Christ, and an act testifying our
faith concerning Gods imputation of sin unto Christ. You should have produced
your Expositors, for they do not generally so speak: the man (says M.
Ainsworth) that brought the offering was to lay or impose his hands, thereby
testifying his faith in Christ the true sacrifice to be slain for sin. But it
being granted that Expositors did so understand it, how does the Dialogue
disprove their exposition?

A private man's imposition cannot represent Gods act, the imposition of the
hands of the Elders cannot, for the Elders actions represent the Churches
astions: neither can the imposition of the Priests and Highpriests, they were
types of Christ's Priestly nature, and not of the father.

(though a private person) in letting his Hebrew servant go free for nothing,
either at the seventh year, Exo. 21.2. or at the year of Jubilee, Lev. 25.40.
figured or represented God the Fathers gift of free redemption by Jesus Christ.

Cyrus (as every King or Emperor which receives his office from the people)
was Persia's representative; yet in letting the Jews go without price and
reward, he typified our free salvation, which is the act of God the Father: the
putting of Gods name upon the children of Israel by Aaron and his sons, Number.
6.27. was (says Ainsworth) a sign that the name and blessing of God was
imposed upon them: It Is improper to say the Priests were types of Christ's
Priestly nature, they were types of his Priestly office, or if you please of
the Priestly part of his office, whereof the person consisting both of divine
and humane nature was the subject.

Imposition of hands with confession of sins upon the head of the sin offering,
signified the owners faith of dependence.

Then it signified the owners faith in Christ as the true sacrifice to be slain
for our sin imputed to him; for besides that this notion of faith in particular
is included in the faith of dependence as the part is in the whole; he that
asserteth the faith of dependence, asserteth therewithal the object thereof:
(for faith and its object are Relates) a part of which object, and that
directly intended in these texts, is this truth, to wit, That Christ did bear
and take away the guilt and punishment due to the elect for sin. In your
reasoning against the doctrine of Imputation from the Text alleged, (omitting
any other) you commit these two errors.

1. You put upon us an interpretation which is not ours, nor has our doctrine
need of it; our conclusion sufficiently proceeding from these Texts, according
to the Exposition given.

The Question is not whether this rite of Imposition of hands with confession
uf sin does represent Gods laying of the sins of the Elect upon Christ: but
whether the sins of the elect were laid upon Chtist by God?

2. In disputing for these rites to signify faith of dependence, you do not
only not dispute against us, but in conclusion against your self, because the
faith of the truth controverted, is included in the faith of dependence; nor do
you in your whole discourse concerning it interpose a syllable to the contrary,
to provide against the retorting of your Argument upon your self.

The conclusion then you argue for being for us, though we approve not your
arguments, we think it best to pass them by, and ease the Reader of so much
impertinence, only minding you that your assertion so often used, viz. that
they imposed hands, and leaned upon the sacrifice with all their might, is
groundless, whatsoever you refer us to in Ainsworth out of Maimony: neither
the Hebrew text, nor any other reason countenancing of it.

If you make the act of laying on of hands on the sin-offering, to signify
Gods laying our sins upon Christ by imputation, then the same act of laying on
of hands with confession of sins upon the Scapegoat must also signify that
God did impute our sin to Christ as well after he was escaped from death by his
resurrection and ascension, as when he made his oblation here upon earth, and
thus by this doctrine Christ is gone as a guilty sinner into heaven.

We have already said that we make not this act a type of Gods laying sin upon
Christ: the live-goat and the scapegoat were both types of Christ, that of him
dying, this of him delivered from death: sin was laid upon the escape goat not
after but before its escape; and signifies that notwithstanding his bearing of
sin typified by both goats, yet after he had suffered, which was typified by
the killed goat, he then should be delivered from those sufferings which were
typified by the scapegoat: and thus by the doctrine of the Scapegoat Christ is
risen again, ascended, and sits at the right hand of God the Father acquitted
from all sin.

But the Hebrew Doctors did not understand this imposition of hands with
confession of sins of Gods imputation: but they understood it to be a typical
sign of the faith of dependence upon Christ's sacrifice of Atonement; and so
much the prayer of the High Priest imports. See Ainsworth Lev. 16.21.

Ainsworth on this very place says, that this act showed how our sins should
be imputed unto Christ; it is not likely therefore he so understood the Hebrew
doctors, otherwise we might well think he would either have forborne a needless
citation contrary in his judgment to the truth, or would have taken notice
thereof. Neither is there any reason so to interpret their meaning from the
words cited by him out of Maimony or yours out of him: the Atonement rightly
understood is so far from opposing, that it presupposes satisfaction to
divine justice by the surety of the meritorious cause thereof.

If Gods imputing of the sins of the Elect to Christ was the cause of Gods
extreme wrath upon him, then by the same reason Christ does still bear the
wrath of God, for Christ does still bear our sins in heaven as much as ever be
bare them upon earth.

Isa. 53.10. But having satisfied it, Joh. 19.30. Col 2.14. the same justice
that before punished him, now acquits him, Romans 8.34. If the debtor be
discharged, and the Bill cancelled, doubtless the surety is free; the same
justice that holds the surety obliged to the creditor, whilst the debt is
unpayed, acquits him when the debt is paid.

CHAP. VII. The Vindication of 2 Cor. 5.21.
2 Cor. 5.21. God made him to be sin for us which knew no sin.
THe meaning of these words is not that he was made sin for us by Gods
imputation, but that he was made sin for us, that is to say, a sacrifice for
our sin; sin is often used for a sin-offering, sacrifices for sin are often
called sin: the word Made is a word of Election and Ordination.

Gal. 3.13. the Greek used here and there are the same: But he was made a curse
by judicial imputation. Because he was the sin-offering in truth, therefore he
was made sin by real imputation, as the legal sin-offering was made sin by
typical Imputation.

The sum of what you say touching the word Made to be a word of Election or
Ordination (how improperly soever) concluding that God ordained concerning
Christ, so as he might make his soul a sin-offering, concludes not against, but
consequently for us and against you, from the typical nature of a
sin-offering; Of which in the foregoing Chapter.

The Apostle does explain the word Sin, Psalm. 40.6. thus (for sin) Heb. 10.6.
therefore seeing the Apostle does explain the word Sin by the particle for, I
may well conclude that Christ was not made sin by Gods Imputation.

David expresses by Sin Psalm. 40.6. is expressed by For sin, Heb. 10.6. both
places intend the sin-offering, therefore you still argue against your self and
for us: it is called a sin-offering because sin was typically imputed to it; it
is said to be for sin, because it was offered for the expiation of sin; the
same offering is said to be a sin-offering in respect of its nature, and said
to be for sin, that is for the expiation of sin in respect of its use: the use
of a thing destroys not the nature of it. The particle For besides the taking
away of sin, notes the manner of its taking away, viz. by way of expiation.

The water of purification from sin is called sin, Numb. 19.9. the money
employed to buy the public sacrifice for sin, is called trespasse-money, 2
King. 12.16. and in this sense God made Christ to be sin.

Numb. 19.9. the money that was to buy the sin-offering, 2 King. 12.16. is also
figuratively called sin; and Christ who is the tru^ sin-offering is said to be
made sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. true, Therefore;

For Christ to be made sin is not to have sin imputed to him, Vide Bezam in
Gal. 3.13.
is a mere non sequitur. If Christ be made sin for us in the same sense that
the water of purification and trespasse-money are called sin: then Christ is
made sin only figuratively; consequently suffered for sin figuratively not
properly, the elect also are saved figuratively and not properly.

To say God made Christ to be sin not by imputing their sin to him, but by
ordaining him to be a sin-offering, is, as if you should say, God made Christ
sin, not by imputing sin to him, but by ordaining him to have sin imputed to
him. If sin was imputed to him, consequently the guilt of sin was imputed,
which we here affirm, and you deny.

tells, that Christ made himself a trespass or a guilt for us, Isa. 53.10. and
if Christ made himself a trespass for us by imputing all our trespasses to
himself, then he must likewise inflict upon himself all the curses of the Law
that are due to us for our trespasses.

Isaiah tells us Christ made himself a guilt for us, (...)
doubtless it is a truth. The Hebrew word is not made himself, but if his soul
shall set it self. God charge Christ with sin as the supreme Lawgiver and
Judge: Christ accepts the charge as a surety, and so subjects himself to the
satisfaction of justice which is the part of a surety; but does not execute
that justice which is the part of a Judge; so Isaiah and Paul do not only
sweetly agree with the Leviticall phrase, but Isaiah, Paul, and Moses jointly
agree with us against you. Paul says, Christ was made sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him, Romans 3.26. that is, that we might be
justified: The same Paul says, That the Believer in Christ is so justified as
that God is just, which cannot be without a judicial imputation of the guilt
and punishment of sin unto the Surety. So when Paul says Christ is made sin,
he means by judicial Imputation of the guilt and punishment of sin.
Doubtless Paul to the Corinthians agrees with Paul to the Romans.

CHAP. VIII. The Vindication of Mat. 26.37. Mar. 14.33. Luke 22.53.
Matthew says, that Christ was sorrowful and grievously troubled, chap. 26.37.
Mark says, that he was sore afraid and amazed, chap. 14.33. Luke says, that
Christ was in an agony, chap. 22.53. Christ made all this ado about a bodily
death only.

Elihu implies, Job 34.4. then your expression of the dolorous passion and
lamentation of the Lord Jesus by that phrase of [making this ado] (for I
believe it is not the language of any Orthodox writer) ordinarily used by way of
diminution and rebuke; argues a mind not affected as becomes a Christian with
the sufferings of his Savior.



Only do but consider what a horrid thing to humane nature the death of the
body is, then consider that Christ had a true humane nature, and therefore why
should be not be troubled with the fear of death as much as his humane nature
could be without sin?

Because Regular affections (such as Christ's were) are moved according to the
nature of the object; so much therefore as bodily death is a less evil then
eternal death; so much is the regular trouble of humane nature conflicting
therewithal, less then that trouble which it is capable of suffering; in case
of its conflicting with eternal death.

All mankind ought to desire and endeavor to preserve their natural lives as
much as lies in them in the use of means, and therefore seeing Christ as he was
true man, could not prevent his death by the use of means: he was bound to be
troubled for the sense of death as much as any other man.



Other men conflicting with death by reason of sin, do not conflict only with
death: other men conflicting with natural death conflict also often with
eternal death, Christ according to you conflicted only with a natural death:
how do you say then without any distinction he was bound to be troubled with
fear of death as much as any other man?

Christ's mere inability as man to prevent death by the use of means; or other
men's inability thereunto, and that at such times when they were not wanting on
their part, neither was it their duty to endeavor continuance of life, but on
the contrary to give up themselves to death, such as was the present case of
Christ, and was long before the case of Isaac, and oftentimes has been the
case of the Martyrs, who notwithstanding have given up their lives with joy,
cannot be looked at as a reason of his or their being bound to be so troubled
with the fear of death.

These were the true causes why Christ was so much pained in his mind with the
fear of death not only that night before his death, but at other times also
even long before.

he was so much pained with fear, Luke 12.50. shows Christ not only to be
held back with the fear of his sufferings on the one hand, but also that he was
urged forward with the remembrance of the counsel of God, and the good of the
Elect on the other hand, between these was he straigthned, whilst it was
accomplished, whereunto Calvin's interpretation of the place agrees.

But Matthew and Mark in the place cited speak only of these sorrows which fell
upon him in the night before his death: Matthew says, he began grievously to be
troubled, i.e. he began afresh to be troubled with a nearer apprehension af his
death then formerly: M. Calvin in his Harmony upon those words, speaks to this
effect; We have seen (says he) our Lord wrestling with the fear of death
before: but now (says he) he buckleth his hands with the temptation, Matthew
calls it the beginning of sorrow.

viz. that the death approaching was a bodily death only.

The sufferings that fell upon Christ before his sufferings in the garden,
because they were in degree much less then those that followed, are
conveniently distinguished from them that fell upon him in the garden, and
afterward Calvin's meaning is that he conflicted before with the fear of death,
but now with the sight of death: he means not a mere bodily death only (as
you say) but such a death as wherein (says he) he took upon him the curse; and
wherein our sins, whose burden was laid upon him, pressed him with a mighty
weight, and wherein he felt that he had to do with the judgment of God.

Those words of Matthew c. 24.8. All these are the beginnings of sorrow, are
spoken either in reference to the destruction of Jerusalom, or the end of the
world, but not to the passion of Christ.

By these sentences out of M. Calvin, we may see, that Christ was deeply
touched with the fear of death, for he wept and groaned in spirit, and troubled
himself for the death of Lazarus.

Calvin speaking of those words John 11.38. inclines to think that Christ by
occasion of Lazarus death, called to mind his own death, yet you deceive your
self not a little in conceiving thence as if Calvin thought that the death of
Christ was no other then a bodily death, and such as the death of Lazarus.

Upon this occasion therefore and the rather because of your so frequently
quoting of Calvin, it may be seasonable to present you with Calvin's judgment
in this point, that so it may appear how well Calvin and the Dialogue agree
herein.

The Dialogue says, Christ made all this ado about a mere bodily death only;
and that he suffered not any degree of Gods wrath at all.

Calvin says, but whence is there both heaviness, Vnde autem illi and maeror,
etc. Calvin in Mat. 26.36. Atque hic rursus tanti maeroris. Idem. Instit. l. 2.
c. 16. s. 10.
anxiety, and fear upon him, except because he conceived something more sad and
horrible, then the separation of the soul from the body?

And here again, we ought to call to mind the cause of so great fear, for
neither would the death of the Son of God by it self have so tortured him,
except he had perceived that he had to do with the judgment, i.e. the divine
justice of God.

Christ's death had been of none effect, if he had suffered only a bodily death:
And truly if his soul had not been partaker of pain he had been only a Redeemer
of our bodies.

The same Author speaking upon Isa. 53.6. says, that he was put instead of
the wicked doers as a surety and pledge, yea, and as the very guilty person
himself, to abide and suffer all the punishment that should have been laid upon
him.

Calv. instit. l. 2. c. 16. s. 13.
Moreover in answer to some who being confuted, leaned (as he says) to another
cavillation, that though Christ feared death, yet he feared not the curse and
wrath of God, from which he knew himself to be safe. After other discourse he
uses words to this effect; whereby it appears (says he) that those triflers
against whom I now dispute, boldly babble upon things they know not, because
they never earnestly considered what it is, or of how great importance it is
that we be redeemed from the judgment of God: thus far Calvin.

I cannot apprehend that he was afraid of the wrath of God for our sin in the
night before his death: for then he could not have said as he did, I have set
the Lord always before my eyes, he is at my right hand, Psa. 16.8. therefore I
shall not be moved. I cannot apprehend that his troubled fear exceeded the
bounds of natural fear.

ver. 10. shows us his certainty of victory; which does not oppose but rather
suppose the matter of his sufferings, which the Scripture manifests to be the
wrath of God. Neither can we apprehend that Christ's fear exceeded the bounds of
natural fear, understanding by natural fear regular fear, in which sense this
distinction is used by Divines after Damascene; who distinguished fear into a
fear according to nature (this was in Christ) and a fear besides nature,
adverse to reason, this was not in Christ.

These sentences of M. Calvin may advise us how we do attribute such a kind of
fear to Christ as might disorder his pure natural affections, which doubtless
would have fallen upon him, if he had undergone the pain of loss for our sins,
such as the damned do feel in hell, as the common Doctrine of Imputation does
teach.

Calvin to prove against us that the fear which was in Christ was pure, and not
impure; it being the professed and known judgment of all: the inference of
impure and vicious fear in Christ from his undergoing of the pain of loss for
our sins, is your own, Institution. lib. 2. c. 16. s. 10. See Willet synops.
and an error: nor have you any greater adversary then Calvin therein, who not
only affirms the fear and affections in Christ to be pure according to your
citations, but also that in his soul he suffered the terrible torment of the
damned and forsaken men. Yet because the sufferings of the damned differ in
some things from the sufferings of Christ, later Writers choose rather upon
just reason to say, he suffered the punishment of the elect, who deserved to be
damned, then that he suffered the punishment of the damned.

And if he had died without manifesting fear of death, it would have occasianed
woeful heresy; yea, notwithstanding the evident proof given of his humane
nature, sundry heretics have denied the truth of his humane nature, it was
necessary therefore that he should be pinched with the fear of death as much as
his true humane nature could bear without sin, as Calvin well observes.

tempted like to us, His words are these, speaking on Matt. 26.39. Sed quantu^
ferri potuit sana and integra natura hominis, metu percussus and anxietate
constructus fuit. Dialogu
yet without sin. So far as I can find in Calvin (for you have not pointed to
the place) you put in the word Therefore, and so force both it and the whole
sentence to confirm your own premises, contrary to his mind, which is directly
against you. See Calv. Comment. on Ver. 2.28. of the chapter mentioned.

If the fear of death which he expressed to his Disciples in the night before
his death, had risen on the sense of his fathers wrath inflicted upon him for
our sin, then you must also say, that he suffered his fathers wrath for our
sins six days before this, for six days before this he spoke those words,
Luke 12.50. where our Savior does express as much distress of mind as here:
yet I know no expositor that ever gathered so much from this place of Luke.

Matthew and Mark, so also Luke 12.50. Christ speaks of his passion, as likewise
that the wrath of God was the principal matter thereof; in Luke he is troubled
at the remembrance of his future passion of his fathers wrath, the sense of
that wrath had at present in great degree taken hold upon him. Christ does not
express so much distress of mind in Luke, as here; he says he was
straightned, but here he professes his sorrowfullnesse unto death, together
with consternation and expavefaction; of which straightway.

Our Savior tells the two sons of Zebedee they must drink of his cup, and be
baptized with his baptism, by these two expressions, which are Synonima's or
equivalent, our Savior does inform the two sons of Zebedee what the true
nature of his sufferings should be, viz. no other but such only as they should
one day suffer from the hands of tyrants.

Piscator) is to be understood with an exception of that passion in which
Christ felt the wrath of God for the Elect. Quod tamen intelligendum est cum
exceptione passionis illius qua Dominus pro electis sensit iram Dei. Pisc. in
loc. Dialogu


Christ suffered both as a Mattyr and as a satisfier: the sons of Zebedee drank
of the cup of Martyrdom, not of the cup of satisfaction or redemption: James
and John (the sons of Zebedee) were asleep whilst Christ was drinking of that
cup.

His son was not touched with any sufferings from Gods wrath at all, except by
way of sympathy from his bodily sufferings only.



These sufferings in the soul were not by way of sympathy, his soul suffered
properly and immediately, Isa. 53.10. Mat. 26.37. the cause of his sufferings
required that his soul should suffer as well as his body; we sinned in soul
properly, therefore our surety must suffer in soul properly. The greatest of
the sufferings of Christ were spiritual, and such as immediately seized on his
soul.

As his active obedience was as properly spiritual as bodily: so his passive
obedience was as properly spiritual as bodily.

Much rather is their judgment to be embraced, who say, The body suffered by
way of sympathy, because the soul is sensible of sufferings without the body,
but not the body without the soul.

If the circumstances of his agony be well weighed, it will appear that it did
not proceed from his fathers wrath but from his natural fear of death only:
because he must be stricken with the fear of death as much at his true humane
nature could bear; he must be touched with the fear of death in a great measure
(as the Prophets did foretell.) Add to these pains of his mind, his earnest
prayers to be delivered from his natural fear of death: the fear of death does
often cause men to sweat, and earnestly pray; as he was man he must be touched
with the fear of death, as he was Mediator he must fully and wholly overcome
his natural fear of death by prayers: therefore there was a necessity for him
to pray, and to strive in prayer until he had overcome it, as I shall further
explain the matter by and by, in Heb. 5.7.



Heb. 5.7.

We must observe the due time of every action, the manner, the place, and the
persons, and all other circumstances to fulfill every circumstance just as the
Prophets had foretold nothing must fail; if he had failed in the least
circumstance he had failed in all: and his humane nature could not be exact in
these circumstances without the concurrence of the divine nature: in all these
respects his natural fear of death could not choose but be very often in his
mind, and as often to put him unto pain till he had overcome it.

Christ, so he fullfilled them, Act. 3.18. Luke 22.37. that there might be a
ready concurrence of the divine nature with the humane, for the enabling of it
unto the fullfilling of them, he was both God and man, Heb. 9.14. Romans 1.4.
there could not therefore be in Christ any fear, as concerning his failing to
fulfill his office to the utmost. Your mentioning other causes (though false)
of Christ's fear, besides his natural death, is a secret acknowledgement that
his conflict with the fear of natural death only was not a sufficient cause of
his exceeding sorrows felt before his death.

Scanderbeg was in such an agony when he was fighting against the Turks, that
the blood has been seen to burst out of his lips with very eagerness of
spirit only; I have heard also from credible persont, that Alexander the great
did sweat blood in the courageous defense of himself and others. The sweaeting
sickness caused many to sweat out of their bodies a bloody humor, and yet
many did recover and live many years after, but if their sweating blood had
been a sign of Gods wrath upon their souls (as you say it was in Christ) then I
think they could not have lived any longer by the strength of nature.

Scanderbergs lips, through the commotion of his spirits, was no sweat; Your
information concerning Alexander in all probability is a mistake, there being
no such matter reported of him by the ordinary Historiographers of his life. It
was but a bloody humor if so (and in a time of sickness) not blood, Arist. l.
3. depart. animal. c. 5. and l. 3. De Historia anim. c. 9. Fernelius lib. 6.
that you mention at the sweating sickness. Aristotle reports of one that
sometimes sweat a kind of bloody excrement, which yet he looked at proceeding
from an evil disposition of the body. Theophrastus confirms the same.
Fernelius writes that he saw blood effused out of the extremity of the veins,
through infirmity of the Liver and the Retentive faculty. Lib. de dignosc morb.
c. 11. and 8. Vid. Gerh. Herm. in Luc. 22.43
Rondelettius tells us, that he saw in the year 1547. a kind of bloody sweat in
a certain Student, occasioned by some defects of the veins, bones, and thinness
of blood. Maldonat upon Mat. 26. makes mention of a man at Paris, strong, and
in health, who having received the sentence of death was bedewed with a bloody
sweat. But this bloody sweat of Christ (properly so) flowing from such a
person, and free from all distemper, either of body or mind, and in such a
manner and plenty (as Luke reports) differed much from all these. Whether the
sweat of Christ were natural or miraculous, we leave it to them that have
leisure and skill to enquire, though the Evangelist mentions it as an effect
proceeding from a greater cause then the fear of a meet natural death; all
which notwithstanding, yet is not our doctrine built only or chiefly upon this
Argument.

Do but consider a little more seriously what an horrid thing to nature the
approach of death is, see in how many horrid expressions David does describe
it, Psa. 116.3. and 18.4. and 55.4, 5.

David was much afraid of death, none of which are to be found in Christ; yet
you make Christ much more afraid of death then David was. Though death be
horrid unto nature, yet not so to faith; much less so horrid as to cause
affections of fear above the nature of the evil feared; that is, erring
affections in an unerring subject.

Suppose Adam in innocence had grapled with the fear of death: like enough it
would have caused a violent sweat over all his body.

Adam being a sinner did grapple with death, Genes. 5.5. without any such sweat
mentioned; doubtless Adam innocent would not have been inferior to Adam a
sinner. Christ was much superior to Adam innocent, though you make him
inferior in this matter to Adam a sinner.

It Is no strange new doctrine to make the natural fear of death to be the
cause of Christ's agony, seeing other learned men do affirm it. Christopher
Carlisle in his Treatise of Christ's desceut into hell, p. 46. says thus, Was
not Christ extremely afflicted when he for fear of death sweat drops in
quantity as thick as drops of blood? John Fryth a godly Martyr says thus in
his answer to Sir Thomas Moor B. 2. Christ did not only weep but he feared so
sore that he sweat drops like drops of blood running down upon the earth, which
was more then to weep. Now (says he) if I should ask you why Christ feared,
and sweat so sore? what would you answer me? was it for fear of the pains of
purgatory? he that shall so answer is worthy to be laughed to scorn, wherefore
then was it? Verily even for the fear of death, as it appears plainly by his
prayer, for he prayed to his Father, saying, If it be possible, let this cup
pass from me.

Fryth's other writings call to have it so. But (though Authorities also are
incomparably for us) it is not man's Authority, but Scripture, and reason from
thence deduced that conclude the question.

It passes my understanding to find out how an Angel could support our
Savior under the sense of his fathers wrath. Can Angels appease Gods wrath? or
can Angels support a man's so^^ to bear it? It Is absurd to think so. God will
not afford the least drop of water to cool any man's tongue that is tormented in
the ^ames of his wrath: therefore that cannot be the reason why God sent an
Angel to comfort him.

Veteres dicunt Angelus confortat sed non portat. Ger. Harm
Had you accepted of that saying of the Ancients, viz. the Angel comforted him
but carried none of his burden; you might have spared the Reader these
Quaeries.

The cause of the Angels apparition and consolation, was to support the humane
nature, from utter fainting before the time, and to strengthen it, not only at
present, but so as it might be able to undergo the sufferings that remained;
the necessity whereof argues his conflict to have been greater then could be
caused by the fear of a mere natural death.

It Is true, God will not afford the least drop of water to cool any man's tongue
that is tormented in the flames of his wrath, viz. that is, totally in torment.
He had a taste of consolation at present, but but there were times wherein he
had not a drop of consolation, as, In his total desertion, in respect of
sense, upon the cross, Christ had his interims of respit, and here an
intervall of consolation, otherwise he could not have fullfilled that which was
written of him. It is no good argument to say he drunk not the cup off at once,
ergo He drunk it not up. He tasted of it in the garden, he drunk it off upon
the cross. The pain of loss and pain of sense which make up the full measure
of the essential wrath of God, met both together in full measure upon him on
the cross.

But on the contrary it is evident that God does often use to comfort his people
against the fear of death, by the Ministry of Angels.

in such cases comforted against? there are other concomitants of death, viz.
the sting of death, the curse, guilt, unbelief, that are more terrible then
death it self.

Though Angels comfort sometimes against the fear of death, yet not only
against the fear of death, but according to other temptations, and necessities
of those whom they are sent to minister unto, 1 Kin. 19.5, 7, 8. Dan. 10, 17.
Mat. 4.11.

The fathers sending of an Angel to comfort his son in his agony, was not an
evidence that the father was angry with him for our sin, but it was a sure
evidence to him that his Father was highly well-pleased with him even in the
time of his agony.



Good reasons there were why Christ should be more afraid of death then many
Martyrs have been, namely, for the clear manifestation of his humane nature,
and also for the accomplishment of the predictions that went before him
touching his sufferings, if he would he could have suffered less fear of
death, and showed more true valor then ever any Martyrs have done, but then
his death would not have been so useful to his children, which for fear of
death were all their life time subject to bondage.

manifestation of the truth of his humane nature can be desired, then that he
was in all things like unto us, except sin. It Is a fiction to assert any divine
prediction that Christ should only suffer a bodily death. There can be no
reason given why the Martyrs, or other men, having received from Christ but a
drop of that spirit which was in him out of measure, should endure with joy the
same death which he himself entering but into the Porch and suburbs of,
Cartwright in Rhem. Test. Mat. 27.46.
through anguish of his soul, had clods rather then drops of blood, streaming
down his blessed body, a thing which neither was seen or heard before or since:
The true reason thereof is, Christ died as a sinner imputatively, pressed under
the sense of the wrath of God, and conflicting with eternal death.

The Martyrs died justified, cheared with the sense of the love of God, and
conflicting only with a temporal death: It is more useful unto those who for
fear of death, i.e. eternal death, are all their life time subject unto
bondage, that Christ conflicted with that death, wherewith they principally
conflict, then otherwise.

CHAP. IX. The Vindication of Heb. 5.7.
Heb. 5.7. Christ in the days of his flesh when he had offered up prayers and
supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him
from death, and he was heard in that which he feared.
Reverence your Authors who expound the word Fear to mean the Fear of
Astonishment at the feeling of Gods wrath for our sin, but I must tell you;
that there are other Learned and Godly Divines that are contrary to them in
their interpretation of the word Fear. K. James his Translators do read it
thus in the margent, He was heard because of his piety. M. Tyndal and M.
Overdale translate thus, He was heard for his reverence. And the Geneva in
other places translate the same Greek word Godly fear, as in Luke 2.25. Act.
8.2. Heb. 12.28. and in this very sense must this Greek word be translated in
Heb. 5.7.

In that which he feared.

(...) being a word that signifies both Fear of reverence, and a fear of evil
impending, notwithstanding the received rule of interpretation (which orders
such words to be expounded according to the nature and circumstances of the
place) many godly learned have taken it, some one way, some another, yet all
generally acknowledging that Christ suffered the wrath of God, though some
acknowledge not this word to afford an argument thereof. K. James Translators,
as they read piety in the margent, which you mention, so they read fear in
the Text which you mention not. M. Tyndall and M. Overdale, though they
translate the Greek as you say, yet how far that translation is from helping
your cause, or prejudicing ours, will fully appear in the sequel of this
chapter.

If the Greek word be translated Godly Fear, Heb. 5.7. it may only thence be
inferred, that this word affords not an argument, but it no way weakens the
cause, which has Arguments enough beside.

The Greek word does properly signify such a fear as makes a man exceeding
wary, and heedfull how he touches any thing that may hurt him.

Cartwright in Rh. Test. Heb. 5.7.
Your explication is too general to give the property of the word, the word
signifies both Reverence and fear, but the proper signification of this word,
being (says Cartwright) never severed from fear, and yet sometimes disjoined
from reverence; It follows that the property of the Greek word serves better
for to note fear then reverence.

I come now to explain the very thing it self from which Christ prayed to be
saved, which was that he might be delivered from death, and this petition was
the masterpeece of all his prayers.

Mar. 14.37, the principal matter whereof was the curse, viz. the wrath of
God, wherefore also out of this verse, from the word Death (if not from the
word translated Fear) it is truly argued, that Christ suffered the wrath of
God. Not Christ's salvation out of his sufferings, but the glory of God in the
salvation of the Elect was the masterpiece of his prayers, Joh. 17.

But for the better understanding the very thing it self that he did so often,
and so earnestly pray to be delivered from, we must consider him with a twofold
respect.

1. As he was true man, so he prayed to be saved from death conditionally, Mat.
26.39.

2. We must consider him in this Text as he was our Mediator, and so he prayed
to be saved from death absolutely, namely, to be saved from his natural fear of
death when he came to make his oblation: for he knew well enough that if there
had remained in him but the least natural unwillingnesse to die, when he came
to make his oblation, it would have spoiled the mediatorial efficacy of his
oblation.



That prayer of Christ Mat. 26.39. was as much the prayer of the Mediator as
this Heb. 5.7. neither was the manhood more concerned in that then in this.

To understand by death Heb. 5.7. his natural fear of death, and by that his
fear of offending God by his natural unwillingnesse to die (for so you expound
your self) beside the manifest and fearlesse violence offered thereby unto the
text, is (that you may wave the true cause of his fear, namely, the wrath of
God, together with your silencing the wonted cause asserted by you, namely, the
fear of bodily death) to devise a new cause of the fear of Christ, viz. lest he
should offend God, i. e. lest he should sin, choosing rather to say, that
Christ was afraid of the evil of sin then of the evil of punishment for sin.

That which it was impossible for Christ to be touched with, that Christ was
not afraid of.

But to offend God by his unwillingnesse to die, was impossible for Christ to
be touched with.

Therefore Christ was not afraid of unwillingnesse to die.

Unwillingnesse to die in Christ had been a sin, he having received a command
to lay down his life, Damasc. de fide orthod. l. 3. c. 23.
Joh, 10.17. Heb. 4.15. Natural fear is either pure, and without vice, this
was in Christ; or impure, adverse to reason, this was not in Christ. So
Damascene long since.

This spoiling of the mediatorly efficacy of this oblation is a supposition of
impossibility, therefore could not be an object of fear to him who was only
subject to pure and reasonable fear. Significat timorem rationabilem. Cham. de
descen. l. 5. c. 5.




For he had from eternity covenanted with his father to give his soul (by his
own active obedience) as a mediatoriall sacrifice of atonement for our sins,
Joh. ^0.17, 18. therefore he must not die a positive death by the power of man,
but he must die as Mediator by the actual and joint concurrence of both divine
and humane nature: no man could force his soul out of his body by all the
torments they could devise, but he must separate his own soul from his body by
the joint concurrence of both his natures.

i. e. the wrath of God, yet because he was God, it was impossible that he
should break his word, and consequently impossible that he should fear an
impossibility. He laid down his life as a surety, which none could have taken
away against his will, but he took not away his life as an executioner.

If he had covenanted to take away his own life as an executioner, neither then
could he have broken his word, because he was God; nor had so covenanting
opposed, but engaged him to the suffering of the wrath of God, his death being
the cursed death of the cross.

Christ made his oblation an exact obedience unto Gods will, both for matter,
manner, and time, and this mediatorial action of his was the highest degree of
obedience that the father required, or that the son could perform for man's
atonement and redemption.



His obedience in his death was not Legal but mediatoriall.



He prayed also to be delivered from the dominion of death after he had made
his oblation, and God heard him and delivered him by his resurrection on the
third day, Act. 2.24, 27.

i. e. of the cursed death of the cross; therefore he suffered the curse, i.
e. the wrath of God.

Neither does the word Fear in this Text signify such an amazed natural fear
of death as the other word Fear does signify, Mar. 14.33. which word I have
expounded to signify our Saviors troubled natural fear of death, and no more.

Fear Mar. 14.33. signifies natural fear of death and no more: but Fear Heb.
5.7. signifies a godly fear, lest he should offend God by his unwillingnesse
to die, that is, Mark speaks of a natural fear of a natural evil, the Author
to the Hebrews of a moral fear of a moral evil; a distinction as vain as
weak, without any warrant. The object of fear in both places is the same, why
should not the affection of fear at least for the kind of it be the same? He
offered up prayers with strong cries, Heb. 5.7. and Jesus cried with a loud
voice, Mar. 14.37.

And therefore it caused him in the days of his flesh to offer up many prayers
and supplications with strong cries and tears unto him that was able to save
him from death, namely, from his natural fear of death, and he was heard
because of his godly fear.

Just now you interpreted the word Death in the Text properly, he prayed, say
you, to be delivered from the dominion of death; now you interpret it
figuratively, namely, for the natural fear of death, one and the same word
(especially not being typical) is capable but of one sense in the same place.

As concerning the meaning of the place. There are no greater asserters of
Christ's suffering the wrath of God then those who translate the Greek word by
Reverence, understanding it causally, viz. that Christ was heard for that
humble reverence wherewith he was affected toward God in his prayers, yet
those who translate it Fear, give many reasons leading thereunto.

How terrible is eternal death, if natural death be called the King of
terror! Job 18.4. (...) Beza in loc. Cham. de descen. Bellarm. enerv. t. 1. l.
2. c. 2.
1. The proper signification of the word.

2. The frequent use of it in this sense by Greek Authors both sacred and
secular, as also Philosophers, Historiographers, and Poets.

3. Analogy of Scripture.

4. The mention of death that great object of fear, together with the affection
of fear in the same verse, And

Lastly, Because the Greek praeposition annexed thereunto, does not well agree
with the translation of it by reverence. For though the praeposition according
to Bellarmines instances is read with a genitive case, and notes the internal
cause of an action; yet it never is observed to signify the external moving
cause of an action, which is the present case. Pareus (who disalloweth neither
of the interpretations, yet thinks the Syriack interpreter to have best
understood the place, and cleared the text) renders it thus; Vid. Bezam and
Paraeum in loc.
who also in the days of his flesh offered prayers and supplications with
strong cries and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, and was
heard. And though he were a son, yet learned he obedience from his fear, and
the things which he suffered. Tremellius follows him and Beza dislikes him
not herein, the sense being the same.

CHAP. X. The Vindication of Psa. 22.1.
Psa. 22.1. My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me?
MAny Divines conclude from this Text, that God did forsake his son in his
anger, because he had imputed to him all our sins: but yet other Divines differ
from them. M. Broughton says, My God, My God, shows that Christ was not
forsaken of God, but that God was his hope. 2. Says he, The word forsaken is
not in the Text, but Why do thou [leave] me? namely, why do thou leave me
to the griefs following from the malice of the Jews? as they are expressed in
the body of the Psalm. 3. Says he, None ever expounded one matter, and made
his amplification of another; but Psalm. 22. has amplification of griefs caused
by men, and not from Gods anger. Therefore the Proposition in the first verse
is not a complaint to God that he forsook his soul in anger for our sins. M.
Robert Wilmot shows at large that the term forsaken is not so proper to this
place as the term leave, and he does parallel it with the word leave, in Psalm.
16.10. M. Ainsworth says, the Hebrew word which we translate [forsaken] may be
translated, why leavest thou me? And he says in a Letter to my self, that
there is no material difference between leaving and forsaking, so as the
meaning be kept sound. Therefore it follows by good consequence that Christ
does not complain Psa. 22. that God had forsaken him in anger for our sins.

Mat. 27.46.) and the Greek word used here by the Septuagint, signifies to
leave another helpless in their necessity or extremiry, which appears not
only in its frequent use in the Scripture, but also in that this very word per
Antiphrasin (it being one of those Hebrew words that have two contrary
significations) signifies to help up that which is down, or fortify, Nehem.
3.8. and 4.2. and such leaving we usually express by forsaking, and
accordingly its read by Latin Expositors promiscuously, who all do in effect
say with M Ainsworth; there is no material difference betwixt leaving and
forsaking, so as the meaning be kept sound, which with M. Ainsworth was, but
with you is not, therefore you choose leaving, which with us is more general,
and refuse forsaking which is a more proper term.

The Hebrew word then signifying to Forsake; the word [forsaken] is in the Text
more proper then the word [leave] contrary to M. Broughton.

The leaving or forsaking here is not only bodily, but chiefly spiritual; The
matter propounded in the first verse, and amplified in the body of the Psalm,
is the same; namely, the passion of Christ, Psa. 22. has amplification of
griefs caused by men instrumentally, and by Gods anger as the efficient cause;
Gods anger and men's herein are not opposite, but subordinate one to another.
Anger in Scripture is taken sometimes for the hatred of God unto a person:
sometime for the execution of vindicative justice, in the latter sense God was
angry with Christ, not in the former. Separation from God in sense or feeling,
Absolute separation from God this second was in Christ. Perk. Gal. 3.13.
Forsaking is either total and final, so God forsakes the Reprobate; or
partial and temporal, as concerning the fruition and sense of the good of the
promise, so God forsook Christ, and of this forsaking Christ complains in
this place, being a principal part of that punishment, which Christ as the
surety of the Elect was to undergo; the words clearly holding forth this truth,
the Text neither according to Grammatical sense, nor Analogy of faith can
admit of any better interpretation. Christ in his death was made sin
imputatively, that is, he suffered the guilt and punishment of sin, a chief
part whereof was this divine paenall desertion, his death was joined with the
curse, made up of the pain of sense, and the pain of loss: If the pain of
loss be not joined with the pain of sense, there can be no sufficient cause
given of so bitter and lamentable a cry for that person who was God man,
therefore it follows by good consequence, that Christ does complain Psa. 22.
that God had forsaken him in anger for our sin.

Our Saviors complaint must run thus, Why have thou left me into the hands of
my malignant adversaries, to be used as a notorious malefactor? It Is not so fit
a phrase to say, Why have thou forsaken me into the hands of my malignant
adversaries, as to say, Why have thou left me into the hands of my malignant
adversaries?

and that justly before God.

It is as fit a phrase to say Why have thou forsaken me in the hands of my
malignant adversaries, as to say Why have thou left me into the hands of my
malignant adversaries. The words of the Psalmist are, Why have thou forsaken
me, or Why have thou left me? and no more: the addition, fit or unfit is the
Dialogues paraphrase, not the Psalmists phrase.

God forsakes the damned totally and finally, because there is no place of
repentance left open to them, but he did not so forsake his son, neither did he
forsake his son by any inward desertion, as he does sometimes forsake his own
people for the trial of their grace: but he left his son only outwardly when
he left him into the hands of Tyrants to be punished as a malefactor without
any due trial of his cause.

Luke 22.28. Heb. 2.18. and 4.15. And he was in all points tempted like unto us.

Therefore the complaint of Christ lies fair and round thus, Why have thou left
me in my righteous cause unto the will of my malignant adversaries, to be
condemned and put to death as a wicked Malefactor?



John Hus appealed to Jesus Christ for justice, saying, My God, My God, why
have thou forsaken me? Ammond de la Roy Martyr, in the time of his torments
said, Lord, Lord, why have thou forsaken me?

the castigatory wrath of God, complained in these words; therefore Christ
suffered not paenall desertion. As weak is the other consequence, God for the
manifestation of his glory in the witnessing of his truth; for the good example
of others, the discovery of the tyranny of Antichrist, forsook David and others
with a castigatory desertion: therefore he forsook not Christ with a paenal
desertion for the manifestation of the glory of his justice.

upon the Article of Christ's descent into hell, says not one word of the
suffering of his fathers wrath, yet he makes use of Psalm. 22.1. and of M.
Calvin's judgment in other points, though he does differ from him in his
exposition of Psa. 22.1.

Calvin's authority with reason, against his without it. It Is not the authority
of Calvin that concludes for; much less the authority of Carlisle that
concludes against: but the reason of either according to truth, that determines
the question.

The holy Ghost has indicted this Psalm by the Prophet David in the Person of
Christ. If so, then all the words of this Psalm must have relation to the
person of Christ. The Psalm it self has two principal parts, the first is from
ver. 1. to 21. in all which Christ does complain to his father of his unjust
usage by his malignant Adversaries: the 2d part of the Psalm is from the 22.
ver. to the end.

David with the distribution thereof, nothing disproveth the desertion
mentioned verse. 1. to proceed from the wrath of God.

In this Psalm Christ complains of his unjust usage by his malignant
adversaries, but not of that only nor principally.

The passions whereof Christ complains in this Psalm, may be conveniently
distributed into four heads. The suffering the wrath of God, ver. 1.2.11. The
grief of his spirit by reproaches, ver. 6, 7, 8, 17, 18. His fear from the
cruelty of his enemies, verse. 12, 13, 16, 20, 21. The torture of his body by
crucifying, ver. 14.15, 16, 17. the greatest whereof was the sense of the wrath
of God.

Therefore seeing Christ in this place does double the term of his affiance in
God, saying, My God, My God; it proves evidently that God had not forsaken his
Son in anger for our sins, but that God was still his hope; and that he would
at last turn all his sufferings but unto the trial of his perfect obedience.



Why art thou then so far from my help, and from the words of my roaring? Why
do thou leave me unto the will of my malignant adversaries, notwithstanding
my prayers, and my righteous cause?



Our Lords complaint here expressed by a Metaphor of roaring, is by the
Evangelists called crying with a loud voice, Mat. 27.46. Mar. 15.34. Luke
23.46. By Paul, strong crying, Heb. 5.7.

This last Text M. Ainsworth cites to the same purpose, whose judgment the
Dialogue seems much to account of.

My heart is melted in the midst of my bowels, that is to say, the evil spirit
that is in my malignant Adversaries, and their doctors, do make my humane
affections to melt in the midst of my bowels.



Thou have brought me unto the dust of death, verse. 15. God does not so bring
Christ unto the dust of death, as he does other men, namely, not so as death is
laid upon man for sin, Genesis 3.19.

Ainsworth whom the Dialogue often cites, seems to understand death to be
laid upon Christ, according to the sense of Genesis 3.19. expressly quoting that
Text in his Commentary upon this Verse. But do you show the difference between
the death of Christ and the death of other men; whence it may appear, that
death was not laid upon Christ for sin.

But for the better understanding of the true difference, I will distinguish
upon the death of Christ; for God appointed him to die a double kind of death.
1. As a Malefactor, and 2. As a Mediator, and all this at one and the same
time.

1. He died as a Malefactor by Gods determinate counsel and decree, he gave
the devil leave to enter into Judas to betray him, and into the Scribes and
Pharisees, and Pontius Pilate to condemn him, and to do what they could to put
him to death, and in that respect God may be truly said to bring him into the
dust of death, Gen 3.19.

2. Notwithstanding all this, Christ died as a Mediator, and therefore his
death was not really finished by those torments which he suffered as a
Malefactor, for as he was our Mediator he separated his own soul from his body
by the power of his Godhead. All the Tyrants in the world could not separate
his soul from his body, Joh. 19.11. no, not by all the torments they could
devise, till himself pleased to actuate his own death by the joint concurrence
of both his natures, Joh. 10.18.



This distinction in name, but in truth a Sophism, is used as a crutch to
support the halting doctrine of the non-imputation of sin unto Christ.

Christ's death as a Mediator (says the distinction) was not really finished
by those torments which he suffered as a Malefactor: the Jews are said to put
Christ to death, because they endeavored to put him to death, but did not
separate his soul from his body; in that sense they did not put him to death,
so is the distinction expressly interpreted, page 100.

If Christ's death was a suffering then the formal cause thereof was not that
active separation of his soul from his body, so often mentioned by the
Dialogue, otherwise Christ should have been his own afflicter, yea, and in this
case his own Executioner, which last the Dialogue it self expressly rejects.
But the Dialogue resuming and insisting further upon this distinction
elsewhere, let the fuller speaking thereunto be referred till then.

Though Haman according to the true sense of that Text, Est 8.7. be said to lay
his hand upon the Jews, yet are the Jews no where said to be slain by Haman.
Abraham is said to have offered up Isaac, yet Isaac is no where said to be
slain by Abraham, as Abraham did sacrifice Isaac, so was Isaac sacrificed, that
is, interpretatively or virtually, not actually. But how often do we read in
Scripture that Christ was actually crucified and put to death by the Jews, Act.
2.37. and 4.10. 1 Cor. 2.8. By this reason it may be said, that the Jews only
endeavored to offer violence unto Christ, and put him to smart, but did not
actually and really, because they could do neither without the permission of
the Divine nature, nor did either without both his Mediatorly permission and
consent. The Jews accounting of Christ as of a Malefactor or Transgressor, was
that the Scripture might be fullfilled, Mat. 15.28. and was just in respect of
God, though unjust in respect of them.

Christ in Gods account suffered not only as a Mediator, but also as a
malefactor or transgressor, i. e. a sinner imputatively in respect of the guilt
and punishment of sin; he was such a Mediator to whom it was essential (for
the time) to be a Malefactor, that is, to suffer the guilt and punishment of
sin. The Priesthood was essential to the Mediator. To be a sacrifice for sin
was essential to the Priesthood, Isa. 53.10. Therefore to be a sacrifice for
sin was essential to the office of a Mediator.

As Christ was by office, so he died. Christ died not only as a Mediator, Heb.
8.6. but also as a surety, Heb. 7.22. He shall bear their iniquity, Isa. 53.11.
Bajulabit.
as a Porter bears a burden, and that upon the Tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. He was made
sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. Christ separated his soul from his body, as a subordinate
cause, not as a principal efficient, that is, as a surety, by voluntary
yielding and offering up his life, Heb. 9.24. but not as an executioner. We
read Joh. 10.18. that Christ laid down his life, but not that he took it away
by violence; the same word that is here used concerning Christ, Peter has
concerning himself, I will lay down my life for thy sake, Joh. 13.37. and John
has concerning Christ and the Saints, because he laid down his life for us, we
ought also to lay down our lives for the brethren, 1 John 3.16. But it was not
lawful for Peter or the Saints to take away their own lives.

Though Christ by his absolute power could have preserved his life against all
created adversary power; none takes it from me, namely, against my consent,
whether I will or not, Joh. 10.18. yet by his limited power, he could not, but
as our surety he was bound to permit the course of physical causes, and
prevailing of the power of darkness, for the fullfilling of what was written
concerning him; This is your hour, and the power of darkness, Luke 22.53. The
Jews therefore doing that which according to the order of second causes, not
only might, but also (through his voluntary and obliged permission) did take
away his life, did not only endeavor but also actually kill him. Yet suppose
the Jews were not isntrumental, in the actual taking away of his bodily life,
it is a mere non-consequence thence to infer the non-imputation of sin unto
Christ. Briefly, as this distinction is a mere sophisme and groundless, so the
discourse concerning the Jews endeavoring to put Christ to death, but not
really putting him to death, making Christ to take away his own life, and
consequently to be his own Executioner, is false and impertinent. For which,
though the Jews may owe the Author some thanks, yet Christ Jesus himself and
all judicious Christians cannot but take it very ill.

Thus have I showed unto you the dependence of the first part of this Psalm; by
which you may see how the scope of this Psalm does set out the sufferings of
Christ to proceed not from Gods wrath but from man's only. Neither do I find
any thing of Gods wrath either in this or in any other Psalm, and yet Christ
does make as doleful complaint to God of his sufferings, both in this Psalm,
and Psalm. 69. as any can be found in all the Bible.

viz. ver. 1.2.11. that Christ suffered the wrath of God; yet because
(notwithstanding you cannot be ignorant of much that is spoken to that purpose)
you do as much as say, that neither here or elsewhere you can find this truth
in the Scripture, that the Reader may here see (for proofs from other places
are to be expected elsewhere) how Christ's suffering the wrath of God, is argued
from his doleful complaints in his passion: I shall close this discourse,
presenting him with a brief yet sad and serious view of the passion of our Lord
Jesus, (...). It intends all the suffering of afflicting and conflicting
affections under the sight and sense of great and eminent peril impending.
(...) Anima Christi fuit tristis usque ad mortem extensive and intensive.
Gerharm. in ^.
a subject which the Angels themselves (how much more should all believers)
desire thoroughly and narrowly to look into, 1 Pet. 1.12. by considering, 1. The
nature. 2. The effects. 3. The adjuncts. 4. The subject of these sufferings.

Luke expresses the nature of his passion in general by an Agony, Chap.
22.44. it signifies the sorrows of combaters entering the lists with the sense
of the utmost danger of life, a metaphor taken from the passion of conflicting
affections, in the greatest, eminentest, and most sensible perils, and so
holding forth the sharpest of the fears of men. The parts of this Agony are.

1. Extreme sorrow, and he began to be sorrowful and very heavy, then says he
unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death, Mat. 26.36, 37. His
sorrow was lethal and deadly, both extensively and intensively; extensively,
continuing unto the last gasp: intensively, killing of it self in time; had
there been no other causes resolving and melting the soul gradually, as wax is
melted with the heat. My heart is like wax, it is melted in the midst of my
bowels, Psa. 22.14.

(...).
2. Amazement, and he began to be sore amazed, Mar. 14 33. which signifies an
universal cessation of all the faculties of the soul from their several
functions, Physicians call it an Horripilation, we usually a Consternation;
Like a clock in kelter, yet stopped for the while from going, by some hand laid
upon it. That such intermission of the operations of the soul, the effect of
this formidable concussion, might be without sin, is evident to him that
remembers Christ slept, Sleep ordinarily implying a cessation of the exercise
of the intellectual faculties for the time.

(...)
3. Expavefaction. He began not merely to be amazed but also to be very heavy,
the word notes expavefaction, which was such a motion of his mind superadded
unto his Consternation: whereby for the time he was disenabled, as concerning
the minding of any thing else, being wholly taken up with the dreadful sense
of the righteous wrath of God; as the eye intensly fixed upon some object,
takes no notice of any other object before it for the while.

(...)
4. Fear, Who in the days of his flesh, i.e. of his infirm flesh before his
death and resurrection, when he offered up prayers and supplications with
strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, and was
heard in that which he feared, Heb. 5.7. his fear was an afflicting affection
arising from the sight and sense of the greatest moral evil, namely, the
fearful wrath of God.

(...).
5. Desertion, or being forsaken of God, that is left helpless and succourless
in his extremity, Mat. 27.46.

The effects of his passion were.

1. Fervent prayer, Mat. 26.36. earnest prayer, Luk 22.44. being fallen upon
his face, ver. 39. with strong crying and tears, Heb. 5.7. three times saying
the same words, My Father if it be possible let this cup pass from me, Mat.
26.44.

2. Bloody sweat, and being in an agony he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat
was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground, Luke 22.44.

Nam ter humi strato, contritio cordis, and ille
Sanguineus sudor, crux fuit ante crucem.
3. That doleful, loud, and lamentable cry, and about the ninth hour, Jesus
cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lamasabachthani, that is to say, My
God, My God, why have thou forsaken me: Mat. 27.46.

The Adjuncts of his passion were.

1. An Angel comforting him, And there appeared an Angel to him from Heaven
strengthening him.

2. A miraculous Eclipse continuing three hours, Aut Deus naturae patitur, aut
mundi machina dissolvitur.
so contrary to the course of nature, as that an understanding Heathen at the
sight of it cried out, Either the God of nature suffers, or the frame of this
world is dissolved.

Lastly, The subject of all these sufferings, namely, Jesus Christ God-man. Now
sum up all these in order; An Agony wherein were lethall sorrow, consternation,
expavefaction, fear, desertion, fervent prayer, bloody sweat, doleful and loud
cry, need of strengthening from an Angel, put all these together in a person
who was not a mere creature, but God-man, having a perfect soul and body, free
from all moral infirmity, of sound health and exact temper, who not only was
God, but knew that God was his, Mat. 27.46. fully understood the glory of the
blessed, that his soul immediately upon its dissolution should be in Paradise,
Luke 23.43. that his body after three days should rise again, Matt. 16.21. and
that in the interim it should not see corruption, Psa. 16.10. and then I appeal
to the conscience of each Christian Reader, whether such a passion in such a
subject argues not greater sufferings then of a mere natural death, or could
argue less then the sufferings of the greatest evil that could befall him that
could not sin; namely, the wrath of God.

CHAP. XI. The Vindication of Gal. 3.13.
Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us, as it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs upon a tree.
IN this Text the Apostle speaks of a twofold curse, 1. He speaks of the
eternal curse in ver. 10.2. Of an outward temporary curse, in ver. 14. such as
all men do suffer, who are hanged upon a tree; the Apostle brings in this
latter curse in a Rhetorical manner only, saying thus, Christ has redeemed us
from the curse of the Law (namely, from the eternal curse at the very
self-same time) when he was made (not that curse, but) a curse for us according
to Deuter. 21.23.

ver. 13. according to the stream of Interpreters answers an Objection arising
out of verse. 10. thus, If every one be cursed that continues not in all things
which are written in the book of the Law to do them, it follows then that all
are accursed, because no one continues in all things which are written in the
book of the Law to do them; No, says Paul, (...) active, est sententia
execratoria: passive, significat execrationis poena^ transgresso: ribus legis
statutam. Paraeus in loc.
for notwithstanding all are accursed in themselves, yet Christ has redeemed
us that believe (not only freed us, as you corruptly turn it) by laying down a
just price, from the curse of the Law, i.e. from the sentence of the Law called
a curse actively, and the execution of justice according to that sentence,
called the curse passively. How? By being made a curse, i.e. that moral curse
for us. But how does that appear? For it is written, viz. Deuteronomy. 21.23. Cursed
is every one that hangs on a Tree.

The Apostle speaks of the eternal or moral curse, verse. 10. and of both the
eternal and ceremonial curse, ver. 13. what more frequent then to hold forth
a real truth by Rhetorical terms, yet here the Apostles style is simple not
Rhetorical. Your needless affecting a Rhetorical style in this Text brings
to mind the words of Beza, speaking of Erasmus, Imo vero in eo positae est
tota nostra spes. Vide Bezam in Gal. 3.13.
seeking also a Trope in this place [Christ being made a curse for us] Nay,
verily (says he) in that is our whole hope laid up, in that appears the
infinite love of God, in that is our salvation placed, that our God poured out
all his wrath upon his own Son, properly and without any trope, he cursed him
as he was our surety properly and without any Trope. The word [when] whereby
you wrest that unto the time which is spoken of the manner how we are redeemed,
is of your own putting in, and not in the Text.

I confess that D. Luther was a rare instrument in the Church of God in his
days, and he has expounded the Epistle to the Galatians better then many
others: but yet I believe he is far from the Apostles meaning in this matter,
and it seems to me he had some doubt also about his Exposition. But he
thinks that the latter curse may well be expounded of his sacrifice for the
Curse (and yet that Exposition is not right neither) for this latter Curse is
no other then an outward temporary curse. For the Text in Deuteronomy. runs thus, If
there be in a man a sin worthy of death, and thou hang him upon a Tree, etc.
then he that is hanged is the curse of God.

Martin Luther, as you immediately before said, commenting upon this Text,
speaks as follows. And although these sentences may be well expounded after
this manner, Christ is made a curse, that is to say, a sacrifice for the curse,
and sin, that is, a sacrifice for sin, yet in my judgment it is better to keep
the proper signification of the words, because there is a greater force and
vehemence therein, as also that in the conclusion he affirms, that Christ
bare all our sins by imputation, and that he bare the curse of the Law really
for us, and in respect of bearing our sins by imputation he says, that Christ
was the greatest thief, blasphemer, etc.

But because you so allege him, as if he were not so much against you, nor for
us in this controversy, as indeed he is, and both of them so clearly and
fully, as no man more, that the Reader may have a true taste of Luthers spirit
and judgment in this point, I shall transcribe what he writes soon after what
you have cited. Paul therefore (says he) handles this place with a true
Apostolical spirit; there is neither Sophister, nor Lawyer, nor Jew, nor
Anabaptist, nor any other, that speaks as he does, for who durst allege this
place out of Moses, accursed is every one that hangs on a tree, and apply it
unto Christ: like as Paul then applied this sentence unto Christ, even so may
we apply unto Christ not only the whole 27 Chapt. of Deuteronomy. but also may gather
all the curses of Moses Law together, and expound the same of Christ; for as
Christ is innocent in this general Law touching his person, so is he also in
all the rest, and as he is guilty in this general Law, in that he is made a
curse for us, and is hanged upon the Cross, as a wicked man, a blaspemer, a
murderer, and a Traitor, even so is he also guilty in all others; for all the
curses of the Law are heaped together and laid upon him, and therefore he did
bear and suffer them in his own body for us, he was therefore not only
accursed, but also was made a curse for us. This is to interpret the Scriptures
truly, and like an Apostle. Thus Luther.

There is not the least appearance that I can observe why Luther should seem,
from what he writes on this Text, to doubt of his Exposition, but very
abundantly much to the contrary.

That Luther and others, who conclude from this Text Christ to have suffered
the wrath of God, have the true meaning thereof, will appear by proving that
the person hanged upon a tree and accursed, Deuteronomy. 21.23. was a type of Christ;
for if the Type bare the Ceremonial, it is then manifest, that the Antitype
bare the moral, that is, the eternal curse.

If not only the malediction of every one that is hanged upon a tree be held
forth, but also Christ's redemption of us from the curse of the Law by being
made a curse for us be both held forth and foretold, Deuteronomy. 21.23. then the Text
Deuteronomy. 21.23. has not only a proper but a typical signification.

The malediction of every one that hangs upon a tree is contained in the Text
properly. Christ's redemption of us from the curse of the Law by being made a
curse for us, is another thing, and cannot be contained therein properly, but
only typically. Who, without the peculiar inspiration of the Spirit could have
found that truth in that Text?

But not only the malediction of every one that is hanged upon a Tree is held
forth, but also Christ's redemption of us from the curse of the Law, being made
a curse for us is both held forth and foretold, Deuteronomy. 21.23.

The Minor is the Apostles, as appears by the causall particle, For, who
proves the foregoing part of the Text (which is his answer to the objection
raised, as we saw before out of verse. 10. namely, Christ has redeemed, etc.)
by the following part, for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs upon
a tree. If those words, Gal. 3.13. Cursed is every one that hangs upon a
tree, and that Text Deuteronomy. 21.23. have both but one and that the same one sense,
what then hinders that the foregoing part of the verse, namely, redemption of
us from the curse of the Law by being made a curse for us, is true of every one
that was hanged upon a tree in Judea from Moses time until the passion of
Christ inclusively, the latter words containing in them a proof of the former,
as we saw just now from the causative particle, For. Then which inference what
is more abominable?

The typical reason excepted, namely, of signifying Christ bearing the moral
curse upon the tree, there can be no sufficient nor probable reason given, why
hanging upon a tree should infame and fasten upon the person hanged this
special curse, whence followed the defiling of the Land, in case the body
continued unburied after Sunset, above all other capital sufferings. For were
all received which is said by the Hebrew Doctors, that is not repugnant unto
Scripture, yet it is certain that some crimes for which they were hanged, were
not so great as some crimes which were punished according to other capital
sentences without hanging. As also that hanging after the manner of the Jews,
was not so painful as some other deaths in use with them. Add hereunto, which
is also acknowledged by you, that the Jews manner was often to hang them not
alive, but after they were dead, yet not he that is stoned alive to death is
accursed, but he that is hanged (though first stoned to death) is accursed;
hanging after stoning, though it be acknowledged, yet it is not so clearly
expressed in Scripture, as burning after stoning is, Josh. 7.25. burning the
body to ashes, was as sore an execution in it self, as hanging up the body for
a short space.

There were Malefactors hanged before the giving of this Law, Deu. 21.23. yet
we read not that they were accursed, during the space between the giving of
this Law and the Passion of Christ, a malefactor hanged out of Judea was not
accursed. In Judea no person how great a malefector soever if not hanged was
thus accursed: The person hanged was equally accursed, whether he was hanged
alive or dead, whether he was hanged after this manner or after that, Jewish or
Roman, etc. whether his crime were more heinous, or not so heinous. yea, for
ought appears, though he were innocent, yet if hanged judicially he was
accursed. Since the Passion of Christ, hanging in Judea, is not ceremonially
accursed.

For otherwise (says Iunius) neither according to the Law of nature, nor
according to civil Law, Nam alioqui neque secundum naturae legem, etc. Junius
paral. lib. 2. par. 52.
nor in respect of the thing it self, is he that is hanged, accursed; seeing
therefore the cause why the carcass of him that is hanged, must not continue
all night unburied, is ceremonial; Christ being the body, and fullfilling of
the ceremonies, it is no doubt but in this ceremonial curse ( Moses himself
being a Type of our eternal Mediator) had respect unto our eternal and
perfect mediation. This Exposition making the man that was hanged upon a tree,
a ceremonial curse, and Christ hanged upon a tree a moral curse, is both
generally received, and every way agreeing to the analogy of faith, which is a
rule of interpreting Scripture.

In that Christ Gal. 3.13. is expressly said to be a curse, it will thence
unavoidably follow, that sin was some way judicially upon Christ; for we
read of no curse inflicted according to the determinate and revealed way of
proceeding with the reasonable creature, but presupposes sin. Wherefore he
could neither have been made a curse, nor die, since the only cause of the
curse and of death is sin, from the which he was free, Luther in Gal. 3.13.
but because he had taken upon him our sins. So Luther.

This Proposition then, Cursed is every one that hangs upon a tree, is a
typical proposition, and contains in it these two truths. 1. That every one
that hangs upon a tree in Judea from the promulgation of that curse until
the Passion of Christ inclusively, is ceremonially accursed, i. e. all that are
hanged shall be infamed with this special infamy, that the carcasses of such,
in case they be not buried before Sunset shall defile the Land. 2. That Christ
in testimony that he redeemed us by beating the moral curse should be hanged
upon a tree.

Est enim propria and destinata. Jun. in Deuteronomy. 21.23. Suspensi propter crimen
capitale, etc. Pisc. obs. in Deuteronomy. 21. Park. de desc. l. 3.
For Christ our Savior by this manner (says Iunius, speaking of hanging upon
the cross) is figured by a ceremony proper, appointed of God and singular, who
as the Apostle excellently delivers, Gal. 3.13. was made a curse for us. They
that were hanged for a capital crime amongst the Israelites typified Christ,
who was to be hanged upon a tree for the sins of the Elect, Piscator, Parker,
in his learned discourse of the Descent of Christ into hell, not only owneth
and uses the distinction of the judicial and moral curse, but says also
that the malediction of the moral Law may be proved by the malediction of the
judicial Law. How far M. Ainsworth, Ainsw. on Exo. 27.1.
who (though the Dialogue often quote him) in this controversy is wholly ours,
is like minded, judge by his ensuing words upon Deuteronomy. 21.23. and here in the
utmost rigor and severity of the Law, God (says he) fore-signified the riches
of his grace toward sinners in Christ, who redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, being made a curse for us, as appeared in that he was hanged upon a tree,
Gal. 3.13.

This premised for the clearing of the Text, let us see, why according to you
the word [Curse] in those words, being made a curse for us, Gal. 3.13. does not
signify the moral and eternal but an outward and temporal curse.

This latter curse is no other then an outward temporary curse; for the text in
Deuteronomy. 21, 22. runs thus, If there be in a man a sin worthy of death, and thou
hang him on a tree, etc. then he that is hanged is the curse of God. What curse
of God is it, that is meant? I answer, that may be discerned by taking notice
of what kind of persons, and for what kind of sin this curse of God does fall
upon any, The persons, the Text describes them thus, namely, he that is put to
death as a Malefactor, by the Magistrate. The kind of sins that are said to
deserve this curse of hanging upon a tree, are described by this general term,
a sin worthy of death, namely of this death; hence it is evident, that not
every sin that deserved death is here meant, but such as deserved a double
death, namely, 1. Stoning to death. 2. Hanging up of their bodies upon a tree,
after they were stoned to death.

then some that were hanged, if they were not hanged were not accursed. Though
the manner of the Jews were to hang up those that were stoned to death, yet we
read not in the Scripture of any that were both stoned and hanged, though we
read of Achan that he was both stoned and burned, but not that he was hanged.
Naboth was stoned but we do not read that he was hanged. The King of Ai was
hanged, but we do not read that he was first stoned, Josh. 8.29. The like we
may observe of Saul's sons, 2 Samuel 29.4. The Gibeonites being Proselytes were
bound to the same laws with the Jews, Exodus 12.49. Those five Kings that were
hanged were first slain (but it is not said they were stoned, nor does any
reason in the text lead so to think) and afterward hanged. Howsoever it is no
consequence, they were great offenders upon whom the ceremonial curse was
inflicted, Deuteronomy. 21.23. Therefore the curse inflicted upon Christ (whom we have
already proved to be the greatest offender, as being imputatively guilty of all
the sins of the elect both hanged upon the cross, and others) was not the
moral curse.

Calvin in Deuteronomy. 21.23. says, That the hanging of Christ upon a tree was not
after the manner that is here spoken of; for such as were stoned to death among
the Jews, were also hanged up upon a gibbet after they were dead.

M. Goodwin and M. Ainsworth from the Hebrew Doctors reckon 18 particular
capital sins, for which men were first stoned to death and after hanged, and
M. Ainsworth does also say, that the Hebrew Doctors do not understand this
hanging of being put to death by hanging, but of hanging a man up after he was
stoned to death, which was done for the greater detestation of such heinous
malefactors.

Ainsworth upon Exo. 12.21. tells us that the Hebrew Doctors say, that all
that were to be stoned death by the Law, were 18. but he does not there say,
that after they were stoned they were hanged; The curse indeed fastened upon
the person hanged, showed the heinousness of sin charged upon the Antitype
as our surety, but that the Jews would not see.
though the Hebrew Doctors say there were 18 sins for which men were stoned and
hanged (not women, see Ainsworth on Deuteronomy. 21.22.) yet Moses does not say so.
Who is ignorant that the Jewish and Roman manner of hanging was (as Calvin
says) diverse? or who denies the manner of the Jews for a long time to be
according to their Doctors writings? but we look at this discourse as
impertinent. It does not appear that hanging by divine institution above all
other punishments pointed out the detestation of the fact. If it did, the
person hanged was so much the fitter to be infamed with that curse, which might
render him a type of the truth in controversy, namely, that Christ who was
hanged upon the tree, was the most heinous Malefactor imputatively.

The rebellious son Deuteronomy. 21.21. is brought in as an instance of this double
punishment, he was first stoned to death, and then hanged upon a tree.



Thou shall not let his carcass remain all night upon the Tree, but thou shall
surely bury him in the same day at the going down of the Sun, and the reason is
added, because he is the cursed of God, namely, because such sinners are more
eminently cursed of God, because they were punished with the heaviest kind of
death that the Judges of Israel did use to inflict upon any Malefactors.

Judea, after this Law given, were thus accursed, without reference to any
other punishment suffered or not. Though hanging of it self concludes the
person accursed, yet not punished with the heaviest kind of death. Stoning and
burning were by the Hebrew Doctors themselves both distinguished from and
accounted heavier then strangling or hanging. See Ainsw. on Exodus 12.21. If
they were dead before they were hanged, they felt not the pain of hanging. All
that were slain before they were hanged were not stoned, Josh. 10.26. If a man
were both stoned and hanged, yet stoning and burning was as heavy, if not a
heavier punishment, of which last execution we read expressly, Josh. 7. but not
so of the first. Even according to the Hebrew Doctors alleged by M. Goodwin
and M. Ainsworth, you may observe some offenses punished with stoning and
burning, not so heinous as some offenses punished by other deaths. Lying with
his daughter in law, or a betrothed maid, was according to them punished with
stoning to death and hanging: whereas lying with his daughter, and that whilst
his wife lived, was punished with burning, and murder was punished with the
sword. Ains. on Exo. 12.21. The reason why such sinners as were hanged were
more eminently cursed of God, then other malefactors, was not because they were
punished with the heaviest kind of death, but for the typical use of this
death.

I think I have sufficiently proved that God did not appoint the hanging upon a
tree to be a type of the temporal curse.



If hanging upon the tree had been appointed by God to be a type of the
eternal curse, then every one that is hanged upon a tree should be eternally
accursed, and then diverse Martyrs that were crucified, as Christ was, are
eternally accursed, and then the penitent thief was eternally accursed.

Neque enim maledictos vocat, ac fi desperata esset little salus, sed quia
maledictionis nota est suspensio. Calv. in 5. lib. Mosis.
for the type as the type could not be the Antitype. Canaan was a type of
heaven, but Canaan was not heaven. Adam in his first sin was a type of Christ
obeying, Romans 5.14. yet Adam was not Christ, nor disobedience obedience. Calvin
often alleged by the Dialogue tells you that the salvation of him that was
hanged upon a tree was not desperate. A person might be ceremonially accursed,
yet everlastingly blessed.

As if it were requisite to the being of a type, or thing signifying, that it
put on the nature of the Antitype, or thing signified, whereas the type as the
type, can no more put on the nature of the Antitype then the adjunct can put
on the nature of the subject.

Adam as a public person disobeying and communicating guilt and punishment to
his seed, was a type, (...).
Romans 5.14. of Christ obeying and communicating righteousness and life unto
his seed. Did then the first Adam put on the nature of the second, and so
become a mediator? or did obedience put on the nature of disobedience? Moses
the Minister of the Law dying before he came into Canaan (as M. Ainsworth
observes on Numb. 20.12.) signified the impotency of the Law to save; was
therefore Moses no instrument of salvation unto any? Cyrus was a type of
Christ, must therefore Cyrus not only be saved, but also put on the nature of a
Mediator, who neither then Isa. 45.4.5. nor afterward for ought that appeared,
believed? Who ever reasoned thus before, that in any measure understood the
nature of a type?

But if the circumstances of the Text be well marked, they will tell you
plainly, that this hanging upon a tree cannot be a type of the eternal curse;
for 1. This Law of Moses must not be understood of putting any man to death by
hanging, but of hanging of a dead body upon a tree after it was first put to
death by stoning: but Christ was crucified whilst he was alive. 2. This
hanging in Moses time was done by the judicial Law and civil Magistrates, and
not by the ceremonial Law nor the Priests. 3. This hanging in Moses was
commanded to be practiced by the Magistrates of the Jews Commonwealth, but the
death which Christ suffered was a Roman kind of death.

Paul who well marked and understood also the Circumstances of the Text,
tells us plainly, Gal. 3.13. that Christ hanging upon the Cross, though by
the Roman power, and also after a Roman manner, was intended in, and proved
out of Deuteronomy. 21.23. The ceremonial curse therefore was laid upon every one
that was judicially hanged upon a tree in Judea, from the time of the giving of
this Law until the time of the passion of Christ, by what lawful authority
soever, or after what manner soever.

The principal scope of this Text is not to command putting to death by
hanging upon a tree (the ground whereof is had elsewhere) but to give a Law
concerning him that is hanged, namely, that he should in any wise be buried
that day, with the reasons thereof annexed.

When the Romans did put Christ to that kind of death which they used to
inflict upon their base fugitive slaves, they made him cursed in his death in
the highest degree they could, and yet at the self-same time Christ did redeem
us from the curse of the Law, even from the eternal curse, because Christ died
not only as a Malefactor by the power of Roman soldiers, but he died also as a
Mediator by his own Mediatoriall obedience.

in the Romans and Jews account, but denies that he died a Malefactor in Gods
account, should not put in that yet Christ died as a Mediator, he could expect
no other but utmost abhorrence from every Christian man, for such a tenet as
did not secretly steal away by subtle sophisms, but openly and before the Sun,
spoil them of their Mediator.

The curse laid upon Christ hanging upon a tree, was not the curse of the
Romans, or a humane but a divine curse, Gal. 3.13. Deuteronomy. 21.23. for he that is
hanged is accursed of God. Christ's death as a Malefactor in the Jews and Romans
account unjustly, was a part, though but a small part of the just punishment of
God inflicted upon him, as the great Malefactor imputatively in Gods account:
Christ died both as a Mediator and as a Malefactor in Gods account. Of his
dying as a Mediator and as a Malefactor in the sense of the Dialogue, See
before, Chapter 10.

This act of Christ was an everlasting act of Mediatoriall obedience, it was no
legal obedience, nor was it any humane act of obedience, as all legal
obedience must be, but it was a supernatural act of obedience, it was no less
then a Mediatoriall oblation, and therefore it was the meritorious procuring
cause of our Redemption from the curse of the Law even at that very same time
when Christ was made a curse for us, by hanging as a Malefactor upon a tree.

This commandment have I received from my Father. Joh. 10.18. He was obedient
to the death, he humbled himself, and became obedient to the death, even the
death of the Cross, Phil. 2.8. He was made under that is, subject to the Law,
Gal. 4.4. and fullfilled the Law, Mat. 5.17. this act of laying down his life
was supernatural, but not only supernatural, it was both divine and humane,
according to both natures, for it was the act and obedience of him who was
God-man, as God-man-Mediator, otherwise it could not have been effectual. This
reasoning is as full of peril, as empty of sound reason.

Therefore the Tree on which Christ was crucified as a Malefactor cannot be the
Altar, neither were the Roman Soldiers the Priests by whom this mediatorial
sacrifice was offered up to God, but it was his own Godhead that was the
Priest, and his own Godhead was the Altar, by which he offered up his soul to
God, a mediatorial sacrifice for the procuring of our redemption from the curse
of the Law.



CHAP. XII. Christ redeemed us not from the curse of the Law, by his
soul-sufferings only. And of the meaning of Haides.
GOod Divines do affirm that Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law,
not by his bodily but by his soul-sufferings only, which God inflicted upon his
soul when his body was crucified upon the Tree.

Willet cen. 5. err. 3. par. 3. q. 3. Cyril. de recta fide ad Theod. Calv.
insti. l. 2. c. 16. sect. 10, 11, 12.
We (says Dr Willet in the name of the Orthodox) say then, that though in the
use and application of Christ's sacrifice, we speak distinctly that Christ's soul
was given for our souls, his flesh for our flesh, as Cyril says, thereby to
set forth the proportion of Gods justice, which must be satisfied with the
price both of body and soul for the redemption of our body and soul, yet we do
not sever nor divide the power and virtue of Christ's sacrifice, but ascribe the
Redemption of our body and soul jointly and equally to the sacrifice of his
body and soul.

This kind of reasoning is very absurd, for as Mr. Broughton well observes,
if Christ suffered the wrath of God in his soul only, to redeem our souls, and
not in his body to redeem our bodies, then our bodies are not redeemed.



If Christ suffered the wrath of God in his soul to redeem our souls from the
eternal curse, he must also suffer the wrath of God in his body to redeem our
bodies from the eternal curse, or else our bodies must still continue under
the eternal curse, though our souls be redeemed by his soul-sufferings: Is not
this to make Christ an imperfect Redeemer, and to leave a doubting conscience
in a Labyrinth of doubts and querg's?

Perkins on the Creed.
Such weapons discovered will turn upon the Author. We believe and have
already affirmed, that Christ suffered the full wrath of God, even the pangs of
hell, both in soul and body; it concerns therefore the Reader to beware of that
Dialogue, and the Author thereof to look to himself, that whilst it says, To
make Christ to suffer the wrath of God only in his soul and not in his body, is
to make him an imperfect Redeemer, and to leave a doubting conscience in a
labyrinth of doubts and quere's, does it self deny Christ to have suffered the
wrath of God either in soul or body. Is not this to make Christ no redeemer,
and to leave a doubting conscience in a labyrinth not of doubts and quere's,
but of despair it self?

The truth is, I find much uncertainty amongst Divines what to affirm in this
point, for first, some affirm that Christ suffered the wrath of God in his soul
only. Secondly, Others affirm that he suffered the wrath of God as well in his
body as in his soul, to redeem our bodies from Gods wrath as well as our souls.



Vrsinus does plainly deny that Christ suffered the pains of the damned in his
body, in Catech. pa. 487. Printed 1611. These pains (says he) he suffered not
in his body, for the sufferings of his body were only external, therefore
(says he) he suffered those pains in his soul; And yet in the same Catechism,
page 487. he affirms, That Christ suffered the wrath of God both in his body
and in his soul, to deliver our souls and bodies from eternal damnation.

Christus corpore and anima sentit totalem Dei iram, explicat. Catechis. part.
2. qu. 37. q. 1. page 256. Idem ibid. qu. 44. page 277.
as you affirm, in so saying, he says the truth, with diverse others, who
distinguish between the pains of those who deserved to be damned, namely, the
Elect, and the pains of the damned, and judiciously resolve that it is better
to say Christ suffered the pains of those who were to be damned according to
their deserts, that is, the essential punishment due unto the Elect for their
sins, then that he suffered the punishment of the damned, part whereof, though
not the substantial but circumstantial, is their total and final separation
from God, sin, despair, duration of the torments for ever, etc. none of which
Christ suffered.

Those Divines that thus interpret the Articles of Christ's descent into hell,
concerning soul-sufferings of Gods wrath, distinguish the sufferings of Christ
into outward, intended by them in those words [he was crucified, dead and
buried] and inward, Nempe omnes poeuae damnatorum his duobus continentur
geueribus, ut aliae pertincant ad corpus, alia ad animam.
intended in those words [he descended into hell] which is a distribution in
respect of the subject, and not of the adjunct, as you mistake, and is as if
they should say, The paenall wrath of God or hell-pains which Christ suffered
were either outward, viz. such as he suffered in body, or inward, viz. such as
he suffered in soul, and this article of his descent into hell signifies his
inward pains, namely, those which he suffered in soul and not in his body.
Vrsin thus intends, and is, and ought to be so understood, and so agrees both
with the truth and with himself.

The like contradiction may be showed in sundry other Authors; Polanus divides
the sufferings of Christ into outward and inward, and he applies his
sufferings of hell torments to his inward soul sufferings only; See his
Substance of Religion, page 141.144.

Vrsin, so you mistake Polanus, the same answer is to be repeated in the same
case. Polanus in opposition to Bellarmine, and some other late Popish Writers,
who teach, that Christ suffered not the wrath of God in his soul, propounds
this question, v. Whether the alone passion and death of the body of Christ was
sufficient punishment for us, and the satisfaction of an infinite price? and
resolves it negatively, proving the satisfactory passion of Christ to be both
outward and inward of both body aad soul, as is plain to the Reader, though
(the nature of the dispute so requiring) he applies himself principally to
prove the soul-sufferings of Christ. You have not yet produced an Orthodox
Author that says Christ suffered the wrath of God in his soul only.

We see but in part and know but in part; God has some truth to bring to light
in every age; the common doctrine of imputation has much obscured the
meritorious price of our redemption and justification.

Woe be to them that put darkness for light, and light for darkness, Isa. 5.20.

Others allege the Article of Christ's Descent, to prove, that Christ suffered
the torments of hell in his soul for our Redemption; but the truth is, the
Article speaks only of his souls passage from his body to Haides, which has a
double lot (when it is applied to the souls departed) a place of joy and a
place of torment, so that all souls both good and bad go to Haides as soon as
they are separated from the body: the bad do go to the place of torment in
Haides, and the good go to the place of pleasure in Haides; therefore seeing
Christ was a good man, even the Holy One of God, he must needs go to the place
of pleasure in Haides, even to the Paradise, Luke 23.43. and that Haides does
comprehend in it a double lot (as Britain does comprehend England and Scotland)
is evident by the use of the Greek word in sundry Greek Authors, and according
to this sense M. Robert Wilmot has expounded this Article, wherein he does
also approve of the judgment of M. Broughton in his Exposition of this Article.

(...) Sym. Apos. (...). Sym. Atha. Nempe quia essentia illorum est per se
(...), and status (...), and locus (...). Jun. cont. 2. l. 4. c. 14.
though the Orthodox sense of it is taught therein clearly and plentifully. The
Learned observe above threescore Creeds of the most ancient Councels and
Fathers, that want this clause, and amongst them the Nicene Creed. The Article
of the Creed says not that Christ descended into Haides but into Hades. It is
true, that Haides in respect of its Etymology is used in a large signification
by both divine and secular Authors, for an invisible place and condition, and
in this sense it is applicable to all souls departed whether good or bad,
because the Being, State, and Place of both are invisible to us.

The Author of the Dialogue perceiving the large use of the word, very
unwarrantably ventures to say the Article of the Creed speaks only of his souls
passage from his body to Haides: Sciendum sane est, quod in Ecclesiae Romanae
symbolo non habetur additum, de scendit ad inferos, sed neque in orientis
Ecclesiis habetur hic sermo, vis tamen verbi eadem videtur esse in eo quod
sepultus dicitur.
For

1. The word in the Creed is doubtless to be interpreted according to some
sense wherein it is used in the Scripture, where it is taken for the grave,
Act. 2.27. for hell Rev. 20.13, 14. but never in this sense used by the
Dialogue,

2. From the incongruity of the words so understood; It were not proper to say
he descended, but he ascended into the place of joy, viz. the celestial
Paradise.

Lastly, the Ancients though they knew the large use of the word Hades, yet did
not take it in the Creed according to the exposition of the Dialogue. Ruffinus
says, directly that these words, He descended into hell, are not found in the
Creed of the Roman Church, nor used in the Churches of the East, and if they
be, that then they signify the burial of Christ.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Dialogues arguments taken from the description of the
torments of hell; and from the place of suffering the torments of the damned.
BY describing the torments of hell you shall be the better able to judge
whether Christ did suffer the torment of hell for our Redemption, or not. The
torments of hell are usually divided into two paerts. 1. Into the pain of
less. 2. Into the pain of sense. The pain of loss is the privation of Gods
favor, by a everlasting separation.

is to be attended to concerning descriptions (which are imperfect definitions)
A little error in the beginning, in a short time becomes a great one, Error
definiendi exiguus, brevi fit ingens.
and increases as the Dispute increases.

Pain of loss and Pain of sense make up the torments of hell. Pain of loss
then being but a part of the curse or punishment, the part is to be
distinguished according to the whole, as the punishment is taken either
essentially for such executions of justice as flow from the curse, as such,
viz. the not enjoying of ought of the good of the promises, and the suffering
of all the substantial positive evil of the curse, without any respect unto
the condition of the Patient, or accidentally for such executions of justice as
are inseparable concomitants of the state of the damned, yet flow not from the
simple nature of the curse, but in respect of the condition of the patient,
viz. total and final separation from God, etc. of which often above.

The Favor of God is taken largely for the effects of his common bounty; so
the wicked are for their sin separated from the favor of God; or it is taken
properly for the special love of God, namely Election: so the wicked cannot be
said to be separated from him: the Legal discovenanting of the Reprobate for
their sin which they have committed, is the effect of justice; that being
discovenanted they fall into the bottomless pit, is also an effect of justice;
but totality and finality of their disunion with God without recovery by the
covenant of grace, is a consequent of Reprobation.

This premised, the error of the description is manifest, which holds only
concerning the pain of loss, as it is an accidental part of punishment, and
belongs to the Reprobate, but not as it is of the essence of punishment, in
which sense it is only true of Christ.

The description of the pain of loss, viz. that it is the privation of Gods
favor by an eternal Separation, is untrue, imperfect, and impertinent.

First, It is untrue, because

1. It affirms a privation of Gods favor, where Gods favor never was, which
is as if we should in Logic suppose a privation where never was an habit.

2. Because it supposes Gods not loving i. e. his hatred of Reprobation to be
an effect of justice (for pain of loss is an effect of justice) whereas
Reprobation is an act of Lordship not of Justice.

Secondly, It is imperfect, leaving out the privation of the good of the
promises, wherein consists the pain of loss essentially and principally.

Thirdly, It is impertinent holding only (as we saw before) concerning the pain
of loss accidentally but not essentially; though this last be the only and
very question between us.

This description of the Dialogue laid as a foundation of the following
Discourse, being overthrown, what we shall find built thereupon must needs
fall with it; which before we proceed unto, it may be seasonable here to
present the Reader with a true description of the pain of loss in stead of this
erroneous description of the Author.

The pain of loss taken essentially, is an universal privation of the
fruition of the good of the promise.

The pain of loss taken essentially and circumstantially is the universal
privation of the fruition of the good of the promise, together with the total
and final absence of those good things which flow not from the curse as such,
but are effects of justice upon the damned, in respect of the condition of the
Patient, viz. disunion with God, privation of his image in the soul, and
desperation.

For as the favor of God through Christ is the fountain of life, because it is
the beginning of eternal life, Psa 36.9. so on the contrary to be totally
separated from Gods favor by an eternal separation, must needs be the
beginning of hell torments or of death eternal.



God does not forsake the Reprobates so long as they live in this life, with
such a total forsaking, as he does after this life: yea, the very Devils,
themselves as long as they live in this world (being Spirits) in the air, are
not so forsaken of God as they shall be at the day of judgment; for as yet
they are not in hell, but in this air, and therefore they have not their full
torments as yet.

whether men or devils in this life, or in the air, are always hated of God.
Gods love and hatred are eternal and immutable.

Vide Pisc. in 2 Pet. 2.4.
The devils being deprived of the image of God after which they were created,
and being under a degree of eternal death, in respect of their malice, final
despair, and present sufferings in part, their condition doubtless is rather a
condition of death then of life.

The Dialogue needlessly here ventureth to tell us that the devils are not in
hell, though Peter says, God cast them down to hell, and John tells us, Rev.
20.3. that the devil was bound a thousand years, and cast into the bottomless
pit, the same word with that which is used by the Legion of devils concerning
the place they feared, when they besought Christ, that he would not command
them thither, Luke 8.31.

And yet this pain of loss may a little further be explained by opening the
term Second death, which may be in part described by comparing it with the
first death, which I have at large described to be our spiritual death, or a
loss of the life of our first pure nature, I may call it a death in corrupt
and sinful qualities, as I have opened, Genesis 2.17. yea, all other miseries
which fall upon us in this life till our bodies be rotten in the grave, I call
them altogether the first death, because they do all befall us in this world;
therefore on the contrary the second death must needs imply a deeper degree of
sinful qualities then did befall us under the first death.

Mat. 10.28. seems rather to oppose it to the death of the body by its
separation from the soul, as also the coherence, Rev. 2.13. and 20.6, 14. And
if the first death is taken for death in sin; and the full measure of sin, as
the Dialogue speaks, be included in the second death, the opposition lies
rather between a bodily death and eternal death, then between the first and
second death, for so far the first and second death are as two degrees of the
same death, not two kinds of death; whereas bodily death and eternal death
are two kinds of death. Yea forasmuch as eternal death follows bodily
death, and bodily death follows death in sin, there would then be three
deaths, viz. death in sin, death of the body, and death of the body and soul in
hell, and so it should be called the third, not the second death.

And thus this very term Second death does plainly tell us that it is such a
degree of death as surpasses all the degrees of death in this life, and that
the full measure of it cannot be inflicted upon any man till this life is
ended, and then their end shall be without mercy, Jam. 2.13.

i.e. of regeneration, whereby the second death is only prevented.

Though for these and other reasons the paenall wrath of God, viz. eternal
death be inflicted after bodily death, yet it thence follows not that the
paenall wrath of God cannot be inflicted but according to this order (which is
the scope of the Dialogue in this discourse) for order of succession is not of
the essence of punishment. Again, the reasons that require this order in the
Reprobates in inflicting paenall wrath upon the damned, have no place
concerning Christ. Add hereunto, that according to extraordinary dispensation,
some of the Reprobates, namely, those that shall be found alive immediately
before the Judgment, 1 Cor. 15.51. shall suffer eternal death without any
separation of the soul from the body, so as eternal death which is a final
separation of the soul and body from God, being opposed to natural death which
is a separation of the soul from the body, is not necessarily a second death,
no, not in the Reprobates.

The second part of the tormentt of hell is the pain of sense, or the sense of
all torturing torments.

Fallacia compositionis and div sionis.
otherwise the Question intending that which is essential only, but the
description including both that which is essential and accidental, is apt to
deceive the Reader by a fallacy, for the better preventing whereof, as before
the Reader had a description of the pain of loss, so let him here if he please
take along with him this description of the pain of sense.

The pain of sense taken essentially is the infl^cting of all the substantial
positive evil of the curse flowing from it as such without any respect to the
condition of the patient.

The pain of sense taken essentially and accidentally superaddeth unto the
essential punishment forementioned, the suffering of such positive punishments
as were concomitant effects of justice in respect of the disposition of the
patient, viz. the evil of sin, desperation, duration of the pains for ever, etc.

As Gods rejection is the principal efficient cause of their damnation, so
Jesus Christ the Mediator is the principal isntrumental cause thereof,
because they believed not in him that was promised to be the seed of the woman.



Now come we to examine the particulars, and whether Christ did suffer these
torments of hell for our Redemption. 1. Did Christ suffer these torments of
hell for our Redemption? Did Christ suffer the second death? Was he spiritually
dead in corrupt and sinful qualities without any restraining grace? and did
God leave him to the liberty of these corrupt and sinful qualities, to hate
and blaspheme God, for his justice and holiness, as inseparable companions of
Gods total separation? for these sinful qualities are inseparably joined to
them that suffer hell torments, as the effect is to the cause. Did Christ
suffer this pain of loss when he said, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me?



There are that deny that the damned sin, whom though I see not why to
consent unto therein, yet it concerned such a Questionist (though that being
done, his work had still been to do) to have satisfied their objections by the
way. The sinful qualities of the damned proceed not from hell torments as an
effect from the cause; Parker de descensu. lib 3.
the torments of hell are an effect and execution of justice, whereof God is
the Author; sinful qualities are a defect not an effect; therefore have a
deficient not an efficient cause, therefore of them God cannot be the Author:
to to say the contrary, were to say, God is the Author of sin, which is high
blasphemy: Sinful qualities are of the circumstantiall not of the substantial
part of punishment, which is manifest. 1. Because God is the Author of
punishment essentially, but he is not the author of sin. 2. Christ suffered
the essential punishment, but was without sin. 3. The Elect sin, yet suffer
not the punishment due to sin, otherwise they should be both elected and not
elected, and in the conclusion both saved and damned.

In that Proposition, God punishes sin with sin, the futurition of sin is to
be distinguished from sin it self, the infallible and paenall futurition of sin
is an effect of justice. Sin as sin is not an effect of justice but a defect in
man.

Though the separation of the damned from God is total and final, yet the
separation or rather desertion of Christ was partial and temporal, in respect
of the sense of the favor of God, and only for a time.

Separatio quoad substantiam, and quoad sensum. Wilict cen. 5. err. 3. par. 9.
q. 3. 1141.
There are two kinds of paenall desertion or forsaking; one is only in part and
for a time, so Christ was forsaken; the other is total and final, so the
Reprobates in hell are forsaken. Total separation from God is not of the
essence of the curse, Genesis 2.17. Otherwise the Elect whilst elect could not be
ministerially obnoxious to the Curse.

In a word, we must carefully keep in mind the distinction between the
essential part, and the circumstantiall part of the punishment of sin, Christ
suffered the former, not the latter. Defects says Damasoone are either simply
miserable, or detestable and vicious, Christ suffered the former not the
latter. When our Lord Jesus Christ that man of sorrows cried out upon the
Cross, My God, My God, Austin. Damascen. Jun. cont. 2. l. 4. c. 5.
why have thou forsaken me? he suffered the pain of loss, understanding
always thereby the substantial not the circumstantial pain of loss.

Did Christ at any time feel the gnawing worm of an accusing conscience? Was he
at any time under the torment of desperation? truly if he had at any time
suffered the tormets of hell, he must of necessity have suffered these things:
Tho. par. 3. q. 46. art. 6. Perk. de desc. l. 3. n. 53. Willet cen. 5. err. 3.
par. 6. q. 3. 1129. Neque enim in eo, questionis hujus cardo vertitur an
inhaesive, verum an imputative tantum peccatis nostris pollu us Christus
dicendus sit Dialogu.
for they are as nearly joined to those that suffer the torment of hell as the
effect is to the cause.

If Christ (says D Willet) truly bare our sins, he sustained also the grief of
conscience for them, which is the inseparable companion of our sin. The
question is not, Whether Christ be polluted with our sin inherently, but only
whether he may be said to be polluted with our sin imputatively. Desperation is
not of the essence, but accidental, in paenal wrath, The rest is but a
repetition of what was said, and also answered a little before.

Did Christ suffer the torments of hell in the proper place of hell? seeing
none can suffer the torments of hell as long as they live in this world, none
can suffer the second death till after this life is ended.



As the Manhood of Christ was partaker of the joys of heaven out of the place
of heaven (if not at other times, as Luk 9.28. yet) after the Resurrection; so
might it suffer the pains of hell out of the place of hell. The prison is no
part of the essential debt. The most Popish enemies of Christ's soul-sufferings
of the wrath of God (whilst, though in their erroneous asserting the local
descent, they affirm an actuality concerning Christ's being in the place of hell
without the pains of hell,) cannot with any reason deny a possibility of being
in the pains of hell without the place of hell.

Vide Rivet ^athol. orth. ^o. 1. tract. ^. q. 60.
Christ was in a paenall hell, not in a local hell; the distinction between a
paenall hell and a local hell is nor only acknowledged unto this day by the
Orthodox, but was long ago taught by sundry of the Learned and sounder
Schoolmen.

The dispensation of God is either extraordinary or ordinary: according to the
ordinary dispensation of God, the full pains of hell are not suffered in this
life; but according to the extraordinary dispensation of God, Christ not only
could but did suffer the pains of hell in this life. Many Reprobate suffer the
pains of hell here in a degree. The Reprobate, as was said before, that shall
be found alive, 1 Cor. 15.51. shall pass into the pains of hell without any
separation of the soul from the body.

Did Christ suffer the torments of hell in his body as well as in his soul, to
redeem our bodies as well as our souls from the torments of hell?



August. de Civit. Dei. l. 21. c. 10.
All the flames of hell are not corporeal and material, witness that fire
wherein the rich man was tormented, such as his eyes and tongue were, such was
the flame, Luke 16.23, 24. Willet. syn. 20. genesis cont. qu. 3. par. 4.
Those flames of hell which torment the bodies of the damned (though justly
acknowledged to be material) are material after a spiritual manner. They
therefore are not to be heard who object against Christ's suffering hell-pains
in his body, because there was no visible instrument of such bodily pain.

If any say his bodily pains were not equal to the bodily pains of them that
are in hell, that being granted to them therein which they are unable to prove,
it is sufficient to integrate and make up the execution of the full measure of
wrath upon Christ, that if his bodily torments were not equal to the bodily
torments of the damned, yet what was not executed upon his body, was executed
upon his soul. The measure of hell-pains is made up without bodily pains in the
Angels that fell, and if happily some minds labor concerning the capacity of
the soul of a mere man, to hold such a measure of torment, they may remember
that the soul of Christ who is both God and Man is above that objection,
exceeding the capacity of all Men and Angels by reason of his personal union.

How long did he suffer the torments of hell? was it for ever? or how long did
he suffer them? and when did the torments of hell first seize on him? and when
was be found freed from them? or did he suffer the torments of hell at several
times or in several places, or but at one time or place only?

Gal. 3.13. and in the garden, Mat. 26. though his sufferings in the garden and
upon the Cross, are the principal, and therefore called the Passion
emphatically, yet the rest of his sufferings from his conception unto his
passion are integral parts thereof, that is, such without which his passive
obedience is not completed,

He was freed from them at his death, Job. 19.30. he was freed from the
sensible part of his sufferings at his death, from sufferings simply at his
Resurrection.

That Christ suffered the torments of hell is revealed, which is the question,
though many circumstances of time and place are not revealed. These are
impertinent and captious quere's.

Was he tormented without any forgiveness, or did Abraham deny him the least
drop of water to cool his tongue?

Romans 8.32. Mat. 26.39. but God gave him a discharge when the debt was paid,
Isa. 53.10. Col. 2.14. He had not then so much as the least drop of water to
ease him of the least particle of suffering due unto him according to justice,
but was wholly forsaken in respect of any participation of the sense of the
good of the promise for the time, Mat. 27.46.

Did Christ inflict the torments of hell upon his own humane nature? was his
Divine nature angry with his humane nature? or did his Divine nature forsake
his humane nature in anger? as it must have done if it had suffered the
torments of hell; if so, then he destroyed the personal union of his two
natures, and then he made himself no Mediator but a cursed damned sinner.

torments of hell upon the humane nature. All the works of the Trinity upon the
creature, whereof this is one, Isa. 53.10. Mat. 26.31. are undivided, that is,
they are wrought by all the persons jointly. In this consideration also the
divine nature was angry not only with the humane nature, but with the person of
the Mediator, because of sin imputed to him, and forsook him with a temporal
and partial desertion. But hence in no ways follows the dissolution of the
personal union; as the body and soul of Christ separated one from the other
continued in personal union, so the soul and body separated from all
participation of the good of the promise for the while, were without
dissolution of the Personal Union.

The execution of the evil of the curse denies communion but not union with
God. The evil of the commination denounced and incurred, as touching our legal
obnoxiousnesse thereunto, dissolveth not the union of the Elect with God in the
everlasting covenant of grace, nor does the denouncing, incurring the danger,
and undergoing of the punishment dissolve the union of the election of Christ,
Isa. 42.1. much less does it dissolve the personal union.

The Second Person considered as subsisting in personal union with the
manhood, Mediatio proprie and analogice. Wolleb.
and as Mediator is properly Christ, and so though the manhood only suffered,
yet the Person that suffered being God-man the person of the Mediator, and
consequently the Divine nature by way of voluntary dispensation was subject to
the Divine nature considered absolutely and in it self.

These and such like gross absurdities the common doctrine of imputation will
often fall into.

any absurdities or inconveniences has (we hope) been sufficiently cleared,
That such and the like unworthy aspersions wherewith the great doctrine of
imputation, through the grace of Christ generally received amongst all that are
worthy to be called Christians, and therefore truly (though not without
appearance of too much irreverence) by this discorse called [Common] is
frequently and ignorantly blasphemed in the Dialogue, may be shook off, as Paul
shook off the viper. so as the [Common] doctrine of imputation may hereby shine
more gloriously, as a part of the [Common faith] Tit. 1.4. is the further
blessing of God,

That the Author of this Treatise may arise not only out of those absurdities,
but also out of those heresies into which the Dialogue shows him to be
fallen, is and shall be our prayers, and the rather are we encouraged that God
will have mercy upon him herein, because we hope he did it ignorantly and
through an erring conscience.

Christ could not suffer any part of the Torments of hell as long as he lived
in this world, because the very devils as long as they live in this air do not
suffer the torments of hell, as it is evident by the fearful crying out to
Christ, Mat. 8.29.

Mat. 8.29. yet how can he that reads Jam. 2.19. 2 Pet, 3.4. Jude 6. deny the
torments of hell to be inflicted in part upon them before the day of judgment:
the cause why the devils suffer not the torments of hell fully or in part, is
not because they are in the air, but from the wise dispensation of God. But why
the Author of the Dialogue who thinks the place of hell to be on high before
the Throne of the Lamb, yea, so near to the place of the blessed, as that the
blessed and damned may talk together, should look at the air as a privileged
place from torment, or as incapable to become a place of torment, I see no
color of reason; The rest is but a repetition of what has been said before
and answered before.

Broughton in a Manuscript says thus: No words in all the Bible do express
any thing, that Christ suffered the wrath of God for our sins, therefore it is
no small impiety for men from general metaphorical terms to gather such a
strange particular: none that ever spoke Greek (Spirit or man) gathered hell
torments for the just from Haides, or from any other Greek or Hebrew Text.
Again, the same Author affirms in Rev. 11.7, that hell-place and torments
are not in this life.



Though the place of the damned who suffer the wrath of God be included in
Haides, taken in its largest signification both by divine and secular authors,
as any that know not already may soon if they please inform themselves: yet
that ever any Orthodox indifferently-learned writer, thence gathered hell
torments for the just, I do not believe is any where extant, except in that
Manuscript or the Dialogue.

We acknowledge readily the gifts of God in M. Broughton, and that he was an
excellent Linguist, yet we do not believe that Greek and Hebrew dwelt with him.
Isaiah speaking Hebrew by the Spirit of God tells us that Christ suffered the
wrath of God, Chap. 53. the like does Paul speaking Greek from the same spirit,
2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13. Doubtless Isaiah could speak Hebrew, and Paul (who
spoke with tongues more then they all) could speak Greek as well, and the
Spirit of God by which they both spoke, could speak both Hebrew and Greek
better then M. Broughton. Sure, the Author is not of his mind whom Erasmus
observes to have said openly, that Paul was ignorant of the Greek Grammar.

And truly it seems to me that the holy Scriptures do confine hell torments to
the proper place of hell it self, which is seated on high before the Throne of
the Lamb, Rev. 14.10. and Solomon does tell us, that all men's souls both good
and bad do ascend, Eccl. 3.21. and the Hebrew Doctors hold generally that hell
is above as well as heaven: and Learned M. Richardson does probably conjecture
in his Philosophical Annotations on Genesis 1. that hellplace is seated in the
Element of fire, and why may it not be so, seeing its place is next before the
Throne of the Lamb where John does place it, Rev. 14.10. And it is certain by
Lukes Parable that hell is seated near unto heaven, or else the comparisons
that Luke uses to describe their neernesse, were absurd.

1. He describes their neernesse by two persons talking together, the one in
heavenplace, and the other in hellplace.

2. He describes their neernesse by seeing each others case, Luke 16. and so
does Isaiah in cha. 66.24.

3. Hence we may see the reason why Haides is put as a common name to both
places; both places are usually called Haides in sundry Greek Writers, as if
they were but two Regions in the same world of souls: one Region for the godly,
and the other for the wicked, where the godly and the wicked may see each
others condition, and talk together in their next adjacent parts, Luke 16.23.

not in the ordinary place of punishment: It has now been often and again said,
the place of punishment is not of the essence of punishment; Joab suffered
death though he suffered not in the common place of execution.

You may read in Pemble that in Eccl. 3.21. Pemble on the place.
to be the speech of an Atheist against the assertion of the immortality of the
soul, and principally both of the felicity and immortality of the souls of good
men; For whereas (says the Athiest) men talk of an immortal soul of man, which
severed from the body ascends up to heaven, and that the soul of a bruit beast
descends downward, that it falls and perishes together with the body; they
do but speak by guess, who knows it? who ever saw it? what Anatomist can find
it out? The opposition then herein intended by the Athiest, lies not between
the spirit of a beast, and the soul of man in general, but between the soul of
a beast, and the soul of such men, which severed from their bodies ascend up to
heaven, that is, godly men, whose spirits return to God that gave them, Eccles.
12.7. Vide Pisc. in utrumque locum.
If the ascending of the spirit be extended unto the souls of the wicked, which
upon their departure are (by some) thought immediately to ascend unto the place
wherein God passes judgment upon them, which done, they are delivered unto
the hands of evil Angels to be carried forthwith into hell, which they judge to
be below. This helps not you.

The place appointed for the sufferings of the damned is in the Scripture
called hell, Mat. 5.22. a Furnace of fire, Mat. 13.42. The place of torment,
Luke 16.38. A prison. 1 Pet. 3.19. A bottomless pit, Rev. 9.1. A Lake of fire,
Rev. 20.15. A Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21.8. some of
which appellations argue that it is below, not on high, but the very place is
not revealed.

I spare to recite the variety of the opinionss of the Learned concerning the
place of hell, with such reasons as are most probable, not looking at it as
pertinent to the controversy. To search out the place of hell, it not being
revealed in the word, is curiosity; to labor according to what is written that
we may not come in that place of torment, is our duty.

If hell were in Aristotle's Element of fire (the very being of which sounder
Philosophy denies) yet if you hearkened either to the learned Philosophers or
Mathematicians who distinguish the heaven of the blessed, and this inferior
Universe into the visible and invisible world, and teach us, that there is a
most vast (and unto the unlearned incredible) distance between the supposed
Element of fire, and the first mover (what then is the distance beeween it and
the heaven of heavens) you would not think that the blessed and damned could
see and talk with one another.

Similitudo seu Parabola adaequetur principali scopo and intentioni
declarantis, atque extra hanc non extendatur. Keck. log. l. 1. sect. post. c.
4. Calv. in Lu. 16.23
Your arguing the nearness of heaven and hell from the conference of Abraham
and Dives in the Parable, argues that the rule of interpreting Parables was
not attended by you herein, namely, that a similitude or Parable is to be
understood according to the principal scope and intention of the Author, and
not to be extended beyond it.

The comparisons of the Scripture abused, vexed, and strained beyond the scope
intended, have been the beginning and strengthening of many errors and too many
heresies.

Calvin tells you, That Christ by sensible figures does here describe
spiritual things, Souls (says he) have not fingers, eye, nor do they feel
thirst (I may add) neither have they tongues to be tormented with flames, but
the sum is, Rest is prepared for the souls of the faithful departed, and
torment for the souls of the Reprobate.

It cannot seem much, that he who forbeareth not to charge the Evangelists
comparison to be absurd, except it bear his absurd Expositions, does so
frequently burden the doctrine of the generation of the godly both learned and
unlearned, concerning the imputation of sin unto Christ (being contrary to him)
with absurd consequences.

I omit that the sentence of condemnation is passed in the sight of Christ,
Angels, and the Saints. The sight of Angels and Spirits is intellectual, seeing
their objects by intelligible species, not sensible seeing their objects by
sensible species, as our bodily eyes see sensible objects. The damned see
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven, Luk 13.28 not sensibly but
mentally.

Christ in respect of his Divinity is present every where, and the humane by
virtue of its Personal union, not only excels the understanding of Angels,
but is also capable of seeing in the Divine nature whatever is thereby
presented unto it in a more excellent manner, then if it saw it in its proper
object.

The word [Throne] is not in the Text, Rev. 14.10. but it is your addition
happily to make your notion the more plausible.

Of Haides we have spoken sufficiently before.

It is evident that Christ did not suffer the torments of hell in this world,
because there was no necessary use or end of such sufferings, for such
sufferings are no way satisfactory to the justice of God for our sins: for the
rule of Gods justice does require that soul only to die which sins, the soul
that sins shall die; one man shall not die for another man's sin, Ezekiel, 18. By
this rule of justice God cannot inflict the torments of hell upon an innocent
to redeem a guilty person.

Romans 5.18. noting an obedience satisfactory, according to order of justice.
And we read that he gave his life a ransom for many, Mat. 20.28. a ransom
for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. that is, a sufficient price for our deliverance from the
curse. He did not only suffer for our good, but in our place and stead; to this
purpose we read that he redeemed his people, and that we have redemption
through his blood, Luke 1.68. and 2.38. Heb. 9.12. Col. 1.14. Heb. 9.15. which
words note a just and satisfactoty price laid down for our sins, therefore
necessary, that remission of sins might be without any prejudice to the truth
and justice of God.

Paul tells us that God has set forth Christ to be a propitiation, Romans
3.25. The word is observed to signify a just and propitiatory expiation of sin.

Ezekiel. 18.20. argues for, not against the justice of the death of Christ, The
soul that sins shall die, Good: Man sinned, ergo man died. Christ was a
sinner imputatively, though not inherently, and the soul that sins whether
inherently or imputatively shall die.

Mors animae absoluta vel bypothetica.
The death of the soul is either absolute, so none die but such as are
inherently guilty; or Hypothetical, viz. Cautionary, in way of a Surety, that
undertakes for the satisfaction of justice: so Christ suffered death. Mors non
conditionis sed criminis. Park. l. 3. n. 87. Willet. cont. 5. Err. 3. part. 3.
quaest. 3.
Austin calls it a death not of condition but of crime: It is clear according
to this Text, that every one shall bear his own iniquity. Who sees not (says
Dr Willet) that the Prophet makes exception of the person of the Mediator,
for the Scripture testifies of him, that he bare our iniquities, Isa. 53.11.
Therefore as he bare our sins in himself, so also in Gods justice he was to
bear the punishment for the same.

Yet neither according to this Rule nor any other Rule of justice can either
the torments of hell or any other, no, not the least punishment be inflicted
upon a person simply innocent. Christ though he was innocent in himself, yet he
was not innocent as our Surety until the guilt imputed to him was satisfied for.

It is no way repugnant to the justice of God, says Vrsinus, and after him
Paraeus, that a person innocent in himself should die for the sin of another,
upon such conditions as were mentioned Chap. 3.

And as God does tie himself to this Rule of justice touching the everlasting
state of men's souls, so he does appoint civil Magistrates to observe this Rule
of justice touching the bodiet of sinful Malefactors, they may not punish an
innocent for a guilty person, but that man only that sins must die, as 2 Kin.
14. does expound the meaning of the judicial Law. in Deuteronomy. 24.16. I hold it a
point of gross injustice for any Court of Magistrates to torture an innocent
person for the redemption of a gross Malefactor.

Deuteronomy. 24.16. The fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither
shall the children be put to death for the fathers. Every man shall be put to
death for his own sin. But we must here distinguish between an inherent
judicial guilt, and an extrinsecal judicial guilt: if Thomas be judicially
guilty of a capital crime inherently, though Peter be guiltless thereof
inherently, yet if he be guilty thereof extrinsecally, it seems to be no
injustice for the Magistrate in case to put Peter to death for Thomas his crime.

In some cases, says D. Willet, Willet cen. 5. genesis cont. 20. part. 7. qu. 3.
by the Law of God the surety gave life for life, as the Prophet shows unto
Ahab by this Parable, A man was taken in battle and committed to another to
keep, under this condition, If he be lost, thy life shall go for his life, or
else thou shall pay a Talent of silver: A price of equal value to his life
that went away. But in the application of this Parable, the Prophet leaves out
the Talent because God cannot be waged with money, and says unto Ahab
precisely, thy life shall go for his life, 1 Kin. ^0.39.42. The justice whereof
Ahab himself (not yet considering it to be his own case) readily acknowledges
and pronounces sentence accordingly, ver, 40.

Hostages or pledges, whose lives with their consenr are legally engaged for
the security of the faith of that state whereof they are members, may lawfully
be put to death, in case the state, whose fidelity they are to secure, break
their faith; for the consequence or inconsequence of securing or not securing
the fidelity of States, is a greater good or evil then the life or death of a
pledge.

Besides that, the part owes it self unto the preservation of the whole. That
this position is subscribed unto by the common consent of Nations, may be
gathered from their carriages concerning and executions of Hostages, diverse of
which though they may be disputable or blameable, yet they all serve to be
founded on this general truth, namely, that there are cases wherein a pledge
though innocent in himself, yet guilty by the legal contract of the violation
of the state upon himself, may be justly put to death. The people of Spain
howsoever inclined to join with with the Romans against the Carthaginians, Tit.
Livij hist. lib. 22. and lib. 24.
yet durst not for fear they should lament the guilt of their defection in the
blood of their sons then pledges in Hannibals custody,

The Romans put to death the pledge of Tarentum for making an unlawful escape
out of custody.

Keepers of prisons engaged to the Commonwealth that the prisoners shall be
forthcoming to satisfy justice in case of the escape of the prisoners through
their default, though the fault be in it self inconsiderable, yet by reason of
the circumstances may justly be put to suffer the punishment due to such an
offender escaped, and that the Romans thought so may well be collected from
Act. 12.19. though Herod's command in that place is unjust.

He that is legally guilty of a capital crime, the Civil Magistrate may justly
put to death; but a person though inherently guiltless, yet extrinsecally and
judicially guilty of a capital crime, is legally guilty of a capital crime.
Therefore a person inherently guiltless and innocent, but extrinsecally and
judicially guilty may be put to death.

Neither do Histories afford instances only in public, but also in personal
cases wherein the surety has suffered the punishment of another, and by so
suffering delivered the person suffered for, and that not only in inferior
grievances, Quint. Declam. 5. and 9. Idem, Declam. 6.
but even in the matter of life it self. Quintilian makes mention of one friend
that redeemed another by vice-labour, i. e. by doing that servile work in his
friends stead, which he was to have done l and in another place, of a son that
redeemed his father by vice-handywork, that is, by doing with his own hands
that work which his father was to have done. Cham. de desecnsu. l. 5. c. 21.
Greg. lib. Dial. c. 37. referente Estio. 1 Jo. 3.16.
And Chamier reports out of others of one Paulicus Nolanus, who enslaved
himself unto the King of the Vandals for the redemption of a certain widows
son, Gregory tells us of one Sanctulus a Presbyter that offered himself to be
beheaded for a certain Deacon that was to be put to death by the Longobards.

I dare almost say (says Grotius, Caterum ubi consensus, etc. Grotius de
satisfacti-Christ. c. 6.
a man excelling in this kind of learning) that where there is consent there
is not any of all those whom we call Pagans who would esteem it unjust that one
should be punished for the delinquency of another.

And this distinction of the souls case from the bodies case may sufficiently
serve as an answer to M. Reynolds who does labor to justify the imputation of
our sins unto our innocent Savior in Psa. 110. p. 444. 445.



M, Reynolds distinguishes between inherent and imputative guilt, and
concludes Christ was guilty imputatively, that is, obnoxious unto the
punishment that others had deserved.

Ursin. expos. Catech. p. 1. qu. 13. Paraeus in Romans cap. 5. Dub. 5. Mr
Reynolds on Psa. 110. page 446.
The arguments whereby he proves that Christ (though inherently innocent) might
be guilty imputatively, and suffer the punishment that others had deserved,
they that please to examine shall find solid and in effect much the same with
what Vrsin and Paraeus had taught before.

Were there place for this distinction concerning any other subject, yet it
holds not concerning Christ who was guilty imputatively (though not inherently
and in himself) which has been proved in its proper place before.

PART II.
SECTION I.
Wherein the Dialogue pretends to prove I. That Christ has redeemed us from
the Curse of the Law (not by suffering the said curse for us, but) by a
satisfactory price of Atonement, namely, by paying or performing unto his
Father that invaluable precious thing of his Mediatorial obedience whereof his
Mediatorial sacrifice of Atonement was the masterpiece. II. A sinners
Righteousness or Justification is explained and cleared from some Common
Errors.


CHAP. I. Of the nature of Mediatorly obedience, both according to the Dialogue
and the Orthodox.
THat which Christ did to redeem us from the curse of the Law, was not by
bearing of the said curse really in our stead (as the common doctrine of
imputation does teach) but by procuring his Fathers atonement by the invaluable
price or performance of his own Mediatoriall obedience whereof his Mediatoriall
sacrifice of atonement was the finishing masterpiece, this kind of obedience
was that rich thing of price which the Father required and accepted as
satisfactory for the procuring of his atonement for our full Redemption,
Justification and Adoption.



And according to this tenor the Apostle Paul does explain the matter, he does
teach us to place the obedience of the Mediator in a direct opposition to the
first disobedience of Adam Romans 5.19. he makes the merit of Christ's
Mediatoriall obedience to countervail the demerit of Adams disobedience: for
the disobedience of Adam was but the disobedience of a mere man, but the
obedience of Christ was the obedience of God-man, and in that respect God the
Father was more highly pleased with the obedience of the Mediator, then he was
displeased with the disobedience of Adam.

Adam and obedience of the second, are opposites, these opposites are compared
in respect of some things wherein they are alike, viz. Both are public
persons, both communicate what is theirs to their seed respectively; and some
things wherein they are unlike, viz. 1. In respect of their efficacy, the
obedience of Christ is more potent to communicate the good of his obedience
unto his, then the disobedience of Adam is able to communicate the evil of his
disobedience unto his. 2. In respect of the effect, the disobedience of Adam in
eating the forbidden fruit makes his seed guilty only of that first act of
disobedience, but the obedience of Christ discharges believers which are his
seed, not only from the guilt of that one act of the disobedience of Adams sin,
but also from the guilt of all other disobedience both original and actual.

The obedience of the second Adam did not only countervail but exceed all the
disobedience of the first Adam, much more, Romans 5.15, 16. Grace abounded, ver.
16. abundance of grace, verse. 17. where sin abounded grace did much more
abound, ver. 20.

It is a truth most precious that God was more highly pleased with the
obedience of the Mediator, then he was displeased with the disobedience of
Adam; but so unhappy is the Dialogue contending against the Mediatorly
obedience of Christ, as that in the prosecuting of that opposition it cannot
speak this truth without insinuating a fallacy of putting that for the cause
which is not the cause, for the ground of the acceptance of the Mediatorly
obedience of Christ proceeds not wholly though principally from the eminency of
the Person, which the Dialogue acknowledges, but also from the kind of his
obedience which the Dialogue denies.

But how does this either prove the bearing of the curse really to be no part
of the obedience of the Mediator, which the argumentation intends (though the
obedience whereof the Text speaks intends the contrary) or inform the Reader
what the Dialogue means by its new Mediatorly obedience, which the order of
disputation here called for.

The Dialogue denying the received doctrine concerning the Passive obedience of
Christ as Mediator, yet acknowledging a Mediatorly obedience, but not giving
any tolerable description of it in any one place, whence the ordinary Reader
may know what it, is only here and there mentions the name thereof, and
occasionally adding to that name, such a something as indeed renders it a dark
nothing, which manner of handling it, is rather a snare then a guide to the
less attentive Reader, before we proceed to examine the arguments for this new
Mediatorly obedience, what the rules of disputation required of the Author,
namely, that he should first have given us some such definition or description
thereof, whence we might have understood what it is that he so much contends
for: (for to be willing to dispute (say the Logicians) before we undrstand
certainly what is the Question, is to be willing to lose our time; and that
serious and affectionate counsel of Keckerman is here seasonable; Kec. Log.
Sact. Post. cap. 1.
Let us not (says he) dispute of any thing in Divinity before the various
signification of that whereof we dispute is diligently distinguished,) that I
shall endeavor to supply, namely, to acquaint the Reader with what the
Dialogue intends by its new Mediatorly obedience, according to what is to be
collected out of it self, comparing one place with another, whereto I shall
also subjoyn a description of Mediatorly obedience according to the received
doctrine of the Orthodox, that so the Reader conferring both together, may the
better judge both of the question and disputation: Truth loves the light, and
error lurks in ambiguities.

The mind of the Dialogue concerning Mediatorly obedience is to be gathered,
1. By its dictinction. 2. By putting together what in several places it speaks
concerning it.

It is necessary (says the Dialogue) to distinguish between Legal and
Mediatoriall obedience; Legal or natural obedience is no more, but humane
obedience performed by Christ as a godly Jew unto the Law of works, all the
actions of Christ from his birth until he was thirty years of age, must be
considered but as natural or but as legal acts of obedience: I cannot see
(says the Dialogue) how any of these actions (which yet it somewhat corrects,
as we shall find in due place) can properly be called Mediatoriall obedience.
Page 111. 112.

The Mediatorial obedience of Christ, Mediatorial obedience of the Dialogue,
what? Largely.
according to the Dialogue, consists of those acts of his obedience which he
did actuate by the joint concurrence of both his natures, some whereof, viz.
many mediatoriall prayers of his intercession, though they were acted by him
before 30 years of age, yet the far greater part of the acts thereof, and all
the public actions were performed after he was thirty years of age, viz. after
his public installing into the office of Mediatorship, Mat. 3. See page 112.
113. amongst the which mediatorial acts of his obedience is his giving up his
Manhood by the power of his Divine nature to suffer a natural death, such and
no other as the sons of Zebedee suffered, Mar. 10.39. Page 46. without
suffering any degree of Gods wrath at all, either in soul or body, page 2. yet
so as the Divine nature separated his soul from his body, which was the
masterpiece, and was accepted of God the Father as the price and meritorious
procuring cause of our Redemption, page 86. for that was the most precious
thing that either God the Father could require, or that the Mediator could
perform for our atonement or redemption, page 87.

The sum whereof take thus; Briefly.
Christ's Mediatorly obedience (according to the Dialogue) are certain actions
performed by him (not in way of obedience to the moral Law, for all such
actions he performed as a godly Jew and as man only, but) as God-man Mediator
unto the Law of Mediatorship, especially after 30 years of age, the
Masterpiece whereof was his yielding himself to suffer a bodily death.

Mediatorly obedience according to the Orthodox, what?
Mediatorly obedience, according to the received doctrine of the Orthodox, is
the inherent conformity and whole course of the active and passive obedience of
Christ from his conception to his passion inclusively, performed by him as
God-man Mediator, unto the Law, in way of Covenant, whereunto the whole good
of Redemption was due unto the Elect for Christ's sake, according to order of
justice, though conferred upon them in a way of mere grace.

Touching the Dialogues Mediatorly obedience here are diverse things which the
Reader is desired to take distinct and seasonable notice of.

1. Concerning the distinction; Mediatorly and Legal obedience are not two
kinds of obedience in Christ, but one and the same obedience, called
Mediatorly from the office of the person obeying, Legal from the Rule which
was obeyed.

2. Concerning the nature of Mediatorly obedience, we have First a new Law
given, which is called the Law of the Mediator excluding from it wholly the
Law of works; Secondly, we have a new Mediatorly obedience conformable to that
new Law, and excluding expressly the essential obedience of the Mediator, which
consists in obedience to the Law of works.

That obedience which the Creditor according to the Law demands and the Debtor
owes, that the Surety is to pay; but the obedience unto the Command, i.e. the
Law of works, Lev. 18.5. Gal. 3.10. and suffering of the punishment due to sin,
Genesis 2.17. is that which God according to Law demands, and the Debtor namely
the sinner owes; therefore obedience unto the Law of works is that which the
Surety ought to pay.

It is a fiction not only unwarrantable, and from beginning of time (as I
believe) unheard from any Classical author, but above measure presumptuous,
expressly to deny, about or near 30 years of the obedience of Christ to be
Mediatorly obedience, and upon point to acknowledge only an uncertain little
part of his life to be spent in that service; it is also an ignorant and
snaring contradiction, to affirm that to be meritorious which is not done in a
way of justice; Justice is of the form of merit: Merit is a debt according to
order of justice; it is a just debt. Christ's mediatorly obedience was an act of
a far higher nature then is the fictitious obedience of the Dialogue. It is an
untruth of perilous consequence to corrupt the Faith of the Reader by
asserting Gods high acceptance of such a Mediatorly obedience, which is not
Mediatorly obedience nor will be so owned of God.

That Christ in giving up his life in respect of the Divine nature, as
considered in Personal union with the humane nature acted in way of consent,
but not as his own executioner, has been often seen.

CHAP. II. Of the diverse ways of Redemption.
IF so, then there is no need that our blessed Mediator should pay both the
price of his Mediatoriall obedience, and also bear the Curse of the Law really
for our Redemption.

viz. that the obedience of the second countervailed, yea, far transcended the
disobedience of the first Adam) because our blessed Mediator paid the price of
his Mediatorly obedience by beating the curse of the Law really for our
Redemption; the Meritorious obedience of Christ (not the fictitious obedience
of the Dialogue) was the cause of Gods actual acceptance thereof (not of his
volition to accept) and not Gods actual acceptance, the cause of his
meritorious obedience.

I never heard that ever any Turkish Tyrant did require such a double
satisfaction of any Redeemer for the Redemption of Gally-slaves, I never heard
that ever any Tyrant did require any Redeemer to pay both the full price that
they demanded for their redemption of their Gally-slaves, and to bear their
punishment of their curse and slavery also in their stead; I think no cruel
Tyrant did ever exact such a double satisfaction: Therefore I cannot choose but
wonder at the common doctrine of imputation, because it makes God the Father
more rigid in the price of our Redemption, then ever Turkish Tyrant was, and to
be a harder Creditor in the point of satisfaction, then ever any rigid Creditor
was among men.



The ways of Redemption are ranked into three sorts. 1. By exchange of one
captive for another; but we are not thus redeemed, for God did not give his Son
into the hands of Satan to redeem us from under the power of Satan. 2. There is
a Redemption by force and strength, but this may be called a deliverance rather
then a Redemption, but however Christ did not thus redeem us from Gods wrath;
for then Christ must be stronger then his Father, Joh. 14.28. 3. Therefore
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, and so consequently from his
Fathers wrath, by no other way or means, but by that rich and invaluable price
or merit of his Mediatorial obedience.

Abraham delivered Lot out of the hand of Chedor-lahomer, Genesis 14.16. This is
rather a deliverance or a rescue then a Redemption; or by way of price, and
that either fully, when that which is given in way of Redemption is of equal
value with that which is redeemed, thus one Kinsman redeemed another out of
service, Lev. 20.50, 51, 52. Or partially and imperfect, when that which is
given in way of Redemption is accepted thereunto, though it be not of equal
value with the thing that is redeemed thereby, the firstborn of some unclean
creature was more worth then a Lamb, Exodus 13.13. the worth of a man far
exceeded five shekels, Number. 18.15. the steward accepts 50 lb for a 100 lb
Luke 16.6. this way of Redemption is by some, and happily in reference unto the
Law-term, is called Acceptilation. Or lastly, Acceptilatio non est vera and
naturalis, sed civilis, i. e. fictitia and (ut ait Justinianus) imaginaria
solutio. Pet. Fab. Seem. l. 2. c. 22. Redemptio potestativa, and per modum
vadimonij. Cha To. 2. lib. 5. de descens. cap. 20.
by way of suretiship when the Redeemer delivers the redeemed by putting
himself in the place and stead of those whom he does redeem, thus Christ
redeemed the Elect.

Christ is such a Redeemer as is also a surety, Heb. 7.22. that is, such a
Redeemer as sets himself in the stead of the Redeemed; so Isaac was saved by
the Ram, Genesis 22.12, 13. the firstling of the Ass with a Lamb, Exo. 13.13.
(although out of the indulgence of God it was at the pleasure of the owner to
redeem the firstlings of unclean creatures, either with a lamb or money, yet no
price can dispense in the case of the Antitype, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.) A slain
bullock was a typical sacrifice in stead of the owner.

Christ died for us as a Vice-sufferer, not for our good only, as Socinus would
have it, but also in our place and stead: Mortuus est non tantum nostro bono
sed etiam nostro loco and nostra vice. Paraeus in Romans cap. 3 dub. 10.
instantia. 10. Et cap. 5. dub. 5. Grotius de satisfact. cap. 1. Wolleb.
compend. l. 1. c. 38.
thus the particle [For] is often taken in the Scripture, whatsoever he rashly
affirms to the contrary. See Joh. 10.11. Romans 5.7. and 8.26. and 9.1. Joh.
12.50, 51, 52. 2 Samuel 18.33.

Christ died for us as an expiatory sacrifice for our sin, that is, he so died
for us as that he suffered what was due to us for our sins, Heb. 10.12, 14. He
died for us as a Priest, therefore according to the type he offered his
oblation not only for us but also in our stead. (His oblation was himself, Heb.
7.27. and 9.11.12.) and that as our surety that satisfied vindicative justice
in our place, which else we must have suffered.

Those words, God did not give his Son into the hands of Satan to redeem us
from under the power of Satan, as they are alleged, viz. to prejudice
Redemption by way of Suretiship or Exchange, are a vain cavil, Willet. syn.
cent. 5. genesis cont. 20. par. 7. qu. 3.
and already answered by D. Willet. The price (says he) was paid unto God to
satisfy Gods justice, it was not given unto Satan; for God is the judge, Satan
is the Jailer, to whom the Judge delivers sinners because of their sins, Luke
12.38. Christ came and paid the debt unto God, not unto the devil; the debt
paid, the Jailer has no longer charge or power to keep us in prison.

The heresy couched under those specious expressions of that rich and
invaluable price, or merit of his Mediatorial obedience, being understood
according to the sense of the Dialogue, we have seen before, and the Reader is
always desired occasionally to remember.

And this way of Redemption is often taught and confirmed by the holy
Scriptures, as in 1 Cor. 6.20. 1 Pet. 1.19. and in this sense only we have
atonement, Romans 5.11. and redemption through his blood, Ephesians. 1.7. and in this
sense he gave his life a Ransom for many, Mat. 20.28. and in this sense he
gave himself to redeem us from all iniquity, and to cleanse us to himself, Ti.
2.14.



The Apostle comparing of Christ's obedience to a price, which is the just value
of a thing that is bought, points us unto the preciousnesse of the blood,
that is, of the obedience of Christ (a principal part thereof synechdochically
put for the whole) which proceeds from the dignity of the person obeying, the
kind of obedience, and the acceptance thereof jointly, not from any of them
alone.

The blood of Christ of which Romans 5.11. 1 John 1.17. was shed in a way of
divine justice, Romans 3.24, 25. the Greek words used Ephesians. 1.7. and Mat. 20.28.
and Tit. 2.14. signify not only a price but a satisfactory price, such as was
necessarily given for sin, that remission might proceed without any violation
of justice. The person who suffered, being God, is so far from opposing his
sufferings to have been in a way of satisfaction unto justice, as that it was
absolutely requisite thereunto.

Let not the Reader be moved with the multitude of Scriptures misalledged, but
know the private and erring interpretation of them all to be but a very
fallacy, of putting that which is not a Cause for a Cause, namely, that which
is not a Divine Testimony for a Divine Testimony: the letter of the Scripture
alleged not according to its sense, is not the Scripture: That saying of
Christ, The Father is greater then I, Nulli haeretici aut heterodoxi unquam
citarunt aut citant verbum Dei. Keck. theo. lib. 1. c. 9.
in Joh. 14.28. cited according to the sense of an Arian is not Scripture.
These words This is my body, Mat. 26. cited according to the sense of the
Papist, is not the word of God; neither is that Text 1 Cor. 6.20. nor any of
the rest cited for the confirmation of Mediatorly obedience in the sense of the
Dialogue, the word of God. So true is that Proposition, No heretics or
heterodox as such, ever cited the Word of God.

It is evident by another typical ceremony of Redemption, that Christ has
redeemed us by a price only, and not by bearing the Curse of the Law for us.
Lev. 25.25, 39.



Of types some do signify but not exemplify, as Hosea's three children whose
name signified but did not exemplify the truth to be fullfilled in the
Antitype; of such as both signify and exemplify, some exemplify without any
sense or feeling of the thing exemplified, Figura non habet quodcunque habet
veritas, ut nec imago regia, quae Rex. Vid. Park. lib. 3. de Descen.
as Jeremies Girdle, Chap. 13. some exemplify with suffering, yet so as
holding less proportion with the truth signified, so the wounding of the
Prophet prefigured the death of Ahab, 1 King. 20.37, some hold more proportion,
as the present Lamb slain and roasted, typified Christ's sufferings of the wrath
of God, yet still so as the Antitype has more then the type.

The Paschall Lamb typically sacrificed, not only for the good, but also in
stead of the several families, and the Lamb of the daily offering, typically
sacrificed not only for the good, but also in stead of the people, the killed
Goat upon which sin was laid typically, slain not only for the good, but in the
stead of the sinful owner, Lev. 16. The ram slain in stead of Isaac, the Lamb
in stead of, and for the Redemption of the firstling of the Ass, or for the
firstling of any other beasts synechdochically, all these signified our
Redemption by Christ, not to be a redemption by laying down a price only or
acceptilation, but by way of suretiship, where that which does Redeem is put in
the place of the Redeemed.

Though in many typical redemptions (for it was not so in all no price could
exempt the Paschall Lamb, or the Lamb for the daily sacrifice, or the killed
goat) God acepted of a price, and spared life, yet not so in the Antitype.
Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things as
silver and gold from your vain conversation, received by tradition from your
fathers, but with the precious blood of Christ as of a Lamb without blemish and
without spot, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. If this Argument be of force as it is here
propounded without any limitation, then Christ need not have redeemed us by his
death, but by money or money-worth, and so it holds against the Dialogue it
self, and not only against us.

Though all types of Christ put together hold forth all the essentials of
Mediatorly obedience, yet such an universal significancy is not requisite to
the nature of a single type: single types signify the truth or truths intended
thereby concerning the Antitype, some one or more, some another, according to
the intention of the Author.

It is a dangerous error in the tenet of the Lutherans to say, that one drop
of the blood of Christ is sufficient to redeem the whole world.

Chemnitius, Gerhard, Cramerus, and the generality of the Lutherans, shall
find their judgment contrary to what here is imputed to them.

CHAP. III. Of that wherein the true meritorious efficacy of the blood of
Christ lies.
THe true meritorious efficacy of the blood of Christ lies not in this, that it
was a part of the corporeal substance of the Lamb of God without spot; nor in
this, that he suffered his blood to be shed by the Roman soldiers in a passive
manner of obedience, but it lies in this, that it was shed by his own active
priestly power, by which means only it became a Mediatorial sacrifice of
atonement.

[the meritorious efficacy of the blood of Christ] then under the phrase of
[Mediatorly obedience] whereof the shedding of his blood only was a small part.

They that desire to speak properly, distinguish thus between Value, Equality,
Merit, and Efficacy in the point of Mediatorly obedience: Value respects the
sufficient worth of it; Equality respects the full and adaequate satisfaction
thereof unto Divine justice; Merit is that whereby the good of Redemption is
due, for the sake thereof unto the Elect, according to the order of justice;
Efficacy intends the actual application of the benefit thereof unto the Elect.
But understanding in this place with the Dialogue, the Value and Worth of the
Obedience of the Mediator, by the meritorious efficacy of his blood, the
fallacy of this assertion lies in putting that which is not the Cause, namely,
Causae partiales in toto concursu stant pro una.
a partial and insufficient cause to produce the effect, of it self alone; for
the whole and complete cause. The valor and preciousnesse of the obedience of
Christ, though it depends principally, yet it depends not wholly upon the
eminency of his person, but also upon the quality of his obedience, and Gods
gracious acceptance thereof, the absence of any of these would render Christ
an insufficient Redeemer. Had not he been such a person, his obedience could
not have been satisfactory, and though there were such a person, yet without
such obedience unto the Law, there can be no satisfaction.

The immutable truth of God, Genesis 2 17. and his inviolable justice, Romans 1.32.
require obedience in the Mediator; the Law requires obedience, both active
Lev. 18.5. and passive, Gal. 3.10. else there can be no life; The Dialogues
frequent reiteration of the same objections, forces the reiteration of the
same answers.

The firstling of the Ass must either be redeemed or destroyed, Exodus 34 20.
Christ was appointed of God to be a common and more effectual principle of
Redemption then Adam was of destruction, Romans 5.14, 16, 17, 18, 19. 1 Cor.
15.22.

Christ at one and the same time died both as a Mediator actively, and as a
Malefactor passively, as I have explained the matter, Gal. 3.13. and in other
places also.



But for your better understanding of the meritorious efficacy of the blood of
Christ, consider 2. things. 1. Consider what was the Priestly nature of Christ,
and 2. Consider what was his Priestly action. 1. His Priestly nature was his
Divine nature, for he is said to be a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedeck, of whom it is witnessed that he lives, or that he ever lives,
Heb. 7.8.

Melchisedeck, but that Christ's Priestly nature was his Divine nature only,
that is, that Christ was only a Priest according to his Divine nature, which
the language of the Dialogue seems to hold forth, is a great error; the
common principles of Religion tell us that the Priesthood is a part of the
Mediatorly office. Christ as Mediator is God man, therefore as Priest he is
Godman. Parts are of the same nature with the whole. Necessary it is, say the
Catechisms, that the Mediator should be both God and Man: he must be man, else
he could not be a meet sacrifice; he must be God or else his sacrifice could
not have been effectual.

Christ was both Priest, Sacrifice, and Altar. The humane nature only suffered
(therefore most properly was the sacrifice) yet so, as in Personal union with
the Godhead, the Divine nature was that which upheld the humane: The person
consisting of both natures was the Priest.

Christ offered up himself before his humane nature was dissolved by death,
which consideration might have prevented that objection in this place: though
the union of the body with the soul was dissolved by death, Dawascen. de fide
orthodox. l. 3. cap. 7.
yet the union both of soul and body with the second Person continued
undissolved, the separation of the soul from the body loosed not the union of
both with the Divine nature, Tho. par. 3. qu. 5. ar. 4. Gerh. suppl. 104.
they were locally separated the one from the other, but both united
hypostatically, i. e. personally with the Deity. Neither the soul nor the body
of Christ, ever had any subsistence but in the Word.

The word [He] in the Scriptures alleged, signifies not either Nature apart,
but the person consisting of both Natures; as the Mediator was not (nor is not)
God alone, nor man alone, but God-man; so he merited not as God alone or man
alone, but as God-man: and as Christ merited the application of the good of
Redemption, so God applies it not for the sake of the Divine nature alone, nor
the humane nature alone, but for the sake of God-man Mediator.

The Scripture so attributes the infinite value and efficacy of the works of
the Mediator unto the Divine nature, denoted by the word [Spirit] as it also
ascribes those works unto the Person ( i. e. whole Christ consisting of both
natures) signified by the word [Who] How much more shall the blood of Christ
who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, Synops.
pur. Theol. disp. 26. These. 18, 19.
purge your consciences from dead works to serve the living God? Heb. 9.14.
Because the actions of the Mediator were the actions of Christ who is God-man,
in them the Divine nature was the principal, the humane nature the less
principal and instrumental cause.

If upon a supposition this untruth were a truth, yet it is impertinent to the
question, being neither beneficial to the tenet of the Author, nor
prejudicial to the tenet of the Orthodox.

But yet withal take notice that the term He Genesis 3.15. does comprehend under
it his humane nature as well as his divine, yea, it does also comprehend under
it the Personal union of both his Natures.

He Genesis 3.15. notes the Person consisting of both natures; therefore not the
Divine nature only: but the person consisting of both natures was the Priest.
The Term He in the other Scriptures being by your own acknowledgement of the
same sense with the term He Genesis 3.15. you hereby unsay what you just now said,
or otherwise what was said, was nothing to the purpose.

Consider what was his Priestly action, and that was the sprinkling of his own
blood by his own Priestly nature, that is to say, by his divine nature. Isa.
53.12. namely, by the active power of his own divine Priestly nature, Heb.
9.14. that is to say, he separated his soul from his body by the power of his
Godhead when he made his soul a trespasse-offering for our sin, Isa. 53.10. and
the manner of sprinkling of blood by the Priests upon the Altar, must be done
with a large and liberal quantity, and therefore it is called pouring out, and
this sprinkling with pouring out did typifie the death of the Mediator; a
large quantity of bloodshed must needs be a true evidence of death.

Heb. 13.16.

The Priest that offered this Sacrifice was not the Divine nature alone, but
the Person of Christ consisting of both natures with the needless repetition
of which, it is full time to cease troubling the Reader any further.

So to attribute the Mediatorly obedience of his death unto the divine nature,
as to exclude the humane nature from its influence thereunto, is not only to
derogate from the humane nature, but indeed not to attribute such mediatorly
obedience unto Christ, for Christ is a person consisting of both Natures.

Christ's shedding of his blood in such a large manner as we read in the
Scripture, is a truth worthy of all attention and acknowledgement, but
understood in the sense of the Dialogue for the shedding of his material blood
only, it is comparatively but a small part of his obedience: for Christ
suffered not only a natural death, Job. 19.30. but also a spiritual death,
Mat. 26.46. Heb. 2.9. not only a bodily but also a spiritual death, he shed his
blood together with the sense of the wrath of God, here his death is not called
a death simply, but a suffering, wherein the iniquities of us all gathered
together as in an heap were laid upon him, Isa. 53.6. and a curse; but this is
already largely spoken to.

The death or shedding of the blood of Christ in Scripture is often put for the
whole satisfactory obedience which he performed in the state of his
humiliation, Romans 3.25. Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.20. because it was the completing and
consummation of all; or synechdochically taking a part for the whole, namely,
the visible part of his sufferings for both visible and invisible, Med. lib. 1.
c. 22. th. 5. Polan. Pis. 2 Pet. 2.4.
like as in the relating the moral acts of his obedience, the external part is
oftentimes only mentioned, the internal understood; and in setting down the
works of the Creation, the visible creatures are named, the invisible included.

And secondly, In this respect the blood of Christ is called the blood of God,
Act. 20 28. not only because his humane nature was united to his Divine nature,
for by the communication of properties that may be attributed to the Person
which is proper to one nature only: but secondly, it is called the blood of God
in another respect, namely, because he shed his blood by his own Priestly
nature, that is to say, by the actual power of his divine nature, for he
offered himself by his eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14.



Christ's offering up of himself unto God was a free and a willing act,
otherwise his offering had not been effectual; it could not have been obedience
if it had not been done freely.

In respect of God, He had done none any wrong if the second Person had
continued only in that subsistence wherein he was equal unto God, without
admitting any subsistence in personal union with the Manhood, in which respect
he is inferior unto God by voluntary dispensation. He laid down his life of
his own accord, otherwise there was no one could have taken it away, Ioh.
10.18. Christ had power of right, authority, and Majesty, and might dispose of
his own life, yet having received commandment of the Father to lay down his
life, he put not forth his Divine power to rescue the manhood from deadly
sufferings, but cooperating with subordinate instruments, according to the
concourse of the first cause with the second, gave way to the course of nature,
and patiently suffered a violent death.

That which the Dialogue is to prove, is, that the Mediatorly obedience of
Christ whereby we are redeemed, is by way of price only, not by way of
Suretiship and just satisfaction unto the Law: but that which it here says,
is, that the blood of Christ was shed with a large and liberal quantity, that
his blood was shed for the atonement of men's souls, that the blood that was
shed was the blood of him that was God, all which are true, but conclude not
the question: he shed his blood, most true: but he did not only shed his blood,
but so as the sense of the wrath of God was mixed with it, he suffered both a
natural and a supernatural death.

Separation of the soul from the body is either by the first and universal
efficient, so the Divine nature, considered in it self, separated one from the
other, or by an universal subordinate efficient acting by way of consent, so
the Divine nature subsisting in Personal union acted together with the humane
in the separation of his soul from his body; or else by the next formal cause,
so the executioners separated his soul from his body.

In like sort he is called Jehovah our Righteousness, Jer. 20.3. because his
Mediatorial obedience (whereof his oblation was the masterpiece) was actuated
by Jehovah, that is to say, by his divine nature as well as by his humane,

Jehovah our righteousness because he merited our justification by obeying,
and because he obedience imputed is the matter of our righteousness.

You now plainly acknowledging that his Mediatorly obedience was actuated by
Jehovah, that is to say, by his divine nature as well as by his humane,
acknowledge therewithal that it was performed by the joint concurrence of both
natures, as elsewhere you say; And so show that your Reader is troubled in vain
to find out the meaning of those novell propositions, viz. He poured out his
soul to death by the active power of his own Divine Priestly nature. He
separated his soul from his body by the power of his Godhead, without
mentioning the humane nature.

We must needs look at that as a piece of the mystery of darkness which has
no other strength but in imagination, and that only whilst it is not
understood, but when understood becomes just nothing. The Father of Popery
proves a known Impostor, if men once speak in the mother tongue; Popery lives
no longer then it speaks Latin to plain people.

So then I may well conclude that the death of Christ was a Mediatorial
sacrifice of atonement, because it was the act of the Mediator in both his
natures, in his humane nature he was the Lamb of God without spot, and in his
Divine nature he was the Priest to offer up his humane nature to God as a
Mediatorial sacrifice of atonement for the full Redemption of all the Elect.

viz. because it was the act of the Mediator in both natures, immediately
discovers it self unto him who sees herein the Dialogues usual fallacy of
putting that which is not a cause for a cause, since not only the eminency of
the Person, but also the kind of obedience and acceptance of God are required
as essential to Mediatorly obedience.

But the Dialogues conclusion expressing it self in ambiguous terms capable
both vf the sense of the Orthodox and Heterodox, does by this unseasonable and
irregular equivocation betray the weakness of its cause and arguments both at
once.

It was the holiness of his Divine nature that gave the quickening power to the
oblation of his humane nature, Joh. 6.63.



In this answer Joh. 6.63. our Savior declares two things.

1. That the gross and carnal substance of his flesh and blood considered by
it self alone had no meritorious efficacy, and therefore his legal obedience
cannot profit us.

2. Our Savior in his answer declared wherein the true force and efficacy of
his sacrifice did lie, namely, in these two things.

1. In the Personal union of his humane nature with his divine nature.

2. It lies in his Priestly offering up of his humane nature by his divine
nature.



The efficacy of it lay in the eminency of the Person offering, that is the
Person who offered up himself was such a man who was also God, Joh. 6.63. Act.
20.28. Heb. 9.14. but not in that only, this is but the same in more words
which is usually expressed in fewer, viz. the value and efficacy of the
Sacrifice depends (yet not wholly) upon the dignity of the Person Godman
offered properly, Godman was offered but not without the limitation of
communication of properties. The humane nature suffered properly but the divine
nature suffered not: Whole Christ suffered, but not the whole of Christ, i.e.
though the Godhead did not suffer, yet he that did suffer was God.

CHAP. IV. Whether the Jews and Romans put Christ to death.
NEither did he die a passive death by the power of the Roman soldiers, as the
Jews thought, and as the Papists and other carnal Protestants do think: All the
men and devils in the world could not put him to death by their power, I mean,
they could not separate his soul from his body, till himself pleased to do it
by his own Priestly power, Joh. 10.17, 18. his soul was not separated from his
body by the sense of those pains which the Roman soldiers inflisted upon him,
as the souls of the two thieves were that were crucified with him, for Christ
died not sooner nor later then the very punctual hour in which God had
appointed him to make his oblation.

i.e. he separated his soul from his body, shed his own blood, actuated his own
death, but the Jews and Romans put him not to death.

Suppose it were true that men did not instrumentally inflict upon Christ a
natural death, and that they killed him not, which yet is against the express
letter of the Scripture, Act. 2.23. it does not therefore follow God did not
inflict upon him a spiritual death.

As they killed their own Prophets so they killed Christ, 1 These. 2.15. but
they killed their own Prophets not only in appearance, but effectually: Neither
Christ's being active, as concerning his death, sc. as voluntarily permitting or
giving way and consenting unto it, neither the inability of man to take away
his life till himself pleased; neither his not dying either sooner or later
then the very punctual hour in which God had appointed, deny the sense of those
pains which the Roman Soldiers inflicted upon him to have instrumentally, and
as next external causes separated his soul fron his body when he pleased, by
suspending the assistance of the Divinity to give way unto the course of nature
in the appointed hour. By the last reason no man dies a violent death, because
no man dies sooner or later then his appointed time,

The Centurion did plainly see a manifest difference between the manner of
Christ's death, and the death of the two thieves that were crucified with him,
for as yet they did still continue alive in their torments till after the time
that Joseph of Arimathea had begged our Saviors dead body of Pilate, at the
Sunset Evening: for Joseph did not go to Pilate to beg our Saviors body until
the Evening was come, Mat. 27.57. Mar. 15.52, 53. and that was at Sunset, it
could not be when the first Evening was come; but Christ was dead long before
this, for he gave up the ghost at the ninth hour, which was about three hours
before the two thieves were killed, and yet by the course of his nature he
might have lived in his torments as long as the two thieves did, for the Roman
Soldiers did crucify all three alike.

Joseph of Arimathea begged not the body of Christ until Sunset-Evening, and
that he died three hours before the thieves; this disproveth not the Jews as
procurers, Pilate as a Commander, and the Roman soldiers as Executioners to
have effectually put Christ to death; neither does all being granted touch the
question; man's not putting Christ to his natural death, no way disproving Gods
putting of him to a supernatural death: so impertinent are these new assertions
though true.

It Is true, the latter Evening began not until Sunset, but it is not true that
Joseph came not to beg the body of Christ until Sunset, for he came as the
Evening was coming, as the Greek has it, therefore before it was actually
come. Besides, otherwise he could not have taken down the body, and buried it
the same day (for it was before Sunset even, after the exposition of the
Dialogue it self on Gal. 3.13.) according to the Law, Deuteronomy. 22.23. which John
testifies they were careful and mindeful of, Chapter 19.31. There being therefore
so much reason to conclude the thieves were buried before Sunset, it is very
inconsiderately affirmed that they were alive at Sunset. It is also very
inconfiderately affirmed that the thieves did continue alive in their torments,
till after the time that Joseph of Arimathea had begged our Saviors dead body
of Pilate, when John tells us that the Jews besought Pilate that their legs
might be broken, and that they might be taken away, and after that their legs
were broken and Christ's side was pierced with a spear, Joseph of Arimathea
besought Pilate that he might take away the body of Jesus, Ioh. 19.31, 34, 38.
but much more unadvised is it to say that the thieves were alive at Sunset,
there being so much reason to conclude they were buried before Sunset.

The Margin note concerns not us who acknowledge but two Evenings, nor
oppose the Hebrews or Jews beginning the first with the sensible declining of
the Sun, after its being in its altitude at midday; the latter at Sunset;
between which two evenings that is in the space after the beginning of the
first, and before the beginning of the second, the Lamb was slain, Exo. 12.6.

Christ died after three of the clock, Mat. 27.45 50. the thieves were taken
down and buried out of the way before Sunset, and it is probable Christ and they
were taken down together, whose body being wound up in linen clothes with the
spices, and carried into Joseph's own sepulcher in a garden upon the same mount
must necessarily take up some time, neither is there reason to think they would
put themselves upon any danget of entrenching upon the Sabbath. The case thus
standing, and it being not set down what space there was between the death of
Christ and of the thieves, the Dialogue ventures too far, in saying Christ died
not only long, but three hours before them. But be it what it was, let us see
what the Dialogue infers from thence.

What then was the true reason why Christ died three hours before the thieves?
had he less strength of nature to bear his torments then they? or did the
Roman soldiers add more torment upon his body then upon the two thieves? or
did the Fathers wrath kill him sooner then the two thieves, as some think?
surely none of all these things did hasten his death before the two thieves,
but the only true reason was because he did actuate his own death as a
mediatorial sacrifice of atonement (at the just hour appointed by his Father)
by the joint concurrence of both his natures.

Pilate marvelled if he were already dead, Mar. 14.4^. But that he died three
hours before them cannot appear.

Christ had less strength of nature left to bear his torments then the thieves
had, therefore they compelled a man of Cyrene Simon by name, to bear his
Cross, that is, to help him bear it.

Illusio and conspuitio Christi post latam in eum mortis sententiam a ministris
a media nocte usque ad horas matutinas fuit producta. Gerh. harm. 73.
He is a very negligent Reader of the History of the Passion, that observes not
many sufferings inflicted upon Christ by men more then were upon the thieves.
His restless vexation the night before by their carrying of him first before
Annas, Joh. 18. then to Caiaphas, ver. 24. where they spit in his face, and
buffeted him, others smote him with the palms of their hands, Mat. 27.67.
Again, they cover his face and buffet, and say unto him, Prophecy, Mar. 14.65.
and thence they carry him to Pilate early in the morning, Mat. 27.1, 2. thence
to Herod, Luke 23.7. and Herod with his men of war set him at naught, and
mocked him, and arrayed him in a gorgeous robe, and sent him again to Pilate,
where the soldiers of the Governor took Jesus into the Common Hall, and
gathered unto him the whole Band of soldiers, and they stripped him, and put
upon him a scarlet Robe, and when they had platted a Crown of thorns, they put
it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand, and they bowed themselves
before him, Thom. part. 3. qu. 46. vid. Gerh. harm. in loc.
saying, Hail, King of the Jews, and spit upon him, and took the reed and smote
him on the head, Mat. 27.27, 28, 29, 30. add hereunto their casting lots upon
his vesture, reviling of him, wagging their heads at him, and mocking of him as
well by the better as by the meaner sort, whilst he was hanging upon the
Cross, and all this besides what was extraordinary in his scourging; you
forget his sorrow unto death, mortal of it self in time, his agony in the
garden, besides the full sense of the wrath of God upon the Cross, no wonder
if all these exhausted the spirits of the Manhood.

(...).
Behold the man! and if these things still seem less to the author of the
Dialogue, yet know they seemed great both to David that spoke of them, and to
Christ that felt them; Reproach has broken my heart, Psa. 69.20. My heart is
like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels, my strength is dried up like
a potsherd, Psa. 22.14, 15.

Surely none of all these things did hasten his death before the two thieves,
but the only true reason was, because he did actuate his own death as a
mediatoriall sacrifice of atonement (at the just hour appointed by his Father)
by the joint concurrence of both his natures.

Heb. 5.7.

In regard of the Personal union and unction of Christ, whereby he received all
possible created fitness for the execution of his office, it is inconsisting
with his perfection to suppose the least unreadinesse either in respect of fear
or whatsoever else, to perform any Mediatorly service in the time thereof.

John tells us the true reason why Christ died then and not before nor after:
because then and not until then his work of Mediatorly obedience, both active
and passive was finished, and whatsoever was written concerning him was
fullfilled, When Jesus therefore had received the Vinegar, he said, It is
finished, and he bowed his head and gave up the ghost.

CHAP. V. Of the Dialogues distinction of Christ's dying as a Mediator and as a
Malefactor.
Have already showed you that Christ dyed a twofold death: for he died both as
a Malefactor and as a Mediator at one and the same time; as a Malefactor he
died a passive death, but as a Mediator he died an active death, and the
Scripture does often speak of both these deaths, sometimes jointly and
sometimes severally: when the Scripture does mention his passive death, then it
says that he was put to death, killed and slain. But secondly, the Scripture
does sometime speak jointly of his passive death, and of his Mediatorly death
together in one sentence, as in Romans 8.13. and in Gal. 3.13. (which Scriptures
I have opened at large in the first part,) Luke 22.19. compared with 1 Cor.
11.24. Luke 22.20. so Isa. 12. with Romans 4.25. The Scripture does sometime
speak of his Mediatorial death only as Isa. 53.10. he gave his soul to be a
trespasse-offering for our sins, and he offered himself by his eternal spirit,
Heb. 9.14. and he laid down his own life, Joh. 10.17, 18, and he sanctified
himself, Joh. 17.19. therefore seeing the holy Scriptures do teach us to
observe this distinction upon the death of Christ, it is necessary that all
Gods people should take notice of it, and engrave it in their minds and
memories.



1. The sense of it, 2. The Scriptures alleged for the ground of it. 3. The
scope of it. 4. The deductions from it.
By it the Dialogue means, that the natural death of Christ (for the
spiritual death it denies) is either Active, actuated by the Divine nature,
yea, the joint concurrence of both natures, so he died as a Mediator, and this
was real: or Passive, wherein the Jews and Romans inflicted upon him the sores
of death, but did not put him to death though they thought they did, so he died
as a Malefactor. This was not real, but only in the Jews account; Such is the
mind of the distinction.

Those Texts wherein Christ is said to be put to death, Luke 18.33. 1 Pet.
3.18. killed, Gal. 3.13. teach us, that Christ was passive in his death, but
make no mention of the Dialogues twofold natural death, nor do they deny
Christ to be active in that death wherein he was passive. They show plainly his
blood was shed, and that by Jews, but not one of them affirms that Christ
shed it himself.

Isa, 53.10. Heb. 9.14. Ioh. 10.17, 18. and 17.19. teach expressly that Christ
was active, and imply him to be be passive as concerning the same oblation of
himself by his death.

Luke 22.19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.24. show us that the body of Christ was given for
us, primarily by the Father who gave his Son, and subordinately by Christ, who
by voluntary consent gave himself according to his Fathers will for us, as also
that the breaking of the bread in the administration of the Sacrament is to be
used as significative of his sufferings. What is this to the distinction?

Romans 4.25. clearly intimates Christ to be passive, but denies him not be
active in one and the same natural death.

Romans 8.13. Isa. 12. speak not of the death of Christ at all.

Some of these Texts alleged say that Christ was active, others that he was
Passive in his death, that is, in one and the same death whether it be natural
or supernatural, but not one says, his death was passive. Diverse of the
Scriptures alleged hold forth manifestly both his natural and supernatural
death; the most include his supernatural death, none deny it.

The scope of the distinction is to make Christ the formal taker away of his
own life.

The deduction from it; therefore neither Jews nor Romans put Christ to death:
of both which before and in the answer immediately following.

This distinctions twofold death is but one: for he died not a passive death as
a Malefactor, according to the Dialogue, p. 97. and 100. It denies the death
of Christ as Mediator to be Passive, which can hardly escape a contradiction.
It denies Christ as he was Mediator to be a Malefactor, though to be
imputatively a Malefactor was essential for the time unto his being a Mediator.

As in your distinction of Legal and Mediatoriall obedience, you understand
the terms Legal and Mediatorial to signify two kinds of obedience, which are
but two appellations of the same obedience, so in this distinction of the
active and passive death of Christ, (according also as you express your self
clearer upon the margent) you make these terms to signify two kinds of death
which only signify diverse affections in the Person dying.

The terms Mediator and Malefactor are to be distinguished as the whole and the
part of the same office.

To be a Malefactor imputatively was an essential part, for the time, of the
office of the Mediator.

The terms Active and Passive do not denote or distinguish two deaths, but are
to be distinguished as adjuncts or affections of the same Person and Officer,
as concerning one and the same death.

When I speak of the death of Christ as a Malefactor, then the Scribes and
Pharisees must be considered as the wicked instruments thereof, yet this must
be remembered also, that I do not mean that they by their torments did separate
his soul from his body, in that sense they did not put him to death (himself
only did separate his own soul from his body by the power of his Godhead) but
they put him to death, because they inflicted the sores of death upon his body,
they did that to him which they thought sufficient to put him to death: and men
are often said to do that which they endeavor to do; as in the example of
Abraham, Heb. 11.7. Haman, Esth. 8.7. Amalek, Exodus 17.16. Saul Psalm. 143, 3.
The Magicians, Exo. 8.18. The Israelites, Numb. 14.30. as the matter is
explained in Deuteronomy. 1.41. and in this sense it is said, that the Jews did kill
and slay the Lord of life, because they endeavored to do it.

Act. 17.28. The formal efficiency of the second cause consists with, and is
subordinate to the universal efficiency of the first cause; so as the
efficiency of the second cause is both ordered by, and is also the effect of
the first cause; but the deficiency of the second cause, though it be ordered
by, (...). Ad efficientem causam indirecte refertur voluntas ipsius Christi.
Synops. pur. theol. disput. 27. these. 19.
yet it is not the effect of the first cause.

Christ as Mediator was the voluntary cause freely and readily consenting to
the Fathers will, Heb. 10.7. and 9.14. Gal. 2.20. Christ was Lord of his own
life, he had power of right concerning it, Ioh, 10.18. It was his own, and he
had done no wrong in case he had not taken upon him the form of a servant,
Phil. 2.6.7. He had power of might to have preserved his life, no man could
take it from him against his will, Ioh. 10.18. All which notwithstanding, he
voluntarily humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of
the Cross, Phil. 2.8. Thus Christ was active concerning his death, but not as
his own executioner, and formal shedder of his own blood.

The Executioners were the immediate, external, and blameable cause, so are
these Texts to be understood, 1 Pet. 3.18. Act. 2.32. and 3.15. 1 These. 3.15.
Jam. 5.6.

Two of your instances hold not, viz. Exo. 8.18. which the diligent Reader may
easily perceive, and Numb. 14.40. where the words are better read by Learned
Translators, And they rose up early in the morning that they might ascend, etc.
A third, viz. Exo. 17.16. is expounded with as good reason against you. That
also Esth. 8.7. might be troubled if not taken from you, the true meaning of
places is to be attended. Your number of instances, if need were, I doubt not,
may be made up elsewhere.

It Is true, the will is in diverse places put for the deed, but not therefore
in every place, nor consequently in this. So to argue were a non-consequence
proceeding from particulars to an universal.

Where in Scripture the will is put for the deed, there it is also manifest
that though there was the will, yet there was not the deed, as in your
instances of Abraham, Saul, and Haman, if yet the last will hold as here
alleged. But you cannot produce any Scripture where the will is put for the
deed, when there was a sufficient physical cause exerted to produce that
effect, and also the effect followed; it were indeed an implicate, i.e. a
contradiction, yet such is the case here. It Is true, no torments though in
themselves killing could kill Christ until he pleased, and it is also true, that
torments killing in themselves could kill him when he pleased.

If because the life of Christ could not be taken away until the time
appointed, nor without his consent, it therefore follows, that the Jews and
Romans did not take away his life, by the same reason it may be said of the
blood that was shed at the scourging, crucifying, the piercing of his side with
the Lance, that they did not take away that blood from him only endeavored to
take away his blood: for that blood was not shed until the time appointed, not
until Christ pleased, it being in the power of the Divine nature to have
retained it. Nay, why may it not be said by the same reason, of all the
sufferings inflicted upon him by men, that they did but endeavor to afflict
him, but they did not afflict him, since all the evils that men inflicted upon
him were inflicted according to his consent, and in the time and manner as was
written, Luke 22.37. Act. 3.18. This reasoning too much favors Socinians and
other heretics, who deny the sufferings of Christ to be real, affirming them
only to be Metaphorical.

It is a daring assertion, when there is not one text, nor (I believe) one
Classical Author who affirms that Christ as the next and formal cause shed
his blood, but on the contrary, plentiful Texts and Testimonies, that he was
put to death, killed, and slain, and that by the Jews, Luke 18.33. 1 Pet. 3.18.
Mar. 12.8. Act. 3.15. 1 These. 3.15. Jam. 5.6. Act. 2.23. Rev. 5.6, 9, 12. and
6.9. to contradict not only the godly whether learned or unlearned both of the
present and all past generations since the Passion of our Lord Jesus, but also
the Scriptures themselves in saying the Jews did not actually put Christ to
death. Nor let the Jews, Romans, or Pilate rejoice at this; in vain does the
Dialogue discharge whom God has charged.

After all this, give me leave again to mind the Reader, that though this
untruth were true, yet it is impertinent to the question; for what though the
Jews did not put Christ to a natural death? what though Christ shed his own
blood? what though he were his own Executioner, yea, killed himself? which last
though the Dialogue in words somewhere rejects, yet in consequence asserts (at
the writing of which my pen trembles) does it therefore follow that God did
not inflict upon him his paenall wrath?

He laid down his life by the same power by which he raised it up again, Joh.
10.17, 18.



Yea, his Mediatoriall death may well be called a miraculous death.

Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.7. and of Caleb Josh. 14.11. in the time of old age, that
Christ as man should die whilst the Manhood was in personal union with the
Godhead, is miraculous; but that the Divine nature suspending its assistance, a
man should die under deadly pains, was not miraculous.

Christ's death was in some respect miraculous and supernatural, and in some
respect not miraculous but natural; as Christ's natural so his supernatural
death was miracalous, but it does not follow it was miraculous, therefore it
was not; the contrary follows, his supernatural death was miraculous,
therefore it was.

Christ died not by degrees (says M. Nichols in his Day Star) as his Saints
do, his senses do not decay, etc.

It was finished, as that his death was without pain (which yet I believe not)
is not the question, but whether Christ suffered the wrath of God.

Austin says thus, Who can sleep (says he) when he will, as Christ died when
he would? who can lay aside his garment, so as Christ laid aside his flesh? Who
can leave his place as Christ left his life? his life was not forced from him
by any imposed punishment, but he did voluntarily render it up to God as a
Mediatorial sacrifice: in his life time he was often touched with the fear of
death, but by his strong crying unto God with daily prayers and tears he
obtained power against his natural fear of death, before he came to make his
oblation; as I have expounded, Heb. 5.7.

Augustine in his 119 Tractate upon John, speaks as you recite, until those
words, who can leave his place so as Christ left his life? so far are his
words, but no further in that place, nor (I believe) any where else. The rest
seem to be your own, and (if so) ought to have been accordingly distinguished
by the character. Your Exposition of Heb. 5.7. Sed Pelagiani quo modo dicunt
solum mortem nos transisse, etc. August. contra duas Epistolas. Pelag. l. 4.
cap. 4.
has received its answer.

If Augustines judgment in this Controversy be of weight with you, you may
learn it out of these his ensuing words. But (says he) after what manner do
the Pelagians say that death passed unto us by Adam? For we therefore die
because he is dead, and he died because he sinned: they say (says he) the
punishment passed without the fault, and that innocent babes are punished with
an unjust punishment by contracting death without the desert of death: See more
testimonies both of August. and other Ancients to this purpose out of Grotius
de satisf. Christ.
which the Catholic faith acknowledges of the one alone Mediator of God and
Men, the Man Christ Jesus, who vouchsafed to undergo death for us, that is, the
punishment of sin without sin: for as he alone was made the Son of man that we
by him might be made the sons of God; so he alone undertook for us the
punishment of sin without evil deserts, that we by him might obtain grace
without good deserts; for as unto us there was no good due, so unto him there
was no evil due.

Again, it is evident that his death was miraculous, because at that instant
when he breathed out his soul into the hands of God, the veil of the Temple
(which typified his humane nature) rent it self in twain from the top to the
bottom; and at that time also the graves of the Saints did open themselves,
and many of the dead Saints did arise, Mat. 27.51.



It is rather thought that the Miracle of the Resurrection of the Saints was
not till after the Resurrection; Many bodies of the Saints that slept, arose,
and came out of their graves after his Resurrection, Mat. 27.51. but in matters
of this nature we contend not.

The miracles that fell out about the death of Christ whether before or at, or
after it, were the Eclipse of the Sun, causing darkness, from the sixth hour
unto the ninth, whilst Christ was hanging upon the Cross: The rending of the
vail of the Temple, an Earthquake, the rending or the Rocks: the opening of the
graves, and rising of many of the Saints. The conversion of the Centurion and
others; the coming forth of blood and water out of Christ's side; all which are
summed together in that memorial Distich,

Eclipsis, velum, terrae trepedatio, Rupes.
Busta: cruci astantum conversio, sanguis, and unda.
The death of Christ (says D. Ames) was true not feigned; Mors ista Christi
fuit vera non ficta. etc. Med. l. 1. c. 22. th. 27
it was natural from causes naturally efficacious to procure it, not
supernatural, it was voluntary, not plainly constrained; yet it was violent. It
was also in some respect supernatural and miraculous, because Christ conserved
his strength and life so long as he would, and laid them down when he would.

Hence we learn that the doctrine of the Papists and Lutherans in their
transubstantiation and consubstantiation is very erroneous; for they place the
meritorious price of their Redemption in the gross substance of Christ's flesh
and blood, and in the passive shedding of it upon the Cross by the Romans.



The cleansing virtue of his blood lies in his own Mediatorial shedding of it,
for though he did not break his own body, and power out his own blood with nails
and spears, as the Roman soldiers did, yet he brake his own body in pieces by
separating his own soul from his body by the power of the Divine nature: and
then he did actually shed his own blood when he did pour out his own soul to
death, Isa. 53.12. as a Mediatorial sacrifice of Atonement for the procuring of
his Fathers Atonement for our full Redemption, Justification and Adoption, and
in this sense only the blood of Christ does purge us, Tit. 2.14. and cleanse us
1 John 1.7. and wash us from our sins, Rev. 1.

he was his own executioner. Unto the cleansing virtue of his blood there is
required not only the dignity of his person, but also that besides the shedding
of his blood there is required that he should suffer a supernatural death, i.
e. the paenal death of the curse due to the Elect for their sin, which is
synechdochically signified by [his bloud] this putting of a partial and
insufficient cause for the whole cause, Logicians call a fallacy of putting a
not-cause for a cause; and is a fundamental and perpetual error in the
Dialogue: the value of the Mediatorly obedience which is figuratively signified
by Blood, proceeds from the eminency of the person obeying: the quality of the
obedience, and the acceptance of God jointly, and not from any of them alone.

The blood of Christ whereof 1 John 1.7. and Rev. 1. was blood shed in a way of
satisfaction to divine justice, Romans 3.24, 25. not by way of a price improperly
so called, whose acceptance is by Divines called Acceptilation. That Redeeming
of which Tit. 2.14. signifies a Redemption not by way of an improper or
imperfect, but by way of a full and satisfactory price, such as was necessarily
given for sin, that remission might proceed without any violation of justice:
These objections have been urged before and answered before.

That which the Author in this former Section of the second part affirms is,
that the active bodily death of Christ only ( i. e. his death actuated by the
divine nature, separating his soul from his body, which the Dialogue calls
the masterpiece of his Mediatorial obedience) together with certain foregoing
actions performed by him as God-man, was the meritorious price of our
Redemption, denying that Christ suffered the curse of the Law in our stead;
which it endeavors to prove by comparing the merit of Christ's obedience with
the demerit of Adams disobedience, Romans 5.19. by allegation of certain
Scriptures both misinterpred and corrupted, viz. 1 Cor. 6.20. etc. By the type
of the Redemption-Mony, by the typical Redemption Lev. 25.25, 39, 47. by
placing the meritorious efficacy of the blood of Christ in that it was shed by
his own active priestly power, not by the Roman Soldiers: this last
Proposition it labors to clear by the consideration of his priestly power, and
in his Priestly action, namely, the sprinkling of his own blood. The efficacy
of his death performed by the joint concurrence of both natures, is again
ascribed wholly unto the divine nature; which gave the quickening power to the
oblation of the humane nature: for the illustration and confirmation whereof,
it propounds two distinctions, First of Legal and Mediatoriall obedience. The
second of an active and passive death. Or that Christ died as a Mediator and as
a Malefactor. Of the former distinction there will be a further and more proper
place to speak hereafter; The latter the Dialogue has taken much pains in, and
made much use of; its grounds are Scriptures misalledged: its scope is to make
Christ the sole actor of his own death: the inference from it, that the Jews
did not put Christ to death: but if the distinction it self be proved to be but
a figment, the scope thereof unsound, and if true, yet impertinent: the
inference an untruth (of all which the Reader must judge) then the crutch
falling, all that is built thereupon must needs fall together with it.

SECTION II. A Discourse touching the obedience of Christ to the Moral Law:
Whether it were done for our Justification or no by way of Imputation?
CHAP. I. Of the Dialogues Reasoning against the influence of Christ's obedience
into Justification, by way of Imputation.
THe Dialogue denying the imputation of sin unto Christ, thereupon necessarily
denies Christ's suffering of the punishment due for sin (which is usually
called his passive obedience) and therewithal all legal obedience performed
by him in our stead whether passive or active; hereupon it is necessitated to
deny all Legal Mediatorly obedience, and consequently the legal obedience of
Christ to be the meritorious price of our redemption, or to be the matter of
our Justification. For that which is not at all, cannot be either of them: so
fruitful is error, one pulling on another.

As the denial of Christ's Legal obedience to have place in the meritorious
cause, forced the Author to find out a new Mediatorly obedience, as the price
of our redemption; which we have already examined: so the denial of his Legal
obedience to be the matter of our justification, forces him to invent a new
way of justifying (I cannot say a new matter of Justification, for he does not
present any though that was excepted) of which now (Christ who is our
righteousness assisting) we are to consider.

Before I can speak any thing touching Christ's obedience to the Moral Law, it
must be understood what you mean by this term moral Law: By the term moral
Law you mean the Decalogue or ten Commandments, and call it the moral Law,
because every one of these ten Commandments were engraven in our nature in the
time of innocence: but in my apprehension in this sense the term moral Law is
very ill applied, because it makes most men look at no further matter in the
ten Commandments but at moral duties only: or it makes them look no further
but at sanctified walking in relation to moral duties.



It is sufficient (so far as concerns the matter in hand) unto the
Justification of the use of the term moral, if it be applicable unto the Law,
as given to Adam in innocence; though it were not applicable unto it, under the
notion of the Decalogue. Suppose it be applicable to neither; the Question is
not whether the term Moral be aptly applied unto the Decalogue: but whether
Christ's obedience unto the Law were done for our justification?

The Law in Scripture is called the image of God, because by it written in the
heart man resembled God, Genesis 1.27. The ten words or ten Commandments from the
number of the precepts therein contained, Deuteronomy. 4.13. The two great
Commandments, Mat. 22.40. The Law of Moses, Act. 28.23. because given by Moses,
Joh. 1.17. The Law of works, Romans 3.27. because it required personal and
perfect obedience thereunto, as the condition of our Justification. By Divines
it is called the Decalogue because it consists of ten Commandments. The
second edition of the Law of nature being first concreated with our nature,
Genesis 1.27. and afterward written upon two Tables of stones, Exodus 31.18. The
moral Law because it is the perpetual rule of manners teaching how we should
be ordered toward God and Man, and also to distinguish it from the Ceremonial
and judicial Law: But not because every one of the ten Commandments were
engraven in our nature in the time of Adams innocence, as the Dialogue puts
upon us to make way for its burdening of us with its vain and impertinent
objection against calling the Decalogue the moral Law.

Though the Decalogue or moral Law were written in Adams heart, yet it is not
therefore called the moral Law, because it was written in his heart. Neither is
it so proper to say it was written in our Nature, man's nature remained when
Adam was deprived of Gods image. The image of God after which Adam was created
was a Divine not a Humane Nature.

If the term Moral extend not to the Latitude of the Law in all considerations,
the Law is not therefore contracted unto the term; neither in it self nor in
the intention of the Authors thereof, who have many more names to express the
Law by.

But the truth is, they are greatly deceived, for the ten Commandments do
require faith in Christ as well as moral duties: but faith in Christ was not
engraven in Adams nature in the time of his innocence, he knew nothing
concerning faith in Christ, till after his fall; therefore the ten Commandments
in the full latitude of them were not given to Adam in his innocence: they were
not given till after Christ was published to be the seed of the woman, to break
the devils head-plot, therefore the ten Commandments do require faith in Christ
as well as moral duties.

Christ as well as moral duties, then the ten Commandments require moral
duties as well as faith in Christ; if so, then they may aptly in that respect
be called the moral Law.

Moral duties so called from the Law, that universal and perpetual rule of
manners teaching how man should be ordered, disposed, qualified, conformed, and
(if we may so speak) mannered toward God and man: are co-extended with the Law
it self; Law and Duty are Relates: as therefore faith in Christ becomes a part
of man's duty and orderly or regular disposition and conformity toward God;
what hinders but in this larger acception thereof it may be said to be a moral
duty? though strictly (and according to the sense of that usual distinction of
faith and manners) it is not so taken.

Adams knowing nothing concerning faith in Christ until after the fall, does
not disprove a principle in him whereby he was able to believe in Christ. The
Angels knew no more of Christ's being propounded to them to be believed in as
their head and confirmer, then Adam did of Christ's being propounded to him to
be believed in as his head and Redeemer: Yet the Angels in their Creation
received a principle whereby they were able to believe in Christ as their head
and confirmer (being commanded so to do) without the inspiring of any new
principle. Had Christ in like manner been propounded unto Adam, yet in his
innocence to have been believed in as his Head and Confirmer, which was no more
repugnant to that estate then to the state of the Angels, he had been also
(through proportionable concourse of the first cause) able to have yielded like
obedience thereunto; the concreated image of God in Adam and in the Angels
being the same in kind. Why then was not that principle in Adam able to have
carried him out to have believed in Christ as a Head and Redeemer? could that
command have consisted with the state of innocence?

The cause of Adams not believing in Christ in the state of innocence, was not
through the defect of a principle enabling him thereunto: But by reason, First,
of the inconsistency of justifying faith with that estate. Secondly, By reason
of the not revealing of the object of faith.

Adam in innocence had a principle enabling him to parental duties, yet never
was he called thereunto, as also to duties of mercy and charity, which yet were
inconsistent with that estate: the Saints in glory have a principle whereby
they are able to perform the duties of repentance, patience, mortification; the
like may be said of Christ, though neither Christ nor the Saints are called
thereunto; those services inconsisting with their estate. More might be added
to evince this truth if that were the Question, but it may suffice that by what
is spoken your Argument taken from the engraving of faith in Adams heart, to
prove that the term Moral is unfitly applied to the ten Commandments, is of no
force. The Law of works was the same to Adam before and after the fall, because
the Covenant of works is allwaies the same; the Law being the same the
obligation is the same. Such duties after the fall as are inconsisting with the
Covenant of works, are temporary; neither infer any alteration in the Law, nor
do they exceed the compass of its former obligation.

The Law of God (says Zanchy) speaking of the Law of Moses, Zanch. de rel
gione Christiana sidei. To. 8 cap. 10. aphor. 3.
given in the interim, between the promise of Redemption, made first to Adam,
afterward to Abraham, and the fullfilling thereof; is nothing else but a true
and lively expressed picture of the image of God, according to which man was
created.

Here again the Reader is to keep in mind that the (...) Dialogue is all this
while besides the Question, for our Quere is not, Whether the ten Commandments
in the full latitude of them were given to Adam in innocence: but whether the
obedience of Christ to the Law (that is, to the Law as given to Adam in
innocence) were for our Justification? whose affirmative by the way appears
thus.

That obedience unto the Law whereby Adam in case of his personal performance
thereof had been justified legally, is that, by Christ's performance whereof
received by faith we are justified Evangelically; but the performance of
obedience unto the Law, as given to Adam in innocence is that performance of
obedience unto the Law, by which Adam in case of performance personally had
been justified legally; therefore Christ's performance of the Law that was given
to Adam in innocence (whatsoever its extent be more or less, as given to him
after the fall) received by faith, is that whereby we are justified
evangelically.

If the whole Law and the Prophets do hang upon the ten Commandments as the
general heads of all that is contained within the Law and the Prophets, then
the ten Commandments must needs contain in them rules of faith in Christ as
well as moral duties.

Adam was obliged to believe in Christ, in case God should call for it: because
the Law (now called the Decalogue) was given to Adam as a Rule of Universal,
and absolute obedience; he stood obliged thereby not only unto what God did at
present, but unto whatsoever God should afterward require.

If you intend that whatsoever is contained in the Law and the Prophets, is
reducible to some one or more of the ten Commandments, we also consent.

But if you mean that the ten Commandments strictly taken viz. for the Law of
works as distinguished from the Law of faith contain rules, that is, the
doctrine of faith in Christ: then your inference is denied, for this is to
confound Law and Gospel.

And this is further evident by the Preface of the ten Commandments, which runs
thus, I am Jehovah thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt: Christ
was that Jehovah which brought them out of the Land of Egypt: So it was Christ
that gave the first Commandment, Thou shall have no other Gods but me, that is
to say, Thou shall have no other Gods but the Trinity, and no other mediator
but me alone to be thy Redeemer and Savior. In like sort Christ in the second
Commandment does require obedience to all his outward worship, and in special
to all his Leviticall worship, and the observation of that worship is
especially called the Law of works, though the ten Commandments also must be
included.

But the right application of the typical signification of the Leviticall
worship to the soul, is called the Law of faith; the third Commandment does
teach holy reverence to the person of the Mediator: Faith in Christ is also
typically comprehended under the fourth Commandment.

Mount Sinai admits of a threefold consideration, either as a Law of works
obliging man unto a pure legal obedience, and accordingly to expect life or
death: or as a rule of universal and absolute obedience, obliging man not only
to what was commanded at present, but also unto whatsoever should afterward be
required.

Or as the Covenant of grace it self, though dispensed after a Legal manner,
comprehending the Law as a perpetual rule of righteousness, freed from its
pure legal nature of coaction, malediction and justification by works.

Now that by the Law as given at Mount Sinai we are not to understand the Law
of works only, but also the Covenant of grace dispensed after a Legal manner,
appears thus. Vide Will. in Exo. 19. quest. 20. and 21. item c. 20. qu. 7.
Because it is called a Covenant, Exodus 24.6, 8. the speaker whereof was Jesus
Christ God-man, Ast. 7.38. for he was the speaker that brought them out of the
Land of Egypt, Exodus 20.2. but Jesus Christ brought them out of the Land of
Egypt, which act was a type of their redemption; the delivery of it written in
Tables of Stone by Moses, (therein a typical Mediator) figuring Christ the
Antitype, Gal. 3.29.

It was confirmed by the blood of beasts, a type also of the blood of Christ,
Exodus 24.5, 8. compared with Heb. 9.19. Paul calls it a Testament, a phrase
proper to the Covenant of Grace, presupposing the death of the Testator, and
never attributed to the Covenant of works, See Heb. 9.18, 19, 20. though the
Covenant of which Exo. 24.6, 8. be called the first Covenant (implying, that
the Covenant as dispensed under the Gospel is a second) we are not to
understand by the first and second, two distinct Covenants: but two distinct
dispensations of one and the same Covenant.

By the Law in the first consideration faith is not required, in the second Man
stands obliged to faith in Christ conditionally, viz. when God shall call for
it: in the third Faith is not only required but is a part of our obedience.
Unto whom also as to God the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, our obedience is due
not only according to the four first Commandments, as the Dialogue speaks, but
also according to all the ten Commandments, fulfill the Law of Christ, Gal.
6.2. ye serve the Lord Christ, Col. 3.23, 24, The old Testament or Covenant
(says Paraeus) in its first and proper signification was the doctrine of
spiritual grace, Palam quidem sub condition perfectae obedientiae recte vero
sub condition paenitentiae and fide. Par. in Heb. 8. quest. 1.
promising eternal Salvation to the Fathers, and dull people of the Jews;
openly indeed under the condition of perfect obedience unto the moral Law; and
threatening of eternal malediction, except they fulfill it: together with the
unsupportable burden of rites and yoke of the most strict Mosaical polity, but
secretly under the condition of faith in the Messiah to come, prefigured with
the shadows, and the types of the Ceremonies, that by this manner of
doctrine-worship and polity, a people of a stiffer neck might partly be tamed,
and be led by the hand, as it were, by a kind of paedagogy unto Christ lying
hid in those shadows: thus Paraeus.

As the Gospel is called the Law of faith because it gives salvation by faith
without personal works, so the first Covenant is called the Law of works,
because it requires works, i. e. personal keeping of the Law unto salvation.

The observation of the Leviticall worship cannot be especially called the Law
of works, because it is a part of the Ceremonial Law, long before which was
the Law of works, besides its ceremonial leading us unto Christ takes us off
from the Law of works, and carries us to the Law of faith.

CHAP. II. Of the Dialogues Arguments against the Imputation of Christ's
Obedience.
I Cannot see how the common doctrine of Imputation can stand with Gods
justice; God cannot in justice impute our Saviors Legal obedience to us for
our just righteousness or justification, because it is point blank against the
condition of the Legal Covenant so to do: for the Legal promise of eternal
life is not made over to us upon condition of Christ's personal performance, but
upon condition of our personal performance.

Gal. 3.21. God is just, and the justifier of him that believes.

Such was the demerit of sin, Long itaque ista differunt, etc. Rhetorf. de
oration. exer. 2. c. 3.
why man according to justice could not be justified legally: but not such, why
it should be unjust for God to justify him Evangelically, according to Gods
righteous constitution. Such was man's desert why he should not be justified by
his own righteousness, yet man's demerit not being absolute, but having
dependence upon Gods free constitution; he could not deserve why God might not
justify him by the righteousness of another if he pleased.

If it were unjust for God to justify otherwise then legally, then it were
unjust for God to justify in the way of the Dialogue, viz. by atonement or
acceptilation without all legal obedience, it is more against legal
justification to justify without legal obedience, personal, or otherwise;
then to justify by the legal obedience of another: Sophisma a limitato ad non
limitatum.
the Dialogue by this reason fights as much or rather more against it self then
against us; the fallacy lies in asserting that in an unlimited sense which
holds only in a limited sense: God cannot justify man fallen legally, ergo he
cannot justify man fallen Evangelically, by the righteousness of another; is
not only a mere non-consequence in reason, but also a Pestilence in religion.

It Is evident that God never propounded the Law of works to the fallen sons of
Adam, with any intent at all that ever any of the fallen sons of Adam should
seek for justification and atonement in Gods sight by Legal obedience, but his
intent was directly contrary, for when he propounded the Legal promise of life
eternal to the fallen sons of Adam, he did propound it upon condition of their
own personal obedience, to allure them thereby to search into their own natural
unrighteousness, by this perfect rule of Legal righteousness, so by this Law
of life God intended chiefly to make the soul of the fallen sons of Adam to be
sensible of their own spiritual death in corruption and sin, thereby to provoke
our souls to seek for life some other way, viz. by the mediation of the
Mediator promised; So it follows by good consequence that God did never intend
to justify any corrupt son of Adam by Legal obedience done by his own person,
nor yet by our Saviors obedience imputed as the formal cause of a sinners
justification or righteousness.

of the manner of justification; the matter o^ ^^stification is the same in
both Covenants, viz. Legal obedience; but the way of attaining it is contrary:
that by personal righteousness, this by the righteousness of another.

The principal use of the Law by accident is, that seeing our selves incapable
of righteousness thereby; to provoke the soul to seek for life some other way,
viz. by the mediation of the Mediator promised; so says the Dialogue, to be
our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith,
Gal. 3.24. that is, that we might be partakers of the righteousness of
another; so says Paul.

Though the Ceremonial and Judicial Law with their discipline are ceased, yet
the Moral Law still continues as a perpetual rule of obedience, whereunto
believers are bound not in order to justification, but in way of thanksgiving.
As a Schoolmaster, until Christ, so long as there remains any of the Elect to
be converted, according to the ordinary way of Gods dispensation. Paul speaks
frequently of this accidental use of the Law in order to conversion after the
cessation of the judicial and ceremonial Law, Christ not only being come in the
flesh, but also dead, buried, and ascended, Romans 3.20. and 4.15. and 7.8, 9,
10, 11, 13. into heaven.

The whole Law of Moses was a schoolmaster to lead us unto Christ, the moral
Law leads us unto Christ by an accidental direction of it self, it shuts
souls up into the prison of sin, that it may condemn; it is by accident that
being shut up, we seek after righteousness and life by faith in Jesus Christ:
the ceremonial Law led unto Christ by direct signification, and its period of
duration, the judicial Law led unto Christ by his distinction of the Jews from
all other people, and by the the period of its duration.

It follows by good consequence from this School-masterly discipline of the
Law, that God did never intend to justify any corrupt son of Adam by Legal
obedience done by his own person; but that God did not intend to justify his
Elect by our Saviors Legal obedience, follows not at all from hence, except
in the mistake of the Author of the Dialogue. Paul evidently enough concludes
the direct contrary consequence, Par. in loc.
Gal. 3.24. those words the Law was added for transgressors till the seed
should come, Gal. 3.19. are to be interpreted according hereunto in a limited
not in an absolute sense.

God cannot in justice justify sinners by our Saviors Legal obedience
imputed: because Legal obedience is altogether insufficient to justify a
corrupt son of Adam from his original sin; for our corrupt and sinful nature
did not fall upon us for the breach of any of Moses his Laws, but for the
breach of another Law of works, which God gave to Adam in his innocence by way
of prohibition, In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death; so God
cannot in justice impute our Saviors Legal obedience to any corrupt son of
Adam for his full and perfect righteousness, because it is altogether
insufficient to make a sinner righteous from his original sin.

Luke 16.17. Joh. 15.25. or for all the Books of Moses, Matt. 7.12. sometimes
more strictly for the Moral Law, Romans 7.7. So Paul opposes the Law of works to
the Law of faith; and Luke the Law of Moses unto Christ, Act. 13.39. because by
him all that believe are justified from all things from which they could not be
justified by the Law of Moses.

The Law of Moses taken strictly, and the Law of works (usually known by the
name of the Decalogue or ten Commandments) are the same and differ no
otherwise, then as two Editions of the same Book; the Law of Moses being
nothing else but an external pattern of the internal Law of nature, printed in
the hearts of our first Parents by their creation after the Image of God,
consisting in holiness and righteousness, Ephesians. 4.24. the sum of the two Tables,
it is called the Law of works, Romans 3.27. because it required personal
obedience unto life, Lev. 18.5. the Law of Moses, Act. 13.39. because it was
given to the people of Israel by the Ministry of Moses, Joh. 1.17. In the Law
strictly taken (which also holds concerning the Law taken largely) we must
distinguish between that part of it which is moral positive. Vide Will. Exodus
21. qu. 1. Jus morale positivum, jus divinum positivum: Weems exerc. 37. in
precep. 8.
(The habitual writing whereof in our hearts by nature together with its
obligation, were both from the first instant of Creation; this binds
perpetually, and is immutable: so essential is the nulling and obliging nature
of the Law, as that though life be not attained by obedience thereunto, as it
was in the Covenant of works, yet is obedience thereunto unseparable from life
in the Covenant of grace) and that part which is divine positive, which though
it be habitually written in our hearts by nature, yet it binds not without a
superadded command; these are accessory Commandments added to the Law written;
and bind not by force of creation or light of nature, but by force of
institution: both moral positive, and divine positive Law are the Law of
nature, only that is the primary this is the secondary Law of nature. As God at
Mount Sinai after the Decalogue, gave the judicial and ceremonial Laws, which
were accessory commands, part of, and reducible thereunto, as conclusions to
their principles, so God at the creation having given the Law unto Adam by
writing it in his heart, Genesis 1.27. after that gave him this accessory command
concerning the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil, Genesis 2.17. part of and
reducible thereunto, and as a Conclusion of its principle.

The transgression then of Adam in eating of the forbidden fruit, was a breach
of the same Law of works, which was given to Adam, and afterward given by
Moses: and so the punishment of original sin inflicted upon man therefore, did
fall upon us for the breach of Moses Law; which was first given to Adam and
afterward given by Moses: that the imputation of the Legal obedience of Christ
(God so being pleased to accept thereof) is sufficient to make sinners
righteous from all sins, is manifest, because Christ performed perfect
obedience for us unto the Law of works given to Adam, which had Adam himself
personally performed, he had been just.

The Law that was given by Moses convinces us effectually and fully of Adams
sin, Romans 5.20. moreover the Law entered, that sin i. e. Adams sin (for of that
he speaks) might abound; therefore Adams sin was committed against the Law of
Moses; to this purpose serves the labor of Divines, showing how Adams sin was
a violation of the most, yea, of all the Commandments: if so, then it was a
breach of Moses Law.

If Christ's Legal obedience imputed were sufficient to justify a sinner from
all kind of sin both original and actual, then Christ made his oblation in
vain, for it had been altogether needless for him to give his soul as a
Mediatorial sacrifice of atenement for the procuring of our justice in Gods
sight, if his Legal righteousness performed by his life had been sufficient to
justify us from all sin in Gods sight; for if righteousness could have come
to sinners by the Law, then Christ died in vain, Gal. 2.21.

obedience was sufficient to justify man innocent, but not to justify man
fallen. The law in case of innocence required only doing, Lev. 18.5. but in
case of sin it cannot be satisfied without suffering, Genesis 2.17. and doing Gal.
3.10. that is, without both passive and actual obedience; the particle [by]
Gal. 2.21. notes the manner, not the matter; obedience unto the Law neither
cease nor can cease to be the matter of justification, only it is the
obedience performed thereunto by Christ, not by us, that is, not our own, but
the obedience of another imputed to us by grace, and received by faith the
effect of grace. We have the righteousness of the Law, but we have it not by
the Law.

The argumentation of the Apostle proceeds thus, if we be justified by works
Christ died in vain; but Christ is not dead in vain, therefore we are not
justified by works: hereby expressly concluding against justification by our own
obedience, and implicitly for justification by Christ's obedience to the Law.

Christ's Legal obedience was but the work of his flesh or of his humane nature;
therefore it could not be the procuring cause of Gods atonement for
justification; for no obedience is meritorious but that obedience which is
mediatorial. I never heard that the Father required the Mediator to perform
Legal obedience at a proper condition of his Mediators office, nay, our Savior
himself does testify, that his flesh (alone considered) does not profit us to
life and salvation, Joh. 6.63. therefore not his Legal obedience: for that was
but the work of his flesh or humane nature.

of subsistence, infers a dependence in respect of operations: action
includes being, as essential to it: we may as well affirm nothing to be
something, as to affirm that to act of it self, that does not subsist of it
self: From the personal union it comes to pass (says Ames) that all the
actions and passions of Christ are referred partly unto his person as unto the
proper term of them, Med. lib. 1. cap. 18.
although some of them are to be referred to one nature, and some unto another,
as unto the next principles.

To be incarnate was an act of Legal obedience, God sent forth his son made of
a woman made under the Law, Gal. 4.4. a body have thou prepared me, In the
Volume of thy Book it is written of me, that I should do thy will, and then
said I, Lo I come, Heb. 10.5 But the Father required of the Mediator to be
incarnate, as a proper condition of his Mediatorly office, Gal. 4.5. to redeem
such as be under the Law; to fulfill the Law is Legal obedience, but the
Father required of the Mediator to fulfill the Law, Mat. 5.17. I came to fulfill
it, and that as a proper condition of his Mediators office; as he came so he
was sent, but he was sent as Mediator: for the Mediator to suffer death as our
surety in a way of justice, is an act of Legal obedience; but the Father
required of the Mediator as a proper condition of the Mediators office to
suffer death for us in a way of justice, if his soul shall set it self a
sacrifice for sin, he shall see his seed, etc. Isa. 53. therefore the Father
required of the Mediator Legal obedience as a condition of his Mediators
office, to suffer death for us in a way of justice.

There is great iarring among Divines about the right stating of the doctrine
of imputation.

1. Some affirm, that God the Father does impute Christ's Legal obedience to
sinners as their obedience for their full and perfect justification.

2. Others do affirm that Christ's Legal obedience imputed is not sufficient to
make sinners righteous, and so they do affirm that God does impute another
kind of Christ's righteousness to sinners for their full justification, viz.
the purity of his nature to justify us from original sin.

3. Others go further in the point of imputation, for they affirm that God
imputes another kind of righteousness to sinners for their full
justification, viz. the passive obedience: and so by necessary consequence they
do make sinners to be their own Mediators, because they do make Christ's
Mediatorial obedience to be a sinners obedience by Gods imputation.

viz. habitual and actual. The asserters of the last expressly are to be
understood, as asserting the former implicitly: the act presupposing the habit
then spoke not heretofore exclusively; the reason why later Writers speak more
expressly is, because opposers have acted more subtly.

The inference of sinners being their own Mediators from the imputation of
passive obedience, arises from your misunderstanding our doctrine, which
imputes the obedience of Christ in respect of its efficacy, not in respect of
its formality. M. Forbes acknowledges no such great jarring with our
imputation, which he testifies to be without impiety, and any matter of strife
in it self, were this jarring not only great, but greater then it is: the
Gospel remains the Gospel, notwithstanding through man's corruption it becomes
an occasion of contention.

The actions of Christ's obedience neither active nor passive can be made ours
by Gods imputation, no more then our sinful actions can be made his by Gods
imputation; but our sinful actions cannot be made his by Gods imputation; as I
have at large expressed in the opening Genesis 2.17.

Cor. 5.21.

If God do make sinners righteous by the active obedience of Christ imputed,
then Christ must perform all manner of obedience for us that God does require
of us, or else God cannot in justice make us perfectly righteous by the active
obedience of Christ imputed; but Christ did not perform all manner of acts of
obedience for us that God requires of us, because he was never married, etc.
and yet we have as much need to be made righteous in such like actions as in
any, therefore God cannot in justice make us perfectly righteous by the actions
of Christ's active obedience imputed.

viz. actually, unto such duties as it calls to the exercise of, and
habitually unto the rest; otherwise it was impossible for man to be justified
by the Law: neither Adam himself, nor any man, sustaining all relations. Christ
being an infinite person, and our surety, in performing all that was required
of him: he performed more then not only Adam, but then all men had they stood
in their innocence had performed. If he performed more then was required of us,
then he performed as much. Christ performed actually what was so required, and
habitually or rather eminently, whatsoever could be required: if man had stood
in his innocence, he had had but as much grace as there was duty in the
command, his grace had been in measure because but a creature: but Christ had
more grace in him as man then there was duty in the command; Grace was in him
out of measure, by virtue of the personal union.

CHAP. III. Of the Dialogues distinction between Legal and Mediatoriall
Obedience.
IT is a necessary thing to observe a right difference between Christ's Legal
and Mediatorial obedience, which we have in part distinguished already, but for
your further satisfaction I will again distinguish between them.

I grant that God required the Mediator to fulfill all righteousness, but yet
his obedience to the Law of works, and his obedience to the Law of Mediatorship
must be considered as done for several ends and uses.

viz. the dignity of the person, such a kind of obedience, and Gods
acceptance.

The fallacy of this distinction which is one of the fundamental errors of the
Dialogue, lies in the mistake of an adjunct for a form, viz. in taking that
which is but an inseparable concomitant or qualification of obedience for
another kind of obedience.

The terms of Legal and Mediatorly are two names of the same obedience, but
signify not two kinds of obedience; one and the same obedience is called
Legal, in respect of the Law which is the rule: and Mediatorly, in respect of
the office of the person obeying.

As if upon supposition of Paul's discharge of the debt he engaged for unto
Philemon in Onesimus behalf, one should say, it were both a Legal and
fidejussorial, i.e. a sureties act.

That the legal obedience of Christ was not the obedience of Christ as man
only, but of God-man, yea, of God man Mediator, is proved thus.

Christ received the Law not as man only, but as God-man Mediator.

Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, Mine ears have thou opened, a
body have thou prepared, Heb. 10.5. burnt-offering and sin-offering have thou
not required, then said I, Lo I come, In the Volume of thy Book it is written
of me, to do thy will O my God, yea, thy Law is in my heart; the boring of the
ear, and preparing of a body note his incarnation, i e. Christ as God man.

The Law or will of God which he was to do, is that will whereby we are
sanctified, the word taken largely for our being consecrated unto God, and
therefore notes Christ's redeeming of us.

Christ was made subject to the Law, not as man only but as God-man Mediator:
But when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman,
made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, that they might
receive the Adoption of Sons, Gal. 4 4.5. His Son made of a woman, signifies
God-man: the Law whereunto he was subject, is the Law whereunto we are subject;
he was made under the Law, from under which he redeemed us: his circumcision
argued him a debtor to that Law, chap. 5.3. the end was to redeem us, which
evinceth his doing thereof as Mediator.

Christ fullfilled the Law not as man only, but as God-man Mediator. Think
not that I came to destroy the Law or the Prophets, I came not to destroy it
but to fulfill it, Mat. 5.17. compared with Heb. 10 7. he that had a body
prepared came to do the will of God, by which, i.e. by the doing of which (the
relate taken together with the correlate of obedience) we are sanctified:
Christ came to fulfill the Law as he was sent, but God set him as God-man
Mediator, Gal. 4.4. those words are spoken by Christ after John's Baptism in the
time of his Mediatorly obedience, according to the Dialogue.

If Christ then according to the Scripture had the Law of works or the Law of
Moses written in his heart, was made subject thereunto, and fullfilled it not
as man only but as God-man Mediator, then Christ's Legal obedience was not the
obedience of a man only.

All the Legal actions of Christ God-man from his incarnation to his passion
were the actions of Christ God-man Mediator.

All the Legal actions of Christ from his incarnation to his passion were the
actions of Christ God-man, therefore all the Legal actions of Christ from his
incarnation to his passion, were the actions of Christ God-man Mediator. The
major is not denied by the Dialogue, which though it asserts the Legal
obedience of Christ to be done by him as man only, yet it affirms not (to my
observation) that any act of God-man was not the act of God-man Mediator.
Neither indeed can the mayor (with any good reason) be denied, even those who
say Christ merited for himself (which yet is generally denied by the
protestants) understand the word wherefore Phil. 2.9. not causally, but as a
note of consequence, according as it is used, Act. 20.26. Heb. 3.17. 1 Pet.
2.10. and reading those words Heb. 2.9. with a comma, or rather a colon, at
death, and referring those words, suffering death unto the words foregoing
[made little] not to the word following [crowned] acknowledge, that in those
actions wherein he merited for himself, he also merited for us, which is
sufficient to the Proposition asserted. Let an instance of any Legal act of
Christ God-man incarnate, be produced, which was not an act of Christ God-man
Mediator, as such, i.e, as Mediator.

Principium operationum commune persona, formale natura. Polan. syntag li. 6.
cap. 27. Trelcat. Jun instit. l. 2. c 4. Ame. med. l. 1. c. 18. Wolleb.
compend. l. 1. c. 16.
The minor appears because rational actions of persons flow from the person as
their agent; In the work of Christ four things are to be considered.

1. The agent, i.e. the person.

2. The principle according to which the action proceeds, viz. either or both
of the two natures.

3. The action.

4. The work it self, that operation which proceeds from both natures, and so
it is twofold, in respect of its next principle is yet but one action; because
the person or agent is but one: actions in respect of their next principle
proper to either nature, are common to the person consisting of both natures.

The humane nature having no subsistence of its self, it is impossible it
should have any efficiency of it self: Non-subsistence says nothing: nothing
cannot act of it self, but of this I spoke before.

That Law which faith in Christ a Savior establishes, that Law Christ as
God-man Mediator establishes; but the Law of works is that Law which faith in
Christ a Savior establishes, Romans 3.2. therefore the Law of works was
established, and consequently obeyed by Christ as God-man Mediator: for the
establishing of the Law includes Legal obedience.

He who as God-man Mediator is the perfecting end ( i.e. is he, in whom the Law
has its perfecting end) of the Law, performed obedience to the Law: but Christ
i.e. God-man Mediator, as such, is the perfecting end of the Law (so is the
plain and acknowledged sense of the Greek word) Romans 10.4. therefore Christ as
God-man Mediator performed obedience to the Law.

The Law is fullfilled as concerning them that are saved, Gal. 3.10. either by
the obedience of Christ God-man Mediator, or by the personal obedience of the
Believer, not by the personal obedience of the Believer, Romans 3.3. Gal. 3.10.
therefore by the personal obedience of Christ God-man Mediator.

Polan. l. 6. c. 14. Park. de desc. l. 3 n. 52, 53. Rivet. in Psa. 40.
Consideratio deitatis alia (...) alia (...). Polan. syntag. lib. 6. c. 12.
Inequalitas officiorum non tollit aequalitatem naturae, aut personaru^. Ursin.
expl. catech par. 2. qu. 33. q. 6.
Christ Jesus (says Polanus) from the time whereat he took upon himself the
form of a servant, began to pay the price of our redemption: Christ is such a
Mediator as is a debtor to keep the whole Law: to that effect it was necessary,
says Rivet, that seeing Christ was our surety he should be made under the Law.

The divine nature considered absolutely in it self, is not subject unto the
Law, as subsisting in personal union with the humane nature, it is subject in
respect of voluntary dispensation; the humane nature is subject absolutely, and
properly, being a creature.

The sum is, Christ, i.e. the person who is God man Mediator was subject unto
the Law absolutely, as touching the humane nature, in respect of voluntary
dispensation and office, as concerning the divine nature: it is a received rule
given for the understanding of this mystery, that inequality of office takes
not away equality of nature and persons.

First, God appointed the Mediator to fulfill the Law of works, I mean, so
much of it as fell within the compass of his humane course of life, not as a
proper condition belonging to the Law of Mediatorship: [as Mediator] but as
true man only, for he was bound to observe the Law of works as he was true man,
as much as any other Jew, by a native right, Gal. 4.4.

Paul speaks, Gal. 4.4. was the obedience of Christ not as man only, but as
Mediator, which is plain in that it was to redeem us that were under the Law,
ver. 5.

Secondly, Though I make this Legal obedience to be no more but humane
obedience, yet I grant that he was thereby qualified, and fitted to make his
soul a Mediatorly sacrifice, for he could not have been the Lamb of God without
spot, if he had not been exact in the performance of so much Legal obedience as
fell within the compass of his humane course of life, Heb. 7.26.

Rhetorf. de gra. exerc. 1. c. 2.
Righteousness or obedience in Christ has a double consideration, either it is
considered in him as in such a person, and not our surety; or as in such a
person and our surety: righteousness in his person qualified him for the
service of a surety: Legal Mediatorly obedience, or his personal and
surety-obedience are distinguished only notionally not really, i. e. it is one
and the same obedience, considered according to two notions.

Thirdly, The rewards which his father did promise him for his Mediatorly
obedience, do far exceed the rewards which he does promise to Legal obedience;
for I cannot find that ever the Father did promise to reward any man's Legal
obedience with such special rewards as he does promise unto Christ's
Mediatoriall Obedience. I will give thee the end of the earth for thy
possession, Psa. 2. And He shall see his seed, and prolong his days, when he
shall make his soul a trespasse-offering, Isa. 53.10.



Fourthly, Christ was not bound to fulfill personal obedience to every branch of
the Law of works (for he had not wife and children to instruct, etc.) but he
was bound to fulfill every branch and circumstance of the Law of Mediatorship,
he must not be wanting in the least circumstance thereof, if he had been
wanting in the least circumstance he had been wanting in all.



The Law of works, and the Law of the Mediator differ not as two Laws, but as
the whole and the part of the same Law. The will of God concerning the Mediator
was that he should obey the Law of works, Quando igitur quaeritur qualem
obedientiam Deo praestiterit. Pareus in loc. Rivet. in Psalm. 40.8.
and more: Pareus commenting upon those words, Heb. 10.8. speaks thus: If it be
enquired (says he) what obedience Christ performed unto God; we must answer,
both the universal obedience of the whole Law given to man, and the special
obedience imposed upon the Mediator alone: Christ fails not of fulfilling the
least iota unto either. By the Law Psa. 40. (says Rivet) he understands as
well all the Commandments of God common to all men, as the singular command of
laying down his life.

M. Calvin observes rightly, that some of the actions of Christ were proper to
his Godhead only; and some of his actions were proper to his humane nature
only; and some of his actions were common to both his natures, and this
observation (says M. Calvin) shall do no small service to assoyl many doubts,
if the Reader can but fitly apply it.

Nestorius and Eutyches were condemned. Had you sufficiently weighed the use
that Calvin makes of his observation in the words immediately following, viz.
For it is mavelous how much the unskilful, yea, not utterly unlearned are
cumbred with such forms of speech which they see spoken by Christ which do
rather well agree with his Godhead then with his Manhood; because they consider
not that they agree with his person wherein he is showed both God and man, and
with the office of a Mediator, you might not only have spared this Citation,
but also the very distinction it self.

It is absurd to affirm that all the acts of Christ's obedience were Mediatory,
because his person consisted of both natures; for then his natural Actions
should be Mediatorial as well as any other; You may as well say, that all
actions of the Son, and of the holy Ghost are the actions of the Father,
because they are united into one Godhead, as say that the acts of Christ's Legal
obedience were Mediatorial, because his person consisted of two Natures.



Not his person alone, but both his Person and Office are requisite to every
action of a Mediator; all his natural actions of obedience were Mediatorly:
Such natural actions which are so the actions of men, as yet they are not
humane, Rational, or Moral; which considered in themselves, without all
circumstances of good or evil, are indifferent; not falling within the compass
of a rule, are not here considerable.

You have been already told, that we affirm not the Legal acts of Christ to be
Mediatorly acts, because his person consists of both natures with the reason
thereof: But we say, the Legal obedience of Christ were the actions of the
person, consisting of both natures; they were not the actions of a mere man:
and because they were performed by such a person, in way of such an office,
they were all Mediatorly actions.

The distinction of the personal actions in the Trinity, arising from the
natures of the Persons in the Divine essence, holds proportion with our
asserting the actions of Christ to proceed from his Person as the Agent:
Notwithstanding the two Natures are Principles respectively of such actions.

They that have competent knowledge in these great Mysteries of the Trinity of
Persons, in one essence, and the two natures in one Person, will soon see your
inconsiderateness in your comparing the Person, Natures, and Legal obedience
of Christ, with the Divine Nature, Trinity of Persons, and Personal or
Essential acts.

As for example all the Actions of Christ from his birth until he began to be
thirty years of age, must be considered as natural actions, or as Legal acts of
obedience: for till he began te be thirty of years of age, he led a private
life with his parents.

Secondly, When he began to be thirty years of age he did then begin to declare
himself to be the Mediaatour, for when he was baptized of John in Jordan, the
holy Ghost lighted upon him in visible manner before all John's Auditory, and
the Father by his voice from Heaven declared that he was the Mediator.

Thirdly, In the upshot of his life, as soon as he had fullfilled all things
that were written of him he sanctified himself, and sacrificed his oblation by
the joint concurrence of both natures; and this was the masterpiece of his
Mediatorial obedience. Having thus distinguished the actions of the Mediator,
we may and must rank his acts of obedience accordingly; his obedience to the
Law of works must be ranked among the actions of his humane nature, and his
obedience to the Law of Mediatorship must be ranked among his Mediatorial
actions, which he performed by the personal union of both his natures.

Joseph had not declared himself to be the Brother of the Patriarchs and
Benjamin, therefore he was not their Brother. Nor was his weeping in secret,
Genesis 42.24. and weeping again in secret, and his soul-pouring upon his Brother,
Genesis 43.30. brotherly acts.

It has already (I hope) been sufficiently proved, that all the Legal actions
of Christ from his incarnation to his passion were the actions of a Mediator.

Christ was a Mediator to be incarnate before the foundation of the world from
eternity.

It may be you think (as many others do) that Christ began to pay the price of
our redemption from the very first beginning of his incarnation, for many
affirm that he was conceived by the holy Ghost without any original sin, that
so he might thereby justify us from our original sin, which opinion I have
confuted: but the open History of the Evangelists do speak nothing at all of
his Mediatoriall actions, till he was publicly installed into the office of
the Mediator by John's Baptism.

Wherefore when he comes into the world he says, Sacrifice and offering thou
would not, but a body have thou prepared me: In burnt offering and sacrifice
for sin thou have had no pleasure; then said I, Lo I come (in the Volume of thy
Book it is written of me) to do thy will O God: Coming into the world, his
incarnation, doing his will, is the fullfilling the Law for our Redemption.

Whatsoever Righteousness the Law required unto Justification, Christ
performed. Polan. de conceptione Christi.
But the Law required inherent righteousness from the first moment of our
conception, and not only active obedience. Therefore it was necessary that
Christ who fullfilled the Law should be inherently righteous from the first
moment of his conception.

The Dialogue it self acknowledges some Mediatorly acts before thirty years of
age, viz, many Mediatorly prayers, and his incarnation, though incarnation is
not a Mediatorly or office-act, but an act constituting the person called to
that office. If that his meaning be of public actions of a Mediator: Our
Question is not, Whether there were any public Mediatorly acts of Christ
before his Baptism, but whether his Legal obedience was Mediatorly obedience?

Yea, when Christ began to be thirty years of age, he was publicly installed
into the Mediators office, by the joint consent of all the Trinity; and so our
Savior does explain the matter unto John, saying, Thus our Desire is (or thus
it becomes us) to fulfill all Righteousness, Mat. 3.14. These two terms, 1.
our desire, 2. our fulfilling all righteousness had need to be explainad: the
term us or our desire must have relation to some other, namely, to the joint
desire of the Trinity: all the Trinity desired to fulfill all that
righteousness which appertained to the Mediators Person and Office: at this
time they desired to fulfill that part of righteousness which appertained to
his public Installment.

Thus it Becomes Us.

The speaker is Christ, The Persons spoken of are Christ and John, The
Righteousness spoken of is the Office and Service committed respectively to
Christ and John, part of which consisted in the present work, which though John
at first hearkened not to, yet soon after he did. If the Dialogue intends those
words to fulfill that righteousness which appertained to the Mediator
formally; that is to make the Trinity the Mediator: If efficiently then though
the Interpretation were good, it is altogether impertinent to the confirming of
that misleading distinction of Legal and Mediatorial obedience.

CHAP. IV. Of the Dialogues further Reasoning against the influence of Christ's
obedience unto Justification by way of Imputation.
THe Apostle in that Text Romans 8.4. that the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, does not speak of that part of Legal obedience which God
requires of every man that looks to be saved thereby: but in this place he
speaks only of that part of righteousness which the Gospel-part of the Law
taught and typified by their sacrifices of Atonement, which sacrifices are
called sacrifices of Righteousness, because they taught sinners how they might
obatin the Fathers Atonement by the Mediators sacrifice of Atonement for their
full and perfect Righteousness.



It is plain enough by the dependence of this upon the foregoing verse, that
the Law here spoken of is the same with the Law there spoken of, namely, the
Law that was weak through the flesh, that is, unable to justify by reason of
sin, which all know to be the Law of works.

The way of fullfilling this Righteousness is by the Gospel, which teaches
and gives faith in Christ, Bucan. loc. 30. qu. 28. Vide Par. Romans 10. dub. 5.
col. 2.
which consists not in Atonement, as the Dialogue speaks of, but in the Legal
obedience of another made ours by faith, and therefore called the Righteousness
of faith; so that Righteousness or Legal obedience is the matter of our
Justification, both according to Law and Gospel; the difference lies in the
manner of Justification: The Law justifies by our Personal obedience
fullfilled thereunto, the Gospel by our Sureties obedience thereunto received
by faith.

Typical Sacrifices of Atonement are called Sacrifices of Righteousness,
because they taught and typified this truth.

The phrase SACRIFICES of RIGHTEOUSNESS signifies Righteous sacrifices, that
is, Sacrifices done in Righteousness: Sacrifices (says M. Ainsworth) just and
right, and in faith, contrary to those which the Prophet reproves, Mal. 1.14.
Not Sacrifices causing Righteousness (which if so it were) did but further
confirm that Christ the Antitype of the Legal Sacrifices by his obedience unto
the death, purchased Righteousness by faith. So that hence there is neither
cause nor occasion to confound Righteousness and Atonement. But let us proceed
to your other Reasons.

Did Christ condemn sin in the flesh by his Legal Obedience? no; but by his
Mediatorial Obedience only, Romans 8.3, 4.



God sent his Son for sin, when he sent him to make his soul a sacrifice of
Atonement for sin, as I have opened the phrase at large in 2 Cor. 5.21.



In brief the meaning of the Apostle lies thus, when God sent his Son to die as
a Malefactor in the similitude of sinful flesh, Christ did at the same time
condem^ sin, because he did at the same time die as a Mediator, and made his
soul a Mediatorial sacrifice of Atonement for sin, and so he procured his
Fathers Atonement to poor sinners, and by this means he condemned sin in the
flesh, and made sinners sinlesse, that is to say, Righteous.

But this distinction of the double death of Christ I have opened more at large
in Gal. 3.13. and Luke 22.19. and in Psa. 22.15.

The strength then of this misinterpretation being built upon your distinction
of the double death of Christ, namely, his dying as a Mediator,

To be sinlesse is not enough to being Righteous: the unreasonable creature is
sinlesse but not Righteous.

The Dialogue having taken away from us the righteousness or Justification of
the Legal obedience of Christ imputed, now tells us what is our
Righteousness, namely, Gods Atonement or the Fathers Atonement, and page 120.
we have the Dialogues meaning concerning Atonement explained by the several
terms thereof: in pardoning and forgiving sin, blotting out and covering sin,
bearing and taking away sin, purging and cleansing of sinners, passing over,
and not imputing of sin; so that a sinners righteousness, justice, or
justification, according to the Author, is nothing else but the Fathers
Atonement, pardon, and forgiveness, page 118.

The Hebrew translated Atonement properly signifies to cover something, (...)
yet not with a garment or the like, which may be taken off again, but with
some cleaving and tenacious matter, as pitch, lime, mortar, etc, wherewith the
thing covered is wholly hidden: hence referred unto wrath it signifies to
pacify or appease, and that either with a gift prepared, Genesis 32.20. or
compensation made for an injury done, Expiare est piaculum pro peccato
praestare.
2 Samuel 21.3. referred to sin, it signifies to explate, whence the day of
Atonement Lev. 16. is called a day of expiation. An expiation is a sacrifice
given for the purging and satisfaction of some great offense. To purge Psalm.
65.3. and Psalm. 79.9. To be propitious or merciful, Deuteronomy. 21.8. And lastly to
pardon Psa. 78.38. in which last sense the Dialogue takes it for our
righteousness and justification. This the Reader is desired to take full
notice of, it in the Dialogues corrupt sense being that Helena, in defense
whereof a good part of the ensuing discourse spends it self, and the just
confutation whereof here given, and kept in mind, may serve as an answer to
the after frequent repetitions of the same thing.

That Atonement or pardon of sin only (especially such as denies the Legal
Obedience of Christ imputed) cannot be the righteousness of a sinner, is
proved thus.

The difference of the nature of justice and pardon of sin, manifests that
pardon of sin only is not justice or righteousness.

Pardon and sinlessenesse take away deformity in respect of the Law, but
righteousness consists in a conformity unto the Law.

Pardon of sin is an effect of that which is the sinners righteousness: For
the clearing whereof three distinct notions in the justification of a sinner
are to be attended to.

1. Righteousness it self, i. e. the active and passive obedience of Christ
imputed, called by some justification taken actively, or the application
thereof on Gods part.

2. The receiving of this gift of righteousness by faith, Romans 5.17. whereby
we are just, called by some justification taken passively, or the application
thereof on our part.

3. Vid. Buch. loc. 31 q. 6. Remissio peccatorum est pars nostrae
justificationis, sed non est pars nostrae justitiae. Polan. syntag. p. 1493.
The judicial pronouncing of the believer in the Court of conscience hereupon
to be just, by the virtue of the promise of the Gospel, for the merit sake of
Christ, this Divines call our justification, because we are now declared to be
just, and are judicially just, that is, the Believer now made righteous by
faith, is judicially discharged, and declared to be discharged from the
condemning guilt and punishment of sin, and accepted as righteous unto eternal
life. The first is our righteousness or justice it self. The second is our
being justified. The third is the judicial pronunciation that we are
justified, so that pardon of sin is not a part of righteousness it self, but a
part of the judicial sentence concerning one that is righteous, and because he
is righteous.

To say pardon of sin is righteousness is self, is to confound the effect with
the cause.

Whence the reason is plain, why notwithstanding both righteousness or
justice, and the pardon of sins be by Divines frequently made ingredients into
the definition of justification, yet righteousness and pardon of sins are not
to be looked at as the same thing. Such definitions are not (nor is it by the
Author thereof so intended) perfect definitions adequate to thing defined, but
they are descriptions or imperfect definitions, so expressed as best seems to
communicate the truth unto the capacity of the reader. Again, Justification is
an accident, now Logicians teach us such definitions of accidents to be
oftentimes helpful to the understanding that make use of other terms besides
those which are essential. If pardon of sin were a part of a sinners
righteousness, yet being but a part, it could not be the whole. Pardon of sin
cannot complete righteousness, because righteousness does not only consist in
being sinlesse, but also in being just; the heavens are sinlesse, yet they are
not just; the Law is not satisfied with negative obedience. Not only he that
does do what the Law forbids shall die, Genesis 2.17. but he that continues
not in the things that are written in the Book of the Law to do them, Gal.
3.10. Being sinlesse acquits from obnoxiousnesse unto hell, but being just
gives a right unto heaven. There is an observable difference between being
unjust, Injustus, non-injustus, non-justus, justus.
not-unjust, not-just, just. The sinner yet not a believer is unjust; the
unreasonable creature is not-unjust. Adam in innocence was more then
not-unjust, yet was not just. The Believer is just.

There is no such pardon of sin as the Dialogue affirms, namely, such a pardon
of sin as does not only disown the Legal obedience of Christ imputed as its
cause, but also disclaims the very being of it. The being of the Dialogues
pardon is the not being of Christ's active and passive mediatorly obedience to
the Law. It is such a fiction as the Author of it, and that at his conclusion
undertaking to show its being from the causes thereof, Dial. p. 133. tells us
the formal cause is the fathers atonement, pardon, and forgiveness, but the
subject matter is believing sinners of all sorts [the subject matter are the
persons receiving justification, which some Divines call the matter of
justification taken passively, yet adding therewith the Legal obedience of
Christ, which they call the matter of justification taken actively, namely,
that which is the matter, whereby a person elect and called is justified] but
if you enquire after the essential matter of justification amongst the causes
enumerated by the Author, behold the Dialogue is speechless, and presents you
with a form without a matter, such a being as is neither created nor increated.

If Christ's Legal obedience was the expiation of sin, that is, if Christ in way
of obedient fulfilling the Law was a person accursed, the sacrificing of whom
in way of satisfaction to divine justice was necessary to the taking away of
sin; Then there is no pardon of sin without Christ's Legal obedience so
fulfilled and imputed.

But Christ's Legal obedience was the expiation of sin, which appears thus:
The Legal offerings of atonement were typical expiations of sin, Exodus 29.36.
chapter 36. Lev. 16. therefore Christ was the real expiation of sin. He in way of
obedient fulfilling of the Law, Heb. 10 9. Psa. 40.8. Mat. 5.7. was a person
accursed, and that with a paenal and eternal curse, Gal. 3.13. which is already
proved in the foregoing vindication of the Text. The sacrificing of whom in
way of satisfaction to divine justice, was necessary to the taking away of sin,
Isa. 53.10. Romans 3.26. Heb. 9.22. where blood is understood synechdochically,
part of his suffering put for the whole, his blood was shed together with the
wrath of God, because it was shed as the blood of a person accursed. And he
went a little further, etc. fell on his face, etc. prayed, saying, O my Father,
if it be possible, Let this cup pass from me; to the same effect he prayed the
second time, and the third time, Mat. 26.39, 42, 44. If it be possible, If it
be possible, If it be possible, hereby [the definitive way of God being set
concerning the salvation of the Elect] Christ abundantly shows, there was no
other possible way of redemption, but by his drinking up the cup of his Fathers
wrath for us, whatsoever the Dialogue says to the contrary.

God doubtless will not own those pardons for disobedience unto his Law, which
will not own Christ's meritorious obedience to that Law, and that as the cause
of pardon. If our very pardons minister matter of condemnation, how great is
that condemnation? Who can lay any thing to the charge of them that God
justifies? but what shall it avail for the Dialogue to justify any, whose
very pardons God will condemn? The Popes pardons, and the Dialogues how
differing soever in their nature, may go together in respect of their efficacy.

And in this very sense all sacrifices of Atonement are called sacrifices of
Righteousness, Deuteronomy. 33.19. Psa. 4.5. Psa. 51.19.



And in this sense Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one
that believes, Romans 10.4.

etc. the truth signified by the Ceremonial Law.

And thus I think I have explained the true nature of a sinners righteousness,
justice, or justification, which I have described to be nothing else, but the
Fathers merciful atonement, pardon, and forgiveness, so that I may more fitly
call a sinners righteousness a merciful justice put upon poor believing
sinners, by Gods fatherly pardon and forgiveness, then a strict Legal
righteousness imputed to us from Christ's obedience, as our actual
righteousness, as the common doctrine of imputation does teach.



To exclude justice from Justification, which is in effect to say God is not
just, but only merciful in justifying a Believer, what is it else but to
contradict the Apostles saying, God is just, and the justifier of him that
believes?

Bucha. loc. 31. 4. 28. Paraeus Romans 5. dub. 7. Willet med. l. 1. c. 20. Rhet.
ex. 2. cap. 3. Twiss. de praed. l. 1. dig. 3. s. 4. cap. 5. Dialogu
The received doctrine of Imputation holds not forth mercy only, but both
justice and mercy tempered together in the justification of a sinner, they
receive abundance of grace, there is mercy etc. of the gift of righteousness;
there is justice, Romans 5.17. Justice in respect of Christ, mercy in respect of
the Believer: that Christ satisfied the Law is justice, that this satisfaction
was for us, and is given to us, is mercy.

And indeed the righteousness which God the Father bestowed upon poor
believing sinners in making them sinlesse by this Atonement, is an example of
the highest degree of mercy.



The Geneva note on Psa. 130.3. is excellent, Dialogu,
etc. speaks thus, he declares that we cannot be just before God, but by
forgiveness of sins, for Gods forgiveness is a part of his merciful Atonement.

Geneva Bible is to be interpreted according to the doctrine of Geneva, which
acknowledges and teaches the meritorious satisfaction of Christ to divine
justice, to be the cause of the pardon of sin, a truth which the Dialogue
denies.

Hence it is evident that Gods Atonement, pardon, and forgiveness communicated
to poor believing sinners must needs be the formal cause of a sinners
righteousness.

etc. shall God assisting be made yet more evident, in its proper place, I
doubt not.

CHAP. V. Whether the Justice and Righteousness of a sinner does lie only in
Gods merciful Atonement.
THe justice and righteousness of a sinner does not lie in his own righteous
nature, nor in his own just actions, nor yet in the righteousness of Christ
imputed, but it does lie only in the Fathers righteous atonement, pardon and
forgiveness, procured by the meritorious Sacrifice of atonement, and conveyed
by the Father through the Mediator to every believing sinner, as soon as they
are in the Mediator by faith.

This doctrine of a sinners righteousness has ever been well known, and
witnessed among the godly in all ages from the beginning of the world.

1. It is witnessed by the practices of all sacrifices of Atonement before the
Law.

2. It is witnessed by the practices of all sacrifices under the Law.

3. It is witnessed by the doctrine of the Prophets.

4. It is witnessed by the doctrine of the New Testament, and it was never so
much obscured, as it has been of late days by the doctrine of imputation.

pages, he may neither be at a loss, nor deceived by these dark and equivocal
terms of the Dialogue, but being informed beforehand of both our meanings
thereby, pass on with more ease, and judge accordingly.

Mediatorial obedience according to the Dialogue are certain actions performed
by Christ not in way of obedience unto the Moral Law, but by him as God-man,
and especially after thirty years of age, the masterpiece whereof was his
yielding himself to suffer a bodily death.

Atonement or pardon of sin (according to the sense of the Dialogue) is such as
not only denies it self to be the effect of, Supra page 105.
but also denies the very being of the satisfactory and meritorious obedience
of Christ unto the moral Law. Mediatorly obedience according to the Orthodox,
what? see. Atonement or pardon of sin according to the sense of the Orthodox,
both acknowledges the being of, and it self to be the effect of the
satisfactory and meritorious obedience of Christ both active and passive unto
the moral Law.

We have seen before,

1. That Atonement or pardon of sin and righteousness differ in their natures,
to take away unrighteousness from a sinner, is not to give righteousness to a
sinner, it is an impossibility for that which is not justice to be justice.

2. That the righteousness of the Dialogue is such a thing as consists of a
form without any essential matter, and is indeed a Non-ens, such a thing as is
a nothing.

3. That it is such an Atonement as denies it self both to be from, and also
denies any being of the Legal meritorious Obedience of Christ. Behold then
the presumption of the Dialogue, that forgetting just conscience unto God, the
reverence of the truth, dread of so pestilent an untruth, to the peril of the
Reader, that distinguishes not between ostentation and reason, and to the
vexing and just indignation of him that does; engages the godly in all ages
from the beginning of the world, the practice of all sacrifices before the Law,
and under the Law, the doctrine of the Prophets, and of the New Testament, to
witness that fiction of the Author to be a truth, which includes an
impossibility in nature, a contradiction in reason, and an abomination in
Divinity.

It is evident that our first Parents were well acquainted with the doctrine of
a sinners justification by Gods Atonement: for as soon as ever God had told
them, that the seed of the woman should break the devils headplot, he explained
unto them the manner how the seed of the woman should do it, namely, by his
Mediatoriall sacrifice of Atonement.

Genesis 3.15. wherein the person, office, and victorious efficacy of Christ,
together with the victory of all Believers in him, over Satan, and all other
both his and their enemies, was fully held forth; but we deny the doctrine of
the Dialogue to be the doctrine of justification made known to Adam, which was
here undertaken to be proved, but is only said, and not proved.

After the flood when Noah offered a sacrifice of Atonement, Jehovah smelled a
smell of Rest, Genesis 8.21. and to that resting of God in the promise, the sweet
smell of rest, which God smelt in Noah's sacrifice did look. The word Rest
implies that now Gods Spirit was quieted, and that he did rest satisfied and
well pleased in the sacrifice of Christ, which was thereby typified: confer to
this Ephesians. 5. the fathers by faith saw Christ's sacrifice.

Noah's sacrifice typified the sacrifice of Christ, and that God did and does
rest satisfied and well pleased in the Antitype. Your task undertaken is to
prove that Noah's sacrifice witnessed Christ to be a sacrifice in the sense of
the Dialogue, and that Noah so understood it.

By this means Noah knew and believed that he was made righteous or sinlesse by
Gods merciful Atonement procured by Christ's Mediatorial sacrifice of Atonement.



For the God of glory Jesus Christ appeared to him (that is, to Abraham)
whilst he dwelt at Ur of the Caldees, Act. 7.2. no doubt but Jesus Christ did
then tell him in what a miserable lost condition he was, and how he should be
that seed of the woman that should break tht devils head-plot by his sacrifice
of Atonement, and how he should thereby procure his Fathers Atonement to all
poor brokenhearted sinners. All which Abraham believed, and so his sins were
done away by Gods Atonement, which he received by his faith, and so he was made
perfectly just and righteous in Gods sight.

Abraham was made perfectly just and righteous by, was that which was accounted
unto him for righteousness. That which was accounted unto him for
righteousness, was that which he believed, namely, the righteousness of
Christ his head. The rest that is here said, if rightly understood, is true, if
in the sense of the Dialogue, it is false. But whether true or false, hitherto
all is but said, nothing is proved, as concerning the doctrine of sinners
righteousness in the sense of the Dialogue.

The doctrine of a sinners justification or righteousness was abundantly
taught under the Law by their sacrifices of atonement, namely, by their
burnt-offerings, sin offerings, and trespasse-offerings, in Lev. 1. Lev. 4.
Lev. 5. etc. as I have explained their use above.

Heb. 2.17. in such manner as has been formerly both said and proved.

The doctrine of a sinners justification or righteousness by the Fathers
Atonement was taught, and explained by the Prophets. The Prophet David says in
the Person of Christ, I have preached thy Righteousness to the great
Congregation, Ps. 40.9. what righteousness was it that he by himself and by
his Officers preached to the Church of the first born? Was it his Legal
Righteousness made theirs by his Fathers Imputation? no, the Text denies
that, and says, that it was such a righteousness, as he obtains by his
sacrifice of Atonement, saying, Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire,
and then said I, Lo I come, I delight to do thy will, O my God, Ps. 40.8. By
the doing of which will, says Paul, we are sanctified from sin, or made
perfectly righteous.

Righteousness as formally performed is an ingredient into the meritorious
cause of justification. Righteousness as it is imputed (not formally as it is
an ingredient in the meritorius cause, but virtually in respect of its
efficacy) is the matter of the justification of a sinner. It were better said
Atonement is obtained by the sacrifice of Righteousness, then that
Righteousness is obtained by the sacrifice of Atonement. The obedience of
Christ both active and passive is the cause, and sacrifice of atonement:
atonement or pardon of sin is an effect thereof.

Those words [by which will] Heb. 10.10. signify the will of the Father who
appointed his son to take our nature upon him, to make satisfaction for our
sins: or we are to understand will with its correlate, viz. the fullfilling
thereof by the obedience of his Son [we are sanctified] that is, we are made
perfect. Sanctification here is taken largely for all the benefits of Christ.

Or thus, Christ purchased or procured such a righteousness of his Father for
sinners, as shall last to all Eternity by the same way and means by which he
purchased their eternal redemption, but he did not purchase their redemption
and freedom from sin by his active Legal Obedience, but by his active
Meditoriall Obedience, when he made his soul a Mediatoriall Sacrifice of
Atonement for poor sinners. Compare Heb. 9.12.14. with Dan. 9.24. therefore
Christ purchased and procured such a righteousness for sinners as shall last
to all Eternity by no other way or means, but by his Mediatoriall Sacrifice of
Atonement, therefore his Fathers Atonement is a sinners Righteousness.

wherein he was not also passive, nor any so passive, wherein he was not also
active. To speak plainly and properly, atonement is the effect, and the legal
obedience or righteousness of Christ the Mediatorly sacrifice and cause of
this effect, therefore Atonement is not righteousness. But to speak after the
style of the Dialogue, If Righteousness for sinners be purchased and procured
by the sacrifice of Atonement, neither then can atonement be a sinners
Righteousness. That which procures or purchases is the cause, that which is
procured is the effect, the cause cannot be the effect.

The New Testament does also bear witness to this doctrine. S. Paul the
Apostle does tell us Romans 8.4. that the Righteousness of the Law (namely, the
righteousness which was taught and typified by the sacrifices of the Law)
might be fullfilled in us, that walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit;
as I have explained this Text a little before.



Secondly, The Apostle Paul does in another place confirm this doctrine,
saying, God made him to be sin for us (that is to say, God ordained him to be a
Sacrifice of Atonement for our sins,) that we might be made the Righteousness
of God in him; that is to say, that we might be made righteous or sinlesse by
Gods Atonement.



That the doctrine of Imputation is not a doctrine of late days only, the
Reader that pleases may be fully satisfied by the labors of Grotius, who at
the end of his defense of the Catholic faith concerning the satisfaction of
Christ against Socinus has gathered together the testimonies of many of the
Ancients still extant, to this purpose, from Ireneus Anno Christi 180. until
after Bernhard, who lived Anno 1120. or thereabout.

CHAP. VI. How Abraham's Faith was imputed to him for Righteousness.
Faith was imputed to him for Righteousness, because by it he did receive the
Fathers Atonement for his full and perfect Righteousness, because he believed
all this both in Genesis 11.31. and again Genesis 12. therefore God imputed that
faith to him for righteousness, for by that faith he apprehended and received
the Fathers Atonement, and applied it to his own soul, as an effectual remedy
to acquit him from the guilt of all his sins, and so by that means he became
sinlesse, that is to say, justified and righteous in Gods sight.

Abraham apprehended at all any such Atonement, as the Dialogue teaches, and
it remains still to be proved. I take it for granted with us, that faith does
not justify us as a work; but objectively or relatively, that is, for the sake
of that which is believed. Though Abraham apprehended the Fathers Atonement by
faith, it does not therefore follow, that the Atonement apprehended was his
righteousness. Abraham by faith apprehended Atonement or pardon of sin, not as
the matter but as the effect of Righteousness.

Atonement is frequently taken for expiation, noting both the cause and the
effect, namely, both the Legal meritorious obedience of Christ, and the
acquitting of us from the guilt of sin. But so the Dialogue takes it not:
because it acknowledges no essential influence of the obedience of Christ (no
not of its own Mediatorial obedience) into the being of our righteousness.
Atonement according to the Dialogue is the pardon of sin, to apply therefore
Atonement as an effectual remedy to acquit us from the guilt of sin, is to make
atonement its own cause, and its own effect, that is, to make it before and
after it self. The imputation of Abraham's faith for righteousness does plainly
argue, that Abraham was made partaker of the righteousness of the moral Law,
or Law of works by faith without works: 1. Because no man can attain eternal
life without fullfilling the Law, either in himself, or in his surety: Without
the righteousness of the Law there is no life, Lev. 18.5. Deuteronomy. 27, 26 Ezekiel.
18.11. Gal. 3.10. 2. Because the nature of righteousness consists in
conformity and obedience to the Law; you may as well say that a man may be
learned without learning, or that he may be a man without a reasonable soul, as
to say there is a created righteousness without conformity to the Law. 3.
Because the Scripture says the righteousness of the Law, that is, the
righteousness which the Law requires, is fullfilled in us that believe, Romans
10.4. Most vain is the shift of the Dialogue endeavoring to avoid the strength
of this place by interpreting against text, context, and Scripture, those words
[Righteousnesse of the Law] only of the righteousness typified by the
Ceremonial Law, (which it wrests to its own imaginary righteousness; that is
indeed no righteousness but a non-ens, as having no essential matter,
witness the Dialogues enumeration of the causes) since the righteousness of
the moral Law fullfilled by Christ was typified by the Ceremonial Law; the
righteousness of the Law is fullfilled in us, because we by faith apprehend
the obedience of Christ who fullfilled the Law for us: Perkins in Gal. 3.
so M. Perkins with the rest of the cloud of witnesses, neither is there any
other tolerable interpretation possible to be given; With the heart man
believes unto righteousness, Romans 10.10. that is, unto a judicial
righteousness; upon believing we are judicially declared to be righteous with
the righteousness of the Law, though not by the Law. That which was imputed to
Abraham for righteousness was that which Abraham so believed, as that his
faith for the sake of the object thereof, was accounted unto him for
righteousness; Imputing and believing are as giving and receiving: But
righteousness without works, viz. the righteousness of Christ (not pardon of
sin, which is the effect of that righteousness received, Act. 10.43.) was
imputed unto Abraham for righteousness, Romans 46. because it is imputed to all
that are blessed universally, whereof Abraham was an eminent one, therefore the
righteousness of Christ was that which Abraham so believed, as that his faith
for the sake of the object thereof, was accounted unto him for righteousness.

And in this sense the Apostle Paul does prove that Abraham's faith was
accounted to him for righteousness, by a Testimony taken from David, Psa. 32.
saying, even as David also describes the blessedness of that man unto whom
God imputes righteousness without works; saying, Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered, Blessed is the man to whom
the Lord does not impute sin: What other reason can any man else render, why
the Apostle should enterlace this testimony in this place, but to describe unto
us the true manner how Abraham's faith did make him righteous, namely, because
by his faith he did apprehend and receive the fathers atonement, by which his
sins were forgiven, covered, and not imputed.

Paul Romans 4.3. proves that Abraham's faith was accounted to him for
righteousness out of Moses Genesis 15.6. the scop of the Apostle in citing Psalm.
32.1, 2. is not to prove the personal justification of Abraham by faith, but
to prove justification in the general both of the Father of the faithful, and
all others to be by faith, and the reason why the Apostle cites the testimony
of David Romans 4.6, 7, 8. is to strengthen his doctrine of justification by
faith without works, which he having proved by the example of Abraham,
proceeds to confirm it from the testimony of David,: His argumentation or
manner of reasoning lying thus, justification is by imputation, therefore by
faith without works: the not-imputation of sin presupposes imputation of
righteousness, ver. 6, 7. Evangelicall imputation of righteousness supposes
the righteousness that is imputed to be another subjectively and inherently,
therefore to be applied as ours by faith. Touching Abraham's apprehending the
Fathers Atonement by faith, and the imputing o^ accounting his faith unto him
for righteousness, we saw before; but that Abraham's faith was accounted unto
him for righteousness in the sense of the Dialogue, is by us still denied, and
disproved, by you still said and not proved.

And thus after this sort the Apostle does bring in forgiveness of sin as an
effect of justifying faith: for faith is the only instrument of the Spirit, by
which sinners come to be united to the Mediator in and through whose Mediation
they apprehend, and receive the Fathers Atonement, pardon, and forgiveness,
for their full and perfect justification.



This was the only true reason why God imputed Abraham's faith to him for
righteousness, namely, because he believed in Gods atonement, through the
mediation of the seed promised.

Abraham's faith was imputed to him for righteousness. The Atonement of the
Dialogue is not Gods Atonement, but a pestilent fiction, to believe in it is to
believe in an abomination.

And it is further evident that this doctrine of a sinners righteousness by
faith was taught and preached by all the Prophets, as Peter affirms, for all
the Prophets (says he) do witness that through the Name of Christ, whosoever
believes in him shall receive remission of sins, Act. 10.43. that is to say,
they shall receive remission of their sins for their justification by the
Fathers atonement, procured by Christ's sacrifice of atonement.

Jehovah our Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. according to which whosoever believes
in him, how can it be otherwise but that remission of sins must follow as the
effect does its cause?

If then righteousness be the cause, and atonement or remission of sin the
effect; To say again, Atonement is our righteousness, is to say the effect is
the cause, that is to say, a thing is before and after it self, that is to say
and say again an impossibility without any probability.

And to this tenor the Apostle Paul does explain the use of faith in the point
of a sinners justification, Phil. 3 9. and in Romans 10.4, 6, 10. With the heart
says he man believes unto righteousness. He does not say faith is a sinners
righteousness, but that by it a sinner believes unto righteousness.

Phi. 3 9. The righteousness whereof Paul speaks, Romans 10.10. because it has
faith foregoing it, as is evident out of the words alleged, must needs be such
as follows faith, and may be either understood of Gods declaration of the
righteousness of a believer in the Court of conscience, or of the believers
declaration of his righteousness unto others, as works are said to justify
declaratively, which latter interpretation the context seems to favor: Paul
does not say, atonement is a sinners righteousness, which is the question, but
he does say, that visible confession, namely, external profession, worship,
and conversation, is the effect of that faith which is accounted unto
righteousness, and brings salvation, though it self be invisible and in the
heart. For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation.

And in this sense all Sacrifices of Atonement are called Sacrifices of
Righteousness, not only as they are the procuring cause of the Fathers
Atonement for a sinners righteousness, but also because they must be offered
in righteousness, Mal. 3.3. that is to say, in faith, because poor believing
sinners do by faith receive the Fathers atonement for their full and perfect
righteousness.



And it is further evident that faith does no otherwise justify a sinner but
as it is that grace or instrument of the Spirit, whereby a sinner is enabled to
apprehend and receive the Fathers atonement, by the Apostles discourse in Romans
3.21, 22, 23, 24, 25. all which Verses I will br efly expound unto you: First,
The Apostle in these words does teach us the true nature of a sinners
justification, he calls it the righteousness of God; He does not call it the
righteousness of Christ but the righteousness of God the Father, because the
formal cause and finishing act of a sinners righteousness or justification
does come down from God the Father upon all believing sinners. A sinner cannot
be made righteous by the works of the Law, as the former verse does conclude:
For by the Law men come to know themselves to be sinners, and they that are
sinners are ever sinners in themselves, therefore if ever sinners can be made
righteous they must be made righteous by such a kind of righteousness as it
pleases God the Father to bestow upon them, and that can be no other
righteousness then a passive righteousness proceeding from Gods merciful
atonement, pardon and forgiveness.

Romans 5.18. where it is called the rigteousnesse of one, which one is Christ.
The imputation of the righteousness of Christ is the formal cause of our
justification, and is the act of God the Father: The word Father not being
taken personally, for the first person in the Trinity, but essentially for all
the three persons, God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; Because all works
wrought upon the creature are the works of the three persons equally.

A sinner is not justified by the works of the Law, namely, by works that we
have done, Tit. 3.5. For to such a work four things are requisite, viz. that it
be wrought, 1. By virtue of the grace of the first Covenant. 2. By our own
persons. 3, With exact obedience to the Law. 4. Under the promise of
justification unto continuance therein. But yet a sinner is justified by the
works that Christ has wrought, though not by the works that we have wrought.

If that Proposition be absolutely true, that they that are once sinners are
ever sinners, then either the Saints in glory were never sinners, or they are
and ever shall be sinners, and consequently neither are nor ever shall be
perfectly blessed, See Ephesians. 5.27.

Neither the justified persons continuance to be a sinner, which is the
condition of all in this life, nor the dependence of justification upon Gods
free pleasure, nor the passivenesse of the soul in receiving justification, do
at all infer atonement, much less the atonement of the Dialogue to be our
righteousness. The good pleasure of God is the cause why the righteousness of
Christ imputed, and not atonement is our righteousness.

But yet the Apostle does further describe this righteousness of God, ver. 21.
by two other circumstances, 1. Negatively. 2. Affirmatively. 1. Negatively he
says, that this righteousness is without the works of the Law. He does
plainly affirm that the works of the Law have no influence at all in the point
of a sinners justice or justification.

Buchan: loc 31. q. 16.
yet we are justified justly, it cost Christ the laying down of a full price.

He does affirm that this righteousness of God whereby sinners are made
righteous, is such a reghteousnesse as is witnessed by the Law and by the
Prophett. It is witnessed by the Law, namely, by that part of the Law which did
teach and typifie unto sinners how they might be sinlesse by Gods atonement
through their sacrifice of atonement, as the procuring cause thereof, as I have
opened the matter more at large already.

Willet. in loc. q. 27.
The Apostle in those words by the Law, Romans 3.21. does not intend the Law of
works, nor the Ceremonial Law only, but the Law of Moses. Moses wrote of me,
Joh. 5.46. The ceremonial Law did not typifie our being made righteous by
atonement, much less by the atonement of the Dialogue, as it is to be seen in
the answer of the places you refer unto.

Faith it self is not a sinners righteousness, and therefore it cannot be
accounted as a sinners righteousness, in stead of the righteousness of the
Law, as some would have it. For if faith were a sinners righteousness no
otherwise but in the place or stead of the righteousness of the Law, then
faith could not justify a sinner any further then the Law would do, if it
could be supposed that a sinner could by any means attain to the righteousness
of the Law, and then truly faith would be but a poor righteousness to cover a
sinners nakedness. For if a sinner could keep the whole Law in every
circumstance of it, from his birth unto his death, yet it would not be
sufficient to justify him from his original sin.

Abraham's faith was accounted to him for righteousness: Yea, the Dialogue, if
atonement might pass for righteousness, acknowledges, that faith for the
atonements sake received by it, is accounted for righteousness. No marvel
though the Dialogue denies faith to be accounted a sinners righteousness in
stead of the righteousness of the Law; the righteousness of the Law being
righteousness properly and truly so called, which the Dialogue simply denies
to have any influence into the matter of justification. There is no need unto
mere justification that faith should justify a sinner further then the Law
requires: yet faith does not only justify a sinner, which the Law could not,
Romans 8.3, 4. but also justifies him in some respects in a more excellent
manner then the Law could have justified an innocent person.

Romans 8.3, 4. And so Evangelicall righteousness, or the righteousness which
is by faith, is given to us in stead of Legal righteousness. We are through
sin incapable of the righteousness of the Law legally, Haec propositio, side
justificamur legaliter intollecta cum papistis non est vera, sed
blasphema-correlative: autem accepta est vera. Ursin. exp. Cat.
in the stead whereof we are made partakers of the righteousness of the Law
Evangelically, without which we cannot attain eternal life.

Faith justifies not properly as a work or quality, but relatively for the
objects sake, namely, the righteousness of Christ apprehended thereby. This
Proposition, We are justified by faith (says Vrsinus) understood legally with
the Papists, is not true, but blasphemous; but taken correlatively, that is
evangelically, it is true.

The true manner how the Law taught sinners to get righteousness by faith:
When a poor humbled sinner brought his sacrifice of atonement to the Priest to
be offered for him upon the Altar, he must lay both his hands with all his
might upon the head of the sacrifice of atonement; This kind of imposition was
ordained by God to teach and typifie unto sinners how they must by faith rest
and depend upon the sacrifice of Christ as the only meritorious procuring
cause of the Fathers atonement for their full and perfect righteousness.



Whom God has foreordained to be a propitiation (or a sacrifice of atonement)
through faith in his blood; The Apostle explains the matter by another
sentence, Romans 5.11. by whom we have received the atonement. The Apostle does
imply three things in this sentence. 1. That Christ is the Mediator by whom
sinners do receive. 2. The main thing which they do receive by him is the
Fathers atonement. 3. That the means or manner by which they receive the
Fathers atonement, is the grace of faith.

Romans 3 25. alludeth unto the Mercy-seat, Exo. 25.22. as appears by Heb. 9 5.
where speaking of the Mercy-seat in Exodus he calls it by the same word in
Greek which is used here, teaching us thereby that the Mercy-seat was a Figure
of Christ by whom our transgressions of the Law are forgiven and covered: the
Mercy-seat covered the Ark of the Testimony, that is, the Ark wherein was the
Law, which was the testimony of Gods will concerning the duty of man.

The Atonement of which Romans 5.11. is to be understood of reconciliation
applied, according to the sense of the latter reconciliation mentioned verse.
10. and notes a change in respect of dispensation on Gods part, and a change in
respect of state, relation, and disposition, on our part: See more Sect. 2.
Chap. The Greek words are not the same, and may in respect of their
signification, if we seclude the meritorious cause of atonement from atonement,
be distinguished as the whole and the part: his blood signifies his passive
obedience, the meritorious cause of the forgiveness of sin, faith is the
instrument by which we receive it; Atonement or remission of sins is a
principal good received by faith, yet it is not righteousness. But the
Dialogues atonement is neither principal nor less principal, but a mere
fiction.

To declare his righteousness by the passing over sins that are past, through
the forbearance of God.

1. God declares his righteousness toward sinners by ordaining Jesus Christ to
be a propitiation.

2. By ordaining the grace of faith as the instrument of the spirit, whereby
poor sinners might be enabled to believe in the Mediators propitiatory
sacrifice, and receive through him the Fathers atonement for their
righteousness.

the question, without so much as a thread of reason to hold them together. But
I hope saying the same thing frequently and boldly, though sometimes with the
word, Therefore, inserted without any tolerable inference of reason, is not
enough to deceive the Reader.

And therefore justified persons have need of new justice to their consciences
every day.

Paul was as much justified the first instant of his believing, as he is now in
glory: Because the righteousness of Christ which is the matter of
justification is the same.

CHAP. VII. Of the Enumeration of the causes of Justification, according to the
Dialogue, and according to the Orthodox.
ANd now for a conclusion I will sum up the Doctrine of Justification into
six heads.

1. The subject matter of Justification is, believing sinners of all sorts both
Jews and Gentiles all the world over. 2. The formal cause of Justification, or
of a sinners righteousness is, the Fathers atonement, pardon, and
forgiveness. 3. The meritorious procuring cause of the Fathers atonement for a
sinners Justification, is, Christ's Mediatoriall Sacrifice of atonement. 4. The
next isntrumental means by which a sinner does receive and apprehend the
Fathers atonement for his Justification, is faith in Christ. 5. The only
efficient cause of all the former causes and effects, is Gods free grace and
mercy in himself. 6. The end of all is the glory of Gods free grace and mercy
in the believing sinners justification and salvation.
viz. the active and passive obedience of Christ: and the matter taken
passively, i. e. the Subjects which are justified, viz. beleeeving sinners. In
the last you follow them, in the first you leave them. Your leaving out one of
the essential causes both renders and leaves your justification a non-ens, a
nullity, there being no created being, but consists at least of a logical
matter and form.

Atonement or pardon and forgiveness, i. e. the judicial declaration of a
believer to be discharged from the guilt and condemnation of sin is an effect
of a sinners righteousness, which also has been showed before; so far is it
from being the formal cause thereof.

The meritorious procuring cause not only of our atonement, but also of our
righteousness, is Christ's Mediatorly Sacrifice, but not in the sense of the
Dialogue, for there is no such Mediatorly obedience as it imagines.

Faith apprehends the righteousness of Christ as the matter of our
righteousness, and atonement or pardon as the effect thereof.

You leave out part of the final cause, viz. the glory of his justice.

But because it is not sufficient for the edification of the Reader, that
error be discovered, except the truth be also manifested: I shall shut up this
fourth and last head of controversy between the Dialogue and us, with an
enumeration of the causes of justification, according to the doctrine of the
Orthodox.

The efficient cause.
The efficient cause is the gracious good pleasure of God the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, Tit. 3.4. Romans 3.22. Psalm. 3.9. He is God, Lord, Lawgiver, and
Judge, his will is the Rule of Righteousness, All reason in one reason, and the
reason of all reasons; to whom it was free to justify man in whether way he
pleased, either legally by our own works, or evangelically by the works of
another.

The meritorious cause.
The meritorious cause is the whole Legal obedience of Christ consisting of his
habitual conformity together with his active and passive obedience, from the
instant of his incarnation unto his passion inclusively; performed by him as
God-man, our Mediatout and Surety in way of Covenant; to the fullfilling
whereof the application of all the good of election, consequently justification
as a part thereof was due unto the Elect according to the order of justice,
though (as concerning themselves) purposed, purchased, and perfected altogether
in way of mere grace.

Four things to be attended for the clearing of the meritorious cause.
Four things attended to will help to clear the meritorious cause.

1. The Person. 2. The Office. 3. The Service. 4. The merit whereupon debt
arises according to order of justice.


1 The Person. The Person obeying is God-man; the eminency of the person is
requisite to the value of the Service. 2 Office. By Office he was Mediator,
which he took not upon him, but was called thereunto, an essential part
whereof was to stand as our surety, and pay our debt even unto the death;
during which space only Christ's Mediatorship is to be looked at as having
influence into the meritorious cause of our justification. Notwithstanding
Christ still continues a Mediator and Surety, yet no more to pay our debt:
that being already discharged, death had no more dominion over him, Heb.
7.27.9.28. 1 Pet. 3.18. He was offered once, he suffered once. 3 Service. His
service, or his perfect obedience consists of his original conformity, and his
active and passive obedience unto the Law.


His original righteousness is that gracious inherent disposition in Christ,
from the first instant of his conception, whereby he was habitually conformable
to the Law, Luke 1.35. there was more habitual grace in Christ then there is
duty in the Law, or then there is or shall be habitual grace in the Elect both
Angels and men, because Christ was God-man, and received the Spirit out of
measure as much as was possible to be in a creature. This original
righteousness of Christ answered for our original unrighteousness.

Concerning his active and passive obedience to the Law, observe these three
propositions.

Cha. part. 2.



That passive obedience was requisite is unquestionable. That active obedience
was requisite is thus proved.

There was no part of Christ's obedience which was not active. As there was no
part of Christ's active obedience that was so active as that it was no way
passive; so there was no part of his passive obedience, which was so passive as
that it was not also active.

The Law requires not only death in case of sin, Genesis 2.17. but also doing of
the Legal obedience unto the command, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10. otherwise there
is no life. The command then must be obeyed in our selves or in our Surety. It
cannot be obeyed in our selves.

Obedience of the Saints whether in grace or glory is not Legal, viz. such as
is 1. Performed in our own persons. 2. From a concreated principle of grace
received in the first Covenant. 3. In way of merit. 4. Perfect. Therefore in
our Surety.

Because this double satisfaction answers to our double misery. viz. the
guilt of punishment, or condemnation, and defect of righteousness.

Because righteousness properly and truly so called consists in actual
obedience.



He was born for us, Luke 2.10, 11. he was made subject to the Law for us, Gal.
4.4. for our sakes he sanctified himself, Joh. 17.19. and that from the womb
unto his last oblation of himself upon the cross; He obeyed the Law for our
sakes. I come to do thy will O God, Heb. 10.7. by the which will we are
sanctified, cap. 10. that is, that will whereby he was appointed to this
office, and by doing his will in that office, according as he was appointed.
What Christ did in way of discharging his office he did for us. Christ
fulfilled the Law, Mat. 5.17. in way of discharging his office: Therefore he
fullfilled the Law for us: He came to fulfill all the Law: As he came so he
was sent, and his sending or mission was nothing else but his actual entering
upon his Office, according to the pleasure and command of the Father. Briefly,

He came as he was sent,

He was sent as Mediator, Ergo.

Either all Christ's active obedience was for us, Obedientia Christi est una
copulativa. Alste. Theo. Sect. 3. loc. 22. Med. l. 1. c. 21. and 23, 24.
Wolleb. l. 1. c. 18.
or some of it only for himself; but there can no reason be given why any of it
should be only for himself; If it should be granted (which the Protestant
Writers do generally deny) that Christ merited for himself, yet the Proposition
stands, if that Christ merited not only for himself but for us also.

Every action of Christ's obedience was an integrall part of his satisfaction,
that is, though some part of this obedience be more eminent then others, yet
the whole is not complete without the least. All the obedience of Christ makes
but one obedience: All his obedience is one copulative.

Merit. Merit justly indebteth, it is that whereunto the thing merited is due
according to the order of justice.

Debt then according to the order of justice is so a debt, as that in case God
should not perform it, he should not be just. The application of the good of
election to the redeemed becomes a just debt, for the obedience sake of Christ
by virtue of the Covenant between God and Christ, wherein God has in this
sense, freely made himself a debtor; Isa. 53.10. He is faithful and just to
forgive us our sin, 1 John 1.9. As Adams disobedience justly deserved
condemnation; so Christ's obedience justly deserves salvation for his seed: His
merit exceeds Adams demerit.

Obj. Works and Grace are opposite, Romans 11.6. Buchan. just. Theol. loc. 31.
qu. 16.
How can merit consist with the Covenant of grace?

Ans. The Covenant of grace denies merit in the proper debtor, but not in the
surety, It denies merit in us but not in Christ. In the Covenant of works man
was capable of merit, Romans 3.23. in the Covenant of grace man is incapable of
merit, so we are to understand Romans 11.6. But to him that workerh not but
believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is accounted for
righteousness. Our salvation cost Christ the full price, though it cost us
nothing at all.

The material cause.
The material cause of our justification is the whole course of the active and
passive obedience of Christ, together with his habitual conformity unto the
Law.

As the matter of Adams justification in innocence had not consisted in one act
of obedience, but of a whole course of obedience, the finishing of which was
requisite to have made him just: So it is with the obedience of Christ.

If the justification of a sinner consists not only in the not-imputation of
sin, but also in the imputation of righteousness, then both the active and
passive obedience of Christ are requisite to the matter of our justification.
But the justification of a sinner consists not only of the not-imputation of
sin, but also of the imputation of righteousness: It Is not enough for us not
to be unjust, but we must also be just: Therefore,

Perfect obedience to the Law is the matter of our justification, Gal. 3.10.

But the whole obedience of Christ was requisite to the performance of perfect
Obedience to the Law.

Therefore, The whole obedience of Christ is requisite to the matter of our
justification.

That righteousness of the Law which Christ fullfilled in our stead is the
matter of our Justification.

But the righteousness of the Law which Christ fulfilled in our stead is
completed of his whole active and passive obedience, together with his
original righteousness. Therefore

The difference between the obedience of Christ considered as an ingredient
into the meritorious cause, The difference between the obedience of Christ
considered as an ingredient into the meritorious cause, and considered as the
matter of our justification.
and considered as the matter of our justification, appears thus.

In the meritorious cause it is to be considered together with the person,
office, and merit. In the material cause it is considered as distinct from all
these.

They are distinguished as cause and effect. Obedience in the material cause
is the effect of obedience considered in the meritorious cause.

They are distinguished as the whole and the part: Christ's obedience is but a
part only of the meritorious, but the whole of the material cause.

In the meritorious cause it is both a Legal and an Evangelicall act. Christ's
obeying the Law is Legal, but his obeying for us is Evangelicall; in the
material cause it is only an Evangelicall act, it is given to us freely. There
it is considered as wrought by him for us, here as applied to us. There is as a
garment made, here as a garment put on. There it may be compared to the payment
of the money by the Surety, here to the money as paid and accounted unto the
use of the debtor.

As it is not the commission of our disobedience, but the guilt and punishment
that is imputed to Christ; so it is not the formal working of obedience or
doing of the command, but the good, virtue, and efficacy thereof, that is
imputed unto the Believer: Obedience, righteousness and life, disobedience,
guilt (which is a right unto punishment) and punishment, that is, death, answer
one the other.

The formal cause of justification is imputation. The formal cause.
Imputation is the actual and effectual application of the Righteousness of
Christ unto a Believer.

To impute, reckon, or account, in this place intend the same thing, the same
word in Greek being indifferently translated by any of these, Romans 4. To
impute, is to reckon that unto another which in way of righteousness (whether
of debt or grace) belongs unto him. Imputation is either Legal, imputing to us
that which we have done, so the word is used, Romans 4. or Evangelicall, imputing
to us that which another has done. Thus to impute is for God in his act of
justifying a sinner to account the righteousness of Christ [which is not ours
formally, nor by just debt] to be ours by grace, and that as verily and really
ours as if it were wrought by us. And in this sense the word is used ten times,
Romans 4.3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11.22, 23, 24. The justification of a Believer is
either by righteousness inherent or imputed. But not by righteousness
inherent. Therefore by righteousness imputed. The righteousness whereby man
is justified before God is perfect. It were destructive to the merit of Christ,
and to turn the Covenant of grace into a Covenant of works, to say we are
justified by righteousness inherent in us.

The isntrumental cause of justification is faith. We are justified by faith
correlatively, that is, we are justified by that which is the correlate of
faith, namely, the obedience of Christ. The meaning is, it is the obedience of
Christ, not faith it self that justifies, i. e. that which is apprehended, not
that which does apprehend.

Synop. par. Theol. disp. 33. n. 32. Twist. l. 1. p. 1. de prae. D. 3. f. 4.
Med. l. 1. c. 20.
The final cause is the manifestation of the glory of mercy tempered with
justice. Of mercy in that he justifies the ungodly, Romans 4 5. And that freely,
Romans 3.24. Of justice in that he justifies not without Christ's full
satisfaction unto the Law, Romans 3.26.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Dialogues examination of certain Arguments propounded by M.
Forbes for the proving of justification by the Imputation of the passive
obedience of Christ in his death and satisfaction.
I Pray you produce some of his Arguments that they may be tried and examined
whether there be any weight of truth in them or no.

Forbes alleged to prove that sinners are justified by the imputation of the
passive obedience of Christ in his death. This it does not as adhering to us
wherein M. Forbes dissents (for it agrees with him wherein he disagreeth) but
as opposing him, wherein he consents with us in the doctrine of imputation.

That the answer therefore may be as full in the Vindication as the Dialogue
pretends to be in the refutation of the Doctrine of the Orthodox, we shall
examine the Dialogues examination, and [impertinences omitted] consider all
that, and only that which herein concerns the Question.

Nothing (says M. Forbes) is made of God to be a sinners righteousness but
Jesus Christ alone and his righteousness, and this he proves by 1 Cor. 1.30.
Jer. 23.26. with other places. The Apostle says that Christ was made of God
unto us righteousness, but how? not as the doctrine of imputation speaks,
but thus, God made him to be our righteousness in a Mediatoriall way, by
ordaining him to be the only meritorious procuring cause of his atonement,
which is a sinners only righteousness. Christ is not a sinners righteousness
any otherwise but in a Mediatoriall way only, as I have often warned. Christ is
called Jehovah our righteousness, but still it must be understood in a
Mediatoriall way, and no otherwise.

We have seen already that Atonement is not righteousness, it cannot then be a
sinners only righteousness.

That which the Dialogue calls a Mediatorial way is indeed no way, but is
destructive unto the true way, and consequently an heretical way, denying of
and inconsisting with the Mediatorly obedience of Christ unto the Law.

The Legal obedience of Christ is to be considered formally and virtually, as
considered formally it is an ingredient into the meritorious cause of our
justification, as considered virtually it is the material cause thereof. Of
which before.

And thus Christ is our Righteousness in one respect, the Father in another,
and the holy Ghost in another. Each person is a sinners righteousness in
several respects, The manner how Christ should justify the many was by
bearing their iniquities, and how else did he bear their iniquities but by his
sacrifice of Atonement? and in this sense Christ is said to justify us with
his blood, Romans 5.9. that is to say, by his Sacrifice of Atonement; therefore
his righteousness cannot be the formal cause of a sinners righteousness; it
is but the procuring cause of the Fathers atonement, which is the only formal
cause of a sinners righteousness.



The Apostle Romans 5.9. speaks of the meritoritorious cause, part thereof
being put for the whole Synechdochically; Upon this occasion let us observe
both the intent and consent of such Scriptures as speak diversely of the cause
of justification. We are said to be justified by grace, Romans 3.24. i. e. as the
efficient cause; By his blood Romans 5 9. i. e. as the meritorious cause: By his
obedience Romans 5.19. i. e. as the material cause: By imputation ( viz. of his
obedience) Romans 4.6. i. e. as the formal cause; By faith Romans 5.1. i. e. as
the instrument.

Your inference, Christ bare our iniquities by his sacrifice of atonement,
therefore his righteousness cannot be the formal cause of a sinners
righteousness, is impertinent; and argues that you understand not our doctrine.
We say not that the obedience of Christ is the formal, but the material cause
of a sinners righteousness, and that imputation is the formal cause thereof.

The Father is a sinners righteousness, 1. Efficiently. 2. Formally; His
Atonement so procured must needs be the formal cause of a sinners full and
perfect righteousness.

Osianders error who held that we were justified by the essential
righteousness of God. But the following words show you mistake or at least
inconveniently use the term formally, and intend no other then your former
error. The efficient cause of a sinners righteousness is the Father; [Father]
taken not personally but essentially, for God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

The holy Ghost also does make sinners righteous, instrumentally by fitting,
preparing and qualifying sinners for the Fathers Atonement, by quickening their
souls with the lively grace of faith, by which grace sinners are enabled to
apprehend and receive the Fathers Atonement.



It is well that your Author will grant remission of sins to be righteousness
in effect: if remission of sins be a sinners righteousness, then (I pray)
consider whose act it is to forgive sins formally. I have already proved it to
be the Fathers act to forgive sin formally, and not Christ's; he does forgive
sin no otherwise but as a Mediator by procuring his Fathers pardon and
forgivensse.

Romans 10.10. remission of sins is an immediate and inseparable effect of the
former, but a part of the latter.

Imputation which is the formal cause of justification, is a transient act,
and is the effect of the Father taken essentially. Our Question is not
concerning the formal but the material cause of justification.

M. Forbes is put to his shifts to declare that Christ's passive Obedience is
the matter of a sinners righteousness, by a distinction between Christ as he
was our Lamb for Sacrifice in his humane nature, and as he was our Priest in
his divine nature; for else he did foresee, that he should run into an
exceeding gross absurdity, if he had made any action of Christ's Godhead or
Priestly nature to have been a sinners righteousness by imputation: Therefore
to avoid that absurdity he does place a sinners righteousness in his passive
obedience only. His distinction between Christ as he was a Lamb for sacrifice
in his humane nature, and as he is our Priest in his Divine nature is very ill
applied, because he makes Christ's passive obedience to be meritorious and
satisfactory, excluding him as he is our Priest.

Forbes is to prove that not the active but the passive obedience of Christ is
the only matter of our justification, and therein his blood and death alone.

To that end he distinguishes between the matter of our righteousness and the
requisites in Christ to the end that he may be righteousness unto us; like as
the blood of the Lamb is to be distinguished from those things in the Lamb,
which made the Lambs blood to serve for a propitiation for sin; placing the
active obedience of Christ amongst the requisites, and excluding it from the
matter of our righteousness, in both which we leave him.

The distinction you mention and call it a shift, I find not in the Chapter
cited.

Though M. Forbes do distinguish between the Sacrifice of obedience, and the
natures, office, and person of Christ considered apart; yet you do him great
and open wrong to speak of him, as if he excluded the influence of the person,
office, or concurrence of both natures from Christ's passive obedience. Of the
impropriety of the use of those words [Christs Godhead or Priestly nature]
has been spoken before. To make the actions, i. e. the active obedience of
Christ God-man Mediator, part of the matter of a sinners righteousness ( viz.
not properly, as if they were personally done by us, but virtually because done
by our Surety) is to assert a great and necessary truth.

From all the premises I think I may well conclude that your Author is in a
great error, to ascribe the whole matter of a sinners righteousness to
Christ's bloody Sacrifice only: Neither was his bloody sacrifice the only
procuring of his fathers atonement, but his Priestly nature must concur
thereunto; he made his oblation by his divine nature as well as by his humane
nature.



That he makes his passive obedience in his death only to be the matter of our
justification excluding his active (the contrary whereunto is proved par. 2. S.
2. cha. 7.) we look at it as no little error; and do hereby bear solemn
testimony against it; Yet withal we may not conceal that observable
temperature of that Learned and Godly Author herein, which appears by his
Testimony concerning the doctrine of imputation of both active and passive
obedience, Chap. 24. beg. and upon this occasion it may not be unseasonable
here to acquaint the Reader with the tenet of those who assert the passive
obedience of Christ only to be the matter of our justification, consisting in
these particulars.

Vid. Pisc. praef. in Ep. 1. ad Tim. Wotton.
They acknowledge 1. The active obedience of Christ to be the obedience of
God-man our Surety unto the Law. 2. That the active obedience of Christ has an
influence into the meritorious cause of our justification. 3. That it does in
its way conduce unto our justification, as a preparation or disposition. 4.
That our justification is by the righteousness of Christ imputed. Lastly, M.
Forbes himself judges that the doctrine of imputation of the active and
passive obedience of Christ may be tolerated without any contention or strife,
acknowledging, Forbes of justificat. cha. 24.
it contains not in it any impiety, hinders not any man from the mark or
matter of his righteousness, and that it is not contrary to truth.

Your labor to prove that the Mediatorly obedience of Christ was the oblation
of whole Christ God-man Mediator with the joint concurrence of both natures,
might have been spared, Who is he that doubts of it?

The blood of Jesus Christ does cleanse us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. by a
Synecdoche; for the Apostle does not say that his blood alone without any thing
does cleanse us from all sin (as M. Forbes would have him speak) but he names
his blood as a Synecdoche of his death or as a Synechdoche of his Mediatoriall
obedience, which also he sealed with his blood, when he made his soul a
Mediatoriall Sacrifice.

Forbes so far speaks the truth as he interprets blood synechdochically of
Christ's passive obedience imputed: he erreth 1. In limiting his passive
obedience imputed to that of his death only. 2. In excluding his active
obedience wholly from imputation. The Dialogues Mediatoriall Obedience is
confuted before, and therewith its interpretation.

I grant that all mankind are one with Adam by ae natural union, as
proceeding from the same root and fountain of nature; but I fear your Author
does stretch out natural union with Adam unto a personal union (I mean M.
Forbes does so by consequence) to the end that he might make Adams personal
action to be ours by imputation.

Forbes is to prove the imputation of Christ's passive obedience, and that only
in his death, to be the matter of our justification. Paul's comparison according
to his interpretation is instituted not between that single act of Adams
disobedience in eating the forbidden fruit, imputed unto his seed; and the
obedience of Christ in general both active and passive imputed to his seed,
but between the single act of Adams disobedience, and one act of Christ's
obedience, viz. his death.

We consent to M Forbes as concerning the argument taken from the comparison,
we dissent from him as concerning the restrictions, the reason of the
comparison being founded upon the condition of the persons and divine
institution, it holds between such acts as the first and second Adam acted as
public persons: Adam therefore being in that act of disobedience only a
public person, hence that act only is imputed unto his seed; but Christ being
in all his acts of obedience a public person, hence therefore all the acts of
Christ's obedience are imputed to his seed. As upon the supposition of Adams
continuing in obedience (because he had then continued a public person) all
the acts of his obedience even unto the finishing of perfect righteousness,
had been imputed unto his seed, according to the nature of the Covenant of
works, unto their attaining of justification by the Law.

The union between Adam and his posterity was not personal, nor only natural,
but mystical. It was a conjunction of the person of Adam, and all contained
then in his loins, in one spiritual body, by the institution of God, whereby he
was as their head, they as his members, to stand or fall with him standing or
falling.

Adams disobedience had this effect, that it procured a corrupt and sinful
nature to himself, and to all his posterity, which otherwise had continued
righteous and sinlesse.

In like sort Christ's Mediatoriall obedience had this effect, that it procured
Gods fatherly atonement and acceptance of all his posterity and seed that
should be born of the same promise, Genesis 3.15.

Adams posterity was the effect of Adams disobedience, in like sort as
Atonement, i. e. remission of sin is the effect of Christ's obedience, then it
was the effect thereof according to justice (as indeed it was, for original sin
is the penal effect of Adams sin) he is just to forgive us our sin, 1 John 1.9.

By one man, namely Adams sin in eating the forbidden fruit, death entered into
the world, and death by sin, namely, spiritual death in sin fell upon Adam and
his posterity for his sin; and so death passed upon all men for that all men
had sinned. That is to say, in whose loins all men have sinned [by receiving
from his loins his corrupt nature which is sin) and also is the punishment of
Adams sinful eating; not whose act of disobedience in eating the forbidden
fruit, all men have sinned in eating the forbidden fruit, for then we must have
been united to Adam as one person with him.

Genesis 2.17. The Dialogue not enduring the imputation either of our disobedience
unto Christ, or of Christ's obedience unto us, to avoid the Apostles argument
taken from the imputation of Adams disobedience to mankind, Romans 5. denies
that we are guilty of Adams sin, acknowledging only that we receive from Adam a
corrupt nature or a spiritual death in sin, viz. that which we call original
sin.

Whilst you acknowledge corruption of nature to be the punishment of Adams
sinful eating, and yet deny that we sinned in eating the forbidden fruit, you
make a contradiction, for there can be no punishment without sin, and by
consequence also you put injustice upon God, who notwithstanding by his
absolute will he might, yet having limited himself he does not afflict without
sin.

That all descended of Adam by ordinary generation are guilty of Adams sin is
evident.

1. From the express Text; for that all have sinned, Romans 5.12. or in whom, i.
e. in Adam all have sinned, as it is upon the margent, and according as the
Learned Interpreters generally turn it; Both come to the same sense. In this
Chapter the Apostle insists upon Adams sin, as in the 7th upon original sin.

2. From the effect; all sinned in Adam because all died in Adam, even those
that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, viz. Infants
who sinned not actually in their proper persons, but only in their public
person, Romans 5.14. Genesis 2.17. 1 Cor. 15.22.

3. There can be no other reason given according to the revealed will of God,
of the propagation of of original sin. This doctrine of yours too much favors
Pelagius, who denied Infants to be guilty of Adams sin and of original sin.

4. Adam in his first transgression stood as a public person by the free
constitution of God, whose will is the rule of righteousness, who is the
figure of him that was to come, Romans 5.14.

Adams being a public person was a great aggravation of Adams sin, hence a
world of sin was in Adams sin.

1. Because Adam was the whole world, the world sinned in Adams sin.

2. Because Adam by that sin slew the whole world.

3. Because all sin by consequence was contained in this sin. Thence is
Original sin as an effect from the cause, hence actual sin as an act from
the habit.

4. It was a universal sin, because in it was in sum the violation of the
whole Decalogue.

But it passes my understanding to conceive how God in justice can impute the
act of Christ's Mediatoriall Sacrifice of Atonement to us as our act, unless he
do first make us one with Christ in the personal unity of both natures, noither
can I see how any of the actions of Christ can be imputed to Believers as their
actions.



The Legal acceptance of the offended or creditor, Justitia Christi non
imputatur nobis ut causis, sed ut subjectis tantura. Bellarm. encr. Tom. 4. l.
6. c. 1.
and the consent of the surety are sufficient for the Legal charging the
offense or debt of a third person (who is the offender or debtor) upon the
surety.

Christ's obedience is imputed to us not formally, as if we were the performers
thereof, but in respect of its efficacy, because we have the benefit of it as
effectually as if we had performed it our selves. The obedience of Christ is
imputed to us as the Subjects merely, not as the causes of it. Christ's actions
are ours not properly but virtually in respect of their vigor, good, benefit
and efficacy.

In like sort our blessed Mediator (as he is the mystical head of all
believers in the Covenant of grace) did take care to do all and every act of
Mediatoriall obedience that might procure his Fathers Atonement for the good
and benefit of every member of his mystical body, as fully and effectually as
if every member could have performed those acts of Mediatoriall obedience
themselves. And in this sense God does imput^ the efficacy of all Christ's
Mediatoriall obedience to all believers as the only meritorious price of his
Fathers atonement for them.

Bellarmine, who having spent whole Books in a laborious disputation for man's
merit against grace, Bellarm. Tom. 4. l. 5. c. 7. Tutissimum, etc.
at length says, It is most safe to place our confidence in the alone mercy of
God. So it is here fallen out with the Author, who after his labor hitherto
against the doctrine of Imputation, now at length may seem to acknowledge it:
But though his words be equivocall, yet his meaning is the same that it was
before, and so much the more dangerous, because the same evil sense is
insinuated in a better language.

To suppose a sinner to have performed those acts of Mediatorly obedience,
which Christ performed, is to suppose an impossibility: Christ was and is
God-man, and without sin, neither of which can be found in him who is a sinner.

The voice of this whole clause (this supposition excepted, or somewhat
qualified) is not unlike the voice of Jacob, but the sense is the sense of
Esau; i. e. the mind of the Dialogue uttered by the tongue of the Orthodox;
(...).
but it is with the mind of the Orthodox, as has been said of old concerning
the Scripture: it lies not in the sound but in the sense.

Nec putemus in verbis scripturarum esse Evangelium, sed in sensu. Hieron. in
Ep. ad Gal. ca. 1.
If most pestilent doctrines have oftentimes been communicated in the language
of the Scripture, marvel not then that they are communicated in a language
which does not unbecome the Orthodox: Neither let us (says Hierome) speaking
against the heresies of Ebion, Photinus, Marcion, and Bafilides, think the
Gospel to be in the words of the Scripture, but in the sense. Who is ignorant
that the Arrians speak heresy by that Text, The Father is greater then I, Joh.
14.28. or that the Papists idolatry by that Proposition, This is my Body, Mat.
26.26. And they who please may read Pelagius by those words, For that all have
sinned, or, In whom all have sinned, Romans 5. August. contra Julian. l. 6. c. 12.
12. breathing forth no small seeds of Pelagianism; so interpreting or rather
corrupting of them, as that he acknowledges not the meaning of them to be,
that all sinned in Adam (wherein the Dialogue follows him) thereby laying a
ground for the deducing the corruption of nature not to be by propagation, as a
penal effect of Adams sin, but by way of imitation. An error or heresy
expressed by the words of the Scripture, or the words of the Orthodox is never
the less erroneous though so much the more dangerous.

This admonition here may suffice to preserve the Reader against the infection
of the unchanged doctrine of the Dialogue, notwithstanding the change of its
voice: Mediatorly obedience and atonement following thereupon, being (both
according to the sense of the Dialogue and the sense of the Orthodox)
sufficiently understood out of what has been said before.

CHAP. IX. Of Atonement or Reconciliation.
THe Fathers Atonement comprehends under it justification and adoption.

These two parts of the Fathers atonement or reconciliation are evident by the
effects, which all the Sacrifices of atonement under the Law did procure to
poor believing sinners (for all sacrifices of atonement under the Law did
typifie Christ's Sacrifice of atonement) and they procured the Fathers
atonement, which has a threefold effect toward poor believing sinners.

1. All Sacrifices of Atonement in general were ordained to procure a savor
of rest unto Jehovah, namely to procure a savor of rest to God the Father.

2. The sin offerings (which were Sacrifices of atonement) were ordained by God
to procure Gods merciful atonement, pardon, and forgiveness to poor believing
sinners, by which means only sinners are made sinlesse, that is to say, just
and righteous in Gods sight.

3. The burnt-offerings (which also were Sacrifices of Atonement) were ordained
of God to procure his favorable acceptance toward poor believing sinners, by
receiving them into special favor as Adopted sinners.

Par. 2. seems to understand pardon of sin by atonement: See page 151. and
162. here it seems by Atonement to understand reconciliation, and so indeed
it is to be understood.

The Reader is here desired to keep in mind, that our Question is not, Whether
justification and Adoption are parts of Atonement. The affirmative whereof, the
Author (therein following M. Wotton) asserts in this place. But whether the
obedience of Christ be the matter of a sinners righteousness. Although
therefore that the Dialogue here said the truth, yet it is impertinent,
according to the sense of the Orthodox, neither making for, nor against, as
concerning the matter of the controversy.

Atonement or Reconciliation, as also Justification and Adoption, are joint
effects of the same cause, viz. the Mediatorly obedience of Christ, which was
the Sacrifice of Atonement; but it does not therefore follow that Justification
and Adoption are parts of atonement, one joint or fellow-effect, because a
fellow-effect is not therefore a part of its fellow-effect.

(...)
Though the Hebrew word that signifies to cover sin, and to expiate sin, be
translated atonement (which Translation the Dialogue has formerly followed)
and the Greek word signifying propitiation, which is the same in effect with
reconciliation be generally ascribed unto Chrsst, Romans 3.25. 1 John 2.2. and
4.10. the cause put for the effect, because Christ is our propitiation
causally, Heb. 2.17. yet neither covering of sin, nor the expiation of sin, nor
Christ himself is our reconciliation properly and formally; pardon of sin is a
necessary and inseparable antecedent, Christ is the procurer, and expiation
holds forth the manner of procuring reconciliation, but none of them are
reconciliation it self.

Reconciliation in general, Reconciliation what? Ex hoc colligimus duplicem
reconciliationem in Scripturis confiderari, unam generalem and applicabilem in
cruce peractam, alteram particularem and applicatam. Dav. in Col. 1.23.
is the restoring of friends after offense given and taken, or taken though not
given, into the same condition of friendship, wherein they were before the
offense was given or conceived to be given.

The Scripture mentions reconciliation under a double notion, either as
procured Romans 5.10. 2 Cor. 5.19. Col. 1.20. or as applied Romans 4.11. Colos.
1.22. we speak of it in the last notion only.

Because man by reconciliation (though he be restored into a better, yet) is
not rrstored into the same estate formally, wherein he was before the fall: for
then though he was a son, Luke 3.38. and in a state of favor with God, yet he
was not just, nor was his condition immutable, but now being reconciled, he is
not only just but also in a state of special favor, a son, and his condition
immutable; hence it may be described thus: Evangelicall reconciliation is a
transient act of Gods special grace, whereby a believer for the sake of Christ
(who is the propitiation for our sin) received by faith, is restored into an
estate of everlasting favor, sonship, and one-ness of spirit.

Reconciliation notes a change of the parties reconciled, August. in Joan.
tract. 110.
and consequently a change both in respect of God and man; on Gods part it
infers no change in respect of affection, but in respect of the manifestation
of his love and dispensation; God always loves the persons of the elect,
Lomba. l. 3. did. 19. and did. 32. Thom. p. 3. q. 49. art. 4. ad 2. Calv.
instit. l. 2. c. 16. sect. 2, 3, 4. Dav. Col. 1.20.
the love of God is an immanent act, and is nothing else but God himself
loving. To affirm any change in God in respect of his affection, were to
affirm, that God is unconstant and mutable, to deny his immutability, and by
consequence to deny him to be God. By reconciliation Gods affection is not
changed, but Gods dispensation and our condition and disposition. That is taken
away by the Mediatorly obedience of Christ, in respect of which God might
justly have been angry with us for ever, and proceeded against us unto just
condemnation.

In respect of man it notes a change in regard of state, relation, and
disposition. A state of favor and adoption are essential unto, therefore
doubtless parts of Evangelicall atonement or reconciliation. But whether
justification precisely considered be a part or necessary antecedent and means
of Reconciliation, as there is no need of discussing in order to the resolution
of the present question, so is it freely left to the judgment of the Reader, or
to any after disquisition; only adding that satisfaction for an offense is an
antecedent and means rather then a part of the reconciliation following
thereupon, between such as are made friends after variance.

Quamvis reconciliatio potius quiddam consequens, and justificationis effectus
sit. Syn. pur. Theol. dis. 33. n. 6.
Reconciliation (say the Leiden Divines) is rather a consequent and effect of
justification. And both that Text, God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5.19. and the Analogy
of faith may as well bear an interpretation agreeable hereunto as any other,
thus: God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, how? by not
imputing their trespasses unto them; so as the not-imputation of sin may seem
to be an antecedent and means rather then a part of atonement or reconciliation.

Therefore his forgiveness of sin is not only a bare acquittance of the fault,
but it does comprehend under it his receiving of sinners into favor. And I do
also grant that his receiving of sinners into favor must be distinguished as
another part of Gods Atonement.

viz.) make forgiveness and receiving into favor parts of Gods atonement: yet
page 154. lin* 19. you make them effects of the Fathers atonement. If they be
parts, they cannot be effects, if effects they cannot be parts, because the
part is before the whole, i. e. its integrum, but the effect is after the
cause; you may as well make the same thing before and after it self as make
these stand together.

This also must be remembered, that no other person in Trinity does forgive sins
formally but God the Father only; Mar. 2.7. Col. 2.13. he of his free grace did
ordain the Mediator, as the meritorious procuring cause of his forgiveness,
and therefore it is said that he does forgive us all our sins for Christ's sake,
Ephesians. 4.32. sometimes Christ is said to forgive sins, Col. 3.3. but still we
must understand his forgiveness to be in a Mediatoriall way, not formally.



The external essential works of God are wrought jointly, immediately and
formally by all the persons; because the principle of them is the divine
essence, Essentiae in personis non discrepat potentia. Aug. in Joan. tract. 20.
which is common to all the three persons; the Son is God of himself, the holy
Ghost is God of himself, the denial hereof argues no little ignorance of the
nature of God.

The Father (father being taken essentially) forgiveth sin formally and
authoritatively as the Supreme Lord, Christ as Mediator formally and
authoritatively by an authority derived as a subordinate Lord. When we say
Christ forgiveth sin formally, the meaning is, he actually takes away sin by
an authoritative and judicial discharging the sinner from the guilt and
punishment thereof, and does not only declare the forgiveness of sin, as the
Ministry does.

And whereas I have oftentimes in this Treatise made Gods atonement to
comprehend under it our Redemption from sin, as well as our justification and
adoption; I would have you take notice that I do not mean that Gods atonement
does contain under it Redemption as another distinct point differing from
justification; but I make our redemption and freedom from sin by the Fathers
atonement, to be all one with our justification from sin.

Luke 2.38. for the purchasing of grace and glory for the elect by laying down
of a price, so Redemption is the meritorious cause, and atonement is an effect;
Or passively, for the good of Redemption applied, Romans 8.23. so redemption is
the whole, and atonement is the part; but atonement whether it be taken for
reconciliation or for freedom from sin, can in neither sense be the same with
redemption. Forgiveness of sin Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14. is mentioned as a
principal, but neither there or elsewhere as the total good of redemption.

The Fathers Atonement or Reconciliation is the top-mercy of all mercies that
makes poor sinners happy.

(...).
Joh. 4.10. How shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Romans
8.32. No benefit following the Gift of Christ is to be compared with Christ
himself.

But the truth is, a sinners Atonement must be considered as it is the work of
all the Trinity.

1. The Father must be considered as the efficient and as the formal cause of a
sinners atonement.

2. The Mediator must be considered as the only meritorious procuring cause of
the Fathers Atonement. Romans 5.10.

3. The holy Ghost must be considered as the principal instrumental cause of
the Fathers atonement, by working in sinners the grace of faith, by which
sinners are enabled to apprehend and receive the Fathers atonement: Or thus,
The Father must be considered as the efficient cause, the Son as the
Mediatoriall procuring cause, and the holy Ghost as the principal
isntrumental cause of all blessings, that poor believing sinners do enjoy,
Ephesians. 1.3.



The Universal efficient cause of all things is uncreated; but created acts of
God whether permanent or transient, done in time, or aeviternity, are the
formal causes of things, i. e. of giving to them their actual being: All the
external essential works of God, i. e. all his works concerning the creature,
viz, whatsoever being or thing is besides God, are wrought jointly, immediately,
equally, and formally (as was said before) by all the three persons, because
essential works universally, both internal and external proceed from the
essence it self, subsisting in the three Persons, Father, Son, and holy Ghost;
not from the manner of the essence, i. e. the persons as persons.

The order and manner of the working of the three Persons upon the creature is
answerable to the manner of their subsistence in the divine nature. The Father
works of himself, the Son works from the-Father, Joh. 5.19, 30. and 8.28.
The holy Ghost works from the Father and the Son, Joh. 16.13. hence though
all the works of God concerning the creature, are wrought jointly by all the
three persons; yet is the work principally ascribed to that person whose manner
of subsistence does most eminently appear therein. Beginning works, as
creation, are ascribed principally to the first person; the carrying works on
to perfection as redemption, to the second person; the perfecting of them, as
the application of redemption (under which last work the grace of justifying
faith is contained) unto the third person.

To make the first person an efficient, and the third person an isntrumental
cause in the working of reconciliation or faith, were by consequence to affirm
some inferiority of the third person in respect of the first, consequently an
inequality between the persons, which were to infer an inequality in God,
because every person is God, which (leaving the consideration of more dangerous
inferences to the intelligent Reader) is inconsisting with the perfection of
God, so unsafe is it to speak unadvisedly in these mysteries.

The second person in the Trinity is to be considered as in himself, so he is
only God and not man; or as subsisting in personal Union with the manhood, so
he is God-man.

The second Person in the Trinity considered in himself works together with the
Father, and the holy Ghost jointly and equally in all essential works,
consequently as concerning faith, atonement, etc. as we have already seen.

The Mediatorly obedience of Christ, i. e. of God-man consisting of the divine
and humane nature in one person, called by the Father unto that service, is the
procuring and only meritorious cause of the Fathers atonement, and all other
spiritual blessings that believing sinners do enjoy.

To conclude, If thou have gotten any spiritual blessing by any thing that I
have said in this Treatise, Let God have all the glory.

Herosis in capite Pol. Syn. l. 7. c. 22. Vide Par. 1. Cor. 1.11. and 11.19.
Ames. Cas. Con. l. 4. c. 4 Val. tom. 3. dis. 1. q. 11. punct. 1, 2, 3.
Taking heresy for a fundamental error, that is, such as whosoever lives
and dies in, cannot be saved,

The Dialogue contains three Heresies.

The first denying the imputation of the sin of the Elect unto Christ, and his
suffering the punishment due thereunto; contrary to 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13.
Isa. 53.5, 6. and

Other Arguments in the Answer proving the Affirmative:

Thereby leaving the Elect to perish in their sin, 1 Cor. 15.17, 18.

This Heresy is maintained in the first part.

The second, denying that Christ as God-man Mediator obeyed the Law, and
therewith that he obeyed it for us as our surety, contrary to Galat. 4.4, 5.
Matthew. 5, 17, 18. Heb. 10.7. compared with Psa. 48.7, 8. Romans 3.31. and

Other arguments in the Answer proving the Affirmative:

Thereby rendering Christ both an unfaithful, and an insufficient Savior, and
spoiling the elect of salvation.

This Heresy is maintained in the former Section of the second part.

The third, 1. Denying the Imputation of Christ's obedience unto justification;
Contrary to Romans 4. Romans 5.19. Phil. 3.19. and the arguments in the answer
proving the affirmative. Thereby leaving all that be ungodly under an
impossibility of being justified.

2. Destroying the very being of a sinners righteousness, by taking away the
obedience of Christ unto the Law, and imputation, which are the matter and
form, that is, the essential causes of justification.

3. Placing a sinners righteousness in a fictitious Atonement or pardon of
sin, such as in effect manifestly does not only deny it self to be the effect
of, but denies, yea, and defieth the very being of the Mediatorly obedience of
Christ to the Law for us.

This Heresy is maintained in the second Section of the second part.

The first holds us in all our sin, and continues the full wrath of God
abiding upon us.

The second takes away our Savior.

The third takes away our righteousness and our justification.

What need the Enemy of Jesus, grace, and souls add more?

This threefold cord of Heretical doctrine so directly and deeply destructive
to the truth of the Gospel, and salvation of man, We (desiring after Christ's
example to distinguish where there is cause between Peter and Satan, reserving
all charitable and compassionate thoughts according to rule, touching the
compiler thereof, who (we hope) did it ignorantly, do principally impute to
him, who is not only a liar but also a murderer from the beginning.

Now the good Spirit of Grace that great Defender and Teacher of the Truth as
it is in Jesus, who in his rich mercy causes all then whom he loves to
believe the truth that they may be saved, and in his righteous judgment gives
up such who receive not the truth in the love of it, to believe a lie that they
may be damned,

Grant that truth may look down from heaven in this hour and power of the
spirit of error so perilously prevailing to deceive if it were possible the
very elect;

Preserve the Reader from every false way, and lead him into all truth;
Magnify his compassion in the pardon and recovery of the Author, a person in
many respects to be very much tendered of us; in so saving of him (though as by
fire) as that his rising again may be much more advantageous to the truth,
comfortable to the people of God, and honorable to himself, then his fall has
been scandalous, grieving or dishonorable:

And lastly, Inspire us all with a discerning and conscientious spirit, as
concerning the mystery of piety working in the way of truth, and the mystery of
iniquity working in the way of lying; so as that in these evil days wherein
errors and heresies must be, we may manifest our selves approved, and to be
acted vigorously and efficaciously by the spirit of him who sealed that good
confession before Pontius Pilate, saying, To this end was I born, and for this
cause came I into the world that I should bear witness to the truth.

Christian Reader, if (as sometimes through grace it was with Augustine
concerning the Heresy of Pelagius) by occasion of this Dialogue and other
perilous Treatises, with which this hour of temptation abounds, threatening (it
it were possible) to deceive the very elect; thou have been stirred up more to
search into, and hate the unsound tenets contained therein, and more to search
into and love, the sound doctrines contrary thereunto; Remember to glorify
that God which brings Light out of Darkness by his good Spirit, leading all
those whose Names are written in the Book of Life of the Lamb, into all truth,
teaching them to abhor the wine of deadly errors, notwithstanding they are
presented in a golden cup; and to discern Satan though transformed into an
Angel of Light;

Glory be to God in Jesus Christ.
FINIS.
Isa. 45.21. (...)

And there is none else beside me, a just God and a Savior, there is none
beside me,

Romans 3.26. (...)

To declare I say, at this time his righteousness, that he might be just and
the justifier of him that believes in Jesus.

Discant hi igitur quid peccatum Mereatur, quaeque ad illud expiandum
satisfactio necessaria sit: Ne forte de ijs dicendum sit quod Irenaeus.

Iren. adv. haer. l. 3. c. 21. Debitum Christi dum negant, satisfactionem
illius integram dum credere renuunt: debitores ipsi manent, antidotum vitae non
accipientes.

Parker De Descensu l. 3. n. 52.
The Copy of a Letter written from New England, in Answer to a Letter which
they had received from some Brethren in Old England, in the behalf of Mr
Pinchin.
Reverend and Beloved Brethren in our Lord Jesus,
WE see by your Letters you have thought it meet to address your selves to us
(the Elders of these Churches) in behalf of Mr Pinchin and his Book, to incline
us to a favorable construction of the Tenets held forth in it as Disputable,
and (and to some of note) probable; and for himself to move us to intercede
with our Magistrates to deal favorably with him as a Gentleman pious and well
deserving. In both which we shall give you a just account of our Proceedings.

When Mr Pinchin's Book came over to us, it was the time of the ^itting of our
General Court, wherein both the Magistrates and Deputies of every Town in the
Country, do assemble together to consider and determine of the chiefest affairs
which concern this Colony: At the same time a Ship in the Harbor was ready to
set sail for England. Now the Court (both parts of them, the Magistrates and
Deputies) perceiving by the Title Page that the Contents of the Book were
unsound, and Derogatory, both to the Justice of God and the Grace of Christ,
which being published in England might add to the heap of many Errors and
Heresies already too much abounding, and this Book being published under the
name of a New English Gentleman, might occasion many to think, that New England
also concurred in the allowance of such Exorbitant Aberrations: They therefore
judged it meet, not to stay till the Elders could be gathered together; but
whilst the Ship yet stayed, to declare their own Judgment against the Book,
and to send a Copy of their Declaration to England by the Ship, then ready to
depart: Had the Tenets therein seemed to them to be matters, either of
doubtful disputation, or of small moment, we doubt not, they would either not
at all have declared themselves against the Book, or if they had; they would
have stayed for some opportunity of previous consultation with the Elders; but
some of the Tenets seemed to them so directly to shake the Fundamentals of
Religion, and to wound the vitals of Christianity, that they being many of them
well versed both in the Dogmaticall and Controversall points of Divinity,
thought it their duty to profess their Orthodox faith against all destructive
Paradoxes, and dangerous Innovations vented from amongst our selves; for
according as they believe, they do also profess (as our selves likewise do)
That the Obedience of Christ to the whole Law (which is the Law of
Righteousness) is the matter of our Justification; and the Imputation of our
sins to Christ (and thereupon his suffering the sense of the wrath of God upon
him for our sin) and the Imputation of his obedience and sufferings are the
formal cause of our Justification, and that they that do deny this, do now
take away both these, both the matter and the form of our Justification (as
this Book does) and take away also our Justification, which is the Life of our
souls and of our Religion, and therefore called the Justification of life, Rom,
5.18. As for the Notion which you conceive he declineth, of Infinite wrath, we
readily conceive with you, that though Gods wrath be (as himself is infinite,
yet no creature can hear infinite wrath) but he swallowed up of it; and
therefore the wicked are put to suffer finite wrath in an infinite time; yet
this suffering in an infinite time is accidental, in regard of the finitenesse
of the creature, but Christ being infinite God, as well as finite man, his
manhood suffering, though in a finite measure, the sense of Gods wrath both in
soul and body, the infiniteness of his Godhead (whereto his manhood was united
in one person) made his finite suffering, in a finite time, to become of
infinite value and efficacy, for the satisfaction of Gods Justice, and
transaction of our Redemption. (Thus much for the Book.)

Now for the Author of the Book; before your Letter came to our hands the Court
dealt favorably with him, according to your desire: Before they knew your
desire, they appointed three of our fellow Elders and Brethren, all of them his
friends and acquaintance (such as himself chose) to confer with him, and
finding him yielding in some main point (which he expressed willingly under his
own hand) the Court readily accepted the same, as a fruit of his ingenuity, and
a pledge of more full satisfaction; withal they gave him a Book, penned (at
their appointment by our Reverend Brother Mr Norton) in way of Answer to all
his grounds, which he thankfully accepted, and promised upon a due perusal and
consideration thereof, to return further Answer. All which, though it pleased
God to have done, before your Letter came to our hands; yet we acquainted our
Magistrates with the contents of your Letter, whereto they returned this
Answer; They doubted, either you had not read the Book throughout, or that
having seriously weighed it (as the matter required) you would find some
Fundamental Errors in it, meet to be duly witnessed against: For our selves
we thankfully accept of this your labor of love in advertising us of what you
think behooffull; wherein though we differ, and (as we believe) justly differ
from you, yet if we did not lovingly accept advertisements from our Reverend
Brethren sometimes when there is less need, we might discourage our selves and
other Brethren from sending us due advertisements when there is more need. Now
the Lord Jesus Christ, the God of Truth and Peace, lead you by his Spirit of
Truth into all Truth; and support you with a Spirit of faithfulness and holy
zeal, to stand in the gap against the Inundation of all the Errors and Heresies
of this present Age; and by his Spirit of Peace, guide and bless your Studies
and holy Labors, to the advancement and establishment of Peace with Truth
throughout the Nation; So desiring the Fellowship of your Prayers, we take
leave and rest,

Your loving Brethren in the Lord Jesus and in the Fellowship of his Gospel,
John Cotton, Rich. Mather, Zech. Symmes, John Wilson, Will. Thompson,



