A NARRATION OF THE EXPEDITION TO TAUNTON; The Raising the Siege before it, and
the Condition of our Forces, and the Enemies, at this present in the WEST.

Sent from a Commander in the Army, and dated at Chard, May 18. 1645.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Gellibrand, May 23. 1645.

A brief Narration of the relief of TAVNTON.
GOOD Friend, would I could perform my promise, with as much profit to you, as
delight to my self: But in brief, Since my Apology would but stigmatize as
much your candid construction, as be a further declaration of my own weakness,
you shall understand by these few lines our progress from Stanes, our first
advance on the last of April, by several stages, until we came to our
general Randevouz at Newbery-Wash, May the 4. From whence, by twelve or one of
the clock, we advanced toward Andover, and in the Villages adjacent, with seven
Regiments of Foot, to the number, I suppose, of 10 or 12000. Foot; for the
Horse most of them not then as yet come in: I would write no more then what I
am able to testify, either by my own, or from the hands of good Authors.

From Andover on May the fifth, we drew up our several Regiments a mile from
the Town and staid two or three hours, called a Council of War, where were
cast five or six, one a Renegado, and four more, authors of the mutiny in
Kent, who cast dice for their lives; one of them, and the Renegado a Parsons
son, were executed in a Village on a Tree in the Highway, in Terrorem; the
Parsons son, as was said, in the same Town where he was born, both of them died
as they lived, like Sotts: But how the great Judge past his sentence on them, I
have not to say. Next day, May the sixth, was Proclamation made, That it should
be death for any man to plunder, at which, our old Horse-Dragoons, somewhat
guilty, made answer, If the Parliament would pay truly, let them hang duly:
Which has caused so much good order in our march, that to my best inquiry, I
have not heard of any man to complain to loose an Ox, Sheep, Lamb, Hen, no, nor
an Egg, save in our hard march, hot-dayes, vacancy of Towns, or Houses, over
the Plain, made them inordinately desire drink, or covet for water in the
Villages we past. To give you the particular of our several Stages, would be
as difficult, as needless: Since for the most part we took Barnes, and Hedges
for our nights repose, after our hard and hot-dayes marches, until within the
compass of eight days. We came on the second of this instant, within the
sight of Taunton, where upon the Hills, when we came within ten miles of it,
having the advantage of ground, we gave them a peal of our Artillary, ten of
our pieces being discharged to give them notice of our approach, which yet did
them no good, by reason, that on the Thursday before, which was the eighth of
this instant Month, the enemy drew out a party of their Horse and Foot, with
some pieces of Cannon, and skirmisht in sight of the Town, but only with
Powder; in fine, they made the Town believe, that Fairfax who was coming to
relieve them, was there beaten, hoping by this stratagem, to have drawn a party
of them out, to their succor, and to have cut them off by an Ambuscado: But
God withheld them, they kept close to their works, and when the enemy returned,
they fell to firing of the Town, and told them, you Roundheaded Rogues, you
look for relief, but we have relieved them, and Goring is coming on, and we
will not leave one House standing, if you will not yield; then they played with
their Grenades and Mortar pieces so hot, and so long, that they fired the
Town: So that, I believe, the one half of the Town, which was two long streets
of the Subburbs, be both burnt down to the ground; and the mean while, they
stormed most furiously, but they met with a Gallant Commander in chief,
Colonel Blake, and his stout Soldiers, that gave them such showers of lead,
that from good hands it is reported, 1200. at least, there sacrificed their
filthy lives, and left their carcasses: The Town in all, from the beginning, to
the raising of the siedge, has lost 200. men. On Friday they had work enough
to bury their dead, and bethink themselves of saving their living. Hopton sent
a parley to resign the Town upon conditions, Blake returned him answer, he had
four pair of Boots yet left, and he would eat three pair of them, before he
should have it.

On Saturday we came to Chard, within eight miles of it; on the Lord's Day,
orders were given to beat our Drums by day light, and accordingly, drew up our
whole Army, Horse and Foot; and allthough by command from the Parliament, our
noble General Fairfax, General Major Skippon, and that Regiment which formerly
was Barkeleys, were commanded back when we were at Blandford, which was a sad
breakfast to most, both Officers and Soldiers, were after sad salutes, and
watery eyes, like the parting of Husbands from their Wives, and dear friends,
yet we were a thinking of nothing more then resolution to obey, and action to
perform, that great work for the which we were sent, with four Regiments of
Foot, to wit. Colonel Welden, who as eldest Colonel, a gallant, wise, and
brave Gentleman, Commander in chief, Colonel Fortescu, Colonel Floyd, and
Colonel Englesby Regiments; and as we past, came in for our recrute, and met
us about Dorchester, six Companies of the Skie-colour Regiment of Colonel
Morrels; and on Saturday, as many Colors from Lime, those old, brave Blades,
We had a fine Body of Horse, of some 1500. or 2000. and 4. or 5000 Foot, where
I never beheld men of all sorts, of more promising courage, resolution, all as
one man, sweetly combined against the common enemies of mankind, such love
amongst themselves, Horse, and Foot. One passage I will relate, though I hate
prolixitie, a brave gallant Fellow, but a common Soldier, cries out to the
Horse as they marched by: O brave Horse, go on, show them no more mercy, then to
a Louse: Remember Cornwall; To whom a brave Captain of the Plimmouth Troop
replied, O Fellow Soldier, let us remember our God, and not fight in malice,
but do his work, and leave the success to him, and you shall see, through Gods
mercy, we will stand close to you, O you gallant Foot; but I may not be
tedious, yet surely, braver courage was never seen, then even then, when a
party of the enemies Horse, and ours, faced each other; our Forlorn Horses
meet, and exchange some Pistols, put them quickly to the Trial of their heels;
but after we were drawn up into Battalia, expecting when to be charged, and
made choice of our ground, no enemy appeared, we went on to the very Brow of
the Hill in Battalia, and saw betwixt that and Taunton, nothing but enclosures,
not minding to adventure all our Horse into a pitfold; the Lanes in many places
from thence, we could not march above four or six in breast: The Agitant of the
Horse surely a gallant man, a Dutchman, and some eight or nine others, fall
down to Pitmister, and without his Dublet, only in his Shirt, incountered a
Troop of the enemies Horse, being as is said, Hoptons Lifeguard, for they were
commanded by his own Cornet, one Brown an Irish man, who furiously charges
them, and cries, why do you not fire you cowardly Rogues, spent one Pistol,
charged them through, and killed three or four with his own hands, his Sword
being all bloody up to the very Hilt; they all run as fast as they could, the
Dutch Agitant wheels off, and retreats, lost not one man in the first Rout; the
Cornet and some twelve more, faced about, and on them the Agitant charges a
fresh, having killed two or three of them, took four of them prisoners, rides
up to the Cornet, and cries quarter, he denies it, but sets Spurs to his Horse
to run away, but he was soon overtaken by his Pistol, which ended his journey
by a brace of Bullets in his back, fell from his Horse, he brought him of
alive, but he soon died; and being demanded why he refused quarter, made
answer, He could not in honor desire it, seeing so many to be beaten, and run
away from so few: But questionless, the man thought of his Nation, and
dreading a halter, chose a more honorable death. All this while, we have not
one word from the Town; whereupon, we gave them two or three pieces of Cannon,
but they were cautious, and persuaded we were the enemy, who endeavored to
draw them forth; for so the enemy suggested, that Goring was come to relieve
them, and that their Rear might not be discovered: toward Evening, we sent a
party of Horse, who approacht to their very Works, the enemy having drawn off
their Guns, and their Rear upon their march, the Town never before, having any
notice of our Forces, that they could confide on as friends there, about six of
the clock fell out upon their Rear, killed some, and took other prisoners. We
marched with our whole Body to Pitmister, and then within two miles of the Town,
took up our quarters in the Fields, and on Monday morning our Colonels go to
Taunton, give order for our whole Army to retreat back to Chard, where we
quartered on Saturday; and the fourteenth is the first days rest, the Army
has had, from our first days motion Westward; which if you consider of, is
one of the greatest expeditions, and gallantest marches, that ever this unhappy
War produced; if you do but weigh the length of the way, the encumbrances that
attend an Army, with their Train, and Artillary; many new Soldiers, hard
quarters, exceeding cold nights, and as hot days: Let God have the Glory, our
Colonells and Officers the praise; who of my knowledge, have marched two or
three days on Foot, and never took their Horse, but still in the head of their
Regiments, gave good encouragement by their own examples, and then God so
ordering, that not a man of us miscarried; for my own Company, I can say, not a
man sick after we left Newbery, and few or none went from us, but all stick
close, valiantly resolved to fight, and die, yet the Town was relieved without
the loss of any man's blood, and a terror struck into the hearts of their
enemies. We may say, God fought for us, and of him, we will make our boast all
the day long; To whom be all the praise, who lives for ever and ever, Amen,
Amen.

Thus far have I brought you to our own Armies expedition; but now for the
enemy one word, and I have done, though neither this, nor future ages will
believe, nor should I my self, who have formerly known these parts, had not my
own eyes beheld it: To see one or two Houses ruined in a place, had been no
great matter, but all the way we marched from Okingham to Taunton; no place
especially, where Religion was most eminent, but you might track the devil by
his cloven Foot: Such devastation of Houses, nay, depopulations in many places;
and those Fields, Pastures, Plains, formerly beautified, and inricht with
Flocks, and Herds: You may pass ten miles, and scarce discern any thing; rich
Pastures, but no Cattle left to eat them. You would suppose the great Turk, his
Janisaries and Armies, rather then their Native Prince his Soldiers had been
there: Who would think a King, who was so tender hearted, as to charge Hotham
so deeply in his Answer to the Parliament, declared 1642. for drowning the
Medows about Hull, and was formerly so careful for the good of the Subjects
disabusing by the several Manafactures of Soap, Cards, Dice, Pinnes, etc.
should now lay all desolate where he has any footing. O that those Counties of
Kent, Essex, etc. which complain of heavy Taxes, would compare their Estates
with the forlorn West: His Majesty complains, that the Flowers of his Crown,
the Prerogative Royal, should be infringed; and yet the Jewels of the ancient
Crown fold to buy us such an unheard off misery, by Walloons, Irish, French,
Dutch, etc. If all this will not please the Queen, the Papists, Jesuits, yea,
the devil himself; I know not how they can study more to grive man, and
provoke God. Let them palliat the Prince, and tell him, he is to give an
account to none but God; yet sure that will be found an hard reckoning at last:
A sad maxim, that no way so sure to settle the King in his Throne, as to Pave
its way through the blood, and ruin of his people and Kingdom. We have heard of
three or four Kings, in four or five years, and yet the Kingdom to flourish;
but we never heard, that one King should destroy two or three Kingdoms, rather
then suffer the least affront, or the least twing of the Toothack; and cursed
be those Councels of the Rabbis in Oxford, and devils of Rome, who so
persuade. If this be Regal Government, I know not what to call Tyranny; yet
King James, though none of the best Princes, nor worst Politician, has written
Basilicon Doron, and shrewdly descanted on this Theme. How ever Solomon could
judge of the true mother by her affection, rather to save her childs life,
though she lost her child formerly: Good Princes have been the sheilds and
saviors, not destroyers of their Countries. If the King should miscarry (which
we abhor to think or desire) yet we may have many Kings hereafter; But if three
Kingdoms perish, what is Monarchy without Majesty; and what Majesty can be
upheld with beggary, misery, and slavery. If this be the Protestant Religion,
its a strange one: yet so it must be called, yea, Hopton when he saw he could
not take, yet cruelly burnt that distressed Town; and when it was all in
flames, called, and pulled out by the ears, those distressed people adjacent,
to look and behold the flames, with execration and scorn; yet after he had two
preachments, no doubt, but to give God thanks, like the Duke de Alva, who
before Dinner, gave a good Grace to his meat, thanking God for his buchery of
so many thousands in a few years: This is that Hopton, formerly accounted
Religious, Honest, Noble, so degenerate by the Council of Tobi Matthews, and
old Cottington, and his Uncle, Sir Arthur Hopton, Spanish compliance, and all
grounded upon his own beggarly estate, so pitifully torn, and out at heels,
that he is become the monster of mankind. In brief, the poor people come from
all parts, rejoicing, praising God, and thanking us for delivering them from
those Beasts of prey, who before this time, had no Trade, Market, Commerce, or
society with each others. Now their faces begin to shut out the former
wrinkles, and smilingly tell us, we have shrewdly galled the Cabballers, shower
and shower, they be all ago: The Lord keep them as safe, as we have left them;
for we have orders to march away Eastward this day, having had not one days
rest this fourteen days, before this time: And now our men are cheerfully
marching, and we hope you are praying, that you may never taste that in London,
which we have seen in the West. O if Kent did know their happiness, they would
not be so mad to purchase such misery, at so dear a rate; however, they bless
themselves with hopes of their King, these poor souls have found they have King
enough. Sir, I have no more to say, but desire three or four words, how things
go at Scarborough, and in the North.

Chard, 18. of May, 1645.
FINIS.

