CHRIST'S Commission-Officer: OR, The Preachers Patent CLEARED: AND, THE
Peoples plea considered. In a Sermon preached before (and now presented to) the
ASSOCIATED Ministers of Christ, in the County of Sommerset, at a late solemn
Ordination at Sommerton in the said County, June, 9. 1658.

By John Norman, Min^ster of the Gospel at Bridgwater.

Romans 10.14, 15. How then shall they call on him, in whom they have not
believed? and how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and
how shall they hear without a preacher?

And how shall they preach except they be sent? as it is written how beautiful
are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of
good things?

1 Timothy 1.12. I thank Christ Jesus our Lord who has enabled me: for that he
counted me faithful, putting me into the Ministry

London, Printed for Edward Brewster, at the Crane in Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

Epistola Dedicatoria.
Dilectissimis, and in Christoperquam reverendis Ministris Evangelii, apud
Somersetenses ASSOCIATIS, arctissimoque and pacis and pietatis vinculo
conjunctis, Gratiam misericordiam and pacem in Domino.
Patres fratresque in Christo colendissimi,
ANte oculos ponit conciuncula haec (qualis qualis est) omnia illa, quibus
nuperrime praebuistis erectas aures. Quam acrius eflagitarunt non pauci, ut in
apricum feram, hanc omnibus and singulis vestrum perquam humillime offero.

Non est quodlauta apologia ceulongis ambagibus vosfutile and nullo cum ^ructu
morer. Post iteratas a me denuo multumque inficias, vicerunt candem eorum,
quibus familiarissime utor, rations, quae desiderio Christi, coeli, evangelii,
ejusdemque Ministerii exardere mihi videbantur.

Pompaticam eloquentiam (ut Hieronymi (...) utar) non ambiit concionator
vester, nec pruritum aurium, 2 Timothy 4.2. (...) Christ. in Tit.
sed prodesse animis: 1 Cor. 10 33.
(...), ut cum Apostolo loquar, ne inanis reddatur crux Christi. 1 Cor. 1.17.
(...). Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. 11.
Oratione itaque pressa usus sum, non praeculta Quemadmodum sapienti viro
incessus modestior convenit; ita oration pressa non audax, Seneca. Ep. 40. in
fine.
populari, non polita. Cujuscunque orationem vides politam, and s^llcitam;
scito ammum in pusiais occupatum in scriptis ni^il solidum, Id. Epist. 21.
Nec minus de rebus Theologicis dicendum semper duxi, quam de Philosophicis
Cicero: Istiusmodi res dicere ornate puerile est, plane autem and perspicue
expedire posse, docti and intelligentis viri. Cicero L. 3. de finibus, bon. and
mal.


Rerum Theologicarum conculcatores, potius, quam concionatores sunt, qui
(secundum Hieronymum) exceptis verbis tinnulis atque emendicatis, nihil aliud
loquuntur. Hier. Ep. ^amil. 56.
Liceat itaque ut cum Apostolo palam and ingenue profitear, non statuisse me
quicquam scire, nisi Jesum Christum, eumque crucifixum: 1 Cor. 2.2.
and quicquid sine hoc nomine fuerit, quamvis literatum, and expolitum, and
veridicum, non me totum rapuisse, sicut Augustinus. Confess. L. 3. ca. 4.
Valiant, per me licet, oratorum lenocinia, Platonicorum and Erubiscat ergo
superbus and infoelix peccator, and limeat elatione coecatus, ira inflammatus,
impatien^iae vitio faedatus, sientiainflatus; cui plus placet ars Aristotelis
quam scientia de Apostolis, plus codex Flatonis cuam liber divinus: quem nulla
lectio laetificat, nulla sapie ntia aedisicat; nullus sermo sapit, nisi suerit
Gram matiee conceptus, Dialectice imaginatus, Rhetorice purpuratus, Aug. li.
specul. peccat. e. 6.
Peripateticorum sophismata: Arma enim militiae nostrae non carnalia sunt, sed
divinitus valida, ad destructionem munitionum: 2 Cor. 10.4.
Vivus est Dei sermo and efficax* Heb. 4.12.
Tota scriptura divinitus est inspirata, eademque utilis ad doctrinam, ad
redargutionem, ad correctionem, ad disciplinam in justitia: Nec solummodo
potest hominem sapientem reddere ad salutem, verum etiam hominem Dei cum (...)
tum (...); Seu (...) a Paulo scriptum sit, ut plerique legunt, (...), ut
Complutensis editio, vim vocabuli (...) in se inclusam habet. Proinde ab
Oecumenio exponitur (...), q. d. integre, plene consummate: a Chrysostomo autem
(...), i. e. accurate and exact instructus, Jo. Rainold. These. 1. de S.
scriptura, p. 64.
and perfectum, and ad omne opus bonum perfect instructum. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16,
17. vide Andr. Rivet. Isagogen. ca. ^5.


In evangelio; en! omnis veritas est, and omnis manifestatio veritatis, ficut
Origenes. Homil. 9. in Exodus
En! (...). Uti Basilius Contra Eunomium. L. 1. Ad eundem modum and
Chrysostomus scripturam dicit (...) Homil. 13. in 2. ad Corinth.
Imo, vel Bellarmino ipso fatente, En! sacra scriptura regula certissima,
tutissimaque est De Verbo Dei. I. 1. c. 2.


Ad scripturas itaque auditores ubique provoco, quarum adoranda est plenitudo.
Adoro scripturae plentudine^ Terr. adve s. Hermog.
Ad legem and contestationem, cum Isaia clamito, Isa. 8.20.
Illud ipsum, quod antehac Constantinus, in Synodo Nicaena, omnibus a me
dissentientibus suadeo: untinam, and addi liceat persuadeo! viz. ut hostilem
omnem expellentes contentionem, ex verbis divinitus inspiratis, solutionem
quaestionu^ capiamus. (...). Theodor. Histor. Ecles. l. 1. ca. 7.
Audiamus, quid dicit Dominus; non quid dicit Donatus, glorifica^um est nomen
meu^ in gentibus, dicit Dominus: Audi: dicit Dominus, non dic^t Donat us, aut
Rogatus, aut Vincentius, aut Ambrosius, aut Augustinus. Ang. Epist. 48. circa
med u^.
etc. vel hic, vel ille, licet apprime eruditus, amicus aut pius. Nec audiamus,
ut inquit idem Augustinus; Contr. Petilianu^ de unit. Ecl. ca. 3.
Haec dico, haec dicis; sed audiamus, haec dicit Dominus. Liceat ejufdem
verbis, and fratres alloqui me, aliter hoc in argumento, quod in manibus est,
sentientes Sunt certe libri Dominici, quorum authoritati utrique consentimus,
utrique credimus, utrique servimus, ibi quaeramus ecclesiam, ibi discutiamus
causam nostram. Nolo equidem, (ut subjungit ille) humanis documentis, sed
divinisoraculis, ecclesiam, addo and ministerium, demonstri. Idem, ibidem.


Illud tamen non diffiteor, sed plane, ut res est, haud invitus expono; hoc
aliquanto majorem mihi injecisse scrupulum, utrum libertas ista prophetandi,
quam adoptarunt fratres, S. scripturae accommodata fuerit? an potius abaliena?
sc. quod, non modo in Socinianorum Docet Paulus recte id fieriposse,
unumquemque munus docendi aggredi, modo ad id aptus sit, quod aggredi cogitat,
vel cupit Theoph. Nicholaid. in refut. tract. de miss. ministrorum. In eandem
sententiam ped^bus eunt. Catechesis Raccoviensis. c. 2. Raddecius in not, in
librum Smigelecti. Socinus in Tractatude Ecclesia. Ejus defensionem habetis,
per Theoph. Nicholaidem.
castris, usitatissime eam propugnatam habemus, qui scripturis parum tribuunt,
verum etiam, in Enthusiastarum colluvie (and ejusdem farraginis homuncionum)
Est igi^ur dogma seditiosum and Diabolicu^, dogma Anabaptisticu^; de homimbus
sine discrimine permittendis, functionem ecclesiastic am suscipere, and
ecclesiam docere. Hieron. Zanchi. in quartum praeceptum.
qui scripturas aperte rejiciunt At sententiae huic uni suffragantur omnes, in
hoc unum lubentisfime coeuntes.

Testem Deum invoco in animam meam; 2 Cor. 1.23.
me nullis vel iracundiae, vel invidiae igniculis exardescere, ob annunciatum
Christum, ceu anhelantessacrorum desiderio Christianos. Hoc mihi intime in
votis est, Dominumque messis animitus and obnixe rogo, ut operarios in messem
suam (...), mittat, Secundu^ vulgatam interpretatio^em
emittat, secu^dum Bez and Ar. Montan.
extrudat, secundum E asmi and Syriac. versionem per Jun. Tremel.
ceu eijciat, sic Hilar. ^pud Leig. Cri^ca Sacr. and sic ad verbum sonat,
inquit Beza.
Nam messis quidem multa, operarii autem auci. Mat. 9.37, 38. vid. Polycarp.
Lyserum ad L^^.
Illud unioe memor^ae infixum velim, quod Domini sit extrudere operarios
ideoque dolosi potius quam docti est, ^eipsum intrudere, ceu injicere. Huc ut
animum advertatis, in eoque cogitationes altius defigere ut placeat, suadet
haec, quam audivistis, concio.

Rerum summas tantum persequebar: utpote, qui compendia longis anfractibus
anteponenda semper sensi. Praesertim vero, quia sic postulabant angustiae
temporis, nec aliud, utplurimum auditorum genii: ut multa in pauca conferam,
and omnia (quoad possem) quae argumentum hoc spectant, ut uno quasi fasce
complectar: Nonnulla insuper adscripsi: at non sine desiderio vostrum alicujus,
multis mihi nominibus pariter and vobis observandi, and multimodae literaturae
celebritate decorati. Haec ad initium cujusvis lineae sic (') insignita dedi.

Me ex aliorum fontibus hortulos hosce nostros irrigasse, haud inficias eo: Est
enim ut arbitror benignum, and plenum ingenui pudoris, fateri per quos
profeceris. Plini. secund, ad Vespasian praefat. not. histor.
Nec solum ab alienigenis Joh Gerhard. Loc. Com. Tom. Sext. de Minist Eccles.
ca. 3. sect. 1. n. 54. etc. r. 64. etc. Fred. Baldvin. Cas. consc. l. 4. ca. 4.
casu 1. Josh. Stegman. Photinianism. Disp. 53. qu. 1 and 2. Hier. Zanchius in
quart. p^aecept. Chemnit. Loc. Com. de ecclesia. Bucanut Loc. Com. 42. qu. 29.
ad qu. 45. Profess. Leyd. cens confess. ca. 2. sect. 2.3. Synopsis pur. Theolog.
Disput. 46. c. 5. Apollonii Considera^io quart. controvers. etc. ca. 5. qu. 3.
sed a nostratibus Lazar. Seaman (...). Gillespy Miscell. quest. Rutherford
peac. plea. chapter 16. qu. 16. and due right of Presbyt. chapter 5. sect. 1, 2.
Collins vindiciae min. Evangel. and vindiciae revindicatae. Hall. Pulpit
guarded. Ferreby Lawf. preach Tho. Bali. London Minist. Ju^ divinum Ministerii
Evangelii. Liber vix. satis laudatus, and qui de ecclesia Anglican a optime
meritus est.
hoc a gumentum teri, eruditioni vestrae satis compertum est.

Vestrum erit, reverendi fratres, aequa lance trutinare, quid sit very, and
quid a vero alieni: qui (musarum dicam? an) scripturarum sacris versatissimi
estis, and politiori literatura instructissimi. Quicquid boni occurrit, aut
very, illud Dei esse, palam profiteor: sin aliquid mali, vel falsi, (quod me
prorsus latet) hoc plane nostri est. Omnia bona mea, nec sunt pure bona, nec
puremea; omnia mala mea, and sunt pure mala, and pure mea. Hugo.
Hic, primum operam dedi, ut quantum omnino potui, cum scripturis loquar, Sic
instruit Zepperus, de art habendi and audiendi conciones Sacr. l. 3. c. 3.
and nec fallar in eis, nec fallam ex eis Sic adprecatur Augustinus. Sint
castae deliciae meae scripturae tuae: nec fallar in eis, nec fallam ex eis,
Confess. Lib. 11. c. 2.
Penes vos sit judicium, his de rebus: quibuscum, tanquam grati in vos animi,
and permagni affectus (licet perexiguum) testimonium, libellus hic deponitur.

Grata memoria amores, mores, res vestras omnes prosequor. Grata mihi semper in
mentem occurrit concordia vestra, grata comitas, grati conventus,
grataconsuetudo and colloquia. Eruditam, quam apud vos frequentissimus
observavi pietatem, exardescentes preces, effervescentem zelum, exoptatam
submissionem, exantlatos labores, and emeritas (...) lauds nulla unquam apud
me deleat (nec delebit) oblivio. At temperabit sermo, quamvis nunquam tacebunt
affectus. Ipse me citius quam vos obliviscar: etsi unquam sermo tacebit,
loquetur affectus. Ambros. de Gratiano and Valentiniano.


Pernavigate, charissimi fratres, and verbi and vitae velis expansis,
secundiori spiritus afflatu fruituri, potiaminique votis, amico sidere, amicis
sanctis, ad Dei gloriam, Diabolorum gravamen, ecclesiae pacem, and
ecclesiasticorum prospera, frementibus licet and frendentibus Satana, ejusque
sectatoribus.

Non est, quod nostrum quivis, Jonae instar, Jon. 1.5, 6.
in tot tantisque ecclesiarum procellis, ignorationis, ignaviae,
intemperantiae, aut ingenii vafri somno sit consopitus. Officio honestati
sumus. Hoc unicum, 2 Timothy 4.1. ad 6. Episcopus est nomen quod plus oneris, quam
honoris significat. Polyd. Virgil.
quas scintillas admoveret? quos stimulos adjiceret? ut Christi propugnatores,
and carnis expugnatores nosmet comprobemus. Optime cedet laboranti. Quot
labores veritati nunc exhibes, tot etiamremuneration^s pignora, intra spei tuae
cubiculum clausum tenes. Gregor. Moral.
Nec obest quo minus in lautiora provehantur dona, ipsissimo usu, and docendo
promoveamur doctrina. Quo in plures diffunditur, eo redundantior manat, and in
suum fontem recurrit. In se enim refluit ubertas prudentiae, and quo pluribus
fluxerit, eo exercitius fit omne, quod remanet. Ambros. Offic.


Quod ad me spectat, cum praefecto Pharaoni a poculis, peccata mea recordaturus
sum hodie; Genesis 41.9.
ingenueque cum Ambrosiorecognosco: Offic. c. 1. Liceat and cum eodem insuper
adscribere -- and quantumlibet quisque profecerit, nemo est: qui doceri non
egeat, dum vivat. Ibid.
quod prius docere inciperem; quam discere: Discendum igitur mihi^ simul and
docendum^ est. Nec profiteri^ piget, Augustini verbis Ego ex eorum numero me
esse profiteor; qui scribunt profictendo, and scribendo proficiunt Epist. 7.
parummutatis, exeorumnumero meesse, qui doce^tproficiendo, and docendo
proficiunt Mutuo ista fiunt ut homines dum doceant, discant. Seneca Epist. 7.
and in hoc gaudeo (uti Seneca) aliquid discere, ut doceam: nec me ulla res
delectabit, licet eximia sit and salutaris, quam mihi uni sciturus sum. Idem,
Epist. 6.


Veneror equidem inventa sapientiae: Senec. Epist. 65.
and facile eorum sententiae accedo, qui judicarunt, nemine^ unqua^ habuisse
doctrinam inmicum, nisi ignorantem. Ideoque de industria, hac in re,
aliquantisper versata suit haecconcio, nequis auditorum a veritatis tramite,
hac ex part, deflectat. Illud vero plane meminisse, and penita mente
reconditum vellem; aliud esse erudiri de veritatibus Jesu Christi, aliud
edoceri de eo, ficut veritas est in Jesu Ehpes. 4.20, 21. Nunquid Domine Deus
veritatis, quisquis novit ista, ipse placet tibi? Infaelix enim homo, qui scit
omnia illa, te autem nescit: Beatus autem qui scit, etiam si illa nesciat.
Quivero and te and illa novit, non propter illa beatior sed propter tesolum
beatus est. etc. Aug. Co^s. L. 5. c. 4
. Potest quis peritus esse, imo praedicator, 1 Cor. 9.27
tamen periturus Quid prodest peruum esse, and periturum! Aug. Confess. L. 11.
C. 2.
. Nec sic immorandum esse scientiis judico, ut post habitae sin^ scripturae
Quid prodest in mudanis proficere doctrinis and marcescere in divinis? Caduca
sequi figmenta, and coelestia fastidire mysteria? Isidor. de libris Gentil.
; nec ipsissimis scripturis, post-habito spiritu -- O Domine perfice me, and
revela mihi eas. Aug. Conf^s. L. 11. ca. 2 -- Agnoscamus gratiam, quae facit
prodesse doctrinam, quae gratia si desit, videmus etiam ob^sse doctrinam. Idem
Epist. 107.
. Animalis enim homo non percipit, quae sunt spiritus Dei, in scripturis nisi,
potenti ejusdem spiritus adjumento 1 Cor. 2.14. Psalm. 119.18.
, cujus inspiratione, exaratae sunt scripturae 2 Timothy 3 16.
.

Sed manum de tabula. Ut veritati and vobis prospere succedant omnia, obnixe
peto. Adunitis vestris consiliis, conatibus, and caeptis omnibus, fausta
laetaque omnia pecor. Ut vivat Christus; valeat causa ejus, vigeat concordia,
nec diutius vacillent Christiani: ut revalescat, quae est secundum pacem,
disciplina, and radices altiores agat, quae est secundum pietatem, doctrina;
iterum atque iterum, instat oration

Devinctissimi vobis fratris (...) ac in Domino conservi JOH. NORMAN.

To the plain, especially the pious READERS.
NExt to the glory of God my Savior, the good of your souls, was it that
subdued me; (who had else been still deaf to all entreaties of friends and
fellow laborers) to let you see this from the Press, which others (and
probably, some of you) heard from the Pulpit. The same God, who perfects
strength in weakness, that so far prospered it when it was delivered to the
ear, make it now likewise powerful upon the heart, when it is delivered to the
eye. If either sin shall be restrained by it, or the saints refreshed, or the
sauciness of seducers rebuked, or the service of our Savior regularly
advanced, the speaker has his end, the sermon its errand. Some things are now
set before you, more than were then spoken: Some things which I did not then
design, especially for further clearing up of objections; others, which I could
not then deliver, for the fuller carrying on of the application. Both are
commonly thus marked (') at the beginning of each line. The rest you have
welnigh in the same words which you then heard, as near as my notes and memory
could suggest it, only some things now and then may be herein delivered less
contractly: especially in the uses. Before you peruse, pray. Man may open the
Scriptures to your understandings, but God alone can open your understandings
to the Scriptures Luke 24.45. Ps. 119.18.
. As you peruse, pause a while, and consider; conferring the several texts and
truths, and comparing spiritual things with spiritual. If you will notmeditate
upon, and search God's Word, I shall never marvail, if you mistake or slight
men's writings. Having perused, put things to an issue; as in the presence of
God, judging your selves that you be not judged. Do you conclude upon the
whole, that such as undertake to be teachers ordinarily in the Church without
ordination, are but toyling themselves in their own corruption? Oh! let
conscience be put off by you, while it is ready to put to you such questions as
these. Is it a sin for this man to preach, and can it be safe for thee to hear
him? Canthy attendance be well, and his act so ill? Shall his guilt increase by
it, and will thine decrease? Does heviolate an Ordinance of God, and invade an
office so sacred in the Gospel? And durst thou beside thy connivence at this
attempt, bring it all the countenanee, whereto thy company will amount? Could
the pr^de o^ his heart make him a preacher, unless thy presence with others,
(probably the more for thee) did maintain him hearers? O my soul! Shall I that
hope f^r heaven, harden him in that sin, for which he must without repentance,
howl in hell for ever? Is this to reprove? or does it not approve this work of
darkness, to give it the respect of my observance in the open light? Shall I
not knowingly hereby communicate in his sin? and how can I have comfort thence
for my own soul? Has God prohibited him to preach? and how can I have a
precept to hear? or hope to profit by hearing him? Where have I (...) promise
that I shall, or how ca^ I pray in faith, that I may reap^ any soul-advantage
by him? especially, while I run my self upon such a tentation, instead of
reclaiming him from his tra^sgression? Nay, hear the Word of the Lord: I sent
them not, nor commanded them: therefore they shall not profit this people at
all, says the Lord, Jer. 23.32. Hearken not to the words of such Prophets; for
I have not sent them, says the Lord, Jer. 27.14.15. and 23.16. with 21. Reader
had thou seen the public tears, that were bled forth at the eyes; or heard
the passionate throws, that were breathed ^orth from the hear^s by one of those
^^^v^nts of Christ that were now solemnly set apart [That ever he should preach
so many sermons without a solemn sending forth! and to which he could see no
promise of success! etc.] It could not but have made some impression upon thy
heart, as it did upon mine and many others. I shall detain thee no longer, but
to deliver my own soul, in the words of Zealous, and Studious Baxter First
sheet for the Ministry, p. 14.
. Christian Reader, as ever thou would be sanctified, confirmed, and saved,
hold fast to Christ, Scripture, Ministry, and Spirit; and that in the Church
and Communion of Saints; and abhor the thoughts of separating each from other.
And to declare my sense of the same truth, in the same terms, with holy and
humble Dr. Sibbs Epistle to the Reader before P. Bayns on ^he Ephefianst,
, now in heaven. I speak not as if way were to be given to Vo^stian, lawless,
licentious, liberty (...) prophesying; that every one, as soon (...) he is big
of some new conceit, shon^ bring forth his abortive monster: F^^ thus the
pillars of Christian fai^^ would soon be shaken, and the Church (...) God,
which is an house of order, wou^^ become a Babel, an house of confusion The
doleful issues of which pretende^ liberty we see in Polonia, Transylva^nia, and
in Countries nearer hand Reader, the doleful issues which we se^ in England,
let us sigh over, and sprea^ before the Lord, in whom Irest.

Thy soul-friend, JOHN NORMAN

CHRIST'S Commission-Officer: OR, AN Ordination-Sermon.
2 Timothy 2.2. And the things that thou have heard of me, among many
witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach
others also.


THese two Epistles of Timothy, and the next to Titus; what are they, but
Paul's Directory for the regular continuance, and reverend carriage of the
Gospel Ministry? Two things he infisle^h upon principally: The investitu^e of
some with the Office of Ministers, the employment of such in this Office. How
and on whom Timothy and Titus shall confer it, and how themselves and those
should carry themselves in it: what was their part for delegating men to the
Ministry, and what must be their own and others part and demeanor in the
Ministry. These things are very accurately and abundantly interspersed.

Lo, it is not enough (without further preface) that Timothy in these, and
Titus in the next Epistle look how they do comport themselves, but they must
commit this sacred trust to others; the necessity of the Ministry is so
eminent: and this with the best-sighted caution, and most studious
circumspection, the nature of the Ministry is likewise so excellent. This, this
beloved and much reverenced; which is the end of your present convention, is
Paul's charge, and must be Timothie's care in this verse. The things that thou
have heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou, etc.

Four things wust be here briefly enquired into. 1. The matters or things which
are to be committed. 2. The manner how? 3. The man by whom. 4. The men to whom
these things are to be committed.

First, what are the things which Timothy must commit? Paul tells him, The
things that thou have heard of me, the same commit thou. But whether those
which he had heard from Paul publicly and openly in his preaching, or more
particularly those at his own ordination, when he was put into the Ministry by
Paul, 2 Timothy 1.6.
together with the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14.
be the chief or only things in our Apostles eye, it is not expressed: The
ensuing words bespeak the last (at least partly, if not) principally intended.
Timothy it is plain, is not only charged in these Epistles with teaching
others, but with ordaining teachers: And no doubt, but with committing unto
others the Office to teach, he is to commit such Gospel Truths by teaching, as
shall be of best, and most inserviency, to their holy and happy conduct,
throughout the difficulties, and discharge of their office of Teachers. A point
of easy observation, and eminent use, which could not probably be omitted at
the Apostles Ordination of Timothy, that has obtained well-nigh an universal
concurrence, at every Ordination since.

Secondly, but how must Timothy commit these things? (...). It would be little
other than a wast of precious time, and of your patience, to produce the
several Scriptures in which, or purposes to which, this word is used. There
are but two senses (I humbly conceive) that can with any probability be
tendered here: viz. Either that Timothy commit these things to others in way of
doctrine only, by teaching and opening these things to them; or in way of
delegation also; and special trust, as the word is often used; 1 Timothy 1 18.
cum 2 Timothy 1.14. Lu. 12 48. (...). The ophylactus hoc discrimen constituit in
verbis (...). Illud accipit de miraculoru^ doni, boc vero de Minillerio. vi
de^plura apud Bezam ad loc. and Leigh. Crit. sac. ad verbum.
trusting these things with them as Officers, who are to teach others, and must
therefore be a depository and treasure-house of divine truths for others. This
latter sense, which eminently takes in the committing of the Office to teach,
is that which to me seems, most especially in our Apostles design and purpose,
for these two reasons. Because, 1. This most openly corresponds, not only to
the subject in hand, but to the scope of the whole: both Epistles being to
direct Timothy, especially about public Ordinances and Officers: how he shall
Ordain Officers, and how these and himself shall order the affairs of their
Office. 2. This has the most obvious, if not the only countenance from the
Characters given us, of the men to whom Timothy is to commit these things which
are immediately subjoined. For if Timothy were to commit these things to them
only, in way of doctrinal teaching; what need or use was there, of so severe a
restriction, or of such special qualifications, as we read added? faithful
men, able to teach others also: which Gillespy in his Miscellany Questions,
Collins in his Vindiciae, and the London Ministers in their Jus Divinum
Ministerii Evangelici, do very well observe. No doubt, but as to the doctrinall
teaching of these things, Timothy was no less a debtor, than was Paul to the
Barbarian, as well as Greek; to the unlearned, as well as learned; both to the
wise, and to the unwise, Romans 1.14. So that Timothy is to commit these things,
more than in way, of doctrine only: He is to commit them in way of delegation
also, unto such faithful men, as shall be able to teach others: which cannot
rationally be understood, of other than public and authoritative teaching; if
either 1. the quality of the men, or 2. the contents and aim of these Epistles,
which concern public tranfactions in the Church, especially public teachers:
or if 3. the command it self be duly weighed: for such as are to teach but
privately, an^ from grounds of charity only, need n^ such commitment of these
things t^ them; nor needs it that there be such choice of men: this being every
man and woman's duty, Heb 5.12. Nor ca^ any thing be justly impleaded, from the
Apostles use of the future tense, [who shall b^ able to teach others also] for
though tha^ they shall be able to teachothers, be necessari^ antecedent to the
commitment of the Office^ sensu physico, i. e. that they shall have abi^ lities
to teach: yet it follows, the commitment of the Office, sensu morali, i. e.
tha^ they shall use such abilities ordinarily, or b^ able to teach others,
acceptably, and lawfully: remembering still that old, honest, an^ veceived
principle. Illud tantum possumu^ quod jure possumus. We are able to do n^ more,
than we are able in Law, or may (...) lawfully. And thus our text aptly
corresponds to that of the same Apostle, Romans 10. verse. 15. How shall they
preach except they be sent? i. e. how shall they preach warrantably? Abilities
they must have before sending, but sending vests them with authority. So that
the words speak as much in effect as this; Does Timothy know such as are
faithful and fit, or able to teach others; he must commit these things to
them, as Trustees for others. Does he find any so qualified for the Office to
teach, he must leave them Commissioned to this Office: Are they qualified with
fidelity and ability, Timothy must commit to them a furniture of authoriy.

Thirdly, but how must Timothy commit these things, this Office to them? What!
he only? he, and none but he? No, we never find the Ministry committed to any,
by a single person; but still it is done by several in society. We always read
of more than one concurring to it, and never remember less than two: And those
are no less than were Paul and Barnabas, Act. 14.23. The Twelve are associates
in it, Acts 6.2, 3, 6. and it is the joint act of how many teachers and
Prophets? Act. 13.1, 2, 3. The seat and subject of this power, is not a
Presbyter; but the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. Can we rationally think, that Paul
does require Timothy to commit the Ministry to others, so as recedes from, and
has no consistency with the practice of Paul in the same case, upon Timothy
himself? Well, and who of us does not remember, that Timothy received his
Commission, no tonly by the laying on of Paul's hands, but of the Presbytery
likewise? 2 Timothy 1, 6. and 1 Timothy 4.14. True it is, that Titus is to Ordain
Elders, (...), City by City, where the Churches were planted, and their
condition called for it; but with this proviso, as Paul had appointed him. Tit.
1.5. And who can think, that Paul's appointments, and Paul's actions should so
little accord, or so much interfere? that Paul should order either Titus there,
or Timothy here, to do that singly by himself, which Paul an Apostle never did
(if I may not say, never durst) but in society? It is granted, that this
command did concern Timothy eminently, and signally above others; but not
exclusively, so as to shut out all others. It must be done by others likewise,
though it be directed to, and is to be directed by him especially, as one that
had an eminent and special trust, about the ordering of this and all other
Church affairs being by office an Evangelist. 2 Timothy 4.5.

Fourthly. Yet once more; to whom must Timothy commit this trust, these things
in way of office? What? to all the Congregation? No: There must be some to be
taught, as well as others sent forth to teach. What then? to any of whatever
qualification? Nor this. They must be at least men of a good life, faithful
men; yea, and men of good learning too, that shall be able to teach others also.

The text thus opened, the truth is obvious, which I shall at this time take
up, or observe from it.

Observe. Those that are authoritatively from Christ, in his Church, to teach
others, must have that Office committed to them, as well as be qualified for
that Office.

How orient (me thinks) is this observation in all its truths from the text!
Lo, 1. Some there must be in the Church, who are authoritatively from Christ to
teach others. But then 2. That there may be such in the Church who are from
Christ to teach authoritatively, they must have the Office committed to them by
some Timothy. Yet 3. Timothy may not give Commission to this Office, unless he
find qualifications for this Office. Timothy may not dare to confer authority
on any, without due cognizance first had, both of their fidelity and ability.
Well, 4. Has God qualified any with fidelity and ability; yet though they are
able to teach others, they may not acceptably teach others in the sense
mentioned, (unless for proof of those abilities) until Timothy has from God
committed to them authority likewise.

But to lead you further abroad. Give me leave to open and offer to you, these
five things, and thereto lend me I beseech you, your most strict and serious
attention. 1. There must be some in the Church who are by Office from Christ
authoritatively to teach others. 2. They must be qualified for this Office. 3.
They must have this Office committed to them. 4. How it must be committed. And
5. Why it must be committed to them.

First, there are to be some in the Church, who are by Office authoritatively
from Christ to teach others. I say by Office; but this not civil, but
spiritual. Officers we are, not in the Commonwealth, but in the Church, to
which Christ has promised. I will also make thy Officers peace, Isa. 60.17.
Thus brethren and beloved, we may with Paul magnify our Office. Romans 11.13.
An Office the Ministry is, 1 Timothy 3.1. Yea, such is the Deaconship, ver.
10.13. and therefore this much more, which as to your want, and its worth does
so much transcend that, as the Apostles intimate Act. 6.2. What less than
this? [that it is an Office] does Paul assert of his own Ministry? Romans 11.13.
or assure the Saints of ours? when he tells them, Romans 12.4. That as we have
many members in one body natural, and all members have not the same Office; so
it is in the body mystical too, ver. 5.6. wherein Deacons, Pastors, Teachers,
and Rulers be in distinct Office, as the 7. and 8. verses import. So that
Preachers are by Office distinct from and dignified above the people. Are all
Teachers says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.29. It is no more possible that all be
Ministers or Teachers in the body spiritual, than that all be Magistrates in
the body civil; or that all be Officers in the body military; or that all the
members be eye or tongue, in the body natural: If all may be Teachers, where
are the others to be taught? of whom this Text tells us. Need I mention the
practice under the Law, the Prophecies then touching the Gospel, or the
precedents left us in the times of the Gospel? He that runs may read, a
constant discretion between the Priests and people then, between Pastor and
people now, between the members of the Church, and the Ministers of the Church
in both. To the Law and to the Testimony. And here how eminent a difference
has the Holy Ghost made! Ministers of the Church are to be overseers, members
of the Church to be overseen, Acts 20.28. These are set under, those said to be
over them in the Lord, 1 These. 5.12. These are to submit, those to preside and
rule, Heb. 13.7, 17. Briefly, these to be taught, the other to teach, Galat.
6. ver. 6.

Yea, teach we must not only with assiduity, but with authority. With authority
I say, not magisterial indeed, as if we were Lords over the Church; 1 Pet. 5.3.
That is interdicted: Mar. 10.42. but Ministertall, as over the Church in the
Lord; 1 These. 5.12. this is encouraged. Heb. 13.17. Far! far be it, that we
should preach up such an authority, as if we had dominion over your faith! 2
Cor. 1.24. No, all the authority which we plead for, is the dispensation (not
domination) committed to us, for the good of the faithful. 1 Cor. 9.17. The
authority which the Lord has given us, is for your edification, and not for
your destruction, 2 Cor. 10.8. And with this restriction, and under this
respect, let me tell you; that we are to teach, and exhort, and rebuke, not
only with authority, but with all authority, Tit. 2.15. and there is not that
holy Minister, but may speak wi^h holy Micah, according to his measure: Truly I
am full of power by the spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of might to
declare unto Jacob his transgression, and unto Israel his sin Mic. 3.8. True it
is, that all Churchmembers ought to be teachers of others. Heb. 5.12. But this
private and charitative: Christ has therefore over and above, appointed in his
Church such teaing likewise, as may be public and authoritative. i.e. that
there be such teachers, who are by power and authority derived from him to
them, publicly to open and apply the Scriptures, for the conversion and
edification of souls; as in his stead, and not only in private, 'Where yet,
such in teaching are properly enough said to preach, though it be in a private
house. Act. 5.42. or but to one particular person; Act. 8.35. it being not
simply an act of 'charity in them, but an act of authority, which it cannot be
said to be in others. Charitative teaching which should be every man's work, too
soon becomes no man's work. And therefore, Christ has ordained, that there be
peculiar officers for authoritative teaching, who are to give themselves wholly
to it, 1 Timothy 4.15. and must not only be able to teach, as the Text speaks; but
must be apt to teach, 2 Timothy 2.24. and abide in teaching. 1 Timothy 4.16. And unto
these teachers, all people are bound to attend, as those that teach not only by
ability, but by authority derived from Jesus Christ. Luke 12.16. Indeed, how
shall they hear without a preacher sent? Ro^. 10.14, 15

Think you, that such teachers are now ceased; and that this office was of no
longer continuance, than the first age or century of the Church? Oh! Where are
your considerations of the everlasting Kingdom of Christ? Is. 9.6.7. Lu. 1.33.
of the Churches perpetual existencies? Mat. 16.18. Heb. 12.27, 28.
and of her continued pressing exigencies? Romans 10.14. Ephesians. 4.12.13, 14.
or of our dearest Christ's ends by, and engagements to the Ministry? Mat.
28.19, 20. Lu. 24.46, 47.
Did a Kingdom ever stand without Officers? Did the Church ever subsist without
a Ministry and Ordinances? Or has Christ said that she ever should, on this
side glory? Nay has he not rather told us, that the word of the Lord endures
for ever? and that this is the word, which by the Gospel is preached to you? 1
Pet. 1.24.25. Beloved, did not Christ assure his Christian Churches by prophecy
under the Old Testament, of giving them teachers by office, without limiting it
to this, or that Century or age? Jer. 3.15 Nay rather, letting us understand,
that he will have such continued, even after the Jews are called, if you
compare that verse with the 14, 16, 17. ver. Or Jer. 23.3.4. etc. or Isa. 66.20,
21. Besides, When Christ had actually sent forth first the Twelve, Mat. 10.1.
and after that the Seventy, Luke 10.1. and again enlarged their Commission,
Mat. 28.19. does not he ascertain his presence with them, e're he parted from
the earth, always, to the end of the world, ver. 20. which could not intend
themselves only, but must include their successors, Quamvis quoad modum and
gradum extraordinarii Ministri nullos habent successores, quoad ipsam tamen
essentiam administrationis, eodem officio funguntur Ministri Ordinarii versus
Ecclesiam, quo extraordinarii olim fungebantur Ames. Medu. Theol. lib. 1. ca.
35. n. 4.
who-ever are, according to his ordinance, bid go teach and baptize: For the
Disciples, where are they and the Apostles? do they live for ever? Again, being
ascended up on high, did not our Lord Christ give gifts unto men? and thus, not
only some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists; but some Pastors
and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the Body of Christ: ends of continued and constant
observation, need, and use. But till when, shall these Pastors and teachers
endure? and how long shall the Church enjoy them? Till we are all come in, or
into (...) quod site exposuit Syrus interpres, quasi Scriptum sit, (...) B^z^
Annot. maj. ad. Loc.
the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect
man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4 8, 11,
12, 13. Shall I add to all this? how Christ has particularly directed, for the
investiture of fit and faithful men with this Office, in his several
Churches, in these two Epistles to Timothy, and in the next to Titus; and how
he will have these Commandments, inviolably and impartially kept until his
appearing, 1 Timothy 5.21, 22. chap 6.14. Readers, if you can believe, that there
is no more need of laborers for husbandry, [1 Cor. 3.9.] or of seedsmen, or
reapers for harvest, [2 Cor. 9.11. Luke 10.2.] or of builders for houses, [1
Cor. 3.9, 10.] "or of some to plant and water for gardens and orchards; [1 Cor.
3.6.] then, and not till then, may you believe that the Church shall have no
more need of Ministers by office: for thus the Scriptures mentioned, express
our necessities of them to us. Sure I am, if Church Members may be still called
the Sons and Daughters of God, 2 Cor. 6.16. Such Ministers may be likewise
called the Spiritual Fathers, that beget them, 1 Cor. 4.15. the spiritual
nurses that feed and nourish them, 1 These. 2.7. 1 Cor. 3.2. and are the
stewards, that when grown up, are to give them their portion of meat in due
season, Luke 12.42. In a word, if men had need still to be believers, they have
still need of Ministers, by whom ye believed, 1 Cor. 3 6. and if ye are still
Pilgrims and strangers, 1 Pet 2.11. how ye can want such Officers as are called
guides, Heb. 13.7. and the light of the Word, Mat 5.14. I must profess, I see
not; farewell the Office-Ministers of Christ in England, and farewell the
chariots and horsemen of England, 2 Kings 2.12.

Tit. 1.5. with 7. Phil. 1.1. Act. 20.17. with 28. (...) a word every where
else re^dered Bishop by our translators.
many of our English Bishops i. e. Prelates themselves being judges A.B.
Whitgift against Cartwright, p. 383. Anselm in 1 Timothy 3. B. Bridges of the
Princes Supremacy p. 255. B. Bilson against Seminaries lib. 1. p. 318. see B.
Jewel against Harding Def of the Apolog. par. 2. chapter 3. divis. and chap 9.
divis. 1. and B. Morton Cathol Apol. par. 1. chapter 33.
he desires a good work, 1 Timothy 3. ver. 1. But must not this be acknowledged
a true saying likewise, that who and what the man is that desires it; [how
able? how apt etc?] should be first considered, before he be Commissioned, or
set apart unto it? Else what mean those numerous characters, which Timothy has
given him in charge, that are continued to the eight verse, and whereof Titus
is re-minded likewise, by the same Apostle, when he appoints him to ordain
Elders in every City, at least of Creet, Tit. 1.5. ad 13. Or what means else
that notable and no less dreadful charge? 1 Timothy 5. ver. 21.22. I charge thee
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels, that thou observe
these things, without preferring one before another, doing nothing by
partiality. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's
sins, keep thy self pure. Ah my brethren! Church-work is chary work. Lay we on
hands suddenly, and we lay them on sinfully. And to be sure, we shall partake
of other men's sins, if we shall so little prize their, our own, and other men's
souls, which any thing below the blood of him that was God, Act. 20.28 1 Pet.
1.18.19.
is too small to purchase? Come sirs, who is the faithful and wise steward? him
shall the Lord make ruler over his household, Luke 12.42. And shall we, who are
the Lords by Office, and must account to the Lord for our Office; shall we make
them rulers, who will manifestly ruin more than rule the household of Faith?
Can we keep our selves pure, and yet be careless of conferring such a power,
such an honor, as the Ministry is? it has a power to bind to, and loos from
hell; A power to open and shut heaven, Mat. 16.19. and an honor abstractly so
called, Heb. 5.4. that does not only speak us to be Ambassadors for Christ, 2
Cor. 5.20. but Angels rather than men, Rev. 1. C. 2. O beloved! who is
sufficient for these things? Surely none are in regard of adequation, and alas!
how few in regard of acceptance? But what though we cannot find men equal to
the Office, shall we forget, that men should be able for the Office? See more
use 2 sect 1
Surely, the bold precipitancies of men uncalled upon this Office, and the
bloody preceleratings of men unqualified into this Office, are abominations
never enough to be bewailed before the Lord.

Thirdly, Those that are authoritatively from Christ to teach others in his
Church, must not only be quallified for this Office, but must have the Office
committed to them. Hear the Apostle; How shall they preach except they be sent?
Romans 10.15. How shall they says he? Nay they do; and this how often! how open!
and God sent them not, say the godly: Yea I have not sent these Prophets, yet
they ran; I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied, says God himself.
Jer. 23.21. True, they do it wickedly; but how shall they do it warrantably?
How shall they preach except they be sent? i.e. with the approbation of God's
Law; they may easily adventure upon it from their own lust, How shall they
preach either with success and countenance from him? or without sinful and
saucy presumption in them? How dares he perform the Heralds Office, to
proclaim war and peace in the conscience, who was never put into the Office,
nor can produce an Herald's patent? This is the Metaphor, (...) How shall they
preach as God's Herald's? Lo Christians! beside meetness for the Office, an
Herald of God, a Minister, must have mission: suitableness to the Office is not
enough without sending. Nay, are you not told, in the same strains of reason
and Rhetoric; that there is as great a necessity of sending, that we be
preachers, as was and is of preachers, that you be hearers? or of hearing, that
you be believers? or of believing, if you expect an answer to, and the
acceptance of your prayers? So high our Apostle carries it, if you look back
upon the 13, and 14. verses. Such an holy concatenation makes he of all these.
'So that you cannot bear us in hand, with the blasphemous Socinian, that there
remains no more a necessity of such sending, since the Apostles ceased: for
that (say they) Ostorod in Instit. c. 42. Th. Nicholaid. in desens. Tract. so
cui de Eccl. c. 1. Schmaltz. in resert. These. D Frantz. per. 2. disput. 4.
these were to preach a new doctrine, which we now are not. For with what
faithfulness can this be said, in regard either of hearers, the interrogations
all running in so clear and constant a stream? It Is as much said, How shall
they hear without a Preacher? and how shall they believe in him of whom they
have not heard? etc as how shall they preach except they be sent? Or in regard
of the holy Apostles? who assure us, that they preached no other things, tha^
those which Moses and the Prophets did say should come. Act. 26.22. Chap.
24.14. Chap. 28.23. And not only, as they passed to and fro, did they ordain
Elders in every Church, Act. 14.23. but prescribed a constant course for
Ordination likewise, as the Epistles to Timothy, and Titus witness. Nor can
you say, that they are sent of God, who are only gifted. For as it is not said;
how shall they preach except they be gifted? but, except they be sent; and that
as watchmen and messengers, as the next words import out of the Prophet Isaiah
52.7.8. So, the Scripture never says that gifting is sending, but supposes
that ordinarily before this; and distinctly speaks of (...) and (...) i. e. of
the abilities to preach or prophecy, and authority to preach or prophecy,of
men's suitable qualifications for it, and sending forth with commissions for it.
Witness Ezekiel. 2.2, 3. Isai. 6.7.8, 9. Jer. 1.7, 9. Joh. 20.21, 22. And what
though it be true; that sending imports many times, Gods commmanding men to go
forth to the work of the Ministry? yet, as no gifted brother can show us any
such command from God, so it is observable; that the Scripture never mentions
any as sent forth to preach or prophecy, but the same persons were always,
either mediately or immediately, appointed of God unto the Office. Witness
Isai. 1 8, 9. Jer. 1.5, 7. Ezekiel. 2.4. Mat. 10, 1, 5, 16. Mar. 3, 14. Joh. 1.6
Mat. 11.10, etc. An immediate missio^ and appointment to this Office there are
no pious men will boast they have; or if they did, there are no prudent men
will believe they have, till, they see it attested with a power of miracles;
Nor is there any promise whereupon any should hope for it. So that I cannot but
conclude upon the whole: That no man can now preach Ordinarily and orderly,
without Ordination, or being sent forth of God mediately. He sins in preaching
that is not thus sent forth with power.

But to draw the proof of this proposition out into more pa^ticulars. Be
pleased to observe the express precepts, eminent precedents, and evident
prescriptions, wherewith God has countenanced it, and the elegant properties
and titles wherewith Ministers are clothed, which bespeak it.

Sect. 1. See the express precepts of God for it (to wave the implicit only. 1 Timothy 5.22. Romans 10.15. Heb. 5.4.
) Behold as they ministered to the Lord; and fasted, Act. 13.2. the holy Ghost
said Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them.
And accordingly, the Prophets and teachers, mentioned ver. 1. When they had
fasted and prayed, and laid their hands onthem, they sent them away, ver. 3.
Observe, Christians. God had suited them to the work. God had supplied them
with fitness, yet these must separate them to the work, and send them forth.
And why this separating, think we, of such extraordinary officers; if not to
sanctify, as it were, and seall an Imprimatur upon the ordinary rule? It is
granted, that Paul's Apostleship was not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus
Christ, and God the Father who raised him from the dead, Gal. 1.1. That he was
first immediately designed hereunto by Jesus Christ, as it was declared to
Ananias, Act. 9.15. B^^ if the holy Ghost will have one so miraculously and
immediately called, to pass thi^ common road, before the ordinary execution of
his office among the Gentiles; who of us then, may plead immunity from it, or
proudly take another bypath? Though God had every way qualified Paul and
Barnabas for the ministry, though God had eminently called them to the
ministry, yet that these Prophets and Teachers do externally commission, or
separate them to the Ministry likewise, i^ evidently the command of the Holy
Ghost* Let me present you next with that precept of God by Paul to Titus, Chapter
1.5. -- And ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed thee. What Elders
means he? By age? No, time, as one says, Collins vindic. Minist, Evang. qu.
2.
(...)etc.
not Titus must make these. What Elders then? Flders by Office, as the words
ensuing clear it; and those, not in the state, but among and over the Saints:
Bishops, or overseeers, who are to hold fast the faithful word, verse 7, 9.
Now thus, there is somewhat supposed in these words, that there should be
Elders in every City, where the Churches were established; and somewhat proposed
how the Churches must be supplied with Elders. How so? Titus must ordain them,
Ordain Elders in every City. They are not Elders by Office then, till
Ordination. But what is this? must Titus qualify them for this Office? and is
this all, which is intended by it? No; this was God's part, and is to be
presupposed on their part, e're Titus may put forth any such act toward them,
as Ordination is; if you consult the following verses 6. ad 10. Titus may
discuss and ventilate their gifts and qualifications, but God only can derive
and furnish. Is. 1.17. 1 Cor. 12.6
That which Titus has in charge is to Ordain, to confer the Office of Elders,
(...): and in that notion is the word used, not only by profane Authors
frequently, Sic apud Demosthene^, Xenoph. and Herodia^ occurrunt, (...) and
similiter
but by the Apostles, Act. 6.3. (...), etc. whom we may appoint over this
business, as our translators render it: This how did they? but by prayer, and
laying their hands on them, ver. 6. and so putting them into the Office of
Deacons? besides if gifts, if qualifications could have made them Elders, of
what need or use was there of such an order from Paul? or of Ordination by
Titu^ for thus they had been Elders already before and without either; if but
(...) charactered, as the next verses do describe. And if so, how is Titus
require^ to Ordain such? and why restrained to Ordain such only? So obvious is
i^ that beside a competency of ability of their part, there must be (...), an
appointment or Ordination on Titus's part likewise; or they are not to be
acknowledged Elders. So express are the precepts of God for it.

Sect. 4. And what eminent precedents find we among the godly for it? Surely no
man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of God, Heb 5.4. True,
many a man does de facto, but not any man does (i. e. ought) de jure. Not Aaron
under the Law, nor any of the Priests after his order: 'They were separated
from among the children of Israel to their Office; Nu^. 8.14 and 2.6. and 1 50.
Exo. 28.1. 2 Chro. 29.11.
which was not only to offer sacrifice unto God, but to open the statutes of
God, and teach in Israel, Deuteronomy. 33 10 Levit. 10.11. 2 Chr. 17.18.9.
the work now of every Gospel Minister. So, nor did the Apostle and High Priest
of our profession Christ Jesus; He also glorified not himself to be made an
High Priest; but he that said unto him, Thou art my son, to day have I begotten
thee, Heb. 5.5. What, did he glorify himself to be made a Prophet then?
Neither. The Spirit of the Lord God (says he) is upon me, and has anointed
me to preach good tidings, etc. Isa. 61.1. i.e. anointed me not only with
abilities, but with authority. He was a Prophet of the Lord's raising up, Act.
3.22. If I honor my self (says he in his Ministry) my honor is nothing; it
is my Father that honors me, Joh. 8.54. It was the Father sanctified and
sent him into the world, about his Ministerial concernments, Joh. 10.36. and
sealed him his Commission, Joh. 6.27. And behold, as my Father sent me, even so
send I you; says he to his Disciples, Joh. 20.21. Ah beloved! Self-Ministers
then are none of our Saviors Ministers. His Ministers can say; he made us, and
not we our selves. And with Paul, 1 Timothy 1.12. I thank Christ Jesus our Lord,
who has enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, putting me into the
Ministry. Observe, He does not thank him only for his enablings for the
Ministry, but for his investiture with the Ministry; not only (...) his
promptness for it, but for putting him i^ it. So distinct a notion did the holy
Apostles and Prophets keep, of their qua^ fications for the Ministry, which
made the^ apt to teach; and of their commission t^ be Ministers which gave them
authority (...) teach. Lo, as they were allowed of God (...) be put in trust
with the Gospel, (so they te^ us) they spoke 1 These. 2.4. and according as the
glorious Gospel of God wa^ committed to them, 1 Timothy 1.11. Did these holy men
of God think it enough, tha^ they were able to preach? Nay, but this was it
they chose rather to insist upon, that they were (as Paul says of himself)
appointed preachers, 2 Timothy 1.11. True it is, they durst not but manifest his
word through preaching, but then it was committed to them according to the
commandment of God our Savior, Tit. 1.3. And therefore how often have we
them, both in the Prophesies of the Old Testament, Jer. 1.5, 7, 17. Ezekiel. 1.3.
and 2.3, 7, 8. Hos. 1.1, 2, etc.
and in the Prefaces to most of the Epistles Romans 1.1. 1 Cor. 1.1. Jam. 1.1. 1
Pet. 1.1. etc.
in the New Testament, insisting upon, and justifying of their callings to be
Prophets and Apostles? Beloved, hear you any of them pleading, that
qualifications are a sufficient Commission? or for a freedom of Prophesying by
un-officed Prophets? (pardon the in congruence of the expression) or, because
God has fitted a man with parts and abilities, that he needs no other
furniture of power or authority, to exercise and exert them? Rather; do you not
hear and read them, distinctly propounding, and directly proving their
Commission, over and above their qualifications? Assuring you, that God did not
only bring them gifts, but bid them go, Isai. Chap. 6. verse. 9. Amos Chap. 7.
verse 15. Jeremiah Chap. 1. verse 7. Ezekiel Chap. 3. verse 1, 4, 11. That God
sanctified them for, that GOD sent them forth to, and God set them in their
Ministerial work and Office, Jeremiah Chap. 1. verse 5.7.10. Ezekiel. Chap. 2.
verse 3.4. etc. Not only had they dispositions and gifts for communicating the
Gospel, but a dispensation of the Gospel was committed to them, 1 Corinthians.
Chap. 9. ver. 17. Gal. 2.7. O my brethren! are we compassed about with so great
a cloud of witnesses, an^ shall we yet think the commitment (...) the Ministry
needless or useless? '(...) can we suffer our selves to be put o^ with so
poor a pretext as this? That a^ these instances from the Apostles an^ Prophets
do not arise to the Ord^nation now practiced, by the interventio^ of men, and
imposition of the hands o^ the Presbytery. For who sees not, tha^ they fully
reach to evince the necessity (...) a commissioning to the Office, beside
qualifications for the Office of Ministers; which is the point now before us?
And it being more then manifest, that the immediate ways of committing men to
the Ministry are now ceased, and a mediate way from God instead thereof,
commanded which is written as with a Sun beam, in the Epistles to Timothy and
Titus: unless you will break with God, and these precedents among the godly, by
putting your selves into the Ministry, whereas they were put into it of God, 1 Timothy 1.12. These instances will in effect and virtue bind you to the Ordination
now practiced; if it be the only way now prescribed, and lest us of Jesus
Christ: Of which hereafter.

Sect. 3. Thirdly, see yet further the evident prescriptions, which are given
forth for putting men into Ministry, by our Lord Jesus? and these how numerous;
that they fill up a good part of three Epistles. Beloved, consider I beseech
you. Why should the conferring of the Ministry be so pressingly directed to
Timothy and Titus? why should the call of men to, and their qualifications for
the Ministry be so plainly differenced? Why should the committers, and they
committed to it, be so particularly distinguished? If gifts, with a desire to
exercise them, were sufficient? or the solemn committing of this Office, were
but super-erogatory and superfluous? Would the blessed Spirit of wisdom have
spentit self in superfluites, think we? Is there no more set before us, but who
are to be Ministers? and how they are to act in their Ministry? Has not the
same spirit set before us, their appointment and putting into the Ministry
likewise? Ay; and this how articulately! By what men? in what manner? after
what matters previous? and by what means present? Who are to be Ordainers? who,
and how they are to be Ordained? what is pre required to it? what to be
performed in it? and what the product and issue of it? Read else but 1 Timothy 3.
Chap and 1 Chap. of Titus. Sirs, why this wast, i^ more were no other
ordination to the Office of Ministers, but what gi^^s, and our own, or others
desires to u^e them make? O you* that stand in the way and see, and ask for the
old paths, where is the good way that we may walk therein, must you not say of
this? This is it, wherein God has been always wont to meet, and give mission to
his servants: either immediately by investiture of them with the Office from
himself, as our Lord was pleased to send forth first the Twelve, Luke 9.1. and
after the seventy, Luk 10 1. Or else mediately, by the interposition of his own
Officers, as T^mothy is directed to do in this verse. We: does Matthias
Apostolize? not till Christ appoints him, Act. 1. Do Paul and Barnabas? not ^ll
our Savior authorize them, Act. 9.17. Chap. 13.2. Has every Church its
Elders, that labor in the word and doctrine? Bu^ Paul and Barnabas first
Ordain them, Act. 14.23. Is it the order of Christ that there be Elders in
every City? but withal that Titus Ordain them, Tit. 1.5. Has Timothy the gift
or Office of an Evangelist? but not without the laying on of Paul's hands, and
of the Presbytery likewise? 2 Timothy 1.6. 1 Timothy 4.4. There must be such who are
by calling to teach others? but Timothy must commit this trust to them for
others, as in the Text. Beloved, why are these things written? and for whom
think we? Are they not for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are
come? Doubtless, whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for
our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have
hope, Romans 15.4. Ah Sirs! may we dare to reject this word of Christ? or remove
to another way of our own or others contriving? either frame new ways of
committing the Ministry (I mean)? or else frowardly deny the continuance of the
Ministry, as too many do? Nay can you so forget the Commandment of Christ, and
his Covenant with his Ministers, which he calls upon us so affectionately to
remember, as a thing of most happy remarke, Mat. 28.19.20 Go teach, etc. Lo, I
am with you always, (...) all days, (...) to the end of the world. Which cannot
be restrained to the end of that age; as the pregnancy and propriety of this
phrase, See it learnedly Vindicated and opened Jus divin. Mini. Eva^. par. 1.
c. 2. p. 27. ad 31 (...)
and the parallel usage of it by this same Evangelist, Mat. 13.40. (m) Chap.
24.3. (n) (besides the precedent passage which is not all your days, but all
days) do plentifully evince. Or have you so forgotten that command by Paul to
Timothy? I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickneth all things, and
before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession:
That thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukeable, until the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. What commandment intends he? I humbly
conceive, with Beza and others Chrysostom. Homil 18. Ambr. Lyra Gorra^. Cornel a
Lavide. Diodat. and Engl. Annotat. ad ver. 1^.
this complex commandment contained in, and carried along through the whole
Epistle; unto which the Apostle quickens him with six arguments. Dickson ad loc.
And thus it eminently takes in that (well-nigh) parallel charge, Chap. 5.
ver. 21.22. which includes the conferring of the Ministerial Office, as does
the third Chapter. And what though this Commandment could not be fulfilled
till the coming of Christ by Timothy himself? yet might it be by Timothie's
successors: 'Who are clearly concerned to attend this charge of the Apostle, as
addressed to them in Timothy; the import and intent of the Scriptures being not
only for the present men and times, but for all that succeed or follow Ro^ 15.^
Psa. 119.152. Lu. 16.16, 17. Rev. 22.19
And verily, 1. if there shall still be till his coming, both sinners to be
begotten unto Christ; and to be brought into his Church; and if there be Saints
to be brought forward, and to be built up in communion with Christ and his
Church; and if there be souls to be sanctified and saved, until the time of
his appearance. (which who doubts that believes any thing?) And 2. if our Lord
Christ has only ordinarily annexed and appointed, to bestow these great
blessings by a Ministry sent, as it is clear he has, Romans Chap. 10. verse,
14, 15. Ephesians Chapt. 4. verse 11, 12, 13. Having by this only (usually)
brought about the addition of sinners to his Church and to himself, Acts the
second Chapter, and the 41. and 47. verses, and Chap. 11. verse. 24. the
conversion of souls to, and their confirmation in and with himself, Acts Chap.
26.18.15.32. The remission of sins, and regeneration of sinners, Acts 26.
Chapter 18. ver. and 1 Corin. Chap. 4. verse. 15. The new birth of souls, and to
believe in himself, James Chap. 1. verse 18. and 1 Corinthians. Chap. 3 verse. 5.
The subduing of sin and Satan, and the salvation of Saints, 2 Corinthians. Chap.
10. verse 4.5. and 1 Corinthians. Chap. 1. verse 21. And 3. If our Lord Christ does
not now extraordinarily send forth any, as it is plain he does not: neither
immediately designing out any persons, nor delivering to any a power of
miracles. I say, if so; then of necessity, the ordinary way of committing this
Office, and of sending out such Officers, which was given in charge to Timothy
and Titus, are of a continuing obligation, and of consant observation in the
Churches of Jesus Christ.

Sect. 4. Let me put you in mind but of one thing more, and this is, the
Elegant titles that are given to Ministers, which do all bespeak a necessity,
not only of being qua^ified for this Office, but of having the Office
committed to them. Are not Ministers c^lled the Angels of the Churches,
Revelations Chap. 1. verse 20. the overseers of the Church? Acts Chap. 20. ver.
28. the rulers of the Church? Hebrews Chap. 13. ver. 7. Yea, and such rulers
they are in, and so over the Church, as are to be counted worthy of double
honor, 1 Timothy Chap. 5. ver. 17. and 1 These. Chap. 5. verse. 12.13. Are they
not the Stewards of Christ? 1 Corinht 4.1. The Heralds of Christ, (...)? Romans
10. verse. 14. Yea, and the ^mb^ssadours of Christ, 2 Cor. 5. ver. 20. Are they
not termed watchmen? Heb. 13.17. builders? 1 Cor. 3.10. and soldiers? 2 Timothy
2.3, etc. Now what less do any of these apart, or can all these together
intimate? than that Ministers should be furnished with authority, as well as
fitted with ability? and must be able to show a commission, as well as speak
of qualifications? In a word, that they must have a deligation from our Savior
to this employment, as well as a disposition in their spirits to this employment.

Sect. 4. Fourthly, how is this Office of being Teachers in the Church to be
committed unto such, as are duly qualified? You will easily observe, that we
are not enquiring about committing the Office to extraordinary teachers; such
as are by immediate deligation from Christ immediate I mean, not only ratione
virtutis, sed suppositi in regard of power, but of person. This case falls not
within our compass; when such immediate furnitures (as were herewith given)
for the Ministry, and therefore such immediate vestitures with the Ministry,
have no place. But our enquiry is about the committing of this office to
Ordinary teachers, by mediate deligation from Christ i. e. by his Officers, who
in his name, and according to his Ordinance, are to separate them to this
service of his, in his Church. Hujus, Ministerij jus per homines Communicare
sol^t, atque i^a ratione vocatio ordinarii Ministri est mediata. Hoc autem sic
est intellgendum, ut authoritas administrandi res divinas a Deo immediate
communicetur ministris omnibus legitimis, and designatio personarum in quas
confertur fiat per Ecclesiam. Ames. Medul. Theol. l. 1. c. 35. n. 5. and 6.
And thus briefly, this Office is to be committed to men duly qualified, 1 by
the Presbytery. 2 after proof. 3 with prayer and fasting. 4. and with putting
on of their hands.

Sect. 1. By the Prebytery i. e. by presbyters in Office; whose part it was in
the Ordination of Timothy. 1 Timothy 4.14. Their common care and charge it was,
and not Paul's only. 2 Timothy 1.6. We never read Paul to have practiced in, or to
have pretended to a sole power of Ordination; or to so much as a negative voice
in that particular, though (no doubt) he had a greater latitude of authority,
than any can now lay claim to, as being an Apostle, not of, or by man, but by
Jesus Christ: Yet Paul was neither ordained nor did Ordain, without the
concurrence of some other Act. 13.1, 2, 3. chapter 14.23. 'If any will yet implead
ordination by a presbytery, because without a Prelate; 1 he ought to produce
the divine institution of a Prelate distinct from a dignified beyond a
Presbyter or Minister. Certain we are, the Apostles have left no such one, upon
their list of Church Officers; Ephesians. 4 11. Romans 12.6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12.28. and
clear it is, that a Bishop and Presbyter are all one in the language of the
Scripture, See sect. 2.
Tit. 1.10. vid. Hieronym. ad Loc. Idem est ergo Presbyter, qui Episcopus etc.
1 Timothy 3.1, 2. Post Episcopum Diaconi ordinationem subjicit. Quare? is it quia
Episcopi and Presbyteri una ordinatio est? uterque exim saeerdos est. Ambros.
ad Loc.
etc. having the same office, the same ordination, the same characters given
to, and qualitier 'required in them, and the same work being committed to them.
And as clear it is that a Presbyter or ordinary Minister is vested with a power
of government or rule. 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 13.7, 17. 1 These. 5.12. Act. 20.17,
28. 2. He ought to prove the divine investiture of prelates with Ordination
ard imposition of hands different from presbyters, whereof 'we read not one
word in all the Scriptures, but of the laying on of the hands of the presbytery
in fair and open characters, 1 Timothy 4.14. True it is that we read of Ordination
by Timothy and Titus 'Evangelists, by Paul and Barnabas Apostles, but this
neither directly serves the cause of the Prelates, they being neither Apostles
nor Evangelists, nor indirectly, unless they can prove themselves to be a
distinct order or dignity of Ministers, by the divine appointment of Jesus
Christ, and in that sense can put in a plea of being their successors which a
Presbyter in a fair construction may, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. Though a Prelate without a
forced construction cannot. Where does 'the Scripture prescribe that there
should be any ordination of Prelates different from, or over and above their
former ordination as Presbyters? Or that there should be any Ordination by
prelates as distinct from Presbyters? When it is a ruled case, that a Bishop or
Prelate ordained per saltum ( i. e. who never had the Ordination of a Presbyter
himself, but only of a Bishop) can neither consecrate and administer the
Sacrament of the Lords body, nor ordain a Presbyter: of the Church. l. 3. chapter
39.
by which it appears, that a Bishop does not excel a Presbyter by a distinct
and higher order or power of order; 'for which Doctor Field has produced the
acknowledgment of the most learned among the Papists. Aquin. Bonavent. Dominic,
a Soto. Armacanus. Camerar. and Contarenus.
(e) The instance of Timothy and Titus, as if Bishops of Ephesus and Crete,
will be a covering too narrow. For as we never read the Spirit of God calling
them Bishops in Scripture, (the Postscript to those Epistles being disowned
from being any part of the Canon by many Papists, even by Baronius and the
Rhemists; and are so disproved by several Protestants, vide Beza Anot. maj. ad
1 Timothy 6.22. ad 2 Timothy 4.23. ad Tit. 3.14.
So, Timothy is expressly enough called an Evangelist. 2 Timothy 4.5. 'Nor could
their frequent removes, see them described Jus Divin. Min. Evan. par. 2. p. 69.
Smectimnuus sect. 13.
after the mention of their being at Ephesus and Crete, have any consistence
'with the charge or Office of a Bishop, which obliges to a fixed residence
among his flock? (to pass other reasons see Jus Di vin. Minist. Evang. par. 2.
c. 5. throughout
against their diocesan Episcopacy) 'Their frequent diversions and journeys,
and various dispatches to and fro, at the desire of the Apostles, and as might
best subserve the design and welfare of the general visible Church, do loudly
enough proclaim them to be Evangelists I know there are on the other hand that
vest the people with this power and privilege of Ordination, beyond what was
ever possessed by the Prelates. But with no countenance that I know from
Christ, yea, or convenience to Christians; while it is little other than a
seed-plot of dissentions among them, and of divisions into parties; and while
beside their distance from the power of ruling, whose place it is to be ruled;
such are their disabilities and disproportion to make proof of men's ready
instruction to the kingdom of God, either in clearing the difficulties of the
Gospel, or in e^vi^cing gainsayers. It Is true; We read (whatsome ingeniously
observe before us London Minist^e in their Jns div. min. evan. par. 3. c. 13.
of Ordaining Elders in every Church, but we never read of Ordaining Elders by
any Church. They Ordained them Elders in every Church, Act. 14.23. Who Ordained
them? Paul and Barnabas for the people, not the people for themselves. That
every Church should Ordain them Elders in every Church, grates too much upon
common sense and truth. Nor will the word (...) help it out, for what ever be
the import of (...) i.e. To stretch out the hand; which is still done in
Ordination, with imposition of hands. Nor can there much more be evinced by the
usage of this word in this place, if there be any worth in that observation of
learned Stephanus, that it signifies not to give suffrage, but to create,
ordain, etc. when it governs an accusarive case, as here it does. (...) Steph.
Thesaur Ling. graec. ad verbum (...).
manifest enough it is, both from what is antecedent to this expression, and
what is after it, that Paul and Barnabas were the (...), to whom [they] must
necessarily be understood to relate nine times besides, in the narrative or
relation which is herewith made, ver. 21. ad finem. Far be it from me, to
divest the Churches of Jesus from any part of those privileges, which are
given them by his charter? Let it be granted them for me, that the people may
choose; and look out men, and set them before the Presbytery, as they did for
Deacons before the Apostles, still observing their limies, Act. 6.3, 5, 6. But
the Presbytery it is, that commit the Ministry, appoint and send forth the men,
as then did the Apostles, ver. 3.6. Peruse I beseech you the primitive
practice, the records of all those Ordinations, which you find in the Acts of
the Apostles, 1.6.13.14. Chapt. and what prints read you, or the obscurest
trace of the peoples putting men into the Office of Ministers? Peruse to these,
the Epistles that most particularly treat of, and purposely take up this
subject or argument, those to Timothy and Titus: and yet tell us where may we
find the smallest track or footstep? Alas! if the peoples suffrage had been
enough to set men in Office, what need such pressing arguments from Paul to
Timothy and Titus? and such particular instruments of them with this business,
that they Ordain Elders in Crete and Ephesus? Does he write at this rate, in
any one of all the Epistles he sends to the Churches? or in either of these
Epistles sent to these Officers, that the Churches see to the Ordaining of
Elders, etc. Again, if so; what need or right had Paul to interess himself or
Barnabas so far, as to Ordain Elders in every Church, at Lystra, Icontum, and
Antioch, etc. Act. 14.19.23 Would they have so abused their own power, or the
peoples privileges, as by this to have been arraigned for busybodies in
other men's matters? which they might have been, had Ordination been in the
power and right of the Churches. It Is true, we may be properly enough called
the Ministers and Messengers of the Churches, so far as I know. But how? Not as
if they were the original, but are the object of our authoritative mission and
messages; not as if we were sent from, and by them into this Office, but as
sent to and for them for their obedience and joy of faith: unless men may be
said to send messengers to themselves,

Sect. 2 The Ministry is not to be committed till after probation or trial
made. Oh that dreadful charge! I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Elect Angels -- lay hands suddenly on no man, 1 Timothy 5.21.22.
Timothy must not, for so much as the Office of a Deacon, therefore surely not
for the Office of a Bishop or Minister. Let these also first be proved; then
let them use the Office of a Deacon, 1 Timothy 3.10. It Is an abuse then to put men
into the Office of the Ministry, before or without proof made. Nor may this
proof be slight and overly, but must be diligent and distinctive. (...) est
prop^^e explorare qualis in se res sit, and a diversis aut contrariis
discernere inquit Pareus. Nec solummodo probare, sed approbare signisicat, ut
po^^ perspectum, sic apud Luc. 14.19. and 1 Pet. 1.7. and Phil. 1.10. and 1
These. 2.4 and apud Plutarc. de Instit. liber. (...).
Proved they should be, in their spiritual and inward call to the Ministry,
and in their suitable qualifications for the Ministry. What they are for life?
what for learning* and what they are like to be for labor? What are their
purposes by it? what i^ their proportion to it? and what will be their
perseverance in it? In a word; what of God and grace is to be found in them?
and what of forwardness and zeal there is and will be for God?

Thirdly, With prayer and fasting. Such was the primitive practice, Acts 6.6.
and 13.3. and 14.23. and stands upon record as our pattern. Whether these enter
the essence of Ordination, I say not: but sure I am, that they are of eminent
and excellent observation and use. Is our Lord himself therefore about to
choose, and authoritatively to send abroad Apostles? He continues all night
before it in prayer to God, and when it was day he called unto him his
Disciples, and of them he chose Twelve whom also he named Apostles, Luke 6.12,
13. Ah sirs! pray, pray, you that want and would have Pastors. Fasting prayers,
will make fervent preachers. We beseech you brethren, for the Lord Jesus
Christ's sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that ye will strive together
with us in your prayers to God, Romans 15.30.
this day. Oh the weaknesses of our persons* the work we are to perform! the
worth and weight of God's presence! and our want of your prayers, which if
earnest, will be sure to be effectual prayers ^a^. 5.16.
! Pray ye therefore, the Lord of the Harvest, that he will send forth these
expectants, Laborers into his Harvest Mat. 9.38.
.

Sect. 4. With imposition of hands. Thus Timothy was Ordained, 1 Timothy 4.14. and
was to Ordain, 1 Timothy 5.22. What though Papists have placed it among the
Sacraments? must we therefore pluck it from among the Saints? although Paul
preserves it among the principles of the doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6 1, 2.
(under what notion, or to what purpose, I shall not dispute) Surely their
dotage on it, will be a poor Apology for our denial or despising of it, upon
whom the true light has shined: especially when the whole solemnity of
Ordination is once and again set forth by this one Ceremony; 1 Timothy 4.14. and
5.22. 2 Timothy 1.6. and you hear none of us pleading for it as a Sacrament;
though we would not be put by from any solemn right; especially if an
inseparable adjunct to an Ordinance of Christ. Is Timothy enjoined to lay hands
suddenly on no man? 1 Timothy 5.22. what less can be employed, than that he lay
hands solemnly upon some, at least after mature scrutiny? I shall not
expatiate, but if (beside the concurrent profession and practice of the
reformed Churches See a brief view of their co^currence herein offered you by
Dr. Seaman in his (...), at the beginning Prop^f^^ion 3.
if Paul, so precious a Saint, and so profound a Scholar, did thus accept it in
his own Ordination to the Ministry, as he did, Act. 13.3. and did thus act and
assist in the Ordination of others, as he did, 2 Timothy 1.6. God forbid! that I,
or any other should so much listen to pride, prejudice, or what ever else it
be, as to hesitate it causlesly! or to harden my self against it contem
trously. ' Paul's prescription and precedent me thinks will be enough to acquit
and answer for us, though we had nothing else to render in account, why we
retain this ancient rite: by which, yet public offices have been wont to be
conveyed, Numb. 27.18, 23. and 8.10. Act. 6.6. and this partacularly, 1 Timothy
4.14. It Is true, when Paul enjoins Titus to Ordain Elders in every City, Titus
1.5. he does not prescribe expressly, imposition of hands. Nor does he prohibit
it; but rather points it out, not obscurely, by two things (though the common
practice thereof in those times might have been intimation enough to him, and a
justification for it, against this exception.) 1. By leading him back to former
instructions [as I had appointed thee] wherein if we may make judgment, from
what Paul practiced, Act. 14.23 2 Timothy 1.6.
to what Paul prescribed, this could not but make one particular, especially,
if the affirma^ive included in that precept to Timothy, 1 Chap. 5.22. be put
with it into the same scale. 2. By the light of the Word (...) (rendered here
by ord^in and in Acts 6.3. by appoint) which the Apostles practice had already
interpreted, to import the laying on of hands, Acts 6.6. as one particular
requisite to that public and solemn work. I know it is pretended that the Holy
Ghost was miraculously given by imposition of hands in Ordination, and thence
it is pleaded, that the miracle now ceasing, so does the mystery too. But how
is the former proved and justified? And if; yet how the latter is therefrom
pleaded or inferred I see not; unless we shall upon the same ground now
relinquish prayer, because it is no more effectual to heal the sick, or rai^e
the dead, as it was formerly. Act. 9.37, 40, 41. Jam. 5.14, 15. We hear the
Apostles requiring them to look out seven men full of the Holy Ghost, that they
may lay hands upon them, Acts 6.3. cum 6. but never hear them relating so much
as one that had received the Holy Ghost, because they had laid their hands upon
him, in his Ordination. I say in his Ordination: for it is granted that the
Holy Ghost was given, by the laying on of hands, in the other cases, Act.
8.17.18. and 19.6. Why must Timothy and Titus (think we) receive satisfaction
touching men's gifts before Ordination? 1 Timothy 3. and Tit. 1. And why must they
till then retard and stave off their Ordination, 1 Timothy 5.22. If laying on of
hands would have conferred that spirit upon men, from whom all gifts come? 1
Cor. 12.8. ad 12. True it is, we read of Timothie's gift by the laying on of
Paul's hands, and of the Presbytery; 2 Timothy 1.6. 1 Timothy 4.14. But not of the
Holy Ghosts being given him hereby. It is rather the gift of the Ministry that
is intended in these Scriptures, than gifts for the Ministry, and perhaps, may
be therefore mentioned in both places not plurally, but singularly [the gift.]
That offices are called gifts, and particularly the Ministry, compare Ep. 4 8,
11. between which the 9 and 10 verles, fall as within a Parenthesis: the 11
verse. giving us th^^e explication in particulars of what had been expressed at
the 8 ver. ingeneral: Isti duo versus ( sc. 9.10) per pareath^sin l^guntur, nam
mox ve^su 11. r^dit ad supe^iora, hoc est, ad explicanda dona aliquo^ de qu b^s
dixerat in genere, dedit dona hominibus Zanch. ad Ephesians. 4.10
And so is an appofite answer to every one that asks this question; what are
those gifts, when Christ ascended up on high, which he received for Psalm. 68.18.
and give unto men? He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evanglists,
and some Pastors and Teachers.



Sect. 1. It is for the honor of Christ. Which is the great design, that grace
has to carry on, by all the various methods and ministrations of it, by all
Officers, and by all Ordinances. Had he thrown the reyns of his Church, Kingdom
and cause loose, to the liberty, or rather lusts of men, take he that will:
teach he that will: who could have then read such his accurate prudence? such
his absolute power? and such his affluence of perfections, as are now made
legible in treating his own affairs; by those only that are of his own
appointment, and can show his royal patent? Alas! what convenience would this
at all bear to his transcendant dignity, and most taking glory, whereof the
greatest royalties are but poor resemblances? Will men call him the wonderful
Counselor, the Prince of peace, Is. 9.6.7
the King of kings, and Lord of Lords? Rev. 19.16.
that either has never a Secretary, Herald, Ambassador, or so much as a
Steward by office, by whom the grand importances of his Court and Crown may be
transacted on the one hand? or is so little tender of these great trusts, and
his own transactions on the other; that whosoever has but will and skill,
forehead and fitness enough, may without further leave from him or his, lay
hold upon these offices, and leap into the highest honor? Need I remind you,
that such are the offices, such is the honor to be a Minister of Jesus? Is it
spiritually? Well; the more spiritual the office and honor is, the more need
in a just sense, of his putting them into a security, from the fleshly
presumptions and forward pretensions of vain men, who are but too desirous of
being teachers of others, even before they understand what they say, or whereof
they affirm themselves, 1 Timothy 1.7. or at least of heaping unto themselves
teachers, having itching ears, 2 Timothy 4.3. It is true, I acknowledge, that
pious Ministers are so far from being accounted ordinarily to the honor of
Christ; that we are made rather with Paul, the filth of the world, and the
offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4.13. But what says Paul? God, who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. and if our brethren be enquired of (says he) they are the
glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 8. ver. 23. And no marvail, for besides the expressions
to his glory by them, such are the ampressions of his glory upon them, not
only in their Ministerial gifts and graces, which bespeak them qualified for
this Office by Christ, but in the Ministerial authority and administrations,
which bespeak them Commissioned to this Office from Christ. And indeed, what
other are his Ministers, Pastors, and Teachers among us; but the speaking
gifts, and standing pledges of Christ's glorious ascension for us? and of his
gracious and great affections to us, Ephesians. 4.8, 11. compared.

Sect. 2. It is for the happiness of the Church likewise, which is next to his
Fathers honor, in the aim and heart of Christ. It is for her enlargement,
edification, and establishment, as the Apostle at large instanceth and
illustrateth in the same, Ephesians. 4.12, 13, 14, 15. verses. For the perfecting
of the Saints, etc. Throw open but this door once, that gifts, and a desire to
exercise them make a Minister, and you may (too late) perceive well-nigh, all
that is dear to the Church going out, and whatsoever is dividing and
destructive coming in, by the same door, both speedily and irremediably. What
Corah and his accomplices will not tell Aaron and Moses too? Ye take too much
upon you; seeing all the Congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord
is among them: wherefore then lift you up your selves above the Congregation of
the Lord, Numb. 163 Nor could I ever yet hear of any thing more eminent among
them, than is error and confusion, who have taken qualifications to give
Commission. Alas! this must needs break the unity, and blast the purity of the
Churches quickly.

N, 1. It must needs break the unity of the Chu^ches, (a blessing how desirable
in it self? and how dear to our Savior) if nothing but fitness and forwardness
be requisite to make an Officer or Minister. Woe to the Commonwealth of this
Israel! If every one that had ability, had therefore authority too; If every
one that probably is, or presumes himself to be fit for such or such an
Office, were thereby put into it, and must be so obeyed; or if every one, who
is qualified for, must be therefore counted a Judge, Justice, yea, or but a
Constable. Has God provided against such intrusions upon civil Offices? and
will he permit it in sacred? Taken such care in order to the accord and quiet
of the Common wealth? and has he thrown it by with respect to his Church,
which is so much dearer to him than are all the Societies in the world beside?
Who would be ruled, if but to presume our selves qualified, would make us
rulers, either in Church or State? Surely this would make the militant Church,
like that military body, where qualifications to command were a commission for
a Company: The Church should have all Officers and no Soldiers quickly; and if
it did not run with such an army into blood and confusion, yet would soon and
surely run with it into bitterness and contentions. 'He that can secure me the
peace and unity of that Kingdom, where every one that is fit, may be thereby
supreme; or of that County, whe^^ every one that is fit, may be thereby
Sheriff; or but of that Corporation, where every one that is fit, may be
thereby Major, shall be (with me) a nonesuch among men, and may persuade, if
any, that the beauty and harmony of the Churches of Jesus may be preserved too,
wherein every one that judges himself fit, is thereby made a Minister and
Officer. Let me add ^his, if Ministers are not Officers,* the Church has none:
For who else can show me so clear evidences? And if men may be bold with this
Office in the Church, to invest themselves with it, and to execute at pleasure,
why they should be backward to, or baulk any other Office, I know not: For this
of all others is most sacred and most circumscribed. And if all Offices lie in
common where shall we look for the Churches Concord? Ah Sirs! have we read the
12 to the Romans from the the 3 to the 9, or the 1 Cor. 12? And can we think
our blessed head and Master, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
kindness, so remiss about conferring Offices? and so regardlesse of the
Churches concord as this amounts to? What! are there so many unities? and all
with respect had to the Church? One body, and one spirit, even as they are
called in one hope of their calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God
and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in them all? Ephesians.
4.5, 6. Lo, therefore Christ has given Pastors and Teachers (names of Office)
verse 8, 11. that they may keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.
verse 3. and that till we all come in the unity of the faith etc. ver. 13.

N. 2. This will blast the purity of the Churches too, and let in (what not?)
that is destructive to verity, and the power of Godliness. If our sti^ring
times have not given sufficient testimony to this sad truth, I know not what
times ever did or shall. What through uncalled Preachers, and uncatechised
hearers, Oh! the havoc and convulsions that are made in the Churches of Jesus!
And ind^ed, who can expect; but that those, who will vainly or violently enter
upon the Ministry without Ordination, shall likewise venturously employ
themselves in it, without observation? Witness those false teachers whereof
Peter tells us. 2 Peter, Chapter 2. and Jude, from the fourth to the twentieth
verse. Who may, or how can we expect other, than unsetlednesse in the love of
the Gospel? and unsoundnesse in the life of godliness from that man, or men,
who shake off the order of the Gospel? Surely, they that heap to themselves
teachers, walk but after their own lusts therein, and have it ching ears,
turned from the truth, and unto fables. 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. And therefore whether
they that make themselves teachers are like to walk in the law of God, and to
lead you in the ways of that truth which is according to godliness, judge ye?
What less can be said than this? That measuring themselves by themselves, and
comparing themselves among themselves, they are not wise: and if the premises be
considered, how wicked!

Sect. 3. It Is for the beartning and comfort of such teachers, that beside
qualifications, they shall have the Office committed to them: their comfortable
encouragement much conducing to the credit and interesse of that King Jesus,
whose Ambassadors they are. Sirs! the duties, difficulties, and
discouragements of Ministers, how various are they? how involved! And alas!
what sorry things are our best qualifications to support us, without the strong
aid of that grace, which sets before us the benefit of our Commission, to stay
and cheer our hearts. Who of us, my brethren, but must confess with Paul, that
we are not sufficient of our selves, so much as to think any thing as of our
selves? Where then is our sufficiency? and what is our support? Our sufficiency
is of God, who also has made us able Ministers of the New Testament, 2 Cor,
3.5, 6. That God, who has made us Ministors, is the spring head of our
sufficiencies in the discharge and exercise of our Ministry; and that God has
made us Ministers, is the stay and basis of our hopes in all the difficult
emergencies of our Ministry. See 2 Timothy 1.11, 12.
That our God has sent us, is the stablishing consideration, against all
despondencies and discouragements, that he will supply, strengthen, secure, and
work all our works in us and for us. And Lo, by this it is, that God would have
us to chide down our fears, and to keep up our faith. I sanctified thee, says
he to Jeremie, and I ordained thee a Prophet unto the Nations. Does Jeremie
say? A^ Lord God! I am a child, behold I cannot speak. Ay, but hear what the
Lord says unto Jeremy: say not (...) am a child, for thou shall go to all that
I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee thou shall speak: Be not
afraid of their faces; for I am with thee to deliver thee says the Lord;
Behold, I have made thee a defenced City, etc. Jer. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 18, 19. An
beloved, God does therefore Commission us, to corroborate and comfort our
hearts, and to confirm us you see against hardships. 'Oh the tears and
tentations, that every man of God is subject to! without are fightings, within
are fears: And in the amidst of so many inward distractions, and outward
distresses; while such is the difficulty of our province, such the d^bi^ity of
our persons, such the deceitfulness of sin, such the deiusions of Satan, such
the desperate stubborness of the world, such the depths and heights of the
Word, and such the danger and worth of immortal souls, for which we must give
an account; In the amidst of all this, how would our hearts gather
astonishment! and our hopes go down into despair, did not the sense of this
truth, and the sweet fruits that grow upon it solace our souls: If God has
sent. God will second me; if God has put me into the Ministry, he will prosper
me in the Ministry; if he has given me a Commission, he will not deny me his
conourrence; he that appointed me to this Office, will accomplish his ends by
and upon me in this Office: These, these are the comforts of a Commissioned, if
conscientious Minister. Be the success what it will, if he be sincere and sent,
he is to God a sweet savor, though in them that perish 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. and
God is his strength and reward; though he has spent his own strength to no
purpose, Isa. 49.4, 5.

A stranger, an unofficed preacher has not to intermeddle with this joy. But
Oh the sweet Cordial! and com^ortable savor, of our investitu^e with the
Office both unto us and you! when both you and we shall call to mind; that we
are not barely the servants, but the stewards of Christ; or only the subjects,
but the Ambassadors of Christ, and so whatsoever we bind or loose, beseech or
charge, rebuke or comfort, it is as if God did it; as though God did beseech you
by us; we pray you in Christ's stead, 2 Cor. 5.20. Christ has bid us go teach,
baptize, etc. Lo, I am with you, Mat. 28.19, 20. But the unofficed preacher
has neither part nor lot in this promise; for be it supposed, that Christ has
given him feet, bestowed abilities; yet has he not bid him go, granted him
authority: and who can hope, that Christ will go with him, that goes before
Christ, or rather steals away before he sent him? Will he be with the Prophets
that run, and he not sent them? Nay, I am against these Prophets, says the
Lord, Jeremi. 23.21.30.31, 32.

USE.
Having thus explained and evinced the assertion or observation; give me leave
now to exercise my self and you, a while, in the application. I shall not be
very long; neither the straights of time, There being 13. afterward to be
ordained.
nor indeed my strength, permitting it. I shall therefore lay but three Uses of
this point before you. The first for humiliation and consternation, the second
for holy caution, the third in way of hearty counsel.

Use 1. Of humbling consternation. Is it so, that such as are to teach
authoritatively in the Church, or Ministers of Christ, must be both men
qualified for the Office, and have the Office committed to them? Oh! what
matter of humbling consternation and holy confusion before the Lord does this
call for from us this day? Oh that mine head were waters, and mine eyes a
fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain (shall I say,
or for the souls?) of the daughter of my people, Jer. 9.1. Partly through
unqualified Ministers of the one side, and partly through uncommissioned
Ministers on the other side. Oh the ravine and ruin, that is made of
multitudes of souls! one whereof is more worth than all England, all the
Indies, yea, than all the world. Ah firs! how have holy things been profaned?
how have heavenly things been polluted? and how much, how long have wholesome
truths been perverted, what between this and that extreme? Who of us is such a
stranger in England but unless deaf does hear? that unless blind does see? and
unless sensual or stupid, but must sigh, and smite upon our thighs, in the sad
remembrances of there things! Oh! how has God been and is yet dishonored by
it? How has the Gospel bee^, and is yet despised by it? and how has godliness
be^n, and is yet derided for it, to this day? Ay, and for this, notwithstanding
all our engagements and endeavors for a Reformation, the land mou^n^ and lies
unreformed, even to this hou^. And now, Oh that we could (^ure I am that we
should) mourn before the Lord for these things.

Sect. 1. Let us mourn for unqualified Ministers. O believed! how many have
walked (and Oh that I should mention it without weeping!) walked under the
calling of Minister, that have not been worthy to be caded men? but have been
rather like the Mule for ignorance the, Goat for lust and the Swine for
drunkenness, than like the Ministers of Jesus; such whose God has been their
belly, whose Gospel has been their barn, whose glory has been their shame.
Non Pastores, sed praedatores; non praecones, sed praedones, as Bernard Ad
Cleru^ Sermo in Cencilio ^hemens^.
elegantly declaimeth the profane Priests, especially the Prelates of his
time: Soul-thieves and murderers, rather than true Ministers. Ministers shall I
call them in Divinity? monsters they are in Morality. Beasts in men's shapes,
rather than Ministers, which ought to be the best of men. Oh the building up
of sin! the betraying of our Savior's interesse! and the blood of immortal
souls, that will be required at your hands! I say at your hands, if any such
are here. What I thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self? Art a
light to them that sit in darkness, and yet the light that is in thee is but
darkness? Tell others of a narrow way to heaven, and yet art treading thy
self the broad way to hell? Pressest humility, holiness, and
heavenly-mindednesse in the Pulpit, and there is naught but pride,
profaneness, coveteousnesse, or contention in thy practice? Warn'st others
against all sin, and against all appearance of sin, and to adorn the
doctrine of God our Savior in all things, as ever they would enjoy him or
heaven; and yet walk thy self, as if there were neither sin, nor suffering,
God or Gospel, hell or heaven, to be shut into, or shut out from? And art thou
a Minister (think thou) that Christ will, and Christians must own? Oh! how
will Christ shake off such prophesiers in his name, in the open view and
prospect both of men and Angels at the last day? and profess unto them, I
never knew you, i. e. I never owned you, Depart from me ye that work
iniquity. Ah wretches! take ye my Covenant into your mouths, and take up my
Commission as Ministers, and yet live like miscreants? Verily if there be a
furnace of divine vengeance heated one seven times more, then usual, these
shall fill it: if there be an hotter place in hell than others, these shall
have and howl in it. If you will not receive it from me, read I pray, Romans
2.17. to the end, Mat. 7, 22.23. Psalm 50.15. Hos 4.6. Rev. 19.20, 21. O
Christians, have you no tears left for these men? no bowels of pity and
compassion? especially when the Church of Christ i^ so concerned in them? Alas!
without eminent repentance, there remains nothing but woe, woe, woe, for them. For
wrath and astonishment, for horror and amazement, for blackness and chains
under darkness are such reserved, for ever and ever. Such Angels, whosoever
escape, shall be sure to be tormented among the damned Devils.

Sect. 2. Let us mourn for uncommissioned Ministers. Ministers! do I mean such?
nay rather they are busybodies in other men's matters. Ministers by intrusion
they are, and equivocally; but not by investiture not properly; if in title,
yet not in truth. Their judgment proceeds of themselves, and usually are in
judgment and for destruction to the sheep; not for the preservation, but for
the perdition of the souls that are led by, and listen to them; witness those
Jeremiah 14.14, 15, 16. and Chap. 27.25. 2 Pet. 2.1. etc. So usual has it
been, for self-Ministers, to be soul murderers, Nor do the Prophets only
declaim such for false Prophets, who run, and God never sent them with that
message; but such likewise who run and God never sent the men: or if you will,
such who prophesied and God never sent them, Jer. 23.21. and 14.14.15.
as well as those who prophesied what God never spoke to them. It is true that
ordinarily both these met in one and the same persons. And is it not as true as
familiar and frequent in our times? It never was (I am apt to think) more
usual in Israel, than now it is in England, that such who prophecy without
designation or warrant from God, prophecy the deceit of their own hearts,
instead of the Word of God. Ezekiel. 13.1, 2, 3, 17. Jer. 14.1. and 23.16, 26.
And are not such, think we, for a lamentation? yea, and let them be for a
lamentation. Oh friends! these, these are they, that have been so much
complained of by God, Jeremiah 23.21, 32. so much cautioned to the godly, Jer.
29. ver 8, 9. So much the curse of that Prince, who has given them
countenance, 1 Kings 22. verse 1. ad 37. and have so miserably cheated, and
perniciously corrupted the people that have reposed confidence, or taken
complacen^ie in them, Ezekiel 13. verse 4. ad 17. Oh Christians! as there were
false Prophe^s also among the people, has not Christ foretold Mat. 7.15. and
24.23, 24, 25, 26. 2 Pet. 2.1. etc. 1 John 4.1.
that there shall be false teachers among you? and have not our eyes seen
them? men of the same character, and of the same carriage, which he foretold?
and have not the same sad consequences been found among us, who have read their
description delusions, and dreadful issues in the 2 Pet. 2. and in the Epistle
of Jude? Sirs, that our souls could weep in secret for them! and for the
Church, Cause and Covenant of our God, that suffer through and by them! And as
for you the Prophets and Ministers of God, let me say to every one of you from
the Lord, what was sometime said unto Ezekiel. Son of man, prophecy against
the Prophets of Israel (Says he, of England say I, to you) that prophecy, and
say unto them that prophecy out of their own hearts: Hear ye the word of the
Lord Thus says the Lord God Woe unto the foolish Prophets, that follow their
own spirit, and have seen nothing etc. Ezekiel. 13.1, 2, etc.

Use 2. Of holy caution, Is it so that such who are to teach authoritatively in
the Church must be both qualified for the Office, and have the Office committed
to them? I have this to beseech and beg, to command and charge you, from and by
the Lord. Take heed, Oh! take heed, of adventuring upon public authoritative
teaching in his Church, till you have both of these; parts and power,
qualifications and commission given you of Jesus Christ.

Sect. 1. Do not adventure upon this Office without qualfications. This is such
an Office, that (what head is so able! What heart is so accurate and honest!)
who is equal to it? If the Apostle cries out (...); who is equal or
sufficient? 2 Cor. 2.16. What must we do who are not more short of his
Apostleship, than we are of his abilities? Surely no life can be too good, no
learning can be too great for the Ministry, nay or good or great enough. A
Pastor among his people, like Saul among his subjects, should be higher at
least by head and shouldiers both for fidelity and for ability, for soundness
of apprehensions, for simplicity of affections and for sincerity and
unbiastnesse in all his actions. Like Ezra, one that has prepared his heart to
seek the law of the Lord, and to do it, and to teach in Israel statutes and
judgments, Ezra 7.10. Who-ever may be blameworthy a bishop must be blameless
as the Steward of God. 1 Timothy 3.2. as the Apostle inculcateth twice together.
Tit. 1.6, 7. Nor is it enough that he be good really but he must have a good
report; and this not only of them that are within, but of them likewise, which
are without. 1 Timothy 3.7. But because it is not life, so much as learning, which
is now adays made the matter of question, if not of contumely and contention:
Let me have the liberty to leave my sense in this likewise. And I beseech you,
let not pride, let not prejudice, let not precipitancy, or whatever else, shut
up your ears, or stop your hearts against it. Oh! never think that you are apt
to be teachers of others, unless you are able to teach others also. Know that
such a one had need be full of goodness, and filled with all knowledge, who is
fit (especially of Office) to admonish others Romans 15.14. Full of judgment and
of might, Mic. 3.8 He had need with Ezra, be a ready scribe in the Law of God,
Ezra 7.6. a scribe instructed to the Kingdom of God Man. 13.52. one of picked
and choice abilities and experience, worth and wisdom; a messenger, and
interpreter one among a thousand, Job 33.23. an able Ministe^ of the New
Testament, 2 Cor 3.6.

'Well may such be reckoned by ou^ Apostle among the Impostors of the las^
times, who understand not, 2 Pet. 2. 1. cum 12.
but ar^ willingly ignorant 2 Pet. 3.8.
of which sort are they that creep into houses, and lead captive silly women
laden with sins, led away of diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to
come to the knowledge of the truth 2 Timothy 3.6.7. But never were, or shall they
be reputed among the Pastors of the last times; for these are to hold fast the
faithful word as they have been taught, and are able by sound doctrine both to
exhort and convince the gainsayers Tit. 1.9. These cast not off, but continue
in the things which they have learned and been assured of. 2 Timothy 3.14. A good
Minister of Christ is one nourished up in the words of faith, and of good
doctrine whereunto he has attained. 1 Timothy 4.6 True it is, that we are
fallen among men and times, that discourage, dissuade and disgrace learning:
but let not that deter us, who are not (through mercy) ^ut such, that on the
other hand, quic^n, cherish, countenance it, and speak ^mfortably unto all the
Levites that teach ^he good knowledge of the Lord. Chro. 30. 22.
It Is true, some would have us Preachers like Je^boams Priests, only of the
lowest of the people. 1 King. 12.31. at least, for lite^ature (not to mention
livelihood.) And well may such indeed pass for the Priests of Jeroboam, for
(with me it is ^eyond doubt) they are not the Prea^hers of Jesus, i.e. by his
allowance and ^ppointment. No; Christians, his are ^pproved workmen, that need
not be asha^ed, rightly dividing the word of truth, (...) Tim 2.15. The Pastors
after his heart ^^e such, as shall (and therefore can) feed ^is People with
knowledge and understanding. Jer. 3.15. not blind seers, igno^ant watchmen, or
Shepherds that can ^ot understand. Isai. Chap. 56. verse 10, 11. I do not say,
but you may be good men, and have but little or no learning; but I dare not
say, you will make good Ministers without learning; for how should you? I pray
consider.

N. 1. Will not your relations to God ca^^ upon you for learning? He imploys
none but the wise and faithful to be his Stewards. Mat. 13.52. How can you be
his mouth? Jer. 15.19.
his messengers? Isa. 42.19.
or the men of God 1 Timothy 6.11.
else, who are to make known the mysteries of his Gospel? If you are the mouth
of God, let us hear you speak as the Oracles of God. 1 Pet. Chapter 4. verse
11. Who do expect a proof of Christ speaking in and by you 2 Cor. 13.3.
if you are the Messengers of the Lord of Hosts, Let us see that your lips do
preserve knowledge, that men may find the law at your mouth Malac. Chapter 2.
verse 7. And if you are men of God, make us at least some way sensible, that
you are furnished with instructions to every good work. 2 Timothy Chap. 3 verse 17.

N. 2. Mat. 5.14.
Will not your relations to the people call upon you for learning? These you
ought to warn and teach in all wisdom, Isa. 9.16
Col. 1.28. Mat 13.52.
How shall you be their lights? their leaders, and instructors else unto the
Kingdom of God? If you are blind leaders of the blind, both shall fall into the
ditch, Mat. 15.14. And a dreadful thing it will b^ for you, if God's people
are destroyed for lack of knowledge in you, Hos 4.6. Your lips should preserve
knowledge for the people, as a public storehouse; and they must seek the law
at your mouth, Mal. 2.7. If there arise matters too hard for them, they must
arise and ask you, Deuteronomy. 17.8. ad 12. Ezekiel. 44.24. And how shall you teach
them, if ye are yet to learn the Oracles of God your selves? Heb. 5.12. Thou
that teach another, teach thou not thy self, says the Apostle? Romans 2.12.

N. 3. Will not the requisites and duties of your office call upon you for
learning? Surely the Law should not perish from the Priest, nor counsel from
the wise, nor the Word from the Prophet, Jer. 18.18. Men may declaim humane or
School-learning very confidently; but whereunto will a Minister's duty arise,
unless he be furnished with some competency thereof? How shall he convince
gain sayers without it, (...).
shutting them up in their argum^nts and answers? or stop the mouths of the
learned adversaries, who fly either to the original texts, or to those orderly
contextures of truth, which have received the allowance and consent both of
teachers and Christians, to stand as maxims of unquestionable truths? Besides
how shall he rightly divide the word of truth else, 2 Timothy 2.15. or reconcile
the Scriptures which seemingly differ, if he has no acquaintance with Logic,
Rhetoric, or Grammar? Again, how shall he reveal the sense of Scriptures
entirely, and cause the people to understand the reading? Nehemi. 8. ver. 7, 8.
Especially, since there are so many riddles Ezekiel. 17 2.
and dark sayings Ps. 78.2.
in them, and all expositions of, and observations from them, are to bear such
exact accord to, and to be examined by the original, which the Holy Ghost
inspired. Nay, or how shall he so much as read the Scriptures intelligently
without some humane teachings and learning? Deliver this Bible to one that is
not at all learned, saying, read this I pray you, and must he not say I cannot,
for I am not learned! Isa. 29.12, Had we to do with no more then Paul's
Epistles; how many things must be acknowledged in them, both hard to be
understood, and hard to be utterred? Heb. 5.11.
But what do the unlearned and unstable? Let Peter tell you: They wrest them,
as they do also the other Scriptures, unto their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16.
It Is in vain to tell me that Jesus Christ was not learned. For does not he
himself assure me otherwise? The Lord God has given me the tongue of the
learned, and opened mine ear to hear as the learned, Isa. 50.4. And do not his
auditors assure me the same too? Mat. 13.54, 55. Joh. 7.15. Say you the
Apostles were not learned? and as for the Prophets how illitterate were they!
But sirs, do the Scriptures say the same likewise? Indeed, was Moses such an
one, who was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians? Act. 7.22. or was
Daniel, to whom God had given skill in all learnning and wisdom? Dan. 1.17. or
was Paul that was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, Act. 23.5. and was so
eminently versed both in humane learning Tit. 1.22 Act. 17.28
and divine, that Festus thinks much learning had made him even mad? Act.
26.24. Again, were Samuel, Elijah, or Elisha so unlearned, who had so many
pupills, and bred up so many scholars, which were called sons of the Prophets,
at Naioth, Bethel, Jericho, and Gilgall, which were in this respect little
other than Universities and Schools of learning? 2 Samuel 19.19, 20. 2 Kings 2.2
3, 5, 12. and 4.38. as we read of a College at Jerusalem likewise, 2 Chronicles.
34.22. and 2 Kings 22.14. True it is, that grace called many such to be
Prophets and Apostles, who were unlearned: but then the same grace which
called, did by and by qualify the^ with learning, that they were, as Micah
says of himself, full of power by the Spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and
of might, Micah 3.8. If they had not learning by outward education, they had
learning by inward inspiration, and spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost,
2 Pet. 1.21. If they had not acquired learning, i. e. by their own stud^es,
they had (which is better) infused learning by the Spirit of grace. The Spirit
did still make an extraordinary supply of learning from himself, unto such as
were allowed of him in the Minist^y, that were without an ordinary supply
thereof by Schools of learning. To one was given says Paul, by the Spirit the
word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit, to another
prophecy, to another discerning of spirits, to another diverse kinds of
tongues, to another the interpretation of tongues; all which were wrought by
the self-same Spirit, 1 Cor. 128, 10.11.

2. Sect. Do not adventure upon public authoritative teaching in the Church
without a commission. If you expect the assistance, acceptance, allowance, and
approbation of Christ; Oh! do not adventure upon it, without authority first
given you of Christ. If affectation, if avarice, if ambition, or whatever else
it be, shall be putting you on; let the aw of this truth of God, and your
accountableness to the God of truth prepo^derate and stay you back; as ever you
would answer it to Christ, to his Church, or to your own Consciences another
day Sirs, the time is coming, when a^l V^zards shall be plucked off, and what
were your aims by, what your abilities for, and why you declined author^zing to
the Ministry shall be produced in open Court, and conscience shall be put to
it (will you nill you) to answer such interrogatories as these are: Who made
you a teacher in Israel? who required this at your hands? who gave you this
authority? etc. And sirs, will not this be a sad indictment from the Lord in
that day? I did not send these Prophets, these preachers, yet they ran; I have
not spoken to them yet they prophesied. Well; is it so, that such teachers must
have a commission as well as qualifications from our Lord Jesus Christ? Oh!
that such among us, who exercise the Ministry, enjoy the maintenance, and
expect the reverence of Ministers, yet never entered by the door of Ordination
upon the discharge of this Office, but have climbed up some other way, would
seriously lay it to heart! What? is the Ministry an Office? and the external
committing of the Ministry unto men God's Ordinance? how is it then, that such
do (that I say not that such da^e) ordinarily exercise the Ministry, as to the
preaching part, who never were, and perhaps never will be, who never did
design, nor do now desire to be solemnly set apart to the Ministry? Consider I
pray you these two things. 1. That to do the proper work of a Minister or
Officer of God cannot be safe. 2. To do the preaching work of a Minister
cannot but be sinful.

N. 1. To do the proper work of a Minister or Officer of God cannot be safe,
without his ordination or appointment thereunto. Men may pass it by, it is
true, but God will not put it up unpunished. The holiest pretexts of Korah and
his accomplices will not help them, if they seek the Priesthood. Numb. 16.3.10,
31.32, 33. God is so far from bearing withit in common men, that he would at no
hand take it from the chiefest magistrate: witness Saul's loss of the Kingdom
for it, though burdened then with so great straits 1 Samuel 13 8 to 15 and
Vzziahs leaprosie to the day of his death for it, though (before this) he had
been blessed with so great success. 2 Chronicles. 26.16 to 22. And now beloved, is
not ordinary authoritative teaching in the Church the proper work of a Minister
of Christ? Yea; what is, if this benot? Wherefore or whereunto is a Minister
ordained else, if not to be a Preacher and Teacher of the Church in faith and
verity? 1 Timothy 2.7. wherefore worthy of double honor else, if not for
laboring in the word and doctrine, which eminently bespeaketh preaching? 1 Timothy 5.17. Wherefore is the Gospel and this Office committed to him else, if
not for manifesting the word through preaching? Tit. 1.3. yea indeed, not so
much to baptize as to preach. 1 Cor. 1.17. Beloved, therefore it is we are
allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel, 1 These. 2, 4. therefore are
we appointed of God to this trust in the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.11. therefore and
thereunto it is that we are so adjured and called upon God in the Gospel. I
charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and
the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom; preach the word, be instant
inseaso^, out of season, etc 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. 'Sirs, is there any proper act of a
Gospel-Minister? If there be not, why do you not plainly tell us, there is no
such Officer left us? If there be, may not preaching put in as fair and full,
yea a fairer and fuller claim than any? Say you, the administration of the
Sacraments is al proper act of this Officer? Be it so but consider I beseech
you, whether preaching may not put in for the precedence thereunto? Are
Gospell-Ministers more eminently, or more expressly said, either to be
commissioned to be Ministers, for that act then for this? 1 Cor. 1.17. 1 Timothy
2.7. or more commended in their ministry by that act, than by this? 2 Timothy
2.15. or more to be counted of with respect to their ministry, for that act,
than for this? 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 These. 5.12, 13. or are we more often, or more
openly circum-scribed, or described, as the Ministers of the Lord by that, than
by this? ibid and Heb. 13.7. Or are we more concerned, and commanded, and
charged to attend upon that act of our Ministry, than this? Romans 12.7, 8. 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15, 16. Sure I am, though I exclude not the administration of
the Sacraments from being a proper act of an Office-Minister, and one of those
purposes and ayms, why God will have men put into the Ministry; yet preaching
the Gospel is with more abundant frequency expressed among the acts of
Ministers, and with more abundant fullness evinced to be the aim of God by the
Ministry. If you have but overly read the Scriptures, yet you cannot but
observe this. With what consonancy therefore to sound reason or
Scripture-revelation the administration of Sacraments shall be received to be
the Proper act of a Minister of Christ: and authoritative teaching rerejected
meanwhile, judge ye? And if it be (as it is proved to be) the proper act of a
Minister thus to preach authoritatively; what an adventure you run, what an
attempt you rush upon, Oh that you may attend in time, who Ordinarily discharg
this part of our Office without Ordination thereunto.

N. 2. Todo the preaching work of a Minister ordinarily, without Ordination
cannot but be sinful. What though we yield that there may be an essay without
it for trial of qualifications? will it therefore be an excuse for such who make
it a trade or course? or because the sons of the Prophets may be called
thereunto occasionally? will it therefore be a covert for him who is exercised
therein ordinarily? Can you so forget the prohibitions, precepts, precedents
and pregnant characters and titles of preachers mentioned formerly. *Is it not
sinful for an unofficed person to baptize? Consult else the disputes between
Papists and Protestants about midwives baptism. And can that be sinful for
you, yet preaching sinlesse? When both these are prescribed in the same
commission, and preaching has the precedence; not only in the order of words
there, Mat. 28.19. but in regard o^ worth and eminency elsewhere, as the more
notable end, and nobler errand why we were sent forth not to baptize, as our
Apostle says, but to preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.17. i.e. not so much to that
as to this. But more particularly see I beseech you, whether this sin tends to
these three things at least.

1. To the vacating of this Gospel-Officer, as to this act at least, of
preaching. For if this be a common operation, what needs a peculiar officer
for it? If it may be, nay must be (for so far some carry it) the work of
every other man, to labor for abilities to preach, and to lay them out in
preaching; what need we as to this purpose of an office-Minister? Is there a
special officer for the common work of every particular member in the body
civil, military, or natural? If not 'What it is with others I know not, but a
thing of sad remark and resentment it is with me; that so many of those, who at
first have contended for no more than that unofficed men may preach, have at
length cast off the office of preachers, and therewith cast out all the
Ordinances and Churches of our dearest Jesus.

2. To the violating of Gospel Order. For what is more openly delivered here,
than that every one do his own business, studying to be quiet, 1 These. 4.11.
That as the Lord has called every one, so he walk and abide in the same
calling wherein he was called, 1 Cor. 7.17, 20. That no one think more highly
of himself than he ought to think, but soberly, according as God has dealt to
every man the measure of faith, Romans 12.3. And that every member keep to his
own place in the body; God having set the members in the body, every one of
them, as it has pleased him, 1 Cor. 12, 18, etc.

3. To usurpation upon the Gospel-Churches. For who reads not, that they have
rule over you, and must be so remembered, who have spoken to you the Word of
the Lord? Heb. 13.7. That such as are to admonish you from the Lord, have
authority, and are over you in the Lord? 1 These. 5.12. and must be esteemed
very highly in love by you for their work sake, ver. 13. If gifted brethren are
to labor in the Word and doctrine, to preach or teach authoritatively in the
Churches; the Churches must then perform them reverence. 1 Timothy 5.17. yea, and
pay them maintenance: for what has God more clearly ordained, than that they
who preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14. and that he that
is taught in the Word communicate to him that teaches in all good things? Gal.
6, 6. 'But I forbear any longer to rub upon this soar; trusting through grace,
that the Libertinism produced by this liberty of prophesying (as it is
misnamed) will at length awaken all the people of God and preachers of the
Gospel to a just averia^ion from, and abhorrence of it. And I no way doubt but
such Proph^ts at length, as run to and fro, preaching the dreams and delusions
of their own hearts, shall be ashamed every one of his vision which he has
propesied, neither shall they wear any long^r a rough garment to deceive. i.e.
counterfeit the true Prophets, who commonly wore such garments. 2 King. 1.8
Isai. 20.2. Mat. 3.4. se Hutchenson upon the place
But he shall say, I am no Prophet, I am an husband man: for man taught me to
keep cattle from my youth Zech. 13.4, 5 As for you brethren and beloved who
take your selves to be apt and able, inwardly called and competently qualified
to t^ach others in the Church, why should not this Office be committed to you,
that you may with peace to you, with profit to others, and without provocation
to God authoritatively teach others? Yea, and let me entreat and engage you by
our Lord Jesus; as ever you would have his presence with you, his protection
and gracious providence over you, his power aiding, and his grace prospering
you; do not exercise the Ministry ordinarily, without or before entrance
thereinto by Ordination. Oh! be not so averse to Christ's honor, the Churches
happiness, and your own comfort I but if you are indeed qualified for the
Ministry, see that you have the Ministry committed to you. Sirs, w^y should
your proving for the Ministry seem so dreadful? or putting into the Ministry
seem no more defirable to you who profess, that this one act of the Ministry
is so delicious and dear unto you? If your aims are right and abilities real,
why there should be such an aversation from trial, I know not. Sure I am, you
should be first proved, and then, and not till then use the Office of a Bishop,
being found blameless 1 Timothy 3.10. cum ver. 1, etc.
If you are not averse from, nor afraid of trial, acquit your selves, and
acquaint us where your exception^lye, and put not such a stumbling block in
your brethrens way. Why there should be so much loathnesse or averseness to
Ordination, if there be so much love of, and ability for the office, as is
pretended, I must profess I see not.

Object. Do you tell me, the Apostle says, ye may all prophecy one by one? 1
Cor. 14.31. Answ. True; all ye that are Prophets, of whom he is now speaking,
29, 32, verses. He says not all ye people. 'One whole sex are prohibited, 34,
35, verses, and for the other, what less than this speaks he? Are all Prophets?
1 Cor. 12.29. i. e. all are not, Where does the Scripture tell you of unofficed
Prophets? men that never were, nor never will be put into office, yet
ordinarily did and might perform this act of office? See you not how distinct
the mention is of the Prophet and righteous man? Mat. 10.42. and how frequently
the Prophet is delivered in upon the Catalogue of Church Officers, even in this
same Epistle? 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11, etc.

Object Eldad and Medad (say you) do prophecy in the Camp. Numb. 11.27. Answ.
True; and who would not have wished with Moses in the same case? would God all
the Lord's people were Prophets! But, Lo, when was it? not til the Lord took
off the Spirit that was upon Moses, and it rested upon them, ver. 26. 'And who
were they? Of them that were written, but went not out unto the Tabernacle,
ver. 26. i. e. of the Seventy Elders (officers of Israel) whom God commands
Moses to bring thither, and covenants to put upon them of his Spirit, ver. 16,
17, 18

Object. But we are all Priests unto God, Rev. 1.6. Answ. True; but not all
Prophets, 1 Cor. 12.29. The same Christ who has made us Priests has made us
Kings too, a royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. We are neither properly, but in a
figurative sense only. 'Will not this vest us with a civil authority to mulct
and punish? how will that then, to Minister publicly or preach?

Object. But we all ought to be teachers of others? Heb. 5.12. Answ. True, even
women are not exempted, but enjoined Titus 2.3, 4. Yet not in the Churches, how
eminently soever gifted, 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. Privately and charitatively all may,
all must, as I have said; Oh let your families, friends, and with whom ye walk
in fellowship witness it, and let the Word of God dwell richly in you to this
purpose, Col. 3.16. But ought therefore all to teach publicly and
authoritatively likewise? Nay, here our Apostle: Are all teachers, 1 Cor. 12.
ver. 29. i. e. all are not, all ought not, 1 Cor. 12.29. 'Shew us I pray you,
where any gifted brother may assume authority to himself? or where he is
allowed of our Savior, as in his name and stead, to teach publicly in the
assemblies of his servants? and where attention is due to him in so doing by
commandment from the Lord? Has Christ ever said to such as he has to his
office-Ministers? He that hears you hears me, and he that despises you,
despises me, etc. Luke 10.16.

Object. But we must speak often one to another, rebuke, consider, comfort,
edify, and exhort one another; not only our families, but especially those
with whom we walk in fellowship. Answ. True; do it and spare not. No good man
or Minister durst dissuade or discourage it. Nay, this we do command and
charge you by the Lord. Mal. 3.16 Levit. 19.17. Heb. 10.24 25. 1 These. 5.11.
Heb. 3.13.
But what is this to warrant your public preaching in the Churches of Christ?
Is there no difference between that and private Christian-converse and
conferences, which grow out of charity and the communion of Saints? 'Do you,
will you say, but that women among you as well as men are intended by the
Apostle in those Scriptures, whereto you allude? yet who sees not that women
must keep silence in the Churches? 1 Cor. 14.34. Pray show us from Scripture,
where men out of office are enjoined to such public teaching, or so to teach,
from which women are precluded?

Object. Say you as every man has received the gift, even so should we
minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of
God? Answ. True; 'But your selves will not say (I think) that women are excluded
from what this text enjoyneth. Accept this command then in it is greatest
latitude, it can import no more than this, if you allow (what I am sure you
must, and believe you do) in it is full accord with other Scriptures, that we
minister the gift we have received one to an other, every one in his own orb,
in his order; Public Ministers of the Church, (in which he instanceth ver 11.)
in a public and authori^ative way, private members of the Church in a private
and charitative way, as did Aquila and Priscilla, Act. 18.26. 'And beyond
doubt, those women that labored with Paul in the Gospel, Phil. 4.3. for he
suffered not a woman to teach in the Church, 1 Timothy 2.12. And truly otherwise,
upon the same ground that you infer from this text, that every one who has
gifts for public preaching must minister the same publicly? upon the same
ground with equal^ right and reason may another inter, that this gifted person
must preach publicly, whether the Church approves him gifted, and indulgeth
him this liberty or not: (and indeed where that call and compr^bation of the
Church has any footsteps in Scripture, which some speak of, e're such shall
exercise his gifts, I see not) and again, that every man who has received
gifts or abilities to administer the Sacraments, or to absolv from censures,
may and must minister the same to others, which you do not, dare not grant, nor
indeed may without destroying the order of the Churches, despising the
Ordinances of Christ, and denying the necessity of Ministers by office. And I
pray consider, whether more eminent abilities be needful for the ordinary
ministration of Sacraments, than for preaching? and whether you are more
evidently excluded by this text, or by any other from ordinary ministration of
Sacraments than of sermons? But if you limit this command, according to the
liberty which the words afford you, it speaks for us, and against you. For what
are stewards, but men in office? and in what other notion, is it ever used in
Scripture, or where? And thus it will be no more, than this, in the sense of it:
That as every man has received the office (which is by gift frequently
understood in Scripture, Romans 12.6, 7. Ephesians. 4.8. cum 11.) so he minister, viz.
according to his trust and office; which is illustrated particularly, v. 11.
wherein he distinguishes these officers or stewards, into two species or
ranks, viz. such as are to speak from Christ, and such as are to serve in his
Church: such as are to be the mouth of God, authoritatively to guide them; and
such as are to minister, as of the ability which God has given, i. e. Bishops
or Presbyters, and Deacons as he frequently elsewhere makes the distribution,
Phil. 1. 1 Timothy 1.3. etc. These he describes by the most eminent acts of their
office, and directs how they shall discharge them.

Object. Why? they that were scattered abroad went every where preaching the
Word? Acts 8.4. True, but who were they? If you say men out of office, let us
hear your proof, the only particular man therewith mentioned is Philip, ver.
5. who was e're this ordained, Chap. 6.5, 6. and was an Evangelist Chap. 21.8
Again, when did they it? when the Church was all scattered abroad, which was at
Jerusalem, verse 1. And is there no difference between preaching under the
scattering of the Churches, and during their settlement? 'Though I think that
the universal term [all] ver. 1. does rather intend all the Ministers of that
Church, except the Apostles, than all the members. For why, or where should the
Apostles have stayed, if all these had been scattered abroad? Or how could Saul
have been still making havoc of the Churchthere, haling men and women to
prisons, v. 3. which is another probability that they were only men in office,
who went thus preaching to and fro, to which you may add the pregnancy of the
expression, which Luk, makes use of verse 4 (...), which this Evangelist has
so often and only used of preachers by office, Act. 5.4. and 8.12. and 10.36.
Luke 8.1. and 9.6. and 20.1. as the late learned laborious and pious Assembly
do animadvert. see their answer to the Reas. of the diss. brethren, p 30, 31,
32.


Object. 'But we find Apollos teaching the way of the Lord diligently, even in
the Synagogue? Act. 18.25. True, but who was Apollos? not only an elequent
man, and mighty in the Scriptures, verse 24. but is expressly mentioned to be
one of the Ministers by whom the Corinthians believed, 1 Cor. 3.5, 6. and in
that regard he is owned by Paul, as his brother Apollos 1 Cor. 16.12. and
ranked with him and Pet, 1 Cor. 1.12. Say you he was not put into office when
he preached at Ephesus, Act. 18. but how prove you it? Surely the mention of
his knowledge only of John's baptism, i. e. his doctrine and Ministry, ver. 25,
will be too slender a proof thereof; especially if you consider the other
characters therewith given him, and the contracted knowledge of the Disciples
of Jesus, some time after their first sending forth, and that John had his
Disciples, as well as had Jesus his. But further suppose we it: yet what can be
more inferred, than we readily grant? viz. that that one who purposes the
Ministry, and is preparatorily qualified for it, may give proof of his
qualifications by preaching some sermons e're his putting into office; into
which it is manifest that Apollos was, if not already put, yet not long after
this at Corinth, to which he passed from Ephesus ver. cum Chapter 19.1.
26.

Object. 'Doth not Jehosophat send his princes toteach in the Cities of Judah?
2 Chronicles. 17, 7. and with them the Priests and Levites v. 8, and they taught in
Judah, v. 9. True; So that there is never an unsent teacher. Amemorable and
imitable precede^ (no doubt) for supreme governors: that the teachings of the
Law of the Land and of the Law of the Lord do go together, the Magistrates
teaching that, and taking care for, and giving countenance to the Ministers
teaching this. But behold, it is so done, as the matters of the Lord and the
matters of the Kin^, are distinctly ordered by distinct officers, as the same
Jehosophat appoints Chap 19.11. So that it no where appears that the secular
Lords and Princes did teach the same matters, and in the same manner, as did
the Priests and Levites.

' Object. Say any yet amongst us? Sir, we have been proved and approved by the
Ministers of Jesus. Some of us formerly, under the power of the Committees; some
now before the present Commisioners which are entrusted with the inductio^ of
Ministers. Why should you press us to ordination, who can already offer so fair
and full a plea for the office? Ans. Be it so, as you have said in the former
part; (though how many have crept in at another door without either probation
or approbatio^. I am loath to speak) Surely, as I cannot but commend so much
care on the part of the civil Magistrate, e're he invests men with the civil
right of enjoying the maintenance, or inducteth them to the exercise of the
Ministry in such a particular parish; yet this covering I must tell you, will
be too narrow for you, who expect the doublehonour and execute the office of
the Ministers of Christ. How strictly you were proved, your selves best know;
but that you were not solemnly approved, with prayer, fasting, and imposition
of hands, who knows not? If your selves will but ask your approvers now, or
heretofore, you will easily receive this ready answer: That they did not put
you into the office of Ministers; (such kind of ordinations having no patrons
(that I know) among men, nor pretexts for it from God, nor scarce any
consistence with any principles amongst us whatsoever.) But what they did was
to permit and approve you, so far as concerned them, as delegated from the
civil Magistrate, to the exercise and enjoyments of the Ministry in such a
place. Formerly none might be approved, but such as were already
office-Ministers; at present none but such as are (if not actually made
Ministers, yet) apt and able for the Ministry; the actual investiture of men
with which Office is not their present buisnesse. And though whether this
investiture be in the power of the Presbytery, or of the people, may not be so
well accorded: Yet that there is something else, than the present approbation,
for making one an Office-Minister, is on all hands between those of the
presbyterian and Congregational persuasions assented to.'

Sirs, may any or all this weigh with you? Or will you yet retain your
prejudices? Let me only mind you of that of the Apostle: That no man think of
himself, more highly then he ought to think; Romans 12, 3. and renew my former
motion once more to you, and I pass to the next use. Sirs, are you gifted in
earnest for the Ministry? and have you not gilded over your preaching out of
Office, with pretexts only? Oh! com, come, try your qualifications, and take up
a commission, and see whether we will not give you the right hand of fellowship.

Use 3. Of hearty Counsel, wherein I must and shall be very contract, being
sensible both of your work, and my own weakness. It shall be 1. To you unto
whom this office is or shall be this day committed. 2. To you over whom God
has or shall commit such officers.

Sect. 1. To you unto whom this Office already is, or shall be this day
committed. Is it so etc. This calls upon you to do the whole Offic^ that is
committed to you of God, and ^o to demean your selves as those that have this
holy Office comm^tt^d to you of God. 1. 'To d^ the whole Office that is
committed to you. Make full proof of your Ministry. 2 Timothy 4.5 It Is (let me tell
you) of a vast c^mpass; doctrinall, disciplinary, public, private, in season
and out of season, etc. and of a vast consequence: el^e it h^d never been so
affectionately persuaded by Christ, and so awfully pressed by his Apostle, or
so frequently by both. Joh. 21.15, 16, 17. 1 Timothy 5.21 ch 6.13.14. 2 Timothy 4.1.
ad 6. As ever we would have peace in our own bosoms, or be pure from others
blood, let us withold nothing from our people, that is profitable for them to
know, and proper for us to communicate. This will be their crown, and our
comfort. Acts 20.20, 27, 28. If we would not be counted men but of half-hearts,
or would not be contented with an half-holinesse in our people, or with an
half-heaven for our own persons, let us do, I pray you, our whole work. It
cannot be concealed that we have in these times a great many half-Christians,
Act. 26.18.
half professors; and it must be confessed, that we have but too many
half-ministers, or half-pastours, as to the execution of their Office. And
surely, to me it seems not much an inferior solecism according to Scripture,
to hear of an half-Minister, as to hear of an half-Christian in grace, or an
half-man in nature. 2. This calls upon you so to demean your selves in the
work of the Ministry, as those that have the Office committed unto you of God.
'The man of God, especially in the matters of God, must not be or behave
himself, only after the rate of other men. 2 Timothy 2.24. 1 Timothy 6 11. The
ordinary works we perform, should leave a relish and savor of that sacred word
we preach, and of this spiritual Office we are put into. An Sirs! what
examples, should we Pastors be to our people in (wellnigh) every particular!
in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity, 1 Iim.
4.12. Tit. 2, 7. 1 Pet. 5 3. He that has my word, let him speak my word
faithfully, what is the chafe to the wheat says the Lord, Jer. 23.28. And oh
that we may show our selves approved unto God, and workmen that need not to be
ashamed before men! 2 Timothy 2.15. Say you how should we? 1 Let us do our work
convincingly; convincingly both in regard of others consciences, Joh. 8.9.
and of our own Commission. 2 Cor. 6.1.
Let us do it with authority, like our Savior, and not as the Scribes, Mat.
7.29. as those that are full of power, and of judgment, and of might, by the
Spirit of the Lord, Mic. 3.8. That when we preach, or pray, or censure, or
comfort, etc. and there comes in one that believes not, he may be so
convinced of us, and judged of us, and the secrets of his heart made manifest:
As that falling down on his face, he may worship God, and report that God is in
us of a truth, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. 2. Let us do our work conscientiously and
sincerely; without partiality as to man, and with purposes for God. 'For why
else is our Commission? 1 Timothy 1.11, 12 what else is God's Command? 2 Timothy
2.15. or what less will be our comfort? 2 Cor. 1.12. and must be our
character, 2 Cor. 2.17. 1 Be not partial toward men, how shall we then prove
our selves the Ministers and Stewards of Christ? 2 Cor. 4 1, 2. who must give
every one their portion of meat in due season, Luke 12.42. Let us remember
God's Covenant with Levi, Deuteronomy. 33 8, 9. and the command he has left with us,
1 Timothy 5.21. And truly it is worth our most serious reflections upon our selves,
whether, what the Lord sometime in way of reproof told the Priests, does not now
as particularly reach us, in the amidst of so many reproaches! viz. Therefore
have I also made you contemptible and base before all the people, according as
ye have not kept my ways, but have been parti^l in my law, Mal. 2.9. Again, 2.
Let all our purposes center in God. We are unworthy to be called his
Officers, who are careless of his honor, and unworthy that he should have a
care of ours, 1 Samuel 2.30. Sirs, let us not preach our selves, but Jesus the
Lord, 2 Cor. 4.5. As of sincerity, as of God, in the sight of God, so let us
speak in Christ, 2 Cor. 2.17. What I would we please men? how are we then the
servants of Christ? Col 1.10. As we are allowed of God, to be put in trust with
the Gospel, even so let us speak not as pleasing men, but God, who tries our
hearts, 1 These. 2.4. 3. Let us do our work courageously and strenuously,
without despondency or shrinking, without dejection or sinking. If God's
Commission and concurrence will not bear up our hearts, and bear us up through
hardships, I know not what will. A prisoner with these at the bar is able to
face and fright a Judge upon the bench, Act. 24.25. 'Were we Ambassadors in
bonds, yet we ought to speak boldly, Ephe. 6. verse. 20. Such is the person we
sustain, and the place we stand in. What should baulk or brow-beat us, who have
such an authority to warrant us, and such almightinesse with us, to work all
our works in us and for us? 2 Timothy 1.11, 12. Were we private men, or went we
but upon a private message, well might our hearts m^ditate terrors. But being
Officers of Christ, and such as he will own to the worlds end, nor bonds, nor
blood, or death should move us, Act 20.23, 24, and 21.13 A few b^g looks, or
bitter words, or biting scoffs are sorry bug-bears to daunt a
Commission-officer of Jesus; to whom is given all power both in heaven and
earth, a^ he ^^lls us for our encouragement, Mat 28.18, 19, 20. How would we
have born to have stood at the bar? Act. 25.6, 7
or have sat in the stocks? c. 16.23, 24, 25.
or have been scourged at the Whipping-poast 2 Cor. 11.24.
with our predecessors? yet were they bold in our God, to speak the Gospel of
God, wi^h much contention 1 Ihes. 2.4. and waxed the bolder, by their own and
others bounds, Phil. 1.14. Act. 4.29. 4 Let us do our Ministerial work
carefully and diligently: neither listening to our own idleness, nor led away
of other intanglements. Oh the weight of that one Scripture! worthy to be
engraven in letters of gold, upon all our Study-doors, and to be continually
recorded in our hearts. Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to
doctrine: Neglect not the gift that is in thee which was given thee by
prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. Meditate on these
things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profitting may appear (...), to
all men, in all things, by all means. Take heed unto thy self and unto your
doctrine, continue in them: for in doing this, thou shall both save thy self
and them that hear thee. 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15, 16. 'Are we Officers? we must
wait on our Office: he that teaches on teaching, and he that exhorts on
exhortation. Romans 12.7.8. Whosoever have time to spare for the toys and
vanities of the world, we have none, whose time is Christ's and his Churches,
and who are to give our selves wholly to the word. 1 Timothy 4.15. Oh how puz^^ng
and perplexing would such questions as these be, if Christ should put them unto
us. Why stand ye here (perhaps) all the day idle? We cannot say, No man has
hired us. Mat. 20.6, 7. Or what do thou here Elijah? 1 King. 19.9, 13. be we
either in the Cave, or in the crowd; either weary of our callings, or wasting
our time to and fro about lower concernments? Sirs, are not we the soldiers of
Christ? No man that warreth intangleth himself with the affairs of this life,
that he may please him who has chosen him to be a soldier, 2 Timothy 2.4. We
have Sanctuary work to attend. 'Twas death for the Priests, if they did not
abide in the Sanctuary, according to their several charges, because the
anointing oil of the Lord was upon hem: because they were solemnly appointed to
this work and office, Levit. 10.7. and 21.11, 12. and 8.35. It is not reason
that we shall leave the Word of the Lord, say the Apostle, and serve tables,
Act. 6.2 this was in ministering to the bodily necessities of the poor. And
shall we leave the Word of the Lord, and serve the times? or be securing
trifles in comparison of eternity, with the miscarriage of our peoples souls?
Oh! let us stir up the gift of God that is in us! Had we nothing to reflect
upon, but the laying on of others hands upon us, this might be enough to cause
us to return upon our own hearts often, and to revive and blow up whatsoever is
of love or zeal in us, to a vigorous execution of our office, 2 Timothy 1.6. Are
we Officers of Christ, and in his Church? Surely we had need ply our
business hard. Nor can we (likely) be too busy in our office, who have (I am
sure) the highest charge, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.
the heaviest account, Heb. 13.17.
the hardest work, 2 Timothy 4.2, 5. Jer. 1.18, 19
and the hottest warfare, (i) 2 Timothy 2.3, 4.

Sect. 2. This truth calls upon you over whom God has set or committed, or
shall this day commit such officers. This counsels you how to esteem of, and
entertain them in exercise of their trust, and execution of their Ministry. Say
you how? As those that are officers of the Lord, and as over you in the Lord, 1
These. 5.12. As those that are appointed of God to watch for your souls, and
must give an account, Heb. 13.17. And therefore how should you submit your
selves? and obey them, so far as they rule over you in the Lord? that they may
give up their account with joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable
for you, as the Apostle adds. What though such have been, or now shall be
outwardly appointed by men, yet are they allowed of God to be put in trust with
the Gospel, 1 These. 2.4. with Act. 13.2, 3. Beloved, those who are ordained of
men according to God's Ordinance, are yet God's Officers, God's Ministers. What
else does Paul assure us of the Elders, or ordinary Pastors and Teachers of the
Church of Ephesus? (which because ordinary, could not be immediately put into
office:) The Holy Ghost made them overseers, Act. 20.28. Or what else does he
affirm of those of the Church at Colosse? In his mention of Epaphras; it is, our
dear fellow servants, who is for you a faithful Minister of Christ, Col. 1.7.
When he minds them their duty touching Archippus, (who was it seems none of
the most circumspect or constant Minister) it is thus; Say to Archippus, take
heed to the Ministry which thou have received in the Lord, that thou fulfill
it, Col. 4.17. And what other language hear we concerning Tychicus? Col. 4.7.
Tychicus a beloved brother and a faithful Minister, and a fellow servants in the
Lord. So far was it from truth, in the purest primitive times; that they were
only to be accounted the officers and Ministers of the Lord, who were
immediately put into the office by the Lord. Well then; let a man so account of
us as of the Ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor.
4.1. I say as Ministers of Christ, not of the Commonwealth, not of Antichrist.
I know there is a common reproach rolled upon the Ministry in England, as if we
were no other than Priests of Baal, limbs of Antichrist, Antichristian Priests
etc. So much unbridled are the spirits and speech of many, that would seem to
be religious, and thereby speak their religion vain. Isa. 1.26.
But beloved call you those, or can they be Antichristian, who have been so
evidently opposed by Antichrist, and so eminently owned by Christ; as have been
the zealous and strict Ministry in England, and still are to this day? Oh! how
can you more honor, more help up Antichrist? or hurl more dirt and disgrace in
the face of Jesus Christ? than by calling those Ministers Antichristian, who
have been and are so powerfully able, and so prosperously useful to break the
league of so many thousands of souls with sin and death, and to bring them over
to the real and ready imbracements, of the service of God and life eternal?
'Christians, have not your eyes seen, and ears eard of multitudes both of men
and women, that have been, and still are begotten by them, unto Christ through
the Gospel? and that are built up in communion with him through their Ministry
in the Gospel? Built up, not in aerie speculations and dotage, about questions
and strifes of words; whereof comes envy, strife, railings, etc. This is
easily done indeed (and among us how eminently) by the subtilty and zeal of
seducers, and such as consent not to wholesome words, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5. But lo,
multitudes built up, through the good hand of God upon the gracious Ministry in
England, in the real abhorrency of sin, the rich anointings of the Spirit, in
the life of faith, the labor of love, in the power of sanctification, poverty
of spirit, in heavenliness of their minds within, and holiness of manners
without: In a word, to be doers of righteousness, and in the doctrine which is
according to godliness. Need I call for Testimony to a truth so established, in
the mouth of more then two or three thousand witnesses? 2 Cor. 13.1.
Need we, as some others, may the pious preachers to the pious people of
England, from it is first reformation say; Need we, as some others, Epistles of
commendation to you? or letters of commendation from you? Ye are our Epistle
written in our hearts, known and read of all men. Forasmuch as ye are manifestly
declared to be the Epistle of Christ, ministered by us; written not with ink,
but with the spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshly
tables of the heart 2 Cor. 3.1, 2.3. What is our hope, or joy, or crown of
rejoicing? are not even ye, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, at his
coming? 1 These. 2.19. And will you also, being led away with the error of the
wicked, fall from your own steadfastnesse? 2 Pet. 3.17. you of whom we have
been so affectionately desirous, as we were willing to have imparted to you,
not the Gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because ye were dear to us?
1 These. 2.8. And will you also listen to their scurrulous imputations, who
compass us about with words of hatred, and say: Come, and let us smite them
with the tongue (who cannot now smite them with the sword) and let us not give
heed to any of their words. Jer. 18.18. Why? Sirs, ye are our work in the Lord.
If we are not the Ministers of Christ to others, yet doubtless we are unto
you, for the seal of our ministry are ye in the Lord 1 Cor. 9.1, 2. Say you,
ay, but we are antichristian? however we cloak it over, or cover it up? But
sirs, upon what reason? whence rises it? Are we put into the Ministry by
antichrist? No, But by instruments that are his professed and open adversaries.
Do we promote antichrist by our Ministry? Neither: This is to pluck him up root
and branch, and to prefer Jesus Christ in all his Offices. Are we protected in
our ministry by antichrist? Nor this, unless the croakings of those froggs
which come out of his mouth, the contradictions, calumnies and comminations of
his Priests and Jesuits (which have immixed themselves with separatists of all
sorts) be our shield and protection. Have we not been persecuted in our
ministry by Antichrist? Surely yes; what else does the Book of Matyrs attest?
and the bonds, blood and ashes of Holy Bradford, Sanders, Rogers, and the rest
in Q. M. days? On the other hand. Have not the purposes of the zealous
Ministers in England been eminently for Christ? To exalt his salvation, and
with the ejection and downfall of that man of fin? Witness else both presses
and Pulpits. Has not the presence of Christ been eminently with the zealous
ministry of England? to blast the policies, and break the power of Antichrist,
prospering them in his own work and against the wiles and wrath of that wicked
one? Speak malice it self and spare not. Has not the power of Christ ^e^n
eminently active by, and apparent in the zealous Ministry of England? Ark
others else? If I may not appeal to your own consciencies: whether their
sermons have not fallen like thunder and lightning upon them? and the weapons
of their warfare have not been mighty, through God, to the pulling down of
strong holds? and pierced even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit? Nay
once more, have there not been, and yet are the prints and characters of the
Ministers of Christ eminently found upon the zealous Ministers of England?
compare them else, with these Epistles to Timothy and Titus. Sirs, what else
have been and are their dispositions and qualifications for the Ministry, but
such as Christ has propounded? What else their deligation to the ministry, for
the substance of it, but such as Christ has prescribed? What else the
discharge of their Minstry, for the scope and main of it, but such as Christ
has pressed? Allowing in all this for humane infirmities; for you may not
think we cease to be men, when we come to be Ministers. Lastly what else the
doctrine which they did and do still minister, but such as Christ and his
Apostles preached? 'And are we yet Antichristian? Whence, or why is it? Do you
tell us we were ordained by Bishops (at least several of us) and these are
antichristian? But Sirs, if you can content your selves with so littlecharity,
I must, and do count it my duty to labor for more honesty, than to brand those
holy and learned men with being Antichristian, who first brought us from under
the yoke of Antichrist, and burned in flames of Marty^dom, by his cruelty, for
the cause of Christ. Thus did these zealous Bishops: Cranmer, Farrer, Latimer,
Hooper, Ridley. And I doubt not but many others since would have sealed the
same cause, upon the same call, with their choicest blood, whose works and
writings for piety and against Popery, will speak for them among the living,
when you are sleeping among the dead. Can Satan thus cast out Satan? Mar. 3.23.
or would Antichrist so consume and cast out Antichrist? Well: but should your
prejudice pass; and we suppose with you, our English Bishops to have been all
Antichirstian, yet will you be to seek for proof of your sequel: that all
those are Antichristian too, who were ordained by Bishops: unless you will
happily call your lease or land Antichristian, because this was derived from,
or that drawn up by a Popish Landlord. Ordination of Presbyters was not
annexed to a bishop as such only, for he could not ordain a Presbyter, unless
himself had been ordained a Presbyter. Nor did he ordain any Presbyters singly
by himself, but still with the concurrence of other Presbyters. The premises do
plainly enough evince, That one Presbyter may assist in the Ordination of other
Presbyters: That ordination by Presbyters is Gods Ordinance: That Ministers so
ordained must be acknowledged Gods Officers. If therefore this Bishop, together
with other Presbyters, may warrantably ordain in the capacity of a Presbyter,
and one so ordained by him must be reputed the Officer of Christ; with what
right, or by what rule shall the same man ordained by this Bishop be rejected
for an Officer of Antichrist? If this Bishop loves to have the pre-eminence,
over the other Presbyters in Ordination, and lays hold upon it by a divine
right, (generally they have claimed by an humane only) it is his sin, but does
no way annul or alter the substance of this man's ordination: no more than does
the same Bishops administration of the Lord's Supper, upon the same aims and
affectation, adnull this Supper to any pious soul. We well know, he may lawfully
do this (as likewise that) in the capacity of a Presbyter. Say you yet that our
Ministry in England is Antichristian, because our ordmation came from Rome,
from Antichrist? If so, you may not be offended if I tell you, that this charge
is either utterly fall, or very fallacious. Would you attempt the proof of
England's conversion and Ministry to have come originally from Rome? you may
indeed gratify the Jesuits who have been long striving in this subject, but
with no success: But you should do well first to consult our English Chroniclers
upon this subject, see Fox's Acts and Monumets book 2 beginning, or Speeds
History, or Fullers Ecl. History.
and the just conquest, which some have already got see ^hites way to the
Church, sect. 49.
upon this point: and by that time you will easily resolve, that these were not
from Rome, and if you please to read on, may soon inform your self what stout
champio^s against Rome's apostasy, have been usually found among our English
Ministry. We do and must tell you, that our ordination came from Christ, not
from Rome, not from Antichrist, though it is true it has miserably been
contaminated by Antichrist, as what office or ordinance in the Church has not?
Now that we must part with an ordinance of Christ, because it h^th sometime been
possessed by, and passed to us through the hands of such, as have served and set
up Antichrist, pray show us, who are wholly to seek of such a Scripture. Must
the Jews cast away the golden vessels of Sion, because they had been quafft in,
in the literal [the figure of this mysticall] Babylon? or must they not rather
carry them back, in^o the Temple in Jerusalem, Ezra 5.14, 15.
which was a type of Jesus. Or did they cease to be the vessels of the Temple
(I know they ceased to be vessels in the Temple) while they were carried to
Babylon, or were kept there? Farewell all Churches, constitutions, and
ordinances of Christ; if their coming to us through the bold intrusions and
invasions of Antichrist, may divest us. yea, and farewell the offices of Christ
too, for upon which of these has he not been and still is an usurper? But
blessed be God, all the cunning and commixtures of Antichrist are not able to
vacate one constitution of Jesus Christ. Baptism and the Lord's Supper,
notwithstanding all his usurpations and additions, have been, and still are,
the blessed Ordinances of our Lord and Savior, and shall be till the worlds
end, Mat. 28.19. cum 20. 1 Cor. 11.26. we have his security therefore; and may
thence easily assume the continuance of an office-Ministry, for dispensing
these Ordinances, and consequently of Ordination likewise; see these things
proved before
the Scripture prescribing this as the only course of putting men into office,
Tit. 1.5. etc. and never promising such office-Ministers since the Apostles
days, as shall be without ordination to the Ministry. Come then beloved, suffer
not your selves to be detained with such prejudices, or be drawn aside with
such pretexts from the ordained and office-Ministers of Jesus. But receiv such
in the Lord with all gladness, and hold them in reputation, Phil. 2.29. neither
making nor taking up false reports against them, neither refusing to hear, nor
to honor them; especially remembering what Christ has told you. Hear them, and
you hear him; receive them, and you receive him; despise them, and you despise
him; and if you despise him, you despise him that sent him, Luk 10.16. Mat.
10.40. It Is true, there is little other due to us, than what scurrilous tongues
and pens take liberty to load us with, if we be looked upon as we are in our
selves; sinful men, that may be in this respect the least of Saints, Ephesians. 3.8.
and chiefest of sinners, 1 Timothy 1 15.
as Paul says of himself. But there is a double honor which is due unto us,
if we be looked upon as laborers in the Word and Doctrine, as the messengers
and Ministers of Jesus, 1 Timothy 5.17. Sirs, as little respect as you will for
man's, for our own sake; yet much is due, for the message sake, for the
Ministeries sake, for our Masters sake. In this regard, Paul tells Philemon
that he owes him his very self, Phil. 19. If you enquire of the best of
Ministers as men, Elias, one of the loftiest Prophets is a man of like
passions, Jam. 5.17. Alas! we have the same Devil to assault us, the same
deceitful world to allure us, and the same desparately wicked heart to assist
to them, and betray us. But if you enquire of us as Ministers, we are
fellow-helpers concerning you, 2 Cor. 8.23. overseers of you, Act. 20.28. that
are to rule over you, Heb. 13.7, 17. and are over you in the Lord, 1 These 5.12.
We are fellow-workers unto the kingdom of God, workers together with God, 1
Cor. 6.1. Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, 2 Cor.
5.20. Let me therefore Christians say this unto you, especially of the
Congregations concerned in those, which are solemnly to be set apart to the
office and work of the Ministry this day, as Paul said of Timotheus unto the
Corinthians, with a very little change, 1 Cor. 16.10, 11. If Timotheus, if
these come to you, see that they may be with you without fear, for they work
the work of the Lord, as we also do. Let no man therefore despise them, but
conduct them in and out, in the work of the Lord with peace.

Soli Deo sit gloria, Amen.
FINIS.

