No Papist nor Presbyterian: But the modest Desires and Proposalls OF Some
well-affected and Freeborn People:

Offered to The General Council of the ARMY, for Redress of Grievances,

In order to the late Representative, and Agreement of the People.

Quod tibi non vis, alteri ne feceris. Published for general satisfaction.
1649.

Proposalls from some well-assected freeborn People, for Redress of Grievances.
HAving long and sadly expected the settlement of this Kingdom in a firm and
lasting Peace, freed from all Tyranny and oppression, and that the Freeborn
People of this Land may enjoy such Immunities and Privileges as of right
belong unto us, which we being in some present and apparent hope (by the
goodness of God) to enjoy; and having always professed and owned that
Principle of doing to others as we would be done unto, have thought fit to
propound to those, who are at present empowered and entrusted by us the People,
as our Representatives, some additionall grievances to be inserted into the
Peoples Agreement, and these as well in behalf and out of a fellow-feeling of
others interests, as of our own, being clearly in order to that so often
repeated and promised Liberty of Conscience; which promise we are confident
has caused some interests to acquiesce, which otherwise might in all
probability have assisted or adhered unto our professed enemies, even in the
time of ours and the Armies greatest Exigence; But now since God has been
pleased to subjugate our enemies, and thus far to advance and own this cause,
we hope this success of the sword will not cause any of the chief Officers of
the Army or others to recede from their former principles, or forget their so
often declared Liberty of Conscience without exception; In confidence whereof,
and in order whereunto, we propound as follows.

1. That all penal Statutes against non-conformists in Religion may be
forthwith repealed, and made null, since for the most part all the
well-affected and conscientious men of this Kingdom are as well concerned
therein, and liable thereunto, as the Papists. And that all Justices of Peace,
Pursuivants, or other Persecutors, that shall any ways proceed upon any of
those Statutes, may be severely punished.

2. That the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, with the National Covenant,
and all other compulsory Oaths may be effectually declared against, and taken
away.

3. That there may be a free and unmolested exercise of Religion, at least in
private houses, for all sorts of People that profess Christ, none excepted.

4. That no person be forced to pay or contribute toward the maintenance of
the public Ministers, who out of Conscience cannot submit thereunto, but that
they may be provided for in some other unoppressive way.

5. That (as it has been well propounded by others against Lawyers, and the
expense and protraction of Law Suites,) so likewise, that the excessive Fees of
Physicians may be regulated and reduced, whereby the poor for a small and
reasonable Fee may have the benefit of their skill; As in France, a Physicians
common Fee for coming to a patient is a Quard* escu, or 1. sh. 6. d.

6. That the Lands and Goods of all Papists, who cannot be lawfully charged or
convicted by two sufficient witnesses either to have been in Arms against the
Parliament, or to have aided or assisted the King, be immediately discharged of
all sequestrations, and unjust seizures; since that delinquency being cleared,
it will follow, that they suffer merely for Conscience sake, if still
sequestered.

7. That Papists in Arms may be no worse dealt with in their Compositions then
others in Arms; since to lay a Fine or mulct upon their Religion, is no ways
in order to Liberty of Conscience.

8. That no person be disabled from bearing any Office in the Commonwealth,
for any opinion or practice in Religion, though contrary to the public way.

9. That all persons whatsoever now in durance, who cannot be charged with any
crime against the State, or are not imprisoned for debt, but that suffer only
for Conscience sake, may be forthwith discharged.

Some perhaps may here object, that to grant thus much, would be too much in
favor of the Papists; Whereunto we answer, That as we bear them no more love
then what one Christian is bound to show unto another, and their tenets much
less; so we are clear of opinion, that it cannot perfectly be said to be
Liberty of Conscience, nor can it be warranted by Scripture, that they or any
others that wear the Title of Christians, should be excluded; besides, if any
restrictions or penalties shall be continued on the Papists, though for the
present we and other well-affected persons may be secure and unmolested, yet we
know not how soon the same Laws or penalties by any change of times, may be
laid upon us; As has been too evident of late years, when as the penal
Statutes which we know were primarily intended against Papists and their
Adherents, were made a foundation for the Bishops to exercise their Lordly and
tyrannical wills over many peaceable and conscientious men, for nonconformity
in matters of Religion.

Here we may add the consistency of Liberty of Conscience, with many, nay most
Governments, whether Monarchical, Popular, or mixed, As in France, Holland,
Germany, Switzerland, etc. where diversity of Faith exiles no confidence, but
persons of all Religions are indifferently employed and found faithful in
Offices and places of greatest trust.

Again if there be such penalties and restrictions put upon men's Consciences,
they cannot be termed Freeborne People, and English Natives, but rather aliens,
outlawes or men barred of all propriety of persons and goods, and without the
protection of the Laws, which are every man's birthright; and what is the case
of others to day, may be ours tomorrow, according to the ebb or flow of fortune.

Here perhaps some others will object and say, that though all other Religions
ought to be tolerated, yet Papists ought not, because they are Idolaters;
whereto if you will take the answer, which we have heard some of them deliver
(for we think it just to hear all parties, and hold it a work of Charity to
convert any, by arguments from the Written Word) their answer is this, that
they give not Pictures or such representations (as they call them) any
Sovereign honor, which is that that properly belongs to God, but an inferior
or relative kind of reverence or honor.

And if we take Papists in our or the common received sense, yet we cannot say
they are such Idolaters, as those mentioned in the old Testament, who
absolutely adored, even with Sovereign honor, the Images of false Gods, which
these Papists (for ought we can learn) do not do, but do adore the Image of
the true God; and therefore cannot properly be called Idolaters, at least in
Scripture sense, but rather superstitious and Popish persons.

But supposing it to be lawful or warranted by the Word of God, to persecute
the Papists or any other sort of people professing Christ, yet we have observed
in these last 7. years of their persecution, (which we confess has been very
severe, and we believe that their persecutors, if they ever get the power, will
be as rigid and unchristian toward us) when many of them have been hanged,
drawn and quartered, others 7. or 8. years imprisoned only for refusing such
oaths as we, or perhaps the persecutors themselves cannot in conscience take,
and many of their Estates sequestered only for nonconformity in matters of
Religion, yet we do not see that this persecution has any thing at all abated
or lessened the number of them, but that they are rather increased by
suffering; so that whether we respect our own principle, of doing to others as
we would be done unto, or be steered by reasons of Religion or of common
policy, we humbly offer and think fit, that no Agreement of the People be
concluded (or offered to public test) by any Representative, but that as a
principal and material part which belongs to God, Liberty of Conscience to all
that profess Christ without exception may be inserted, and the foresaid
grievances redressed; so shall we with all true and Freeborn English men
join hands and hearts against all Enemies to Peace and Godliness.

FINIS.

