Beams Of Former Light, Discovering how Evil it is TO IMPOSE Doubtful and
Disputable Forms or Practices, upon Ministers: ESPECIALLY Under the Penalty of
Ejection for Nonconformity unto the same.

AS ALSO Something about CATECHIZING.

LONDON, Printed by R.I. for Adoniram Byfield, at the three Bibles in Cornhill,
next door to Popes-head-Alley. 1660.

The PREFACE.
Catechizing, which is a plain laying down the Principles of the Oracles of
God, or of the Doctrine of Christ, and is a part of Preaching, (as says the
late Reverend Assembly)

It is a part or branch of that great Ordinance, by which Faith is wrought, and
the Spirit received, and our Souls saved. It is such a kind of instructing or
preaching, so useful, and of such importance, as it cannot be omitted (if we
desire to edify our people) with more security, than a foundation by him that
intends an edifice or building. The Apostle professes himself at a stand, and
that he could not go on with his people, to build them up some stories higher
in the Faith, and Mysteries of Christ our High Priest; because there had been
such a woeful slowness in learning the fundamentals, Heb. 5.
Heb. 5. It is in the same place made as necessary to our Infancy in Religion
(be we old or young) as Milk is to children; If when Infants we begin their
nourishment with strong meat, we shall either starve them, or radicate such
distempers, as a wearyish sickly frame is likely to be the condition of those
persons all their days.

I am persuaded, the woeful distempers of Professors, broken out in these latter
days, to such a monstrousness, and the strange totterings and Apostasy amongst
us from the sound Truths of the Gospel, has been hence, even the neglect of
holding persons in their first institution to plain Fundamental Truths; such,
Heb. 5.12
(says Paul) have NEED of Milk, and not of strong meat.

Catechizing is a branch of Preaching, as was said; Two things there are in it
peculiar, which eminently commend this course.

1 The Subject Matter; It is conversant about such Truths, as being most
necessary to Salvation, are so to our hand laid down in Scripture, as Milk is
in nature, which taken in from the breast, and with least Cookery and dressing,
is most wholesome; It is our first food, and with such truths our instruction
must of necessity begin. The Church of God, in the days of Adam, Enoch, Noah,
etc. its first infancy, had little other knowledge but of such plain truths;
Afterward a further accession of light was brought them by Moses and the
Prophets. Yet then, as David tells us, The Ignorant must have of these easy
truths, for entrance and initiation; Psalm. 119.130.
The entrance of thy Word gives light to the simple. There was an Infancy also
of the Church after Christ; the Apostle in that age of it did for the most part
teach the people such fundamentals only, the sum whereof was, as Act. 20.21.
Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; and in so doing
he tells them, he kept back nothing that was profitable to them; though he
had higher wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.6
which he spoke among them that were perfect, and more knowing. As a wise
Master Builder, he laid the foundation; this he did at his first coming to
them, afterward by his Epistles, he builds them up further, leaving the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ; let us (says he) go on to perfection,
and this will we do if God permit, Heb. 6.1.13.

2 The Manner, which is so to instruct, as to require a personal account of
what is understood and remembered by them that are taught, whereas in preaching
there is liberty for the most part, left to the hearer, whether he will heed
or not: but this kind of Instruction is ordinarily so managed, as to leave some
kind of greater necessity in the hearer to attend and observe what is said
unto him, each person for himself.

It is incredible how little, poor Ignorant souls, attend the doctrinal part of
a Sermon: when in the Application their Morals are dealt with, their Adultery,
Drunkenness, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, and the like gross sins; possibly
there is some little attention, at least as they are the sins of others, which
corrupt nature is pleased as well to hear, as to speak of.

A discourse of Navigation, to a company of men, whose understanding and
profession is to till the Earth, will be little heeded, or in the least able
to draw their minds from what their present thoughts are set upon: But if there
be an acquaintance with the lowest Elements of a Profession, we will of our
selves with delight attend to the opening of the higher Secrets and Mysteries
thereof. There is a necessity therefore in a more familiar way to endeavor
that each man's soul in particular under our charge be brought into
acquaintance with the Elements and first Principles of Religion, otherwise your
most constant and frequent hearers will sit at Sermons as those, Ezekiel. 33.31.
Ezekiel. 33. they sit before thee as my people, etc. Or if they do attend; for
want of such praecognita or preparative light, they profit little, by much and
frequent hearing; They may grow up in an overlie and ungrounded knowledge, be
ever learning, 2 Timothy 37
yet never be able to come to such solid knowledge of the Truth, as will
preserve their souls from the lusts that are within, or seducers without.

Now, by how much the more excellent and necessary any Ordinance is found to
be, by so much the more watchful and industrious, Satan and his instruments
have always been to clog it with some Ceremony or additional of their own,
that they may be swallowed together, as, the Apocripha with the Bible, which if
it had gone forth into the world, by it self, or with some other book, it would
never have gained such reverence, or so sacred an esteem generally with men; so
kneeling was added to the Lords Supper, the Cross to Baptism, a Surplesse to
our public worship, a stinted and limited form of words to our prayers; and
the like attempted in this CASE. If any man hereupon scrupling these Forms and
Ceremonies, withdraw from those excellent Ordinances, though upon that account
only, as many in all ages have done: yet shall they suffer under the reproach
of despising Sacraments, and the unquestionable duties of a Christian.

The Lord having now (by very strange turnings of providence) called in to
place those Honorable Knights and Burgesses, the great Reformers in matters of
Religion, who have by their care and vigilance, done more herein, than ever was
by any Parliament since Popery has been rejected, The Wonderful Counselor,
we hope in mercy will still guide them, and all Parliaments hereafter by their
example, to carry on this work of Reformation with like moderation, as has
been hitherto the progess of it.

It will prove a great burden, and become an endless strife and contention in
the Churches of Christ, If Magistrates or Synods shall impose with heavy
penalties, every such practice and observance as possibly they may conceive to
be pious and useful for the better or more solemn performance of the service
and worship of God. That Synod in the year, 1640. which was rigid and imposing
enough, exercises a remarkable moderation in their seventh Canon. A practice
they endeavor there, to bring into the Church; which they profess to be pious
in it self, profitable unto us, and edifying unto others, yet notwithstanding
enjoin it not, much less under any penalty; but, think it very meet and
behoveful, and heartily commend it to all good and well-affected people,
members of this Church, it being an ancient and laudable custom. And with this
imitable moderation and tenderness conclude the Canon in these words. And in
the practice or omission of this right, we desire that the Rule of Charity
prescribed by the Apostle, may be observed, which is, That they which use this
Rite, despise not them that use it not, and they that use it not, condemn not
them that use it.

Such a Christian charity and tenderness in Magistrates and Synods in respect
to Rites and Observances, or matters of like nature, not evidently necessary,
to the worship and service of God: is all this little Treatise humbly pleads
for.

And truly it may seem very reasonable, considering how plain and punctual the
Scripture is in the practical Resolution of such Cases, in Romans 14. and in 1
Corinthians 8, etc. And with what woeful distractions and disturbances the Lord
has chastized us, for want of a more strict observance thereof. And doubtless
all matters of the same nature in the worship and service of God, may safely
be ordered by the same Scriptures, and the Rule in this and the like cases, is
so perfect, plain and full, as we may say of it, as Christ of his direction
about Asseverations, Mat. 5.37. Let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay;
for whatsoever is more than these comes of evil; And therefore if such become
more severe than the Lord has required, it will be their evil, our misery only
Our Church Governors questionless might have brought in one Rite or Ceremony,
with the same liberty to men's consciences, that they have done another. The
Cross and Surplice, etc. with the same liberty, as bowing to the East, or
Altar. Other officiatings, with no more strictness of stinted words, The Priest
shall say these words, or such like. Rub. for Churching.
than the Churching of Women, etc. they might with security have so done, in
respect of any thing that the Lord requires more of them, which if they had
observed from the beginning of Reformation, how had the Lord this day been
worshipped by us in the beauty of holiness throughout the Nation!

Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings; be instructed, ye
Judges of the Earth.

Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.

Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath
is kindled but a little, Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.

ERRATA.
PAge 17. line 7. read impositions, l. 23. r. quacunque, p. 34. l. 17. r.
methodical, p. 39. l. 17. r. say, p. 58. l. 12. r. indicantur, p. 80. l. 19. r.
learner, p. 95. l. 24. r. Canons of 1571, p. 98. l. 13. r. liberty, p. 110. l.
12. r. have, p. 102. l. 1. r. Book, p. 108. l. 10. r. liturgy. p. 117. l. 4. r.
having some other, l. 12. r. of his duty, p. 118. l. 17. r. whom, p. 121. l.
18. r. rigid, p. 122. l. ^^. r. Pretour, p. 133. l. 20. r. yet would, p. 142.
l. 23. r. Armach, p. 148. l. 19. r. unto. It, p. 152. l: 6. r. fear for this,
p. 154. l. 20. r. appear) p. 158. l. 12. r. left their.

Some beams of Light, broke forth in a former age, and now of use for the
resolving a Case of Conscience of present importance.
CHAP. I The Case, with an Explication of some terms, and the state of the
Question.
Case.

WHether it be well to impose upon Ministers, or public Preachers some one
Catechism to be held to, for matter and words as a sacred help, and more
effectual means for propagating the Gospel, or the like spiritual use or end.

For the further explanation and stating this case.

. 1.
The Magistrate, whether christian or Heathen (for in each the same power,
though not the same light to guide it) is Custos utriusque tabulae) Yet with
this difference, in second Table duties, he has liberty to create or make
Laws de novo, such as were never Laws or in being before he created them, and
we are bound by the Law of God to be subject to such Laws even to every
humane creation (...) for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.13. But not so in the duties
of the first Table, all Laws necessary for the managing of the worship of God
and his spiritual Kingdom are from himself, who only knows himself, and what
will be for his honor, and the edification of his people, upon this account
the Lord frequently in the Scripture gives charge to Princes, as well as
others, Deuteronomy. 4.2
not to add too, nor take from his Law, or to do the thing that seems good
in their own eyes, because though a Christian, yet he cannot so well by his
wisdom judge in the matters of Piety what is suitable to God, as a Heathen can
judge in matters of Civility what is suitable to man.

He may notwithstanding exercise his authority to the glory of God, even in
the matters of worship in these Cases,

1 Its granted generally, whatsoever is clearly and evidently set forth in the
word, as the way in which the Lord will be served and worshipped, he is not
only to submit to it himself as a Christian, but to use all lawful means that
others may do the like, as he is a Magistrate, whatsoever talent we have
received, must be improved to the glory of him that gave it.

2 Seeing the Assemblies for the worship of God have many things common, being
of the same nature in the general, and as a Coetus hominum, with other Civil
assemblies, whatsoever is found expedient; comely, and useful in these, ought
carefully to be furthered and looked unto, that the like be observed in these
more sacred meetings. Such Circumstances or Laws established by the Magistrate
about them, do not immediately reach the worship it self, but the worshippers:
yet so necessary, as without such provision the service cannot so conveniently
or edifyingly be performed; if time and place be not designed, if many speak
at the same time, if in a great Congregation no eminent place for him that
preaches, the Sermon will not be so edifying; And yet there is nothing in
such Law or provision, more holy or sacred than there is any thing evil or
sinful, in the preservation or keeping up the being of Devils or wicked men;
The Magistrate may make Laws for the preservation of the lives of murderers,
and the worst of men, as men and rational Creatures, and yet not by it do any
Act, or make any Law that is sinful or evil, and so it is with the Laws and
Provisions for the being or convenient being of the service and worship of God;
though it be sacred and spiritual, yet such Laws are not. The schoolmen say of
Letters, Literae significantes sacras sententias, non significant eas in
quantum sacra sunt, sed in quantum sunt res, ergo literae non sunt sacrae.

2. To impose, etc.
The Magistrate may not only permit, but commend and advise a practice,
without any Coercisive impression of authority; such was the decree of Darius,
Dan. 6.25. I make a decree that in every dominion of my Kingdom, men tremble
and fear before the God of Daniel, for he is the living God, and steadfast for
ever, etc. he works signs and Wonders, etc. where, the reason of the thing,
rather than the authority of him that commands, is represented, so in that of
Paul, Philem. 8. Though I might enjoin thee that which is convenient, yet I
rather beseech thee. And this is safe for the Magistrate, especially where the
reason of the practice is not so evident as to be of general acceptance by
the godly of present or former ages, as Infant Baptism, necessity of
ordination to all that preach in public, this or that external form of Church
Government, and the like.

2 He may protect those that conform to such advise, and impose penalties
(which a private Christian cannot) on any that shall molest, disturb, or
discourage those that shall so do, of this nature was that injunction, in
respect to those that were disturbed in reading the Bible in the English, or
the paraphrases of Erasmus, upon the Gospels, Injunct. of Q^ ^^^^.
which was to be had in every Church.

3 A penalty or curse being not essential to a Law, The Magistrate may command
or enjoin, and yet add no penalty or forfeiture. In such cases, a perpetual
constant practice is not ordinarily expected, peaceable omission upon grounds
of reason, where no contempt or despising of authority, is accepted, or at
least connived at, and so much is intimated in the very forming of a Law, as
about Ceremonies in the injunctions of Q. Elizabeth, no man ought obstinately,
no maliciously to break and violate the laudable Ceremonies of the Church, C^n.
22
commanded by public authority to be observed.

4. The Case is about a command with a penalty, which is the most
Magistratical, there is more of power and authority, Premiare potest ad quem
libet pertinere, sed punire non pertinet nisi administrum legis. Aq. 1^. ad q.
92. art. 2
in a penalty, than in a rewards for to punish is peculiar to Magistracy, to
reward is in the power of any man that has wherewith. A penalty imposed with
greatest severity, those that obey not though out of tenderness of conscience,
and ever so peaceable, and free from contempt in their forbearance, and
conformable in other matters, their doom is the same, with the obstinate.

The Common people, especially in their youth and natural condition are more
brutish and indisposed to instruction, such despise knowledge: The Care of a
Christian Magistrate conduces more to the eternal welfare of their souls, than
any care they have of themselves; they heed more the Commands and impositions
of men than of God, and are more reduced to the use of the means from the
penalty of a law than from the threatenings of Hell. They come under the
Magistrates hand, and care, by birth and providence, But Ministers and Public
Preachers by his own Election, and satisfaction received of their sufficiency
and fitness, and are not admitted to any place of public instructing either
of young or old, but as they are found upon examination to be both able and
willing, To commend or advise, will effect as much with such persons as to
command, yea, enjoin cum minis and suppliciis, will do with those others.

. 3. Some one Catechism, etc.
TO Catechize in the sense of our Case, is to take some plain discourse about
the Principles of Religion, formed in method of Questions and Answers, by which
the Minister is taught to ask his people questions, and taught also how to
teach them to give him answers to those questions, a provision more suitable to
a former age, when the blind did lead the blind, of whom that Scripture was
verified, Heb. 5.12. for after the Bishops had made a man a Minister, he was
enjoined to learn Nowels Catechism, and to get some Scripture by heart, and
give an account to the Archdeacon, or his Official at every Visitation.

Some one.
The Shorter Catechism agreed upon by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster,
and presented to the Honorable Houses of Parliament then sitting, and by them
ordered to be printed and published, but no man enjoined to use it, or
punishable if he made use of any other to instruct his people in. This little
Book for the comprehensiveness of it, as also exactness of order and
expression, has (as it deserves) a great esteem with many Learned men,
notwithstanding to be the one and only Book, for all capacities that are to be
instructed in Principles, throughout the Nation, is a perfection not to be
expected from any Common gift, nor is this for such purpose the fittest in its
kind, as we shall endeavor to show in this Dispute.

. 4. To be held to for matter and words.
Prayer and Instruction, are duties the Minister is specially to attend and
give himself to, and to conceive and form his work both for matter and words,
according as he has received gifts from the Lord Jesus Christ.

It is true, there has been a Custom even in the reformed Churches, to
compose by the more learned and prudent, your Agenda, or Church Dispensatories,
that is, some Generals in matter and method by way of a Directory, for such as
are less able, as that of the Assembly, for Prayer and Instruction, leaving
the Minister to his liberty, to make use of the whole, or any part of it, or
any thing to like purpose, as he shall find expedient, as it is there
expressed. So our Brethren the N. Conformists at Franckford, after they had
gathered a Church out of the Church there, Their Rubric thus, Gratiarum in
hanc aut aliam consimil^m formam pro ministri ipsius arbitratu annectit, p. 50
Minister precatione eadem hac qua pracedit vel aliae quacunque propria pro
instinctu animi sui uti licebit. p. 37.
and had settled at Geneva, composed a Directory, which they term, Forma public
orandi, etc. Anno 1556. where the like liberty, as in our Directory, is left to
the Ministers. But an imposition of matter and words is to do all, not to
direct only, but to do the thing, and leave no more to the Minister to do
than any Child in the Parish that can read English can do as well as he. And
in this part of his Ministry he is in the same form with those, who were
rendered odious in darker times by public Authority, The Bishop shall suffer no
man to be occupied in the Ministration of the Church, which calls himself by
the idle name of a Reader, in the Canons of 1571.

. 5. As a sacred and more effectual means.
In the Service and Worship of God, Actions or Methods are for the nature of
them according to what is there stated, etc. if it be to effect immediately a
Holy or Spiritual end, or to prevent the like evil (as in this case) it is
sacred and spiritual; and whatsoever thing or action of this nature enjoined by
the Civil Magistrate, falls under the first Head (as before) and must have
clear and evident Scripture-warrant; nothing makes a thing holy and sacred but
the Word, and nothing will serve (in it self) to any spiritual end but what God
appoints. Principles and Fundamentals may be the matter of a Sermon as well as
of a Catechism, the difference is only in the method and way; this method and
way is termed not only an ancient and good, but a pious or holy way of
instructing, and designed as a special means for the propagating the Gospel,
and to prevent the growth of Ignorance, Atheism, and Heresy; and all this as
distinct from preaching: So it is not for the truths, or the matter sake only,
for that may be the same in plain preaching, but in the method and way; for
although the people be instructed in the same Principles and Fundamentals, by
way of preaching according to the Directory, yet if he do not instruct in this
method, and way, and words, he shall be put by his Ministry and maintenance;
this being the nature of the imposition, and the methods, or matters some of
our Brethren would have imposed, it cannot be judged of as any other thing but
the imposition of a sacred means of help to the Service and Worship of God; the
Case thus stated and explained, the Negative is asserted, namely, the
unlawfulness of such impositions, and how great an evil it is to bring us back
again under stinted forms in any kind; being so happily delivered from them,
and from those that kept these burdens upon us. And for confirmation hereof,
let the following reasonings without prejudice be considered of.

CHAP. II. The first Argument. Rites and Forms that have a stated use, and to
spiritual ends in the worship of God, ought to have Scripture warrant for their
establishment.
1.
ALl Methods and forms prescribed to be received as a matter of Piety, and for
spiritual and special ends and advantages in the service of God, ought to have
express direction and warrant out of the Word of God. This is one of the great
truths our brethren the Non Conformists asserted in their age against humane
oppositions, and sealed it by their sore and great sufferings. Which they have
argued against, from these Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 16.21. Col. 2.20.23. Exodus 20.4.
Esaias 1.12. Matthew. 13.19. Hebrew 3.4, 5, 6. Matthew. 28.20. And by other
Scriptures also, they prove that, not only what is done against or contrary to
the word, but also what is done besides it, Deuteronomy 4.2. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Prove.
30.6. Levit. 10.1. 2 Samuel 7.7. Jer. 7.31. is unwarrantable.

That saying of Augustine is frequently urged by them, sive de Christo, sive de
Ecclesia, sive de quacumque alia re, non dico si nos, sed si Angelus de coelo
vobis anuntiaverit preter quam quod in Scripturis accepistis anathema sit. Dr.
Reynolds (a learned N. Conformist) avouching these words, makes this
observation, he says not contra quam, sed preter quam, so that Augustine
thinks not only things which are contrary to the Word to be unlawful, but
even those things also which are besides the word. Doctor Reynolds confer. with
Heart. cap. 2.

And in particular against the imposing,

1 A form, method, or an external garb or way of worship to be held
constantly, and not appointed in the Word, We are not to think says Mr.
Cartwright, Against Whitg. lib. 1. p. 26
that in the word there is only the substance of Religion, etc. and those
things left out which should pertain to the form and fashion of it. Those says
Mr. Bradshaw, that have power to make peculiar forms of Religion and worship,
have power to invent a Religion and worship of their own, and Page 29. and 30.
True worship both for matter and manner ought to be according to the prescript
rule of Gods word only: Religio est vertus voluntatis ergo ut prolatio
exterior sit vera, debet procedere ex intensione, pertinente ad religionem.
Neither has any mortal man authority to frame according to his own conceit,
any form or fashion of Gods service and worship; for the manner of worship also
must be holy, and not the matter only, and no man has power to make any thing
holy, that God allows not by his word and Spirit. In the discipline of
Scotland as it was set forth. Anno. 1560. As the Magistrate ought not to
preach, (catechizing is a part So termed by the assembly in their advice for
Chur. Government. English po. Cerem. page 139. out of Daneus.
of preaching) so he ought not to prescribe any rule how it should be done,
but command the Ministers to observe the rule commanded in the word. And a
learned Scotchman, in the worship of God whether internal or external, he (the
Magistrate) ought to move nothing, prescribe nothing, except that which is
expressly delivered in Gods written word. Nulla justa disponendi servos Dei
(says Jun. in Lev. 9) ad cultum Dei ratio ab hominibus in vestigari potest
nisi quam Deus prescripserit.

2.
2 A stated service of God, or a help or means for the making of such service
or any part of it more effectual or acceptable.

Medul. lib. 2. cap. 4
Res illae says Doctor Ames, quae institutione singulari usibus religionis
destinantur tanquam religionis instrumenta, recte etiam propter statum aut
relationem fixam quam habent vocantur religiosae. Its the same with that
another says, what is done by a Servant of God in the solemn service and
worship of God by precise cannon of the Church (or law of the Commonwealth) is
a part of divine worship. Brad. 12. Arg. arg. 3. and of worsh. p. 47.

Reasons from Scotland.
Thus against our set form of prayer they argued, if there were never an ill
word or sentence in all the prayers (if it were framed all out of Scripture
phrases and sentences says an another) yet to use it as a set service, etc.
though the words be good, yet the use is naught. Adm. 2. par. p. 55. Fresh.
Suit p. 211.
If Christ says Dr. Ames be our authentic Teacher in all good that we
learn about Religion, who taught our Prelates such good manners as to put
fescues of their own making into his hand, and so appoint him after what
manner, and by what means he shall teach us? And brings this saying of Peter
Martyr, For as much as God is most wise, he needs not our devise for
instruments to stir up faith in us, which also no tradesman in his kind would
endure, but would choose to himself at his own pleasure what he should think
most fit.

Our brethren were offended at the Leiturgy upon this account, because in the
Act by which it is established, you have this reason of the imposition, namely
to make the same prayer and fashion of service more earnest and fit to stir
Christian people to the true honor of Almighty God, his Majesty has ordered
the book of Common Prayer to be perused and made fully perfect. Stat. 5. Ed. 6.


3.
3 If with opinion of holiness or necessity in the reasons given against
subscription, by the Ministers of Lincoln. Abrid. pa. 38.
When opinion of necessity or holiness is known to be annexed, either by such
as impose or use them, in this case, it is a part of that confession which
every Christian is bound to make of his religion, to reject them.

The Church at Geneva to their brethren in England write thus, humana decreta
atque inventa omnia quantumvis illustrem secum splendorem persuasionemque
apportent, si vel verbum Dei cursum impediant vel necessitatem inferant absque
omni dubitatione refringi rescindique debent.

It is then sacred, when appropriated to some holy end or use (as was said
before) The holy God only, and by his holy Word sanctifies and separates what
he is pleased to accept from us as holy in all our approaches before him.
Things appropriated to religious or spiritual persons, Functions or Actions,
either are or ought to be religious and spiritual. And therefore either are, or
ought to be instituted immediately by God, who alone is the Author and
Institutor of all religious and spiritual actions and things, whether internal
or external, Doctor Ames in his Pur. Anglic. cap. 1.6. What is holy must be
from God, A solo Deo diximus, quia ejus solius est, and suum cultum, and res
cultui, and rebus Ceremonias, and omnibus ipsas Circumstantias sacrare. Anon.
de adiaph. p. 11.

And then in our esteem necessary. 1 When urged in the use, to be constant,
and without intermission, such an imposition either finds things, or makes the
things imposed to be so, Ritibus ne accedat perpetua observatio, Part 1. p. 88.
Parker out of Ursinus. 2 When the use (of such things imposed) is urged more,
or as much as the observation of the Laws and Ordinances of God, Link. Abridg.
p. 39. If those that are willing to do all necessary services tending to the
Salvation of man, but cannot conform, must therefore be turned out of Christ's
service, Brad. 12. Arg. at. 11
such Conformity is reputed necessary to Salvation. When so pressed (says
Master Parker) that the most respected Preachers shall be utterly cast away,
(themselves and theirs) etc. How can it be but we must conceive that the men
who bring this wrack, do hold them necessary in their judgment, Mr. Par. of
the Cross, p. 2. cap. 2.. 19. 3 We esteem that necessary that we judge tends
to edification, for edification is necessary, and all things tending thereto,
necessitate precepti, says another.

. 4.
All or most of these will be found the blame of this imposition, as,

1 It is by this appointment a part of the set Service of God to be performed
every Lords Day in the Public Congregation; this Book to be instituted (and
ordained as it were by the laying on of the hands of Authority) and set apart
from other Books of this kind, to instruct and reveal to our people the whole
Truth of God necessary to Salvation; it is to be a kind of Curate to officiate
with us, and as the mouth of God to our people. A set Form of Prayer, and thus
established, to be held to by all Ministers, may with more reason be pleaded
for. The Minister in the duty of Prayer is the mouth of the people to God, in
preaching or instructing as the mouth of God to the people; it is now more
congruous in reason, that the people, or their Representatives prescribe in
what words he shall be a mouth for them to God, then that he by them should
be taught (and words put into his mouth) when he comes as an Ambassador, and
from God, or in Christ's stead to teach them. The Bishops themselves were
ashamed of their State Homilies, and State Catechismes, and quietly permitted
the laying them aside by godly Ministers, when their State Prayers were kept up
in greatest severity.

2 It is likewise imposed as a means or help in the Service of the Lord, it is
clear in those expressions, a better way for the understanding of the
Principles, and expressly designed for the propagation of the Gospel, and to
prevent the growth of Ignorance and Atheism. It is put as a fescue in the
Ministers hand, and must be made use of by all, without respect to what they
want, or have of sufficiency for the work of the Ministry, ^x necessitate
faciendi non facientis.
which evidently speaks it a help to the Worship, and not to the persons only:
whosoever he be that engages in teaching, and instructing work, must make use
of this help, or else he must hold his peace and depart; surely such a maine
beam of the House, such a piece of Architecture without which it cannot stand
if it be set up, would not have been omitted, or left out by our wise
Master Builder. 3. As sacred and necessary; the former express; it is termed,
not only an ancient and good; but also a pious or holy way of instructing.
Perpetua observatio.
And for the necessity it is imposed as a Rite every Lords Day to be
performed, as Prayer, or Preaching, or reading the Scriptures, not left to the
discretion of the Minister at any time, or upon any occasion to be omitted.
With such a penalty also, as if it were equally necessary as any, nay as all
other Ministerial duties put together. For let the Minister be ever so well
qualified, and diligent, and faithful in all Ministerial Services appointed by
Jesus Christ, in relation to his Flock, if ever so peaceable and desirous to
submit to Superiors in all lawful Commands, yet if he scruple obedience in
this, he must be thrown out of his Ministry, his Wife and Children to beggary;
there is no Christian tenderhearted Magistrate would make such an imposition,
if he were not persuaded of it, as a necessary help and furtherance of the
Service of Christ.

And that it was to be imposed as tending to edification, and that not only
for the matter, but the very form and way, is evident, not only in the title,
but throughout the Act.

CHAP. III. What directions there are in the Scripture for the instructing of
others, in respect both of matter, method, means, etc.
NOw that there is no such peculiar way or means (as is mentioned in the Case)
for the instructing of the ignorant, either from promise, or precept, or
example, warranted in the Word will appear, if we consider what direction we
have in the Scripture about this part of Ministerial Service and Worship of
God, namely, the instructing our people.

. 1.
1 The matter to be taught, Whatsoever Christ has commanded, Mat. 28.20. the
Word of the Lord, 2 Timothy 4.2. the whole Counsel of God, Act. 20.27, etc.

2 Method or way. Taking some text of Scripture, and so preaching upon it, as
Luke 4.17.21. or expounding the Scripture all along as we read it, Neh. 8.8. or
occasionally discoursing as Providence offers matter, Joh. 15.1. Acts 10.3,
4. and 13.16, 17. or by Parables, as in the Gospels; or by reasoning and
disputing, as Acts 9.29. Mar. 9.34. Acts 17.17. or by resolving Cases or
Questions proposed by our Children, and such as are desirous to learn, 1 Cor.
10.25. Exo. 12.26, 27. Josh. 4.6. Matthew. 19.16, 17.

3 The end, to give knowledge of Salvation, to work conversion to save our
selves, and those that hear us, Jer. 23.23. Acts 26.18. 1 Timothy 4.16.

4 For the Gesture and Posture, standing, or sitting, we have examples of
both, Nehemiah 8.4. Matthew. 23.2. higher than the rest of the people in a
Pulpit, Nehem. 8.4, 5. a chair, or seat, Matthew 23.2.

. 2.
But that we may come yet nearer to our present Case, we have direction also
in the Word about the

5 Manner. Our instructions ought to be,

1 Plain, and to the lowest capacity, Neh. 8.8. 1 Cor. 14.

2 With authority and command, Tit. 2.15. 1 Timothy 4.11. In demonstration of the
Spirit, and not with the enticing words of man's wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.4.

3 With dexterity and skilfulness, 2 Timothy 2.15. which stands much in dividing
the word, and respective application to each soul.

There is a variety in the capacity and frame of spirit found in those under
our charge, as simple ones, Babes, weak in faith; others more knowing,
established, of full age, perfect; there are unruly and scandalous, erroneous,
and gainsayers, Heretics, and Apostates, Hypocrites, and Dissemblers; there
are also such who are found in the faith, sincere, and upright spirits without
guile, etc. so also certain sorts of truth, Principles, Fundamentals, milk,
strong meat, and certain methods and ways of applying our selves and truths
to such persons respectively; there are Doctrines, Reproofs, Corrections,
Consolations, Rebukes, Disputings, etc.

4 With quick and suitable affections, some save with fear, others with
boldness and courage, others to be treated with in tenderness, compassion,
love, meekness, etc.

It is a work requires more than ordinary abilities and watchfulness, to
distinguish the Spiritual state of souls in their great variety, to collect and
gather fit and suitable matter, dividing and cutting out truths to each state,
and to get hearts and affections suitable. In the last place, therefore let it
be considered, the

3.
6 Means, or the helps and provision Christ has made for his Ministers, and
what he requires of them that they may be sufficiently furnished to this great
work.

1 The Bible, a book put into our hands by the Lord himself, that has in it up
and down all materials and furniture necessary to this great work, 1 Timothy 3.6.
holding fast the faithful word that he may be able by sound Doctrine both to
exhort and convince the gainsayers, and 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scriptures are given
-- 17. that the man of God (the Minister) may be perfect, thoroughly furnished
to all good (Ministerial) works.

2 Gifts given by Christ upon his ascension to this end, Ephesians. 4.10.12.
knowledge and utterance not only able but apt to teach, having a stock or
treasure, they have a gift also to communicate it. Nature gives Nipples as
well as milk to the breasts. And none to be taken into this blessed work
(according to Christ's Directory) but such as are so qualified.

3 Industry and diligence, search the Scriptures, attend to reading, a giving
our selves wholly to the work. Truths are delivered in the Scriptures, not in
such a sorted or methodial way, that you may find the concernments of each
Doctrine or each man's condition, all together in one place, but are let fall
here and there in an occasional way: as in an Epistle or story, or Prophecy, or
song, etc. and not only in gathering together fit and suitable matter, but it
must be put into a method and order. The Preacher Eccl: 12.9. did not only
seek out but set in order many Proverbs, as the Priests, Lev. 24.4. were to
order their lamps. Peter did not only search out matter, but its said Act.
11.4. he expounded it in order unto them, Luke 1.3
It must be a part of our industry also to improve our gift of utterance by
searching after fit and significant expressions, that the Trumpet may give a
certain sound, that is intelligent and distinct, sweet and pleasant.

3 The blessed spirit of God; that shows us the things of Christ and of God,
and has its fruit in words or utterance, as well as in knowledge and matter as
in that antithesis, 1 Cor. 2.4
my speech was not -- but in, etc.

4 Stirring affections, (as before) a great help to utterance and elocution,
where clearness of knowledge, a gift of expression in the general, matter
chosen out and sorted to such and such persons, and then affections suitable,
there will be a tongue as the pen of a ready writer: there will be such a
stirring emphasis even in the very words, Interior affectus quasi naturali
impetu movet linguam.
and so much of the similitude and likeness of our affectionate hearts; as it is
impossible in any form of words composed by another, or (it may be) by our
selves at another time, or in a cold deliberation, to speak in any measure
answerable, or so edifying; who could have taught Paul, so well as his
sanctified passion taught him to express himself, Phil. 3.18.

. 4.
Now for any man to go further, that is, in any of those particulars to be
more particular. When Christ has sufficiently instructed his scribe and taken
off his hand, as being able now to form his own work, for the Magistrate, or a
Synod, to take him into tutorage, to add more safe and particular rules and
Laws for the direction of the Ministers of Christ in their Ministerial
employment, what is this but to do work after the King, Eccles. 2.12. we
impose these Laws, upon Ministers, such as are approved both for their grace
and gifts, for their Doctrine and Life, as persons fit and able for this work.

After Christ has given his Ministers a Book (as before) the Scriptures, and
given it to this end that they may be perfect, 1 Timothy 3.16, 17.
and thoroughly furnished to all employments; yet others are not satisfied, he
must have another Book, a Prayer book, and another Book, an instructing or
preaching Book, a Catechism book; and to the same end, that he may be better
furnished for his work, that by this means it may be done more perfectly, more
to edification, as the Common Prayer Book formerly. There is a precise
appointment with what words and sentences Gods Name shall be called upon, says
Mr. Hooker, that the endless and senseless effusions of indigested Prayers may
not be, Pol. p. 239. and another of them, The end of these forms is to be a
means to banish utterly out of Christ's Church all extemporal invention of
unsound prayer, Covel against Burgis.
p. 70, 71. So for the other part of our Ministerial work, we have been
furnished with a Homily Book, and now a Catechism Book, which some would have
imposed upon Ministers, utterly to banish out of Christ's Church all other
Catechismes, as also a more particular help and means then any Christ has
furnished his Ministers with, for the better understanding of the Principles,
and for the better propagating the Gospel, and preserving men sound in their
knowledge, which is to like ends as was those set forms formerly imposed.

5.
To conclude this Argument, our demand is of those that have so zealously
stickled for such an imposition, and have a mind to bring Ministers to their
Books again, from whose necks this yoke has been (and that by a mighty hand
of God) so lately taken off, I demand, whether any thing in those reasonings of
our suffering Brethren against Apocrypha, Common Prayer-books, and
Homily-books, he of any consequence, from this topic: the bringing of other
books into the solemn Service of God, besides those of Divine Authority?
Neither the Levites (says many of our Brethren together in the Abridgement)
nor Christ, Abrid p. 6.
nor his Apostles did ever read, preach, or interpret any other writing for the
instruction of the Church, but only the Canonical Scripture; Again in the same
place, It is the proper Office of Christ to be the Teacher of his Church, and
therefore no writings may be appointed to be read in the Congregation for
instruction, but only such as have been indicted by his Spirit. Mr. Cartw. in
Cat. makes it a breach of the Second Commandment, and against Doctor Whitg.
about reading of Homilies in the Church he writes thus; Neither the Homilies,
nor the Apocripha are to be read at all in the Church. It is good to consider
the order which God kept with his people in times past, when he commanded that
no Vessel, nor instrument, either Beesome, or Flesh-hook, etc. should come into
the Temple, but those only which were sanctified, and set apart for that use.
And he will have no other Trumpets to call the people together, but those only
which were set apart for that purpose, what should the meaning of this Law be?
The matter of other common Vessels and Trumpets was the same oftentimes which
theirs was; the same form also and Trumpets, able to serve for the uses of
sounding, etc. as well as those of the Temple, and as those which were set
apart, wherefore might not these as well be used in the Temple as others?
forsooth, because the Lord would by these Rudiments teach that he would have
nothing brought into the Church but that which he had appointed, no not
although they seemed in the judgment of men as good; the Homilies, be they
ever so learned and pithy, etc. see Parker on the Cross, 1 part. Doctor
Chadderton on Romans 12. and diverse others to the same purpose.

I demand again, what show of Scripture there is for any such method, or way,
as prescribed by Christ, or Authority left (by him) to any other person, to
prescribe any such Utensile or Instrument. What warrant has any man to carry
on the Directory for instruction, further, and more particularly than Christ
himself has thought fit to do, and thus to establish a Humane form in a
settled, stated, Sabbath-service without Scripture warrant. And whether he may
not as lawfully collect matter, and put it in a set method, and form of words,
and furnish the Minister with a Book, as a help or means for the better
edification of the people in any other, or in all other the works and parts of
the Ministerial Function, as in this, and as lawfully impose such Books to be
used by him and no other, nor any other thing done by him but what is done by
Book. If he may be by such means better enabled for one part of his
Ministry, he may likewise for another; and if for all, why should it not be
rather chosen.

CHAP. IV. Diverse Objections answered, no show of Scripture for it, nor
necessity, nor requisite for uniformity, or obliged to it by our Covenant.
I Shall now faithfully give an account of whatever I have either read or
heard, or imagine can be pleaded as a warrant in this case.

1.
Obj. 1 The notation of the word (...), to teach by voice from (...), and this
from (...) (...) autem sonum sive simplicem sive ex reflexa and repercussione
geminatum significat.
and hence we have our English word Echo, which is as it were an answering
again.

Ans. There is no such distinct meaning in the Scripture use of the word, but
most ordinarily for preaching or instructing by voice, and so interpreted by
our Translators, 1 Cor. 14.19. (...) that by my voice I might teach others,
Gal. 6.6. we do not believe the Ministers maintenance, is to rise from those
that learn Catechismes only, such as are unmarried, and under the age of twenty
one years, yet the same word there, and is translated teaching, and the
Scripture speaking of such to whom this Catechistical way seems to be most
suitable, it expresses their instruction, and teaching by another word, Heb.
5.12. You have need that one teach you the first Principles of the Oracles of
God: the word there is (...) not (...), the word is used also for a story, or
any report by hearsay, Luke 1.4. Acts 21.21, 24.

Obj. 2. Those Scriptures are objected that mention Principles, Fundamentals,
which are reckoned up, Heb. 6.1. and Psalm. 34.11. Come ye children, hearken
unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord. And 2 Timothy 1.13. a pattern
of sound words, in faith and love; and Romans 2.20. the form of the knowledge of
the truth is spoken of.

Ans. In none of these Scriptures any set form for method and words, and if
so, yet not with injunction to be held to only, that principles and lower
truths are to be taught, and to those of a lower capacity in a more familiar
and plain method and way; this is confirmed by those Scriptures, and is a duty
of that evidence from Scripture, that the Civil Magistrate may impose and
compel Ministers thus to instruct, leaving them as Christ has left them, for
choice of matter and words according to the gifts the Lord has furnished them
with for his service.

. 2.
Obj. 3. It is ancient, and received by all Churches in all ages since the
Apostles times?

Ans. If it be meant instructing the ignorant, and younger sort in Principles,
it is not only so, but more ancient, even before the Apostles times, and
confirmed by them, and is or ought to be received and practiced by all
Churches; But method, words, etc. imposed as a necessary Rite, and Order in the
Service of God; this is not ancient, and he that was well skilled in antiquity
will tell you so. Mr. Parker of Symbolizing with Antichrist, part 2. p. 19.
If they speak of Canons inferring necessity, they must know there were no such
Canons in ancient time, Christian Liberty was more tendered in those days.
Again, Anciently (says the same Author) there was in Rites a liberty
permitted, and no necessity imposed, necessity in Rites is jugum papale, never
heard of in the Church till Antichrist began to usurp over the liberty of
Christian men.

Ans. 2. Suppose it had both Antiquity and Universality.

Is this a topic more cogent here then in former disputes? as between
Protestants and Papists, Conformists and Non Conformists; Cassander, Anglica.
page 2.
Mr. Sprint lays his most weight upon this Argument, The refusing of
Conformity, says he, tends to condemn all true Churches, all faithful and
sound Teachers of all times and places since the time of the Apostles of Christ.

The avouching Antiquity, and Universality of acceptance, as equivalent in a
Dispute, to Divine Authority (which is, or ought to be the only rule in this
matter) is very sufficiently refuted by Jewel, Whitakers, Reinolds, Morton, and
the rest of ours against Papists, as also at large disputed between Doctor
Ames, in his reply to Mr. Sprint, and Doctor Burgis his rejoinder, and then Dr.
Ames again in his Fresh suit.

Obj. 4. And for any necessity, or Arguments drawn from thence?

Ans. There is no Ministerial work in which a necessity may not better be
pretended; as

1 In convincing the Gain-sayer, controversal disputes, such difficulty, as for
want of help sometimes men are disputed into error.

2 To pitch upon such Characters and signs, by which Sincerity may be
discerned from Hypocrisy is very difficult, and for want of experience and
skilfulness in such a work, the hearts of those have been made sad whom God
would not have made sad. Ezekiel. 13.
If in such Cases the Magistrate should consult with a Synod, and form
certain ways of reasoning for method and words, and impose upon the Minister
in their Disputes to be held to, and no other; and the like for the imposing
certain forms of signs, and marks, by which Sincerity and Hypocrisy may
safely be distinguished; or any other difficulty that falls in the way of our
Ministry: is much more necessary and allowable.

3 To be able to speak level, and not over or under in determining the
Magistrates power in Ecclesiastical matters, is a difficulty, and to what
extremities do good men in their preaching and printing run in the point; upon
this consideration a Homily is composed, that is, a certain form for matter
and words, Synod 40. Can. 2.
and imposed * upon all Ministers as follows, For the fuller and clearer
instruction and information of all Christian people in their duties in this
particular, we do Ordain and Decree, That every Parson, Vicar, Curate, or
Preacher, upon some Sunday in every quarter of a year, shall treatably, and
audibly read these explanations of the regal Power here inserted. and the words
are set down. In every of these Cases (and forty more might be instanced)
there is more necessity of impositions than in teaching plain Principles; Can
it be imagined Ministers entrusted, without any such books or helps, in these
more difficult points, will need them in the easiest part of his Ministry? Is a
Minister able to feed with strong meat, and not fit to be trusted with Babes
and Lambs?

Obj. 5. It will conduce (say some) much to uniformity, and so to unity and
peace, if the same order in this matter be observed throughout the Nation.

Ans. This is the old Plea, and a means by which the Ceremonies and Common
Prayer Book kept their station so long amongst us. There is an uniformity
arising from the virtue of internal principles, as also from an external mould
or frame, the one is free and natural, the other compelled and forced.
Uniformity from internal Principles is an excellency in Nature, and in Grace
also. That an Acorn, a grain of Corn, a Kernel, a seed, from each a Body, and
in its kind the like; the like leaf, bark, branch, fruit; it is true, not in
smaller things so exact in likeness as what you cast in the same mould, yet
for substance, and in the maine they are the same; all Vines, Cedars, every
Plant, and every Herb in its kind, every Beast, and every Bird in its kind. And
so is it with gracious and holy men, being a holy Seed, and having this Seed
remaining in them, their conversation for the substance is the same, and so
visibly, uniforme, and the same, as the blind World can distinguish them from
other men.

So also in this part of their conversation, their Service of God in his
Ordinances; if the institutions of Christ, and whatsoever he in his Word has
prescribed, as necessary means, and circumstances from more general Rules be
observed, by Ministers that are gifted, industrious, and gracious, you will
have a natural, free, and comely uniformity, and more to the glory of God, then
to have all by external injunctions, cast as it were in an artificial mould;
such a forced Conformity in all Ages has been the occasion of greatest
differences and disturbances; I say, the neglect of Scripture Rules, which
guide and direct an uniformity in matters of substance and greater consequence,
and by Canons and Injunctions erect an uniformity in matters of doubtful
Dispute, and not of much concernment if they were cleared. Those Reverend N.
Conformists that wrote the Admonition spoke very prudently to this; The only
cause why our Church differs from the Churches reformed of the Strangers, or
among our selves, or they among themselves is, because our Church suffers not
it self so to be directed by the course of those Scriptures as another does,
except it be in those things of order, wherein one Parish may many times differ
from another without offense, following the general Rules of Scripture for
order, as in appointing time, place, and the like, 2 Ad. pa. 42. The pretense
of uniformity, and upon that account taking liberty to impose doubtful
Traditions, has been in all Ages an Utensile in the hands of Church
Governors, by which they have exercised the greatest tyranny, and put
themselves in a capacity to bring Ministers under what bondage they please. One
Council Decrees, that all Ministers must live single lives, for uniformity.
Bellarmine disputes to have the Service in the same Language in all the Popes
Dominions for uniformities sake, and what thing, be it ever so absurd but may
be brought into this List. Where Councels or Convocations have a mind to be
rid of those, of more conscientious and uncomplying spirits (tempting them by
this means to that which they will call Schism and separation) they may thus
easily compass their designs.

Ob. 6. We are bound by Covenant to uniformity in the Worship and Service of
God, and in particular to an uniformity in Catechizing.

Answ. I do not believe the Covenant did, or does bind us to any thing in the
Worship of God, but what in conscience and prudence we were bound to practice,
and do if there had been no Covenant; neither are we bound to any other
uniformity but what was but even now mentioned.

2 The former part of the Dispute in this Argument must be refuted, before we
can thus reason; for if it be a sinful and unwarrantable addition in the
Worship of God besides, or against the Word of God. The Covenant cannot make a
crooked thing strait, Eccl. 7.13.
or an evil thing good; a Covenant brought in so lately cannot make void any
branch of the Covenant God made with his Church so many hundred years before
it. And therefore it is added in our Covenant, according to the Word of God.

3 There is no Uniformity in any administration mentioned there, but such as is
necessary to such an end as is there also proposed, namely, that we and our
posterity after us may as brethren live in faith and love, and the Lord may
delight to dwell in the midst of us; which certainly will better be
accomplished without such an external mould of conformity then with it. There
was faith, and love, and peace amongst godly Ministers when Catechismes were,
and were used in greatest variety.

4 We are bound by the Covenant to no stricter uniformity in a Catechism then
we are in other parts of Worship; now in no part of the Directory, or Worship
there mentioned, are we bound to method and words, as appears evidently
throughout the Directory; no nor are we bound to the Directory further then is
explained in the Preface to it, for that was stood upon by a considerable party
in the Assembly, and assented unto by the whole (and mentioned in the Committee
of Accommodation as a foundation of an agreement, p. 4. which Preface
professedly holds forth the intent of the Assembly in matters of Uniformity
thus; Our meaning therein being only that the general Heads, the sense and
scope of the Prayers, and other parts of Public Worship being known to all,
there may be a consent of all the Churches, in those things that contain the
substance of the Service and Worship of God; and the Ministers may be hereby
directed in their Administrations to keep like soundness in Doctrine and
Prayer; and may, if need be, have some help and furniture: And yet so, as they
become not hereby slothful and negligent in stirring up the gifts of Christ in
them: But, that each one, by meditation, by taking heed to himself and the
Flock of God committed to him, and by wise observing the ways of Divine
Providence, may be careful to furnish his heart and tongue with further, or
other materials of Prayer and Exhortation, as shall be needful upon all
occasions.

5 It is not to an uniforme Catechism, but uniformity in Catechizing in the
Covenant, we may be uniforme in Catechizing, though we use not a Catechism,
the same for matter and words; we may be uniforme in preaching, though we be
not bound to the same Homily, the same form of words; nay, though not use the
same method, as to preach constantly by Doctrines, Reasons, and Uses, which is
expressly asserted in the Directory for Preaching.

And such were the Directories of reformed Churches (as before was instanced)
where I hope was Uniformity. Yea in Scotland it self, the Uniformity stands not
in being held to a sameness of words, Habemus quidem nos etiam in Ecclesia,
(says a Learned Scotch-man) agendas and ordinem in sacris celebrandis
servandum, Alex. D^^
sed nemo alligatur, etc. proponuntur tantum ut paradgimata quib; precum
materia and forma quo ad substantialia indecantur, non ut eisdem verbis
astringantur ministri; totos ego tredecim annos quibus functus sum ministerio
sive in Sacramenta sive in aliis sacris celebrandis precib; aut Exhortationibus
quae extant in agenda, unquam usus sum, sic etiam aliis cumplures and omnibus
etiam liberum idem facere. That this is the use of a Directory in the reformed
Churches, appears in the words of Mr. Hooker in his Eccl. Pol. We hold it much
better with the Church of Rome to appoint a prescript form, which every man
shall be bound to observe, then with them (the reformed Churches) to set down
a kind of Directory, a form for men to use if they list, or otherwise to
change as it pleases themselves. There was an uniformity in blessing the
people, yet if you compare Numbers 6.23. 2 Cor. 12.13. 2 Thessalonians. 3.17, 18. Heb.
13.20, 21. Jude 24, 25. together, you shall not find their blessings the same
for matter and words; no, nor in that which you call the Lords Prayer, if you
compare Matthew 6.9.13. and Luke 11.2, 3, 4.

Ob. 7. It may be yet further argued, it will be an advantage when the younger
sort remove out of one Parish into another, as we find in using the same
Grammar, and other Books, it is an advantage when Children remove from one
School to another.

Ans. Forms beget a form, but as they have little, so work little of the
power of godliness; the scope of Ministerial instruction is not only to fasten
in the Memory, and accordingly by rote to repeat it thence; but to beget a
grounded understanding, whether we carry away the words or not, if variety of
Catechisms, and all sound, and according to the Analogy of Faith, the Doctrine
is the same though the words be not, and if it be received with understanding,
we shall acknowledge truth in what method or form of words soever we meet
with it; if it be not the same, but another Catechism, containing some few
other truths, yet such possibly as are useful and necessary to be known as
those in a former Catechism, and so a means to increase knowledge.

CHAP. V. The second Argument. Of Christian Liberty, things indifferent, the
particular Catechism designed, not so desirable for this use; and how many
ways our Ministerial Liberty is prejudiced by the imposition of it.
SUch an imposition of a set Catechism, cannot be submitted unto, and our
Christian Liberty preserved. This was another Argument, brought by our
suffering Brethren against former impositions, in the Worship of God in the
Episcopal times. How much we ought to stand for the preservation of such a
Liberty they declare from these following Scriptures, Galath. 5.1. Col. 2.20,
21. 1 Cor. 7.23. and the like.

. 1.
For further explication of this argument. The reverend Divines of the Assembly
in their Preface to the Directory for worship, express themselves thus; Our
care has been to hold forth, 1. Such things as are of Divine institution in
every Ordinance. 2. And other things we have endeavored to set forth,
according to the rules of Christian Prudence agreeable to the general rules of
the Word of God. To these two heads therefore in their opinion, the substance
of what Church Governors have either to injoyne, or commend in the Worship of
God may be reduced.

For the former, It will I suppose be granted, as we have already endeavored
to prove, the particular Catechism, or any one form for method and words is
not of an express institution; for if it were, it ought to be the same in all
Churches, and Ages. For the second, it is of such things or circumstances of
Worship, as are not absolutely necessary, but (compared with what is expressly
instituted) indifferent only. This I suppose to be Mr. B. meaning in what he
speaks of set Forms of Prayer. It is granted, says he, Mr. Ball of
Separation. p. 4
that no set form of Prayer, or Liturgy it simply necessary either in public
or private, for then our Savior Christ would by his Apostles have expressly set
down such a one for an exact rule to all Christians and Churches. And the like
may we say, in the words of Reverend Mr. Cotton, Answer to Mr. B. p. 3
of set forms of Catechizing, To devise and prescribe, says he, a set Form
of words, wherein all the questions and answers shall run, and no other, we
know no warrant for that from Scripture. If God would have his people limited
to a set forms of words in Catechizing, he would himself have prescribed some
set form of his own inspiration, which might be defective in no Principles,
nor incommodious in any expression. This Catechism then, or any the like, are
of no other consideration as a Catechism, or peculiar form or method of
instructing, but as such things which are of an indifferent nature (according
to the vulgar use of the word) and left to Prudence, and the general rules of
Scripture, for particular determination in practice.

Now as Church Governors ought not by a Law to institute or make sacred, what
the Lord has not consecrated by some word of institution; so where the Lord
has left any matters common, or indifferent in Worship, we must not impose
them as necessary; for as the former is against Christian Piety, so is this
against Christian Liberty. Two particulars here will need further explaining,
1. What is meant by things indifferent. 2. What by Christian Liberty.

. 2.
A thing indifferent is either absolutely so, and such a thing which ratione
objecti nihil includit rectae rationi conform aut difforme, that is, it is
neither good nor evil: for the Moral goodness of Humane action stands in its
conformity to right reason, and the Word of God. Comparativelie indifferent may
be explained thus, all deliberate actions are to an end, what is most
conformable, or conducing in right reason, and the mind of God, to such an end
is best; but where many things are found equally useful for such a purpose, so
that no more reason for the one than for the other, though each of these he
necessary in respect to the end, yet neither of them necessary, but each
indifferent in comparison, or respect one to another.

Again, we further distinguish: Humane Actions are considerable, either In
actu signato and quoad speciem, or in actu exercito, quoad individuum. An
Action has its efsence or kind from the object and end, but when it comes to
exist and in being, Nulla est individua actio Human^ quae est indifferens, sed
propter circumstantias necesserio, vel bona vel mala si Thomae and omnibus
Thomastis credimus, credendum est omnino Morton Apol. p. 1. lib. 1. cap 47.
there are other Circumstances that are inseparable; as time, place, person,
etc. we may conceive or think of an action in our mind, in the bare
specifical nature of it without any of these, but we cannot do, or practice,
but such Circumstances (being necessary to all Humane Actions) must be taken in
likewise; which Circumstances do not only change the nature of the action by
its becoming Morally good or evil, which before was indifferent; (hence the
Schoolmen assert, there is no individual action, or action existing,
indifferent) but some one of these Circumstances proves effectual many times,
Humani actu non folum ex objecto ve^um ex circumstantiis boni vel male esse
dicantur. Aq. p. 2. 918. ar. 3.
to change that which was good in the general consideration into evil, by
reason of such and such Circumstances. In the Worship and Service of God, those
Circumstances that are not expressly instituted, but in their general nature the
same as the other Humane actions we term indifferent; but when we come to
practice, if the holy Service become less decent, orderly, or less to
edification by reason of such Circumstances, though these Circumstances are
indifferent in their general nature, yet as applied to such services and
actions they cease to be indifferent in their use, and become evil, and the
service it self becomes evil by reason thereof.

To Preach, Pray, to give Sacraments, these are holy duties, yet such may be
the Circumstances of time, place, when, and where occasions, or persons to
whom, as these services become evil, and to be refused if imposed: as to be at
our private Devotion in the Public Assembly, As it is the manner of him that
preaches in Scotland so soon as in the Pulpit. Master Marshall when in
Scotland refused this practice, being entreated to conform to them; and Master
G. droven out of Edinburgh, and another place afterward for scrupling this
conformity.
in the corner of the streets, Mat. 6.5.

To give Sacraments in private Houses, at the Bed-sides of sick Persons, to
such as are notoriously scandalous; to read Service, or Preach at Funerals,
this also has been esteemed evil from the Circumstance Burial Sermons are put
in the place of Trentals, whereout spring many abuses, and therefore in the
best reformed Churches are removed. Admon. p. ^3. It was never recorded or
found in the New Testament or the Old, that God either appointed, or there was
used any Service for, or at, and in the Burial of the dead, it is no part of
the Ministers work, it belongs to him no more than to another; who played the
Priest when Abraham buried his Wife, and Jacob his, and Stephen, etc. who
preached at any of these Burials? A reproof of the view, par. 2. S. 4. Many
both godly and learned considering the original of Funeral Sermons from whence
they came, and the end for which for the most part they are now observed, the
honor of the dead, and the enriching the Preacher, etc. have no great
affection to such Sermons. Mr. Sherwoods Answer to Doct. Downham. Mr.
Cartwright amongst other reasons gives this as one, being most ordinarily at
the Funeral of the rich, and not of the poor; there is brought into the Church
contrary to the Word of God an acceptance of persons which ought not to be,
and although the Minister may give to one more honor than to another according
as the civil Calling or degree requires, yet in his Ministry, and that which
pertains to his Office, he ought to show himself indifferent, and therefore
to preach as well at the death of the poor as the rich, and because he cannot
well do both, it is convenient to leave both, Rep. 1. pa. 101. the like in the
Discipline of Scotland, Mr. Hildersham (as diverse others of our Reverend N. C.)
took order in his will, that there should be no Funeral Sermon at his burial.
Mr. Clarks Martyr, p. 385. it is therefore no new piece of singularity in those
that still scruple this practice.


3.
2 By Christian Liberty, the liberty of our judgments, and liberty of
practice, to judge of our Ministerial work according to light received, and to
practice according as we judge, every one is to give an account of himself. It
is an abridgement of this liberty.

1 In practice, when by reason of Humane Laws or impositions, I am constrained
to do otherwise in the Service and Worship of God, then in prudence or
conscience I judge my self bound to do, if there were no such precept or
imposition of man. If what Christ has left free does not still remain as free
as Christ has left it, and we yield to it, and comply accordingly; this is not
to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. Take an
instance in the lowest breach upon this liberty in practice, as where a variety
of things or Circumstances, each whereof necessary in respect of the act or
end, but in such an equality, as in respect to each other there is an
indifferency in comparison: here now to be limited to one, though it be equal
and indifferent in other respects, yet it is a bondage, for it is not
indifferent to me to be free, or to be limited, in a service in which I
promise my self (from the dignity and excellency of it) a perfect freedom.
There are diverse forms of Prayer in the Scripture, to pitch upon some one, and
impose the use of it, and in a greater frequency, as the Lords prayer. This our
brethren judged against their Christian Liberty, so though the reading of one
Chapter in the Bible, may be as edifying as another, and all Scripture is
profitable, and ought to be read in public, but to have the chapter for each
day imposed, to be read and no other, is one reason our Brethren opposed the
Common Prayer book.

2 In Opinion, thoughts are free, I may meditate and exercise my Faith, and
reason to find out and judge in any Christian practice what is good or evil,
or good and better. We are abridged in this Liberty, more expressly, when its
imposed upon me to assent or subscribe ex animo to the opinions of other men;
It is also abridged by evident implication or consequence, when in actions lest
to me in respect of circumstances, to make choice of such as are most
conducible (as free and master of my own doings under Christ my Lord) I must
notwithstanding do otherwise than what I judge is best, because some other
thing or way is judged better by another, as, if others judge the Apocripha in
some parts of it to be more edifying than some Chapters in the Canonical
Scriptures, though I judge otherwise, yet this being imposed, I must do it;
This the greatest bondage and most sinful. For in performances wherein I ought
to do my best, and to that end have from Christ both ability and liberty to do
better; yet to please others in their commands I will comply to do what is
worse; willingly suspending my own judgment, because it seems to be better or
best in theirs; This is either to sin against light, or to do away the liberty
of my own judgment, and in the most slavish way to become a Servant to men.

Having thus premised, I shall now lay down more distinctly, and enumerate the
ways wherein such imposition being the same as in our case, is against
Christian liberty, or rather ministerial liberty.

4.
In a Ministerial teaching, or instructing of others, there are these three
things to be heeded, and that will engage the conscience of him that
instructs.

1 The Matter, that it be sound and suitable to the capacity of such who I am
to instruct, as Milk for Babes, etc. Fundamentals and first principles to those
of a more low, and dull capacity.

2 Form, That for method and words our meditations be fitly carried forth and
easily understood.

1 Cor. 12.7
3 That the Gifts and Graces given in their great diversity, by Jesus Christ be
exercised accordingly.

1 For the Matter, 1 There are diverse Ministers of piety and worth, and such as
the present establishment allows as public preachers that cannot teach or
urge others to believe that infants are to be baptized. There are also some
other, the like doubtful and disputable points, which we are engaged to teach
or quit our ministry. He that has the charge of souls may not upon any
consideration teach another the least matter that he believes not himself,
Mat. 5.19
so that such have not liberty to instruct and teach what according to their
consciences is judged truth.

2 Though ever so sound and Orthodox, yet its not made up of principles, of
first truths or fundamentals, though it be supposed and was to be enjoined as
such, for a man may be saved that assents not to, nor believes many
particulars laid down in that Catechism.

Again, do but compare Heb. 5. the latter end with chap. 6. etc. where is laid
down what is fit doctrine, or matter for such instruction, you will find this
Catechism nothing according to that directory. There are not higher truths and
stronger meat through out the whole Epistle to the Hebrews, or any other
Scriptures than necessarily must be explained and taught, for the
understanding this Catechism, which will easily appear if you do but read over
the former part of it.

3 Though it were both sound and suitable, yet it is not Scripture, its not of
divine inspiration, its from a private or common gift, and therefore not to be
of public interpretation. It is to bring into the solemn worship and service
of God, the Composures and writings of men, to be of standing use there: and in
the likeness and similitude of the Scriptures, to be received, read publicly,
interpreted and applied; Though the gifts I have received from Christ to that
purpose be equal, and my own Composures more suitable and useful, yet they
must give place, and all the Ministers in the Nation, and we know not for how
many ages to come must thus exalt it, and do special reverence to this
Catechism. Mr. Heiron, composed a Catechism wherein the Answers were the very
words of Scripture, the like by one Mr. Scot, Anno 1642. another in the like
way, by V.P. Anno. 1647. possibly to preserve this honor, as peculiar to the
Scriptures, to be as a Text, and the subject of our interpretation, and
application for instruction, etc.

4 You shall find two third parts of that Catechism to be as a Commentary or
Exposition upon, those portions of Scripture, in Exodus 20. and Matthew 6.
commonly called the Lords Prayer, and ten Commandments To enjoin Ministers to
receive into their Congregations for public use Commentaries composed by men
subject to error, and ex animo to subscribe to them (or that which is
equivalent) to own them and teach them to others, not only as truths, but the
true meaning of the Spirit in such or such a text, is such an imposing as in
the worst of times the Ministers of England, or any reformed Church has not
yet been acquainted with.

. 5.
The Form or Method of instructing the ignorant by set questions and answers
(as in that catechism) is not unquestionably the best, and most to edification,
in the judgment and experience of many holy men, who have gone before us in
this work.

1 The reading instructions out of a Book, or learning and saying it by rote,
is so dead and flat, as some godly Ministers have chosen (as more edifying;)
first, to Preach principles and these fundamental truths, in a more stirring
and awakning way, as other truths; and then going over the Heads of such a
Sermon by questions, as Christ often dealt with his Disciples after he had
preached, Act. 8
and Philip with the Eunuch. Paul so instructed the ignorant, 1 Cor. 14.25
as a stirring efficacy did accompany, his delivering these truths even to the
conversion of such as heard him.

Our brethren under Episcopacy in like manner scrupled, as in their admonition.
Faith say they comes by Preaching, Romans 10. and not by reading in an ordinary
way, it is not so much praying as saying a prayer, when it is read off from a
book, nor so much preaching, or Catechizing as saying a Sermon, a Catechism
when all is thus done by book.

2 Some have conceived it most to edification, to lay down the principles as so
many distinct Thesis or Doctrines one after another, without the forming or
interposing any such leading question. So Mr. Nicholas Bifield in his
Principles, Bishop Andrews in his Catechistical Doctrine and others, there is a
Catechism Printed Anno. 1649. in this method, and in the preface, a perferring
it before any other: as also the blame of set questions.

3 Mr. Herbert Palmer, a holy faithful Pastor, found it by much experience to
be the best way to instruct his people, by forming two sorts of questions with
two sorts of Answers, whereof the one is a bare affirmative, or Negative, yea
or no; conceiving the ordinary way not sufficient to drop knowledge into narrow
mouthed vessels (as in his preface) I. W. now a public professor in Oxford
being of the same Opinion, bestowed the pains to put the matter of this
Assembly Catechism into that form, and Printed it Anno 1649. who in his
Epistle to the Reader tells us, this method is of more advantage to the Learned
than the other, both in respect of memory and clearness of understanding the
truths in the Catechism.

4 A Godly industrious Minister, lately composed a Catechism, in which the
child or learner asked the questions, and the Minister or parent gave the
answer, which he conceived to be a method or form more Scripture like than any
other, and for this method urges, Exodus 12.26, 27. Joshua 4.6. John 3.4.
Matthew 19.16, 17, etc.

5 If the interesting our memory in this work, if to be able to retain and
repeat the Principles of Christian Religion readily; be one of our great aims
in this exercise, as it is, if not the chiefest. T.D. printed, Anno 1649.
Then surely he that put the matter of this Catechism into Meeter (a method
warrantable from Scripture, David penned a Psalm to give instruction) judged
in his Conscience this to be a form or method most to edification, and if he
might have his liberty, would use it before any other.

6 The length and shortness of a Catechism ought to be regarded according to
the state of the people we have to do with. To that end a larger Catechism by
the Assembly, and received by the general Assembly of the Church of Scotland,
Preface to larger Catechism.
as suitable to such as have made some proficiency in the knowledge of the
grounds of Religion, and this shorter which also is received by them, for
Catechizing such as are of weaker capacity; if holy experienced Pastors find
it expedient, by reason of various parts and abilities in the Learner, to
compose variety of Catechism in this respect for the same place or Parish, how
much more will it be inconvenient to impose this one, only, throughout the
Nation. Doctor Gouge, a diligent Catechiser all his days, and of much
experience, had three sorts of Catechismes for length and shortness, which he
ordinarily used for the instruction of his people of Black Friars; Mr. Painter,
Master Bradshaw, Doctor Twiss, and diverse Ministers have done the like; as Mr.
Perkins, his Six Principles, there is two sorts, a shorter and longer, in one;
So in a Catechism by Master J. Geere.

. 6.
If conscientiously a Minister that has the Charge of Souls be persuaded,
this form or method of the Assembly be not sufficient, as Mr. Palmer in his
Preface, or not so edifying (as others) at least for the people of my charge.
If I believe also even in such Circumstances of methods and forms where is a
difference, I am to choose what is most to edification, and am now limited to
some one form, that in my judgment is less to edification; I must in such a
case either by an implicit faith believe as the imposers believe, which
destroys the liberty of my judgment, or be limited from practicing according
to my judgment, which is a greater bondage. The methods, and forms, and
circumstances of Worship, and the Service of Christ, which are left free by
him, ought to remain free, and in our Ministry we ought to do no more, or
otherwise in this kind at the command of Church Governors, then in prudence
and conscience we judge our selves bound to do if there were no command;
where Christ has left a liberty there needs a liberty; though the imposition
of some one form may be suitable to some few, yet the same if imposed upon all,
will become prejudicial to many. It is therefore frequently mentioned, (by
those that publish new Catechismes) as a reason why they did so, the state of
their Congregations required it, their own composures were more fit and
suitable in that respect then what was done by others. So Master Gataker, Dr.
Hill, etc. in their Epistles to their Catechismes.

7.
If nothing faulty either in the matter or form of this Catechism, yet we
enjoy not that ministerial liberty Christ has left us, and that which
hitherto, and even in the worst times has bin enjoyed in this Nation, and
hitherto we have not been straightned or narrowed. It is true, a form of
Catechism is mentioned in the Common Prayer Book, but so as a liberty left,
and taken to compose, or choose what Catechism a man judged more suitable to his
people for their edification; and few Ministers of eminency in the Land but
composed a distinct Catechism, there are I believe no less then five hundred
several Catechismes extant; nay men of the Episcopal way, and such as were
punctual in observing the very hints of what was likely to be pleasing or
displeasing to their Lords, composed and published Catechismes for matter and
method differing from what was allowed by authority; as Doct. Hall, who was
afterward Bishop, Dr. Featly, Dr. Chitwin, Dr. Hill, Mr. Pearston, who
dedicated his Catechism to the Bishop of London, Mr. Vicars Chap. to Bishop
Carlton, and many others.

Neither has this variety been looked upon as hurtful, for if so, then holy
men would have kept to what they found, and have made conscience of increasing
this evil by adding to the number; I find (says Dr. Gouge) in all ages of the
Church, Epistle to his Catechism.
God has stirred up many of his Servants to publish several forms, all
agreeable in the substance, and I observe among many other, these two good uses
to arise from thence, etc. which there he specifieth; nay, since this of the
Assembly, composed by a Synod of holy and learned men, approved of, and
commended to the Nation by the Parliament then sitting, and received and settled
in Scotland; yet men's Consciences have not been satisfied in this, as the only
Catechism fit to be used, as appears in the great number and variety of
Catechismes composed and printed since this was published, a greater number
then in so short a time were ever published before.

But suppose in all this variety of Catechismes there were no difference, no
one better, but each equally as good, and edifying to my people as other; that
which I now further assert is this, that in these Spiritual affairs, to impose
or limit to some one in such a case, is against Christian Liberty, and our
freedom as Ministers; if a man has obtained his Freedom in any Trade, he is
judged fit to set up in any part of the City, no man can limit him to any one
Precinct, though he might drive his Trade with as much advantage there as in
any other place; nay, if a man shall enter into Bond to his Master not to set
up his Trade in such a street, or within such a distance from him, this Bond is
void in Law, so tender are our Laws of Humane liberty.

The Lords Prayer, so termed, is beyond Controversy, as edifying as any other
Prayer in the Scripture, yet our Brethren the N. C. could not subject to such
an imposition, as gave a pre-eminence, or more stated use of this one Scripture
Prayer above all the rest, the refusal of such an use of that Prayer was one
thing for which Mr. Hooker could not have the liberty of his Ministry with Mr.
Paget at Amsterdam, when for N. Conformity he was enforced by the Bishops to
make that his refuge. It was an Objection against the Common Prayer Book, that
in the Calender some Scriptures were to be read every year, and some oftener,
and some part of Canonical Scripture not to be read in public at all; a pari
ratione in ordinary gifts, to exalt any one work or composition by such a
solemn sanction, above all that has been, or shall be, and limit us from the
like public use of any other, though from men of equal gifts and graces, is an
abridgment of our Liberty, ordinary as well as extraordinary gifts are from
Christ, and for his ends.

8.
The third particular by which in such impositions we are abridged of our
Liberty, it is in respect of the gifts and abilities we have received from
Christ. It is the privilege of a Minister to have liberty to employ his own
talent, there is an honor and reward in so doing, Our labor and study shall
not be lost in the Lord, every man shall receive according to his own work,
and the talents he has employed: the Disciples work has but a Disciples
reward, but the Prophets work a Prophets reward; If the Lord Christ has put
into my hand and trust, Prophets or Pastors work, and gifts and talents
suitable, if I be faithful, and put my self out accordingly, I shall
accordingly be accepted of the Lord; if I fulfill my Ministry, I shall not come
short of a full reward.

We are equally entrusted with the Lambs as with the Sheep, with the weak as
with the strong, and to show our love to Christ in feeding the one as well as
the other; we are upon this account Debtors, both to the Greeks and to the
Barbarians, both to the wise and to the unwise, Romans 1.14.

It is laid on us not only to find out fit and suitable matter for such
instruction, but expressions and words; to this end Christ has given gifts of
utterance as well as a gift of knowledge; and whatsoever gift we have received
we must stir up and use, Eccl. 12.9. The Preacher was wise, he taught the
people knowledge, he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in order -- the
Preacher sought to find out acceptable words; so that matter, and order, and
words, and all is by Christ entrusted with the Preacher, it is not for him to
enquire what the State, or a Synod has sought out and set in order. The truth
is, he who is to be the mouth of God, and to whom it is given to speak from
him to the people, to him belongs the finding out both of matter and words,
Psalm. 19.14. hence those to whom to instruct others belongs, are dealt with
by the Apostle about the method and form of words in which that holy duty is
to be managed, 1 Cor. 14.9. so likewise except you, even you, (...), you that
are to Prophecy, to instruct, utter by the tongue words significant; (...), (a
word well and aptly signifying) how shall it be known what is spoken, says
the Apostle. If I had not warrant, if it were not my liberty and privilege to
express my own matter in my own words; faylings and faults in expressions
would not be accounted as my sin, but rash inapt unsignificant expressions,
tautologies, Word or speech, so (...)
etc. we find in Scripture charged upon those that pray, or instruct, and non
simplex vox seu dictio sed integra sententia seu rei narratio.
Eccles. 5.2. Let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing; the conceptions of
my heart are my charge and to be expressed in fit significant words; whosoever
was the Author of the Jewish Leiturgye, the (...), and vain repetition is
charged upon him that officiates, Matthew. 6.7.

Now then, to have an imbargo more or less put upon the talents, the stock we
are entrusted with from Christ, the improvement whereof shall be so richly
rewarded, this is directly against the liberty and privilege of a Gospel
Ministry.

9.
It is an honorable employment, the honor and dignity of it is in this, the
use of his gifts, with industry and labor in the word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy
5.17. if others share in the work, if they share not in the honor it is a
wrong, Hos ego versiculos feci tulit alter honorem, it is a dishonor to
pretend to Poetry, and yet repeat another man's Verses as if mine own; Adm. p.
10
to pretend to be a Teacher or Leader, and yet not able to lead but by other
men's Lights. To go with Crutches, carry my arm in a Skarfe, or use
Spectacles, when the man is sound and needs no such helps, it is a dishonor to
him, he goes in the esteem of others as an infirm man, infirm in hands, and
feet, and eyes. To use a set form of instruction of another man's composing,
argues a defect in ability, as if not able to teach, to impose it under such
penalties, a defect in will, as not apt to teach; and what greater dishonor
can be put upon the Ministry of the Nation than this, that they are neither
able nor willing to instruct the poor ignorant Souls committed to their
charge, especially in an age wherein a more strict way than ever is taken, to
keep and cast out such as are not both for gifts and grace fitly qualified for
the Ministry. Had it been in the days of old, when the Common Prayer Book
Catechism was formed, when forms for Prayer, Preaching, Sacraments, Marrying,
Burying, and all by the Book, some more ground for such an imposition; Upon
this account Doctor Burges, after he had subscribed three times, refused
subscription, because not like necessity of such helps for Prayer, etc. when a
more able Ministry. Let an effectual course be taken to bring the ignorant of
each Parish, young and old to a more familiar way of personal instruction, it
will quickly appear there is a greater number of Ministers throughout the
Nation than in former ages, that are both able and willing, without such poor
helps, to do the work in some measure Christ has entrusted them with; which
if they be, it is an abridgment of their privilege and honor, to put the
work in part or in whole upon others, as if they were not sufficient for one
of the lowest performances that belongs to their calling.

I say, young and old, if ignorant, for such was the care formerly in our
Discipline, as appears in the 71. Canon They shall teach the Catechism, and
therein shall instruct all their Flock, of what age or degree soever, not only
Maidens and Children, but also the elder if need be; And under most severe
penalties, whereof this is one, that no Persons might be married; except
before they have learned the Principles of Christian Religion, and cannot fitly
and aptly answer to all the parts of the Catechism. And this, will bring us to
another particular, wherein Ministerial liberty is abridged.

. 10.
It is certainly the duty of the Minister to instruct all, with respect to
their capacity, giving each a portion in due season; strong meat to such whose
senses are exercised, and Milk to Babes, and this without respect to their
years or age, if for years fit to be Teachers (which according to the manner
of the Jews, and ancient Canons since, supposes persons to be above one and
twenty years) yet if at this age dull and ignorant, Heb. 5.
they ought to be taught the very Principles of the Oracles of God. And it is
the duty of the Magistrate, to cause all sorts to observe the Sabbath, and come
to the public Assemblies, and to submit to instruction, as well the old as the
young, the married as the unmarried. It is true, we are not forbidden to
Catechize the elder: But to put the younger sort, and those that are unmarried
only, under the edge of the Law, is such a kind of exemption as secretly will
harden the elder, (though ever so ignorant) as if by Law approved of as less
needing to be taught than others. It will be a very hard matter for a
Minister, to get any that are married, or above one and twenty years of age to
submit to such instruction. Ministers are in a better condition for the
reducing their people into order and subjection in many Cases, when none at
all, than when only a half provision is made.

The exercise of Discipline in our Congregations, was ordered by the
Parliament, but limited likewise to an enumeration of the sins, for which we
might Excommunicate; exempting other Sinners that were as much under our
charge. This was looked upon by the Assembly as a great abridgement of their
Ministerial liberry, and so great; as they professed it could not with a good
Conscience be submited unto, as not being able to perform their trust which
they received from Jesus Christ, and must give an account of, to him,
resolving, to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made them free.

CHAP. VI. The third Argument: Taken from the imposition and penalty, the
severity and inequality of it.
. 1.
A Third Argument is taken from the imposition and penalty. Since a blessed
reformation, and seasonable Gospel-freedom has been wrought out, for the
people of God; this is the first imposition, with penalty, that has been
endeavored upon the Ministers of Christ: Nor has this work, (the Catechizing
of the younger sort) by any Parliament as yet been so imposed upon Ministers.

There was a Catechism in the beginning of Edw. 6. which afterward was
enlarged and confirmed by authority of Parliament, but the use of it, was not
enjoined with a penalty; to be inflicted upon those that should do otherwise,
as there was for other matters in the Common Prayer book: So that a liberty was
generally taken by godly Ministers, to use publicly what form of instruction
they judged most suitable to their peoples capacity.

There has been hundreds of Catechisms used and published, according to the
variety of gifts in those that composed them, and capacity of those that were
to be instructed. And this liberty was enjoyed throughout the Nation from the
beginning of Reformation until toward the latter end of the Bishops reign, and
then though they themselves had been the Authors of Catechisms formerly, yet
began to be severe against this liberty, and enjoin the use of the
Common-prayer-Books Catechism only.

. 2.
There is considerable in this imposition and penalty annexed, 1 The greatness
and inequality of it; and 2 The evil consequences that will follow upon it.


1 The penalty or punishment is expressed thus, or to such purpose; If any
Minister receiving the States maintenance, miss Catechizing (a particular
Catechism is prescribed) ten Sabbath days in a whole year, unless it be upon
such cause as two Justices shall approve of, such omissions being proved by the
Oath of any two witnesses, this person is to be ejected out of his Living, as
a negligent and scandalous Minister.

Our Reverend Fathers (who many years groaned under this penalty for Episcopal
or Common-Prayer-Books Non Conformity) express themselves sadly thus: We
thought that in equity our fault, and in discretion our Calling, is to be
regarded, that punishment deserved, exceed not the fault committed. But loss of
living by deprivation or suspension is the next punishment to death; Eccles.
34.23.
therefore we complain that more than severity is done against us, for if it
be a grievous punishment to fine a Laymen (so called) ten, twenty, or thirty
pound, may not the grieved spirits of faithful Ministers sigh, yea cry unto God
for that their bondage is such, that only Omission, and that of Conscience with
peace, Trial of Subs. p. 15
is corrected with no less punishment than loss of living.

Through the Bishops rigor many were ejected, about the beginning of K. James
his Reign: But men were so sensible of the great discouragement upon the hearts
of godly Ministers by reason thereof, that the Members of the House of Commons
in the Parliament, Anno 1610. thus Petitioned the King; Whereas diverse painful
and learned Pastors, that have long time traveled in the work of the Ministry,
with good fruit and blessing of their labor, have been removed from their
Ecclesiastical Livings, being their Freehold, and debarred from all means of
maintenance, to the great grief of sundry your Majesty's well-affected
Subjects; we therefore humbly beseech your Majesty would be graciously
pleased, that such deprived and silenced Ministers, Living quietly and
peaceably, may be restored, etc.

. 3.
And yet there was a tenderness in those Laws, in many respects more than would
have been found in this. 1 There were expressions in them whereby the crime is
placed in such omissions only as are from wilfulness and contempt to authority;
so 13. of Eliz. cap. 12. Such as refuse to use the form prescribed for Prayer
and Sacraments, or OBSTINATELY use any other, either form or Ceremony; so in
the Queens injunctions, No man ought obstinately and maliciously to break and
violate the laudable Ceremonies of the^ Church, commanded by public authority
to be observed, Inj. 22. Non qualiscunque mandati praeteritio criminalem facit
in obedientiam sed repugnare sed nolle obedire.
But no such indulgence in THIS CASE. The penalty falls to the full upon the
most peaceable, if he refuse; though his recusancy be from ever so much
tenderness or doubtfulnesse in Conscience.

Thus our Brethren formerly complained of the Bishops, who were more severe
than the Law. If such only are openly to be rebuked as openly break the
Traditions of the Church, through private judgment, and contemptuous
wilfulness, then only omission (and that of Conscience with peace) deserves
not so public and extreme punishments, as deprivation and suspension.

2 An Ecclesiastical Censure from the Ordinary, prevented the penalty in that
statute, for the first offense, or if not, it was but the loss of one years
profits. He was not ejected from all, and for ever, as in this case for his
first transgression.

3 Not only two Witnesses, (which is all required in this case) but the person
offending must be lawfully convicted according to the Laws of this Realm,
Stat. 1. Eliz.
which is by the Verdict of a sworn Jury in open Court, before sworn Judges; as
the interests in other Freehold States were tried, before he could be
ejected. The Statute also was penned with so much caution and indulgence to
Ministers, Certain Consults, page 14.
That good Lawyers (says one) even such as afterward were Judges; have
professed it almost impossible so to frame an Indictment upon that Statute
against a Minister, that is not traversable and avoidable.

4 If the Minister offending be not indicted for it the very next general
Sessions after his trespass committed, or breach of the Law; he could never
afterward be impeached or molested for that offense; but there is no such
provision here, but having once offended, danger hangs over our heads all our
days.

5 And such a penalty threatened as in THIS CASE is the more grievous to the
Ministers of the Gospel; when others, far their inferiors, for the same
offense are more tenderly treated. Caution and provision in the same Law is
made for Schoolmasters, Parents, etc. (to whom the duty as much appertains
as to Ministers) that the punishment for their omission in any kind shall not
exceed a Fine of five shillings.

. 4.
It is evident therefore the punishment for this Nonconformity has more
severity in it, than what was formerly, for Common-Prayer-Books Nonconformity;
and yet, (which will increase the grief of those that suffer,) the necessity and
reason of any such imposition is not so evident, as it was for impositions of
this nature in former times.

1 The Ministry was very low and impotent in those days, by reason of late
Persecution. Few left of Learning that were sound, and of the true religion. 8
Eliz. Jnj. 33.
Children and such as were utterly unlearned, if they could read were put into
the Ministry, nay such as could not read English perfectly, Such as were but
mean Readers, were enjoined to peruse over before, once or twice, the Chapters
and Homilies, to the intent they might read to the better understanding of the
people, and the more encouragement of godliness. In the Archdeacons
Visitation, the Ministers had some part of the New Testament given unto them by
him to learn without book, (so mean they were) and at the next Synod to make
repetition of it. Marie Canons of 1571. page 9.


Being thus low in their gifts they stood in need of such helps, and by holy
and learned men the Leitourgie and Homilies then imposed upon that account were
subscribed unto, by such persons who afterward refused when there was a more
able Ministry: these helps were looked upon as fitting, and in some respect
necessary for that age, by the same persons who suffered for Non-subscription
afterward.

2 There was yet a further and very great consideration for this strict
uniformity, and keeping to a book appointed; it being the zeal of that age
(which, if not kindled, yet the heat of it very much increased by the flames of
Persecution in Queen Mary's days) to root out Papists, which could not be done
without a means to discover who were such. One way then judged fit for such a
discovery was this; their conforming or not, to the service and administration
of Sacraments as then established; and all therefore about the age of 16 years
were enjoined to receive, as it was termed, once a year at the least.

Now without such an express and precise form of words in this administration
as are pleadable in a Court of Justice; recusancy could not legally be thence
adjudged. For if such forms had not been thus strictly held to, by little
alterations backward (possibly no more than what was done in that Book sent to
Scotland) toward the Masse-book, out of which they were taken: the Service and
Sacraments might have been so superstitiously administered, as a Papist would
not scruple to be present at them.

. 5.
There is no such State necessity for this form, Neither is there such
disability in Ministers now to Catechize: as there was then, to pray and preach
from their own gifts, these being performances requiring greater ability and
learning. For certainly, thus to ask questions by the Book, and receive answers
by the Book requires no great gifts or study. Parents, Masters of Families, and
those of lowest parts or learning may sufficiently perform it, Mr. Baxter his
advice.
yea Master Baxter, and so do others grant, persons not set apart to any
Office in the Ministry may thus Catechize and instruct, Worstersh. Asso.
not only their own Families but the whole Parish.

Such are the abilities of Ministers generally (we bless the Lord for it) as
they stand in as little need of books to Catechize and instruct youth by, as
books to say prayers by, or to preach by. And it being so, it is a very sad
consideration, that having through mercy persons qualified, and approved for
Ministerial gifts and graces: Such must now in an age of light and experience,
be silenced and put from the employment to which Christ has called them: for
not submitting to a Form, or Circumstance, which is neither peculiar, or of
absolute necessity to ministerial work or service:

. 6.
The younger sort of a Parish may be instructed, according to Scripture
direction in the Fundamentals of Religion (for so are the elder, and many of
them as ignorant though not in such a method of Catechizing as is enjoined:
This strict method may be practiced (as it has been for many years) and yet
no one particular Catechism enjoined. The crime lies in the omission only of
a form, or rather circumstance of such a form; to instruct in such a method is
but a form; but an arbitrary form, some other method may be as good, this or
that particular Catechism is but a circumstance of such a form, the punishment
is as great as for omission or negligence in the great and essential duties of
the Ministry. This is not equal the Canonists say, Penor Cic. de off.
Poena non debet excedere delictum. And a Heathen, Cavendum est ne poena major
sit quam culpa.

Mag. Cha. cap. 14.
The old Law of Magna Charta was this, Ex quantitate poena cognoscitur quantitas
delicti, quia paena debet esse commensurabilis delicto, and our suffering
Brethren pleaded it against the unreasonablenesse of the penalties imposed upon
them for omissions in Forms and Ceremonies, pretending they did it with
contempt to Authority, which is the greatest aggravation of an omission; No
Freeholder for contempt of the Kings Commandment may, be punished with the
loss of his. Freehold, when the great Charter of England tells us, that a
Freeman shall not be amerced for a small fault, but after the quantity of the
fault, and for a great fault after the manner thereof, saving unto him his
Conteniment and Freehold. If then unto every Freeman punishable by the law,
though his fault be great, his Conteniment or Freehold ought to be reserved,
it seems much more reasonably to follow, that no Churchman being a freeman
may so be punished, etc.

Certain considerations printed, anno 1605. p. 43. where the justification of a
more severe proceedings against Churchmen than other Freeholders (because
these hold virtute officii only) is also debated and concluded, that if the
crime of which he is guilty be not inconsistent with his office, he ought to
enjoy the same privilege granted to other Freeholders by Magna Charta. So
that if the not observing a Ceremony or form, or the not owning Episcopacy: If
the not instructing in such an order, or by such a particular book enjoined; or
not coming up to such forms of Discipline as are established: Be not a defect,
which is in it self destructive to the Office of a Minister; according to our
Brethrens opinion such ought not to be put out of their Livings under any such
pretense.

. 7.
Silencing and putting Ministers from their places, for such matters, was
argued formerly by those holy men to be an unjust, and unequal kind of
punishment from another consideration also: namely, that such punishing of
Ministers is a greater punishment upon the people. Such stopping of the mouths
of painful and profitable preachers is no less punishment to the Church it
self than to the Preachers, Prove. 29.18.
yea far much the greater: for where there is no vision the people perish.
Trial of Sub. p. 18. So in the Petition of the House of Commons to King James,
Anno 1610. Ministers being removed from their Ecclesiastical Livings for not
conforming in some points, it is a great grief to your Majesty's Subjects,
seeing the whole people that want instruction are by this means punished, and
through ignorance lie open to the seducements of Popish and ill-affected
persons.

Congregations (says one) in this miserable condition, Advertisements to the
Parliament, in Anno 23. p. 11.
and every member of them, may say to you, most Honorable high Court of
Parliament, as Job said to his friends, Job. 19.21
Have pity upon us, oh ye our Honorable and Christian Friends, for the hand
of God has touched us, in suffering our Ministers to be taken from us, our
souls are starved by keeping back our Spiritual food. Job 30.18
We go mourning without the Sun, for these things we weep, our eyes run down
with water because the Comforters that should refresh our souls are far from
us. Lam. 1.16


Punishments of this nature light most heavy upon the most innocent. The
people who are most concerned, and for whose supposed good; this punishment is
inflicted upon their Minister: but proves indeed a greater evil to them than
the evil it self for which he is punished. For he may be a person well
accomplished, able and willing to instruct the whole Parish Old and Young; To
feed with milk and strong meat, and yet upon the reasons before mentioned
scruple the submission to such a particular method or help where it is
needless, Arguments, chapter 2. and 5.
or some other in his Conscience more useful and suitable to his charge. Let
the person be of ever so much worth, and beloved of his people, he and his
Ministry is wholly taken away from them Old and Young: for a defect (if it were
so) in a part or circumstance in his duty, and in respect only to a part (the
younger sort) of his Congregation.

. 8.
The truth is, this silencing and depriving of Ministers, for matters of
Discipline or Worship, upon account of their opinions or practices if it be in
a matter disputable, and not apparently necessary, and these Ministers persons
of Learning and Piety, persons for Life and Doctrine in other things
unblameable, it is and always has been so heavy a load upon the minds and
spirits of Gods people, as will never be borne by them, without sad complaints
to God and man, both for their Ministers sake, and in their own behalf and
loss.

With what difficulty and disturbance do people bear the ejecting of the worst
of Ministers? Is it not with many Parishes, as with Micha in his complaint and
outcry to the people of Dan, his Idols and Idolatrous Priests being taken
away, Alas, says he, I am undone, what have I more. Judge. 18
But to have such Teachers removed into corners, who formerly our eyes have
beheld with comfort, and their very feet have been beautiful; such as from the
feelings and manifold refreshings of our souls, we cannot but honor; and have
in great estimation for their works sake; To have such Lights put under a
Bushel, must needs leave a sad and dark house.

. 9.
The Apostle speaking of the Ministry, and Ministerial duties, made this
demand, 2 Cor. 2.16.
Who is sufficient for these things? The scarcity and fewness of such who are
able, and conscientious in this work, is unknown to no man; But in time of
reformation, and when such as are found totally unfit are ejected, the want of
able persons to supply in their places is much greater, and more felt by the
people.

What low and poor work was Clergy work in former times? (the ability to read
a piece of Latin, being a sufficient qualification for it) and yet then that
work was so much prized by the State, that a crime deserving death shall be
pardoned, rather than a person, that could but legere ut clericus should be
taken from the work.

The highest qualifications, and such as are according to the Word are now
required, and if persons that are accordingly worthy shall be ejected, for a
scruple in Conscience, and not pardoned in what is but Circumstantial to the
work; it cannot be judged we are equal in zeal (though we have more light)
for the Ministry, with those of darker times.

CHAP. VII. Of the prejudice to the Ministry, and evil consequences of such an
Imposition.
. 1.
The former branch, p. 101.
THe second branch of this Argument is, that such an imposition has had evil
consequences in former ages, and likely so to be followed still, whereof this
is one.

Such great and breaking penalties render the Calling of the Ministry less
desirable. Thus our Brethren formerly complained, The fear of such RUINING
penalties make many convert their studies to Physic, Law, or some other
profession, Trial of Sub. p. 19. So the Advertiser. How many worthy men (says
he) are discouraged from the Ministry? How many have no use of their gifts?
How many are turned Lawyers, and Physicians, Advert. p. 13.
or at least are such that otherwise would have been Ministers?

Mr. Parker (out of Hyperius) notes two impediments that hinder from the
Ministry, whereof this is one, A too ridgid exaction of certain traditions, and
the observation of unprofitable Ceremonies, to which men are tied that are set
over Charges. He further tells us, being sensible how great an evil it is to
discourage from the Ministry out of the Tripart: History.

Valentinian rejoiced when he heard that Ambrose was made a Minister, whom he
before had made a Praetor, and praised God for it: On the other side, what loss
(says he) is there, even in one able Preacher turned to some other course of
life, and how irrecoverable. O take up a lamentation ye that love Sion, over
the MANY that are gone over; some to Gallen, some to Justinian, some to
Littleton, whom we might long since have seen in Moses Chair, had not the
subscription like the blade of a fiery Cherubin kept them out. Of the Cross,
cap. 4.. 8.


. 2.
The Lord himself judges Ministers, such as labor in the Word and Doctrine, to
be worthy not only of Hire, 1 Timothy, 5.17, 18.
but in such a proportion as is Honorable, and something suitable to
Housekeepers, that are able to keep Hospitality; 1 Timothy 3.2
A man cannot be Hospitious if he have not more means, house-room, Servants,
and a more plentiful Table than will barely suffice for himself and Family.
Those that serve their Country with their Lives, 2 Cor. 9.7
such as go a Warfare, have rewards, and a pay that is plentiful and
honorable. And times have been that even this Calling of a Minister in respect
of the means annexed has tempted men to covet it, 2 Pet. 5.2
for filthy lucre. It is utterly otherwise now, not but that there is a very
liberal maintenance appertaining to Ministers (and greater by the bounty of the
Honorable Parliament, than the preaching Ministry have formerly enjoyed.) But
the discouragement lies in this, then slender and UNCERTAIN TENVRE; It is
supposed in the Law that every Parson and Vicar has the interest of a
Freeholder, but it proves no other than a dum been se gesserit; and the Rules
and Law of his deportment is so mutable upon all occasions, and made up of such
small and circumstantial concernments in respect to his high and honorable
Calling, that his tenure proves to him little better than a holding at will,
and that upon this account; because seldom any Laws or Rules are given in
this kind, with a less penalty, (if any) than silencing, deposing ejection
from his livelihood, and the like. It is not so in any other Profession or
Calling whatsoever, in so much as we are in the eyes of most, a generation
separated to servitude and vassalage, and under great contempt; and by nothing
more than by the great and peculiar mulcts and punishments upon all occasions
inflicted upon us. Whereas of all callings, the hazard of this is such as it
deserves the greatest encouragement. Confer at H. p. 53.
For,

. 3.
1 In the breeding up a child toward the Ministry; Besides the chargeable
education for some years, and painful industry for the obtaining a competency
of Learning: there is over and above (and that which is a hazard to this
Calling) an expectation what the person will prove to be for his Piety and
Morals also, of which we are and may be long uncertain and doubtful.

It is true, in former times before this blessed and happy reformation, the
door was so wide into Christ's Sheepfold; the qualifications, according to the
then legal establishment, were so loose and uncertain: that the very Bishops
themselves complained. The Bishop of Winchester in the conference at Hampton
Court thus informs King James, The insufficiency of the Clergy (says he)
comes not by the Bishops fault, but partly by Lay Patrons, who present very
mean men to their Cures, partly by the Law of the Land, which admits of a
very mean sufficiency in any Clerk, so that if the Bishop should not admit
them, then presently a Quare impedit is sent out against him. But now, through
the Lords mercy to the poor people of this Nation, and by the zeal and care of
our Governors it is otherwise; the qualifications of persons who are now
judged fit for this Function, (according to what is established by Parliament,
with the advice of the Assembly) are such as imply grace and holiness, so
far as man can judge, to be in truth and sincerity.

Before any man be admitted to the Ministry, Ordinance for Ordination, etc.
Novem. 8. 1645.
there must be inquiry made (says the Ordinance) touching the grace of God in
him, and whether he be of such holiness of life as is requisite in a Minister
of the Gospel; A man for his learning and morals may be fit for any place or
station in the Commonwealth, and yet fall short of such a stame in respect of
his Spiritual condition, as is necessarily required to this sacred calling. And
the hazard and venture of his education is the greater, because this is an
accomplishment, or requisite of such a nature as is not to be purchased with
money, or attainable by any industry of our own; both the will and the deed is
from the mere pleasure of the Lord.

. 4.
2 After a man has entered upon his calling, and is comfortably disposed of in
the work, and has a support thereby for himself and family, yet being a person
thus holy and gracious, if State impositions in Ecclesiastical matters be at
such a rate he will be upon terms of great uncertainty for his continuance, or
any constant settlement in his place, and that upon a twofold account.

1 His Conscience engages him narrowly to consider of all the performances his
place requires; the business and work of his calling being more peculiarly
the service of God, does lie more directly and dreadfully in view of his
conscience. His calling engages him to search the Scriptures, and furnish
himself thence with a treasure of what is new and old: And hence his
apprehensions may possibly (and the more holy and conscientious the more
likely) fall otherwise, especially in disputable matters, then other men's have
done formerly; or otherwise then the present establishment: which if they
happen to do, he is undone, and must be turned out of his livelihood, to
beggary, or some other way to get a poor support for himself and family.

Hence it is, that some Students, intending the Ministry, out of fear how their
thoughts may fall, keep off from the search and enquiry, into such
concernments, until Conscience enforce them. Preface to his Ser. at Lambeth.
Doctor Downham a learned godly man, tells us it was thus with him, I suspended
the study thereof (meaning Church matters) for a long time, and gives this as
one reason, if I came to the issue of such a study, it would be either the
disgrace of my ministry, amongst the forward sort, if I resolved for
Episcopacy: or overthrow of my Ministry, if I stand for Discipline. And when we
are necessitated to the settling of our though as in such points. Where the
heart is sincere and led by Scripture light, it is hard to say upon what we
shall pitch at last. He further tells us, that being in the Ministry he was
necessitated to come to a resolution for one form of Government or other, and
though no enemy, but rather a Friend to the Presbyterian way, from a reverend
opinion (as he says) I had conceived of Master Calvin, and Mr. Beza, and many
other learned men, Patrons and Factors of the DISCIPLINE. But in studying the
Controversy as one that means to be convicted with truth, his persuasion fell
in with Episcopacy, and so he practiced. This has been, and daily is the lot
of many Ministers of the Gospel, especially in these days of light, (and since
Popery which captivated men's consciences by an implicit faith) in their search
after a settlement in these agitated points of Worship and Discipline: their
persuasions have been fixed otherwise than they possibly expected.

. 5.
Let it be but seriously weighed, 1 What differences of Judgment there are,
and always has been amongst those that are truly godly, and of some eminency.
And then, 2 Take the variety of such persons or persuasions rather, that are in
this, or some one, or part of an age, and accordingly sort them, as in a way of
succession, five, ten, or twenty years one after another, (so providence might
have disposed) And if each in its succession had been imposed, under this
penalty of ejection, if not owned. How long or how little time rather could any
conscientious man be likely to have held his Ministry? The variety of
apprehensions amongst those of the same persuasion, the differences amongst
Independents, as some have made them, and how reverend Mr. Cotton, now with
God, contradicts himself, as Mr. Caudery would suppose (and it might have been
more than his supposition) As likewise the greater variety amongst the
Presbyterians, and in greater matters, as set down by Bishop Bancroft, as also
the contradictions of one he mentions with himself and others; (I could give
other instances) Is of better use than I believe was intended in blasoning the
infirmities of godly men, namely to confirm this experiment, That where the
most conscientious search is made, there apprehensions may fall various in
these smaller matters: yea and if a man, differ from himself also in respect of
his former thoughts, it (...) dishonor while in that state wherein he knows
but in part. And few there be that set themselves to a conscientious and
unprejudiced search after truth; but know (comparing what apprehensions they
have had at several times) and must acknowledge, they have differed as much
with themselves at times as they differ from other godly men at the present.

. 6.
IN the second place consider upon what uncertainties also a conscientious
Minister is; in respect of the great unsetlednesse and frequent changes of the
orders and Laws (upon which the liberty of his Ministry depends) by the Civil
Magistrate, especially when reformation-work is in hand: and this, not only
from different apprehensions, which are in Governors and Magistrates, as well
as in Ministers. But principally, from their coveting to bring Ecclesiastical
affairs, into a compliance with the Civil. Yea such Magistrates as are not with
Erastus; for the whole frame of Church Government to depend upon the prudential
formings of Christian Magistrates, yea it would have the Circumstances, and
such other things as are not of the substance in Church matters, so to be
ordered as may rightly joint what is to be settled with the Laws and government
of the Kingdom, Ordinance of March 14. 1645. in the Preface.
the want whereof (say they) has caused much trouble in this and other States.
This was one consideration, upon which Episcopacy was taken away, Ordinan. June
12. 1643.
namely, because it was very prejudicial to the state and government of this
Kingdom.

Now, if a settlement in the Church depends thus upon the Laws and
constitutions of the Commonwealth, As they or it shall alter and change, there
will ordinarily (then at furthest) be new mouldings of the Church order in
whole; or in some parts of it: and if so, experiments may be made, of several
ways and impositions, before a through and fixed settlement of any. It cannot
be expected (says the former Ordinance) a rule in every particular should be
settled at once, but that there will be need of suppliment, and additions, and
happily also of alterations; in some things as EXPERIENCE shall bring to light
the necessity thereof, though the fundamentals and substantial parts of
Church Government has been settled.

And so in the first reformation, there was a reserve for alterations. It is
said of the Ceremonies and Church Order then determined, Preface to the Com.
Prayer Book.
that upon just causes they may be altered and changed, being not as the Law
of God, and a little after in the same Declaration, That we should put away
such things from time to time, as we perceive to be abused, as in man's
Ordinance it often chances. And it is appointed by the Statute for Uniformity;
That the Queens Majesty, with the advice of her Metropolitan, might make such
alterations, and ordain and publish such further Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church as may be most for Gods glory, etc. And what alteration was, in the
Common Prayer Book, in 1^ Jacobi was done by Commission under the Great Seal,
Proclamation of March 5. 1 Jaco.
which is there said to be according to the form which the Laws of this Realm
in like case prescribe to be used, so that not only in Parliament, but at other
times also, alterations might be made

. 7.
So they say, Ordi. of March 14. 1645.
THe great difficulty which the Honorable Houses found, to pitch upon any thing
suddenly in Church Government, especially in what they judged not to be
fundamental, and of the substance of it, for that was sooner settled by them:
And the possibility upon further experience to make alterations in
Circumstantials and lesser matters. Did beget a tenderness in them, and
gracious indulgence to such as were to submit, in what they then settled: as

1 In the establishing of matters more doubtful for three years only, or a
shorter time. 2 What was to be for a standing Law, or Rule, and for longer
time, had no ruining penalty, to enforce submission. 3 A forbearance was
consulted, for such as through tenderness of Conscicence could not come up to
that rule, prudently and piously considering; What was not without so much
difficulty resolved upon in their own Consciences to establish: might after
establishment, find some difficulty in other men's Consciences to be submitted
unto.

And the truth is, such matters as Civil Governors and others have looked upon
as small differences, or but Circumstances, or at most, not of the substance of
Discipline or Worship: yet it has fallen out otherwise, in the Consciences of
those that have been to practice, knowing their God to be a jealous and severe
God, in matters wherein his Worship and Name is concerned, Exodus 20.
Small things are great to a searching tender Conscience, and where doing or
not doing, thrusts a man between these two rocks; the offending of God or man.

. 8.
And that our Governors may still (if it please the Lord) continue this work
of reformation, with the like tenderness, as it has bin begun, and hitherto
carried on: let it be seriously and sadly considered, how that from time to
time the greatest differences and contentions with us in Ecclesiastical affairs
have risen: not from what is of the substance or essence, either in Discipline
or Worship; but from Circumstances only, and lesser matters in both. And then
especially such things have proved, and will prove occasions of greatest
suffering and discouragement to Ministers; when such smaller and more doubtful
matters as these, are imposed under such great and undoing penalties, as in
THIS CASH.

Episcopal and Common Prayer Book Conformity, and the contentions and
sufferings upon that account is a sad instance, and may not be forgotten. The
matters controverted were not of the substance either of Discipline or Worship,
in the opinions of those that imposed them. This appears in the Preface to the
Common Prayer Boo^ and frequent professions of the Bishops: Nor were they
otherwise judged of by those that opposed and sought to have them reformed. It
is asserted by our Brethren in a Treatise, that the Bishops and Seekers of
Reformation are all one (that is the title of the Book) the drift and scope
whereof is to show, that whatsoever is essentially of the religion and
profession of the Church of England, and of the Ministry, described in the Holy
Scripture, maintained by the Prelates standing for conformity: We the
Ministers and People, who seek reformation, do hold and profess the same. And
the things we desire to be reformed, and they stand earnestly to maintain,
are but Circumstantial. Additaments, brought into the Church by Humane
constitution. Which will be more evident, if we reduce the Controversies
thereabout to these three heads; the Leitourgie, Ceremonies, and Episcopacy.

For the first, stinted prayers. A formed Leitourgie there was, to be held to
for matter and words, by all Ministers, or to lose their Livings. Those that
were for this, look upon such forms imposed to be no matter of Religion, Mr.
B^^^ his trial, p. 4.
or substantial means of Worship, nor necessary to prayer; And those against it
join in this, that the Book of Common prayer may be used for the substance
thereof.

2 The heats and sufferings about the Ceremonies were greater, the Materials of
this Controversy were but Circumstantials, so granted by both parties; Our
Brethren disputed not against them, Br^dsh. 12, Arg.
but as in manner and form prescribed. Those that pressed Ceremonies professed
as much. Our Church, (says Bishop Morton) retains them for decency, etc.
without making them of the substance of Gods Service, The 3 Innocent Cerem p.
45.
thinking them alterable and changeable, without opinion of necessity. And of
the Cross (one of the worst of them) in the Canons of 1603. Can. 30. The
keeping and omitting of a Ceremony in it self considered is but a small thing,
Ed. 6. Common Prayer Book, Ann. 1549.
it is said to be no part of the SVBSTANCE of the Worship. The infant is fully
and perfectly Baptized before the sign of the Cross, which being afterward
used, does neither add any thing, or being omitted does detract any thing from
the effect and SVBSTANCE of it, and in the same Can. It is a thing in it self
INDIFFERENT.

3. Episcopacy, and that form of Government, which (says Doct. Downham is the
chief and principal: though other particulars be controverted, and so chief:
as that sometimes I have thought the rest to be but controversies in pretense,
Pref. to his Sermon. at La^^.
to avoid the envy of this. The foundation of this Controversy also is laid
in matters of the same nature, and such as are not of the substance and
Essentials of Church Government, betwixt it and Presbytery, in the proper work
and acts of either there is not found a substantial difference. The Parliament
gives us an instance in one of the highest, ORDINATION. Which is asserted in
the Episcopal way to be for SVBSTANCE valid, and not to be disclaimed by any
that have received it, and that Presbyters so ordained may ORDAIN other
Presbyters; the like may be said of Excommunication, and other Administrations
of either: that they are the same for substance. The learned Bishop of Armath
in a Treatise written by him long ago, showed how without the breach of any
Scripture rules, or destroying any thing essential to Church Government; The
reduc. of Episco. unto a Synodical form.
Episcopacy and Presbytery might be reduced into one form. And it is the
opinion of the most of our Non-Conformists, in their writings against those of
the separation; Bradsh. against Johnson, Hildersham Jacobs, and others.
that the Bishops of this Nation, and Presbyters, according to the institution
of Christ, differ not in any essential part or work of the Ministry.

I may add also in point of Church Government, that Presbytery and
Independency is the same for substance, and so granted by both; We agree (say
the dissenting Brethren) with them (Presbyterians) in Doctrine and Worship,
Accommodation, pa. 29. and 77 Jus di. Min. by the Province of Lon.
and in the most SUBSTANTIAL things of Church Government; our brethren also
assert, that our differences from them are in Circumstantials, and in lesser
matters only.

If now Presbytery, and Independency be the same for substance, and their
differences but in Circumstances, and upon that account the Magistrate (in his
opinion) has power to settle either, as he shall judge most suitable to the
Civil estate, and when he finds it inconvenient in that respect also, to
alter again any form, as he did Episcopacy; if this be supposed, and either
of these should be imposed to be owned under the penalty of ejection, or
silencing; (which the Lord in mercy as yet has prevented) It may be a means in
all likelihood, to take from the people of God, as many precious Ministers of
the Gospel (if it should remain, so long) as Episcopacy when it had its time,
and was in the like manner imposed.

It was looked upon by the Parliament, as no matter of the substance of
Church Government, as they expressly declare, which was by Ordinance
established: for the judging of scandalous sinners, and such as were to be
kept from the Sacrament. They profess also in doing this, Ordinanc. of March
14. 1645.
they had the COVENANT which they had so solemnly taken before their eyes. And
yet those that were to submit and obey, complain in their petition to both
Houses, that there were some things established in those Ordinances, so
contrary to that way of Government which Christ has appointed in his Word,
Assemb. Pet. of March 23, 1645.
and so disagreeable to the COVENANT, that they dare not practice according to
that provision. And if the penalty of Ejection should have been laid upon those
that could not in conscience submit to that establishment; it was professed by
the Assembly in another Petition, that they did evidently foresee, that not
only THEY, but MANY of their godly Brethren, must be put upon sinning, or the
forsaking of their stations in the ministry.

. 9.
Thus we see what great discouragements arise from such impositions; and how
not only the WAY is made far narrower to those who would come into the
Ministry, and the STATION more slippery and uncertain to those that are in;
which uncertainty arises not only from the doubtfulnesse of our own thoughts
in disputable points, but the changes may happen in a state.

This must needs bring a low esteem upon this way, especially when so many
other Callings and employments are in our eye, more illustrious and creditful,
and may be undertook, and continued in, with much more security; The Law,
Physic, Merchandise, etc. Callings much more gainful, and may be had, and
practiced by a Turk, or Jew, or Papist, here amongst us; nor is there any thing
in point of Religion or Morals more required of them in that respect, than in
the holding of their Houses, Lands, or Temporal estates.

And let not men deceive themselves in thinking, that this Calling has such a
peculiar sweetness, and such encouragements from the Lord, more than other
Callings, that there is no fear we shall want Ministers; Or that the men of
this Calling should be so Spiritual, as revenues or reward in these temporal
and carnal things, should, or ought not to be respected by them.

Ans. Though sowing of Spiritual things was, and is, a very sweet and
comfortable employment: yet the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.11. thought it not equal, we
should therefore imbitter it with poverty, but rather sweeten it further, by
their reaping of carnal things, Gal. 6.6, 7.
and he that is taught to communicate to him that teaches, the good things of
this life, else but a mocking of God.

If this Calling do meet with such peculiar encouragements, above other
Callings, from the Lord, this is no argument it may therefore be the more
loaded by us; but on the contrary, as he will honor them that honor him, so
should we honor them that God honors, and encourage them, most of any, that
the Lord encourages: You that are Gods and Fathers here on the earth, with the
comforts of the earth, as our heavenly Father does such with the greater
comforts of his Spirit. I answer further, and let it be considered.

When men take the first prospect of the calling, they purpose themselves unto,
it is at a distance, and after this resolution is taken up (which is but the
first step) there is a tedious journey to be made through some years
education; so that the most men that now are in this, or in most other
callings, are such who were in their Natural state and condition, when they
first chose and designed their way. And made their choice with respect rather
to a livelihood, and support in outward things; some to raise an estate, etc.
than any thing of more Spiritual consideration: As the bread and plenty in his
Fathers house was to that Son (in the place and distance in which he stood)
the first, if not the greatest motive, Luke 15.17
in a higher and greater disposement.

And therefore when those great encouragements, and places of advancement, as
Bishoprics, Deaneries, double Benefices, Benefices with Prebendaries, and the
like: without some of which there was never yet any man, though of ever so
great eminency in this calling, has been able to rise, to any such estate in
this world, as almost in any other profession, some that are expert and able in
it have done. I say, when these were taken away, a very great encouragement to
Learning was removed, and such as will be felt in the following age. Not that
the continuance of such places is in the least desirable, no, they were sinful,
and ought to be removed.

But let Gods dealing and providence in removing of them, be remarkably
observed, and especially in this, namely, That when the Lord took from this
Tribe those invitations, that did balance the hazard of a long and chargeable
education, and other uncertainties, At the same time these Ceremonies and
subscriptions, (the tenure by which they were held) and those great and
breaking penalties of ejection and deprivation for Nonconformity were also
happily removed; which was so great an encouragement on the other hand; as it
held up men's minds to the Ministry notwithstanding.

But now to see these penalties, upon one occasion or other, returning upon us
again (but those encouragements, or any equivalent, never likely to return) and
that after they have been so lately, and twice taken away, and to return again
in as strict a severity upon this almost sunk generation of men as ever they
were inflicted; It will cause multitudes to turn their backs upon this
Profession more than upon any other; and more than ever they have done
heretofore.

I must profess, I have long feared, and do still more than ever, considering
these things, and upon what uncertain terms also, that maintenance depends,
which the Law has allowed for the Ministers support, and how long struck at (I
mean Tithes) and petitioned against, and I doubt had been taken away before
this time, were it not for the Lay-interest (so much spoken against by some) of
Appropriators. And also with what difficulty, some Tithes, especially in Cities
and Towns, are now recovered and gotten in.

I say, when I thus consider and lay all together, I fear this Nation, which
has been worthily famous throughout the world, for learned, powerful, able
Preachers, In a short time (if such discouragements should be brought in again
upon the Ministry) our Governors will be constrained, either 1 To take the
course they do in the Netherlands, where the Ministers being low and mean,
their Children coming to the charity of the State, are bred up to the Ministry
again for a supply when their Fathers go off by death. And for their Professors
places, men are called ordinarily from other parts to supply them. Or 2 To put
into the Ministry persons bred up to some other Calling or Trade: who though
not able in conscience to conform to what is, or what may be imposed in
Discipline or Worship, yet (if it so happen) can take up their Shops or Trades
again: Having been so provident, as not to cast their youth into such a way of
breeding, as will hang their necessary livelihood upon such an uncertain, and
turning hinge.

. 10.
And if this also be added, the SEASON, and a consideration of these times, in
which, 1 Ministers work never lay heavier upon those that are faithful; and 2
The hands never fewer to bear it up, than at this present, which will add
weight and aggravation to our discouragement.

For the first, when a reformation is made, of what is amiss in Religion; when
the Worship of God comes to be purged of old wonts and superstitions, these
are such things as the common people are more unwilling to part with than their
gold or silver, 1 Pet. 1.18. Judge. 18.24 Jer. 32.35.
or any thing else they have in this world. A more Spiritual Gospel Light also,
in reforming times, breaks forth upon such as naturally love darkness rather
than light. At such times therefore there has ever been great stirrings, and
distempers of spirit through the generality of a whole Nation.

The Ministers they only stand as it were in the front of contention, and
receive all the shot of opposition. Though the alterations be by the Laws of
the Nation, and the resolutions of their own representatives: yet they are
willing to look no further than their Ministers (in whose hands indeed these
changes first appear, as those that make them. Our Minister (says one) will
not use the Common Prayer Book, not Marry, nor Bury, nor Church, as we were
wont to have it; our Minister will set up Discipline, keep us from the
Sacrament, say others.

When Ministers had to do only with the Doctrine of the Gospel, and discharged
their Consciences in a faithful and searching application of it to each person,
such a man's condition was not much better than Ishmaels, of whom it is said,
Genesis 16.12
His hand is against every man, and every man's hand against him: But, Gospel-
Discipline provokes and displeases ten times more, and this also is now
Ministerial work, and it is a New work to the common people, especially it
being exercised by so mean a hand (as they account it) a common Minister.
Formerly it was done by a Bishop, a Spiritual Court, under Seal, and by those
that exercised a great deal of state in their Ecclesiastical proceedings, like
the Princes of this world, that have dominion over their people.

Thus we see Ministers have discouragements enough at such a time, from the
work it self if performed as it should be, in so much as in many places they
are enforced to sit down with half the means the Laws give them; and what they
do get, is with such uncomfortable, contentions, as did not necessity urge,
they were better bestow their pains amongst them for nothing. And this has
been the Ministers condition upon all changes and further reformations; who
being not able in Conscience to satisfy their people in such superstitious
vanities, as they formerly enjoyed; the people put them to the utmost extremity
and molestation in every thing they have to do with them in.

And so it is at this time, in so much as his Highness commiserating the
sufferings in this kind. Proclamation for the better encouragement of godly
Ministers. Nov. 25. 1658.
of the most conscientious Ministers throughout the Nation; was graciously
pleased with the advice of his Council: by a seasonable Proclamation, to
require all persons concerned, to deal more righteously in this matter.

And it being thus at present with the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, and
especially with those that are most zealous to carry on this work of
reformation. If to this severe Discipline of the people, who take from him half
his means, because he discharges his Conscience in some things: such
Discipline of the Magistrate be added; the taking away his whole means,
because he cannot go against his Conscience in some other things. I say, if it
be thus with this profession, and on each hand beset with such discouragements,
it is not for us to expect any thing in the future, but a very low Ministry
through the Nation, some few persons being off the Stage, that more encouraging
times engaged to come on.

. 11.
For the Second. As the work it self has not been so troublesome and
discouraging, in any age: so is this a season wherein the faithful Orthodox
Laborers are few, very few in comparison. The age before this late
Reformation, was a very wasting age, by reason of Episcopal tyranny, many that
were conscientious diverted their Studies; of those that engaged in the
Ministry, multitudes were hunted out of this Nation into foreign parts, where
half of them lost their last breath, and not half of that half remaining, are
returned amongst us again.

It is also with us now, as in the first reformation, the Popish then so the
Episcopal disaffected Ministers now, have necessarily been turned out of this
employment: so that such is the scarcity of well-affected and able men to carry
on this work, that many Parishes throughout the Nation lie vacant, and are as
sheep without a Shepherd; especially in the remoter parts. And where it is
otherwise, and places better furnished; the number is not sufficient, no not in
the City of London, or the Universities, to preserve their people to the
intrest of the present work of Christ: but are more and more prevailed upon,
and infected with the old Leaven of Popery and Superstition, and the wretched
Principles of the Episcopal malignant Party, which daily increases every where.

And the reason of such Apostasy I conceive to be this. Many superstitious and
ill-affected, still hold their places and Livings, by the intrest of friends,
or having been wary, and kept without the reach of the Ordinance; and those
more open who have been ejected, creep into the empty and vacant places, and
having no legal maintenance are not (nor are the people that receive and
maintain them) within the reach of any Law as yet established: so that it is to
be feared, such persons upon one account or other, are a greater number than
the sound and godly, and those that engage thoroughly in this work.

This being so, the faithful and well-affected Ministers of the Gospel, should
not at such a time especially, but for very great unworthiness, be ejected and
put out of their places. There is too much ground to fear, that some one such
imposition as in THIS CASE, and rigorously prosecuted upon such as cannot
conform, will give the Malignant party the day they look for; and those that
do conform and keep their places: will be so overtopped by Malignants and
their followers, as they will not be able to do much in reforming of their
people any where. The common sort of men in all such changes being ordinarily
found, very brutishly to stick and hold to old Customs, and then most of all,
and with most zeal, when there is an endeavor by wholesome Laws and
constitutions to direct, and put them on to a more Gospel and Spiritual way of
serving the Lord.

. 12.
It is thought and said, the differences and contest about Church Government,
and the like matters, that have unhappily fallen out amongst those that are
well-affected, has been a great advantage and strengthening to the other party.
And very likely it has been so, and therefore the more heed ought to be, lest
some new matter of controversy be started, that may occasion further
differences amongst the godly.

Our adversaries never have such advantage of the different opinions or
practices that are amongst our selves, as when for such differences we drive
one another out of the field. Though differences are and have bin between
Presbyterians and Independents, yet each keeps his station, and fights (in
different regiments, it may be) against the same common Enemy. But by such
penalties of ejection and silencing; we drive a considerable part of our own
out from us, when our common enemy is already too strong for the whole. The
Popish party had no such advantage by any differences amongst those that
opposed them, in the first reformation, as when the brethren so differing came
by the severity of Governors, to be distinguished by the sir-names of
Conformists and Non-Conformists, and the one upon that account cashiered and
droven out of the field by the other.

And I have been very apt to conceive, this to be the cause why that first
reformation prospered no better: we know that in near a hundred years it gained
little upon Popery and superstition more than was gotten by the first assault,
nay it decayed, and Popery grew under it so fast, as at last we were almost
returned into the same condition that we were reformed from; this I say may be
the cause. There was the like severe impositions and Laws made (as in this
case) upon occasion of differences amongst themselves, and then advantages were
taken thereby, and many put out of the Muster-roll, for Nonconformity, who
were of greatest courage, and most faithful resolution against Popery and
Superstition, the then common enemy.

The silencing and ejection of Ministers in Q. Elizabeth's days, reformation
being newly begun, and the enemies to it many, the friends and those that
faithfully engaged few: was looked upon by the godly prudent of that age, as
very unseasonable; yea though their crimes had deserved it, because of the
scarcity of Preachers at that time. There is nothing more frequent in our
suffering Brethrens writings, that were then published against the Hierarchy,
than a bemoaning the great loss to the cause and people of God thereby. I will
mention but one; Considering the season (says Mr. Parker) though we were
worthy, yet should we least be deprived now when Popery (Episcopacy and
malignancy we may add) rises like the swellings of Jordan, yea makes
invasion like an armed man, when there are wanting many (this is truly our sad
case at present) On the other side, in many Parishes to stand up in the gap
against it. Does not the Canon Law it self spare depriving for greater faults,
when there is PENVRIA sacerdotum and quando utilitas eccelesiae exigit. Park.
of the Cross, cap. 5.. 16.

CHAP. VIII. Schisms and Divisions amongst the people of God, occasioned and
continued thereby, is another fruit, See Pa. 101, and 120
or evil consequence of such penalties.
. 1:
SUch Impositions and Penalties, are a means to fix and hold up the differences
that are in men's judgments about the things of Christ: and alienate affections
in those that differ, and so occasion Rents and Schisms amongst the people of
God.

Love is the bond of perfection, by it the members are Spiritually united to
the body, as they are by faith to the Head Christ Jesus. Heresy divides from
the head, Schism from the members, it being a loosening, or breach in that
bond, love has its seat and foundation in TRUTH, 2 John. 1. Whom I love in the
truth. 2. For the truths sake which dwells in us, and shall be with us for
ever. As Saints, and especially Churches, have their love and compactnesse
maintained, in being of the same mind and judgment in Truths: so Schisms
usually begin from differences in that respect, Romans 16.17.

. 2.
There are truths known and generally received, there are also truths not, or
not so fully known, but doubtfully assented to: Truths nourish love no further
than mutually believed and agreed in; hence ignorance, weakness in judgment,
dubiousnesse and the like; or what keeps us from a clear and full cloze with
truth, are very prejudicial to love, and entireness amongst brethren.

Truths also are either about what is of necessity and a Christians duty, or
what is indifferent and a Christians liberty. Where these are not held
distinct, and weight laid upon them accordingly: but matters of duty, in a
liberty or indifferency; or things left to our liberty, held to and required in
our practice as necessary. Herein so far as we divide from truth in our
apprehensions; in like proportion, we are disposed to divide one from another
in our affections.

Ignorance, Error, mis-apprehensions, alienation in affections; these and the
like dispose us to Schism and Divisions: Aquinas 2^.2^. q. 39.
yet Schism is a sin distinct from each. We must propria sponte and
intention, separare ab unitate quam CHARITAS facit, before we become
Schismatics.

Knowingly and purposely, to take up or impose that for duty which is not so;
or to make such things indifferent, that are necessary: To be wilfully
ignorant, or (through sluggishnesse and indisposednesse to search) to take upon
trust with a party; and thereupon endeavor a wilful separation, and dividing
from our brethren; this (whatsoever other thing besides it) may justly be
termed Schism. And it is then most visibly and properly schism, when it is a
dividing where a more visible and professed union, as in or from Churches: as
Sedition is most apparently such, when it is a faction in a formed
Commonwealth.

. 3.
These and the like Roots of Schism, lie many times secret and under ground,
our darkness as well as our light may be under a bushel; our infirmities and
mis-apprehensions, yea want of Love it self is sometimes covered with love: so
that differences break not forth to an open contest, and professed disowning,
either of opinion, practices, of persons. But when the matter of such
differences falls under an IMPOSITION, Governors thinking to bring all into
unity, by an enforced uniformity. These differences then that before were
private, or in a less compass, are (scattered as it were and carried forth by
the hand of these Laws and injunctions) become more public and professed.
Yea, what before was of infirmity and weakness, grows up apace to wilfulness
and stiffness: at least so judged (by one of the other) in the opinion of each
party respectively.

In matters that are indifferent, and granted to be so, by the imposers: or if
necessary, yet when not evidently so, but doubtful and disputable, let it be in
Worship or Discipline; there is no severity of the Civil Magistrate, or Censure
of the Church, can reduce all, no not all that are holy, sober, and judicious,
into an uniformity. The experience of many years, and the extremities and
sufferings upon this account of many precious learned men, do sufficiently
confirm it.

And if by such severity, unity and uniformity be not obtained, divisions,
distractions, and differences will from thence arise, and grow more open and
fixed, by reason of such impositions. And this comes to pass many ways.

. 4.
I
SUch matters though in themselves indifferent and arbitrary, or if otherwise,
yet if not clearly but doubtfully so; by an imposition of this nature are
evidently held forth, and as it were asserted to be both clear and necessary,
and this has ever been a foundation of great breaches.

1 Necessary and a duty. For what is imposed by wise and righteous Governors,
with such enforcements; as if it be not submitted unto, the most necessary
duties of the Ministerial Function, as Preaching, Sacraments, etc. Abridg. page
38.
must be omitted: at least by the most tender and conscientious Ministers,
throughout the Nation (it was so argued in the Case of Ceremonies)
questionless whatsoever shall be so imposed, Bradsh. 12. Arg. arg. 1
interprets it self thereby, to be equally necessary, with some or all these
Ministerial duties. And in my submission and practice, in respect to such
imposition, I own them to be of the same necessity; and there is no means to
give testimony to the contrary, and to what I judge the truth, but by
Nonconformity, and submitting rather to the penalty. For where there is an
opinion of necessity (say our Brethren) known to be annexed unto that, which
in my Conscience is not so; it is a part of that Confession which every
Christian is bound to make of his Religion, Abridgement, pa. 38.
to reject them: and this reason for it is given by them. The yielding
obedience in using such Forms, or Ceremonies, or what is of an indifferent
nature in it self, wherein others place holiness or necessity, is an occasion
of confirming and hardening such Governors or others in their errors. Again,

2 Such a penalty as silencing or ejection implies these commands, to have very
clear evidence, and undoubted warrant from the Scriptures; at least in the
opinion of the Governors that inflict it, otherwise it were great injustice to
require submission upon such terms. He that cannot clearly know his Masters
will, should not be chastised with such stripes. If we refuse to submit (though
it be) out of tenderness and fear to offend the Lord; being doubtful: yet such
commands, speaking these things, not only necessary, but evidently so; We
shall suffer under the reproaches (as our Brethren formerly did) of persons that
were proud, Powel in his Consider.
wilful, obstinate, disobedient to Government, disturbers of the Church,
Schismatics, and the like.

. 5
Our differences being thus heightened by impositions, and becoming greater by
prejudice and misinterpretation upon that account; than what indeed they are in
themselves, The persons engaged are accordingly judged of and Censured, and a
distance kept, as if they were guilty of wilful disobedience, or neglect in
some great and necessary matters of the Worship and Service of God, and
accordingly we hold off from one another, and abate in affections. When the
foundation is removed, when TRUTH has changed its station, LOVE that is built
upon it must needs vary, if not vanish quite away. And that party which soever
it is, that from any consideration interprets up, those lesser matters to such
an odious height, will be judged by the other to be the first that declines in
affection, and that is the beginning of all breaches and schisms.

The load of that reproach was laid by the Episcopal Party on the Ministers
that left their Charges, who in Conscience were not able to conform. Offer of
Conf. p. 5
But with a great deal more reason our Brethren that suffered, charged the
Schisms and disturbances in the Church upon Episcopal severity, and rigor of
their power in keeping on, and heightning penal impositions upon Ministers, and
taking advantage thereby to suspend some, and weary others out of their places.

And if then such a decession of Ministers from their Churches were a Schism,
the Crime of it is most justly charged by our Brethren upon those who were the
sole cause of it, and not upon those who with much sadness and grief of heart
left their stations. Chapter Go. with peoples consent. p. 138
They themselves (speaking of the Prelates) are the Schismatics, and the
makers of the divisions which are now in England, All wise men know, that not
the difference, but the cause makes a Schismatic, and more fully afterward,
page 175. The Superior overruling Minister over many distinct Congregations
which the Word knows not. In truth such a one is the proper cause of
dissension and Schism, for he not willing to submit to Gods Word, by his
power draws many with him, whereupon follows dissension and schism. And
then he with his Company (being the stronger in the world) may cry out loudest
against those fewer that dissent, that they are Schismatics and
Peace-breakers, but look to the Word of God, and themselves will be found to
be the makers of the Schism by their traditions.

De. Pol. l. 1. c. 37.
Learned Parker bestows a whole Chapter in proving that, Episcopis non
puritanis dissiaium anglicanum imputandum esse. And in his Treatise of the
Cross, I would (says he) our opposites (the Bishops) were as well able to
clear themselves of Schism, as we are able, who run within that Censure of
Augustine, Quicunq, invident bonis ut quaerant occasiones excludendi eos aut
degradandi, etc. Whosoever says he envies those that are good, and seeks
occasion to exclude and eject them, that rather than they will leave their own
faults they will devise how to raise up troubles in the Church, and drive men
into Conventicles, these are Schismatics, though they still remain in the
Church.

About seven or eight and twenty years since, Master George Walker preached a
Visitation Sermon (I have cause to remember it, being then suspended, and put
out of my Ministry by the Visitor) it was upon 1 Cor. 11.16. If any man seem to
be contentious, etc. he declared, and with much strength and evidence,
asserted the Imposers, who (being not necessitated,) lay such snares; and not
those that conscientiously shun them, are the CONTENTIOUS persons, For which
Sermon he was articled against, and molested long in the High Commission Court.

. 6.
These penalties and severe impositions are many times laid by the Magistrate,
when his Conscience is not by any Scripture Light necessitated so to do. The
matters which the Scriptures have not determined precisely one way or other,
nor required any such determination from the Magistrate: If such things be
strictly imposed and bound upon us, He does not leave that liberty to others
(though it be every man's right as well as his) which he found left to him by
the Lord. And where it is thus; what was arbitrary in the Imposer, becomes
necessary to the persons imposed upon, they are necessitated either to submit
or leave their places.

And this puts a great difference, as more or less blameable in the parties
contending; when the one can plead little but his will or resolution, and the
other an apparent necessity. "We do not (said our suffering Brethren)
separate our selves from the Church, Positions Archip. pa. 10. 11.
or forsake the Ministry of the Gospel, but are thrust from it; if men driven
by Excommunication out of the Church be not Schismatics, much less Ministers
driven by suspension and deprivation. If the Prelates cannot prove from the
Word, the things in question, may be prescribed by Authority, and yielded to by
the Ministers without sin, then are the Prelates Schismatical, according to the
judgment of the Apostle, who beseeches the Brethren to mark them diligently,
who cause division and differences, besides the Doctrine which they have
learned, and avoid them, Romans 16.17.

. 7.
Breaches and Divisions (secondly) are continued and fixed by such impositions
upon this account.. II.


Humble reasonings about matters in difference amongst Brethren, if it be with
equal liberty to each, is the ordinary way to reduce into peaceable union,
persons of different judgments. But opinions or practices having obtained an
establishment by Law, are thereby exempted from any such Disputings; or so much
as being questioned, in respect either to their lawfulness or expedience.
Ecclesiast. Pol. p. 26.
Things were disputed, (says Hooker) before they came to be determined, men
afterward are not to DISPVTE any longer, but obey. Prudentia, say others, non
obedientis sed imperantis est; it is our part to obey, and not to be so wise
as to dispute what is established by power; and many are the like expressions
in Episcopal writings.

In so much as though our silenced Brethren, and those of that party, did all
along make it their humble suit, that they might have liberty and freedom) in a
modest and Christian way, to confer and dispute with the Prelatical party,
about the main and principal Controversies, and differences that were betwixt
them, This could not be obtained by all the friends and interest those poor
men could make. But (upon the like reasons as are before mentioned) it was
constantly denied them.

These forms (say the Prelates) and Ceremonies being established by a Law,
ought not to be called in question, and disputed of, as if they were doubtful.
It is presumption and arrogance to reason against what our Superiors have
done. Answ. the Minist. of London, pa. 17.
For a Subject to examine the Law of his Magistrate (says another) is to
presume and usurp authority above his superiors. The Governors themselves
have ever been sufficiently against it. Proclam. 5o Mar. 1o Jacabi
King James tells us, it is necessary for them to use constancy in upholding
the public determinations of State, otherwise it will become ridiculous, and
that the steadfast maintaining of things by public advice established, is the
weal of all Common wealths. He speaks there of Church Laws. The Canons of
1603. which were confirmed by his authority, threaten thus, Can. 6. Whosoever
shall hereafter AFFIRM the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England by
LAW ESTABLISHED, are such as being commanded by lawful authority, men may not
with a good conscience approve, use, or if occasion require subscribe unto
them, let him be excommunicated ipso facto. ( Can. 7.) The like for those that
own not Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, etc.

So that when these lesser, or doubtful matters, come to be established by a
Law, the scruples about them cannot in an ordinary way be brought to any
period: the one party being forbidden to declare their Consciences, under as
great a penalty, as for the greatest Crime a man can fall into, for so is
Excommunication ipso facto.

And if he escape this Thunderbolt from above, there is a gulf provided
beneath to swallow up all his livelihood, Act for Uniformity.
the Act for Uniformity, which is thus: Whosoever refuses to use the said
Common Prayers, etc. or shall preach, declare, or speak any thing in the
derogation of the said Book, or any thing therein contained, We are in danger
of a praemunire, and 12. Mon. imprisonment, if we speak against the Book. Ad.
pa. 41.
or of any part thereof -- he shall forfeit the profits of all his Spiritual
Benefices arising in one whole year; where the penalty for Disputing, or
reasoning against the superstitions of those Forms and Ceremonies, is as great
as for the not using them.

The deprived Ministers, when they desired a Conference or Dispute with the
Bishops, as the likeliest and readiest way both to find out the truth, Per. to
K. James. anno 1606
and to put a perpetual end to all those continued Controversies, they were
fain to make this humble suit to the King, That it would please his Majesty to
weigh the equity and justice of their desires, and the most certain advantage
the truth (on which side soever it be) shall receive thereby; and to secure by
Royal protection those that shall have to do in this conference. There is
little hope to end a Controversy, when we must not only dispute and reason,
for a liberty to dispute it, but this liberty is by Petition to be sought, of
that party only which has professedly owned their differences from us, and
fixed them already by a public establishment.

. 8.
But suppose a freedom for Dispute should be yielded, and an equal leave and
liberty granted to each party, to bring forth their strength, And so, weigh and
balance what is said on both sides. The difficulty will then be, how to set up
an even beam, while there is any thing weighs with us, but TRUTH it self; yet
so it is, where there is an establishment, and with such a penalty, there will
be a twofold WEIGHT, besides the naked truth of the cause, unavoydably cast
in: there will be, 1 The authority of the imposers. 2 Loss or gain, according
as we do conform, or otherwise.


1 Laws are looked upon as Sacred, and in things sacred, Exam. of the Decla.
of the Min. of London, pa. 56.
as enacted by the special assistance of the Holy Ghost; and ought to be
received in some sense as the Commandments of God, so they interptet, to obey
in the Lord, to obey in the Lord say they, is to obey the Magistrate, by
acknowledging his voice to be the voice of God himself. Mr. Hooker asserts,
Ecclesiast. Policy, p. 26
In litigious and controverted causes, when they come by authority to be
determined, it is the will of God that we should do accordingly, though it
seems (yea perhaps truly seems) in our private judgment or opinion, its
utterly disallowed by the Law of God. Again, such a determination is a ground
sufficient for any reasonable man's Conscience to build the duties of obedience
upon, whatsoever his own opinion were, as touching the matter before in
question.

And although some abatement be made, of this over-high opinion of the Laws
of men, in these matters: yet at the lowest rate, such Laws will be esteemed,
as the digested results, from most serious debates of such persons, who for
their prudence, and other abilities, are the choice of a whole Nation; and such
authority will have great advantage and weight in men's belief, beyond the
tenets and assertions of a few private men; what is established and in being,
equity, reason, the Law of Nature, God and Man do all FAVOR, says Hooker.

There will be a kind of reverence and homage done, even to an error, if it be
of Statutable extraction, and have a Crown upon the head of it: Hence the old
saying, Tollatur LEX and fiat certamen; while one party has a LAW on their
side, it is in vain to DISPVTE; the odds and difference will not equally be
judged of. It was moved by some Parliament men, Friends to Episcopacy, when it
was to be removed; that it might remain until a better Government were
concluded: but on the other hand, See the pref. to the Ord. of Ju. 12. 1643.
it was prudently considered, how while that form stood, and had the advantage
of the Law, there would be no freedom in arguing about it.

Reasons will not be equally weighed, if the prejudice of a Law or Authority
be put into one of the scales only. Pref. to Ecc. pol.
Things established (says Hooker) if it be but PROBABLE they be good, nothing
but evident DEMONSTRATION from private persons may be brought against them.
That which is of less weight in it self, being made up with authority, will
hold an aequilibrium with greater evidence of truth from private persons. So
that by this means the contending parties will hang (as weights equally poyzed
upon the beam, perpetually vying one with another: whereas if the Law, and
prejudice by it, were removed or wholly kept out of the Controversy; it would
quickly appear, which of the Parties contending has most truth and reason on
their side, and so controversies would either not rise, or more easily come to
a conclusion; or such as shall prolong them, discover a contentious spirit, and
not at all be regarded.

. 9.
2 There is a weight of PROFIT, also the whole revenue of the Ministry, by such
a penalty is laid on one side only. Learned men are apt enough to adhere to an
opinion they make their own, even upon this single consideration, it is their
own. But when this opinion is set closer, and become more theirs, by the
engagement of their whole livelihood: there will need a light, of a very strong
influence, to attract their judgments from it.

Some persons I acknowledge will be tempted, hereby to the contrary, and engage
the more to their opinions, when the tenure is made more noble, by the addition
of a kind of Martyrdom, or aliquid carcere dignum: but this not so ordinary,
yet where it is, such penal Laws are the temptors, and so become in a degree
accessaries, in this evil. Persons of a much more feeble spirits there are, who
may possibly yield, with a little of that light which shines so warm upon
their outward concernments; especially if narrowed by the necessities of a
Family-charge, though otherwise godly. Either of which (where it so falls
out) will be a means to continue and fix our differences.

By this latter, the hands of others, such as take up their persuasions upon
worse principles; will come to be strengthened. Those also that have stood out
for the truth, will be staggered, yea it may be change their judgments, and
fall off from their former profession. O quam sapiens argumentatrix (says one)
sibi videtur humana ignorantia, praesertim cum aliquid de gaudiis and fructibus
seculi, metuit amittere. The better grounded and resolved, not being able to
bear with such infirmities and unsteadinesse, alienate their affections (more
than is brotherly) and so, uncomfortable breaches are held up amongst those,
that are otherwise godly. When differences both in judgment and practice about
greater matters being but of private Cognizance never break forth to any such
disturbance in comparison. The Ceremonies in Edw. 6. first reformation were at
that time (only commended as it were) and all that while there was no matter of
strife about them. The sad and sorry contentions came in, with those
destructive imposings. The Litourgie, and Rites in the reformed Churches, which
they term their Agenda, are not such bones of Contention any where, as with us;
and this is the reason: they have not been enforced, under pain of deprivation,
for not conforming.

And in the present CASE, what variety of Catechisms (though a form settled by
the State) for almost an age were in use, in the several Congregations
throughout this Nation, and yet in all that age, neither by Pen, or Pulpit, the
least noise of contention about it? which could not have been, if that or any
one form had so severely been imposed.

. 10.
The malignity and evil of such penal impositions, and how prejudicial and
binding when we would try the truth, and reasonableness of men's assertions: is
demonstrated by our suffering Brethren (in their Case with the Bishops) thus.

A superstitious, or some doubtful practice, with the Magistrates
establishment, and consequences of it, put together in one scale; and what is
evidently a necessary Scripture DVTY, into the other: and you you find that in
the common esteem and judgment of men, this duty is of little weight or
consideration in comparison: 2. But on the other hand, let these prejudices and
carnal intrests be removed, and nothing but truth, and Scripture grounds, on
each side weighed one with another, you will hardly find the weight of a
feather for their Cause, or against ours. 3 Let the same impositions and
penalties be put into the other scale, against Episcopacy and Ceremonies: If
the Law had said, it shall be the loss of a man's Living to practice or preach
for Episcopacy, Common Prayer Book, or Ceremonies; these things even in their
own opinions would have been light as vanity. That you may have our Brethrens
own words in this experiment: There were presented certain Propositions to King
James, in Anno 1606. as their tenets and opinions against Episcopacy, etc. and
for Presbytery, and thereupon they thus write. The former Propositions are such
as there will not be found any one conformable Minister in this Kingdom,
except he be a masked Papist, that will refuse to subscribe to any one of them,
if so be it would please the King and State, by Law to urge them thereupon,
under such penalties as the Ministers are urged to subscribe to the Articles
devised by the Prelates. Yea, we are out of all doubt, that the Prelates
themselves (if it were pressed upon them by the King and State) under pain of
deprivation from their Bishoprics, would not stick to avouch upon their
oaths, that the Ceremonies and subscription for which the Ministers stand
suspended, and deprived, are wicked and ungodly, and such as no good Christian
ought to yield unto. Nay, if the case stood but upon the saving of their
temporalties thereby (which else they should lose) we doubt not but with heart
and hand to subscribe to any one of the aforesaid Propositions.

The conjecture or guess our Brethren made of the Episcopal party, we have
found very true, having been so happy as to see some comfortable changes, and
the trials of their spirits in them. For when the authority and countenance of
our superiors came to be set as much against these superstitions as it was
formerly for them, how easily were they laid down by those that were most
zealous for them before? And we find very few (truly conscientious) if any,
silenced, rather than not to use the Ceremonies: whereas formerly of those that
were against the use of them, near three hundred eminently godly were deprived
in the space of a year.

All which declares in effect, that the Ceremonies and these forms are not of
any such necessity or real worth in themselves: It is that to which they are
raised, by the Magistrates authority and settlement, that has rendered them
the matter of such contention; the imposers themselves do in a manner say so,
The keeping or omitting of a Ceremony in it self considered, Preface to Com.
Pr. Book.
is but a SMALL THING, yet the transgression of a Common Order is no small
offense before God. There is nothing in the Service and Worship of God
offensive to him, but the omission of some DVTY, or the transgression of some
Commandment about it. And therefore when such small things as are neither of
these, come to be thus greatned, and more offenses against God in his service,
by reason of Human impositions then God himself has made, and the faithful
Laborers of Christ turned out of his Vineyard for such offenses only, this is
the Gravamen.

And against this thraldom and bondage, our Brethren the Servants of God in
the former age, did humbly contend in their generation: that is, to have no
more, nor other things imposed, or received as necessary, and duties in the
service of God, but what he in his Word has made so. And this is the great
felicity and happiness (through their prayers and sufferings) the Lord by the
present reformation has restored unto us.

And we have been possessed now some years with the sweet fruition of that
liberty, those our Brethren saw only afar of, rejoicing in the hopes of it,
and so fell asleep in the Lord. I say, to suffer our selves again to be
brought into bondage, and not to stir and do our duty, and what belongs to
each in our places for the preventing hereof, is to degenerate in respect of
the courage our Fathers had for the Lord in their times. Had they prevailed for
themselves, by their contests with the Episcopal party, and enjoyed ten or
twelve years freedom as grear, or greater than was hoped for; and tasted the
sweetness of it in the purity of Ordinances for such a time: would they have
been the more, or less patient in being brought again to their former
thraldom? Can any reasonable man imagine then, that the returning of like
impositions in as great severity again as ever formerly, and for the like
matters, will not occasion greater contentions, and differences, Schisms, and
distractions amongst the people of God, than ever was heretofore; especially
when besides Scripture Light, that lays it upon our Consciences thus to
contend, Jude 3. Gal. 5.1
and stand fast in our liberty, we have had also the experience (which our
Fathers never had) that such humble, yet zealous contendings and strivings for
truth and purity of Ordinances, has been blessed and made successeful?

There have not been any reformed Churches in the world more oppressed in this
kind; or any that have prayed, and sought God more in their sufferings; no
people that have obtained of the Lord a more full deliverance, and greater
Gospel liberty, than the godly people of England this day enjoy, abroad
formerly, but at home also now. Can it be imagined that a people, after an age
of praying and sufferings, after part of an age, in hazarding their Estates and
Lives, and for so considerable a time now enjoying the fruit of it, can with an
easier and quieter mind, dwell in a house of bondage again: than their
predecessors, that never had a taste of such manifestations of the Lord, in
owning his oppressed ones, as we have had in these late years.

. 12.
And it is a mercy of the Lord never to be forgotten, the taking off all such
burdens from the Ministry; and that a different judgment in smaller matters,
shall neither keep, nor cast out (as formerly) such as are learned, and
faithful in their places.

This is effectually done by the Petition and advice presented to his late
Highness by the Parliament, Anno 1656. a work and favor to the people of God,
doubtless very acceptable to Jesus Christ. And I do most humbly beseech our
Brethren, and whomsoever they are that pretend to the furtherance of
reformation, not to suffer their eye to be evil, because the Magistrate has
been so good; but if still we will be so inconsiderate, as to be calling for
fire from Heaven against those that in smaller matters of Discipline, or
Worship differ from us; the Lord I hope will keep the heart of our Governors
stedy, to what has been so happily by themselves established, and not easily
be prevailed upon, by persons of any persuasion, that make it the matter of
their suit, and solicitations, not so much the enjoying of liberty to
themselves, as the restraining of it, from others as holy and Orthodox as
themselves, especially when nothing will serve their turn, but such penalties
as will utterly ruin those that differ from them.

. 13.
Does not this present age look upon the severity of the former age as very
strange and unwarrantable. If not such a garment, such a gesture, such a form
of words as others shall direct; you must out of your Living, out of your
Ministry. It is thought VERY NECESSARY (says the Injunction) that no manner of
Priest or Deacon shall hereafter take to his Wife any manner of Woman,
Injunctions of Q. Eli. An. 1559. Injunct. 2 9
without the advice and allowance first had by the Bishop of the Diocese, and
two Justices of Peace next to the place of her abode, etc. and if any shall do
otherwise they shall not be permitted to preach the Word, or give Sacraments,
nor he capable of any Ecclesiastical Benefice, does this seem strange to us
now? it seemed very necessary in the judgment of our Governors then; and why
may not the injunctions, we make of so much necessity now (as that a Minister
shall not without the advice and allowance of others CHVS^ his own words) look
as strange in the eyes of the godly prudent, in an after age; and if it should
do so, it is but a just recompense of our sluggishnesse, in lingering and
hanging back on former Customs, and letting the present light and
manifestations of the Lord so far out-goe us. The truth is, whatsoever is
adhered to, of Human invention, let it seem ever so specious, and useful in the
service of God for the present: yet the glory of the flesh is but as the flower
of grass, 1 Pet. 1.24, 25
which will fade away, The Word and wisdom of the Lord only, is that which
will be the same to day, yesterday, and for ever.

. 14.
It is a strange unhappiness, that Ministers only of all other persons are
found to be of such an unwholesome temperature, that their infirmities (if such)
can no way be cured, but (igne and ferro) by abcission, no punishment
sufficient (almost) for any fault, but silencing, ejection, and the like. Gild.
Silvianus, pa. 214
I confess (says Mr. B.) if I had my will the man should be EjECTED as a
negligent Pastor, that will not rule his people by Discipline. 2 Others, London
Petition, Mr. P. and Mr. M. in their writings, with others.
if not Conform to the Discipline (in particular) established. 3 There are
others on the other hand, if they had their will, those that do exercise
Discipline, and suspend from the Sacrament upon that account, should in like
manner be punished. And in this case those that do not instruct in a Homily
form, An Act presented to his late Highness which was refused by him, which
has occasioned this discourse.
should have been ejected as a negligent Minister. If in a Civil State there
should be but one kind of punishment, and for every Crime a man be made a
Felon, or Traitor; it will argue in such a Commonwealth, there are more people
than they can tell what to do with, and their Laws are bent rather to rid the
Country of men, than of their Crimes; it were uncharitable to think there is
such a spirit in all that have thus by Petition, or otherwise provoked
Parliaments and Magistrates to such a severity: yet this we know, there was
such a Root of bitterness found amongst the persecuting Bishops, in so much as
conformity to all their drudgeries would not serve at last; but ( Conformist,
or Nonconformist) if he were a conscientious Minister, they would worm him
out one way or other. And it was the constant profession, some of them were not
ashamed to make; that they hated a conforming Puritan more than a Papist, or a
Drunkard; which showed plainly, they brought in, and kept up such penalties, to
rid themselves of a party, which by the dint of truth and reason they could not
subdue. This Height and Hypocrisy was the evident forerunner of their fall,
the Lord in mercy grant we may be warned thereby. I hope it is the spirit of
very few, if any amongst us; nor did this evil disease cleave to all the
Bishops, some of them did more tender the Gospels progress, than to desire the
outing of such as differed from them. I will conclude this Discourse with the
Speech of one of them (it being pertinent to our purpose) whose moderation and
prudence is worthy our imitation. It was spoken in the Convocation House, May
23. anno 1604. by the Bishop of St. David's, to the rest of the Bishops (and it
is the sum of what I aim at in this third Argument) his words are these:

I put great difference between Quod liceat, and Quid expediat, and likewise
between them that are Schismatical, or open disturbers of the State
Ecclesiastical established, and them that are scrupulous only upon some
Ceremonies, and other Circumstances, being otherwise learned, studious, grave,
and honest men, whose labors have been both painful in the Church, and
profitable to their several Congregations.

Concerning those Preachers last mentioned, I suppose that if upon urging of
them to the use of Ceremonies, and attire prescribed, they should stand out
stiffly, and choose rather to forgo their Livings, and the exercise of their
Ministry, and though I do not justify their doings therein, yet surely their
service would be missed, at such time, as need shall require them and us, to
give the right hand of fellowship one to another, and to go arm in arm
against the Common Adversary, that so there might be, Vis unita fortior. In
which case of want of their joint labors with ours, there might arise cause of
some such doleful complaint, as fell out upon an accident of another nature in
the Book of Judge. 5.15. where it is said, that for the divisions of Reuben
there were great thoughts of heart.

Also remember, Judge. 20.12, 13, 14.46, 47, and 21.1.6. etc.
that when the Benjamites, though for their desert in maintaining of a bad
cause were all destroyed saving six hundred, and the men of Israel swear in
their fury, that none of them would give his Daughter to the Benjamites to
Wife, yet when their hot blood was over, they lamented, and said, There is one
Tribe cut off from Israel this day, and they used all their wits to the
uttermost of their policy to restore that Tribe again. In like sort, if these
our Brethren aforesaid should be deprived of their places for the matters
premised, I think we should find cause to bend our wits to the uttermost
extent of our skill to provide some Cure of Souls for them, where they may
exercise their talents.

Furthermore, if these men, being diverse hundreds (as it is bruited abroad)
should forsake their Charges (as some do presuppose they will) who I pray you
should succeed them? Verily I know not where to find so many able Preachers
within this Realm unprovided for. But be it that so many may be found to
supply those empty rooms, yet they might more conveniently be settled in the
Seats of unpreaching Ministers, and so the number of Preachers should be much
increased. But if they should be put into the places of these men being
dispossessed, thereupon would follow; First, That the number of preaching
Incumbents should not be multiplied by their supply; and Secondly, The Churches
could not in likelihood be so well and fitly furnished on the sudden; for that
though happily the new supply should be of men as learned as the former, yet
is it not probable that they should be at their first coming from the
Universities, or in a good while after, so ready Preachers, so experimented in
Pastoral Government, so well acquainted with the manners, and usage of the
people, and so discreet every way in the carriage of themselves, as the others,
who have spent already many years abroad in their Ministerial charges. Besides
this, for so much as in the life time of the late Archbishop of Canterbury,
these things were not so extremely urged, but that many learned Preachers
enjoyed their liberty herein, conditionally that they did not by word or deed
openly disgrace, or disturb the State established; I would know a reason, why
it should now be so generally and exceeding strictly called upon, especially
seeing that those men are now the more necessary, by so much as we see greater
increase of Papists to be now of late than were before. To conclude, I wish,
that if by Petition made to the Kings Majesty, there cannot be obtained a quite
remove of the premises, which seem so grievous to diverse, The Bishops
themselves some of them were not so zealous against tolleration as some of our
Brethren are.
nor yet a TOLLERATION for them, which be of the more stayed, and temperate
carriage; yet at the least, there might be procured a mitigation of the
penalty, if they cannot be drawn by other reasons to a conformity with us.

CHAP. IX. The Fourth Argument. It is destructive to that Independency which
has been anciently claimed and professed, by our brethren the Non-Conformists.
. 1.
THere is an exemption, or Independency, in the manage of Ecclesiastical
matters, pleaded for by those our Brethren, as an immunity or peculiar of the
Church and Ministers (being a Body or Corporation distinct from the Civil
State) which is utterly overthrown by such an imposition, as in THIS CASE. A
sole power to determine and order all matters appertaining to the Worship and
Service of God: Such methods and forms also, with the usage of them, and other
circumstances as are pertinent to the same; is placed primarily and
independently in Ministers of the Gospel, and not in Parliaments or Princes.
This has been constantly asserted by our Brethren of the Presbyterian
persuasion, ancient and modern, those that have suffered, and those that have
reigned. Discip. of Scot. p. 73
As the Magistrate (says the Discipline of the Church of Scotland) ought not
to preach, Minister Sacraments, or Excommunicate; so he ought not to prescribe
any rule how it should be done, but command the Ministers to observe the Rules
commanded in the Word. Cartwright against Whitg. lib. 1 p. 192
As Ministers meddle not (says Master Cartwright) with making of Civil Laws,
and Laws for the Common Wealth; so the Civil Magistrate is not to ORDER
matters of the Church. Eng. po. Cerem. p. 148
The Civil Magistrate (says a Modern Author) may not by himself, define and
direct such matters as appertain to Divine Worship, or make any Laws
thereabout; it belongs not to Princes to govern and direct things of this
nature, even as it belongs not to Pastors to govern and direct earthly
things, and civil societies of men. The Officers of Christ qua- Officers, are
not directly and properly (say our London Ministers) subject to the Civil
power; to whom then? Jus di. regim. p. 89
It is told us, pa. 90. the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets, not to the Civil power as such. Argument against Cer. etc. Arg. 4.
And long before, viz. in Anno 1570. it was asserted, that Ministers ought not
to obey Princes when they command Ceremonies and forms, etc. it does diminish
(says the Author) the authority of his Office, which is to govern the Church
of God, Acts 20. but in this he himself and the Church of God is governed by
the will of the Prince. This Ecclesiastical power (according to them) is in
every particular Officer, derived immediately from the Lord Jesus Christ; and
to be exercised by the Coetus Presbyterorum, which they call the Church. The
Synod has to determine the time, place, and FORM of preaching and praying,
etc. for who should be able to know these things best, according to Gods Word,
but they that be Preachers of the same unto others? Dr. Fulk his disc. of
Discipline, p. 117. If Discipline were settled (says Mr. Knox) there would need
no coming to the Parliament for matters of Religion. Exhor. to Eng. p. 99
If the Convocation house (say others) were such as it ought to be, Sup. to Q.
Eliz. p. 45
then were it not LAWFUL for the Parliament to establish any thing appertaining
to the Worship of God.

If this be so, such a determination as in this case cannot be made by the
Civil Magistrate, without an incroachment upon the privileges and intrustments
of the Church; contained in the Charter, by which we are Officers and Ministers
of Jesus Christ. For if all questions, (as our Brethren of Scotland affirm)
about Religion, Declar. of the Com. of the Genesis Assemb. p. 26
and matters Ecclesiastical ought to be determined by the assemblies of the
Church, as matters Civil by the Parliament (a Parliament is absolute and
independent in its determinations) Then this question, whether stinted Forms of
Prayer, or instruction composed by men ought to have a constant settled use, and
how frequent or seldom to be used in the Worship of God, and of the
sufficiency or insufficiency of a Minister in any such respect: being
undoubtedly questions of that nature: should first have been determined by the
Church, (which has not been done) before the Parliament had meddled with it.

. 2.
Obj. If it be said, the Assembly of Divines, disposed and put the principles
of Religion into this form or mould, and fitted it for such a method and way of
instruction, and commended this Catechism to the Parliament.

A. 1. So were the forms of Prayer and Homilies composed by learned godly men,
and out of a good intention, those first reformers are acknowledged to be
excellent instruments raised of God, The Preface to the Direct.
etc. it is not the matter (in those Prayers and Homilies) that was so much
blamed; but the end and use for which, and the authority by which they were
brought into the Church: they are imposed (says the Admonition to the
Parliament) as a set service to God, Adm. p. 9
though the words or matter be good, the use is naught. Our Supplications,
Remonstrances (say our Brethren of Scotland, in the aforesaid Declaration) Acts
of assembly and Parliament, and our defensive arms in Anno 1630. and 1640.
were not only against the Book of Canons, Page 26.
Service Book, etc. for the evil matter there contained, but the manner of
introducing the same; that is, by a Civil, and not by a Church power.

Ans. 2. The Assembly did never intend such a stinted stated use of it in the
solemn Worship of God, as in the Case; according to which a Sabbath is not
judged well spent wherein the words of this Catechism, or some part of them are
not read or said. And that the not submission hereunto upon any account, should
be a sufficient test of a persons unfitness to enjoy a place or station in the
Ministry. Such a severe strict use of it was never advised by that Assembly;
but rather condemned by them, in condemning the like use made formerly of set
forms of the same nature. Preface to the Directory.
The Liturgy (say they) has been a great means, as on the one hand to make
and increase an idle and unedifying Ministry, which contented it self with set
forms made to their hands by others, etc. so on the other side, it has been,
and ever would be (if continued) a matter of endless strife and contention in
the Church, and a snare both to many godly and faithful Ministers, who have
been persecuted and silenced upon that occasion: and to others of hopeful
parts, many of which have been, and more still would be diverted from all
thoughts of the Ministry, to other Studies; especially in these latter times,
wherein a greater discovery of error and superstition, and more knowledge in
the Mysteries of godliness, and gifts in preaching and prayer. In another place
we are told in the same preface, how by reason of such forms, and the not
submitting to them, diverse able and faithful Ministers are debarred from the
exercise of their Ministry, to the indangering of many thousand souls in a time
of such scarcity of faithful Pastors, and spoiled of their livelihood, to the
undoing of them and their families.

. 3.
These were the evils of such a stated authoritative use of set forms in the
solemn Worship of God, observed by the Reverend Divines of that Synod. And
therefore they advise, there may be no more such severe injunctions; but
instead of them a Directory for all parts of Worship, in which the Minister is
left at more freedom; Preface to the Direct.
having liberty to furnish both his heart and tongue with further, or OTHER
materials of Prayer and exhortation as shall be needful upon all occasions.
These words of the Assembly contain the true nature and notion of a Directory,
as it differs from a stinted form, and is the same with Hookers distinction
before mentioned. Pa. 58, 59.
A prescript form is such an appointment as every man must observe. A Directory
is a form men may use if they please, or change it and please themselves in
some other if there be just reason. Now it is professed by the Assembly of
Scotland, Act of the Genesis Ass. for appro. the Cat.
that they receive this Catechism under no other notion but as a DIRECTORY for
CATECHIZING, and not as a stinted Catechism. And thus the Parliament understood
the Assembly, in all the forms they presented to them; and condescended so far
as to reason with our Brethren of Scotland, and justify the liberty and
freedom they had given by the Directory, as being according to the judgment of
moderate Presbyterians here in England, When we consider, says the Parliament,
what some Ministers of the Presbyterian judgment (and members of that
Assembly) in their book subscribed, Smectimnius, dedicated to the Parliament,
say of the Litourgy then established by Law [ it was never established to be so
punctually observed, so rigorously pressed to the casting out of all that
scruple it, Declar. of the Lords and Com. in answ. to the Scot, Papers.
or any thing in it] we have reason well to consider what we put the stamp of
public authority upon, for if this uniformity of the Directory,
Church Government, Confession of Faith and CATECHIZE, should produce such a
rigid Conformity unto them, it is not easy to foresee all the mischiefs and
inconveniences it would beget, though we may easily guess they would not be
small, by what we have felt in the like kind.

Ans. 3. We are told, Eng. po. Cer. p. 154
before Princes Ordinances can be said to bind us, it must first be showed
they have been prescribed by a lawful Synod of the Church. The Magistrates
power is only Cumulative, so that an Ecclesiastical power is first to be put
forth, by a lawful Synod of the Church. The Assembly called by the Parliament
was no such Synod, being, 1 Not made up of persons delegated from the Churches
by the intrinsical power received from Christ; ^en. As^^^b. of (...). Anno
1647. Ses. 23.
nor, 2 Any power of suffrage; for the minor part presented their resolutions
as well, and with as much authority as the major. 3 Nor had they liberty to
debate of any thing, but what was proposed by the Parliament. Hence those
Ordinances were examined, and owned by the general assembly in Scotland, before
they had any sanction of that State, or reception in their Churches. And we in
England having no general Assembly so established, the Provincial assembly of
London took it upon themselves, and after the Parliament had enjoined us
forthwith to practice according to their Ordinances: they added considerations
and cautions before they would receive them. And by consequence, if no
Provincial, a Classical Assembly may do the like; and if no Classis, each
Congregation being furnished with a Presbytery, ought to make (if not before
Judgment by their Delegates in some greater Assembly, yet) an after Judgment
(and to accept or refuse what a Parliament shall do in this kind) by their
Presbytery, according to Presbyterial principles: which liberty cannot be
enjoyed where Civil powers impose with such penalties, as in the case.

CHAP. X. The Fifth Argument. It is difficult in Ecclesiastical matters, to
obtain reformation of what is amiss. These things are pressed with greatest
severity upon the most conscientious.
WHen any change happens in Ecclesiastical affairs, it is long before we can
come to a settlement, as we have formerly showed: This settlement being made,
and munited with penal Laws by the Civil Magistrate: it is difficult, if not
impossible, in an ordinary way, to get any thing reformed; though it be ever
so inconvenient, and burdensome to men's Consciences. Repeals and changes are
made frequently of Laws about Civil affairs, and our evils cured as they come
to be discerned: but Church grievances, like diseases in the spirits, are in a
manner incurable. 1 There are but a few in comparison, and those more strict
and conscientious (who are ordinarily the worst beloved, and least regarded)
that feel the pain of such distempers. 2 By such impositions we rid our selves
of those Ministers, whom we esteem most troublesome; and have great advantage
to fashion, the rest (I mean the less conscientious) to a state guise. The sad
experience we have had formerly, and what great and constant endeavors after
reformation have been many years prosecuted, with little or no fruit, may be a
proof sufficient hereof.

In the Reformation began with Edward the Sixth, such relics of Popery were
left in the Church, as did much offend diverse godly learned, even in those
days. These Superstitions coming to a settlement, and by penal Laws fixed in
the Worship and Service of God, they held their station near a hundred years,
notwithstanding the testimonies at several times given all along against them.
In the beginning of Queen Mary's days, those learned men that left their own
Country, and went into Germany, where this reformation, and the superstitions
settled in it, being stuck to by some amongst them, there was then a very great
testimony, and in the eye of the Churches of Christ, given against those evils
by others of them, better affected to a through reformation, of which more
afterward. These endeavors and witnessings did not in the least loosen the
hold those corruptions had gotten by their first establishment, but were
continued still, as will appear in what follows.

. 2.
Those Brethren, and such others as desired further reformation, conceived
great hope to themselves, upon Queen Elizabeth's coming to the Crown, who was a
Sufferer with them; SHE by Imprisonment, as they by Banishment. Application
was made betimes, and with much zeal, and so it was continued all her days.
There were Petitions preferred to her Majesty, to the Parliament, to the
Council, to the Bishops, to the Convocation, Pleas, Admonitions,
Advertisements, Considerations, and the like to the Common people. Multitudes
of Books daily, and profers of Disputation against those forms, and
impositions; as also Assertions and Demonstrations, wherein a more savoury
Discipline in the Church, and order in the Worship of God is held forth; and in
so much evidence of Scripture light, as they were not able to put it under a
bushel; much out of our Brethrens Writings might be brought forth to this
purpose, and of the great actings, and sufferings, by the godly party all her
reign; and yet all this obtained not the least alteration, or to have the
lightest penalty taken off from such as could not conform, though some of them
sealed their testimony with their blood.

Greater hopes by far were conceived upon King James his coming to the Crown,
whose breeding seemed to set him fair for the desired reformation; as also the
Oaths, Covenants, and other engagements that were upon him; his seeming
dislike also of our Bishops, and Ceremonies, expressed frequently.

As a preparation hereunto there were representations, and applications made to
him, while in Scotland, and speedily at his first coming into England. There
were by a discreet and moderate Pen, some considerations put into his hand,
about this work of reformation; And to make way hereunto, in the first place
the Author endeavors to represent, the slownesse and neglect of States, in
altering what has gotten any settlement in Ecclesiastical affairs; though
matters be ever so much amiss; his words are these, I ask, why the Civil
State should be purged and restored, by good and wholesome Laws made in every
third or fourth year in Parliament, providing remedies as fast as time breeds
mischiefs; and contrariwise, the Ecclesiastical state should still continue
upon the dreggs of time, and receive no alterations, now for this five and
forty years and more; It is above five and forty years since.
We have heard (says he) of no offer of Bills in Parliament; Is nothing
amiss?

The pretensions for not making alterations in Churches settled, are mentioned
by the same Honorable Pen, in page 29. Tares, say they, Discourse concerning
Church affairs by the L. Bacon.
must not be plucked up, lest you supplant the good Corn, but let them grow
together; they stiffly hold, that nothing may be innovated, because it would
make a breach upon the rest, which he reasons against thus: Qui mala non
permutat, in bonis non perseverat, Without change of ill a man cannot continue
in good; to take away abuses, supplanteth not good orders, but establishes
them, Morosa moris retentio, res turbulata aeque ac novitas est, Contentious
retaining of Custom is a turbulent thing, as well as innovation. page 32.

There were solicitations by the godly Ministers and people of both Kingdoms,
the suffering of good Ministers all Queen Elizabeth's days were represented to
him, which before he came to this Crown he seemed much to resent.

These hopes were strengthened by his Majesty's condescension to a Conference,
which could never be obtained before, in which he was present in his own
person. And what was the issue of all those hopes and endeavors? It is strange
to consider, 1 Not one grievance, ( some small things only, explained rather
than changed) or imposition removed, or penalty lessened, but advantage taken
to lay the yoke heavier upon those that desired reformation, in representing
them to the Nation, as persons Schismatical, and troublesome in the Church. 2 A
Proclamation was sent abroad immediately, March the 5. in 1 Jacobi.
to let all men know, that whatsoever was presumed upon, of his Majesty's
intentions, to further reformation, was without cause given by him. All former
Laws and penalties are anew enforced (thus the Proclamation concludes.) And
last of all, we do admonish all men, that hereafter they shall not expect or
attempt any further alteration in the common and public form of Gods service,
from this which is now established; such a resolution, in respect to Laws and
Statutes made about Civil affairs has not been known.

In King Charles his time the like endeavors continued, yet Ministers daily
silenced, and being utterly wearied with expectation, Multitudes, Ministers and
others, (being hopeless) as their last testimony against those evils,
separated themselves from the Congregations here in England, and went to the
utmost ends of the earth, and into a Wilderness some of them, and others into
other parts beyond the Seas, that they might enjoy Ordinances in purity. None
of all these endeavors moved the State to remove the least thing offensive
either in Discipline or Worship, nor at all to bear with those that could not
submit.

. 3.
Let it be everlastingly a Caution to Governors, that they do not impose
smaller matters, and such as themselves judge but Circumstances, under such
ruining penalties. It is a wretched policy (and too much practiced by
Statesmen) where there is want of light or reason to enforce, to supply it by
the severity of Laws and penalties. And let not Ministers, or Churches, which
should be as pillars to hold forth, and as an Army with banners to contend for
Truth, Can. 6.4
and Liberty, according to Christ; I say, let not such be wanting, in all
humility to use endeavors to hinder such settlements.

It is not for us to say, light is growing, and knowledge in these matters
increases every day more and more; and therefore, such evils and Law
restraints will fall off of themselves. I confess, if any thing do it, one
would think the breaking forth of Scripture light should; it being the property
of that light to burn up, and consume Wood, Hay, 1 Cor. 3.13.
Stubble, and the like mixtures with, or additions to, the Doctrine and Worship
of God. But yet let it be considered, where Forms and Ceremonies have once
gotten a footing; how long they have been able to keep their stations, after
their evil and offensivenesse, by most evident light and demonstration on every
side, have been discovered to all men.

It was written by Master Udal, Mr. Cartwright, and others in an Epistle to the
Bishops, as follows. Many and most evident have our Declarations been, etc.
never have any one of you taken in hand to say any thing against it, but it
has made his eyes to dazzle as the clearest Sunshine, whereby he has been
driven hither and thither, groping for evasions, and yet could not escape, but
has fallen into infinite, most monstrous absurdities, and blasphemous
assertions; so forceable is the truth to amaze the gainsayers thereof: yet
still you continue in your course, is it because you see not what you should
do? It cannot be so -- unless you have eyes and see not: for the cause has
been (by the blessing of God) so managed, that many Plow-men, Artificers, and
Children do see it, and know it, and are able by the Word of God to justify
it, and condemn you to be adversaries to the Gospel, etc. Do not persuade
your selves therefore, that further light, and a greater suffrage hereafter
will be able to remove what things for the present seem not so allowable; its
true, God can do any thing; But it is evident there has been light, light
sealed with sufferings, sealed with the estates, liberties, and lives of as
gracious, holy, learned men as any the World had, and that for the space of
near a hundred years, and yet these abuses and impositions remained, in as
great vigor and freshness, to run their race, oppress, and destroy, for a
hundred years more, had not a hand from Heaven prevented it; the Lord did shake
Heaven and earth, the sea and dry land, that those shaken things might be
removed, and such things only that cannot be shaken may remain.

. 4.
The sharpest edge of such Laws while unreformed, verging about from their
first pious and righteous intentions (if any such were) will be set, and in
the greatest rigor against the most conscientious and holy Ministers, and
others. Something, and some instances that bear a proportion to this
observation may be given, from former actings, not yet quite out of memory.

In Edward the sixths reformation, Common Prayers, and the leaving of a
Prayer Book as a help to the Minister in officiating, etc. was for a good
purpose, Preface to C. P.
and great advancement of godliness, as is professed by the Composers of it.
As also the Ceremonies to be observed in officiating according to that Book,
Of Ceremonies why before the C. Prayer Book.
they were of a godly intent and purpose formerly devised, they are reserved
for a decent order in the Church, for which they were first devised, and
because they appertain to edification, etc. and upon this good meaning, that
without some Ceremonies it is not possible to keep any order, or quiet
Discipline in the Church. It was far from the thoughts of those good men,
(who afterward were Martyrs some of them,) it would ever have been wrought
about, to become a matter of such high contention, and made use of (as it was
in a few years) to eject from the Ministry, so many hundreds of the choycest
persons that ever had station amongst us. Dr. Burges Apol. on K. James.
This Doctor Burges gives as one reason why he could not yield to subscription
though he had formerly subscribed; because he perceived by the Book of Canons,
published in 1603. the intention of the Leitourgy and Ceremonies, was to
another purpose than what the Church aimed at in the first imposition.

2 The not suffering Ministers to preach without a License from the Bishop had
a good rise in that age, See Injon in 1. Eliz. N. 8
when most places were supplied with Readers, and those found able to preach,
Popish and corrupt in their judgments. In process of time it became a bar
only to the most holy and eminent Preachers.

3 Three or four men that tender Gods glory, Injunct. of Eliz. N. 46.
and his true religion, were to be appointed by the Ordinary, as informers, to
observe that men kept their own Parish Churches, and to present such as were
negligent, into the Spiritual Court: this was intended against the Popishly
affected; but not long after those Informers appointed by the Ordinary, were
the vilest of men, and few Popishly affected, but the holiest and most
conscientious persons presented and molested by them, and the neglect of Common
Prayer became the Character of a Puritan; so were they described to King James
in the Conference at Hampton Court, by the Bishop of London.

4 In the Articles appointed by Queen Elizabeth, Artic. 51.
to be inquired of in the Visitation, this is one, Item, Whether do you know
any man in your Parish, secretly, or in unlawful Conventicles, say, or hear
Mass? etc. but in after times, such as met together to fast and pray, to
repeat Sermons, and edify one another with good conference, were these
Conventiclers, and punished accordingly.

. 5.
In some Diocesses, where the Bishop (being mindful of that wholesome
exhortation to mercy in his Consecration) was more tender to his Clergy: Book
of Ordination, pa. penult.
there more indulgence was exercised, and not such wresting former Injunctions,
and Articles, or perverting them against the godly sober Ministers. Hence
Visitation Articles and Inquiries were of different strains, according to the
spirit of the Diocessan: which being observed, and that there was more liberty
given in one Diocese than in another from the inadvertency (as his Majesty
termed it) of some in authority: By the ninth Can. of the Synod in the year
1640. It was ordained for the better settling of uniformity in the outward
government and administration of the Church as follows, This Synod, (says
the Canon) has now caused a summary of Visitatory Articles -- and we do
Decree and Ordain, that no Bishop -- shall cause to be printed or published any
other Articles, or forms of enquiry, etc. So that the edge of those former
Injunctions, which was intentionally set against Popery and Profaneness, by
this new Book of Articles, and enquiries, is fixedly set (and without all hope
of indulgence from any better-minded Bishop) to wound the peace and comfort, of
the best affected Ministers and People throughout the Nation, and for all times
to come. It being now not left in the power, or to the discretion of any Bishop
without hazard of a Months suspension ipso facto from his Bishopric, to be
more favorable than another, or less severe and rigorous than the major part
of that Synod; a Synod that mounted their Canons to a greater height against
the purity and simplicity of Gospel Worship, than any at any time before them
since the reformation.

FINIS.
The Contents.
THe Usefulness of Catechizing, and the prejudice to the people for want of it.
Pref. CHAP. I. A Case; With an explication of some terms, and the State of the
Question. Page 1 CHAP. II. The first Argument. Rites and Forms that have a
Stated Use, and to Spiritual ends, in the Worship of God, ought to have
Scripture warrant for their establishment. p. 16 CHAP. III. What directions
there are in the Scripture for the instructing of others, in respect both of
matter, method, and means, etc. p. 29 CHAP. IV. Diverse Objections answered, no
show of Scripture for it, nor necessity, nor requisite for Uniformity, or
obliged to it by our Covenant. p. 43 CHAP. V. The second Argument. Of Christian
Liberty, things indifferent, the particular Catechism designed, not so
desirable for this Use; and how many ways our Ministerial liberty is
prejudiced by the imposition of it. p. 61 CHAP. VI. The third Argument: Taken
from the imposition and penalty, the severity and inequality of it. p. 99 CHAP.
VII. Of the prejudice to the Ministry, and evil consequences of such an
imposition. p. 120 CHAP. VIII. Schisms and Divisions amongst the People of God,
occasioned and continued thereby, is another fruit, or evil consequence of such
penalties. p. 165 CHAP. IX. The fourth Argument. It is destructive to that
Independency which has been anciently claimed and professed by our brethren
the Nonconformists. p. 211 CHAP. X. The fifth Argument. It is difficult in
Ecclesiastical matters, to obtain reformation of what is amiss. These things
are pressed with greatest severity upon the most conscientious. p. 233
Courteous Reader, These Books following are printed or sold by Adoniram
Byfield, at the three Bibles in Cornhil, next door to Pope's Head Alley.
THE History of the Evangelical Churches of the Valies of Piedmont, containing
a most exact Geographical description of the place, and a faithful account of
the Doctrine, Life, and Preservation of the Ancient Inhabitants, together with
a most naked and punctual relation of the late bloody Massacre, 1655. And a
Narrative of all the following transactions to 1658. Justified partly by diverse
Ancient Manuscripts written many hundred years before Calvin or Luther, by
Samuel Monland Esquire. in fol. Divine Characters, in two parts, acutely
distinguishing the more secret and undiscerned differences between the
hypocrite in his best dress of seeming virtues, and form of duties, and the
true Christian in his real graces, and sincere obedience, by Mr. Samuel Crook,
in fol. A Commentary upon the three first Chapters of Genesis, by that Reverend
Divine Mr. John White, late of Dorchester, in sol. An Exposition upon Ezekiel,
by Mr. William Greenhill, in quarto. The Humble Sinner resolved what he should
do to be saved, or Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ the only way of Salvation,
by Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick, in quarto. The Riches of Grace displayed in the offer
and tender of Salvation to poor Sinners, by Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick, in 12o. The
Fountain opened, and the water of Life flowing forth, for the refreshing of
thirsty Sinners, wherein is set out Christ's earnest and gracious Invitation of
poor Sinners to come unto the waters: His complaining Expostulation, with the
ingratitude and folly of those who neglect so great Salvation. His renewed
Solicitation, with all earnestness, and the most persuasive Arguments to allure
thirsty Sinners to come to Christ, by Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick, in quarto. The
Anatomy of Secret sins, Presumptuous sins, sins in Dominion, and Uprightness,
wherein diverse Cases are resolved; with the Remissibleness of all sin, and the
Irremissibleness of the sin against the Holy Ghost, by Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick.
The Plain Doctrine of the Justification of a Sinner in the sight of God,
justified by the God of Truth in his holy Word, and the cloud of witnesses in
all ages, wherein are handled the Causes of the Sinners Justification,
explained and applied in a plain doctrinal and familiar way, for the capacity
and understanding of the weak and ignorant, by Mr. Charles Chauncy, in quarto.
The Gospels Glory, without prejudice to the Law, shining forth in the glory of
God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for the Salvation of Sinners, who through
Grace do believe, by Richard By field, in octavo. A Declaration of the Faith
and Order owned and practiced in the Congregational Churches in England, agreed
upon, and consented unto by their Elders and Messengers in their meeting at the
Savoy, in quarto. Habbakkuks Prayer applied to the Churches present occasion,
and Christ's Counsel to the Church of Philadelphia, very seasonable and useful
for these times, by Mr. Samuel Balmford, in 8o. A Short Catechism, by Mr.
Obadiah Sedgwick. Hidden Manna, by Mr. Fenner, in 12o. Safe Conduct, or the
Saints guidance to glory, by Mr. Ralph Robinson, in quarto. The Saints Longing
after their heavenly Country, by Mr. Ralph Robinson, in quarto. A Sermon at a
Fast, by Mr. Nathaniel Ward, in quarto. Moses his Death, a Sermon at the
Funeral of Mr. Edward Bright Minister, by Mr. Samuel Jacomb, in quarto. A short
and plain Catechism, instructing a learner of Christian Religion what he is to
believe, and what he is to practice, by Mr. Samuel Jacomb, in octo. The
Hypocritical Nation described, with an Epistle prefixed by Mr. Samuel Jacomb,
in quarto. A Sermon of the baptizing of infants, by Mr. Stephen Marshal, in
quarto. The unity of the Saints with Christ the head, by Mr. Stephen Marshal.
There is now in the press that long expected book, The bowels of tender mercy
sealed in the everlasting Covenant, by Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick, in fol.
FINIS.

